The POETICAL HISTORIES BEING A COMPLETE COLLECTION Of all the STORIES
necessary for a Perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets and other
Ancient Authors written Originally in French, by the Learned Jesuit. P.
GALTRVCHIVS.

Now Englisht and enricht with Observations concerning the Gods worshipped by
our Ancestors in this Island by the Phoenicians, and Syrians in Asia with many
useful Notes and Occasional Proverbs gathered out of the best Authors.

Unto which are added Two TREATISES. One of the Curiosities of Old ROME, and of
the difficult Names relating to the affairs of that City. The Other containing
the most remarkable Hieroglyphics of EGYPT.

By MARIUS D'ASSIGNY, B. D.

London, Printed by B. G. and are to be sold by Moses Pit, at the White-hart
in Little-Britain, 1671.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir ORLANDO BRIDGMAN, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
IF the value of Offerings were always to be equal to the Grandeur of the
Persons unto whom they are presented, I should not dare to make this bold
address. But the greatness of my Devotion that has no other way to manifest
it self at present, will, I hope, make amends for the meanness of this, and
persuade your Honor to condescend to the acceptance of this poor expression of
my respects.

I am encouraged to this presumption, not only by your Lordships eminent
quality, under whose protection, these Treatises will receive many advantages,
but also by your Lordships favor to, and acquaintance with learning, whereby
you have been enabled for one of the noblest employments of State in which your
Honor does act with the Universal applanse of the whole Nation. May your
Lordships unwearied diligence, your approved Fidelity, and uncorrupted Justice
in the mannagement of the public affairs maintain you always above the reach
of unconstancy and of envy. If these Treatises may be so happy, as to give unto
your Lordship some satisfaction and recreation in the perusal of them, I shall
attain unto the advantage, which is chiefly aimed at by this Dedication of

Your Lordships,

THE CONTENTS
The First Book.
The History of the Heathen Gods.
Chap. 1. Of Saturn 1 Chap. 2. Of Cybele 6 Chap. 3. Of Jupiter. 10 Chap. 4. Of
Juno and of her Children. 16 Chap. 5. Of Apollo, and of the Sun. 25 Chap. 6. Of
Diana. 37 Chap. 7. Of Bacchus. 42 Chap. 8. Of Mercurius. 48 Chap. 9. Of Venus.
52 Chap. 10. Of Aurora, and of such like Divinities 55 Chap. 11. Of Neptunus
and of the Sea Divinities 59 Chap. 12. Of the Divinities of the Earth. 68 Chap.
13. Of the Infernal Gods. 71 Chap. 14. Of some other Divinities 81 Chap. 15. Of
the Gods mentioned in holy Writ and of those that were adored in Phoenicia,
Syria, and in the Adjoining Countries. 93 Chap. 16. Of the Heathen Gods
worshipped in England. 114
The Second Book.
The History of the Heathen Demigods
The Preface
Chap. 1. Of Perseus. 12^ Chap. 2. Of Hercules. 128 Chap. 3. Of Theseus. 143
Chap. 4. Of Castor and Pollux. 150 Chap. 5. Of Orpheus* 154 Chap. 6. Of Jason
and of the Argonauts. 180 Chap. 7. Of Cadmus and of the City of Thebs. 168
Chap. 8. Of Oedipus 172 Chap. 9. Of the War against the City of Thebs. 177
Chap. 10. Of Antigone, and of some passages that happened after the war of
Thebs. 187 Chap. 11. Of Tantalus and of Pelops his Son. 190 Chap. 12. Of Atreus
and of Thyestes. 196 Chap. 13. Of the Kings of Troy. 199 Chap. 14. Of Paris.
202 Chap. 15. Of the preparations of the Greeks against the City of Troy. 207
Chap. 16. The Siege of Troy. 213 Chap. 17. The Ruin of the City of Troy. 224
Chap. 18. The Adventures of Agamemnon and of Orestes his Son after the ^ine of
Troy. 237 Chap. 19. The adventures of Ulysses after the War of Troy. 242 Chap.
20. Of the Adventures of Aeneas. 250 Chap. 21. Of several other Famous men
frequently named in the Heathen (...) and not mentioned by Galtr^chius. ^59
Chap. 22. Of the Heathen Gods, who (...) proper to several places and (...) in
the World, and had been Men. 267 Chap. 23. Of a few famous women of Antiquity.
274 Chap. 24. Of the Truth of the Fable according to the opinion of
Galtruchius. 278
The Third Book.
Of the Honors paid by the Heathens unto their Gods.
The Preface.
Chap, 1. Of the Statues consecrated to the False Gods 1 Chap. 2. Of the
Edifices and Temples dedicated to the Heathen Gods. 11 Chap. 3. Of the
Sacrifices offered to the Id^l Gods. 19 Chap. 4. Of the Priests of the False
Gods. 28 Chap. 5. Of the Festival days appointed in honor of the false Gods.
34 Chap. 6. Of the Plays of Greece appointed in honor of the False Gods 42
Chap. 7. Of the public Pastimes of the Romans 48
Of the Roman Curiosities.
Chap. 1. Of the City and People of Rome. 63 Chap. 2. Of the Marriages of the
Romans. 68 Chap. 3. Of the manner of devorcing the Roman Wives. 73 Chap. 4. Of
the Funerals of the Romans. 75 Chap. 5. Of the Apparel of the Romans. 79 Chap.
6. Of the Customs of the Romans in eating. 87 Chap. 7. Of the Roman Assemblies
appointed for public affairs. 93 Chap. 8. Of the Roman Magistrates, 99 Chap.
9. Of the Roman Laws, and of many particulars relating to their Judicatory
proceedings. 122 Chap. 10. Of the Roman punishments inflicted upon Offenders.
128 Chap. 11. Of the Roman Militia 133
Of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics.
The Preface.
Chap. 1. Of God and of his Works. 153 Chap. 2. Of Man and of things relating
to him. Chap. 3. Of several kind of Hieroglyphics drawn from the disposition
of Living Creatures. 190 Chap. 4. Of some few notable Observations of several
places of the World and of animals. 198
THE PREFACE TO THE Judicious READER.
I Intend not to make any Apology for this Book: If it cannot justify it self
from the idle aspersions of its enemies. I shall freely consent that it may
undergo their Censures; neither do I intend to court my Reader, nor persuade
him to the perusal of it. I shall only say this, that what others have
imperfectly mentioned in several Treatises, and much more, is here in this one
Volume briefly comprehended without much Interpretation I confess, for I look
upon such Expositions as have been already given to the Fables of the Heathen
Gods, as the silly productions and groundless fancies of Religious Minds, who
have labored to find in the ignorance of Paganism, the knowledges of the
Gospel. In the contrivances and inspirations of the Devil, the sublimest
Mysteries of Christianity. Such Interpreters of the Poets, are near related to
that wise Expositor of the Revelations, who would needs declare the meaning of
the Visions of S. John, by certain Characters found upon the back of some
Fishes taken near the Northern Pole. The wit of Man may stretch out a
comparison between Light and Darkness, between Virtue and Vice, between
Christianity and Gentilism; But I see no reason to believe that the latter was
a favourer of the former. The Devils, who were the first promoters of Poetical
Inventions, had mistaken their Interest; If, they ha^ taught their Worshippers
the Redemption of Man by Christ, and entertained them in an expectation of a
Messiah to come. Some wise Heathens ashamed of their Religion, have endeavored
to Allegoris^ upon all the Fables, and cover the impudent stories with a
virtuous gloss, as Averroes that Mahumetan Philosopher has done with the
Alcoran of his Prophet for the same cause. The Grand design of Satan the enemy
of Mankind, was, to oppose Gods Promises of Salvation, and to settle his
Interest amongst men, by possessing them with Stories, and a Belief contrary to
the Gospel of Christ, and by promoting such Practices as might engage Men in
his service, and cause them to abhor the sanctity and purity of Christianity.
And if these Fables have any thing of reality and truth, They discover more of
the estate of the Devils amongst themselves, than the wonders of Nature; for we
are informed from the Learned Heathens, that they did worship the Devils.
Porphyrius acknowledges it, and laments, because, since the Preaching of the
Gospel Men could not have so much familiarity with them, nor receive from them
Instructions, as before. Plato, and his disciples d^ call the Heathen Gods,
Jupiter, and the rest, Daemones. Besides others divide them into 3 Orders: The
highest is above all Elemental substances, with which their Beings have not the
least relation; The second are appointed for the ruling and rouling of the
Celestial Globes; The third are scattered amongst the Elements according (...),
or Abaddon, Wh ose hands are stained with Blood. Paus. Arcad. l. 1.

(...).

Alexand.


to the Doctrine of the Heathen Philosophers. Jupiter himself was named (...),
as Lactantius tells us out of the Pagan Writers; and Beelzebub, styled in
Scripture the Prince of the Devils, is said to be Jupiter by the Heathens; for
Jupiter is called (...), Muscarius, or the driver away of Flies, and (...), and
(...) the killer of Flies; Because the Flies are Creatures formed by his
immediate Agencie, or because the Sun, by whose heat also such Beings are
produced, seem to have been committed before the apostacyof the Angels, to the
power of him that is now the chief of the Devils; for that cause he is so often
named Apollo, Mithra, Osiris, Tharamis, etc. and the Epithetes proper to the
Sun, are ascribed to Jupit. as Fulminator* for by the Virtue and Influence of
the Sun, the Thunders, and all other Meteors, are formed in the second Region
of the Air. Diespiter, the Father of the Day. Lucetius, because the Sun is the
author of Light, (...), or Lucifer, Aethreus, Panomphaeus, (...), Aristaeus,
Aratrius, Jupiter dicitur lucetius quia luce nos adjuvat Gell.
(...), and (...), because the Sun is the Universal Cause of Life, and of
Motion. These Epithetes attributed to Jupiter, have a relation to Jupiter est
author luck Macrob. lib. Sat.
the Sun; therefore we may conclude from thence, that Jupiter and the Sun, or
the Princes of the Devils, are the same in Lucifer, is the name of the chief
Devil amongst Christians.
the Theology of the Heathens. The rest of the Gods or Devils, associates of
Beelzebub, and subject to his power, do also bear the names of the most
Glorious Stars Eusebius. de praep. Evang. lib. 4. cap. 9.
of the Firmament. They did usurp these names as some do imagine, because in the
time of their Integrity, they had been the moving Angels of these great Bodies
of Light; or because they were persuaded by that means to oblige the Men of the
World to their Worship and Service. The Host of Heaven is called in Holy Writ,
(...), Suidas.
and by the 70. (...), which Suidas understands to be a number of Stars in the
Zodiac. Now the learned Rabins, who have searched most into the nature and
manner of the living of the Spiritual Beings, do inform us, that there is an
order of Angels called Mazouroth, the lowest order, or that which is
degenerated into Devils. It seems that they did yet bear the name of the places
from whence they are shamefully fallen, and do make use of the blessed
Influences and universal credit of the most beneficial Stars, to procure to
themselves the Homages of mortal beings.

That the Gods of the Heathens were the Devils, or Apostate Angels, may also
appear from the express words of Scripture. The Heathens are said to have
worshipped the Devils in many places, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. They Sacrificed unto
Devils. 1 Cor. 10. 20. The things which the Gentiles Sacrifice; they Sacrifice
to Devils, and not unto God. Psalm. 106. 37. It is said that the Israelites did
offer their Children unto Devils, and in the 65. of Isaias 11. ver. there is,
(...), Our Version says: That prepare a Table for a Troop, or for Gad.
preparing a Table for Jupiter, or for Gad, Jupiter and Gad were the same. This
passage is rendered thus by the Seventy Interpreters, (...), where you see that
Jupiter, and the Star Gad worshipped, as the chief God of that place, are
expressly called the Devil. He was also adored in the shape of a Goat. The
Egyptians Maimonid. lib. 3. c. 40.
did represent the Sun in their Hieroglyphics as a Goat; from hence it is The
Devils did persuade many nations to worship the Beast that was instrumental to
man's Apostasy, that is, the Serpent. The Egyptians did imagine it to have an
immortal nature Celius Lamprid. says of Heliog. Aegyptios dracuncu^os Romae
habuit quos illi agathodaemonas appellant.

and Euse^. in praepar. Evang. lib. 1.

(...).

And all nations did honor he Serpents, because they did imagane they had
something of Divinity in them.


that they did pay so much respect to the Image of this Animal. Of this kind of
Worship Moses speaks, Leviticus 17. 7. They shall no more offer their
Sacrifices unto Devils. In Hebrew, there is (...), Goats. It seems that this
worshipping of the Sun in the form of a Goat, was the worshipping of the great
Devil. It was his custom to advance his Interest, and persuade the Nations to
adore him instead of God, by causing the names and the Beings most in favor
with the People to be cried up and worshipped. In all the Eastern Nations, he
bears several different Titles: In Rome he was called Jupiter, in Graecia
(...), in Persia, Mithra; in Phoenicia, Baal; in Syria, Heliogabalus; in
England, Thor, or Belenus; in Egypt, (...), as Plato says; or Apis and Osiris;
in India Topan; in Arabia, Dyonusos; in Scythia, Mars; in Moab, Chemos. We must
take notice of this particular, otherwise we shall find our selves entangled in
the ordinary confusion of Names of Gods, From hence it is that the Worthies,
who did desire to be esteemed more than Men did invent, that the Serpents had
begotten them. See Justin of Alexander.
which appear in the Mythologists, and shall not be able to discover any sense.
We are therefore by the chief God, worshipped in every place, to understand the
Chief and Prince of the Apostate Angels. He did suffer his fellow Devils to
share with him in the respects of the nations, but they were not so universally
adored, because their power and inspection was not so universal as his;
Therefore the Scripture puts a notable difference between the Gods of the
several Nations of the East. In every place of the world these evil Spirits had
usurped Gods Rights, and the Peoples Devotions, and had drawn them to Sacrifice
unto them, Creatures and humane victims. According to this opinion, therefore
we are to look upon many of the Fables of the Gods, as mysterious discoveries
of the Estate of the Devils amongst themselves, when they speak of Marriages
and Alliances between them, they do then show unto us some real Truths, with a
condescension to our weak Capacities, and to our manner of expression. I will
not venture to particularise any of these Mysteries, nor offer to interpret
things, of which we have but strong conjectures and a probable opinion. I shall
only say that the Dispositions of these several Devils, are clearly manifest in
their manner of Worship, in the Sacrifices that they did require, and in the
things ascribed to their tuition. Jupiter, the Emperor of Heaven is the chief,
and the most powerful Varro says that Jupiter is a God of Palestine, because
the name is derived from Jah, or Jehovah the holy name of Almighty God.
of all the Devils, styled in holy Writ the Prince of the Air; and by the Poets
he is called Olympius, because he delights in the highest places. (...),
because he has so many Legions of wicked Angels at his command. Martius,
because he did encourage War and Bloodshed amongst Men. Hospitalis, Aristaeus,
(...), and other good names were given unto him, to signify some remains of
Virtue and Goodness which are yet in this Prince of Darkness. Juno his Wife, as
I conceive, is another Devil far inferior in power and authority, related to
him in a manner proper to their spiritual Beings, fierce and cruel, an
encourager of Pride and wantoness, whereof the Peacock, dedicated to this
Goddess, was an Emblem. Apollo seems to be a Devil excelling in Beauty,
Knowledge, and Wisdom, the rest of his Comrades. Neptunus, is some Spirit that
delights in Ship-wracks; and amongst the Storms and Billows of the raging Sea,
therefore he is named (...) the Commander of the Sea, (...), Famous in the Sea;
and the Epithetes proper to this Element, are ascribed to him, as (...), etc.
Pluto is some infernal Fiend that is ashamed to behold the Light; therefore the
rest of the Devils have assigned unto him Hell, or the concavities of the Earth
for his abode. Mars, the God of War, encourages the effusion of Blood. This
intimates his cruelty and tyrannical disposition. I could run over the rest of
the Gods, worshipped by the Pagans, but this general intimation may
sufficiently discover unto the judicious Reader the other truths of the Fables.

I think that this may be another reason of the frequent Relations between the
Heathen Gods that are all allied one to another. If they had not been
discovered unto us in this manner, the Devil could not have recommended the
foul practice of those Vices; which are described in their stories; for as the
miscarriages of our lives, do depend upon our relations to one another, or to
God our Creator: The Devil could not have proposed a perfect example of those
actions, nor encouraged us to the imitation of them, if he had not invented the
same Relations between the Apostate Angels, as are between Men. Therefore these
stories of the Heathen Gods, are not only a real declaration of certain secrets
concerning the estate of the evil Spirits, and the works of Nature, but many of
them are ingenious Fables, contrived by the Devil, and delivered to the Poets
to discredit Virtue, and cause Vice to reign with authority amongst Men; for
when the Divinities whom they did worship, were guilty of such misdemeanors,
when such as had power to punish, were the grand abettors and protectors of
their vicious actions, they could neither think it a shameful nor a dangerous
thing to obey their suggestions, and follow their Examples. By this means the
Enemy of Mankind did labor to destroy the works of God, and to deface the
beautiful Image of our Creator imprinted in our Souls, with all manner of
Vices. The Devils did admit into their Society and to their Divine Honors many
brave Souls when they were departed ont of the world.

Our Learned Jesuit has here given an account of these Fables, with the
ordinary interpretation in some places where they relate to Nature, and to its
Mysteries. And because he had omitted several things, tending to the
understanding of the Poets, I have supplied what was wanting in him.

The other Treatises will be no less useful to the same purpose; for several
Ancient Authors do make frequent allusions to the Roman Antiquities, and to the
Hieroglyphics of Egypt. Therefore, without the knowledge of these things many
thousand passages of the Poets and Historians, are as obscure, as unknown paths
to the blind.

Some of these things have been already collected in English, I confess, but
how, and in what manner, I leave to the Readers judgment. In this Work I have
endeavored to render these Poetical stories, and this Scholastic kind of
Learning, fit for the perusal of judicious men, as well as of young students.
Some things are related in a different manner according to different Opinions
of the best Authors.

Vale. M. D.

These Books are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little Britain.
Folio.
CAssandra, the famed Romance, 1667.

Brigg's Logarithms.

Francisci Suarez Metaphysica.

Quarto.
Dr. John Pell's Introduction to Algebra, Translated out of High Dutch into
English by Thomas Branker, M. A. Also a Table of odd Numbers less than 100000,
showing those that are Incomposits, and resolving the rest into their Factors
and Coefficients, 1668.

Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, five Methodus construendi Logarithmos,
1668.

Jacobi Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668.

Dr. John Wallis Opera Mechanica, pars prima and secunda, 1670.

Pars tertia, now in the Press.

Banister's Works of Chyrurgery.

Hugh Broughton's Consent of Scripture.

Snellii Typis Batavus, Lugd. Bat. 1624. Observat. Hussiacae.


Petrus Paaw, de Ossibus Amstelreod. 1633.

A Letter from a Gentleman of the Lord Howard's Retinue, to his Friend in
London. Dated at Fez, November. 1669. Wherein he gives a full Relation of the
most remarkable Passages in their Voyage thither, and of the present State of
the Countries under the power of Taffaletta, Emperor of Morocco; With a brief
account of the Merchandising Commodities of Africa, as also the Manners and
Customs of the People there.

Lex Talionis, five vindiciae Pharmacopoeorum: Or, A Short Reply to Dr.
Merret's Book, and others, written against the Apothecaries; wherein may be
discovered the Frauds and Abuses committed by Doctors professing and practicing
Pharmacy.

Octavo.
A Discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to Demonstrate the Laws of Motion:
and withal to prove that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Descartes on this
Subject, he has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671.

The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogul, together
with the most considerable pasiages for five years following in that Empire: To
which is added a Letter to the Lord Colbert, touching the extent of Indostan,
the Corculation of the Gold-nd Silver of the World, at last swallowed up there:
As also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same, and the Principal cause of
the decay of the States of Asta, in Octavo. 1671.

Biblia Hebraea, Josephi Athias, 1661.

Gualteri Needham, Disputatio Anatomica de Formato Foetu, 1667.

Buxtorfius's Epitomy of his Hebrew Grammar, translated into English by John
Davis, 1658.

Crow, Scriptores in Scripturam: Now in the Press.

The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of the Dr. Cenudo, 1670.

The Adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant* taken Prisoner by the Turks
of Argiers, and carried into the Inland Countries of Africa; with a Description
of the Kingdom of Argiers, and of all the Towns and Places thereabouts; As also
a Relation of the chief Commodities of the Country, and of the Actions and
Manners of the People: Whereunto is annexed, an Observation of the Tide, and
how to turn a Ship out of the Streights Mouth the Wind being Westerly, 1670.

Contemplations on Mortality, 1669.

A Discourse written to a Learned Friar by Mr. Des Fourneilis, showing, that
the System of Mr. Des Carts, and particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all that he has written of both,
seems to have been taken out of the first Chapter of Genesis: To which is
annexed the System general of the Cartesian Philosophy.

The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland Frejus of
Marseilles, by the French King's Order, 1666. To Muley Arxid King of Taffaletta
etc. For the establishment of a Commerce in the Kingdom of Fez, and all his
other Conquests. With a Letter, In answer to diverse curious Questions
concerning the Religion, Manners, and Customs of his Countries; Also their
Trading to Tombutum for Gold, and diverse other particulars; By one who lived
five and twenty years in the Kingdom of Sus and Morocco. Printed at Park. 1670.
Englished, 1671. Octavo.

A Genuine Explication of the Visions of the Book of Revelation, full of new
Christian Considerations; Wherein true and false Christendom is briefly and
nakedly represented, and the Time of each of them, after a Mathematical manner,
demonstrated; and all confronted with good History; Both showing the
Accomplishment of things past, and thence ascertaining the Fulfilling of things
yet to come. By the Learned and and Pious A. B. Peganus. Englished out of
High Dutch by H. O. Now in the Press.

Steno of the Weight and Motions of the Earth, A Philosophical Discourse in
Octavo, now in the Press.

The Conquest of the Empire of China by the Tart^ Written by the Viceroy of
Mexico; first Printed the Original, 1670. in Octavo. Now in the Press

The Second Volume of the History of the Gre^ Mogul, By F. B^rneire. Now in the
Press.

The most pleasant History of the POETS, necessary for the understanding of the
Heathen Writers.
BOOK I.
Of the Chief Divinities of the Heathens.
CHAP. I.
Of the Story of Saturn.
THe Poets tell us that Heaven called in Greek (...), and by the Latins Coelus,
was the ancientest of all the Gods: He had two Sons; the youngest named Saturn
(...), the God of Time, who committed an action full of impiety upon his
Father; with his graceless Sithe he cut off his Privy Parts, and deprived him
of the power of Begetting: What he had taken from him he cast into the Sea,
where by the continual agitation of the Waves, it found a favorable Womb
amongst the Froth, for out of this bleeding substance the Goddess Venus was
produced, as some do say.

Titanus was the Elder Brother of Saturnus, therefore the Kingdom of the World
did appertain unto him by right; but to comply wlth the persuasions of his
Mother Vesta, and of Cybele his Sister, he willingly resigned unto him the
Scepter, upon this condition, that Saturn should never suffer any Male Children
to live, and that the Empire of the World should after his decease return to
his Posterity.

Therefore Saturn was wont to devour all his Male Children as soon as they
were born; but when Cybele his Wife was happily brought to bed of Twins,
Jupiter and Juno together, she caused little Jupiter to be conveyed away, and
put in the hands of the Curetes, or Corybantes, to be by them brought up,
showing only Juno to her greedy and cruel Husband: The Corybantes fearing least
the Child should be discovered by its crying, invented a new sport, which was
to leap and beat the ^ In their hands they had little brass Bucklers, with
which they did meet and strike at one another in order; the noise that they
made thereby was so great, that the cries of the young Jupiter could never be
heard by Saturn. After that, he had several other Children, Neptune and Pluto,
who were also privately nourished by their Mother; and when she was once
constrained to discover unto her Husband the fruit of her Womb, she instead of
her Child gave into his hands a great stone, which he greedily swallowed in the
dark. As soon as Titanus was informed how his expectation was frustrated, and
what impediments were likely to be to his lawful Succession, contrary to the
former agreement, and the oath that was given, he resolved, with the assistance
of his Sons, to make War upon Saturn: When he had vanquished him, he clapped him
fast in Prison with his Wife Cybele, and there kept them until Jupiter came to
be of sufficient Age to deliver them. But Saturn having learnt by some Oracle
that one of his Sons should take from him his Scepter and Kingdom, he resolved
to lay snares for his Son Jupiter that he might destroy him. This resolution
was the cause of his final ruin; for Jupiter was so much offended at the
design of his Father, that he revolted from him, and by force of Arms cast him
out of his Kingdom, and the Empire of Heaven; from whence he came strait into
Italy to hide himself, and therefore it was called Latium a latendo. Janus the
King of this Country received him with all civility and respect: It is said
that Saturn brought on earth that Golden Age, so famous in the Poets, when the
ground did yield all sorts of fruits without labor and manuring, when Astraea,
otherwise called Justice, did manage the affairs of men, and then they did
live together in a perfect love and amity. This Janus was enrolled in the
number of the Gods, not only for the favor that he did unto Saturn, but also
because he was the wisest Prince of his time, and because he had a knowledge of
the time past, and of that which was to come; for that reason you shall find
him represented with two Faces. Numa Pompilius, the King of the Romans, built
him a Temple which was always open when the Commonwealth had any Wars, and was
never shut but in an Universal Peace.

Addit. Not.
The Poets tell us, that Coelus was the great Grandfather of all the Gods, his
Wife Vesta brought forth ^ multitude of Sons and Daughters; from Hesiod we are
informed of their The number is (...)
Names, Codus, Japetus, Thya, Hyperion, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Tethys,
Saturnus, Gygas, Titan, Brontes, etc.

The twelve chief Gods of Rome, Juno, Vesta, Minerva Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Jupiter, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
The m st considerable were Saturnus and Titan; the latter was the Eldest, but
the Younger got the Empire, until he was thrust out of it by his Nephews the
Titans: Jupiter did afterward recover it again, with the help of the rest of
the Gods, who swore fidelity to him upon an Altar, that has since found a
place amongst the Stars: He was so happy in this War, that he put all the
Titans to death, and so freed his Parents from their fetters. Now from the
corrupt blood of these Titans all the Vipers, Serpents, and venomous creatures
of the earth are proceeded.: They were esteemed to be the first that made use
of Wbeat, having received directions how to sow it from Ceres in Sicily; that
was therefore called Drepanum, which signifies a Sickle with which men do reap
this sort of Grain, whereas it was before named Macris, and Coryca.

In Greek (...).
Saturnus was a wise Prince, but unfortunate, forced to fly from the fury of
his Son Jupiter-Belus into Italy, where he taught the Subjects of King Janus a
more polite manner of living then they knew before; for this good office Janus
rewarded him with the half of his Kingdom; Italy from him was named Saturnia.
he taught them to manure and improve the Soil, and therefore he was called
Ster^ulius; his Priests were initiated in Scarlet Robes; to express their
bloody minds, they performed In the sacrifices of all other Gods the Priest did
cover his (...) Virg 3. Aeneid.
his Sacrifices with their heads uncovered, and did offer unto this cruel God
young Infants, for which inhumanity they were all crucified under Tiberius
Caesar.

He is the same with Moloch of the Israelites, for that word is derived from
(...) he reigned, and Kings and powerful men were called Saturni by the
Heathens.
Saturnus was painted with six wings, to express the swiftness of Time, and
with feet of wool, in bis hand a Serpent biting its tail, with a Sickle and an
old garment hanging upon him; Jupiter his Son served him as he had done
formerly his Father Coelus, for he cut off his privy parts; he was mightily
honored of the Romans and Carthaginians, the latter did every year offer unto
him humane Sacrifices, which was the subject of an Embassy from Rome; for the
people of this City did esteem and honor this God, but they approved not On his
Festival day they did loose him from his chains.
that men should be offered to him: They were afraid to loose him, therefore
they kept his Statue always bound with Iron Chains, as the Tyrians did Hercules
when their City was besieged by Alexander.

A^rea nunc revocet Saturni festa December Nunc tibi cum Domino ludere verna
licet.
In December were the festival days of this inhumane God, called Saturnalia, a
time dedicated to debauchery and disorder, as the Carnaval is in the Popish
Dominions, for then the Servants did take upon them to command their Masters,
and the Slaves had liberty to be unruly without fear of punishment, wearing on
their heads a Cap, as a Badge of Freedom, while these days lasted. It was also
the cu tom to send Wax Tapers then as expressions of kindness to friends and
acquaintances; for the Romans had this particular respect for this God, they
caused Torches and Tapers to be burning continually upon his Altars. There is
this also that is remarkable, This Temple was very strong and secure from
Thieves.
the Romans did depose under his protection, and in his Temple, their Treasury,
because in his time there was no robbery nor theft committed; besides they laid
up here the Rolls of the names of the Rom n people, which were made of the skin
of Elephants.

CHAP. II.
The Story of Cybele.
Cybele, the Wife of Saturn, had several names, she was called Dyndimene,
Berecinthyi, and the Grandmother, not only because she had brought forth the
Gods, but also because she was the Goddess of the earth which produces all
things; and for that reason she was called by the Latins Ops, and by the Greeks
Rhea.

She was wont to ride in a Chariot drawn by Lions; her solemn Festivals, called
Megalesia, were every fourth month, at which time the Coryhantes that were her
Priests did act the part of Madmen, with their Drums, Trumpets, and such other
Instruments. The Gauls that had planted themselves in Phrygia, did on these
days move themselves so much, that by degrees they became really mad, striking
one another with Swords, and other Weapons, in wantonness, but many times they
did grievously wound themselves. At the end of the sport they did wash their
bodies and their wounds in some River dedicated to this Goddess.

Cybele was also named Vesta, but the Poets, as their manner is, do vary in
this particular; for sometimes they call Vesta the wife of Saturn, sometimes
his Mother, and sometimes his Sister, or his Daughter.

They give unto one person diverse names which agree with different persons,
they deal in the same manner with others, with Jupiter, Hercules, etc. However
it is certain that Cybele, called otherwise Vesta, is the Goddess of Fire, whom
Numa Pompilius, amongst the Romans, did adore with strange and wonderful
Ceremonies; for he dedicated unto her a Fire which was called Eternal, because
it was to be always continued alive; he ordained for her Priests, named Vestal
Virgins, who were severely chastised by the High Priest, if at any time they
suffered the Eternal Fire to go out. In such a case it was not to be lighted
again, but by the Sun beams. These Vestals were chosen out of the Noblest
Families of Rome, and were to keep their Virginity whiles they remained in the
service of this Goddess; when they did otherwise, they were buried in the
ground alive.

Addit. Not.
Cybele the Grandmother of the Gods, is sometimes taken for Fire, sometimes for
the Earth; She was called Syria Dea, because she was born in Syria; she was
represented with Towers upon her head, sitting in a Chariot drawn with Lions;
her Priests were called Gallantes, or Galli, and their chief leader
Archigallus, because they (...) Prove. quia castrabant seipsos.
were chosen out of Gallo-graecia, a Province in Asia minor, joining to Phrygia:
They were noted for their madness, which they did express by their singings,
howlings, sounding the Trumpets, and cutting themselves desperately, and all
that they met. Of this Goddess we shall speak more at the end of the twelfth
Chapter.

In Greek (...), derived as some imagine, from (...) the fire.
The Goddess Vesta was highly honored by the Romans; they did distinguish her
from Cybele, and appoint unto her particular Sacrifices and Tmples, although
the Poets do confound their names, and take one for the other. She was Vesta a
vestiendo terram flori^us and herbis.
the Goddess of Elemental Fire, her Temple was round, and in it two Lamps were
continually burning. Some say, that there was in the innermost part of it a
fire suspended in the air in pots of earth, kept always alive by the Vestal
Virgins: When it happened, by some misfortune, to be extinct, some fearful
accident did immediately follow to the Roman Empire; therefore they did punish
the Virgins, by whose negligence the fire did go out, in a very cruel manner.
This Goddess was named Matter, Mother, and she had her Statues standing in many
Porches; from hence is derived the word Vestibulum, because they were
consecrated to Vesta, as to the chief of the household Goddesses, and there it
was that the Romans did feast themselves; her Temple was magnificent, in it
were laid up the Palladium, or Image of Pallas, so highly esteemed of the
Romans, because the Oracle had pronounced, that the safety of their Empire did
depend upon the preservationof i^, and because pious Aeneas brought it with him
from Troy, having preserved it with his household Gods, and his aged Father,
from the burning of that City. They were so much afraid to loose it, that L.
Caecilius Metellus, a man sufficiently renowned for his valor and victories
obtained upon the C^rthaginians in Sicily, hazarded his life to save it from
the flames when the Temple was burning about his ears. He did then preserve the
Palladium, but lost his eyes in the smoke. The Senate to acknowledge his care
and courage, comm^aded that his Statue should be placed in the Capit^l. On the
top of Vesta's Temple-stood her Effigies, which was a woman sitting, having
little Jupiter in her arms; her Priests were to keep their Virginity 30 years,
which was the time appointed for their attendance. They were honored so much,
that if they did casually meet in the streets an offender, they could procure
unto him his pardon; but if they did dishonor the service of their Goddess by
Carnal Copulation with any man, they were to die without mercy, they were to be
buried alive with water and bread. It was a custom also in the solemn
Sacrifices, to begin the solemnity by praying unto Vesta, and to end it by an
address unto the same Goddess. Cum far and vino vestam Janumque rogabat.
Juvenal Satyr. 6.
She was honored also as the Goddess of Fodder, therefore she was called Magna
Pales; they did offer unto her the first fruits of all things, especially of
frankincense, of flowers, and of wheat, etc.

CHAP. III.
The Story of Jupiter.
When Jupiter the Son of Saturnus and Cybele had put his Father to flight, he
divided the Empire of the world between himself and brothers; he took to his
share the command of Heaven, he assigned the Waters to his Brother Neptune, and
sent Pluto to dwell in Hell.

He was called the Father of the Gods, and the King of men; he only had the
power to handle the Thunderbolts; and to hold the World in subjection: He had
not long reigned, when the Earth being incensed because he had crushed in pieces
the Titans, she brought forth against him many dreadful Monsters of an
extraordinary bigness, and sent them up to besiege heaven, and drive him from
thence. For that intent they had their rendevouze in Thessaly, in the midst of
the Plegrean Fields, where it was resolved by them, to raise one Mountain upon
another, and thus to make an easy ascent unto Heaven: They began this
difficult work, to scale Heaven, and assault it with great Rocks, and other
fearful Engines: Amongst the Besiegers was Enceladus, Briareus, or Aegeon, with
a hundred hands which he did employ in casting up against Jupiter the Rocks of
the Seashore; Typhoeus was no less remarkable amongst them, because he did
exceed all these Monsters, in bigness of body and strength, for with his head
he did reach to the Heavens, his arms he could stretch from the Northern to the
Southern Pole; he was half a man, and half a Serpent, as many of the rest were;
he was so dreadful to behold, because he did vomit fire and flame, that the
rest of the Gods that came to the assistance of Jupiter, were frighted into a
shameful flight; they ran into Egypt, where they changed themselves into the
forms of several Beasts and Herbs, that they might not be discovered:
Nevertheless Jupiter did pursue these Children of the Earth so vigoroustly, and
did so play upon them with his Thunderbolts, that at last he got the Victory,
after which he destroyed all the Race of these Giants, holding many of them
prisoners in the bottom of Hell; and that they might never rise again, he
loaded them with huge Mountains, as that of Etna. About the same time
Prometheus formed the first men of Earth and Water, animating them with the
fire of Heaven, that he had stolen away, for which cause Jupiter was so incensed
against him, that he commanded Vulcan to tie him upon the Mountain Caucasus
with iron Chains, and to put an Eagle or a Vulture to devour daily his Liver,
which every night did renew again, to his greater and continual torment. He
remained in this condition until Hercules by his incomparable virtue and valor
did release him. Jupiter was not content with this revenge, he sent for
Pandora, that wonderful Woman, which he, and the other Gods amongst them, had
made in such a manner, that every one had bestowed upon her some perfection. By
the order of Jupiter this Pandora went to Epimetheus, the Brother of
Prometheus, with a Box full of Evils and Diseases, as a Present from the Gods:
As soon as he had opened it to see what was in it, they did fly abroad into the
air, and scattered themselves into all the parts of the Earth, only in the
bottom of the Box there was poor hope left alone.

Jupiter having so happily overcome all his Enemies, did dream of nothing but
his pleasures, which hurried him into many extravagant and infamous actions:
Besides that, he did commit Incest with his Sister Juno, taking her to Wife;
besides the violence committed upon Ganimedes, the Son of Tros, King of the
Trojans, whom he stole in the form of an Eagle, and bugred: He committed many
thousand Rapes and Villainies to satisfy his brutish passion; as when he took
the form of a Bull to steal away Europa, the Daughter of Agenor, the King of
the Phoenicians. From this Europa the most Noble and glorions part of the World
has borrowed its name. Notwithstanding all the diligence, the watchfulness and
care of Acrisius the King of Argos, who had secured his Daughter Danae in a
Tower of Brass, this lascivious God found a means to enter into it by the top,
in the form of a Golden Shower, and to accomplish his wicked design, for he
begot on her Perseus, as we shall take notice in the following History. The
World was so full of his shameful pranks, that we should scarce find an end if
we once began to relate them all. We shall have occasion to mention some of
them in the following pages; we may therefore justly take notice with
Tertullian, that it was no marvel to see all sorts of men every where so
debaucht, and guilty of so many abominable crimes, seeing they were persuaded
and encouraged by the example of those that they did adore, and from whom they
were to expect punishments or rewards.

His Epithets Herceus. Cui nihil Hercei profuitara Jovis. This Altar was in the
Yard or Hall of those that were free of the City.

Hospitalis Jupiter, Greek (...), because he was a Protector of strangers.
Sabadius Jupiter, Jupiter Hammon, whose Temple was in the midst of the Sands,
and hills of Africa; for (...) is sand. Jupiter Dodoneus, who gave Oracles in
the old Oaks of the woods of Dodon. Olympius Jup. He was also named Jupiter
Philus, because he is the God of love; Heterius, because he is the God of
fellowship; Homogenius, the God of kindred; and Enhorcius Jup. because he is
the God of Oaths. He is styled Aratrius, Caeneus, Carius, Gnidius, Hypatus,
Omarius, etc.


Jupiter was the chief of the Gods; therefore Kings and Princes were anciently
named Joves. The Cretans did own him for their Countryman, as the Thebans also,
and several other people; but the former did show many years the place where he
was buried, as Lucian informs us: He was nursed up by the Nymphs, and nourished
with the milk of a Goat; which he afterward promoted amongst the Stars, and
covered his Buckler with her skin; therefore he is called by the Poets
Aegiochus Jupiter; His Mother saved him from the cruelty of his Father, and of
the Titans her Brethren, who were always admitted into the room where she was
in Labor of her Children; as the Princes of the Blood Royal of France are,
when the Dauphin is born, into the Queens Chamber.

When Jupiter went to deliver his Father, an Eagle gave him a happy Omen of his
future victory and greatness, therefore he claimed that Bird as his own.

The Cecropes promised him assistance when he resolved to drive his Father out
of the Kingdom, but when they had received his money, they refused to follow
him, therefore he changed them into Apes.

As Soon as Jupiter had cast his father into prison, from whence he did
afterward escape into Italy, all the Gods came to congratulate with him for
his victory in a noble banquet unto which they were invited by him: Apollo sung
his praises in a purple garment.

Jupiter commanded that men should not feed upon humane flesh, but content
themselves with Acrons, therefore the Oak was dedicated to him. He is called
Jupiter a juvando, Despiter, quasi diei pater, the father of the day, and (...)
life because he is taken for the heavens and the firmament, that by their
continual motions and influences do entertain and infuse life into every thing,
as also because of the universal power of God, that moves and supports all
visible beings.

He had as many and as different Statues as Names, the Heathens painted him an
Old-Fellow sitting upon a Throne with a crown upon his head, clothed with a
rich garment sparkling with stars, and representing flashes of fire: In his
hand two globes that intimated Heaven and earth, under him Neptune's Trident
and a carpet, representing the tail and feathers of a Peacock. Sometimes they
gave him Thunderbolts in his hand, which were painted as crooked iron-bars,
sharp at the end, joined together in the middle. The Aegiptians that did
worship him in the figure of a Kam represented his providence, by a scepter
bearing in the top of it a great eye.

All the people of the world did worship him, especially the Romans, who
granted to him several Titles of honor, and erected many Temples to him in
their City, The chief was the Capitol, therefore he was called Capitolinus. He
was also named Deus pater indiges by Aeneas, when he arrived in Italy: Jupiter
Inventor by Hercules, when he recovered his Oxen that were lost, Jupiter
feretrius a feriendo hostem by Romulus, who built unto him a Temple. Jupiter
Stator a sistendo because he stopped the Romans in their flight at the request of
Romulus: Latialis Jupiter was he that was worshipped by the Latin People as
well as by the Romans. There was also in Rome Jupiter Sponsor, Jupiter
Imperator, Jupiter pistor, Jupiter Victor, Jupiter Lucetius a luce, Jupiter
Tonans, Jupiter Ultor, Conservator, and Jupiter Fagutalis, because the
Beech-tree was dedicated to him; Jupiter Praedator, Marianus, Pompeianus,
because Marius and Pompey had built for him these stately edifices.

CHAP. IV.
Of Juno, and of her Children.
IVno was named the Queen of the Gods, the Goddess of the Kingdoms and Riches,
because she was Wife of Jupiter. She had also a Jurisdiction and a Command over
Marriages, and Childbearing, which caused many fair Temples and Altars to be
erected to her Honor: She brought forth Hebe, Goddess of Youth, and placed and
advanced her so far in the favor of Jupiter, that she always poured forth unto
him Nectar to drink until she was displaced by Ganimedes. Vulcan was also her
Son; but when Jupiter saw how ill-shap't and ugly he was to behold when he came
first into the World, he kicked him down from Heaven, so that the poor Babe fell
upon the Earth, and broke one of his legs, whereof he halted ever after. When
he came to be of years, he followed the Trade of a Blacksmith, and work't for
the rest of the Gods, especially for Jupiter, for whom he made Thunderbolts:
For that purpose he had several Forges, or Shops, in the Isles of Lemnos,
Lipara, and in Mount Aetna: Some were appointed to assist him, and they were
called Cyclopes, because they had but one great Eye in the middle of their
Forehead; the most famous of them were Brontes, Steropes, and Pyracmon.

But that we may return to the affairs of Juno, the Poets do mention a great
injury that she pretended to have received from Jupiter when he was resolved
alone, without Vulcanus did the office of a Midwife at this time, for with a
sharp hatchet he slit Jupiters Skull for Pallas to creep out* Lucian in his
Dialog.
her assistance, to bring forth the Goddess Pallas, otherwise called Minerva.
They tell us, that he performed his design, and that Pallas came out of his
Brain in a gallant Armor, the Lance in her hand, dancing a Dance called the
Pyrrhick, which was proper to Martial Men, invented by Pyrrhus Son of Achilles,
and which was agreeable to a Tune named Hyporchematick: For these reasons she
was held to be the Goddess of War, and to have a hand and in-sight in all the
Battles; they did nevertheless attribute to her the invention of several Arts
and Sciences, which are the Ornaments of Peace; therefore the Athenians did pay
unto her a singular homage and respect, having instituted several solemn
Festivals in honor of this Goddess, as the Panathenees which were kept with
diverse rare Spectacles, and expressions of joy. Juno was inwardly chaft at the
birth of this Goddess, because she had no hand in the business; and therefore
she resolved to revenge her self upon Jupiter by a like action; she resolved to
have a Child without any acquaintance with her Husband. The Goddess Flora says
Ovid taught her the means, she gave unto her a certain Flower, of a strange
nature, which caused her to conceive and bring forth Mars, the God of War, as
well as Pallas.

Juno did fee and entertain in her service a certain Fellow full of Eyes,
called Argus, to observe and relate unto her the actions of her Husband
Jupiter. When part of his Eyes were oppressed with sleep, the rest were waking.
But Jupiter was not pleased with this watchful Spy, and therefore he sent the
God Mercurius to lull him asleep with his Pipe, and kill him, at which Juno was
inwardly grieved: Therefore to reward the faithfulness of her dead Servant, she
changed him into a stately Peacock, that shows yet in his feathers the great
number of the Eyes of Argus.

Greek (...) invado quia aer omnia penetrat and invadit.
Juno the Sister of Jupiter signifies the Air, she saved her Brother from death
as soon as he was born; he requited that good Office by Marrying, and raising
her to the honor of Queen of Heaven and Earth: But she was not willing to
consent to this Incestuous Marriage, therefore Jupiter employed his skill and
wit to bring it to pass: He took the shape of a Cuckoo, and in Storm lighted
upon her Lap: Juno out of pity received the Bird into her Bosom, to shelter it
from the violence of the weather; but when the subtle Bird felt the warmth of
her body, it took again the form of Jupiter, who obtained his desire, by a
promise of present Marriage.

Now Juno was represented upon a Throne, sitting with a Scepter in her hand,
and a Crown of Gold upon her head, that did touch the Clouds; round about her
was the fair and beautiful Iris, that is called Nuncia Junonis, the Messenger
of Juno; on every side she was attended by Peacocks, named therefore Aves
Junonis, the Birds of Juno. She was also represented in another manner, as she
was taken for the Moon. She was thus called Lucina, and painted with beams of
light about her face, sitting upon Lions, a Scepter and a Spindle in her hand;
and because the Moon bath a power upon Women with-child, they did make their
Addresses unto her in their Pain, saying, Juno Lucina fer opem.

Juno was also painted with Sheers, and a Platter in her hand, clothed with a
Goats skin, crowned and girded with Vine Branches, and under her feet a
Lyoness. On the top of her Scepter, which was sometimes given to her, was the
Image of a Cuckoo, and Castor and Pollux, two Meteors waiting upon her.

Juno was adored by all Nations of the World, and by all sorts of people; the
Soldiers called her Curetis, the common people Populania, the rich Misers
Soticena, or Sospitatrix, Sospita Juno was worshipped in Lanuvium. Tit. Live.
and Opipena, the new-married people Inderduca, Domiduca, Unxia, Cinxia, the
women with-child Fluona, and Lucina. Three Cities did worship her more than any
others, Mycenae, Sparta, and Argos. The Poets say, Juno Februalis was adored in
February.
that she spent her (...) at Samos, a very pleasant Island of (...) and that
Jupiter married (...) certain a yearly Solemnity was (...) year in remembrance
of her (...) Junonia; at which time the Maids (...) did run Races From hence
Marriage is called Vnicla Jugalia.
in honor of this (...) whom they did petition for Husbands, (...) her Juno
Pronuba, and Jugalis; and in Rome an Altar was dedicated to this Juno Juga,
where the new-married couple did appear to offer Sacrifice. Che tien del
nodomantal la cura vinz. Cattar. Im. de gli Dei.
In which this is remarkable, that they did take from the sacrificed Beast the
Gall, and did cast it behind the Altar, to express how all displeasure should
be banished from such persons.

The Temple of Juno was open on the top, and Numa Pompilius commanded that all
Whores should not so much as touch or come near her Walls, because there had
been none so much persecuted by such sort of people as she, and none had
greater cause to abominate them, for her lecherous Jupiter was seldom without
half a dozen Mistresses. In the War of the Giants, in the general fright of the
Gods, she fled into Egypt, and took upon her the form of a white Cow, which may
be the cause wherefore this Animal was adored by the Inhabitants. The Heathens
offered to her a white Cow, Geese, and Ravens in Sacrifice. Adrianus, the Roman
Emperor, presented her a rich gift in one of her Temples; he dedicated a
Peacock, her beloved Bird, of pure Gold, with wings round about, at the
extremities, he caused all manner of sparklings and precious stones to be put
in, that they might serve in lieu of eyes, and represent the perfect form of a
Peacock.

Juno was often offended with Jupiter, as she had just reason, and he in like
manner was displeased with her; therefore in his anger Homerus tells us, that
he hanged her up by the heels, at which sight all the Gods took Juno's part,
and labored to cast Jupiter out of Heaven, but their endeavors were in vain.

She hated all the Children of her Husbands Concubines, especially Hercules;
therefore she appointed unto him all his Adventures, and he in a tumult
unfortunately gave her a wound.

This Juno was named Juno Sororia. There was also in Rome Juno Calendaris,
because she was honored in the Calends. Juno Novelia, Juno Februata; Opigena
Populona, etc.
It was to this Goddess that Horacius, who got the Victory of the Curii, built
a Temple, to make expiation for the horrid crime committed in his anger, for he
killed in a fury his own Sister, because she did weep for her Sweetheart that
her Brother had killed in a Duel, upon which the happiness of Rome did depend.

Ilithya was also daughter of Juno, called otherwise Lucina.

Praepositam timidis parientibus Ilithyam. Ovid Mesam. lib. 9.


Junones were the Genii or Demones that waited upon women, but of that
hereafter.

The Children of Juno were Hebe, Vulcan, Mars.

Hebe the Goddess of Youth was painted as a dainty Girl, covered with Garlands
and Flowers: Her Mother conceived her in a pleasant manner, without any
acquaintance with a Male; She is named (...). Hom. 4. Iliad.
for she was invited to a sumptuous Feast by Neptune in Jupiters Palace, and
there she met with a dainty Sallad of Lettice that moved her imagination, and
caused her to conceive this Hebe, whose Beauty advanced her into Jupiters
favor, and in his service, for her Office was to present the Cup to him when
he was at Dinner with the other Gods.

A misfortune happened to this young Girl at a solemn Feast in the presence of
all the Heavenly Company that was invited, her heels tript up, and discovered
her nakedness to them; which accident made Jupiter remove her, and place
Ganimedes in her Office. She had several fair Temples built unto her,
especially near Athens, where all Vagabonds and idle Knaves did find a
favorable Sanctuary, and good entertainment. The Poets tell us, that when
Hercules was admitted amongst the Gods, Jupiter recommended him for a Husband
to Hebe, who was married to him. From this jolly and pleasant Goddess all merry
Meetings of Youth are Greek (...).
named Hebetria.

In Greek (...) from (...) to be bright. Vulcanus a volvendo; or a volando
Candor.
Vulcanus was also a Child of Juno, nursed by Thetis, and the Nymphs, when
Jupiter kicked him out of Heaven. He is taken for the Natural Heat; therefore
the Egyptians in their Hiereglyphicks did represent an Egg proceeding out of
Jupiters mouth, from which Vulcanus was engendered. The Lightning was ascribed
to him, when it was dusky and darkish, as the white Lightning to Minerva, and
the red to Jupiter. He was an ill-shap't Wretch, insomuch The Star of Mars in
the Heavens, receives an influence from, and is a friend to Venus. This is the
cause of the Fable. Philostr.
that Minerva scorned his offers when she was woed by him; he behaved himself
very generously in the War of the Giants, for he began the onset, whiles many
of the other Gods fled away. His two Wives were Aglaia, and Venus. The latter
had no kindness for him, because of his def rmity; therefore she sought
satisfaction somewhere else, and readily accepted of the embraces Gallus was
the Sentinel at the door; and because he gave not notice of Apollo's rising, he
was turned into a Cock, that now foretells his rising in the Heavens
of Mars: But Apollo gave notice of the meeting to poor Vulcan, who found a way
to trapan the Knave in bed with his Wife: He spread his Net all over the place,
and caught them there together; and to put them to greater shame, he sent for
all the Gods to be Witnesses of their dishonesty.

He was the only Blacksmith that made the Chariot of the Sun, the Armor of the
Gods, and of the Heroes, and Jupiters Thunderbolts. His Feasts were named
Protervia. The Romans did run about with lighted Torches in honor of him, and
did sacrifice unto him the Lion.

Greek (...).
Mars, or Mavors, was another of Juno's Children, begot without her Husbands
assistance, The Scyihians had no other God. Justin.
in revenge of the affront received from Jupiter, who did bring forth Pallas in
the same manner, without Juno's privity. He was never Herod says, that they
worshipped other Gods, but did allow no Temples nor Statues but only to Mars.
welcome to Jupiter in his Minority; he was nursed by Thero in the Northern
Climates that are inclinable to War, He was represented upon a high Chariot,
drawn by two furious Horses, named by some Terror and Fear, with all his Armor
Defensive and Offensive: His attendance Claudian.
were three frightful Spirits, Apprehension, Contention, and Clamor: Before him
Fame full of Eyes, Ears and Tongues, did fly. His Sister was Bellona, that had
usually a Bloody Whip in her hand. He was said to be born in Thracia, because
the people of that Country did offer unto him Humane Sacrifices, as other
people did the Wolf, the Vulture, the Dog, the Pie, the Calf, and the Horse. He
was mightily esteemed of the Romans, because they held their beginning from
him, and gave out, that Romulus was his Son: Yet they would not suffer his
Statues and Images to be raised in their City, but caused them to stand
without. to intimate their inclination rather to Foreign then Civil War. His
Priests were named Salii, because they did skip about his Altars that were
erected under the same Roof as those of Venus, to express the happy influences
that the Stars, Mars and Venus, did pour upon us when they meet in the
Nativity of Children.

Mavors sanguinea qui cuspide verberat urbes, Claudian.
Et Venus humanas quae laxat in otia curas, Aurati delubra tenent communia
Templi. The Poets take notice that Mars was released at the request of
Neptunus, when he was caught in Vulcans Bed with Venus; for that old God did
consider how it might be his own case to be surprised in the same manner.

CHAP. V.
Of Apollo, and of the Sun.
He is named (...), because he killed at Cuffs Phorbas a cruel Robber, that
hindered the access to his Temple in Delphos.
AT last Jupiter began to be weary of Juno, and to desire change; therefore to
satisfy his appetite, he cast his affections upon a certain Latona, whom he
entirely loved. Juno was enraged when she heard of her Rivals happiness, and
sent against her a Serpent of a prodigious bigness, named Python, which was
crept out of that filthy slime and matter that remained after the Deluge of
Deucalion, whereof we shall have occasion to speak hereafter. And to the end
that the poor Latona might not escape the fury of this Monster, Juno had
covenanted with the Earth to allow her no other retreat besides the Island of
Delos, which then was floting in the Aegean Sea, and sunk under water. Neptunus
out of pity raised it up, and fixed it in a place, so that it might serve for a
refuge and dwelling to this Exiled Creature, when she was near the time of her
Delivery. Latona was there brought to Bed of Apollo and Diana, upon the large
leaf of a Palm Tree, which by chance was found in that Desolate Island.

When Apollo came to be of years, he remembered unto what shifts and extremity
the Serpent Python had reduced his poor Mother; therefore he killed him with
his Bow and Arrows, after a long and grievous fight, during which, these words
Jo Paean were frequently heard. From hence is derived the custom of singing
and repeating these words in the public Plays, in the Triumphs and Victories.

After this happy Combat, he begot a Son called Esculapius, whom he committed
to the Tuition of Chiron the Centaur, to be brought up in the Mysteries of
Physic, whereof he was afterward esteemed the God. But Jupiter struck this
Esculapius with his Thunderbolts, because he restored to life Hyppolitus, who
had been torn in pieces by his own Chariot Horses when he fled from the fury of
his Father, as we shall see in the story of Theseus. The death of Esculapius
did not a little afflict Apollo, and because he could not revenge himself upon
Jupiter, he killed the Cyclopes that had made the Thunderbolts with which his
Son had been smitten. Jupiter was highly incensed at him for this action, and
therefore banished him out of Heaven, and deprived him of the privileges of his
Divinity for a time. Whiles he was thus banished and shut out of Heaven, he
endured a World of misery: His poverty constrained him to go to the service of
Admetus, King of Thessaly, to feed his sheep for a livelihood: For that reason
he was esteemed the God of Shepherds: In this Quality they did offer unto him
the Wolf, the Enemy of the Sheep. From hence the Prove. (...), a witty child,
because he was a young Thief.
As he did one day keep his Cows, Mercurius the God of Thieves stole from him
one of the best, and when he did complain of it, and sought satisfaction, the
former Thief very subtly stole from him his Quiver that hung upon his
shoulders, all which turned into sport and laughter.

The misery of Apollo could not hinder him from falling in love with a certain
Daphne, who would never consent unto his entreaties. As she was one day running
from his pursuits, she was changed into a Laurel, which therefore was
consecrated unto Apollo. But he met afterward with a greater misfortune, when
he played with little Hyacinthus his Darling, for while he was sporting with
him by chance, he struck him in such a manner, that he died presently after.
The Earth was so much moved with compassion at this unhappy accident, that she
caused the Flower Hyacinthus, a Violet, to rise out of the drops of his Blood,
to perpetuate his Name to Posterity. Apollo was in no small danger by this
misfortune; for some did concern themselves for the death of Hyacinthus,
seeking to revenge themselves upon him; of whom being jealous, he fled to the
City of Troy, where he met with Neptunus, fallen also into the displeasure of
Jupiter.

Both together seeing themselves reduced to extreme poverty in a strange
Country, far from their possessions, resolved to enter themselves in the
service of King Laomedon, to help him to build his City. They work't long for
this ungrateful King; but when they saw no hopes of the Reward promised to
their labor, they threatened to revenge themselves. Neptunus with the swelling
Waves of the Sea had almost drowned him, and all his people; and Apollo sent
amongst them such a furious Pestilence, that it left every where nothing but
Desolation and Slaughter.

When Laomedon saw into what inconvenicies his perfidious dealing had brought
him, he consulted the Oracle, that informed him, that there was no other way to
appease the displeasure of these angry Gods, but by exposing every year a
Virgin of Troy to be devoured by the Sea Monsters. The Lot fell at last upon
the Kings Daughter Hesione; but Hercules offered to deliver her, and fight with
the Sea Monster, if Laomedon would give him for the reward of his service the
Horses begot of a Divine Seed, which were then in his Stables at Troy. The
promise was made, but perfidious Laomedon stood not to it when Hesione was set
at liberty, which so much incensed Hercules, that he laid Siege to the City of
Troy, took and sacked it, killed Laomedon, and carried his Son into Captivity,
who was afterward redeemed by the Trojans, and for that cause was named
Priamus; as we shall see in the sequel of our discourse.

After all these misfortunes, Apollo reassumed again his Divinity, and became
one of the most noted of all the Gods, not only by the great number of Oracles
that he did give in several parts of the World, but also by the several
Functions and Offices that were attributed unto him, and by the famous persons
that were said to Be his Sons.

First, He was taken for the Sun, and in this Quality he had the name of
Pboebus given to him, that is by interpretation, The Light of the Living. It is
true, that some do differ in their relations concerning the Sun, and say, that
his Father was one of the Titans, named Hyperion, from whence it is that he is
called Titan. They have imagined that he rides upon a glorious Chariot, that
every night he goes down to rest in the Ocean, until the next day, when the
Hours do prepare him his Horses to begin again his course. He did seem to
delight in the Isle of Rhodez, more than any other part of the World, for this
reason; because, as Solinus does report, there is no day never so dark nor
clouded, but the Sun appears to the Inhabitants there: Besides they say, that
in this Island he begat his Daughter Rhodia. He sent down in it showers of
Gold, and caused on his Birthday Roses to open and spread. The From hence the
Proverb (...) of a huge body
Rhodians did dedicate unto him that famous Colossus of Brass, of 800 feet in
height, and of a proportionable bigness, which was broken down by the Sarazens,
that took the Island in the year of our Lord 684. When it was beat in pieces,
they loaded above 900 Camels with it. This was esteemed one of the seven
Wonders of the World.

The Pythia did offer Oracles in her belly without the assistance of mouth or
tongue, therefore called (...) Plutarch de Orac.
Amongst the most famous places where Apollo did give Oracles, Delphos was one
of the chief: In it was a glorious Temple, or Fabric, enriched with
innumerable gifts, which came from every corner: In it was a Woman* Priest,
named Poebas, otherwise Pithia or Pythanissa, that received the Enthusiasme,
sitting upon a little Table supported with three feet; it was called (...), or
Cortina, because it was covered with the skin of the Serpent Python.

This God was also esteemed the Inventer of Music, he flead the Satyr Marsias
alive, because he was so impudent and daring as to challenge him to sing. The
Muses, that were Daughters of Jupiter, and of Mnemosyne, were committed to his
tuition; their names were Calliope, Clio, Erato, Thalia, Melpomene,
Therpsicore, Euterpe, Polymnia, or Polyhymnia, and Urania. They had several
names, according to the several places where they did dwell: Sometimes they
were called Pierides, because of the Forest Pieris in Macedonia, where they
were said to be born; sometimes Heliconiades, from the Mountain Helicon, which
is nigh to their beloved Parnassus, from whence also they were named
Parnassides, and Cytherides, from the Mountain Cytheron; Castalides, and
Aganippides, from two noted Fountains that were consecrated unto them.

These Muses, by the assistance of Apollo, invented Music: Their chief Office
was to be present at the solemn Festivals, and Sacred Banquets, and there to
sing the praises of the famous men, that they might encourage others to
undertake glorious actions. They were esteemed for their Chastity which they
did profess so much, that when Admis, the Favorite of Venus, offered to stir up
in them some inclinations of Love, they fell upon him, and put him to death.

The Children of Apollo were many, besides that Rhodia mentioned before: He had
Atha, the Father of Medea, King of Colchos. unto whom was committed the Golden
Fleece, by Phrixus the Son of Athamas, King of Thebes, when he fled with his
Sister from the fury of his Stepmother, as you shall see in the eleventh
Chapter. Apollo had another Daughter named Pasiphae, married to Minos King of
Crete, and who became at last enamoured with a Bull, by whom she had the
Monster called Minotaure. Phaeton was also his Son. This young Gallant had an
ambitious fancy to govern the Chariot of the Sun, and to give light to the
World for one day: But not knowing the right way through the middle of the Air,
and wanting strength to rule the winged Horses that ran so swiftly, he set the
Heaven and part of the Earth in a From this accident men under the line are
black, as some say.
flame: For which cause Jupiter being offended, killed him with his
Thunderbolts, and cast him headlong into the River of Padus in Italy, that is
otherwise called Eridanus; where his Sisters, afflicted with his misfortune,
were changed into Poplar-trees, and their Tears into Amber, as the Poets say.

After this Conflagration, there happened an Universal Deluge, when Deucalion,
the Son of Prometheus, was King of Thessaly; for the waters were so great, as
they say, that all living Creatures were destroyed, only Deucalion, and Pyrrha
his Wife, were forced for the safety of their lives to seek a retreat upon the
top of Mount Parnassus. When the Waters were abated, and that they saw
themselves alone in the World, they requested the Gods to create some other men
to keep them company, or to deprive them of their lives. Themis, the Goddess of
Justice, sent them word, that their desire might be accomplished, if they did
but cast behind them the bones of their Grandmother. They presently imagined,
that this Grandmother was the Earth; therefore according to this order, they
gathered up the stones, and cast them over their backs: Those that were cast by
Deucalion, were turned into men; and those that came from Pyrrha, became women.
By this Stony Generation all the Earth has been filled. This Deluge and
another that happened in the time of Ogyges King of Thebes, are the most
remarkable in the writings of the Poets.

Addit. Not.
This Deucalion is commended for his Piety and Justice, and is said to have
built the first Temple for the worship of God. It is plain by the circumstances
mentioned in the Poets, that this Fable is borrowed from the truth of the
Scripture, from the History of Noah, who saved himself and his family from the
universal Deluge by Gods appointment. Nicolaus Damascenus and Berosus Chaldeus,
two of the ancientest Historians do mention this Deluge, with some difference
from the Scripture: Moreover, they say, That the Ark in which mankind was
saved, did continue till their days upon Mount Barin in Armenia, where it was
worshipped, as well in requital of that good service that it had rendered, as
because of those Diseases that it did cure, and the miracles that it did work.
Abidenus Eusebius. Evangel. praepar.
relates the same Story with some change of Names. This is an infallible a
argument to prove the Truth of this Story, seeing so many persons that did live
at such a distance one from another, that they had scarce any correspondency
between themselves, but none with the Possessors of Moses writings, do all
agree in one Relation. From hence it may be easily proved, That they had this,
and all their other Stories that are agreeable to those of Moses, from the
Tradition of their Forefathers, as Moses had his.

(...) ab (...) a destruendo.
Apollo was one of the most gentile Gods of the Heathens, of whom they do not
relate such filthy Stories as of the others: He was the God of Wisdom, Physic,
Music, Learning, and His Names are Nomius, Abaeus, Aegyptius, Agraeus,
Cerdeus, Lycius, Grynaeus, Delius, Laemius, Nepaeus, Pataraeus, Parnopius,
Hyperboreus, Thyraeus, all these Names are derived from places where he was
worshipped.
Arching: He was represented as a young man without a Beard, and Rays of light
about his Head; in one Hand was a Harp and three Graces, and in the other a
Shield and Arrows. He was reputed the Father of many Eminent Persons, of
Aesculapius, of Eleutherus, of Delphus, of Philandrus, of Janus, of Miletus,
and of Arabus, etc.

He was famous for Oracles at Delphs: There was a most stately Temple, enriched
with the Gifts of many Princes dedicated to Apollo: Croesus enriched it with
much Gold and Silver. In it was a dark Cave, where a Trivet of Gold did stand,
upon which the Pythia or Priest of Apollo did sit. When the Oracle was
consulted she began immediately to swell and foam, being possessed with an evil
Spirit, who did give an answer to the parties that were present; they did never
appear with empty hands. The Custom was, before the Oracle was questioned, to
offer sacrifice to Apollo that was there named Ismenius. Now the Sacrifices
that were pleasing to him were Bullocks, Lambs, and young Heifers: The Wolf
also, the Crow, the Swan, the Hawk, the Juniper* the Laurel, the Olive, and the
Hyacinth were consecrated to him. Some do say, That under the Trivet has been
seen a Dragon, (...) Prove. an insallible truth.
that did give Answers to the Petitioners. In several places he did give
Oracles, but the most noted was Delphs a City in Greece, that is said to be the
middle of the World, for the Poets report, That Jupiter, being desirous to know
where the middle was, let fly two Eagles at the same instant, the one from the
East, the other from the West, and that they both met at the City of Delphs:
Therefore in remembrance of this, a Golden Eagle was laid up in the Temple and
consecrated to Apollo.

During his Disgrace he assisted Alcathous, as well as Laomedon, to build his
Labyrinth, where he had fixed a stone, upon which his Harp being laid, it gave
unto it the wonderful virtue of The Persians adored Apollo or the Sun in the
figure of a Lion, crowned with a Diadem holding the Horns of an Ox in his paws.
They called the Sun Mithra.

Tertullian lib. 1. contra Marcionem and Q. Curtius.


sounding melodious Tunes, when it was touched with any hard Instrument.

The Romans erected several Altars to this God, distinguished by many Names.
There was one to Apollo Coelispex, and another to Apollo Medicus: And when
Augustus got the Victory of Antonius and Cleopatra, he built a Temple to Apollo
Palatinus, called also Actiacus Navalis, and Paraetonius: The Doors were of
Ivory, and Gold, and within were many Statues of Gold and Silver; it was also
enriched with the Spoils of the Enemy. There was also in Rome Apollo,
Sandaliarius, Sosianus, Tortor, Thuscanicus. They did solemnize in honor of
him public Plays called Ludi Apollinares.

(...) ab a privativa and (...) quia non sinit mori vel ab (...) quia medici
sunt crudeles, and blandi Omnes medicidi cebantur Aesculapii.
Aesculapius was one of his Sons, begotten of the Nymph Coronis, and because
she had admitted another to her Bed, when she was big with Child of Diana, some
say Apollo killed her with an Arrow, but he saved the Child by cutting it out
of her Womb. The truth is, This Aesculapius was a poor Infant cast away and
laid in a Wood near Epidaurus, by the cruel Parents that were ashamed to own
it. Some Huntsmen fortunately found it, and seeing a lighted flame a^out the
Head, they looked upon it as a prognostic of the Child's future Greatness; it
was therefore delivered by them to a Nurse named Trigo; the Poets say a Goat
gave him suck, he studied Physic under Chiron the Centaure: He proved so
excellent a proficient in this kind of Learning, that he was generally esteemed
the God of Physic. In the City of Tetrapolis, belonging to the Ionians, he had
a Temple full of rare Gifts, offered by those that did ascribe their Recoveries
from sickness to the Power of Aesculapius. The walls also were covered and hung
with the memorials of the miracles done by him.

The Romans sent for him from Epidaurus Therefore Ovid says he was changed
into a Serpent.
when their City was troubled with the Plague. They say that the Serpent that
was Worshipped there for Aesculapius did follow the Ambassadors of its own
accord to the Ship that transported it to Rome; Where it was placed in a Temple
built in the Isle called Tiberina. The sick people were wont to lie in it, and
when they found themselves no better, they did scold at Aesculapius.

He was painted as an old man with a long Beard, Crowned with a branch of a
Bay Tree, in his Hand was a staff full of knots, about which a Serpent had
twisted it self; at his Feet did stand a Dog or an Owl. These particulars were
Representations and Hierogliphicks of the Qualities of a good Physician: Who
must be as cunning as a Serpent, as vigilant as a Dog, as full of Experience as
an old Senior, to handle such a difficult and troublesome staff as Physic.

It is reported of Dionysius of Sicily, that he cast a good jest upon
Aesculapius to cloak his Sacrilege; for when he came into a Temple where the
Statues of Apollo and Aesculapius were together, and that of Aesculapius had a
grave Beard of massive Gold, he told him that it was not just he should have a
Beard, and that Apollo his Father should have none: therefore he caused it to
be taken away, and melted for his use.

Unto this God they did dedicate the Serpent, the Raven, the Goat, the Dog, and
the Dragon: And for his sake in the Woods, near the City of Epidaurus, the
Grecians did celebrate Plays every five years, nine days after the Isthmian.

CHAP. VI.
The History of Diana.
THis Goddess has three names, either because of three Offices that are
attributed to her, or because the Poets do confound three Divnities in one: She
has been represented with three Heads, and then she was called Triple Hec^te:
In the Heaven she is Luna, the Moon: In the Earth Diana: And in Hell Pros^rpina.

First, as she is the Moon she is called Phoebe, because of her Brother Phoebus
from whom she borrows her Light: She is also named Cynthia and Delia, from the
place of her Nativity. She grew amorous of the Shepherd Endymion, that Jupiter
had condemned to a perpetual sleep, because he had been too familiar with Juno
his Wife. Diana hid him from the sight of Jupiter in a Mountain. The truth is,
That Endymion did study very much the motions of the Moon, and for that end he
was wont to pass the nights in the retired places, to behold her with less
interruption. The Sorcerers of Thessaly did boast to have the power of drawing
her to the Earth by their Charms. They imagined that she did come here below to
walk amongst us when she did disappear to our eyesight by an Eclipse.

She is also called Diana upon Earth, and so she is the Goddess of Woods, of
Mountains, and of Huntsmen: Therefore she is always painted armed with Bow and
Arrows, and threescore Maids or Nymphs in her train. She had some Office when
Women were Juno is also called Lucina.
brought to Bed, and so she was named Lucina. She did always keep her
Virginity, and therefore would never suffer any thing to the prejudice of her
Honor: For that reason she did severely punish the rashness of the Hunter
Acteon, who having met her with her followers, he beheld her with too much
curiosity whiles she was washing her self. She was not content to load him with
reproaches, but changed him into a Deer, so that his Dogs not knowing him for
their Master they tore him in pieces. At Ephesus was her chief Temple, which
was one of the Wonders of the World. Erostratus set it on fire that his name
might be rendered famous, having no other means to get renown but by this wicked
deed. The Ephesians did command that none should offer to mention his name upon
pain of Dealth. It is remarkable that Alexander the Great came into the World
the very day that this incendy or burning happened in Asia.

It was the custom of certain people amongst the Scythians, named Tauri, upon
the Euxin-Sea, when they paid their homage to this Goddess, to offer unto her
nothing but humane sacrifices: As many Greeks as did unhappily make Ship wrack
upon their Coast, and all the strangers that did fall into their hands, were
condemned to bleed upon her Altars, as we shall see more at large in the Story
of Orestes.

Finally this Goddess with three Faces was Proserpina in Hell, although some
esteem Proserpina to be the Daughter of Jupiter, and of Ceres, who was ravished
by Pluto, when she went abroad upon Mount Aetna in Sicily to gather flowers:
Therefore it is said that Ceres her Mother, hearing of her misfortune,
traveled all over the World to seek after her: And at that time taught men to
Sow, to Manure the Ground, to Reap, and change their Food of Acrons into that
of Bread. For that reason she is worshipped as the Goddess of Corn.

Addit. Not. (...) valeo quia potens erat Virgo, and incolumis a voluptatibus
aliena.
Diana the Goddess of Hunting, Childbearing, Virginity, and Dancing, is said
to be the Daughter of Hiperion, by others of Tartarus, or of Coeus, or of
Aristaeus; but the plurality do make her the Daughter of Jupiter and Latona:
Her Brother was Apollo, and because she was first born, the Poets say that she
did this good Office to him and her Mother, as to help her to be Delivered of
him in a Desolate Island where no Midwife was to be found; therefore she is
esteemed Therefore by the Greeks called (...).
a Goddess that had a hand in bringing Children into the World. She always kept
her Virginity, therefore she is represented by a Greek Poet petitioning
Jupiter. (...).


This shows the nature and property of the Moon.
She was painted with her Bow and Arrows in a Silver Chariot drawn by two white
Staggs, sometimes by two Horses, one black the other white: On her She was
called from the places where she was adored, Diana, Taurica, Persica, Minthia,
Ephesia, Forensis, Lycea, Sospita, Leucophryne, Salaminia, Alphedia* Euclea,
etc. And Jaculatrix, Venatrix, (...), Triformis, (...) destroyer of beasts,
etc. Therefore named Lya or Lua.
Shoulders were two Wings to express her swiftness, and in her hands were a Lion
and a Leopard. She delighted in Hunting, and therefore she was named Dyctinnis,
from (...), a Net used by Hunters.

She killed the Son of Pyrenes the Nymph in a chafe, his mother hearing of
this misfortune, poured forth such a quantity of tears, that she was changed
into a Fountain of that Name.

And because she was a Virgin, and no Lover of Marriage, the young Virgins that
had a mind to change their condition, did first offer Sacrifice to appease and
satisfy this Goddess: And when their Belly did begin to rise so high that
their Virginal Girdle was too little for them, they came to offer it in the
Temple of Diana: From hence is derived this expression, Zonam solvere, which
signifies to be with Child.

The Hunter Alphaeus was a Suter to Diana, but could never obtain his request.
Unto her were sacrificed Men, and Women, Bulls, Oxen, Boars, and the first
fruits of the Seeds of the Earth: Which because King Oeneus neglected to offer
unto her, she sent a wild Boar of a prodigious bigness into his Territories, to
cause there a destruction, as Ovid tells us. The Heathens There were three
degrees amongst her Priests, (...), Novices entered into the Office, and (...)
that were grown old in the Service. Plutarch.
did sacrifice Virgins upon her Altars, and instead of them afterward a White
Heart. The most noted place where she was worshipped was Ephesus, her Temple
there was built and contrived by Chersiphron, and enlarged and enriched by
every Prince afterward: In it were a hundred twenty seven Pillars, crected by
so many Kings: It was four hundred twenty five foot long, and two hundred and
twenty foot broad: When it was burnt by Erostratus but the Ephesians rebuilt it
again.

Under the Protection of this Goddess were the Vagabonds and all Debtors, and
all sorts of Woods. Her Images were commonly placed in the Corner of the
Streets, and Ways, with two Dogs chained at her Feet, and therefore called
Trivia Diana.

In Greek (...) a (...) maneo per antiphrasin quia non manet eadem.

The Romans did offer unto her the spoils of the Enemy. T. Livius 5. Decad.
lib. 5.


Some say that Luna, otherwise Diana, was the Daughter of Hesperion and Thaea,
who sorrowing above measure for her dear Brother Sol, that was murdered and
cast into the Po in Italy, she drowned her self also in that River. Sol
afterward appeared to his Mother in a Dream, and desired her not to weep for
his misfortune, because he had obtained thereby immortality with his Sister.
This Dream she related to the people, who transferred the names of Sol and Luna
to the two Lights of the Heavens, that were before named Fires: And because
Thaea did in a frantic manner, with a Kettle in her hand run up and down the
Country making a noise, they performed the Sacrifices to Luna with the noise of
Drums, Kettles, Cymbals, Trumpets, etc. And when she was eclipsed, they made a
rattling in the Streets that she might not hear the enchantments of Witches,
whom they thought to be the cause of it.

CHAP. VII.
Of Bacchus,
BAcchus was born in the City of Thebes, his Father was Jupiter, and Semele was
his Mother: She suffered her self while she was big with Child, to be deceived
by the persuasions of Juno, that did hate all the Mistresses of her Husband.
For Juno disguised her self and came in the habit of an old Woman to Semele,
telling her, That it did concern both her interest and honor, that Jupiter
should visit her in the same manner as he did Juno, with his Thunderbolts in
his Hand, and that she should beg from him this favor: Jupiter could not deny
her the request, but it happened that she was by this means consumed according
to Juno's desire. The Child's danger moved Jupiter, who presently separated him
from his dead Mother, and shut him in his Thigh until the full time of his
Birth was expired; So that he did him the Office of a Mother: For that reason
Bacchus is called Bimater: Other Names are given unto him as Dyonisius, Liber,
Bromius, Lycaeus, Lenaeus, Evan, etc.

As soon as he was born he was delivered to Silenus and the Nymphs, some say to
Ceres, to be by them brought up; they were therefore in reward of their good
Service received up into Heaven, and there changed into Stars called now Hyades.

When Bacchus came to be of Age he passed through most part of the World, and
made War upon the Indians, whom he overcame, and in their Country he built the
City of Nisa. He was the first that did introduce the custom of Triumphing; at
that time he did wear a Golden Diadem about his Head. His Chariot was drawn by
Tigers, his Habit was the Skin of a Deer, his Scepter was a little Lance,
adorned with branches of Ivy and of the Vine. He invented the use of Wine,
which he gave to the Indians to drink, at first they imagined that he had given
them Therefore named (...) cruel Bacchus.
poison, because it had made them both drunk and mad. They did commonly
sacrifice unto him Men, but since his expedition into India he was content with
other Sacrifices; for they offered unto him afterward nothing but Asses, and
Goats; to signify, that those that are given to Wine, become sots, as Asses,
or as lascivious, as Goats. Bacchus was brought up with the Nymphs, that
teaches us that we must mix Water with our Wine. He never had other Priests
but the Satyrs, and women because the latter had followed him in great
Companies in his Journeys, crying, singing, and dancing continually: Therefore
they were named Bacchanales, Mimallones, Lenae, Bassarides, Thyades, and
Menades, names that express fury and madness. The greatest solemnities in
honor of this God, were every three years, called therefore Trieteria, or
Orgia, from the word (...), which signifies a transport of anger, because these
mad Women clothed themselves wiih skins of Tigers, Panthers, and in their hair
hanging down they did run over the Mountains with lighted Torches in their
Hands, crying aloud, Eu hoe Evan, Eu hoe Bacche, that is, Good Son, a name
given to him by Jupiter when in the War with the Giants, this Bacchus in the
form of a Lion, ran violently upon the first and tore him in pieces.

Addit. Not. He was also painted riding upon a Tiger, in one hand a bunch of
Grapes, in the other a cup full of Wine.
Bacchus was usually painted with a Miter upon his Head, an Ornament proper to
Women, or with a bald Pate, which signifies the effect of the excess of Wine.
He had a Sickle in one Hand, a Pitcher in the other, and a Garland of R^ses
upon his Head. He did always appear young, because Wine moderately taken
purifies the blood, and keeps the Body in a youthful strength and color. His
Temple was next to Bacchus was called Hedereus, Servator, Lysius, Lyeus,
Nyseus, Leneus, Dithyambus, Briseus, Sabasius, (...) venerando Iacchus,
Elebeus, Thyoneus, Nyctileus, Ovid lib. 4. Metam. l. He is called Vitifer.
Minerva's, to express how useful Wine is to revive the Spirits, and enable our
Fancy to Invent; for that reason the Heathens did sacrifice unto him the
quick-sighted Dragon; and the chattering Py was also sacred to Bacchus, because
Wine does cause us to prattle more than is convenient. His Sacrifices were
usually performed in the Evening and at night: And it is reported of him, that
he carried the Torch before Proserpina, when she was led to be married to Pluto
the infernal God.

Juno could never endure the sight of him, therefore she labored to drive him
out of Heaven, and to banish him from all Society; he fled from her fury, and
as he was resting himself (...) Furore percitus, a mad man, and a mad god.
under a Tree, a Serpent named Amphisboena bit him, but he killed it with a Vine
branch, which is a mortal poison to some Serpents. Juno continued her hatred
for him because he was her Husbands Bastard, until she cast him into a fit of
madness, which made him undertake an expedition against the Indians, and run
over all the East Countries: Lusus was his companion, from him Portugal is
called Lusitania.

The truth is Liber, otherwise called Dionysius, or Osiris, by the Egyptians,
was a King of Nysa a City in Arabia Felix, who taught his people, and the
inhabitants of the adjoining Countries many useful Arts, as the ordering of the
Vine, and the preserving of Bees: He established several good Laws; he is
therefore called (...). He persuaded the people to sacrifice to their Gods. He
was therefore mightily honored by all civil Nations: The Graecians established
several Festival days in honor of him; the chief are their Trieteria, kept
every three years in remembrance of his Indian Expedition, performed in that
space of time, their Apaturia, their Phallica, and their Lenaea in the
beginning of the Spring, that he might He is called (...) Pindar. and Horace
lib. 2. Od. 19.
bless their Vines. This latter Festival was named Orgia, because his Proselytes
did express in it nothing but fury and madness, although this name is sometime
taken for all other Festivals. The Romans had appointed the Ascolia in honor
of Bacchus, at which time they carried the Statues of this God about their
Vineyards, This Festival is called the Festival of God. It is about the month
of May.
as the Papists do beyond Sea their Host, or the Priest's God about their Fields
that he might bless the fruits of the Earth. Afterward the procession of
Bacchus did return to his Altar, and there they raised the consecrated Victime
upon the top of a Lance, and did burn it to the honor of Bacchus; besides they
took his Statues and Images and did hang them upon high Trees, imagining that
they did contribute to the increase of the Grapes and of the Wine.

Now the Beasts that were dedicated to Bacchus, were the Goats, the Dragons;
the Egyptians offered Sows. The Trees consecrated to him were the Ivy-tree,
the Oak, the Fig, the Vine, the Smilax, and the Fir Tree. It was the Custom
that all those that did sacrifice to Bacchus, did approach his Altars with a
Branch or a Crown of that Tree in their hands, which they offered unto him.
Bacchus was sometimes seen with a Garland of Daffadil or Narcissus about his
head. His Priests were Women painted in frightful shapes, with Snakes for their
Girdles, and Serpents twisted about their hair to represent their cruelty: for
when they did perform the solemnity of this God, they did run with lighted
Tapers and Swords in their hands, and did sometimes destroy one another, as
Agave did her Son Pentheus, who despised Bacchus and his Sacrifices.

This God did, as the Poets tell us, punish all those persons that did neglect
or oppose his Worship. Alcethous was changed into a Batt, Philostrat.
because he would not Sacrifice to him. And the Pirates of Tire, that stole him
with an intent to abuse him, were changed into Dolphins; for when they had
brought him on Shipboard, he forced them into the Sea in the shape of a
furious Lion.

T. Livius lib. 39.
T. Livius relates a strange story of the Festivals of Bacchus, in Rome
introduced by a Fortune Tellers of Greece. Three times in a year the Women of
all qualities did meet in a Grove called Simila, and there did act all sorts of
Villainy, those that did appear most reserved were sacreficed to Bacchus; and
that the cries of the murdered and ravished Creatures might not be heard, they
did howl, sing, and run up and down with lighted Torches: When the Senate was
acquainted with these night meetings, and their filthy practices, they banished
them out of Italy.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Mercurius.
In Greek (...) quia interpres er at and Nuncius Deorum, Mercurius quasi
mercium curans.
HE was esteemed one of the most remarkable of the Gods, as well for the
Nobility of his Birth, as for diverse Offices attributed to him, and which are
very pleasantly described in the tenth Ode in the first Book of Horace.

He was the Son of Jupiter and Maia Daughter of Atlas, who bears up the Heavens
with his Shoulders, he was born upon the Mountain Cyllene, which is in Arcadia.

His ordinary Office was Ambassador and Interpreter of the Gods, in this
quality, he had Wings at his Heels, and at his Head, and in his Hand a
Caduceus, which was a Rod with two Serpents twisting about it their Tails, in
token of peace and amity. It is thought that Mercurius is the discourse which
interprets our mind and thoughts, it flies as he did, for there is nothing more
quick and speedy than the discourse, which has the power of gaining and
uniting hearts.

Another of his Offices was to show the ways, and to guide the deceased Souls
into hell; therefore the Poets do say, that none can die until Mercurius comes
with his Rod to break the tie that unites the soul to the body. When these
souls have passed many years in the Elysean Fields, and after that they have
drunk of the River Lethe, as we shall see in the following Chapters, the same
Mercurius, by the virtue of his Rod, does cause them to pass into other bodies
to live again, according to the judgment of those that believe the
Metempsycosis.

He invented the Lute, and a kind of Harp, which he presented to Apollo: He was
also the God of Eloquence, it did serve him mightily in his Embassies and
Negotiations: He was also the God of Thieves, because he had been a very subtle
Thief himself, as may appear by what he did to Apollo when he fed the sheep of
King Admetus, for he stole from him a great many, and was not discovered by any
but only by the Shepherd Battus, who was changed afterward into a Rock by
Mercurius, because he did reveal him, notwithstanding his promise to the
contrary.

Mercurius had one Son by the Goddess Venus his Sister, who was named
Hermaphrodite: This Child happened to meet with the Nymph Salmacis at a
Fountain; the Gods at her earnest request made of both their bodies but One, in
such a manner, that both Sexes were conserved entire. By this the Poets do give
us to understand the union that should be between married persons; they ought
to be but one body, and one heart.

Some say that this Mercurius made Daedalus so excellent an Architect, and
taught him so many rare inventions, that they rendered him famous all over the
World. This Daedalus left the City of Athens to offer his service to King Minos
in the Isle of Crete, or Candia, where he built the Labyrinth with so much art,
and with so many windings, that those that did enter in could scarce get out
again. He was shut into it himself, with his Son Icarus, because he had
offended the King; but he made wings for himself, and his Son, to fly through
the air out of prison. All things succeeded well to him, but for Icarus,
because he ventured too near the Sun, notwithstanding the admonition of his
experienced Father, the Wax that did unite his Wings to his shoulders melted by
the heat of the beams, and he fell into the Sea, which since bears his Name.

Addit. Not. He is said to be a watchful God.
Mercurius was admired for his nimbleness, which he expressed in several
occasions; when he stole from Mars his Sword, from Vulcan a pair of Tongs, from
Apollo his Arrows, and his Beasts, from Venus her girdle, and from Neptunus his
Trident: He had also undertaken to convey away the Thunderbolts of Jupiter, but
the fear of his displeasure hindered him: He was much reverenced by the
Egyptians, who did Egypt painted his face half black, and half of gold.
worship him in the Image of a Dog, called Anubis; and by the Gauls, who did
cause several men to bleed at his Altars: It is reported of him, that he taught
the Arts and Sciences in Egypt: It is probable, that the famous Trismegistus,
Some think him to be Moses.
who flourished in the first Ages of the World, was worshipped under this name
of Mercurius. As he was the God of Eloquence, they did consecrate unto him
Tongues: His Statue was usually placed in the Market, therefore he is called
(...). He was painted with yellow hair, and a purse in his hand, to intimate
the advantage we may expect by diligence and learning.

Mercurius was also the God of Merchants, of Shepherds, and of Dreams; the
Egyptians received from him their Arts and Sciences, and therefore they did
honor him more than other people; he was painted with the characters of an
ingenious man, because that they prove very ingenious that are born when the
Star of Mercurius g verns. He was named Cyllenicus from the Mountain Cyllene,
where he was bred and born; and Camillus, which signifies an Officer; Called
therefore (...).
his Statues was placed in the ways unto which they did offer their first
fruits; he and Minerva were worshipped in one Temple together; the Greeks
placed his Image over the door of their houses, because as he was the God of
Thieves, he was best able to protect the house from their violence.

His Image was sometimes made as that of Hercules Gallicus, mentioned by
Caesar, out of whose mouth came forth chains of gold, which were joined to the
ears of several little men that stood at his feet: This expresses the power of
Eloquence, that enslaves and governs the Auditors, and makes men more able to
command than strength and valor.

CHAP. IX.
Of Venus.
WE have already mentioned her birth in the first Chapter, but the other Poets
do tell us, that she was the Daughter of Jupiter, and of the Goddess Dione.

She was the Goddess of Love and Pleasures, because of her extraordinary
beauty: Her Chariot was dragged only by Swans and Pigeons, lascivious birds;
and the places where she was most adored were Amathus, Cythera, and Paphos,
pleasant Mountains in the Island of Cyprus.

She had several children; Hymeneus the God of Marriages was one of her Sons,
and the three Charities or Graces were her Daughters that kept her company: She
was also the Mother of the two Cupi^'s, Gods of Love; the one was honest, the
other was the God of unlawful and carnal pleasures; he had wings upon his back,
and a Quiver full of sharp and burning Arrows, by which he did inflame and heat
the hearts. The infamous Priapus, mentioned in Holy Writ, did also acknowledge
her for his Mother: Unto this God no other beast was offered but the Ass;
Aeneas, so often mentioned in the Latin Poets, was another of the Sons of
Venus; and although this shameful Divinity was like a Bitch prostituted to
every one, she had the God Vulcan for her Husband, of whom she never had any
Children.

Addit. Not.
In the City of Rome several Temples were built to Venus: There was one to
Venus Erycina, where was the Statue of Amor Laetheus, dipping his Arrows in a
River; another to Venus Libitina, where the Vrns and Coffins of the most
considerable of Rome were placed and kept. Another to Venus Verticordia, who
was also called Dea Viriplaca, where the Women did appear with their Husbands
when there was and difference between them, to find some way of reconciliation.
After the ceremonies appointed for that good office, they did return to their
home with that satisfaction that they did seek, there were several other Images
and Names of Venus. There was in Rome Venus Calvata, with a bald pate, Venus
Barbata, with a long beard, falling down to her Navel, Venus Cloacina, or
Cluacina. In Greece the Lacedaemonians erected From hence armed women are named
(...).
a Statue to '(...), in memory of that famous Victory obtained by their Women
of the Messenians, their deadly enemies. The usual Sacrifices were Doves,
Pigeons, Sparrows, Swans, etc. The Rose, an inducement to Love; the Myrtle
Tree, a symbol of Peace, were dedicated to this Divinity, who was some times
represented with fetters at her feet.

Her Children were many; Pryapus the God of Gardens was the most noted,
although he was the most deformed. It is reported, that when Bacchus came from
India, Venus went to meet him, and Crown him with Garlands and Roses; he in
requital begot on her this misshapen fellow Priapus, who came to be thus
deformed by the enchantments of Juno, for he was bewitched in his Mothers Womb.
He was no sooner in the World, but when she beheld his ugly shape, she caused
him to be conveyed out of her sight.

Hymeneus was the Son of Liber, and of Venus; he was named Thalassius amongst
the Romans; he was the Protector of Virginity, and the God of Marriages, unto
whom the newmarried Virgins did offer Sacrifice, as they did also to the
Goddess Concordia.

In the City of Rome there were two Cupido's, called Eros and Anteros, to
represent mutual love, for they strove one against another who should have the
branch of a Palm Tree that was between them to express that contention that
should be between friends, to deserve the Palm, or the honor of excelling in
love and friendship.

CHAP. X.
Of Aurora, and of such like Divinities.
THat light that we perceive before the rising of the Sun upon our Hemisphere,
has been taken for the Goddess Aurora, who according to the Opinion of the
Heathens, does come upon a Golden Chariot, having her fingers dropping with
Dew, to foretell the arrival of the Sun.

She fell in love with Tithonus, the Son of Laomedon, whom Jupiter at her
request made Immortal, without granting unto him the privilege of continuing
always young: When he came to be extreme old, he was impatient of those many
evils that did trouble him in his decrepit Age; therefore he consented to be
metamorphosed into a Grasshopper. This Fable contains much truth, for it is
certain, that Tithonus, a great lover of Astrology, was wont to rise by break
of day to behold the Stars: This continual and constant vigilance had rewarded
him with a long life, and preserved him from all sickness; but as Old Age,
amongst other Vices, is subject to excessive prattling, from hence it is that
they imagine that Old Tithonus was turned into a Grasshopper. From this Marriage
of Aurora with Tithonus, did proceed the courageous Memnon, who went to the
Trojan War to the assistance of Priamus, and was there called into the field
and killed by Achilles in a single fight, at which loss Aurora was extremely
afflicted; therefore when his body was in the flames, upon the pile, she
changed him into a Bird. The Egyptians to honor his valor, did dedicate unto
him a Brazen Statue, of which it is reported, that When it was visited with the
Beams of the Morning Sun, it appeared most pleasant, and yielded a harmony
grateful to the ear.

That Star that we call Venus, which rises at break of day, was the Daughter of
Aurora, it is called also Lucifer, or Phosphorus, when it marches before the
Sun; but at night, when it marches before the Sun; but at night, when it
remains behind, at Sunsetting, it is named Vesper, or Hesperus, whose Office
is to appear at the head of all the other Stars, when they come to enlighten
the night.

A^d^ N^^.
Aurora is said to be the Daughter of Hiperion, and the Nymph Thia, or of Titan
and the Earth: When her Husband grew old and loathsome, she labored by certain
Herbs to remedy her own grief, for by their virtue she restored unto him, in
his decrepit Age, his youthful heat and vigor, and removed from him those
weaknesses that were grievous unto both.

If the Heathens have enrolled Aurora in the number of the Gods, we must not
wonder at what they have believed concerning the Sun, the Moon, as we have
already seen, and of all the other Heavenly Bodies, who were, as they affirm,
certain men, and Animals translatid from Earth to Heaven, and changed into
Stars. Several of them held the Rank of Gods, as Hercules, Cepheus, and his
Wife Cassiope, his Daughter Andromede, his Son-in-law Perseus; Erichtonius, who
was begot of the Seed of Vulcan when he offered violence to Minerva, and was
also delivered to the Daughters of Cecrops to be nourished, who because they
observed not Minerva's advice, but curiously searched into the Basket where
this newborn Monster was hid, they became mad.

This Erichtonius was the first that invented the use of Coaches and Chariots
to hide his deformity, because he had nothing but Dragons feet: He was King of
Athens, and governed his people with Justice and Equity.

At the Northern Pole is that Constellation called Cynosura, or the Little
Bear, that serves to direct the Mariners: This She-Bear was one of the Nymphs
that had the tuition of Jupiter when he was an Infant. The Great Bear is
otherwise called Helice, or Callisto, she was Daughter of Lycaon, King of
Arcadia, and was changed into a Bear by the Goddess Diana, because she had
dishonored her Company, by suffering Jupiter to rob her of her Virginity which
she had promised to keep: Jupiter was so much moved with compassion, that he
carried her into Heaven, and changed her into this Constellation.

Although some do name it the Chariot, because of the disposition of the Stars
that do form and represent a perfect Chariot; the Stars that are next adjoining
are called Arctophylax, that is keeper of the Bear or Boots, that is driver of
the Chariot. Orion also, who is the foreteller of Rain, is in the Heavens, he
had done good service to Diana in Hunting, and had so much strength and skill,
that he did not fear to meet with any Savage Beast, although it were the most
furious. The Horse Pegasus was also there promoted, and the Serpent that kept
the Apples Hesperides with the Eagle that brought Ganimedes to Jupiter; the
Whale that Neptunus sent to devour Andromedes, the Great Dog, and the Canicule,
otherwise named Procyon, with many other creatures, that are all placed in the
Zodiac, and in the other parts of the Heaven.

Orion is said to have been begot of the Urine of Jupiter, Mercury and Neptune,
who pissed in an Oxes Hide when they were feasted by Hyreus, and to requite him
for his kind Hospitality, they advised him to bury the Hide ten months in the
ground, and promised him then out of it a Child, because he had none. He became
an excellent Hunter, and in this employment he served Diana; but when he began
to boast of his skill, she killed him not long before he adventured to ravish
Mecops Daughter of Aenopion, who punished him by putting out his eyes; but by
Vulcans help and assistance he recovered his sight again. This Constellation of
Orion in the Heavens has 17 Stars.

CHAP. XI.
Of Neptunus, and of the Sea Divinities.
NEptune was one of the Children of Saturnus, that had to his lot the command
of the Seas, and of the Waters, when the World was divided amongst him and his
Brethren; his Scepter was a Trident, and his Chariot a great shell of the Sea,
which was drawn either by Whales, or by Sea Monsters, or by Horses that had the
lower part of Fish: His Wife was Amphitrite, so named, because the Sea does
encompass about the Earth: He obtained her by the means of a Dolphin, who was
afterward advanced amongst the Stars, near the Capricorn: He taught unto men
the use of the Horse, when he had caused him to come forth of the earth with a
blow of his Trident, at the dispute he had with Minerva about the name of the
City of Athens in the Areopage. Because he had been engaged in a conspiracy
against Jupiter, he was confined to the earth, where he was forced to offer
himself to the service of King Laomedon, to build the City of Troy, as we have
seen in the story of Ap^ll^. The Tritans, half men, and half Dolphins, were his
Children; they were wont to accompany him, sounding certain shells, in form of
a Trumpet. He begot also the Harpies by the acquaintance that he had with the
Earth; they were Monsters that did ingeniously and perfectly express the
qualities of a Niggard: They had faces of young Maids, although somewhat pale;
but their bodies were like the Vultures, with Wings and Claws both at their
hands and feet; their bellies were insatiable, and of a prodigious bigness;
whatever they did touch was infected and spoiled, and they did steal all that
came near them.

Addit. Not. Of Neptune.
Neptunus was esteemed a famous God, because the Heathens judged him to have
the command of one of the Elements; he was called (...) Homerus.
Consus, for the Romans do affirm, that he did advise them in the first
beginning of their Empire, when there was scarcity of Women in their City, to
steal from their Neighours, the Sabins, a convenient supply of that Sex. He was
named also Neptunus Hippius, or Equester, because he taught unto men the use of
Horses; and as the Fable informs us, he created at Athens a Horse when the City
was built: The Romans to acknowledge the benefit that their Empire had received
from Horses, instituted Horse-Races in honor of Neptune. The Sea is called by
his Name, either because he was Admiral of it in the Reign of Saturn, or
because this greedy and inhumane God did drown him in the Sea as soon as he was
born: He had a famous Temple in Rome, enriched with the spoils of many Sea
Victories; but he received a signal affront when Augustus the Emperor caused
his Statue to be pulled down, because he was thought to have raised against him
a Tempest at Sea, where he had received some loss, with no small danger of his
life.

The Ocean where Neptunus commanded was esteemed a God, the Father of the
Rivers: His Effigies was much like to that of a River, a great man with Bulls
Horns upon his head; His Wife was Thetis, of whom he had Nereus and Doris, that
married together, and put into the World many Daughters, called Nymphs; some of
them ascended up into Heaven, but those that had green locks of hair remained
upon the Earth, amongst the Waters, the Meadows, the Forests* The Napeae, the
Dryades, and the Hamadryades, did dwell in the Woods, in the Meadows, and
amongst the Flowers and green Pastures: The Naiades were for the Fountains and
Rivers, and the Nereides, that did borrow their Name of their Father, were
appointed to the Sea: They did extremely love the Halcyons, Sea-birds, of whom
this Wonder is related, that they build their Nests upon the Waves of the Sea,
in the midst of the most stormy Winters; but when their young ones do peep
forth of the shell, the Sea round about them appears calm, and if it be rough
they never come by any damage by it. The most remarkable of the Nereids was
Thetis, who kept the Name of her Mother, she was so fair, that Jupiter fell in
love with her: but when he heard the Destinies foretell, that if she was married
that she should have a Son far more courageous and more dreadful than his
Father; he willingly left her, and gave her in marriage to Peleus, the Father
of Achilles, whose Actions and Life we shall describe in their proper place.

Protheus, Neptune's Shepherd, and the Leader of his Phoei, who were called
Calves of the Sea, was another Son of Ocean and Thetis; the Romans called him
Vertumnus, because he had the skill to change himself into all sorts of forms
and figures, and he was a great Fortune Tellers; those that intended to make any
use of him, were to surprise him, and bind him fast until he did take his
proper and natural shape, and tell them what they desired.

Glaucus Ino and Melicerta were Divinities of the Sea. Glaucus had been before
a Fisherman; at a certain time having cast his Fish upon the Grass, and
perceiving that by the Hence Prove. (...).
virtue of a certain Herb which they did touch they did receive a wonderful
strength, and did afterward leap into the Sea again, his curiosity moved him
to try the virtue of it in himself: He had no sooner tasted of it, but he fell
into a fit of madness, and cast himself into the midst of the Waves, where the
Sea Divinities had a care to receive him, and admit him into their Society.

The story of Ino is more various; Athamas King of Thebes had married her in
second Nuptials, after that he had divorced his former Wife Nephele. This Ino
was resolved to destroy Phrixus and Hell, Children of Nephele. Phrixus to
prevent his mischief, ran away with the Ram that had a Golden Fleece, the
honor and riches of his Family. He and his Sister mounted upon it with a
design to flee to some other Country, as they were passing over the Straits,
between Asia and Europe, Hell fell into the Sea in a fright, from hence this
place is named Hellespont: But Phrixus arrived happily in the Country of
Colchos, where he offered his Ram to Jupiter, and since this same Ram has been
admitted amongst the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, but the Fleece was put in the
hands of Aetha King of the Country, who placed it in a Park consecrated to
Mars, and a good guard to keep it, as we shall see in the story of Jason.

Juno was mightily concerned for the Children of Nephele, therefore she
troubled the mind of Athamas, and caused him to become furious; in that
condition he offered to kill Ino and her Children, but she being surprised with
so great a change, casts her self into the Sea with Melicerta: Neptune pitied
her, and therefore received her in the number of the Divinities of his Train;
afterward she was esteemed to be Aurora, and therefore called Leucothea, the
break of day: Her Son was called Palaemon, he was the God of the Havens.

We must not here forget the God Aeolus, for his Empire was upon the Waves of
the Sea; he was the God of the Winds, who dwelt in one of the Islands next unto
Sicily, where he kept the Winds close prisoners, giving them liberty when he
thought it convenient.

Besides all these, there were certain Monsters that did dwell near the Sea,
and that did terrify the Mariners: In the Straits of Sicily were Scylla and
Charybdis; they say that this Charybdis was a Woman of a savage Nature, that
did run upon all passengers to rob them: When she had stolen the Oxen of
Hercules, Jupiter killed her with his Thunderbolts, afterward he turned her
into a furious Monster, and cast her into a Gulf that bears her name.

Scylla was the Daughter of Nisus, King of the Megariens, she fell in love with
Minos King of Candia, and for his sake she betrayed her own Father: For when
Minos made War upon the Megariens, because the Inhabitants of the Country had
cruelly put to death his Son Androgeos, and when he held the chief City, Megara
besieged Scylla: during the Siege, did often walk upon the Walls to recreate
her self with the harmonious sounds that the stones did give: for when Apollo
did build this City, he did often leave his Harp upon the stones, and by this
means he granted unto them the virtue, that when they should be touched, they
should yield a most delightful sound. This young Princess seeing Minos from
this place, she began to entertain a kindness for him, which persuaded her to
deliver the City unto him, upon condition that he should yield unto her desire
and lust. The business did depend only upon a hair of a Purple color which was
in the head of Nisus, for whiles he did keep it he could not be overcome;
therefore when he was asleep she cut it off. This Treason was not unprofitable
to Minos, but he could not abide a Daughter guilty of so much cruelty against
her Father, therefore he caused her to be thrown headlong into a Gulf of the
Sea, under the Promontory or Cape that is against that of Charybdis: There she
became a most horrible Monster, for all her lower parts, (...)
from the Girdle downwards, changed themselves into dogs of several shapes, that
did continually bark there. Others there are that relate this Story otherwise;
for Ovidius tells us how Scylla was metamorphosed into a Lark, and Nisus into a
Hawk, that did persecute her continually for her Treason. These do say, that
this was another Scylla that the Witch Circe changed into this Monster in a fit
of jealousy, because Glaucus had less love and kindness for her than for
Scylla. We shall see in the nineteenth Chap. of the next Book who this Scylla
was.

The Sirens did also inhabit upon these Coasts of Sicily; their upper part was
like fair Virgins, and their lower did represent the tail and body of a great
Fish: They did sing such melodious tunes, that the Passengers were charmed and
drawn to them; but it was to the end that they might destroy them* therefore
they do very well typifie unto us unlawful Lust, for its pleasures and
allurements will infallibly bring us to an unhappy end, unless we imitate the
example of Ulysses, who commanded his men to stop their ears with Wax, and
caused himself to be bound fast to the Mast of his Ship, when he passed by in
these Seas, that the Sirens might not prevail upon him. This craftiness of
Ulysses did not a little vex them, for they hoped to obtain him and his Company
for their prey.

Addit. Not.
The Heathens did say that Oceanus was the beginning and first principle of all
things; he had a numerous Posterity: Hesiodus numbers three thousand Daughters,
besides Sons: Prometheus was his intimate friend, and he did many good offices
to the Gods: he brought up and nourished Juno.

Nereus was his Son, who had about sixty Daughters that waited upon Neptunus;
his habitation was in the Aegean Sea; Hercules went to know from him where he
should find the Golden Apples.

When Ino had craftily made away all the Children of Nephele except two; she
caused the Oracle to demand one of them as a Sacrifice to Jupiter, which forced
them both to fly away. Athamas her Husband was so incensed at her cruelty, that
he took her Son Learchus and cut off his head; then Ino in have caught hold of
Vocatur Leucothea a Graecis and Medusa a Latinis Cicer and habita est Dea Maris.
Melicerta, and cast her self with him into the Sea: He was called Palemon, or
Portunus, God of the Harbors: In some places of Greece Children were offered
in Sacrifice to him.

The Sirens are noted for their folly and cruelty: These are the Names of the
chief of them, Aglaope, Pisinoe, Thelxiope, Molpe, Alagophonos, Leucosia,
Ligea, Parthenope: The last gave her name to the famous City of Italy, Naples,
anciently called Parthenope. They did sing upon several Instruments of Music,
and very well, insomuch that they did challenge the Muses themselves by the
persuasion of Juno. In the Island of Crete was the meeting, where the poor
Sirens were shamefully overcome by the Nine Sisters, who took from them their
Wings, and made of them Crowns, which they all wore, except one who was
esteemed the Mother of the Sirens, and therefore it did become her not to
triumph at the shame of her Daughters. Their dwelling was between Italy and
Sicily, all the Passengers are said to have perished there but Orpheus, who
with the sound of his Harp did overcome the noise of the Sirens voices. Ulysses
had the happiness to pass also without any harm; it is said that they were so
much grieved at the escape of this last, that they cast themselves headlong
into the Sea, and since they have never been seen.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Divinities of the Earth.
CYbele that we mentioned in the second Chap. as the Mother of the Gods, is
also the Goddess of the Earth; therefore she was painted sitting, and crowned
with Towns, and about her abundance of Animals and Trees: The Shepherds did own
her for their Goddess; amongst them she was named Magna Pales.

Pan was eminent amongst the Gods of the Fields; he was Son of Mercurius, that
had taken the form of a Goat to beget him; therefore his Beard and his Feet
were like a Goats, with horns upon his head: He was called Sylvanus, although
Virgilius seems to be of another mind: He was the beloved of the Nymphs that
did put themselves under his protection, and did dance at the sound of his
pipe: The Arcadians did honor him as their God, offering unto him Sacrifices
of Milk and Honey: The Romans also, in the month of February, did dedicate to
him certain Feastival days, called Lupercalia, from the place Lupercal, that
was consecrated to his worship by Evander, and where Remus and Romulus were
afterward nourished by a Wolf.

Picus the K. of the Latin people had a Son named Faunus, that was also a
famous God of the Fields, he invented many things necessary for Husbandmen: He
was looked upon as the Father of the other Fauni, and of the Satyrs, who did all
wear horns upon their heads, and had Goats feet. When these Satyrs became old,
they were called Sileti; they were great Tiplers of Wine: The chief and the
ancientest of them brought up and tutored Bacchus in his Infancy; he was always
seen riding upon an Ass. This Animal became famous in India, when Bacchus made
War against the Indians; for when it began to bray, the Elephants of the
Enemies were frighted and disordered, which was the cause of the Victory. In
reward of this good service, Bacchus promoted this Ass amongst the Stars, near
the Crab.

Addit. Not
Cybele was originally of Phrygia, the Daughter of Menoe, an ancient King of
that Country; she was cast into a Wood, and there left to be devoured by the
Wild Beasts, upon some distaste that her Father had taken against her Mother: A
Shepherd happily finding her, brought her to his home, and there caused her to
be bred up as his Child* She quickly grew famous when she came to years of
understanding, because of her extraordinary beauty and skill in Music, and in
the curing of Infants diseases, which caused the King to acknowledge her for
his Daughter, and to grant unto her a Train better befitting her Birth: She
afterward became amorous of Atys, a young man of the Country, who because he
could not have the liberty to marry her, he got her with-child: Atys was
condemned for it to die, and Cybele for grief became mad; so that she left her
Fathers Court, and ran up and down the Country with a Pipe and Drum in her
hand: After her death, when the Phrygians were afflicted with scarcity of corn,
and diverse diseases; the Oracle gave them this advice as a remedy to their
evils, to worship Cybele as a Goddess. She was not well known amongst the
Romans, until Hannibal was in the bowels of Italy with his Army: The Senate
being frighted with several prodigious accidents that happened at that time,
sent to consult the Books of the Sybile, where they found that the strangers
might be driven out of Italy, if Matter Idaea did come to Rome. This obliged
them to send Ambassadors to Attalus King of Phrygia, Hence called Matter
Pessinuntia, or Dea Syria.
to beg from him the Statue of this Goddess, which was of stone in the Town of
Pesinunte: They brought it to Rome, and all the Dames of the City went out as
far as the mouth of Tyber to welcome her: The next year a Temple was erected
for her, her Priests were Phrygians, called Corybantes, they had over them one
called Archi Gallus an Eunuch, as most of them were therefore called Semiviri
Phryges: They did perform her solemnity with a furious noise of Drums, of
beating of Brass, and of Musical Instruments. The Corybantes are Jupiters
Lifeguard, because they brought him up. The Pine Tree and Box were consecrated
to this Goddess.

Pan was the God of Mountains, and Sheep; also of Huntsmen; he loved Echo, of
whom he had a Daughter called Irynges: He was also beloved He loved also the
Nymph Syring. Ovid.
of Luna; his Sacrifices were performed in a deep Cave, situate in the middle
of a thick Wood; they were wont to offer unto him Milk and Honey in Shepherds
Dishes; he was painted with a stick in one hand, and a Pipe in the other, with
a long Beard, and horns of a great length upon his head, and with Goats feet.

Faunus was also a God of the Field, all the Apparitions in the Woods, and all
the voices were attributed to him.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Infernal Gods.
IF we speak of Hell, according to the manner of the ancient Poets, we must
represent it as a large subterraneous place, whither the Souls are conveyed
when they go out of their bodies: The God that commands there is Pluto, Brother
of Jupiter and Neptunus; his Wife is Proserpina, the Daughter of Ceres; he was
constrained to steal her, for he had been refused of all the Goddesses, because
of his ill-looks, and of the darkness of his Kingdom.

Several Rivers do encompass it, which we must all pass before we can enter
into it: Acheron is the first, Styx the second, this River did run round Hell
nine times; Victory was his daughter, she was favorable to Jupiter in the War
of the Giants. Therefore by her means he attained to so great a credit, that
the Gods having sworn by his waters, it was not lawful for them to act contrary
to their engagements: When they did, they were deprived of the Nectar, and of
their Divinity, one hundred years complete. The Styx did rise out of a Fountain
of Arcadia, whereof the waters are venomous, and of such a strange nature, that
there is no metal that can keep them: Nothing but the hallow of an Ass, or of a
Mules Hoof, can retain this piercing water.

The third River of Hell was the Cocytes, which did swell only with Tears: The
fourth was Phlegeton, whereof the waters boil.

Charon, the Ferry-man, did offer his assistance, and his Boat, to carry over
all that did come from this Upper World: He did show as little respect to the
Lords, to the Grandees, and to the Princes, as to the meanest Slaves, because
Death does bring all men to an equality. They whose bodies had not been buried,
did wait many years upon the Banks of the River before they could be admitted
to pass with the rest.

At the descent from the Boat they met Cerberus a great Dog with three heads,
instead of hair he was covered all over with Serpents.

He did keep the entry of Hell in such a manner that he did suffer all to enter
but none to go out.

Within was a dreadful night esteemed a Goddess the eldest daughters of Chaos
and the Mother of several Monsters that did beseige this unhappy place for
besides Envy, Grief, Poverty, Care, Labor, Diseases, Cruelty, Despair, here
were to be seen Death and his kinsman sleep. The latter was honored as a
favorable God unto men, because of the rest that he procures unto us, one of
his Officers was Morpheus the God of Dreams who had the cunning and Art of
taking all sorts of shapes. There were also the Harpyes condemned to perpetual
darkness, and the Chimera that did vomit fire and flame, her head was like a
Lions, her middle like a Goat, and her tail did resemble that of a furious
Dragon

In these subterraneous places was the abode of the furies called otherwise
Dirae or Eumenidae their names were Tisiphone, Megera and Alecto they were
armed with flaming Torches, out of their mouth proceeded a filthy froth, a
sign of their raging humor, their eyes did sparkle as the lightning and their
head instead of hair was adorned with long and dreadful Vipers.

In the Palace of Pluto the three sisters named Parcoe, Clatho, Lachesis, and
Atropas did dwell. These were the fatal Goddesses or the Destinies that did
appoint unto every one the several adventures of his Life, what they had
decreed according to the Judgment of the Gods could not be altered, they were
more Clotho colum retinet Lachesis net, et Attropas occat. they are called also
nona decima morta.
especially busied in handling the thread and disposing of the course of men's
lives, the youngest held the distaff and did draw the thread, the seeond in age
did wind it about the Spindle, and the third old and decrepit, did cut it off,
and this was followed with the immediate death of the person living.

As Soon as the Souls were arrived in Hell they did go to give an account of
their lives before Minos Rhadamantus, and Aeacus their Judges, who had in their
keeping the fatal Chest where the names of all the living upon Earth, were
contained, out of it was drawn every man's name when he was arrived at the end
of his days, The Gods had entrusted these men with this Office, because during
their lives they had been very just in their Judgments: Here we must not forget
what is related of Aeacus when the plague had carried away all the Inhabitants
of the Isle of Egine where he was King, he obtained of Jupiter the favor that
all the Ants should be changed into men, that the Island might be again filled
with Inhabitants, they were therefore called Myrmidones; The truth is they were
thus named because they did mightily apply themselves in the improvement of the
ground, as the Ants they were always stirring it up.

When these infernal Judges had pronounced their sentence against the wicked
Souls they were cast headlong by the furies into the bottom of the Tartare, a
dreadful place designed for their punishment.

There were to be seen the Giants and the Titans, in the midst of the flames
laden with huge mountains, to hinder them from rising again. And Tantalus that
was ready to perish with hunger and thirst encompassed with the abundance of
all sorts of dainties. There was also Salmoneus the King of ^lide who had bin
struck dead with Jupiters thunderbolts, because he had the impudency to
counterfeit and play the God upon a Bridge of Brass causing his Chariot to run
over it that it might yield a noise like that of the Thunder: In his conrse he
did cast on every side flaming Torches to represent the Lightning, and such of
the spectators upon whom they did unhappily fall were cruelly murdered by him.

In this place were also the Danaides, or the Belides, so named from Belus
their Grandfather, they were the Daughters of Danaus, from whom the Greeks have
taken their name Danai. This Danaus was forced to marry them to the sons of
Egyptus his Brother, they were equal in number, for Egyptus had fifty Sons for
the fifty Daughters of Danaus; But these wretched Creatures cut their Husbands
throats the first night that they came together, only one excepted; therefore
they were condemned in Hell to fill up with Water a Tunn, without a bottom,
which they could never effect, because at the same time that they did pour in,
as much did run out.

Here was also one Sysiphus a famous Robber, forced to heave up a great stone
with his Shoulder to the top of a Mountain, when he was almost come to the end
of his labor, it did fall again to the bottom, so that he was constrained to
be allwayesbegining.

Ixion was here tied about a Wheel that did continually move: He was condemned
to this punishment, because he had been so bold as to seek a too familiar
acquaintance with Juno, Jupiter to be better informed of his intentions,
presented unto him a Cloud in Juno's likeness, of whom he begot the Centauri,
half Men and half Horses.

All the Men that had lived an honorable life, and all those that had ended
their appointed time in the Tartare, were conducted into the Elisian Feilds,
Places that did abound with all manner of delights and satisfactions. But at
the end of a certain number of years, they did return into the World again to
live in other Bodies, and that the Souls might not retain any remembrance of
these Elysian Feilds, they did drink of the River Lethe, that had the virtue of
causing them to forget all the things past.

It is very remarkable that the Papists do follow in their descriptions and
fancies of Hell, and of its suburbs, the Heathens, or Romans their
predecessors, who with the Empire of the World have left them many of their
groundless opinions, and strange superstitions, as the former did imagine,
several apartments under ground, and subterraneous places, so the latter do
maintain diverse retreats of the soul after Death, The Purgatory of the Poets
described by Virgil, is the same as that of these mistaken Christians.

Pluto was the God of Hell, and of Riches he had two keys in his hand, and was
attended He is named Dis Summanus Altor, Rusor, Februus.
by a dreadful train, by Cerberus with three heads, by the furies the Paucae;
etc. * he had upon his head a Helmet, that did render him invisible, and all
those that did ware it; by this is intimated the safety men find in the grave.
His sacrifices were performed in the night, and the Tree that was dedicated to
him, Orci Galea
was the Cypress. He was a blind God that did not love to see any light,
therefore the Poets say that he is mightily afraid when the Earth does quake
and let in the day into Hell. Haec omnis quam cernis in opis in humataque turba
est: portitur ille Charon, hi quos vehit unda sepulti.

Nec ripas datur horrendas etc. Virgil 6 Aen.




Charon the son of Erebus, and of the night was his Ferry-man to convey the
Souls of the deceased unto him, he was greedy of money, therefore he would let
none pass without a piece of Silver, which the Souls were wont to carry
between their lips, those that were not dead or unburied were never admitted
into this man's boat. Yet Aeneas by his Piety, Hercules and Theseus by their
valor, and Orpheus by his music obtained the privilege of viewing Hell, and
of passing to and fro in old Charons ferry boat.

Cerberus was an ill shaped and a cruel mastif begot of Typhon and Echidna,
Hercules had the strength to drag him from under ground, and bring him to see
the light of the Sun when he was upon Earth, it is reported that he vomitted on
the ground and immediately a new herb sprung forth called Aconitum, wolfes bane.

In these lower Regions of the Earth were several strange Goddesses, Nox the
night was she that had the greatest command, and that was one of the most
remarkable; she was held to be the Mother of Love, of Deceit, of Old Age, of
Death, of Sleep, of Dreams, of Complaint, of Fear, and of Darkness.

The Cock was offerred in sacrifice to her, and she was painted with black
hair, with a Garland of Poppies about her head, and her Chariot was draw'n with
black Horses, and in her Arms a white boy signifying Sleep, and a black one
intimating Death, both taking their rest.

The harpies were strange sorts of Birds painted with women's Faces, Dragons
Tails, and Eagles Talons; they are sometimes called Furiae, Striges, and
Lamiae. They were said to suck in the night the blood of Infants, there were
three in number Aello, Ocypete, and Celaeno, They were very troublesome at
public Feasts; in the night, and especially to blind Peneus, but Calais and
Zetis the two Children of Boreas and Orythea, had pity of the old man having
therefore winged feet, they persued the Harpies and drove them from Peneas
Stable, afterward they were confined to Hell, their next neighbor was a cruel
Monster, named Chimera, that was dreadful because of it is misshapen body, but
much more because it breathed forth nothing but flames of fire. The furies had
here their habitation, but when the Gods had any great design in the World, in
raising of Wars or troubling the peace of Men they did send for these furies of
Hell, who disguising themselves did go and perform the commissions with which
they were entrusted, by applying their burning Torches to the heart and
affections of the persons with whom they were concerned. This represents unto
us, how the Devils do tempt us inwardly to evil.

The Heathens did imagine a severer Justice in Hell than was upon Earth, for
they placed three Kings eminent for their upright dealing, to judge and dispose
of the estate of every one according to his deserts, the Souls were brought
before them naked, without any ornament or name that might render them
recommendable, therefore the wicked were punished with fire, but the good were
admitted immediately into the Elysean feilds.

Ixion the Son of Phlegias, is remarkable amongst the wicked not only by his
horrid murder which he committed under the pretense of friendship, for he cast
his Father in law into a pit of burning coals: his troubled Conscience caused
him afterward to wander up and down the Earth until Jupiter out of pity made
satisfaction for his crime, and received him into heaven, where ease and
pleasure caused him to become both wanton and ungrateful, He fell in love with
Juno, and sought to defile Jupiters bed, when he heard of it he presented unto
him a serving maid, called Nephele a Cloud in Juno's habit of whom he begot the
lecherous Centaurs: By that means falling into disgrace with Jupiter he was
sent back again upon Earth, where he began to brag of his prancks, and how Juno
had submitted to his lust for which he was by Jupiter condemned to this torment
in Hell, to be continually carried about a wheel which never stood still, but
when Orpheus was there playing upon his Harp.

Sisiphus the son of Aeolus was accused for having discovered the secrets of
the Gods, and particularly of Jupiter, who had made him the confident of his
love to Aegina, the daughter of Asopus, also for having spoken irreverently of
him and for having spoiled and murdered strangers, for which enormities he was
first slain by Theseus and then sent to Hell to roll up a great stone that did
fall down again and renew his labors.

CHAP. XIV,
Of some other Divinities.
BEsides these common and universal divinities that we have mentioned the
Heathens did fancy others who had a particular kindness, for certain houses and
persons.

The domestic Gods were named Lares or Penates they were in shape like Monkies
placed in some private part of the house, or in the Chimney corner, they did
honor them as their Protectors, and therefore did make unto them offerings of
wine and frankincense.

They did also imagine that every one was borne with two Genii proper unto his
person, named Daemones; the one was the good and favorable, who did persuade
him to honesty and virtue, and in recompense did procure unto him all manner of
good things proper to our Estates. The other was the Evil Genius, who was the
cause of all wickedness and mishap when he did get the upper hand in us.

The Heathens did acknowledge also a Great Goddess, named Fortune, who had in
her possession, and at her disposal, the honors, the riches, and the happiness
of this life, she did give them and take them away at her pleasure: But this is
noted of her, that she was blind, and very unconstant; in her hand was a Wheel
that she did turn without ceasing, raising sometimes men on the top of the
Wheel, and sometimes casting them down, so that there was nothing settled or
assured that did concern her. She was adored by the most part of men, the
greatest Princes had one of Gold kept safe with them in their dwellings, that
she might be always favorable unto them: The Goddess Nemesis, or Vindiciae,
had an eye upon the crimes and misdemeanors of every one to punish them. The
God Momus was worshipped by them, but he grew mightily out of favor, and
became odious to all the World, because of his ill qualities; for he had his
beginning from Sleep, and the Night: And although he was very slothful and
ignorant, he was nevertheless one that found fault, and who did prattle of
every thing, which did proceed partly from his vanity, and the partly from the
ness of his judgment.

Addit. Not. Genius a gignendo, or ab ingerendo; because he supports or
suggests unto us thoughts.

Virgil names them Manes.


The God of particular persons, or of Kingdoms, was named Genius; he had a
continual eye over them, and did accompany them to the Grave. The Genius of the
Roman State was painted with a Horn of abundance in one hand, and a dish full
in the other, which was stretched out upon an Altar. The Heathens said, hat
their Genii were of a Nature between God and Man, and therefore they imagined
them to be the Sons of Jupiter and Terra. All the Stars were reckoned in their
number, and therefore they did worship them as the Jews did in the quality of
Angels: They did paint them differently, sometimes as a Serpent, and sometimes
as Boys or Girls, or as Old Men; but a Garland of a Palm Tree was always upon
their heads, therefore this Tree is named Genialis. In some ancient Medals, the
Genius of the Emperor was represeuted as a Man, with a large dish of all sorts
of Flowers in one hand, and a Scourge in the other, to express both rewards and
punishments: They thought it not lawful to kill any Creature unto their Genius,
because it was not decent that they should cause Creatures to loose their
lives, the day on which they received theirs; yet Horace mentions the killing
of a Pig of two months old. The usual offerings to the Genius were Wine and
Flowers; as the men had their Genii, the Women had also their Junones
Goddesses, that did watch over and protect them. Magnigeni cape thura lubens
votisque faveto, Tibull. lib. 4.



And Funde merum Genio.


The Penates were the Gods that were placed in penetralibus domi, in the inner
most part of the house, as Guardians and Protectors ^o it: There were the
Penates of Cities, of Kingdoms, of Heaven and Earth, and of many eminent
dwellings; Aeneas brought his from Troy, that were two young men in a sitting
Posture: The Dictator and chief Magistrates of Rome did sacrifice to them when
they entered into their Offices, and to the Goddess Vesta.

Lararium, the place where they were worshipped. There were Lares publici,
Lares familiares I ares Hostitii, to drive away enemies, Lares Marini, of the
Sea; Lares querquetulani, of she Oaks. They are also called Praestites Larvae,
Lemures,
Lares is another kind of Domestic Gods in Figure, like a Dog: Plutarch tells
us, that they were but covered with a Dogs skin, and a Dog was placed next to
them, to express the watchfulness and care they had of the house, and their
friendship to those who did belong to it. The Fable says, that Lara being
condemned to loose her tongue, for revealing unto Juno Jupiters intention of
deflouring Juturna; and being sent in Mercuries custody to Hell, by the way he
laid with her, and begot two Sons named Lares, from whom these Gods are
derived.

Fortune the Daughter of Oceanus, and the servant of the Gods, was carried in a
Chariot dragged by four blind horses, under her feet lay a Globe, in her right
hand the Helm of a Ship, and in her left the Horn of Plenty: She had several
Images, Statues and Temples erected to her honor, for the Romans did worship
none more than Fortuna: At her right hand did play upon a Wheel a young Youth,
with Wings upon his shoulders, named Favor, to express how soon her favors may
fly away from us. Two Images were remarkable at Rome, Fortuna Calva, and (...)
both very significant. (...) several Temples built (...) Fortune, one to
Fortuna (...) in the Capitol another to Fortuna obsequens, to Fortuna privata,
to Fortuna (...) the later was near the Temple of Venus; (...) to Fortuna
barbata, to Fortuna publica, to Fortuna plebeia, and another to Fortuna
muliebris, whose Statue had the power to speak, as Val. Max. l. 5. cap. 2.
informs us; and to several other kinds of Fortune Temples were erected. When
Fortune was not favorable to them, they did ^ad her with Curses and
Imprecations.

Nemesis, the Daughter of Jupiter and Necessity, was the Goddess of Revenge;
she was called Adrastia, because Adrastus built her a Temple; and Rhamnusia,
from a place in Greece where she was worshipped: She was painted as Justice is,
with a Sword in one hand, and a pair of Balances in the other, with a sad
countenance of a Virgin, and piercing Eyes, or with a Bridle and a Ruler. The
Heathens did think, that she would either reward or punish all the actions of
our life.

The employment of Momus was to reprove the faults of every one* he did not
like Vulcans Man, who had not a Window in his breast that his thoughts thorough
it might be seen: He was not pleased with the Slippers of Venus, because they
made too much noise: He reproved Neptunes Bull, for not having Horns on his
shoulders, rather than on his head; and Minerva's House, because it was not
moveable.

Besides these Gods that were worshipped by most Nations, the Romans had
several otbers, and of many kinds: Some were called Indigetes, who were
advanced from the Estate of Men, to the honor of the Gods: Of this number were
Hercules, unto whom diverse Chapels and Altars were erected in Rome, and many
favorable Epithets ascribed unto him, as Magnus Victor Triumphator, Defensor,
etc. Faunus was another, Carmenta Evanders wife another, and Evander himself,
King of the Natives of Italy, Castor and Pollux, Aesculapius, Acca Laurentia,
the Nurse of Romulus and Remus, Quirinus, a name of Romulus; from whence comes
the word Quirites, the Romans Title.

All the perfections and virtues of the Soul were also adored as so many
Goddesses, Men's the mind, Virtus virtue, Honos honor, Pietas, etc. And over
every part of a man's life they had particular Gods and Divinities: The young
Babes were under the protection of these, Opis, Nascio, or Vagitanus.
Vaticanus, Levana, Cumina, Goddesses that did look to the Chill in the Crad e,
Rumina that did assist it to suck; Potina, Educa, Ossilago, Fabulinus, Carnea,
Juventas, Orbona, Volupia, Lubentina-Anculi Dii, were honored by servants. The
new-married Couple had several Gods, Jugatinus that did join them together,
Domiducus he that led the Bride home, Minturna Dea, Virginensis, Cinxia,
Mutinus, Deus Pater, Subigus, Dea matter prema, Viriplaca Dea. All these had
their several Offices appointed them in Marriages: The Goddesses of
Childbearing are Mena Dea, Juno, Fluonia, and Lucina, Pertunda, Latona,
Egeria, Bona Dea, Magna Genata, etc.

Murica Dea, the Goddess of Laziness.

Strenua Dea, of Strength and Valor.

Stimula Dea, who prompts men to labor.

Agonius Deus, who did bless their undertakings.

Dea Horta, who did persuade them to any business.

Catius Deus, that made them careful.

Volumnus Deus, the God of their Wills.

Adeona and abeona Deae, the Goddesses of their coming in, and going out.

Vitula Dea, the Goddess of Joy or Victory.

Pellonia Dea, she that was active in driving away their Enemies.

Fessonia, she who did help the wearied.

Averruncus Deus, that did divert from us all evil.

Angerona, the Goddess of silence.

Laverna Dea, who did bless the Thieves in their Robberies, and unto whom they
did offer Sacrifice. They that were under her protection, did divide the Spoil
in her Wood, where her Temple was erected; therefore they were called Fures
Laverniones.

Naaenia Dea, the Goddess of Funerals, etc.

There were also amongst the Romans the Gods and Goddesses of the Fields,
besides the multitude of Nymphs and Satyrs: These were the most noted.

Pales Dea, the Goddess of Fodder, and of Shepherds.

Flora Dea, a remarkable Whore, who gave all her Estate to the people of Rome,
upon condition that they would honor her Birthday with Plays: The Senate to
remove the infamy of her life, created her the Goddess of Flowers, and did
offer unto her Sacrifice, that she might bless the hopeful increase of the
Fruits and Flowers: In her honor were instituted the Floralia.

Pamona Dea had a Command over the Apples, and such like Fruits.

Tutilina Dea, had an eye over the Corn.

Robigus Deus, did preserve the Corn from the infection of the air.

Populonia and fulgor Dii, that did keep the Corn from the Thunder.

Pilumnus and Picumnus Dii, the latter is called Sterquilinus, because he
taught men to improve the ground with Dung: The first is the God of Millers.

Bubona Dea, of Oxen.

Hippona Dea, of Horses,

Mellona Dea, of Bees.

Jugatinus Deus, who did live upon the Mountains.

Rusina Dea, a Country Goddess.

Terminus Deus, the God of Limits: The people of Rome were commanded to set
stones upon the confines of their ground, which were called Terminalia; upon
them they did offer to Jupiter every year; and if any was so impudent as to
remove them, his Head was to satisfy Jupiter, unto whom they were consecrated.
These Stones were crowned every year with Flowers, and upon them Milk was
offered to Terminus.

Pan was a Field God.

Sylvanus the God of Cattle, and of the Country.

Priapus, who was the most impure and shameless of all their Gods; he was also
the God of Mariners, as well as of the Country, and of Nuda Venus faecunda
Pales, Pharetrata Diana, Juno gravis, prudens Pallas, turrita Cybelle.
Gardens: He was painted naked, as all the other Gods and Goddesses of Love.
Feronia Dea was also a Divinity of the Woods, the Wife of Jupiter Anxur in
Italy; near her Temple was a large Wood which took fire, but when the people
did run to extinguish it, of its own accord the fire went out, and the Wood in
a moment became green again and flourishing. The Slaves who were to be made
free, did receive the badges of liberty in her Temple. It is reported of her
Priests, that they did use to go bare foot upon burning coals every year at a
set time before the people.

The Romans had increased the number of their Divinities, so that many
thousands were reckoned; every affection of the mind, and disease of the body,
was honored as a Deity: Such were Pavor, and Pallor, Cloacina, Aius, Locutius,
whose Statue gave the Romans notice of the coming of the Gauls. Ridiculus was
another God, Tempestas, Febris, Fugia, Forna^x, Cacia, Vicepota, and Volturnus
Deus, etc.

And as the Romans did enlarge their Dominions, they did admit all the Gods and
Goddesses of strange Nations into their City: Therefore when Tiberius heard of
the Miracles of our Savior from Pilats information, he desired the Senate that
he might be introduced amongst the number of their Divinities, which they had
no inclination to do, either because of the place of his Nativity, which was
generally hated of all Nations, or because he could n t be rightly worshipped
where there were such a multiplicity of Idle Gods. Now these were the strange
Divinities worshipped in Rome, when they had conquered the World.

Sanctus, or Deus Fidius, the God of the Sabins; Io, or Isis, a Goddess of the
Egyptians. The Poets inform us, that she was the Daughter of the River
Inachus, a professed Whore, yet the Priest of Juno: She persuaded Jupiter to
yield to her Lust; but Juno's jealousic pursuing after her Husband, found them
together, Jupiter in the form of a Cloud, and Isis in that of a white Cow, for
Jupiter had changed her that she might not be suspected of his Wife, who
understood his subtilty; therefore she begged the Cow from Jupiter, he being
afraid, by a refusal, to discover her and his own dishonesty, granted her to
Juno, who presently committed her to the custody of Argus with a hundred eyes;
there she continued in much misery and persecution, until Mercurius was sent
from Jupiter to deliver her, he played Argus asleep with his pleasant Music,
intending to steal away the counterfeit Cow; but a Boy, named Hierax, gave
notice to Argus, and waked him, as the other was a departing with his prize.
Mercurius seeing no remedy, but that he must either neglect Jupiters Command,
or kill Argus, he took a great stone and knocked him dead upon the place, and
changed Hierax into a Hawk for his ill Office. Juno was not a little displeased
at the loss of her faithful servant, therefore she transformed him into a
Peacock, that yet retains the number of his eyes in its feathers; and she sent
some Creatures to vex Isis, so that she became mad, and ran up and down the
World, swimming over the Seas into Ionia, unto which she left her Name, as
Besides these most noted Gods of Egypt, they worshipped there all the Herbs of
their Garden, which the Romans were ashamed to imitate.
also to the Sea that waters that Country: At last she returned back to Egypt,
where she married Osiris: Her Son by Jupiter was Epaphus; after her death she
was a^lored by the Egyptians; her hair was preserved as a Sacred Relick in her
Temple at Memphis; she was honored as the Goddess of Navigation, and of the
Weather: Her Statue was a Cow with Horns, or as some say, a Dogs Head, unto
which Ovid alludes, calling her Latrator Some thinks this Anubis to be
Mercurius as we shall see afterward.
Anubis. The Romans had an extraordinary reverence for this Goddess, although
they banished her, because her Priests had consented to defile her Temple with
Whoredoms afterward she was admitted again: Her Priests were initiated with
Blood and Water, they had their Heads and Beards shaven, and did wear all White
Linen Garments: At the entry in of her Temple was the Statue of a Sphynx, to
signify that she was a mysterious Godd^ss: For her sake the Egyptians did keep
in a corner of her Temple a White Cow; when it did die, they did all mourn, as
for a Prince, until another was put in the place of the dead Beast.

Osiris, King of Egypt, was her Brother and Husband; he is esteemed the same
with Serapis, some call him Dionysius, Ammon, Jupiter, and Pluto. The last name
I conceive was granted unto him, because he had such an extraordinary care of
the Dead, causing them to be buried in several places made on t^ purpose near
Memphis, to encourage Virtue, and a good life; for if the deceased had not
lived well, he was by persons Herodot. sacres Igurn.
appointed to enquire into every man's actions, cast into places of shame and
punishment; the Virtuous were interred in beautiful Fields, flourishing with
all manner of Flowers. This place was near the City Memphis, encompassed
several times with the River Nilus, and an old Fellow did convey the dead
bodies over. By this means this Prince did awe his people into obedience, and a
submission to his Laws. And from hence it is that the Poets have borrowed their
pleasant descriptions of Hell, as the rest of their superstitious Fables, as
several writers informs us. Osiris is also called Apis, in whose Temple a Bull
was nourished: Upon the Statue of Osiris was placed a Bushel; this has given
occasion to some to fancy Osiris to be Joseph, who saved Egypt from the great
Famine: It is probable the Bushel was placed upon Osiris his head, in honor of
him.

All the other Gods of the Grecians, Illyrians, Gauls, Spaniards, Germans, and
Asian People, were brought and worshipped at Rome, because we have already
named them, and given a full account of their beginning and Histories, it is
needless to repeat them here again.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Gods mentioned in Holy Writ, and of those that were adored in Syria,
Phoenicia, and the adjoining Countries.
I Think it not amiss, in this review of all the Heathen Gods, to add a Chapter
or two concerning those who have been adored by the Inhabitants of the Eastern
Countries, and by our Forefathers in this Island.

The Sacred Records do mention many Idols unto whom the Israelites did
shametully prostrate themselves; their names are Moloch, Baal, Astoreth, Dagon,
Baalzebub, Succoth, Benoth, Nergal, Nisroch, Rimmon, Thammuz, Nebo, Sesach, the
Golden Calf, the Teraphim, Remphan, etc.

The Golden Calf which the Israelites did make in the Wilderness, was a God of
Egypt, called Api^: Lactantius informs us, that the De sapient. cap. 10.

Et comes in pompa corniger. Apis erat. Ovid. fast.

Exodus 32. 6. Barbara Memphiten plangere docta Bovem Tibull.


Head was the Image of a Bull; therefore they did worship him in the some
manner as the Egyptians did their Apis, for they did mightily rejoice and feast
themselves when he was made, and dance round about the Idol: But I cannot
conceive how the Israelites could be of such weak memories, as to forget the
greatness of Gods Power lately manifested to them in their deliverance from
Egypt, and in the publishing of the Law, or of such perverse judgments, as to
ascribe to the works of their hands the glorious Acts of the Almighty, of which
they had been Eyewitnesses; for it seems they intended, as our Religious
Papists do, to adore God in the outward and visible representation of a Bull,
or of a Calf, according to the custom of the Egyptians; therefore they did not
say, To morrow there shall be a Festival to Apis, Osiris, or Isis, the Gods of
Egypt, but to the Lord (...) so that they were so impious as to ascribe the
Sacred Name of God to this shameful Image, or rather to worship God in this
vile form: The Hebrews do tell us, that the Generation of such as were so
profane at this time, had yellow Beards growing in their faces, in remembrance
of that foul sin which their Forefathers were so forward to commit in the
Wilderness.

When Jeroboam returned out of Egypt, whither he had been banished by Solomon,
he caused the same kind of Idolatry to be established in the Dominions that
acknowledged his Scepter; for he placed two Golden Calves at the two
Extremities of the Ten Tribes in Dan and Bethel, to prevent the return of the
people to the worship of God in Jerusalem, and to their Allegiance to their
lawful Prince. It may seem very strange, that the Israelites possessed with a
real Opinion of Gods Power and Authority over them, should be so easily drawn
to commit such an abomination, directly contrary to the Law of God, unless they
had been induced thereunto by their mistakes of some Example given unto them by
Moses himself. We find that when Jeroboam intended to draw them to Idolatry, he
could think of no better expedient, than to present unto them Golden Calves,
for they were more inclinable to the adoration of them, than any other Idol;
because, as some do imagine, they were wont to see these Images in the Temple
of Jerusalem, as their Forefathers had been accustomed to behold them
worshipped in Egypt; for by these Idols the ignorant Egyptians did adore Nilus,
otherwise Plinius, lib. 5. cap. 9.

Osiris also named Bacchus.


called Siris, and Osiris, because their life and riches did proceed from the
excellent virtues of the Water of Nilus.

The Teraphim, mentioned in Judge. 17. 5. were not, as some have imagined, the
Household Gods of the Heathens; for in the same place, a Graven Image and a
Molten Image are named, which were the Household Gods; but I do rather think,
that they were some Talismanical Representations, consecrated by Devilish
Ceremonies, to oblige some Evil Spirit to answer in them the demands of their
Worshippers, and give Oracles. Elias Levita tells us, that they were made in
this manner, they did kill a man who was a Firstborn, and pull off his Head
with their hands; and when they had embalmed it, they did place it upon a Plate
of Gold, upon which the name of the Unclean Spirit that they did invocate for
an Answer was first handsomely engraven; Afterward they did put it into a
place made in a wall purposely for it; they did light round about it Torches
and Lamps, and did fall down before it to worship it. The Images that Rachel
stole from her Father Laban, are called Teraphim by some, they were the same as
the Greeks name (...), only the former did return Answers to the Petitioners,
whereas the latter were the protecting Gods of a Family, worshipped near the
Chimney Corners, usually in the Images of Dogs, who are watchful Creatures.

The Idol Moloch is the same with Saturn, unto whom the cruel Heathens did
sacrifice their Sons and Daughters, causing them to be burnt alive in a Brazen
Image made purposely for such abominations. The Ammonites, Nachmonides and R.
Moses.
whose God this Idol was, did oblidge all the Parents either to offer them in
this manner to Moloch, or to cause them to pass between two fires in honor of
this God: Sometimes when men did come to years of understanding, they did offer
themselves freely to be burnt for this God. Near Jerusalem stood Moloch in a
beautiful Valley, belonging to the Children of Hinnom, in the midst of a
pleasant Grove, where the Jews did imitate their profane Neighbors. From hence
is derived this inhumane custom practiced in Greece, and in many other parts of
the world. Minucius Faelix, Lactant. Justin.
The Carthaginians were so extravagant, as to sacrifice 200 Noble men's Children
to Moloch, when Agathocles made war upon them in Africa: And because this word
signifies a Prince, or a King, the Heathen Worthies did borrow from hence their
names, as Amilcar, Imilcon, etc.

2 King. 17. 31.
The two Gods of Sepharvaim, Adrammelech, and Anammelech, were worshipped in
the same bloody manner; therefore many have imagined them to be the same with
Moloch, from whom they have derived their Names; but I rather think them to be
other Gods who did share in the same Titles of Honor, and in the same manner
of worship: None of our Interpreters have found the persons unto whom these
Names were given; but I do conjecture from the Hebrew signification of the Name
Adrammelech, and with a small alteration (...) Ador-Melech, a From hence the
Greek word (...) a man.
strong and glorious King, that thereby the Inhabitants of Sepharvaim did either
mean some brave and generous Prince that had Reigned amongst them in much
glory, or else they did intend the Sun by Adrammelech; for he is as a Prince in
the Firmament, sending forth his beams of light into every corner of the World.
Anas or Anam is a Chaldean word Cogere (...) a Chald-word.
never used in Scripture to my knowledge, unless it be Esther 1. 8. It signifies
to force, or to compel; being therefore joined with Melech, it makes a
compelling, or an Imperiou^ King: By this Title some Devil may be understood
that did imperiously tyrannize ov^ them, they did therefore endeavor to
appease his wrath, by sacrificing their dearest enjoyments: That which makes me
inclinab^ Maff^^us de Job. Ind. and Munster. Cosmograph.
to this Opinion is, that to this very day the Inhabitants from whence these
Sepharvaits did come, do worship the Devil in a visible shape, and when they
neglect their Devotion to him, he pitifully afflicts them. The same is
reported of the Caribbians, and of the Indians in Florida, and in the adjacent
Countries. It may also with some kind of probability be imagined from this word
(...) which signifies to compel, that these Heathens did sacrifice to the
Imperious and unresistable Emperor of the World Death; for it is said, Seldom
de diis Syris. cap. 6. Virg. lib. 6. Ovid. Metam. lib. 7.
that his Priests were clothed in black, and therefore named (...) in Holy
Writ. Now it is certain, that this color was an abomination to all the
Superior Gods, and only used in the sacrifices of the Inferior, as we may
understand by these following Verses of Apollon, lib. 3. Argonaut. (...)
(...)
(...)


So it is likely that these Heathens did offer unto Pluto or Death their
Children, that he might spare their lives. Baal was another (...)
Divinity of Phaenicia: The name signifies a Lord, and therefore it is due to
the Sovereign Lord of the World, Hosea 2. 16. But several Nations of the East
have profanely applied Seldom de diis Syris.
it to men in their lives, and after their death have granted it to their
breathless Statues, which they did adore instead of the true God. And as this
word has no particular respect to any of their Divinities, it was ascribed to
most of them. Mars the God of War, or rather Belus the Father of Ninus, was
adored by this Name in Assyria: Jupiter Thalassius, worshipped in Sidon, was
called Baal, Belus, or Beelsamen, the God or Lord of Hesychius (...). Eusebius.
Heaven: The Sun was also worshipped in Syria, and called Agalibalus, or
Alagabalus, the Circular Lord, as the Learned Seldom observes. Herodian informs
us, that the Sun was worshipped in Syria, and that his representation was a
great and round Stone. Moloch was also named Baal; in his Sacrifices His
Priests did cut themselves in honor of him.
the Priests did offer their Privy Members in remembrance of the affront that
Jupiter his Son did unto him.

When the Scripture only names Baal, without any other addition, we must
understand the God who was esteemed by the Pagans the Chief Jupiter: So that
this Name imports in profane Language as much as Jehovah, or Adonai does in
sacred.

The Name of Baal became so universal, that all great Commanders and famous
Princes did add it to their own Names, Hannibal, Asdrubal, Maherbal, etc. But
in Scripture we meet with many Gods who bear this Title with another, as a
token of the peoples respect unto them. Baaltzephon was a City in (...)
Egypt; through its Territories the Israelites did pass when they marched
toward the Red Sea: It is probable that it did borrow its denomination from
the Idol Baal worshipped there. It seems he was one of the most ancient Gods of
the East Countries, for he was adored far and near.

(...)
Baal-Peor, or Beelphegor, as the Seventy write it, signifies a shameful
Divinity set up (...)
amongst the Moabits, beyond Jordan, upon Mount Peor: Some think him to be
Jupiter Hieron adose. cap* 11.

Isidor. Orig. lib. 3. cap, 11. Numb. 25. 1. and 3.

1 Kings 15. 11, 12.

2 Chronicles 15. 16 This Priapus was named Miphleteth, an abominable Idol.


Tonans, others Saturn, or the Sun; but the most probable Opinion is, that he
was Priapus, the adulterous and lascivious God; for the Israelites did worship
him in the same manner as the Grecians did Priapus, by committing fornication in
his Temple. Now this impudent God was chiefly worshipped by women, and therefore
he was named the God of Women, Jer. Chap. 48. 7. 13. calls the same God of
(...) Chemosh, or as the Seventy render it in Greek (...), the Chief God of
Moab; which word I conceive may be derived from the Hebrew (...) Chamas, to
hide, either because he was adored in some obscure corner of the Temple, as it
was usual with some Divinities, or because his abominable worship did deserve
to be concealed in obscurity: It is likely that only the Holy Prophet brands
him with this Title of disgrace, and that it was not his usual Name amongst his
Proselites.

(...)
Baal-Gad, was the God from whose Providence and will all worldly felicity
proceeds: The Grecians and Romans made this Divinity Goddess, and called her
(...), and Bona, or Primigenia Fortuna. The first that caused this God to be
worshipped, were the Astrologers; for when they did perceive how much the
Heavens did contribute to the subsistence and welfare of man, and how his life
was commonly either happy or miserable, according to the hopeful influences of
the Stars that did govern at his birth: They were apt to imagine, that the
Stars had a greater power upon us, and our affairs, and our humors, than
really they have; therefore they did possess the ignorant people with this
fancy, which brought in the adoration of the Stars: The Star Jupiter was thus
Genesis 30. 11. Aben-ezra.
called, therefore Jacob suffered one of his Sons to bear this name; and it was
afterward and before a custom, in use amongst the people of God, as well as
amongst the Munster.
Heathens, to greet the New-married Couple with this kind of Salutation, (...)
Mazal Tob, a good star, sub. I wish unto you; this was the common Title of the
Planet Jupiter; and the Bridegroom, before the Marriage, did deliver to his
future Spouse a Ring, with this same inscription, wishing thereby that her
Children might be born under the powerful and happy Star of the Heavens
Jupiter. It was unto this Planet that the Canaanites did offer sacrifice, and
at the end of the year dress a Table of all sorts of Fruits of the earth, to
acknowledge the benefits received from his influences; therefore Isaiah 65. 10.
Isaiah reproves the Israelites for imitating this Heathenish Superstition.

(...) or (...)
Baalzebub, the Lord of Flies, was the God of Ekron, a City of the Philistines.
Some have imagined this Name to be imposed upon him by the Israelites, because
in the sacrifices that were offered unto him, his Priests were tormented 2 King
1. 2. from hence in Hebr. (...) Deus hoc discrimen posuit imer sacrif. Demon,
and sui legitimi cultus.
with swarms of flies. Now in the sacrifices of the true God, there was no Fly
to be seen, as several Learned Rabbis, and after them Scaliger, have taken
notice. Plinius speaks of him, when he tells us, that the Cyrenians, a people
upon the Coast of Africa, descended from the Phaenicians, did worship the God
Achoren, to be delivered from the Plin. lib. 10. H st. Nature. cap. 28.
troublesome Flies who did torment them, as the Egyptians did adore their Ibes,
to be freed from the Serpents. I think that the Images of these Creatures, and
of this God, were Talifmans, formed by some men Learned in the secrets of
Nature, to free the people from the annoyances of the Serpents and Flies; and
therefore in requital, the ignorant people, who did ascribe the effects to an
immediate Pliny says that after the sacri c^s all the flies did immediately
depart. This agrees with the relation of the Jewish Rabbis above mentioned.
power of a God, did adore them; or it may be that the Devil, who wants no power
in the Empire of the Air, that is attributed to him, was willing to entertain
these Idolaters in his service, by this and other good offices. Now wherefore
the Prince of the Devils should be called Beelzebub, I cannot imagine, unless it
be because the Flies, and several sorts of Insects, proceed from his and the
Suns immediate Agency for the disturbance of mankind.

(...)
Baal-Berith, the Lord of the Covenant, was another God of the Phaenicians: So
Jupiter was named at Rome Sponsor, or Fidius; Signifies a Covenant. Thucyd.

(...)


and amongst the Greeks there was (...), Jupiter Faederator. It may be that the
Devil, an Ape of Almighty God, caused himself to be worshipped by this name, in
remembrance of the Great Covenant that Godmade after the Deluge with all his
living Creatures, applying thereby this expression of Gods love, and the
tribute of our services which we do owe unto it, to himself. In Holy Writ, God
is called the God of the Covenant, Psa. 25. 10.
a God keeping Covenant and Mercy, Nehem. 1. 5. A God steadfast in his Covenant,
Psalm 89. 28. whose Name we are always to call upon in all our Covenants,
Isaiah Jer. 12. 16.
45. 23. The Devil therefore did claim this part of Gods worship, calling
himself Baal-Berith. In Jerem. 12. verse 16. we find a memorable passage that
mentions this God; for it is said there, that the people had been taught to
swear by Baal. I am not ignorant of the Opinion of several of the Learned in
Antiquity, who think that these names of Baal were all attributed to the Sun;
for Porphyrius declares, that his Countrymen the Phenicians did worship the Sun
as the Chief God, and did call him Beelsamen: And Somchoniathon in Philo
Biblius tells us of (...), who had for his Wife (...), or Berith: from this
Elioun comes (...): The Greek word for the Sun, for the better understanding of
this confusion that appears in the Authors speaking of the Heathen Gods, you
must remember what we have noted in our Preface to this work, that the chief of
the Devils did receive the homages of all Nations, under several Names, proper
to the places and dispositions of the Inhabitants; and that he might with more
ease induce men to his worship, he did set up and promote those persons and
things that were most in credit, appointing at the same time such manner of
Devotion as was most suitable to him, and his enmity to mankind: From hence it
is that he is called Jupiter, in Rome, Mithra, in Persia, Baal, in Phaenicia,
Apis, in Egypt, (...), in Grecia, Tharamis, in Germany, Thor, or Belemus, in
England, Mars or Hesus, in Tartaria, Baalpeor or Chemos, in Moab, Baalzebub, in
Ekron, Belus, in Babylon, Bacchus, in Arabia, etc.

It was no difficult business to cause men to The Naturalists do inform us,
that as soon as our eyes are open in a morning, they turn of themselves to
behold and admire the Sun when we sleep in he open Air. Coel. Rhodig.
adore the Sun, for of all visible Creatures he is the most glorious, and the
most useful: That grateful humor therefore that is natural to man, and that
calls upon him to acknowledge that Being from whom he receives favors and
blessings, did incline him to return thanks to the Sun for all the visible
effects of his heat and light; therefore he was the first Creature adored by
the Eastern people. I am inclinable to think, that this Baal-Berith was
intended for the Sun, or rather the Moon; for in Judges 8. ver. 33. it is said,
that the Israelites made Baal-Berith their God, that is, their chief God, and
went a whoring after Baalim. If this latter word, as some of the Learned do
judge, and as may be easily proved, did signify the inferior Stars and
Planets, we may have some reason to conjecture, that Baal-Berith that
accompanies them in this place, was one of the most Eminent Lights in the
Heavens. Other learned Writers do understand the Deified Souls of men, by this
plural number Baalim: This name may be applied to the Semones, or Semidii, by
some people; but I cannot conceive so mean an Opinion of the Israelites, as to
think that they did adore the Souls of men departed out of their sight, without
any further respect. It is more probable, that they did worship the Sun and
Stars, whereof they did daily experience the goodness and power. There is a
passage in 2 Chronicles. ver. 33. that makes me inclinable to this opinion; for
there Manasseh rears up Altars broken down, plants Groves for Baalim: To what
purpose I pray? His design is Acts 7. 41.

2 King. 17. 16. Dan. 8. 10. and Nehem 9. 6. There the Host of Heaven signifies
the Stars.


discovered in the next words, that he might worship and serve all the Host, or
the Stars of Heaven, unto whom he did sacrifice upon those Altars. And if you
compare one place of Scripture with another, you may find the same Gods named
Baalim, who are elsewhere called the Host of Heaven. Herodotus 1 Samuel 7. 4.
Compare 2 Chronicles. 21. 13. and 1 Kin. 18. Chap. 18. with Jer. 8. 2.
and Plato do inform us, that these Stars were the ancient Gods of Greece also,
as well as of Phaenicia; therefore he derives the word (...) God, from (...) to
run, because the Sun, Moon, and Stars do run a very swift pace.

There are several places mentioned in Scripture, where the Images and Temples
(...)
of the God Baal did stand, as Baal-Hamon, Baal-hazor, Baal-Perazin, and
Baal-Shalisha. This last place is mentioned 2 Kings 4. 42. And as in Hebrew it
signifies Ter-Baal, it may cause us to imagine, that the place was thus named
from the Sacred Trinity there worshipped, which Mystery was not unknown to
Steuch. Eugub.
the Heathens, as a Learned Writer has proved.

(...) Cicer. nature. Deor, lib. 3.
Ashtoreth, or Astaroth, or as the 70 write it, (...), was the chief Goddess of
the Sidonians, called by some Luna, by others Venus. She is named Baaltis and
Haec baal. '(...). Lucian. Venus was named (...), and adored in the form of a
Fish. Ovid ^ast. lib. 2.
Philo Biblius reports of her, that she traveled all over the world, having
taken upon her the shape of a Bull: At her return she landed at Tire, and
consecrated there a Star that she had found in her way fallen from the Sky upon
the Earth: I do judge that this Goddess was Luna, for she is named Jerem. 7.
44. (...), the Queen of Heaven: They did adore her, by committing fornication
in her Temple, as in that of Venus, because she has a visible influence in the
Generation of Children, and upon the humors and affections of women; they
thought it therefore their duty to dedicate to her service Eusebius. and (...)
Seldom.
those actions unto which she did stir them up; she was called (...), and (...)
Venus, and Juno Olympia, or Minerva Belisama.

Herodian in vita Heliogab. lib. 5. Histor. She is named Astronoe Damafc. The
Syrians did observe her Festival; the men in habits like women, and the women
in men's clothes. Macrob.
Herodianus mentions this Goddess, and names her from (...) Urania, and tells
us, that the Phaenicians did call her Astroarche. It is probable from this
passage, that thereby the Moon is to be understood; for as the Pagans did marry
(...) and (...), the Sun and Moon together, so Heliogabalus, that silly
Emperor, who required for himself the usual worship rendered unto the Sun, is
there said to have espoused this Urania, or the breathless Statue of this
Goddess; an action better becoming an extravagant of Bedlam, than the Emperor
of Rome.

1 Samuel 5. 2. (...)
Dagon was the great Idol of the Philistines, adored at Ashdod, called Oannes,
and (...), as the Learned Seldom informs us: He was named Jupiter Cassius by
Foreigners, from a Mountain of the same name, situate between Syria and
Palestine, or (...), or Marnas. The Inhabitants did say, that he Bochart Geog.
Sacr. lib. 4
taught unto them how to manure the ground, and the use of Corn: He was
represented half a Man, and half a Fish, and had in his right hand a Pomgranat,
to show (...)
that he was the Protector of the Caphtorims, who bearing this kind of fruit in
their Coat of Arms, did possess themselves of the Country of Phaenicia, Deuteronomy.
2. 23,

Cicer. Not Deorum lib. 3. Caphtorims a people of Cappadocia descended of the
Scythians.
Cicero tells us, that the Syrians did worship a Fish; and Plutarch, how they
abstained from several sorts of Fish, in reverence to their Gods.

Besides the former Astarte, the Phaenicians did adore another Venus called
(...) which some take to be a bright Star of the firmament named by us Venus.

2 Kings 17. (...)
Succoth Benoth was the Idol of the Babylonians the word signifies the
Tabernacle of Daughters, because the Temple of this lascivious Idol was built
in such a manner, that there was several retreats or lodgings Merodotus Munster
in cosmograph.
for women who were to prostitute their bodies to the lust of Strangers. The Law
of the Country did oblige them all to disgrace themselves in this manner once
in their lives in honor of this Goddess, who is thought to be the same with
Venus See Levit. 19. 29
Melita. All Strangers did in requital of their good entertainment, offer money
to Ve^^^ Babylo^ia Dicta est
this Idol. Justine confirms this Story, for he relates how that it was a kind
expression of civility amongst the Babylonians to ^he Goddess ^as named A^itis
in Ar^enia; in her emple Virns did proture themselves before marriage. This
custom was in Lydia. ^lia. lib. 4. v. Hist. The learned Seldom. Va^er. Maxim.
lib. 2. c. 6. ^is remarkable that Venus is named by the Pagans (...) and (...)
the Destroyer of men, for there is no greater enemy to health ^n excess in
Venerean delights.
give their Guests liberty to lie with their Wives.

It seems the Ambassadors of the King of Persia, who were slain in a Banquet by
the Macedonians, for venturing too far beyond the bouuds of modesty upon the
Kings Daughter, were accustomed to this unnatural trade and shameful mode of
their Country. Now this Goddess Benoth, from whence comes Venos or Venus, was
adored in the same manner in several places of the World: for in Africa there
was Sicca Veneria near Carthage, an infamous place dedicated to this Goddess,
where the Women did freely abandon themselves to their lusts, and to the
pleasure of men for a Reward.

Nergal (...) was a continual Fire, which the Persian Magi's did entertain in
honor of the Sun, and of the Lights of the Firmament, upon an Altar.

Their custom was to keep this Fire continually burning, as the Romans did
their Holy Fire dedicated to Vesta. At every time they did meddle with the
Fire, their custom (...) was the Altar upon which the fire did burn.
was to sing hymns in honor of the Sun. The Jewish Writers do affirm, that this
was the God adored in Vr of the Chaldeans, and that Abraham was driven out of
his Country because he did refuse to yield to this Idolatry. Now it was the
custom of the Persians to dedicate to the Sun a Chariot and Horses, and to
adore this glorious Light every morning at his first appearance. The Mahumetans
to this day do perform some kind of devotion I have seen them at these
devotions.
to the rising Sun, for they salute it with much humility, as soon as they can
see it, and do wash themselves with clean water. The Chaldeans were wont to
burn themselves in honor of Nergal in that holy fire that was always
preserved alive. Alexander was an eye witness of this kind of madness, as
Curtius affirms. The simple Fellow, who was resolved to feel the fury of the
Flames, did take his farewell of his Friends in a public Banquet, and when he
was thus reduced to ashes the cunning Priest did cause, the devil to appear in
his likeness to his Acquaintance to tell them wonders of the the other World.

(...)
Asima was a God of the Eastern people, Elias Levit. Diodor.
worshipped in the image of an Ape, as some do affirm, or rather, as a Goat or
Ram: They did worship the Sign of Aries, therefore the Egyptians did abhor
the other Nations, who did kill those Creatures, that they did adore.

Kings 19. (...) Joseph. lib. 1. ap. 4.
Nisroch is thought to be either the Ark of Noah, and a Picture of it, which
was worshipped by the Eastern People, as we may see by Eusebius. de prepar,
Evangel. Or the Image of an Eagle, as others do fancy, because (...) is an
Eagle in the Hebrew, but I rather think that this is a compounded word derived
from (...) to exalt, and (...) to enlarge, to express the high and spacious
Heavens, that ^erodot. in live.
were worshipped by the Persians, as Herodotus affirms.

Nibchaz (...) comes from (...) to bark, as a learned Writer imagines;
therefore he thinks, that this God was the same with Anubis of the Egyptians,
and that he was worshipped in the Image of a Dog.

Rimmon was the chief God of Damascus, 2 Kings (...)
the word signifies a Pomegranate, and from the Scripture, we may understand
that he was one of the principal Gods of these parts: Several Writers do inform
us, that Jupiter Cassius, mentioned before was adored upon the confines of the
Mount Cassius: Now Damascus, See Bochart Georg. Sacr.
where this God had a famous Temple, was near unto the Mountain. I do therefore
think, that this is the place and the God mentioned by Herodotus rather than
Dagon. It is Herodotus
certain, that Jupiter Cassius, whether he was Rimmon or Dagon did hold out in
his right hand a Pomegranate, to show how he was a Protector of that people,
who did bear a Pomegranate in their Coat of Arms.

(...) Ezech. 5. 15.
Thammuz is Adonis of the Greeks; The word is derived from Adonai; Lord. He is
said to be the great Favorite of Venus. The Pagans in the Month of June did
lament for his death, for they say, that he was killed by a wild Boar,
therefore this Creature (...), prove, to offer a hateful thing as a gift.
was odious to Venus: She was mightily concerned for him; especially, when Mars
went with a design to kill him, for she made such haste over some reeds that
stood in her way, that she wounded her feet, and let out some drops of blood,
that fell upon the white roses and changed their lilly color into an
inarnation. The Heathens did shed tears in Tammur from to die
imitation of this Goddess, who grieved for the death of Adonis, and therefore
she required Proserpina to send him back again. The Heathen women did carry a
dead body to the ground, and did weep to perpetuate the funeral of Adonis,
Demosth.
This infernal Goddess being also in love with him, could not yield altogether
to the request, but only granted that he might once a year visit her upon the
Earth, and return as often to her again into Hell.

Some relate the Story of Thammuz in another manner. They say that he was a
Priest wrongfully put to death by the Kiug of Babylon: Therefore the King being
tormented with remorse of Conscience labored to make satisfaction unto him for
the injury. He caused many fabulous Stories to be related of him, that the
people might be persuaded, that he was admitted among the Gods, and besides
commanded that every year there should be an universal mourning for him. I do
think that this, and such like fables do proceed from Astrologers, who did
intend to signify by the death of Thammuz some pleasant Star disappearing to
our Horizon half the year, and returning to us again at a set time.

(...)
Nebo was a God of the Chaldeans in whose Isaiah 46. Jerem. 48. 1.
Temple the Oracles were delivered as his name intimates, for it is derived of
(...) to Prophecy. That climate was full of prophets and men, who studied the
secrets of Nature: and that people was mightily addicted to the the Sciences
that do enable men to conjecture of the events of the time to come, and extreme
superstitiary in observing all extraordinary accidents, as appears in the
History of Most of the Syrian Gods were named Pattaeci, that is Tutelar Gods.
Daniel. I do therefore imagine, that this Nebo was as much in request amongst
the Chaldeans, as Apollo Ismenius was in Greece.

Mero or Merodach was another God of Babylon, whose Name the Princes did assume.

Jerem. 25 26.
Sesach, otherwise called Saceas, was an Idol of the Babylonians, who was
adored almost in the same manner as Saturn in Rome; for his Feastival did give
liberty to all kind of debauchery, and did free the Servants from the command
of their Masters. During the solemnity, Ciun is named in the Acts of the (...)
A nos Acts 7. 43.
Apostles Remphan: Some imagine him to be Saturn, but I think that we must
understand one of the bright Stars of the Firmament worshipped by the
Israelites.

I shall not speak of the Egyptians, who paid their Devotions to the Herbs,
and the creeping things of the Earth, as to so many Gods. I shall not mention
the remote and strange Gods of Assyria, Persia, Cappadocia, and of the
Neighboring Countries. This small account of the Eastern Gods will suffice for
the understanding of several passages of Scripture; we shall therefore proceed
to examine the Names of our Saxon Gods.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Heathen Gods worshipped in England.
IDolatry crept in amongst men, before ever this Island was peopled with
Inhabitants: Therefore when any do mention this place, they speak at the same
time of their Gods: Many of them, with the people, were come from the Eastern
Nations.

The Sun was the Universal God, adored in See Verstegan.
all parts of the World. In this Island of Albion he stood upon a high Pillar,
as half a man, with a face full of Rays of Light, and a flaming Wheel in his
Breast: For his sake, one of the days of our Week is named Sunday, because he
was worshipped on that day: The peoples Devotions were paid in the same manner
to him, as to Mithra of Persia, and to the Divinities of the East, that were
reverenced for the Sun.

The Moon was another ancient Idol of old England; it was represented as a
beautiful Maid, having her head covered, and two ears standing out.

Tuisco, a Grandchild of Noah, was adored after his decease by all his
Posterity in Germany. The Inhabitants of that Country are yet called Tuitsh, or
Duytshm^n, from this their Grandfather; and a day of our Week is named Tuesday,
because it was appointed for the adoration of this Northern Idol.

Woden was a warlike Prince of the Saxons, happy in all encounters of War:
After his death they worshipped him for the God of War; therefore he was
represented as a Mighty Man in perfect Armor, holding in one hand his Sword
lifted up, and his Buckler in the other: From him our Wednesday, or Wensday,
borrows the name.

Tharamis, or Thor, was a famous Idol of the Northern People, adored for
Jupiter; for he was placed upon a high Throne, with a Crown of Gold on his
head, encompassed about with many Stars, and seven Stars representing the seven
Planets in his left hand, and a Scepter in the right. By this we may understand
who he was that was thus named; for this description agrees very well with the
chief of the Gods, who was styled Jupiter Olympius, and Tonans.

Friga was the Goddess unto whom the Heathens did make their addresses, to
obtain plenty of earthly blessings and prosperity in their affairs; therefore
she may be taken for the Goddess of Justice; for there is nothing that causes a
Land to prosper more, than Justice and Equity: For that reason an Author tells
us, that she did usually stand on the right hand of the great God Tharamis, and
Woden the Olaus. Mag.
God of War on the left. She was pictured with a Sword in one hand, and a Bow in
the other, and has left her name to our Friday.

Seater was an ill-favored Idol, painted like an old envious Knave with a thin
face, a long beard, a Wheel, and a Basket of Flowers in his hand, and girded
about with a long girdle; from him our Saturday has borrowed its name.

Ermensewl was a favorable Idol to the Poor, represented as a great man
amongst heaps of Flowers, upon his head he supported a Cock, in his breast a
Bear, and with his right hand he did hold a displayed Banner.

Flint was another Idol of our Forefathers, so named, because he usually stood
amongst or upon Flints.

Fidegast, Sine, Prono, Helmsteed, were also the Idols of old Britain, and of
the Germans: The Romans did call them by names proper to their own Idols; but
it is the Opinion of many, that there was a great difference between the Gods
of Rome, and of the Inhabitants of this Island, but they were as bloody here as
in other Nations; it was a common practice for a Father to cut the throat of
his Son upon the Altars of our English Gods, as a Poet informs us. Et quibus
immitis placatur sanguine diro
Theutates, horrensque feris Altaribus Hesus.


By Theutates the Romans did understand Mercurius, and by Hesus Mars. I do
imagine that they may have some reason for their Opinions, because the
Theutates of the Gauls, and of the Germans, was in the same place, esteem, and
order, as Mercurius was in the Roman Territories: And so the Hesus of our
Britains, was that warlike and bloody Devil, who did delight so much in the
effusion of blood, and who had particular inspection over the places where he
was adored.

In time the Idols did increase; and we find in Ancient Writers, some who have
been transported hither by the Eastern people, as the God Belenus, or
Belatucadrus: The latter to my knowledge has been adored in the North part of
England; for lately since the Learned Cambden has mentioned him, there was a
piece of his Statue found in Westmorland, and near Brougham, belonging to that
bountiful and Venerable Lady Anne Dorset, Countess Dowager of Pembrook,
Mongomery, etc. and in the bottom this Inscription is to be seen, SANCTO DEO
BELATVCADRO, which Idol was doubtless made by the Romans, for it was their
custom to adore the Gods of the Country that they did Conquer.

The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE Heathen Gods: Treating of the Ancient
Demigods.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. and B. G. for Moses Pitts, and are to be sold at the
White-Hart in Little-Britain, 1671.

The Preface.
WE do learn from Hesiod, how the Heathens did acknowledge three sorts of Gods.
For besides those of the First Rank, of whom we have treated in the former
Book, they did suppose, that the Air was full of many little gods called
Daemones, who, according to their belief did employ themselves in the affairs
of mankind.

The Last Sort are those that they call Heroes or Demigods, who did fetch
their beginning from a God either of the Father or Mothers side; nevertheless,
they did admit into their number, such as by their noted virtues or
extraordinary deservings did represent the Perfection of the gods, although
both their Fathers and Mothers were mortals as the the rest. The Statues
asigned unto them were for this reason greater and larger than ordinary men,
unto them the Dragon was dedicated, as a sign of Immortality unto which they
had attained as we may see in Virgil, when he speaks of the Tomb of Anchises,
he says that out of it came forth a great Serpent. And Cleomenes in Plutarch
was esteemed a God by the Egyptians, because they had seen a Serpent engendered
of his corrupted body after his Death. The most famous of these Demigods were
Perseus, Hercules, Theseus, the Argonauts, and many of those famous Captains,
that got so much honor in the Wars of Thebs and Troy: of these we shall now
treat in this Second Book.

THE HISTORY OF THE Ancient Demigods:
Book II.
CHAP. I.
The Story of Perseus.
PErseus was the Son of Jupiter and of Danae Daughter of Acrisius King of the
Argives. Acrisius having been informed by the Oracles, that the Child, that
should be born of his Daughter was to take away his Life, he shut her up in a
Tower of Brass, that she might never have the acquaintance of any man, nor a
Child to trouble him with such an apprehension. But he could not hinder Jupiter
from visiting her when he began to be for by the top of the Tower in a golden
shower, this letcherous god found an entrance to Danae, of whom Perseus was
born as we have seen in the Story of Jupiter, which when Acrisius did
understand, he commanded the Mother and the Child to be shut up in a Chest, and
to be thus cast into the Sea. The Kings command was executed, but the chest was
afterward taken up by some Fishermen, that found it floating upon the waves,
and both the mother and the Child yet alive, by this means the Prophecy of the
Oracle proved true; for at a certain time, when Acrisius was present to see a
pastime or a delightful Combat, Perseus gave him accidently a blow that killed
him.

When this Perseus came to age, he was mightily honored, and favored of all
the gods. Minerva bestowed upon him her looking glass: for a Buckler Mercurius
gave him the wings of his feet and of his head with his Cimiter, by which he
performed notable exploits, for some say he subdued all that Country, that is
named Persia from him. He delivered the wretched Andromeda from the cruelty of
the Nereids, who had bound her to a Rock to be there devoured of the Sea
Monsters, because they had been incensed against her Mother for despising their
beauty,

In his time there were three Sisters the Dau ^^^rs of Phoreys a Sea-god called
Gorgones They were all misshapen and cruel, having but one eye in common to them
all; nevertheless the poets do say, that the third named Medusa, had been a
rare beauty, so that when Neptnne saw her in Minerva's Temple, he was mightily
taken with her, and oblidged her to yield to his lust at the same time. This
action did displease Minerva so much, that she changed Medusa's locks of hair
into fearful Serpents, whose only looks caused every one to be turned into
Stones. Perseus resolved to cut off her head that he might deliver the Country
from this grievous Monster: Out of the drops of her blood was begot, as they
say, the Horse Pegasus with his great wings, who with a stroke of his heels
opened the fountain Hypocrene so highly esteemed of the Poets. This Horse
afterward became more famous, when he gave his assistance to Bellerophon in
his encounter with the Chimaera, afterward being frighted by Jupiter, he cast
his Rider upon the ground, and took his flight to Heaven, where he is at
present among the Stars.

But to return to Medusa, we must take notice, that although her head was cut
off it retained the same virtue and qualities as before, for it changed every
one unto whom it was presented into Stone; as it did poor Atlas, of whom
Perseus did thus revenge himself, because he would not afford him a Lodging
with him. But Perseus was not only notable by his valor and warlike feats, but
also by his favoring of good Learning, which he caused to flourish in his
time, as the manner of great persons is: for that purpose he built a College
upon the Mount Helicon for to instruct Youth; therefore the Poets and
Astrologers have advanced his Name amongst the Stars; so that behind him he
has left the esteem of a great Warrior, and of an excellent favourer of
Learning. His furniture and weapons are Sacred Hieroglyphics of rare qualities
that were in him, and that are required to undertake and compass with success
glorious designs. The Looking-glass of Minerva, that was his Buckler, is an
Emblem of Prudence: The Cimeter and wings of Mercurius, that were given unto
him, do intimate that strength and valor must be seconded with speed and
celerity in the execution of great matters: And that which is said of the Head
of Medusa, teaches, that the only presence of a great man, furnished with such
excellent qualities, are able to strike a terror into the minds of his
Opposers, and stop them in such a manner, as if they were but statues and
stones.

Addit. Not.
Cornelius Agrippa takes notice, that most of the famous men of Antiquity were
begotten by Adultery and Incest, as Alexander, Scipio, Caesar, Constantine the
Great, etc. Amongst the Heathens, when their Fathers were not well known, and
that they were acknowledged by Mothers of a Noble Race, when their actions and
life were worthy of esteem, they did then labor to cloak the shame of their
Birth, declaring, that they proceeded from no Mortal Race, but were begotten by
a God: The people engaged by their good Offices and virtuous actions to believe
them, did embrace and maintain such tales with much heat and animosity. Perseus
was of the number of these men, that did cast the reproach of their birth upon
the Chief of the Gods; for his Mother being deprived of all hopes of having any
lawful issue, by the cruelty of her jealous Father, who confined her to a close
Prison, she was not unwilling to accept of the solicitations of her Uncle
Pretus; so that of this incestuous Copulation was born Perseus: He was with his
Mother cast into the Sea, but Providence conveyed him alive thorough the waves
of the Sea to the Island Seriphus, where Polydectes did command as King. It
happened, that when his Brother Dictys was fishing upon the Sea, he happily met
with these unfortunate creatures shut up in the Chest, floating alive upon the
water; he conveyed them into the Island, and there nourished them at his
Brothers Court.

When Perseus came to Age, he was taken notice of for his valor and strength,
and because he was desirous to ingratiate himself with the people, he undertook
to destroy the Monsters of Women that were in Africa, called Gorgones; some
think them to be Basilisks, that kill with their eyesight. He cut off the Head
of Medusa, and from the drops of corrupt blood that fell on the ground, did
proceed that multitude of Serpents and venomous Beasts that trouble Africa more
than any other part of the World. But Perseus could not have overcome them, had
he not been furnished with the forementioned Armor of the Gods, and the Helmet
of Pluto, by which he became invisible. He did many brave actions, insomuch
that he obtained, not only for himself a place amongst the Stars, but also for
his Father and Mother-in-law, Cepheus, and Cassiopeia, and for his Wife
Andromeda. The Poets do take notice, that when he went to cut Medusa's Head
whiles she was asleep, he turned from her his eyes, and looked in his Buckler,
that was a Looking-glass, how to direct his Sword.

CHAP. II.
Of Hercules.
HErcules has been the most Illustrious and the most Glorious of all the
Heroes of Antiquity, unto whom are ascribed, according to the judgment of many
persons, the deeds of several famous men.

His Mother was Alcmena, who espoused Amphitrion, a Theban Prince, upon
condition that he would revenge the massacre of her Brother. Whiles he was in
the War for that purpose, amorous Jupiter gave a visit to Alcmena in the shape
of Amphitryon; and that he might enjoy the satisfaction of her company longer
without discovery, he made the Night to continue longer than any other. Alemeni
was then big with Iphiclus; she did nevertheless conceive Hercules from
Jupiters acquaintance, and was brought to bed of both of them together.
Although Amphitryon was not the Father of Hercules, he is by the Poets called
Amphitrymiades.

At that time Sthelenus, King of Mycene, was in great hopes of obtaining
speedily a Son, afterward called Eurystheus. Jupiter took an oath, that he
that should be born first of him or Hercules, should be King, and have an
absolute command over the other; which when Juno, the sworn Enemy of all her
Husbands Concubines, and of the Children that were born of them, had
accidentally heard, she caused Eurystheus to come forth of his Mothers Womb at
the end of seven months, and by that means procured unto him the Scepter with
the Sovereign Command.

Some say, that Juno solicited earnestly by Pallas, was reconciled to Hercules;
and that in testimony of her good will and amity, she gave him to suck of her
own milk; by that means it happened, that the Little Hercules having spilt some
of the Milk out of his mouth, he whited all that part of the Sky that we call
the Milken Way. This kindness was but feigned, to satisfy the request of
Pallas; for a while after, when he was yet in the Cradle, she sent two dreadful
Serpents to devour him, which did not answer her expectation, for the Child
without any show of fear caught them in his hands, and tore them in pieces.

When he was come to Age, Eurystheus exposed him to all manner of dangers to
cause him to perish: So that once he took a resolution to obey him no longer;
but the Oracle informed him, that it was the Will of the Gods that he should
pass twelve times more through dangers, in obedience to the Commands of this
Tyrant. These are named the Twelve Adventures of Hercules.

The first was when he was ordered to destroy a great Lion of the Forest of
Nemea, that was fallen from the Globe of the Moon, and that did spoil all the
Country round about: The people had often cast Darts and Arrows at him, but his
skin could not be pierced. Hercules pursued him, and drove him into a Cave,
where he seized upon him, and strangled him. Afterward he always did wear the
skin of this Lion about him, as the Trophy of his Victory. Some say, that this
is the Lion that was placed amongst the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

He was sent next to the Lake of Lerna, near Argos, to encounter with the
Hydra, a notable Serpent, of a strange Nature; for it had seven heads, when one
was cut off, many others did immediately burst forth; so that it was not
possible to overcome this Monster, unless all his Heads were cut off at one
time, and the rest of his body destroyed by Fire and Sword, which was executed
by Hercules. About that time a wild Boar, of an extraordinary bigness, whose
residence was upon Mount Erymanthus in Arcadia, did destroy all the
Neighboring Fields. Hercules dragged him alive to Eurystheus, who was almost
frighted out of his Wits when he beheld him.

In the fourth place he got hold of the Stag of the Mountain Menalus, whose
feet were of brass, and horns of gold, when he had pursued it a whole year.

He put to flight the Birds of the Lake Stymphalus, Called Stymphalides.
that were so numerous, and of such a prodigious greatness, that they did darken
the Air, and hinder the Sun from shining upon men when they did fly over them:
Besides, they did often take up some, and carry them away to devour them.

These Encounters were not worthy to be compared with his Combat against the
Amazons; Now Tartari^*
they were women of Scythia, dwelling upon the Coasts of the Hircanian Sea, who
having followed their Husbands in the War, and seeing them all cut off by the
Enemies, near the River of Thermodon in Cappadocia, they resolved to manage
the War themselves, and not to suffer any Husband, nor any man, to have any
Command either in the Kingdom, or in their Armies: They went amongst their
Neighbors to fetch from them Children; the Males they did destroy, and brought
up none but the Daughters, whose right Pap they did burn in their infancy, that
they might be more ready to handle the Bow and Arrows, and other weapons. They
behaved themselves gallantly in the Siege of Tr^y, in the leading of
Penthesilea. But these warlike women were forced to yield to the valor of
Hercules, who being accompanied by Theseus, went against them, according to the
command of Eurystheus: He took their Queen Hippolyte that was married to
Theseus.

This seventh Adventure, as Virgilius informs us, was to cleanse the Stables of
Augias King of Elis, in them thousands of Oxen had been nourished every day; so
that the dung, by a long continuance, was mightily increased, and did fill the
Air with infection. Hercules therefore turned the current of the River Alpheus
from its ordinary course, and caused it to pass thorough the Stables. Thus he
carried away all the filth in a day, according to his bargain: But Augias was
not grateful to him for his pains, for he denied him the tenth part of the Oxen
that were kept there: This caused his death, and the loss of all his goods.

Afterward Hercules went and seized upon a Bull that did breath nothing but
fire and flame, which Neptunus had sent into Greece to punish some disgraces
and affronts that he had received from that Country.

He passed from thence into Thracia, where he caused the King Diomedes to
endure in his own person that which he made others suffer, for he gave all the
strangers that he could catch in his Kingdom to his Horses, to be devoured by
them. Hercules served Busiris King of Egypt in the same manner, because he was
so cruel to all strangers, as to cut their throats upon the Altars of Jupiter,
that he might cloak his cruelty with a gaudy pretense of Piety. Likewise
Geryon, King of Spain, who was reported to have three bodies, because he did
command three Kingdoms, was no less cruel than the former; he did feed some
Oxen that he highly esteemed, as Diomedes did his Horses; and to keep them, he
had a Dog with three heads, and a Dragon with seven. When Hercules was sent
thither by Eurystheus, he treated him as he had formerly done Diomedes. Now
this Geryon who had three Heads, and three Bodies, Erytio was his cruel
Minister of State, who was killed. He drove these Oxen from Italy, where he
killed Lihys Dereylus, and Alebion, who offered to hinder his passage, and
steal his beasts He sacrificed them all to Juno.
and but one Soul to move them, was not like King Herilus, mentioned by Virgil
in the eighth Book of the Aeneids, who had three Souls in one Body, so that he
could not die by one or two deaths; he was to be killed three times before he
could be dispatched. Another Adventure of Hercules was, to put into the
possession of Eurystheus certain Golden Apples belonging to Juno, that were in
the custody of some Nymphs, Hesperides Daughters of Hesperus, the Brother of
Atlas: But before that any could come to them, a great Dragon, that was at the
entry of the Garden where they did grow, was to be first overcome. He found a
means to accomplish this Enterprise also: Some say that he made use of Atlas,
who went to gather them, in the mean whiles he took upon him the others burden,
and bore up the Heavens with his shoulders.

The last injunction that he received from Eurystheus, was to fetch from Hell
the Dog Cerberus, from whence he brought also Theseus, that was gone down to
keep company to his dear friend Pirithous.

These glorious actions made Hercules to be dreadful to King Eurystheus, and to
all the other Princes of the World. Afterward there was no Monsters nor Tyrant
known, but he undertook to destroy them. Thus he put to death Busiris, the Son
of Neptunus, who did lay Embuscado's to take strangers, that he might massacre
them upon his Altars. Thus he killed Cacus, who had three Heads; the Son of
Vulcanus, mentioned in the Aeneids, because he was a notable Robber, that did
spoil and destroy all that came near the Mount Aventin.

From thence he went to the Mount Caucasus, where he delivered Prometheus, and
killed the Eagle that did devour his Liver, as we have already noted in the
former Book, Chap. 3.

Hercules had also an encounter with Antaeus, the Son of the Earth, who was of
a prodigious bigness, and who did commit all manner of cruelties. This was very
remarkable of him, that as often as he did fall and touch the Earth, so often
he did receive a fresh supply of strength; which when Hercules did perceive, he
lifted him up from the ground, and in his Arms pressed the breath out of his
body. But as Hercules was big, and had a great body, a small matter was not
sufficient to nourish him. One day when he was a hungry, walking in the Fields,
he met Theodamas tilling the ground, from whom he snatched one of his Oxen that
he laid upon his shoulders, and devoured every bit of him before Theodamas, who
in the mean whiles did load him with imprecations and curses in his fury. From
hence was derived the custom of that Country, to offer unto Hercules an Ox in
Sacrifice, with all manner of reproaches.

He made also a journey into Spain, where he separated the two Mountains Calpe
and Abyla, to let in the main Ocean into the Land by the Straits of Gibraltar.
These two Mountains situate one against another, Calpe in Spain, and Abyla in
Mauritania, do appear afar off as two Pillars; they are said to be the Pillars
of Hercules, where he did engrave these words, Non plus ultra; as if that were
the last confines of the world, beyond which he could not enlarge his
Dominions. In all his Conquests he made use of no other weapon but a Club of an
Olive Tree, which at last he dedicated to Mercurius, the God of Eloquence,
whose virtue he did acknowledge to be more profitable than the power of Arms.

Juno was inwardly grieved to see him purchase so much glory, therefore she
sought an opportunity of destroying him, or at least of creating unto him some
mischief whiles he was in his journey to Hell: She persuaded Lycus, banished
from Thebs, to surprise this City in his absence, and to kill Creon the King,
with all his Sons. He had in it taken Megara, the Wife of Hercules, and
Daughter of Creon, and was going to force her to his lust, when Hercules
returned from Hell, and killed Lycus, with all his Associates. This was no
small disgrace to Juno, who was resolved to revenge it; therefore she caused
Hercules to enter into such a fury, that he killed his Wife and Children.
Afterward he became so much afflicted for this deed, when his anger was
appeased, that he resolved to destroy himself, if he had not been hindered by
the prayers and tears of Amphitryon and Theseus.

But this famous man, after so many brave actions, and after that he had
overcome all things by his valor, he became a Slave to Women, and to the
affections that he did entertain for them. Omphalis, Queen of Lydia, was one of
those that did possess him so much, that he changed his Club into spinning
instruments; he clothed himself with the garments of a Damosel, and served
this Princess in the quality of a Maid of Honor.

Afterward he became amorous of Deianira, for whom he was to fight with
Achelous, the Son of Thetys: But the latter being sensible of his own weakness,
did encounter with him in several shapes, changing himself now into a Serpent,
anon into a Bull: Whiles he thus appeared to Hercules, he caught hold of one of
his horns, and tore it up by the root, which made him so ashamed, that ever
since he has remained in the form of a River that bears his Name. The Naiades,
his Daughters, being extremely afflicted at this disgrace received by their
Father, they offered the Horn of Plenty, which Jupiter had bestowed upon them
to redeem that of their Father; for we must understand, that when Jupiter was
an Infant, he was nourished with the Milk of a certain She-goat, named
Amalthea, by some Nymphs that tended him: Afterward he requited their kindness
in this manner, the Goat he advanced amongst the Stars, and gave to the Nymphs
one of her horns, with this rare virtue annexed to it, of being able to procure
unto them all the things that they should wish for; therefore they named it the
Horn of Abundance, or of Plenty.

Hercules returned Conqueror with Deianira, but he was stopped at the Ford of a
River, where Nessus the Centaur offered his service to him, to carry Deianira
behind him on the other side. As soon as the Traitor was there landed, he would
have abused her, had not Hercules pierced him speedily with an Arrow, which
when he did feel that it had struck him to the heart, and that he was ready to
expire, he resolved to revenge himself in this manner; he gave his garment
dropping with his blood to Deianira, persuading her, that if her Husband did
wear it but once, he would never have love for other Women: The silly creature
believes him, therefore she sent it to him by Lychas his man, when he was
sacrificing upon Mount Oeta: But it fell not out as she had imagined, for as
soon as he had put on this Coat, the blood of Nessus, that was a most powerful
poison, caused so great a burning all over his body, that in despair he cast
himself into a flaming pile of Wood, and was there consumed to ashes. The
Servitor Lychas was drowned in the Sea, where he was changed into a Rock, and
Deianira for grief killed her self with a blow of her Husbands Club.

But Hercules before he died did oblige Philoctete, the Son of Pean, his
companion and friend, to swear unto him to never discover unto any body the
place where his ashes were buried: He delivered unto him then his Arrows
colored with the blood of the Hydra.

But when the Grecians were preparing for an expedition against Troy, the
Oracle gave out, that the City was not to be taken, unless they carried with
them the Ashes and Arrows of Hercules. This forced him to discover the place
where they were hid, and that he might not violate his Oath, he showed where
they lay with his feet, which were punished afterward for it; for in his
voyage to Troy, one of these Arrows wounded his foot that had been the
instrument of his perfidy, so grievously, that it corrupted and yielded such a
stink, that he became unsufferable to his company; therefore he was left behind
in the Isle of Lemnos. Nevertheless, because the Greeks did imagine that it was
not possible to obtain any success without the Arrows of Hercules that were in
his keeping, they sent Ulysses back to bring him to the Siege; and afterward
he was perfectly healed by Macaon, that famous Physician, who was the Son of
Esculapius.

Addit. Not.
There has been no King, nor other person, since the beginning of the World,
that has rendered his name more famous than Hercules, f r he was not only known
in Greece, in Italy, and Spain, but in Egypt, as Herodotus, and in France and
Germany, as Caesar do inform us. These following particulars may be further
added to his former History, for the intelligence of the Poets, and Ancient
Writers.

Jupiter when he laid with his Mother spent three nights, which he caused to be
joined together to beget him; his body and stature was answerable to the pains
and power of his Father; for it is reported, that he was four Cubits and a foot
high, and had three ranks of teeth in his mouth; out of his eyes sparkles of
fire and light did sometimes proceed. He had a Sister married to Polyphemus,
mentioned by Homer in his Odyssea; his Brother was Iphiclus, of Witness Aelian
in his various stories, a Greek Poet, (...), etc.
whom it is related that he was so light, that he could run over the ears of
standing ^orn, without any prejudice to them. When Hercules came to years of
understanding, he was put in the tuition of several Masters, that did excel in
many Arts and Sciences, to learn under them the things that were required to
make him accomplished. He was taught by a Shepherd by birth a Scythian, named
Tentares, to handle the Spear and Dart: Lucius, a Son of Apollo, taught him the
Rudiments of Learning; and because he had chastised him with a Rod, Hercules
killed him when he came to be of Age: From Eumolpus he learnt the Art of
playing upon Instruments of Music: Chiron gave him an insight into Astrology,
and Harpolicus made him understand the other Sciences that were necessary to
accomplish a man of his Birth and Valor. He was scarce eighteen years of Age
when Eurystheus employed him in most difficult Enterprises. The first was when
he killed that dreadful Lion fallen from the Moon, that did spoil the Country
round about the Forest of Nemea; he discharged against the wild Beast all his
Arrows, but to little purpose, and then encountered it with his Club only in his
hand, but the skin was so tuff and hard that no weapon could enter it; which as
soon as Hercules perceived it, he caught hold of the raging Lion, and tore him
in pieces with his hands: Ever after he delighted to wear the skin of this
Lion, and in his imitation all Heroes have skins of Lions, or of wild beasts,
upon their Bucklers. The Poets speak of three Lions killed by Hercules,
Heliconius, lesbins, and Nemaus.
of Helicon, of Lesbos, and Nemea. Thespius, King of Boeotia, soon heard of his
valor and strength, therefore he sent for him to make trial of his ability.
This King had fifty Daughters, and never a Son; he imagined that it might be a
great support to him to have Grandchildren by them of extraordinary qualities:
For that intent he imploys Hercules, after a costly banquet, to get them
with-child; and it is reported, that he did his business so well, that they did
all conceive so many Sons in one night. Creon, King of Thebs, bestowed upon him
his Daughter in reward of his good service, for he had delivered him and his
Country from all subjection to Erginus, whom he killed, with most part of his
Army, when he went to consult the Oracle, and expiate his crimes of murdering
his Wife and Children: The Pythia, the Woman-Priest of Apollo, surnamed him
Hercules, whereas he was before called Alcides. They say that Eurystheus that
set him awork was so jealous of Hercules, that at last he would never suffer
him to enter into the gates of the City, but by Copreus his Herald did signify
unto him his pleasure. In his Travels he was kindly entertained by several
persons, especially by Pholu^, who brought forth unto him his best Wine, and
greatest dainties; but it happened, that then his house was beset by the
Centaurs, whom Hercules put to flight, killing great numbers of them.
Afterward he cleansed the Stables of Augias, but being deprived of the reward
promised by this ungrateful King, he sacked his Country, and out of the spoils
he erected Trophies of his Victory, and instituted the Olympic Games, ordering
them to be celebrated every five years in honor of Jupiter. Eurystheus sought
all occasions to destroy him; therefore he commanded him to bring unto him the
Girdle of Hypolite, Queen of the Amazons, that he might give it to his Daughter
Admeta. He conquerrd all the Country of the Amazons; and in his return with
Theseus, he freed Hesione from the fury of the Sea Monster, unto which she was
exposed by her Father, as we have already said, but this Traitor refusing to
give to Hercules the recompense that he had promised, lost both his life and
Kingdom. Hercules after these exploits punished Tmolus and Telegonus, the Sons
of Proteus, because they did inhumanely kill all the strangers that they did
overcome in wrestling; and Sarpedon, the impious Son of Neptunus, received also
from him a worthy reward of his former cruelties. Hercules performed many other
worthy Acts, for he passed through Lybia, Egypt, Palestine, Cilicia, and Asia
minor, destroying all eminent Robbers and petty Tyrants, that made use of their
power to oppress the rest of mankind. Thus he put to death Cygnus the Son of
Mars, Zetes and Calais the Sons of Boreas; he vanquished the cruel people,
called Cercopes, that dwelt in Asia minor; he destroyed the Giants that marched
against him, that proceeded from the blood of the Lion of Nemea; and many other
Monsters of cruelty he humbled in the dust.

CHAP. III.
Of Theseus.
THeseus was the Son of Aegeus, King of Athens, who gave his name to the Aegean
Sea: He did live in the time of Hercules, and was nearly related to him;
therefore he was often a Companion of his Adventures, and a perfect follower of
his generosity, after that he had escaped from the snares of his Mother-in-law
Medea, who with a Cup of Poison intended to deprive him of the succession to
the Kingdom.

The most part of the Princes and great Lords of that time were Robbers, who
made their greatness consist in a Tyrannical Dominion over their miserable
Subjects, and over all those that were so unhappy as to fall into their hands.
Phalaris, King of Sicily, was one of them; he was wont to shut men alive into
the body of a Brazen Bull hollow within, causing fire to be put under it, that
it might oblige them to send forth groans and cries out of the throat of this
Instrument of his cruelty: In the mean while he did take a singular delight to
hear the Bull bellow thus.

Theseus, that wanted neither courage nor goodness, resolved to give a check to
the insolency of all these Tyrants, and to treat them as they had treated
others before. First he marched against one Scirron, who took pleasure in
drowning all Passengers in the Sea. Thus he punished Procustes, because he was
wont to cut in pieces all those that came into his hands: Sometimes he did cut
off their Legs even with the Bed where he did lie.

Thus he encountered with all the Monsters that came into the World, as with the
Bull of Marathon, that was of a prodigious bigness; and as with the Boar of
Calydonia that Meleager had undertaken, but could not overcome him without the
help of Theseus, from whence rises the Proverb, Non sine Theseo.

The most famous and notable of all his exploits, was the victory that he
obtained of the Minotaurus, who was half a man and half a Bull, whose birth we
have mentioned in the former Book, speaking of Pasiphae, the Wife of Minos, who
was the Mother of this Monster, begot by a Bull on her body. And that we may
know how Theseus was engaged in this business, we must understand, that King
Minos did make War upon the people of Attica, to revenge the Death of his Son
Androgeus, massacred by them in a treacherous manner. In this War he took the
City of Megara, and overcame the Athenians; so that he obliged them to send
unto him as a Tribute every year, a certain number of young men whom he did
give to this Minotaurus to be devoured by him. Theseus requested to be sent
amongst the other young men, that he might destroy this Monster that had
devoured already so much of the blood of his Citizens. The Labyrinth was the
place where this Minotaurus was kept. This Edifice had been built by Dedalus in
such a manner, that there were in it so many windings and turnings, that it was
a difficult matter for one within to find the way out again. Theseus wisely
gave order to this inconveniency, for he won the good liking of Ariadone the
Kings Daughter, and she delivered to him a Thread, by its assistance he fo nd a
way out of the Labyrinth, after that he had killed the Minotaur in it. Ariadne
he took with him, promising unto her wonderful advantages in his Kingdom of
Athens. Nevertheless he left her by the way, in the Island of Naxos, to comply
with the desires of the God Bacchus, who wished to have her in Marriage; and
therefore he presented her with a Crown, that has been since placed amongst
the Stars.

The Ship in which Theseus was carried into the Island of Crete, had no other
sails but Black and Mourning: But he had promised to his Father Aegeus, that in
case he obtained the Victory, he would come home with White Sails; which the
excess of joy proceeding from the consideration of his happy return from so
imminent a danger, caused him to forget: Therefore it happened that his Father,
who was always expecting with much impatience his coming back, when he saw the
black sails, the signs of sadness and of sorrow approaching with the Ship, he
was taken with so piercing a grief, that he cast himself headlong into the Sea
at the same moment, and there was drowned.

This Ship was afterward kept by the Athenians, as the Remembrancer or
Monument of the happy Victory that had freed them from so much misery and
apprehension. They did therefore repair i^, when any part of it was decayed by
long standing, and did nail unto it new Planks, in lieu of those that Time did
consume and ^ot. This Ship, says Plutarchus, was always a President in the
disputes of Philosophy in the Schools, brought to express the means that Nature
imploys to preserve the Elemental Bodies, and particularly those that are
maintained by nourishment.

After this, Piritho^s King of the Lapithes, a people of Thessaly, desired to
see so famous a Person; therefore to obtain his desire, he began to spoil the
borders of his Kingdom, to oblige him to come to defend himself. When both met
together, they were so much taken with the beautiful countenance, with the
courage and generous behavior one of the other, that they did swear to be for
ever Friends, and to lend a mutual assistance in all difficult affairs.

Immediately after, Pirithous being ^ssisted by Theseus, did punish severely
the Centaurs, when he invited them to the Feastival that was kept at his
Marriage with Hippodamia, because they had most insolently affronted his people
the Lapithes, and massacred multitudes of them. Now the Centaurs were the first
people that had found out the art of riding upon Horses; and for that cause
they were esteemed half Men, and half Horses, of those that met them on
Horseback. From hence comes their name H ppocentauri.

Another effect of the alliance between Pirithous and Theseus, was the Rape of
the fair Helena, of whom we shall speak hereafter. Theseus also accompanied him
to Hell, when he went to fetch from thence Proserpina that he loved entirely:
But this enterprise succeeded not according to their expectation, for they were
stopped by Pluto. Some say, that Pirithous was condemned to the torments of
Ixion; but Theseus was forced to rest himself after the grievous labors and
pains whom he had endured in this expedition upon a great stone, from which he
could never after rise, nor move himself, until Hercules went down to Hell to
fetch the great Dog (...), are great and difficult undertakings.
Cerberus. He did stick so close to this great stone, that he left upon it his
skin when he was plucked from thence. When he returned again into Hell, after
his decease, Pluto condemned him to the same place, because he had been so bold
as to undertake to ravish and carry away his Queen.

We have already declared in the former Chapter how he married Hippolyte, Queen
of the Amazons, of whom he had a Son that did bear the Name of his Mother,
called by some Antiopea. Afterward he espoused Phedra, one of the Daughters of
Minos. She grew amorous of this Hippolytus her Son-in-law; Of him is the Prove.
(...). Diogen Of a chaste and virtuous man.
but when she could not gain him by prayers, she accused him to Theseus most
maliciously, as if he had offered to dishonor her. Theseus gave credit to her
Calumny; therefore he banished out of his house the poor young Prince, desiring
the God Neptunus to punish him for this conceived Crime.

Hippolytus fled from the rage of his Father upon a Chariot; and as he was
passing by the Seaside, he met with a Sea Monster that frighted his Horses,
cast him to the ground, and killed him in a miserable manner; for he was dragged
over the Rocks and stones, and his body torn in pieces by these fearful and
furious Horses. Phedra was mightily grieved at this mischance; being therefore
pressed with a remorse of conscience, she discovered all the truth of
Hippolytus his Innocence, and of her own malice, and then stob'd her self
before him, leaving unto Theseus the displeasure of having been too credulous.
But since Esculapius being moved with compassion for Hippolytus, he restored
him to life again.

Addit. Not.
Theseus was a wise and valiant King of Athens, that persuaded the people
dispersed in the Country to live together in Cities. He established wholesome
Laws in his Dominions, and destroyed many Tyrants and Thieves that did trouble
the Country, Cercyon, Polypemon, Periphetes, etc. He was said to he the Son of
Neptunus, because he was an encourager of Trade and Navigation. Minos did
question him about his Father, but he proved what he was; for when the King
cast a Ring into the Sea, he dived to the bottom, and fetched it up with a Crown
in his hand, which Thetis bestowed upon him, and which was afterward given to
Ariadne; but after her death it was placed amongst the Stars.

His Sons were Hippolytus, Acamas, and D^mophon: When he came to be old, he was
killed by King Lycomedes in a cruel battle.

Diod. l. 5. cap. ^
He Reigned about the year of the World 2700. in the days of Gedeon, a Judge
of Israel, according to the computation of the best Chronology.

CHAP. IV.
Of the stories of Castor and Pollux.
THe common Opinion of the Poets is, that Leda, the Queen of Tyndarus, King of
Oebalia, having had familiar acquaintance with Jupiter, she brought forth two
big Eggs: Out of one, which was of Jupiter, Hence is the Prove. (...). Of a fair
Lady, she proceeds from an Egg.
she had Pollux and Helena; and from the other, that was of Tyndarus, were born
Castor and Clytemnestra. They were nevertheless all named Tyndarides, because
they were all the Children of one Mother that was Wife of Tyndarus.

The two Brothers, Caster and Pollux, did love one another entirely, insomuch
that they were inseparable, and they always performed their undertakings
together; but only Pollux was immortal by the privileges of his Birth;
therefore out of a tender affection for his Brother, he persuaded Jupiter, who
had a great kindness for him, to admit also the other into the number of his
Sons. From hence the Greeks called them Dios^^uroi, that is, Children of
Jupiter* And Jupiter at last caused Castor to partake with Pollux of his
Immortality, in such a manner, as that they were to live successively one after
another, until the time that they were both transported amongst the signs of
the Zodiac, where they represent the Constellation called Gemini.

But they did not attain unto this great Honor, until they had deserved it by
a many glorious actions; for they forced Theseus to restore their Sister Helena
that he had taken; they cleared the Coast of all Pirates at Sea that interrupted
the Trade; therefore they have been adored amongst the Divinities of the Sea,
and been put in the number of those that were surnamed Apotropaei, that is, who
did protect them from evil. For this cause the Heathens did sacrifice unto them
white Lambs.

The Romans had a particular respect for them, because of the assistance that
they had received from them in a Battle against the Latin people, near the Lake
Rhegilus: Therefore they did erect to them a very stately Temple, and did swear
commonly by their Names: The Oath of the Women was Aecastor, as that of men was
Hercule and Aed^pol; that is by the Temple of Castor or Pollux, for Aedes
signifies a Temple.

Addit. Not.
Castor and Pollux are reckoned amongst the famous men that have deserved an
immortal name by their valor and generosity. They accompanied Jason, and his
Argonauts, in their expedition, to fetch back again the Golden Fleece, in which
these two Brethren did sufficiently declare their courage and skill in Arms,
Pollux especially: He undertook to correct the temerity of Amycus, when he
offered to challenge one of their company out of the Ship to fight with him at
handy blows. Pollux went out, and soon laid him dead upon the ground. In this
voyage, when a dangerous Tempest had overtaken them, they saw two flames of
fire lighting upon the head of Castor and Pollux, which were the happy Omens or
forerunners of the end of their fears and danger; for the Mariners take
notice, that when two fires appear together at Sea, they are to expect
happiness in their undertakings, and a notable calm; whereas if there be but
one, they prepare themselves for a grievous storm. From hence these two lights,
that are Meteors, or the dry exhalations of the Earth, inflamed in the Air, are
called Castor and Pollux; but when one is seen, it is called Helena, as
dangerous to Seamen as she was to Troy.

After the return of the Argonauts, Castor and Pollux had war with the
Athenians, because Theseus their King had ravished their (...). Homer.
fair Sister Helena; but when they had taken one of the Cities of Theseus, and
in it their Sister, they dealt kindly with the Inhabitants, and carried none
away but Aethra, Mother of Theseus: Therefore the Greeks call all Saviors and
favorable Princes (...)

They undertook next a War with Lynceus and Ida, the valiant Sons of Alphareus,
in favor of their Mistresses that had been espoused to them formerly. In the
encounter with them, Castor was unhappily killed by Lynceus, and Pollux
dangerously wounded by Ida; but Jupiter revenged his Sons quarrel, for he
struck Ida to the ground with his Thunderbolts. Pollux, in honor of his
Brother, invented a Dance that was to be performed by young men well armed,
named Castors Dance. Now this Lynceus is reported to have been a man of a very
quick sight: The Poets say, that he was able to perceive any thing through a
solid substance, and to see into the bosom of the Earth; because, as some do
think, he was the first that sent men to groap there for gold and silver.

The Romans did mightily esteem these Gods, because they appeared to assist
them in their need: And the Lacedaemonians gave unto them the Title of (...).
The Locrenses did also see them leading their Army against the Crotoniats, with
Caps on their heads, and Lances in their hands, upon two white Horses. From
hence it is that they are thus represented, and that the Romans have affected a
Cap, as a badge of liberty. When Tarquinius was expelled, they coined pieces of
silver, with two cross Lances, bearing on the top of them Caps, in token of
freedom from bondage.

In the Heavens, hesides these forenamed Meteors, there are two stars in the
Head of Gemini, called Castor and Pollux, mentioned by Homerus Odyss. 11. (...)
(...).


CHAP. V.
Of Orpheus.
THe Poets do relate wonderful stories of several Musicians of the first Ages;
as of Amphion, who built the walls of Thebs only with the pleasant harmony of
his Musical Instruments, for the sweetness of the Tunes caused the stones to
move, and place themselves in good order.

Arion was also admired for his skill in Music, as we may take notice in this
occasion; when he was sailing from Italy into Greece, the Seamen resolved
amongst themselves to cut his throat, that they might have his Purse: But he
requested of them the favor to suffer him to play once more with his Harp
before they did dispatch him. It happened that he made such excellent Music,
that the Dolphins ravished to hear him, came Vnde Ovid de Arione fast lib. 2. at
^ibi nave tua tutius aequor erat.
in companies about the Ship; and when he beheld them, he cast himself into the
Sea, hoping to meet there with more humanity than amongst the cruel Mariners.
He was not deceived of his expectation, for one of these Dolphins, taking him
upon his back, carried Some say to ^he Promontor of Tenarus in Greece.
him to Corinth, where King Periander received him with kindness, and put these
inhumane Sailers to death, to punish them for their intended crime. This
Dolphin was rewarded by the Gods, with a place amongst the Stars, for the good
office that he had done to this poor Musician.

I shall not mention the Satyr Marsias, who because he had more skill in Music
than the common sort of people, he was so transported with vanity and
presumption, as to compare himself with Apollo. This God was so displeased with
him, that when he had overcome him, according to the judgment of the Muses, he
flead him alive, to punish his temerity; as we have already said in the story
of Apollo.

There happened also a like controversy between Apollo, and Pan the God of
Mountains and Shepherds, because he knew pretty well how to play upon the Pipe,
and that these Country Clowns did cry him up for the most expert Musician of
the World: He was so audacious as to dispute this Honor with Apollo. Midas,
King of Phrygia, a simple fellow, (...). A Greek Prove. a simple fellow.
one of the Judges in this Controversy, gave a sentence in favor of Pan;
therefore Apollo caused Asses ears to grow in his head, that he might appear
what he was to the World. This same Prince entreated Silenus to grant unto him
the favor, in reward of a considerable service that he had done unto him, that
all that he should touch, should turn immediately into Gold. He soon repented
of his rash desire, when all his victuals and food became gold; and when in the
midst of all his Gold he was ready to starve for hunger and want.

And that we may not make any longer discourse of those that have excelled in
Music, it is the common Opinion, that Orpheus, who was not only a Poet, but
also a Philosopher, has carried away the Palm from See Ovid Metamorph. 10 and
11 Books.
all the rest. We need not wonder at it, seeing he was born of such Learned
Parents, of Apollo, and the Muse Calliope: Of him it is reported, that he did
cause his voice to agree so admirably well with his Lute, that the Rivers did
stop to listen to him, that the Storms and Tempests did cease, that the most
Savage Animals did come to him in companies to recreate themselves with his
excellent harmony; and that the Trees and Rocks were seen to move at the sound.

He performed something more than this; for when he lost by death his Wife
Eurydice, who flying from the amorous embraces of Aristeus, King of Arcadia,
died suddenly of a Wound received by a Serpent. He went after her to the Gates
of Hell, where he played with that dexterity upon his Instruments of Music,
that Pluto, Proserpina, and all the Infernal Inhabitants, were ravished in
admiration. He prevailed by that means so much upon them, that they granted
unto him the favor to carry with him his Wife back again, to live longer upon
Earth, upon condition, that in his return he would not look back upon her,
until he was ascended into the light; which condition his impatient love for
her caused him to break, by casting his eyes behind him; which when her Guard
had perceived, they dragged her back into Hell, and left him in such a trouble
of mind, that he resolved for her sake to never Some say that he was killed
with a Thunderbolt.
entertain any affection for a Woman; and to dissuade all his acquaintance from
their love and union, which proceeding of his, did (...). it draws nigh
scandalize and displease so much the Dames of Thracia, that in their furious
transports at the Feastival of Bacchus, they tore him in pieces. But afterward
he was metamorphosed into a Swan, and his Harp was placed amongst the Stars.

This Swan is said to sing admirably well when unto death.

Addit. Not. Arion erat Patria Methymneus obscuris parentibus natus, Poeta
insignis pr^ecipue Dithyrambicus.
The Ancients do relate incredible things of Dolphins, besides this famous one
that carried Arion safe to Land out of the hands of the inhumane Mariners.
They tell us of others that have performed kind offices to mankind: Hesiod, the
first famous Writer, when he had been massacred in Neptunes Temple in Nemea,
and cast into the Sea, was by the Dolphins brought carefully to shore again. A
young man, and his Mistress, falling by chance into the Sea, were saved near
the Island of Lesbos by Dolphins, and carried out of the waves to Land. And
Telemachus, Therefore named (...).
the Son of Ulysses, was also preserved in the Sea by Dolphins; therefore his
Father did bear a Dolphin in his Buckler, in remembrance of that kindness
showed to his blood by that Fish. All the Heathens bad a particular respect for
this creature; some of them would not suffer any injury to be offered unto
them, because they are so favorable to mankind. In the remote Countries of the
North, Munsterus tells us, that there is a Fish called Raia, longer than a
Dolphin, and no less kind to mankind: When they meet with any whose misfortune
it is to be cast away, these great fishes do receive and lodge them in their
jaws, and do thus carry them safe to shore. He insinuates there that it is the
Opinion of some who imagine, that this was that kind of Fish, or Whale, that
waited for Jonas when he was cast into the Sea, and that carried him safe to
Land.

Ovid fast. lib. 6. Prima terebrato per rara for amina buxo ut daret effeci
tibia longa sonos.
Marsyas, a Phrygian, was the Inventer of the Pipe, a Musical Instrument: Some
say that Minerva was the first that played with it in a banquet of the Gods; and
that because of her gray eyes when her cheeks were swelled, she did appear
ridiculous to the company, especially to Juno and Venus, who laughed at her for
her pains, which gave her the curiosity of seeing what reason they had to mock
her: For that purpose she came down upon Mount Ida, and began to play with her
Pipe upon the banks of a clear River, that she might behold her self at that
time; but as soon as she perceived how deformed in did represent her, she cast
the Pipe away with a curse, desiring that he that should take it up, might end
his days by cruelty. Marsyas the Satyr, the Son of Hyagnis, a great favorite
of Cybele, found it, and first made use of it in the public sacrifices of this
Goddess; for that reason it did always continue afterward in her solemnities.
But this Marsyas became so proud and self-conceited for this invention, that he
challenged Apollo, upon this condition, that he that could make the most
pleasant Music, should have power over his Antagonist; Apollo was the Victor,
therefore Media illa tempestate inter flueb at Marsyas amnis fabulosis
Graecorum carminibus inclyrus.

Quint. Curt. lib. 3.


^e hanged Marsyas upon a Tree, and pulled his skin over his ears: Some drops
of his blood happened to fall into the River that did run hard by, and therefore
from him it was named Marsyas: It did run through the City Caelenae, taken by
Alexander the Great. Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 3.
Qua celer rect is descendens Marsya ripis
Errantem Maeandron adit, mixtusque refertur.


For Orpheus, he was a Thracian, born as some say, of Apollo and Calliope; as
others, of Eagrus, and the Muse Polymnia. He was Called therefore by Plato
(...), a solitary life, or a harmless life, entertained by herbs and roots.

It is said that he prophesied of the Worlds c ntinuance.

Aetate in sexta cessabit machina mundi.


an excellent Philosopher, and the first that recommended a solitary life, and
abstinence from flesh. Mercurius gave him his Harp, with which he performed
wonders. He was the first that introdueed the Bacchanalia in Greece, called by
some for that cause Sacra Orphica. Horace in art Poet, tells us that

Sylvestres homines sacer interpresq* Deorum Caedibus and victu faedo deterruit
Orpheus, Dictus ab hoc lenire Tigres, rabidosque leones Dictus and, etc.

He was the first that in Thracia caused men to live under Laws and Government,
and called them from their rude and beastly life, to a more gentile and
handsome.

CHAP. VI.
Of Jason, and the Argonauts.
PElias, King of Thessaly, was careful to train up Jason his Nephew in his
sight from his Infancy, because he had taken notice in him of an extraordinary
courage, which had cast some jealousy and suspicion of him into his mind: When
therefore he came to Age, he sought how he might be delivered of him, and of
his apprehensions together; for that cause he sent him to the Conquest of the
Golden Fleece, as to an enterprise from which he could never, according to his
judgment, return alive.

We have already mentioned how Aetha, King of Colchos, had got this Treasure
into his possession, and laid it up safe in a Wood consecrated to Mars,
appointing for a guard certain strange Bulls that had feet of Brass, and that
did cast out of their Nostrils fearful flames of fire. He appointed also a
dreadful Dragon, of a prodigious bigness, accompanied with armed men, that
sprung up from the teeth of this Dragon that had been sowed in the Earth.

Jason, in order to this expedition, commanded a brave ship to be built by one
named Argus, from him it was called Argos the wood of it had been cut out of
the Forest of Dodone; whose Trees were wont to give Oracles; therefore this
Ship did retain the faculty of speaking: In this Voyage it was often heard.

They were in number 54.
A great number of the most Illustrious Worthies of Greece went aboard to
accompany Jason, and share with him in the glory of this undertaking; they
named themselves Argonauts: Hercules was one also; Theseus, Castor and Pollux,
Orpheus, Tiphys, Lynceus, and a great many more: Tiphys did govern the Helm;
Lynceus, who had excellent Lynceo Perspicat^or. Cicero, a quick and good eye.
eyes, was employed to discover the banks of Sand, and the dangerous Rocks hid
under water, to the end that they might decline them: Orpheus with his Music
did pleasantly remove from them the tediousness, and moderate the grievances of
the Voyage; only the company of Hercules was troublesome, for he was so heavy,
that the Vessel was sometimes ready to sink, and he did spend a prodigious
quantity of Victuals, Hercules (...).
besides he did frequently break his Oars; but there happened a misfortune that
delivered them from the inconveniences of his company: He had brought with him
a young Boy whom he loved, called Hylas; when therefore the Ship was run
asho^r, he sent him to seek some fresh water to appease his violent thirst, but
the Lad fell into the Fountain Hylas was the Son of Theodamas, from whom
Hercules stole an Ox in the Isle of Rhodes,
where he was drawing water. This gave occasion to the Fable, that the Nymphs
had stolen him away. At this unhappy accident Hercules left the Company, and the
Ship, to seek him out. From hence it is that the people of that Country
established Feastivals to be kept every year, during which, they were wont to
wander about the Mountains, often calling for Hylas.

These Argonauts met with some misfortunes in this expedition, and several
difficult passages: They were to go between the Simplegades, that are otherwise
called the Cyanean Rocks, situate beyond the Bosphore of Thracia, at the
entrance of the Black Sea, or the Pont Euxin: They did seem to join afar off,
and open when they were coming to the passage. At last they arrived in Colchos.

From the beginning Jason contracted friendship with the Princess Medea, the
Kings Daughter, who was an expert Magician: She, for his sake, caused a dead
sleep to fall upon all the Monsters that did keep the Golden Fleece by her
devilish Enchantments; so that Jason had by that means the liberty to take it.
Immediately after Jason fled away with Medea whom he married, but being pursued
by Aetha the Father, she cut in pieces Absyrthus her little Brother, that she
had brought with her, dispersing and leaving his members at a distance in the
way, that his Father might busy himself in gathering them up, and give them
more leisure to escape.

(...), etc.
When they were come as far as Thessaly, Medea undertook to cure her
Father-in-law Aeson of his old Age: By the virtue of her Magic Art she
restored unto him his youthful appearance and strength; and that she might take
vengeance of the hatred that Pelias did bear unto them, she persuaded his
Daughters to try the same experiment upon him, for he was extreme old and
decrepit. According to her directions they cut him to pieces, and boiled them
in a Kettle with certain Herbs which she had delivered unto them: But these
wretched Daughters seeing it impossible to recover their Father again by that
means, were mightily afflicted and grieved that they had been so absurd as to
murder him upon such unlikely hopes.

All this time Medea did live with Jason in a perfect amity and correspondency,
having had by him two dainty Children. But at last, when Jason arrived at
Corinth, in the Court of King Creon, he fell in love with the Princess Creusa
his Daughter, with whom he married, forgetting the obligations and favors that
he had received from Medea.

She was resolved to revenge her self; therefore dissembling her
dissatisfaction, she seemed to approve of the Match, and sent a Box full of
Jewels, and of such precious things to the Bride, as a Token of her love; but
it was all bewitched in such a manner, that when it was opened a strange flame
burst out of it, which consumed suddenly the Kings Palace to ashes, with the
Bride, and her aged Father in it.

Jason in his fury went to seek Medea to be Merimnus and Pheretres the two
children of Medea. Thessalus her other Son escaped. He reigned in Thessaly, and
gave his name to the Country.
revenged of her for this cruelty. She waited for him on the top of a high
Tower, from whence she reproached him with his ungratitude, and before his eyes
massacred two Children that she had by him. She then took her flight toward
Athens, being supported by two strong and fearful Dragons in the Air. When she
was arrived into this City, she became the Wife of King Aegeus, by whom she had
Medus. But when she ventured to poison Theseus, she was forced to fly away for
her life with her Son Medus, and to retreat into that part of Asia called from
him Media.

In this last Chapter, the most noted persons are Medea, Jason, the Argonauts,
and Creon, of whom the Poets do relate these following stories.

Medea was a renowned Witch, the Daughter of Aeta and Idya, or as Ovid names
her, Mother of Ipsea: She was the Grandchild of Sol; she was tutored and made
acquainted with the secrets of her devilish Art by Hecate, who taught her how
to perform wonderful things by her Spells and Enchantments; she was able to
transport woods from one place to another, to cause the current of the Rivers
to turn back toward their source, to bring down the Moon and the other Stars
upon the Earth, and to give life to the Dead.

The expedition of the Argonauts, and her affection for Jason, rendered her
famous, or rather infamous; for his sake she consented to betray Flammea
subduxi medicato lumina somno: Et tibi quae raperes vellera tuta dedi Me dea,
Jasoni in Ovid.
her Fathers and Countries interest; by her means he seized upon the Golden
Fleece, and when Aeta intended to revenge himself of the Argonauts by their
deaths, in a Banquet unto which they were all invited, Medea discovered the
Plot to Jason, who thought it high time to sail away with his Prize, and Medea
Before her departure she committed a most inhumane act, in killing her only
Brother, and casting his Members in the way for her Father to gather up. She
was no less cruel afterward to Pelias the King, who hearing a false report of
the miscarriage of the Argonauts, abused the friends of Jason, and treated his
Kindred barbarously. At the return of the Ship into a Bay of Thessaly, near the
City Jolaus, Jason understanding all that had happened, entreats his Companions
to assist him; but because they were not able to encounter with a Kingdom,
Medea undertook to punish Pelias with her Enchantments. She makes a Statue of
Diana, with it she lands and hastens into the City, having taken the disguize
of an old Woman: At her entrance she proclaims in the streets, that she did
bring the Image of Diana from the Northern Countries, requiring the people to
receive it with respect; unto her words she added Miracles, to persuade them to
believe: So that when she saw the King and people at her devotion, she revealed
unto the Princes Daughters, that she was commanded by Diana to restore From
hence the Prove. (...). Plutarch. He that kills with an intention to cure. Quid
referam Peliae natos pietate nocentes, Caesaque virginea membra paterna manu.
Ovid in Medea.
to their Father his former youthful strength and appearance. To oblige them
more easily to believe the possibility of this action, she dismembered before
them an old Ram, and then by witchcraft turned it into a young Lamb. They being
thus persuaded to try the same experiment upon their Father, killed him, and by
that means punished him for his cruelty, and gave an opportunity to the
Argonauts to seize upon the empty Throne. Acastus, the Son of Pelias, reigned
in his stead, but his wretched Daughters were married to the Argonauts; Admetus
took Alcestes, who only had not consented to the cruelty committed upon her
Father, Amphinome was married to Andraemon, Asteropea and Autonoe were given to
other Husbands. After this Medea lived quietly with Jason, until he became
enamoured with Creusa, or Glauca, the Kings Daughter. She revenged her self of
this affront; for she sent a Box, or as some say a Crown, shut up in a Box to
the Bride, anointed with a strange compound, called (...), called otherwise
(...), or Iris, or Ignis Medeae, is such a powerful compound, that if it comes
near the fire, or Sun beams, it will suddenly set all the Air round about in a
flame. Plutarch says, that it is made of that sulphurous matter or Clay, that
bursts forth of the Territory of Babylon, called also by the Hebrews (...), as
some imagine from (...) to fly about; because it is of such an airy and fiery
composition, that at the least provocation it spreads and communicates its hot
nature to all that comes near unto it. Of this strange compound Diosc. speak,
lib. 1. cap. 102. And Plinius, lib. 2. cap. 105. And the Greek Poet (...).
Naphtha, which as soon as she had touched, the Air round about her inflamed,
with the Kings Palace about her ears.

Jason was the Son of Aeson and Polymedes, descended by his Father from Aeolus
the God of Winds. When the Oracle had informed his Uncle Pelias, that one of
his Kinsmen should put him to death, and that he should have an eye upon Jason,
he sought to destroy him, but he escaped to Chiron the Centaur, where he was
(...) from (...), to heal, before he was called Dolomodes.
a Student in Physic. Afterward he was sent to recover the Golden Fleece that
did belong to his Family: He, and the other Worthies of Greece, did run many
dangers in this expedition; they were to pass between the Simplegades Rocks
that are in a continual motion; they let go a Pidgeon before they would venture
through with their Ship; and although this Bird flies with a wonderful
swiftness, her tail was caught between the Rocks; nevertheless the wind blew
them through, with little damage to their Vessel. They landed in several places
by the way, and relieved Phineus, an old Fellow that was troubled with the
Harpies; for the two Children of Boreas that were in this expedition made them
fly away, and leave the blind Phineus to eat his meat in quiet. When Jason was
returned, he dedicated bis Ship to Neptunus: It was afterward preserved many
years, and the breaches ^u^. Chron. Diod. l. 5. cap. 11. Aug. lib. 8. de civit.
cap. 26.
that time did make, were repaired as Noah's Ark, and the Ship of Theseus. All
these Argonauts did live in the days of Othoniel and Gedeon, Judges of Israel,
about 2500 years, after the World was created.

CHAP. VII.
Of Cadmus, and of the City of Thebs.
When Jupiter ravished Europa, the Daughter of Agenor, King of the Phaenicians,
as we have said in the third Chapter of the first Book, this Prince sent his
Son to seek her out into many places of the World, with a Command to never
appear before him until he had found her: But Cadmus, after many tedious
voyages, could never learn what was become of her; therefore he went to consult
the Oracle of Apollo in Delphos, to know what was best for him He was to build
a City where the Ox did lie down when it was weary of its journey.
to do: The answer was, that a Cow, some say an Ox, should meet him, and that
he was to follow the directions of this Beast, to build a City, and settle his
habitation. He met the Ox in a Province of Greece, called from thence Boeotia:
And that in a business of so great a concern, he might obtain the assistance of
Heaven, he resolved first to offer the wearied beast in sacrifice to the
Goddess Minerva. In order to this Religious performance, he dispatches his
followers to the next Fountain, named Dirce, to fetch from thence water, but it
happened that a The Dragon did proceed from Mars, it killed Seriphus and
Daileon, the servants of Cadmus. The truth is, this Dragon was a famous Robber.
fearful Dragon surprised them there unawares, and devoured them alive. Minerva
advised him immediately to destroy this Dragon, and to sow the Teeth of his
head in the Earth, which when he had done, several Companies of armed men
sprung up out of this seed, but they could not suffer one another, therefore
they destroyed themselves, only five were remaining, that offered their
assistance to Cadmus, in building a City to dwell, and in furnishing it with
Inhabitants. This City was Thebs, where he reigned many (...), a violent grief,
for she drowned her self in despair. Others add Autonoe and Polydorus, sons of
Cadmus.
years, and left many Children: Ino, Semcle the Mother of Bacchus, and Agave,
who being transported with fury in the company of the Menades, she killed her
own Son Pentheus, that had by his speech discovered a dislike of the mad
Ceremonies of this God.

Cadmus did live to see all his Posterity fall into extreme misery, and himself
and Wife The Oracle told the Illyrians, that they should obtain the victory
against their Enemies, if Cadmus was their Captain. By that means he reigned in
Illyria.
banished into Illyria, or Sclavonia, where, according to their desire, they
were changed into Serpents; for Amphion forced them out of their own City, and
built the walls of it by the harmony of his Lute, as we have already said in
the fifth Chapter; but was afterward killed by Diana for his unconsiderate
speeches of her, and of her Brother Apollo.

But I think it will not be amiss if we take notice here, that there have been
several Cities of Thebs, one in Cilicia, where Andromedes the Wife of Hector
was born, which was sacked by the Greeks when they marched to the Siege of Troy:
There was another in Egypt, the largest of that Name; it had a hundred Gates;
from it that fruitful and renowned Province Thebais was so called, which has
been the retreat of so many Religious Anachorets, that built there their
Covents in the first Ages of Christianity.

But Thebs in Boeotia was the most famous of all these Cities, not only because
of the grievous Wars that it suffered, and the great Captains that it furnished
to Greece, such as Epaminondas was a Scholar of Pythagoras. Diog. Laert. lib. 8.
were Epaminondas, and Pelopidas, but also because the drunken God Bacchm,
Hercules, and Pindarus, the Prince of the Lyrick Poets, were born in it. It is
reported of the last, that the Bees did prognosticate and signify what he
should one day be; for whiles he was yet in the Cradle, they pitched upon his
Thebs was rebuilt by Alexanders command, for the sake of a great Wrastler that
had been thrice crowned at the Olympic Games.
lips, and there laid up their honey, and Pan, with the Nymphs of the
Neighborhood, did keep a Feastival on the day that he came into the World.
Alexander the Great did mightily honor him; for when he commanded all the City
to be destroyed with fire and Sword, he gave an express Order to his Soldiers,
that they should spare the house of Pindarus, with all his Relations.

Addit. Not.
Cadmus, and most of the famous men of Antiquity, cannot much glory in a Noble
Pedigrce: If the truth was known, he was but the Cook of Agenor, King of Tire
or Sidon; Vlpian.
he ran away from his Prince for no good deed with Harmonia a noted Strumpet,
yet he was so happy as to have laid the foundations of the City of Thebs.

The Greek Letters are called (...), and (...) an unhappy Victory.
Herodotus says, that he brought sixteen Letters into Greece, and taught the
people the Art of Writing: Somesay, that Pentheus the Son of Agave, and Echion
his Grandchild, afterward by his furious Mother succeeded him in his Kingdom.

The Poets make Europa bir Sister, Thasus his Brother. Cilix, from whom Cilicia
borrows the Name, and Phoenix, who has called a Province of Asia Phoenicia,
were his other Brethren, Electra and Taygete his other Sisters, by several
Mothers. Europa was the most remarkable of them for her extraordinary beauty,
which caused Jupiter to send some of his Subjects (...). Euripid. in Medea.
to steal her away. They took her and carried her on board a Ship where a Bulls
Image was placed in the Stern, which caused the Fable of Europa's being ravished
by a Bull. Her afflicted Father sent his Sons Thassus and Cadmus after her, but
to little purpose; for when they could not find her, they settled themselves,
and built each of them a City; Thassus in an Isle of the Aegean Sea, and Cadmus
in Greece. The Phaenicians to comfort their disconsolate Prince, invented and
promoted the Fable of Europa's being carried away by Jupiter, therefore they
reckoned her amongst the Goddesses, and appointed Sacrifices and Altars to her,
causing Money to be stamped in honor of her: In one side was Europa sitting
upon a white Bull.

The City of Thebs was famous in Greece, but never so much as when Epaminondas
the great Warrior and Philosopher overcame the After his death his Successors
did enjoy a portion of all the gifts offered to Apollo in Delphos. Some say
Pindarus was a Child cast away in the Woods, and that he was nourisht by Honey
instead of Milk.
Lacedaemonians. Pindarus was a Citizen of this place, he was much respected for
his Poetical Art: The Oracle enrich't him for it, and commanded that a half
part of the gifts dedicated to Apollo, should be presented to him, because he
did sing and compose so many excellent Hymns in honor of that God, and of the
others. The Bees, when he was yet a Child sleeping in the open air, powered
forth upon his lips their delightful honey. The same thing is reported of
Plato, as it is said of Midas, that when he was yet in his Cradle, the Ants
carried into his mouth several grains of Wheat. These passages were
Prognostics of the future splendor and fame of these men in that kind of life
which they did embrace.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Oedipus.
LAius King of Thebs having espoused Jocasta the Daughter of Creon, understood
from the Oracle that he was to die by the hand of one that should proceed out
of this Marriage, therefore he commanded Jocasta his Queen, to destroy all her
Children. When Oedipus was born, his Mother was loath to commit so horrid a
cruelty upon the Babe with her own hands; therefore he was delivered to a
Soldier to be by him strangled: But he also was moved with compassion for the
poor Infant, and could not have the courage to dispatch him, or to see him
expire; for that reason he pierced his feet, and tied him up to a Tree growing
upon Mount Cytheron, that he might there die in that miserable condition: But
it happened that Poebas, one of the Shepherds of Polybius King of Corinth, came
immediately after by that way, and seeing in what danger the Infant was of its
li^e, he took it down; and because it was very fair, he presented it to the
Queen his Mistress, who was Childless. She received it with affection, brought
it up, and caused it to be treated as if it had been her own. He was named
Oedipus, because of the swelling in his feet, proceeding from the holes made in
them by the Soldier of Laius; for in Greece this Word signifies one that has
a swelling in his feet.

When he came to age of understanding, he understood his mistake of being the
Son of Polybius, and therefore he went to consult the Oracle to know who was
his Father: He received this answer, that he should find him in the Province of
Phocis. When he was come thither, he happened to be in a seditious tumult of
the people, where King Laius was also arrived to appease the disorders* without
knowing him for his Father, he killed him by chance: But as he was not
suspected for the Author of this Murder, he went to dwell at Thebs.

At that time Juno, the sworn Enemy of the City, had brought forth a Monster,
and sent it to a place not far off, it was named Sphinx; the face and voice was
like a Girls, the body like a Dog, the tail as a Dragons, and the claws like a
Lions, with great wings upon the back. To every one that passed by, it did
propose aenigmatical Questions, and if they did not give a present solution, it
did devour them without mercy; so that the Country round about was forsaken,
and no body did dare to venture near the City. The Oracle did then declare,
that the only way to be delivered from this Tyranny, was to give the right
meaning to this Riddle of the Sphinx; which was the Creature that in the
morning did walk on four feet, at noon on two, and in the evening on three.
Creon, who succeeded Laius in the Throne, caused it to be proclaimed all over
Greece, that he would quit his Claim to the Crown, and would give Jocasta, the
Widow of Laius, in Marriage to one that would resolve this Question, which
Oedipus did; for he brought the true sense of the Enigma, telling them, that it
was Man, who in his Youth did go upon four feet, as the Beasts; that is, upon
his hands and feet; but when he did arrive to an age of strength, he did march
upon two, without any other support; and when old age did seize upon him, he
was for: ced to make use of a stick, instead of a third foot, to help him to go.

Davussum non Oedipus Terent; one of an ordinary capacity.
When the Monster saw the Riddle resolved, it was so much enraged, that in a
furious manner it dashed its brains against a Rock, and thus delivered the
Country from much fear and danger.

Oedipus was raised to the Throne in reward of this good service, and was
married to Jocasta, whom he knew not to be his Mother. Of her he had two Sons,
Eteocles and Polynices, with two Daughters, Antigone and Ismene.

Now about this time the Gods sent a most grievous plague amongst the Thebans
to punish them for the murder of Laius; and as the Oracle did declare, it was
never to cease until he that was guilty of his blood was banished out of the
City, which caused a diligent search to be made; so that by the Art of
Negromancy it was known that Oedipus was the man.

When he came to understand the truth of all that had happened, and how by
chance he was married to his own Mother, he was so inwardly grieved, that he
plucked out his eyes, and condemned himself to suffer a perpetual banishment,
leaving the Kingdom at the disposition of Eteocles and Polynices his two Sons.

Addit. Not.
Cadmus, the first Founder of Thebs, begot Polidorus of his Wife Harmonia,
Polidorus begot Labdacus, and Labdacus Laius, the Father of Oedipus. This last
committed unwittingly two grievous crimes, he killed his Father, and then
espoused his Mother, which when they understood, they punished themselves.
Jocasta chose a voluntary death, rather than to survive the knowledge of such
foul mistakes, whereof she and her Son were guilty, and Oedipus departed into
banishment. Some say, that his graceless Sons cast him out of the City, and
would never allow him any thing for his maintenance, (...) a Prove. From hence
to express the just curses of a Superior.
which caused him to curse them, and desire that they might be the causes of
their own death. When he was dead, the Thebans wou d never give unto him a
place to be buried; so that they say his body was swallowed up by an
Earthquake. This Oedipus was a witty man, as may appear by his discovery of the
meaning of the Sphinx's Riddle. Some report, that this Sphinx was a Robber, and
that the ambages of his Riddle were the windings and turnings of a Rockie
Mountain; there he had stated himself to (...) the passengers that went to and
fro from Thebs. The qualities of diverse creatures are employ d to describe his
disposition.

It was his custom to propound a Riddle, to massacre these that could not tell
the sense of it, and to let the others pass that did satisfy his Questions.
The Poets say, that this Monster was the Daughter of Echidnae and Typhon.

After the banishment of Oedipus, his two Sons fell into mortal hatred; and
according to his desire, they killed one another, as we shall see in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Of the War against the City of Thebs.
THis famous War is the Subject upon which the Wits of many ancient Poets have
exercised themselves. Statius amongst the Latins has composed twelve Books of
it; and Antimachus amongst the Greeks, in the time of Plato, published four and
twenty Books only of the preparations of this renowned Siege, whereof this was
the cause.

Eteocles and Polynices, the two Sons of Oedipus, did judge it expedient not to
part their little Kingdom, for fear of weakening it, but to succeed one another
in the Government, and to rule each of them a year. Eteocles the Eldest did
reign his year; but when it was expired, he would never yield the Scepter and
Power out of his hands: Therefore Polynices resolved to force him by a Siege,
and to right himself with the edge of his Sword: For that intent he begs the
assistance of Adrastus, King of Argos, whose Daughter he had made his Wife.
According to his request he came with a powerful Army, composed of his own
Subjects, and of the Auxiliaries of his friends and Neighbor Princes.

Tiresia caecior Juvenal a blind fellow. He was the son of ^ur^mus a Shepherd
of Mount Syllerus; he had been both a man and a woman: Juno punished him with
blindness for revealing a secret which women only can tell, but Jupiter
rewarded him with a life seven times longer than ordinary* Read Hyginus 75 Book
of Fables.
The Thebans, for their part, did prepare to receive them, being encouraged by
the Predictions of Tiresias the Southsayer, who promised unto them a happy
success and end of this War, if Meneceus the Son of Creon, and the last of the
Race of Cadmus, would sacrifice himself for his Native Country. This condition
was very grievous and unpleasant, especially to Creon, who would never give his
consent. Nevertheless this young Prince escaped out of the City with a naked
Sword in his hand, and in the sight of all the people that beheld him from the
Walls, he thrust it into his bowels and died. Immediately after the Thebans*
made several stout Sallics upon the Enemies, in which they were so happy, that
they destroyed all the noted Captains, Adrastus only excepted, and totally
routed the rest of the Army.

At first Hippomedon, one of the chief of the Enemies, was wounded to death: It
is said of him in Furipide the Poet, that he had an appearance of a Giant; in
his Buckler was the Image of Argus, full of Eyes; the very sight of him was
dreadful to the beholders. Parthenopeus was no less unfortunate, for he fell
down dead soon after Hippomedon. Of this Warrior it is reported, that he had
the Genius and courageous humor of his Mother Atalanta, a Princess of Arges,
who became famous for her dexterity in the use of the Bow and Arrows, and in
running a Race. She was of that brave disposition, that she resolved never to
marry any but a Of him is the Proverb (...) because he was so cruel to his
Daughter, as to cause her to be devoured of a horse for not preserving her
chastity. Diogenian.
Worthy of that Age that could overcome her in these Martial exercises, which
Hippomenes did. But because they did afterward both loose that respect which
they did owe to Cybele, they were by this Goddess changed into a Lion and a
Lyoness.

Tydeus was also killed in this War: He was a man of a low stature, but very
strong and valiant, as he made it appear in many brave Encounters; for when he
was sent in Embassy to Eteocles, to treat with him concerning the Pretensions
and Right of Polynices, and when he perceived how his Negotiation would prove
ineffectual, he challenged all the Court of Thebs, before his departure, at any
kind of fight, and overcame every one that appeared against him: Therefore
fifty of the most valiant Lords agreed together to lay for him an Ambuscado in
his return to the Camp, but he was so succesful His name was Maeon.
as to overpower them all; of whom he only spared one alive to send to
Eteocles, as the messenger of the death of his Comrades. At last he was
mortally wounded with an Arrow; but Amphiaraus was so concerned for him, that
he pursued his Enemy, cut off his head, and gave it to him to handle before he
died. It is said, that he did treat it in a most inhumane manner, for he tore
off the skin with his teeth, and sucked out the brains, which in his rage he
swallowed.

This action was so displeasing to Minerva that she would not immortalize his
Name as she had promised to him, but conferred this Honor upon his Son
Diomedes.

Capaneus was also in the Army of Polynices: Philostrates tells us, that he was
of a prodigious bigness, and that he had so much confidence in himself, that he
was wont to boast that he seared no more the Thunderbolts of Jupiter, than the
hot beams of the Noon-sun; and that maugre Jupiter, he would take the City: But
a Thunderclap stopped his blaspheming tongue, and beat him to pieces.

Amphiaraus the Prophet, one of the Commanders in the Army, did foresee that he
should end his days in this Siege; therefore he hid himself, for fear of being
forced to go to the War: But his Wife discovered and betrayed him to Adrastus,
who obliged him to accompany the Army. He was killed in a very strange manner,
as he was flying from Thebs, in his return homewards, he was swallowed up by
the Earth alive, and afterward reckoned up in the number of the Gods, and the
power of giving Oracles was ascribed to him: They were for a time the most
noted of all Greece. At last the two Brothers, Eteocles and ^olynices, agreed
to end their differences in a single Duel, where the both fell dead to the
ground: But death was not able to put an end to their hatred, for the F^r^es
did haunt the place where they had been buried by Antigone their Sister, and
when a Pomgranate-Tree had been planted The Thebans after the Victory built a
Temple to (...). Plutarch, Statius. From hence the Prove. Fratris contentiones,
implacable hatreds or discords.

Addit. Not.


there, it did yield frequently drops of blood, which did declare how their
Enmity was become immortal. Besides, it is reported, that the flames of the
pile of Wood in which their bodies were burning together, did divide and
separate into two Pillars at the top, and by no means could be brought to
reunite.

The City of Thebs had seven Gates, and in the Army of Polynices were seven
chief Commanders, who made their approaches every one to a Gate, as Euripides
tells us in one of his Tragedies. (...)
(...).


The City was thus divided between the Chieftains, Parthenopeus was to assault
the Gate called (...), Amphiaraus the other named Proetis; at the Gate of
Ogyges was appointed Hippomedon; The Cranean Gate was surnamed (...), where
there was a Temple dedicated to (...) Jupiter the most high God. Pa^sa^ias and
Plutarch.
Tydeus was seated near the Gate Homoloide, Polynices was at the other called
Cranea, Capaneus did march against the Electrian Gate, and Adrastus was at the
other named (...). Parthenopeus was the Son of that warlike Princess of Argos
Atalanta, the Daughter of Scheneus; or Coeneus: She was the swiftest runner of
her time, and most dexterous in using Bow and Arrows: She was the fitst that
ventured to encounter with the great Calydonian Boar, already mentioned:
Hippomenes, her humble servant, found a subtle means to outrun her. The
Goddess Venus had bestowed upon him some of the Golden Apples of the Hesperide
Gardens, which he cast in the way when they were both in the Race: The lovely
appearance of this fruit caused her to neglect her course, and gather them up,
whiles Hippomenes went on, and reached the Goal before her. By this Race he won
her for his Wife; but because he did not repay to Venus thanks for so great a
benefit received, she caused him so much to forget himself, as to defile the
Temple of Cybele with the enjoyment of his Mistress; for which offense he was
turned into a Lion, and she into a Lyoness, and were coupled together to drag
the Chariot of this Goddess.

Capaneus was a noted man in this Siege for his impiety, as Tydeus was for his
courage and true valor: The latter was the Son of Oeneus, King of Calydonia,
and the Father of that Diomedes who wounded Venus and Mars in the Siege of
Troy. When this Tydeus had unfortunately killed his Brother Menalippus, he
departed to Argos to Adrastus the King, who received him with all expressions
of kindness, and bestowed upon him Deiphile his Daughter in Marriage, as he had
given his other named Agia to Polynices. In the Siege of Thebs Tydeus did
mightily encourage the rest; but an obscure Fellow, named Menalippus, let fly
an Arrow at him, which wounded him to death. In this particular the Poets have
taken notice of the Hand of God, that orders many times that our punishments
should be inflicted upon us by such as are related to those against whom we
have committed great crimes; that men might understand the proceedings of
Divine Justice, it causes a Relation to be visibly seen between the offense
and its judgments.

But there was none so famous in this Expedition as the Prophet Amphiaraus, a
wise man, who had espoused Eriphyle the Sister of King Adrastus: He foresaw
that he should perish if he did engage his person in this War, therefore he hid
himself; but Eriphyle being corrupted with the present of a Golden Chain given
to ber This Chain was unfortunate afterward to all its owners.

Alcmeon gave it to his Wife Amphesibea; and her Brother Themon*gave it to
Apollo at Delph, from whence it was carried by the Phocenses that robbed the
Temple.

His Ph^dram* proc^inque ^ocis, moestamque Eriphylen.

Crudelis gnati monstrantem vu^nera cernit. Virg. lib. 6. Aeneid. The Motto of
Amphiaraus was excellent (...). Euripid in his Tragedy of the Phoeni.


by Polvnices, betrayed the place of her Husbands concealment; for which
unnatural deed he left order with his Son Alcmeon to dispatch her, and revenge
his death, as soon as he should hear of his miscarriage; which cruel Command
was put in execution by Alcmeon, but afterward he became mad, and wandered up
and down the World, until he was killed by the Brethren of Amphisibea, Themon
and Axion, because he had forsaken their Sister, and was married to Callirhoe.
Amphiaraus after his decease was honored as a God, his Oracles were mightily
esteemed: In the Country of Athens, a stately Edifice was erected to him near a
large Cave, where he did give answer to all that did come. Not far from this
place was the Fountain of Amphiaraus, whose waters were dedicated to him; so
that it was a capital crime to impl y them in any ordinary use.

Several persons did come to consult this Oracle from all parts of Greece. It
was not delivered, as those of Apollo, by a Pythonissa, but in a dream. This
God did appear to the party who was to offer a Ram in sacrifice to him, and to
sleep upon the Hide after a fast of 24 hours, and three days abstinence from
Wine: Without this preparation no answer could be expected. It will not be
amiss in this place to say something concerning Dreams; Macrobius mentions five
sorts, (...) a Vision, (...) a discovery of something between sleeping and
waking, (...) a suggestion cast into our fancy, called by Cicero Visum, (...)
an ordinary Dream, (...) a Divine Apparition, or Revelation in our sleep, such
as were the dreams of (...) idem (...), to speak truth, and sen e, or Oracles.

Matthew. 2. 22. Act. 10. 22. Heb. 12. 25. Amongst the Romans the interpretation
of Dreams was the office ^f the Augures Rosin. lib. 3.


the Prophets, and of Joseph the Husband of the Virgin Mary, and of the Mages
of the East, of whom it is said (...). This expression is often used in
Scripture, to signify Gods appearing to his servants in Dreams. The Egyptians
and Romans had a particular regard to Dreams: The Learned of the former did
esteem the Soul in a profound sleep, better able to judge of all affairs, and
to foresee the intricate events of the time to come. We find that many other
people, as the Caldeans and Persisians, did judge some Dreams worthy of
observation, and of the serious exposition of the wise men; therefore they had
persons appointed amongst them, whose employment was to discover the design and
intention of dreams. It is certain, Plinius lib. 7. Chap. 56.
that they do not always deserve our neglect, seeing that they have been a means
of conveying unto men part of the holy Oracles. As we are not therefore to be
so superstitious as to apprehend every idle fancy that is raised in us in our
sleep, I would not have a judicious Christian reckon all Dreams as frivolous
and useless productions of our brain, but rather I would advise every one
seriously, to examine all exraordinary Dreams, Called by Homer (...).

He calls an evil dream (...). Odyss. lib 6. and Iliad. 2 Valerius Maxim, lib.
1* cap. 7. Pont. Diacon. in vita Cyprian, Gregor.

Moral lib. 18.


and to make a good improvement of them; for there is no dream, whether it
proceeds from God, the holy Angels, the Devils, or our selves, but from it we
may gather instruction, comfort or advice in our affairs. It is certain, that
the Heathens have received many extraordinary benefits from Dreams: Augustus
the Emperor escaped from the fury of the Army of Brutus, that forced his men
out of his Camp, by the preadmonition of his Physician Artorius, who was
forewarned of the danger in a Dream. And if his Father Julius had listened to
the dream of his Lady Calphurnia, he had never felt in his ^reast the swords of
his Assassins that day in the Senate: Experience, as well as the judgment f the
ancient Fathers of the Church inform ^s, that Dreams are sometimes Ideas of
Truth ^irred up in our fancy by Spirits, for the Soul then more free from all
sensual impressions, nd is fitter to converse with beings of the same ature as
it self. Aristotle takes notice, that before a Child attains to four years of
Age, he is In somnio exteriores sensus dormiunt and interiores cernuntar.
Gregor. lib. 23. Mor.
not capable of dreams. It seems that this ability does accompany our reason,
and such as are not actively rational, cannot receive any impressions by
dreams. This worthy Philosopher further observes, that such as seldom have any
dreams, have more reason to mind them, for he esteems them either very
propitious, or the fatal Omens Aristotle of Animal 4 Book.
of an approaching disease, or of a certain death. It seems the Devil did appear
and give Oracles in dreams to those that did consult him. Hom. 2. Iliad. (...)
(...).


And Virgil speaking of Faunus, who held the same esteem and office in Italy as
Amphiaraus in Greece, tells us, that the King of the Latins Virgil lib. 7.
Aeneid.
Centum lanigeras mactabat rite bidentes
Atque harum effultus tergo, stratisque jac^bat
Velleribus, subita ex alto vox reddita luco.


They did deliver Oracles in caves of the earth, where the Poets did place the
Ivory gate of hell, for in hell were 2 gates.
I shall not insist upon this digression, only we may be certain, that in our
deep sleep our Soul is better able to entertain Spirits, and receive from them
information; for it was at such times that Amphiaraus, and the other dreaming
Gods, did appear to their Worshippers.

CHAP. X.
Of Antigone, and of some passages that happened after the War of Thebs.
CReon freely resigned the Kingdom to Oedipus and his Heirs; but when he saw
them dead, he reassumed again the Supreme Authority, and governed in Thebs as
before.

As soon as he was proclaimed King, he commanded expressly that none should
offer to bury the body of Polynices, because he had been so impious as to bring
an Army of Enemies against his own Country; therefore he condemned his Carcass
to be devoured of the dogs, and of the Fowls of the Air. But Antigone, the
Sister of this unhappy Prince, stole secretly away out of the City to bury him
in the night. When the King heard of it, he was highly incensed, but not
knowing who had done this act of humanity, he gave order that the Body should
be pulled out of the grave, and again cast to the mercy of the Wild Beasts. She
nevertheless was resolved once more to hazard her life, and venture to bury her
dead Brother; but it happened that she was surprised in the attempt by the
Soldiers that had been appointed to watch near the Body: The King therefore in
his fury commanded her to be buried alive in the Earth, which punishment she
prevented, by strangling her self.

This rigorous proceeding of Creon occasioned much unhappiness and sorrow to
his Family; for at the same time his Son Hemon, who entirely loved Antigone,
and who was ready to espouse her, thrust himself through with his Sword,
resolving to accompany her into another World; and Euridices, the Wife of
Creon, when she saw her Son dead, in the extremity of her grief she killed her
self also, to be delivered of the pain of so great an affliction.

This was the happy Age, when learning was admired and rewarded. From hence the
Prove. Sophocles est, he is a happy Orator.
This was the Subject of one of the Tragedies of Sophocles, in which his fancy
and expressions were so happy, that the Athenians bestowed upon him, as a
reward, the Government of Samos. When the Army of Argos fled away, they left
all the fields round about Thebs covered with the dead bodies of their
Companions, which was a lamentable sight, especially because they did believe
that the Souls of these wretched Creatures were to languish a long while upon
the brim of hell, before they could be admitted into Charons Boat, if their
bones did remain unburied upon the earth.

For this cause Adrastus was persuaded to dispatch Ambassadors to Creon, to
pray him to suffer this last duty to be paid to the Dead, but he could never be
entreated by him: Therefore Adrastus being not able to make War upon him, he
desired Theseus, that was then King of Athens, to lead an Army against him, and
to force him to suffer the Dead to be buried, which he did; only the Body of
Capaneus that had been struck with the Thunder, and cursed because of his
horrid blasphemies, was cast aside, and burnt alone by his Wife Evadne, who
expressed in this occasion her excessive love for him, for she trimmed her self
in her most gaudy and rich apparel, and then cast her self into the midst of
the flames to be burned and consumed to ashes with him.

Addit. Not.
Evadne, the Daughter of Iphys, did love her Husband Capaneus so tenderly, that
she These things happened about the days of Gedeon, Judge of Israel, 2750
years after the Creation of the World, as Eusebius. Chron. Diod. l. 5. and Hygin.
do think.
resolved to accompany him in death. It is the custom of the Indians in Asia to
this day, to sacrifice and bury the dearest Wives of Princes with them, for
they believe the immortality of the Soul; they send therefore such persons as
have been dear unto them to serve them in another world, and keep them company.
The Heathens did believe, that Charon would never suffer such to pass into rest
into the Elysian fields, until their bodies or Relics were buried in the
earth. In such a case they did fancy, that the Souls were tossed up and down,
during the space of a hundred years, upon the banks of the River Acheron, over
which they were to pass into Hell in Charons Boat, as Virgil observes, 6.
Aeneid. when Aeneas descended into Hell; for the Sybil informs him of a
wandering multitude of Souls. Haec omnis quam cernis inops, inhumataque turba
est.
Portitor ille Charon: hi, quos vehit unda, sepulti.
Nec ripas datur horrendas nec rauca fluenta
Transportare prius, quam sedibus ossa quierunt.
Centum errant annos volitantque haec littora circum.
Tum demum admissi stagna exoptata revisunt.


See C. Tacitus lib. 1. Annal.
It was therefore esteemed a cruelty beyond expression, to deny to the dead a
burial; for this Humano generi posuit natura creatrix. Hanc legem, ut tumuli
membra sepulta tegant. Rosin, ex vet. Poet.
cause all great Commanders were very careful, after a battle, to inter the
bodies of their Soldiers that had lost their lives in their quarrels, as we
read in the Commentaries of Caesar, and in Livius. And Curtius observes how
Alexander did encourage his men to fight for him after the Battle at the River
Granicus, by causing the Dead to be buried with solemnity and pomp, and their
Images to be erected as eternal Memorials of their Valor.

CHAP. XI.
Of Tantalus, and of Pelops his Son.
VVHiles the Thebans and the men of Argos were at variance, Tantalus and his
Posterity were afflicted with many sensible evils. The horrid impiety of this
Prince was the cause of them; for as he was one of the Sons of Jupiter, the
Gods at a certain time passing over the World, did him the honor to lodge with
him in his Palace. Being therefore obliged to treat them at supper, he caused
the members of his Son Pelops to be cut in pieces, and to be prepared for them
to eat, that he might try whether they would perceive it, and whether they were
really Gods.

Ceres was deceived at first, for being extreme hungry she eat up one of the
shoulders, but the rest of the company did abominate this cruel Feast;
therefore in compassion of the young Prince they restored him to life again;
for Mercurius went down into Hell to fetch from thence his Soul, and all his
members were restored to him, and established in their right place, only in
lieu of his shoulder which had been eaten, they gave one of Ivory, which had
the virtue of healing all manner of diseases.

But Tantalus was punished for his cruelty; he was condemned to Hell, to be
there tortured with a continual appetite of hunger and thirst, in the midst of
waters, and the plenty of all varieties, that did fly from him when he did
endeavor to catch at them, as we have already said in the first Book.

His Daughter Niobe perished also miserably because of her vanity and pride, for
having a great number of children; she did prefer her self to Latona; therefore
Apollo and Diana destroyed all her Children with Arrows, except one named
Cloris, which affliction cast her into a Consumption, so that the regret and
displeasure did dry her up. From hence the Poets have taken occasion to say,
that she was changed into a Rock.

Pelops left Phrygia, and departed into Greece, to go to the Kingdom of Elis,
where he fell in love with Hippodamia, the Daughter of Oenomaus: But this King
having understood by the Oracles, that his Son-in-law should be one day cause
of his death, he would never venture to give his Daughter to any man, but upon
this condition, that he should first overcome him in a Chariot-Race, or loose
his life.

Pelops was not frighted with the danger, therefore he undertook to run; and
that he might not miss of his purpose, he won the Coachman of Oenomaus, named
Myrtilus, with many golden promises, and obliged him to disorder the Axle-tree
of the Chariot in such a manner, that it broke in the middle of the course: The
poor Oenomaus fell to the ground, and killed himself. After his death, Pelopis
talenta, a great talent. There were two sorts a little one worth 60 l. and a
great one worth 80 l. sterling.
Pelops took the Government of the Kingdom, with his Daughter Hippodamia, and
in a short time he grew to be one of the most Illustrious Princes of his Age.
From him the Peloponessus, called now Morea, is so named. Nevertheless he was
very unhappy in his Children, Atreus and Thyestes, although Agamemnon and
Menelaus, the Sons of Atreus, were the most famous men of that time. But these
particulars we may take notice of in the following Chapters.

Addit. Not. Eusebius. deprepar. Evang. l. 2. (...). Prove. an imminent danger.
Tantalus the Son of Jupiter, and of the Nymph Plote, or as some say the Son of
Aethon, was married to Anthemoissa, the Daughter of Lycus; and as some do
relate, to Euryanissa the fair, Daughter of Taygetes, one of the Pleiades: He
had two Sons, Broteas and Pelops, and an only Girl called Niobe. He is noted
for his indiscretion in discourse, for he revealed all the secrets of the Gods;
and for his Pelops was worshipped as a God, and his Sanctuary placed at the
right hand of the Temple of Jupiter Olymp. His shoulder of Ivory was carried to
Troy, and lost in the Sea at the return, but found by Demarmenus, a Fisherman,
who carried it to the Eleans, by the advice of the Oracle, to deliver them from
the Plague. Pausanias.
unseasonable curiosity, that moved him to an inhumane act, massacred his own
Son Pelops, who was restored to life again; and instead of a shoulder of flesh
eaten by Ceres, the Gods bestowed upon him an Ivory shoulder. In remembrance of
this favor, all the Race of Pelops did bear an Ivory shoulder blazoned in
their Coat of Arms. But Tantalus was sent down to Hell to be punished with want,
and with the fear of a falling Rock that was placed over his head; besides the
Eumenides did continually wait upon him, to disturb his quiet with their grim
looks, and fearful bawlings. This intimates the grievous and troublesome estate
of a Conscience wounded with a crying sin: The Furies of Hell cannot be more
unpleasant, and their company bring more torment, than a Soul awakened with the
sense of a crime.

Pelops his Son is said to be a great Favorite of the Gods, because he did
excel in beauty* and had served some of them in presenting For that reason he
is said to be bis pubescens. Ovid. Metam.
unto them the Cup at a Supper; therefore they restored him to life, and when he
desired Hippodamia in Marriage, Neptunus furnished him with four brave Horses,
and a Chariot, to run for his Mistress with her cruel Father. He Myrtilus the
son of Mercurius and of Cleobula.
was m re happy than the former Wiers, by the treachery of Myrtilus the Coachman
of Aenomaus; for this Varlet being corrupted by the promises of Hippodamia, who
desired passionately Pelops for her Husband, and by the persuasions of Pelops
himself, he betrayed his Masters life, for which he was cursed by Oenomaus,
Pelops promised that he should lie one night with Hippodamia of whom he was
also in love but Pelops would never suffer him* Hygin. Tit. Livius.
when he was ready to expire. It happened afterward as he had desired; Myrtilus
for a supposed crime was cast headlong from a high R^ck into the Sea, and left
his name to the place. Thus the perfidious Myrtilus was rewarded by th se who
did owe unto him their lives and satisfactions; for it is usual to see Treasons
in request, but Traitors were never beloved, nor trusted by any. That Roman
Damosel that betrayed a gate of Rome to the Sabins, was buried alive under
their Bucklers, by them who did detest her crime, although they did receive an
advantage by it. Bajazet and Tamerlane did commonly execute Traitors, and hang
them up with their rewards.

The Poets say, that this Oenomaus was so Pausanies. Lucian in Charidemo.
cruel, as to kill twelve or thirteen young Gallants that came to seek his
Daughter in Marriage; for when he had unhappily overcom^ them in the Race, he
did dispatch them out of his sight without mercy. Lucan Phars. lib. 6.


In running, it was his custom to throw at them his Lance, and kill them; and
that he might sooner overtake them, he did oblige them From hence the Prove.
(...) an excellent Chariot.
to carry ^ith them his Daughter Hippodamia in the Chariot. Pelops was more
happy than the rest; therefore the River Alpheus came out of his current, to
crown him with Laurels after his Victory.

Some say she was the daughter of Phoroneus Giod Boccac.
His Sister was Niobe; she espoused Amphion, and of him had ten Sons; some say
seven, and as many Daughters; but because she was so vainglorious as to say
Ovid. Metam. lib. 6.
-- Cur calitur Latona per aras?
Numen adhuc sine thuie meum est, etc.
And Quoquo modo audetis g^ni^am Titanida Coeo
Latonam praeferre mihi.


She was deprived of all her Children, the Men being massacred by Apollo, and
the Maids by Diana, who left only Cloris alive. Some say, that her grief caused
her to cast her self into the Sea, from a Rock that did bear her name, Ovid de
Pont. lib 1.
upon the Coast of Greece. Ovid calls her Mygdonia, because of her Image that
did stand in the Town of Sipylus, in the Mount Mygdonia. N^nc quoque Mygdonia
flebilis astat humo.


CHAP. XII.
Of Atreus and Thyestes.
THese two Brethren have given occasion to many Tragedies, which proceeded from
an irreconcilable hatred that they did bear to one another: For Thyestes having
no other intent but to vex Atreus, defiled his Bed with Adultery and Incest,
and then saved himself out of his reach. And Atreus surprised the sons of
Thyestes, and got them all into his power: Then he sent unto him to invite him
to a Feast, as if they had been to end all their differences, and reconcile
themselves together. Thyestes persuaded with the desire of seeing his Children,
came readily to the Feast: But when they were both risen from the Table, Atreus
showed unto him the sad Spectacle of their hands and heads chopped off, telling
him also at the same time, that he had fed at supper only upon their flesh. The
Poets say, that the Sun was eclipsed, and did return back toward its rising,
that it might not behold such a detestable cruelty.

But as one Crime draws after it another; it happened that Aegistus, the
Bastard Son of Thyestes, who was reckoned amongst the Dead, because he had been
cast away in a Wood, satisfied his Fathers vengeance, by spilling the blood of
Atreus. This Aegistus was so named, because he had been brought up and
nourished by Goats. He having therefore espoused his Fathers quarrel, he
massacred Agamemnon, the Son of Atreus, at his return from the Siege of Troy,
by the assistance of his Wife Clytemnestra, who had been persuaded to consent
to the murder of her Husband.

We shall in another place take notice how Orestes revenged the death of his
Father Agamemnon, in killing Aegistus, and Clytemnestra his own Mother, because
she had been so perfidious and wicked as to imbrue her hands in her Husbands
blood.

Addit. Not. Seneca in the Tragedy of Thyestes.
The hatred of these two Brothers caused many horrid Villainies to be committed
by them and their Children. Thyestes to displease and affront his Brother
Atreus, debaucht his Wife Aerope, of whom he had two Bastards, Tantalus (...),
an angry conntenance. Lucian Prove.
and Plistenes. When Atreus came to understand who was their Father, he caused
them to be roasted, and given to Thyestes to eat, at a great banquet unto which
he was invited. He found some way to escape out of it, and his Brothers power,
and so departed to King Thesprotus; and from him he went to Sicyone, where he
had placed his Daughter Pelopia. He found her sacrificing to Minerva, and
dancing about her Altar, but it happened that she had stained her clothes with
the blood of the Victim; therefore in the night she went do un to a River alone
to wash them. Her Father Thyestes followed her, and got her with-child, but she
secretly conveyed his Sword away. About that time ^t grievous Famine afflicted
the Country, which the Soothsayers imputed to the cruelty of Atreus, advising
him to be reconciled to his Brother. He hearkened to their counsel, therefore he
went to seek him out in the Kingdom of Thesprotus, but meeting there with
Pelopia, whom he thought to be the Kings Daughter, he desired her in marriage,
and brought her to his home, where she was delivered of Aegistus: And because
he was her Fathers Bastard, she desired that he might be cast away; and that he
might not live to reproach unto her her shame: But Atreus not knowing the
mystery, caused him to be s^er^tly nourished with Agamemnon and Menelaus his
children. It happened that in process of time, Atreus having surprised Thyestes
consulting the Oracle of Apollo how to revenge himself, be sent unto him
Aegistus to kill him; but the Father dise vered the Son by the Sword that his
Daughter had stole from him near the River, and then stuck it into his Bowels,
with a command to revenge his death, which was done by Aegistus; for he killed
Atreus whiles he was sacrificing, and rejoicing at the death of his Brother.

Giod. Boccac. lib. 1^. Geneal. de Gli Dei.
The Poets (...) inform us of the first cause of these Tragedies and fatal
discords: They say it was because Pelops offered to drown Myrtilus, the Son of
Mercurius; therefore this God in revenge, kindled such flames of wrath and
enmity in the breasts of his Sons, that they ceased not till they were both
destroyed, with all their Generation.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Kings of Troy.
THe City of Troy has been heretofore one of the most famous of Asia minor, as
well for its largeness and riches, as for that Renowned War which it n annag'd
against the Army of Greece. It was situate in Phrygia, which is a Province
stretching it self upon the Coast of the Aegean Sea, near unto the Hellespont,
called now the River of Constantineple, over against the C^e^s^n^sus of
Thracia, He was the son of the King of Corinth: when his elder Brother was
dead, there was a dispute between him and his other Brother Jasius about the
succession: part of the people did favor Dard* and the other Jasius. Dard.
with his favorites took shipping, and settled in Phrygia. Philostr.
and the Island Tenedos, which was not far distant from it. The River Soamander,
that proceeds from the Mount Ida, did run by the walls to join with the waters
of the River Sim is; both together do empty themselves into the Sea, near the
Promontory called Sigeum

The first who built this City, and who commanded there in Chief, was Dardanius
the Son of Electra and of Jupiter. When he had killed his Brother Jasius, he
was forced to fly away, and secure himself in Phrygia, where he espoused the
Daughter of King Teucer, with whom he jointly reigned in that Country, which
was sometimes named T^ucria, and sometimes Dardania: The City of Troy did also
bear the same name. In the time that Moses left the leading of the People of
Israel to Joshua, about 700 years before the building of the City of Rome, and
650 years after the first Foundations of the Assyrian Monarchy.

Dardanus left his Kingdom to his Son Erichthonius, who begot Tros: When he was
possessed of the Kingdom, he called the City Tros had War with Tantal. King of
Phrygia, who took his son Ganimede prisoner, and sent him as a present to
Jupiter King of Crete. This gave occasion to the Fable. Natal. Com.
after his own name Troja, and the Country round about was named Troas.

This Tros had several sons, first Ganimedes, who was ravished by Jupiter;
Assaracus the Father of Capys, of whom was Anchises the Favorite of Venus, who
had by him Aeneas, born upon the banks of the River Simois: But the chief of
his Children, and the Heir of his Crown was Ilus, who gave unto the City of
Troy the name of Ilium, when he had mightily enriched it.

The truth is, Laomedon spoiled the Temples of Apollo and Nep^unus to build
Troy. Natal. Com. de Neptuno. This sacriledg has caused the Fable Menia Phoebe
^ structa canore Line. Of Troy Ovid in Epist. Parid.
Laomedon succeeded Ilus his Father; it was ^e that built the walls of the City
of Troy, by the assistance of Apollo and of Neptunus, as we have noted in the
fifth Chapter of the former Book. He had promised unto them with an Oath a
certain reward for their labor, but he was so unworthy afterward as to refuse
it, which caused them to afflict him with many diseases: So that to satisfy
them he was forced to expose his own Daughter Hesione to be devoured of the
Sea Monsters. We have also taken notice how he treated with Hercules to deliver
her from the danger, and how he dealt treacherously also with him, as he had
done formerly with Neptunus and Apollo: But it proved the cause of his ruin;
for Hercules gathered together the Forces of his Friends, especially of Telamon
the King of Salamis, and the Father of Ajax, and then besieged this Traitor
Laomedon. He put him to death, and carried away all his wealth, with Hesione
his Daughter, who was married to Telamon. His Son also was taken and made
prisoner, but his Subjects redeemed him; and therefore he was called Priam,
which in Greek signifies a Redeemed.

When Priam saw himself established in the Kingdom, he began to enlarge his
Dominions, and to render the City of Troy far more famous than ever it was
before; for he rebuilt all the walls, adorning them with Forts and Bastions,
which were then called Pergama.

His Wives name was Hecuba, the Daughter of the King of Thracia; she had by him
several Children, Hector, Polites, Deiphobe, Helenus the Soothsayer, Troilus,
Paris, and Polydorus: Polyxene, Cassandra, and Creusa were his Daughters: His
Court and Palace were full of pomp and glory, and he lived in this prosperous
estate many years: But at last he was so unhappy, as to behold with his own
eyes the desolation and utter ruin of the City of Troy, that lasted only three
hundred years. We shall see how this change came to pass.

Addit. Not.
Laomedon had eight Children* (...) Nec dum Laomedonteae sentis perjuria
gent^s? Virg. lib 4 Aeneid
Daughters; Lampus, Clitio, and (...) mentioned by Homerus; (...) Priamus
Antigone, and (...) remarkable. Their (...) perjury, that when any of (...)
faithful, they are said to be (...) Laomedon.

Antigone had such a rare beauty, that she preferred her self to Juno, who
changed her into a Stork.

Titonus was married to Aurora, of whom the brave Champion of Egypt Memnon was
born.

Creusa, Cassandra, Iliona, Laodicea, Licaste, Medisicasti, Polisena. Paris,
Hector, Helenus Caonus, Troilus, Deiphobe, Polidorus, Licaon, Teucrus, etc.
Priam succeeded his Father Laomedon: Of Hecuba he had nineteen Children.
Whiles he remained in peace, and espoused not the quarrels of the Asian people
against Greece, he prospered, and his Kingdom flourished mightily; but when he
engaged himself in the public enmity of his Country, and suffered Paris to
affront the Grecians, he brought upon himself and his Subjects utter ruin and
destruction, as Herodotus takes notice. But of him hereafter.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Paris.
When Hecuba was with-child of Paris, called otherwise Alexander, she dreamed
that she was bringing into the world a Firebrand, that should kindle the flames
of War in the Country, and cause a general destruction in it.

For this cause, as soon as he was born, Priam delivered him into the hands of
a Soldier, named Arch^laus, that he might cast him away in the Woods to be
devoured of the wild beasts, and prevent the mischief that did threaten his
Kingdom.

But the Mother seeing a Child so well shapt and beautiful, she was moved with
compassion for it; therefore she caused it to be secretly nourished by
Shepherds in Mount Ida. This mean Education did not take from him the generous
qualities and inclinations which he had borrowed from his Illustrious Birth,
for in every occasion he did make a great Courage, Prudence, and Justice,
Virtues worthy of a Prince, appear to the world. So that Juno, Pallas, and
Venus, agreed to choose him the sole Arbitrator and Judge of their Concerns, in
a difference between them. This was the business, At the Nuptials of Peleus and
Thesis, whiles these Goddesses were merry at the Feast, the Goddess of Discord
cast into the middle of the Company a Golden Apple, with this Inscription; For
the fairest and most Beautiful. Each of these did claim it as their own; and
because they could not agree, they resolved to leave it to the judgment of
Paris, who was corrupted with the charms of Venus, and with her promises; for
she had engaged to procure unto him the handsomest Lady of the World-Thus he
despised the Riches of Juno, the Wisdom of Pallas, and pronounced his sentence
in favor of Venus, therefore he provoked the wrath of these Goddesses against
himself, and all his Nation.

After this, in a Meeting he declared who he was; for the Nobles and Gentry of
the Country being assembled near the City to see the sport of Wrestling, when
every one did strive to express his strength and courage, he did also go forth,
and laid upon the ground every one who ventured against him. Hector the Son of
Priam did try his strength, and was also overcome. But this disgrace so enraged
him against Paris, that he offered to kill him, for he esteemed him no better
than a Country Clown. In his anger he had taken away his life, had not Paris,
to prevent him, shown unto him certain small Jewels which Queen Hecuba his
Mother had delivered to his Tutor, and thereby declared unto him how he was his
Brother.

King Priam that had admired his address and courage in the Combats, was
ravished with joy to understand of the preservation of such an excellent Son;
therefore he embraced him, brought him to his Palace, and gave him a unto Train
suitable to his quality, for he had forgot how the Oracles had foretold, that
he was to be the cause of the ruin of the Kingdom and Country.

And because he was full of generosity and valor, he could not rest satisfied
with the enjoyment of the pleasures of the Court: Therefore he caused a Fleet
of twenty Ships to be made ready to sail into Greece, and to demand his Aunt
Hesione, carried away by Hercules, and married to Telamon: But his design was
rather upon Helena, the Sister of Castor and Pollux, mentioned in the fourth
Chapter, and who had been given in Marriage to Menelaus, King of Sparta, a City
in the Peloponnesus. He set sail and landed at Sparta, where Menelaus,
persuaded by the intrigues Venus, who had put Paris upon this enterprise,
received him with all expressions of kindness and civility. And when his
affairs did require his presence in Crete, he left him at his Palace in his
absence: But the affection of this King was requited with a most notable
Treason; for Paris having secretly made friendship with Helena, when he saw
such a favorable opportunity, he departed with her into Asia, and carried her
to Troy; although Herodotus says the contrary. But Dares and Dictys, two
Writers of that time, who were present at the Siege of Troy, do confirm this
Relation.

King Priam was glad of this action, not only because of the hard usage that he
had received from the Greeks during his captivity amongst them, and because
they had cruelly spoiled this City in the Reign of his Father Laomedon; but
also because he did hope by this means to recover out of their hands his Sister
Hesione.

Addit. Not.
It was the custom of the Heathens, when any strange accident did happen, to
consult the Oracles, and to enquire from them what to do. When Priam understood
his Wives dream, he sent also to take advice from the Oracle, who informed him,
that the Child would be the cause of the Countries ruin. To prevent this
mischief, he was designed for the slaughter, as soon as he should come into the
world; but Providence, and his Mothers compassion, saved him, and sent him to
Mount Ida, to the Kings Shepherd, Nevertheless Ovid says, Bella gerant a^i tu
Pari semper ama.
where he was brought up as his Son. He proved as valiant as he was handsome,
but vice overcame his generous disposition. He had two sons by Aenone, a Nympb
of Mount Ida, Daphnis and Ideas, who were as obscure as their Father was
famons. He was at first Renowned for his Justice and civil behavior; but the
pleasures of the Court, and the sudden change of his condition, altered his
temper and carriage so, that when Menelaus had received him with all Con
miaguida ^aduliero Trojano. Espugno Sparta* and Chebbe in suo potere. Gio.
Boccac. Geneal. de gli Dei. l. 3.
expressions of kindness, he rewarded him with ungratitude; he debaucht his
Queen, rifled his Palace, plundered the City of Argos, and carried all away
Captive, with Helena, and with her two Ladies of Honor, Ethra and Pisadia. The
Greeks did revenge this affront and unjustice by a most bloody War, in which
almo^t all the Children of Priam were killed, and Paris also was mortally
wounded by Philoctetes, with the venomous Arrows of Hercules, which had been
dipped in the blood of the Hydra in a single fight. Oenone his first Wife
labored to cure him, but all her endeavors were in vain. After his death, she
had so much love for her unfaithful Husband, as to cast her self in the flames
which did consume his Body.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Grecians Preparations against Troy.
AGamemnon, the King of Mycene, a Kingdom of the Peloponesus, near Argos, was
mightily concerned for the disgrace of Menelaus; because, as we have said in
the twelfth Chapter, they were Brethren, the sons of Atreus, therefore they
were named Atrei^.

This was the cause that obliged him to acquaint the Princes of Greece with
this notable affront, which all the Nations had received.

They all agreed to consult about this business, in two general Assemblies;
which were to meet in Sparta, and in Argos. It was there resolved, that they
should join all their forces together under the leading of Agamemnon to revenge
this disgrace, and that they should oblige themselves solemnly by Oath not to
forsake the war, until the men of Troy would submit to Reason.

Some of them were unwilling to engage themselves in this war, Ulysses the Son
of ^^ertes and King of (...) and of Dulichia, two small Islands of the Ionian
Sea, was one of them. He could scarce forsake his Dear Wife, Penclope, of whom
he had a Son named Telemachus: His tender affection for her was a tie
sufficient to keep him at home: For that reason he did counterfeit a Mad man,
ane did join two ridiculous creatures to a plow driving them upon the Seashore,
which he had sown with salt instead of corn. But as he was both brave and wise
in feats of war, the Grecians would not depart without him. Therefore Palamedes
undertook to discover his Knavery, by means of his young Son, whom he had got
out of the hands of Penclope; for he laid him down in the way by which the plow
was to pass, when Ulysses perceived it, he turned a little aside, for fear of
touching the Babe, by this means Palamedes discovered, that he was mad but in
appearance out of a design, therefore he was forced to take another resolution.
Afterward in the heat of the Siege of Troy he revenged himself upon Palamedes
for this discovery, producing supposed Letters from Priam against him to
persuade the Greeks that he had a design to betray the Army, therefore he was
stoned by the Soldiers

There was no small difficulty to get also Achilles, the Son of Peleus, and of
the Goddess Thetis. The Destinies had published, that Troy could never be
taken without the assistance of this invincible Captain, from his Infancy;
Thesis had put him in the hands of Patrocles his friend and kinsman, that he
might study under Chiron the Centaure, a most accomplished person, not only in
Physic and in Music, but also in all other Sciences and Arts required to
render a man fit for great undertakings. Instead of milk and other ordinary
food, he did suffer him to eat nothing but the marrow of Lions, and of wild
Beasts, that the courage and strength of these Animals might by that means be
nourished in him; from hence it is according to the judgment of some that he is
named Achilles, because being fed in this manner without any common Ab a
privativa and (...)
diet he had no Children. Afterward Thesis carried him into Hell to dip him in
the River Styx that he might be invulnerable all over his He led an Army of
Myrmidones to Troy.
body, except his heel, which she held in her hand, and which was not dipped: with
all this precaution she could not be freed from apprehension; when the Greek
Princes were to meet at the Rendezvous of the Army. Therefore she sent him to
the Court of King Lycomides in the habit of a Girl: whiles he did there live as
a young Lady, he fell in love with the fair Deianira, of whom, he had a Son
named Pyrrhus or Neoptolemus: notwithstanding Ulysses found him out, for when
he came to the Palace of Lycomedes, carrying with him several pretty things for
the young Ladies of the Court; he had amongst them beautiful Arms, of which
Achilles being led by nature, took hold and so discovered himself: when
therefore he could not be freed from going with the rest to the War; Thesis
desired Vulcan to make him such defensive Arms as might not be pierced, to
render him more secure in the midst of dangers.

The Haven of Aulis in Beocia over against the Island of Euhoea, now named
Negrepont was the Rendezvous of all the Army; but they were many years in
preparing all things necessary for so great a design, for the Fleet was no less
than twelve or thirteen hundred Ships. And at last there happened an
unfortunate accident that put a stop to the Voyage. Agamemnon the General of
the Army had killed by chance when he was in Hunting, a Do belonging to Diana:
This Goddess to revenge her self, caused a fearful Plague to spread in the Army
and destroy great multitudes of Soldiers: The Oracles informed them* that
there was no other way to stop the increasing Evil, and to appease the Wrath of
this Goddess, but to spill upon the Altar the blood of Agamemnon. Ulysses
understanding the meaning of this Language, employed his cunning to cause the
Daughter of this unfortunate Prince by name Iphigenia to come into the Camp. We
may easily imagine in what affliction he was in, to see his own Chi d whom he
tenderly loved with an extreme affection to be led to the slaughter: when the
Throat of this Princess was ready to be ^ut, Diana had pity of her, and of her
Fathers grief, and therefore she put in her place a she Goat to serve for a
Victime and transported this young Lady into her Temple at Tauris in Scythia,
recommending her to the keeping of her great Priest Thoas, and appointing her
to wait upon her Altars. After this, all things succeeded well, and the Voyage
proved happy until they arrived at Troy, only Telephus King of Misia
endeavored to hinder their passage, but he was soon put to flight being
desperately wounded with the Lance of Achilles. The Oracle informed him, that
the only means to appease his grief and the only remedy to his Wounds was to be
sought from the Lance that had made them. Therefore he labored to ingratiate
himself with Achill s, who having been instructed by the great Physician Chiron
knew how to cure him, he sent unto him a Remedy, in which, there was some of
the rust of the Spear which had wounded him.

Herodotus informs us, that this expedition against Troy did proceed from an
old grudge that the Grecians had against the Asians People which did encourage
them to offer affronts to one another. This was the true cause of the Voyage of
Hercules and of his fellow Worthies against Laomedon: In revenge, Paris stole
away the Pearl of beauty from the Grecians. They in requital did besiege and
sack Troy: Darius and Xerxes the two Emperors of Asia made an i^rode into
Graecia to revenge the injuries received from the Inhabitants of his Kingdoms:
many excellent Commanders and stout Soldiers were met together in this Army of
Greece. Palamedes was famous for his inventions* He was an expert Engineer, a
Learned Mathematician, Mensuras and pondera invenit Phidion Argivus, aut
Palamedes, ut Ma-Jeuit Gellius. Plin. Lib. 7. Chap. 56.
a witty Astrologer, and a wise Councellor: Philostrates ascribes to him the
invention of money, of Sun-dials, of weights, and measures, and of many other
useful things; he was the Son of Nauplius Prince of Euboea, mightily envied by
Ulisses, for whilst he lived, the latter had little respect showed unto him,
by his calumnies he rendered him odious to Agamemnon, and then in the absence of
Achilles he caused him to be stoned to death, and to be proclaimed, that none
should offer to bury him: Achilles and Ajax, notwithstanding this prohibition,
put him in the ground, and for his sake, would not assist the Graecians for a
while.

He is called by Homer, (...) signify his cunning, and (...) and sanguine
cretu^ Si^yphio.
Ulysses was the Son of Anticlia, the Daughter of Antholycus, when she was
going to Prince Lacrtes to whom she had been promised in Marriage, the famous
Robber Sisyphus ravished her and begot Ulysses, as Ajax says in the Metam. of
Ovid. l. 13. He was not willing to accompany the Greeks in this expedition,
because the Oracles had foretold unto him the dangers that he was to run, and
the dfficulty of a return: Therefore he did prefer the company of his sweet
Penelope to the glory of a famous Victory for which he was to pay so dear.
Achilles also foreseeing that he should end his days before Troy, hid himself
in the Court of King Lycomedes, in the Island of S^yro; But the latter was
discovered by Ulysses as he had been by Palamedes: Now the reason which did
oblige the Grecians to get Achilles with them, is because the Oracle had
declared, that it was impossible for them to overcome unless they had in their
Army one of the race of Aeacides, the Arrows and Bows of Hercules, and unless
they did get into their possession the Horses of Rhesus before they did drink
of the River Scamander.

The Trojans had likewise three conditions proposed unto them, upon which did
depend the preservation of their City from ruin: The first was the keeping of
the Palladium, or the Image of Pallas. The next was, the life of Troilus the
Son of Priam. The last was, whiles the Sepulcher of Laomedon did remain
untoucht upon the Gate Scaea. Troilus was killed by Achilles, the Palladium was
stolen by Ulysses, and the Army of Rhesus defeated by Diomedes, and Ulysses* so
that the Destinies had appointed the taking of Troy.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Siege of the City of Troy.
When the Greeks were set down before this strong Place, they found, a greater
resistance than they had imagined. King Priam had furnished himself with all
things necessary for a long Siege, and Memnon one of their best Commanders of
his time, had brought unto him valiant compagnies of Soldiers from the King of
Assyria. Justin. Lib. 2.
And Penthesilea Queen of the Amazons was already arrived with a powerful
assistance: Besides Rhesus King of Thracia, and Sarpedon the Son of Jupiter
King of Lycia, were in their March with a design to join with him against ^he
Greeks. Also the men of Troy did rep^s^ a great deal of trust in their
Palladium, which was the Statue of Minerva fallen from Heaven; and upon which
all their fatallity, (...) the event of this War did depend; for (...) Oracles
had Proclaimed, that they (...) ver be overcome by their Enemies (...) could
keep it amongst them. The (...) since been said to the Romans (...) their
Ancile, a little Buckler (...) fell down from Heaven in the (...) Num^
Pompilius. But the grea^^^^ ^^rt of the Gods were their enemies, as Homerus
informs us; for when they were all met together Scamander is named (...).
before Jupiter to consult about this business they could never agree, their
Disputes were so hot, that there was at first cause to imagine, that they would
end in a personal The young Damsels were wo^t to wash in t^^s River before
Marriage, saying unto it (...).
fight. Apollo did oppose Neptunus, Minerva was against Mars, Diana against
Juno, Mercurius fell out with Latona, and the God Scamander called otherwise
Xanthus was against Vulcan.

Now this Scamander seeing Achilles destroying the Country round about Troy and
the current of his River stopped with the heaps of dead Corps's, he in his rage
joined himself to his next Neighbor Simois, with an intent to dround Achilles:
They both met so opportunely, that they had already surrounded him with their
waters; and he had Homer Il. 21.
infallibly perished there, had not Ju^^ dispatched away Vulcan in haste to his
assistance. This (...) himself in a rage, with violent Lucian.
flames (...) his hand upon the poor Scaman (...) and consumed most part of his
waters.

(...) memorable Siege lasted many years, (...) it proved fatal to both
parties. (...) of the great Commanders lost their (...) but some of them did
deserve a renown (...) has perpetuated their names and me^^ries to all Ages.

Next to Agamemnon, and Menelaus, (...) Homer.
Achilles ^as one of the most remarkable for his va^^r, and his other excellent
qualities. Paro ^es his Favorite was a noted Captain, as also Id men^us the
Son of Deucalion, Ajax the Son of Telamon, and Ajax the Son of Oil^us King of
Locres, who was very swift in running, and excellent in handling bow and arrows
and the lance. Schelenus the Diomedes wounded Venus, she in revenge made his
wife a whore, so that he would not return home, but settled i^ Italy, where he
built a City now called Benevento, ofter his death his people were
metamorphised into strange birds* named Cetaractes, they ^ly away from a wicked
man, but cherish the good especially the Greeks, see Plin lib. 2. c. (...).
Son of Capaneus was noted for his courage, as also his intimate friend Diomedes
King of Ae^ol^a, and Son of Tydeus mentioned before, he was not like that cruel
Diomedes the King of Thracia, who was slain by Hercules, for he was both
gracious and valiant, he did march to the fight as quick as the thunder bursts
out of a cloud, or as a Torrent that tumbles down a steep Mountain, as Homer
informs us; none but Achilles and Ajax the Son of Telamon did go before him in
the reputation of a great Commander; for Ulysses, he did excel more in cunning
than in courage, he did invent all manner of Stratagems of war aganist the
enemies.

He is called, (...) and (...) Sweet mouthed He was the Son of Neleus King of
Pylos Hercules restored unto him his Kingdom, because of his justice Hygin. chapter
10. and Pausan.
Nestor was three hundred years old, he was nevertheless very useful by his
wise counsels and by his eloquence, for he did insinuate himself into the minds
of his auditors so pleasantly, as if honey had droped from his mouth with his
words. Agamemnon had such an high esteem of him, that he did often say, That if
there were but ten such as Nestor in his Army, the City of Troy could not have
made so long a resistance. They wanted no kind of Persons in this Siege, for
the carrying (...) Homer.
on of their design. They had Catchus and Euripilus two experienced Soothsayers,
who did inform them of the time to come, that they might make provision
accordingly. They had also a learned Physician by name Macaon, the Son of
Esculapius, who did heal all sorts of discases, and Epeus a witty Engineer, who
invented several Engines of war; particularly, that which was called the great
Ram, or the Horse with which the enemies did anciently batter down the walls of
a besieged City. There was also an ill shaped Fellow amongst them named
Thersites, whose mind was as full of evil qualities, as his body was deformed
with ill-favored features. He was the greatest Coward in the Army, yet had the
confidence to oppose all the ablest and stoutest Commanders. Achilles was one
day so enraged against him, that he knocked him down and killed him with a blow
of his fist.

The first of the Grecians army, who landed, when they were arrived in the
Province of Troas was Prothesilaus. Hector cast him He is styled (...) because
he was swift in running*
dead to the Ground with a blow of his lance. His wife Laodimia requested this
favor from the gods to comfort her in her violent affliction, only to see
again the Shadow of her deceased husband, which was granted, but when she
offered to embrace it, she fell down dead.

There were many slain and much blood spilt in the frequent fallies of the
besieged. Troilus one of the Sons of Priam ventured out against Achilles,
though he were very young, but he was unhappily killed by him his death did
mightily afflict the Trojans, because the Oracle had promised, that the City
should never be taken whilst he did live. His elder Brother Hector revenged his
death by the cruel slaughter of a multitude of Greeks with which he did
encounter. So that the besieged did often say that he alone This Ajax was the
Prince of Salamis called (...), the Bulwark of the Greeks, because he was big
and high and rendered invulnerable by the prayers of Hercules who put upon him
his Lions skin and desired Jupiter that he might not be subject to wounds only
under his Arms see Pindar in Od. Iishm.
Ajax and many Worthies were buried. Afterward there happened a very hot
dispute between Ulysses and Ajax the Son of Telamon, about the Arms and
Weapons of Achilles. Ajax did pretend that they did belong to him; not only for
his Deserts and for his Valor, but also because he was near allied in blood to
Achilles. Nevertheless, Ulysses knew so well how to persuade his Judges who
were the Commanders of the Graecians Army by his extraordinary Eloquence, that
they gave them to him; which put Ajax in such a fury that he became mad. In
this condition he ran into an Herd of Swine, and fancying these beasts to be
Agamemnon, Menelaus and the rest of his Judges: he endeavored to destroy them.

But when he came to understand his gross mistake, he killed himself with the
Sword that Hector had given him, verifying the Greek Proverb (...) The Gifts of
Enemies are unhappy. Hector had been also tied and dragged upon the Buckler that
this Ajax had exchanged with him for his Sword.

When Achilles was dead, the Beseiged began to take courage and to express
their joy, but it lasted not long: for Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles being
arrived from Greece, succeeded his Father in all his offices, and he had no
less success in the encounters although he was yet very young? He revenged his
Death upon the Trojans in many Battles, in one of them he killed the Traitor
Paris. Others say that it was Philactetes who wounded him mortally with one of
the poisoned Arrows of Hercules.

At last the besieged were so unhappy as to see their Palladium, upon which the
safety of their City did depend, stolen and carried away privately, by Ulysses
and Diomedes. Which caused King Priam to capitulate with the Greeks, so that he
came to an agreement, but he had no mind to restore Helena who had been married
to Deiphobus another of his Children, after the death of Paris.

Aeneas and Antenor were commissioned to treat with the Enemy. They concluded a
Peace for a certain sum of money, and for a certain quantity of Provisions
which the Trojans were to furnish the Greeks for their return home.

Dardanus Iliace primus pater urbis and Author. Virgil.
The City of Troy being first built by Dardanus and called from him Dardanida,
was afterward enlarged by Ilus his successor and named Ilion, or Ilium. This
Prince made his prayer to the gods, that they would vouchsafe unto him some
sign by which he might understand whether or no they did approve of his
building this City; Immediately at his word there fell down from above, the
Palladium, which was an Image of three Cubits long, was able to destroy the
Enemies Army.

In the mean while the love of women did This Apollo is named by Homer (...)
because he did put his enemies to ^light and (...) from (...) light; because he
brings light into the world or from (...) a Wolf, because he was adored in the
image of a wolf in Egypt. (...) Hom. (...) S^mmusque dies Hectoris idem
patrioeque fuit. Homer calls him (...), and (...).
more prejudice to the Grecians of the weapons of the Trojans, for when
Agamemnon did entertain the daughter of a Priest of Apollo, he drew a grievous
plague into the Army, which did destroy many until Achilles caused her to be
sent home to her Parents to appease the displeasure of this god by the advice
of the Soothsayer Calchas. This action did mightily vex Agamemnon, who to
revenge himself upon Achilles took from him a certain Briseis otherwise named
Hyppodamia, the Daughter of Chryses, for this cause Achilles refused to go out
to fight or to assist his companions.

But when it happened that Patrocles had taken upon him, the arms of Achilles
to encounter Hector, and having not his strength and excellent qualities,
Hector run him through with a lance, and cast him dead to the ground. Achilles
being very much afflicted, for the misfortune of his intimate friend, therefore
to revenge it he returned again to the Camp with other arms, which Vulean had
newly made for him. At the first opportunity he went cut to meet Hector, killed
him, and having tied his body to his Chariot, he dragged it three times round
about the City, and about the Tomb of Patrocles, and afterward sold it to his
Father Priam that he might bury it according to the custom.

This death of Hector did terrefie the besieged, but they were much more
afrighted, when they saw Penthisliea the Queen of the Amazons killed also by
Achilles, and all her Companiors either cut in pieces or drowned by Diomedes in
the water of Scamander.

Memnon thought to have repaired these losses by the slaughter of the enemies.
The Trojans did look upon him, as their greatest Bulwark, but he was very
dangerously wounded by Ajax the Son of Telamon, and afterward he was killed by
Achilles in a single fight. We have already taken notice in the tenth chapter
of the first Book, how his mother Aurora was afflicted for him, and how he was
metamorphised into a Bird.

When Queen Hecuba saw Memnon dead and the stoutest of her Children killed by
Achilles, she saught how she might revenge herself upon him. Paris promised to
give her satisfaction, for that purpose he dealt treacherously with Achilles,
and perceiving that he was in love with Polyxena his Sister, he gave him some
hopes of marrying her; Therefore he appointed him a meeting in the Temple of
Apollo to discourse about this business, but when Achilles was most secure
Paris with an arrow wounded that mortal part of his feet, which had not been
dipped in the River Styx.

This death did mightily trouble the Graecians, who raised for him a Tomb upon
the Promontary of Sigaeum, where also (...), etc. Homer Il. 20.
holding in one hand a Lance, and in the other a spindle with a distaff. The
Statue did no sooner touch the Earth, but it began to march in the presence of
the King: The Oracle afterward did inform him, that Troy should never be taken
nor destroyed whil's that remained safe. Ulysses and Diomedes stole secretly
into the Citadel of Troy through a gutter, and carried away the Palladium,
afterward Aeneas transported it into Italy, where it was committed to the
keeping of the Vestal Virgins.

He was the son of the River Stygmon and of the muse Euterpe or of Eioneus as
Homer says.

Philostrat in Protesiliao


Priam was assisted by many powerful neighbors, Rhesus came with a great Army
to raise the Seige, but Diomedes and Ulysses were dispatched to meet him, in
the way they put to flight his men, and killed him, but after his death he was
reverenced as a Hero in his Country, and Altars were erected to him, unto which
the Poets do say that the Wild Beasts of their own accord did come to be
sacrificed. He was in his life mightily addicted to the sport of hunting, for
that reason they did offer unto him after his Death, Wild Beasts.

He was called ^^ppus by the Aegiptians.

Pausan where he was killed the Poets do say that a Fountain sprung up which
yielded drops of blood every year on the day of his death Not* Com.


Memnon was one of the chief Officers, and Generals of Theutamus King of
Persia, who sent his succors to assist Priam his Vassal against the Greeks. He
gave order to Memnon Viceroy of Ethiopia, to march thither with ten thousand
Ethiopians and other Soldiers: but he was slain by Achylles for killing
Antilochus the son of Nestor.

Sarpedon the Son of Jupiter and of Hippodamia the Daughter of Bellerophon, or
as some say of Jupiter and of Europa, was at the Siege of Troy, with his
Kinsman Glaucus the Son of Hyppolochus the Son also of Bellerophon, he was
killed by Patroclus.

(...), Hom. 15. 11.
It is needless to mention all the Commanders of both parties. Homer gives a
sufficient account of them and of their habitations. Antilochus deserves to be
reckoned amongst the most famons and generous Worthies, for his love to his
Father and for his resolution. He was the Pindar.
youngest of all the Greeks, a great Favorite of Achilles, when his Father was
ready to be Ovid says otherwise in Penelop ad Vlyss. Sive qui^ Antilochum
narrabat ab Hectore victum* etc.

Creta or Candia was called (...) because there was in it an hundred Cities:
now there is but thre^, Candia, Canea or Cidon from whence are the Mala
Cidonia, quinces, the third is Rethymo Gnosus was the Metropolis in the time of
Minos, situate upon Mount Ida now called Philoi^ri.


killed by Memnon, Antilochus stepped in between them, and received in his breast
the mortal blow, that was intended against the Old man. Achilles revenged his
death at the request of Nestor.

We must not forget to say something m re of Idoneus the Grandchild of Minos
and of Deucalion his Successor in the Kingdom of Candia: He brought a stout
Army of Candians to Troy, and did many brave actions worthy of a Stout
Commander. When Troy was taken he was appointed to separate the spoils and
allot unto every one his portion. His Kingdom was full of excellent Archers
trained up in this exercise from their infancy, for the mothers did seldom give
any victuals to their childred every day, until they had fixed an arrow in a
mark, as big as a shilling, at a considerable distance. The Inhabitants of the
Islands Baleares, now Majorca and Minorca, were excellent slingers, their
children were wont also to deserve their breakfast by hitting the mark with a
stone out of a sling.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the taking and of the ruin of the City of Troy.
THe Peace which the Greeks had concluded with the Trojans, was but a Cheat to
surprise them with less difficulty. When they raised the Seige they pretended
to leave behind them a Present for Minerva, to appease her wrath, as if they
had displeased her by stealing away and profaning the Palladium: for that
purpose they caused a wooden Horse of a prodigious bigness to be made. In the
belly of it, they place a great many of the stoutest, and of the ablest
Soldiers of the Army, as Virgil says, and left it before the Walls of the
City, when they rise to be gone, but they retreated only as far as the Island
of Tenedos, staying there to see the success of their enterprise.

The besieged did immediately go out of their City, where they had been shut up
so long (they visit all the quarters of the Greeks Army. They admire this Great
Horse of Wood. At last they deliberate to know whether they should carry it
into their City. Some are of that mind, others are jealous of it, amongst the
rest Laocoon cast his lance at it, for which deed the gods did seem to punish
him, for they sent two fearful Serpents, to kill him and his two children,
which afterward went to the Statue of Pallas; and there they rested. This
accident caused them all to resolve to drag and carry this wooden engine into
the City.

They were far more eager when they heard the Relation and Discourse of a
certain Sinon, a fellow taught for this purpose by Ulysses, and taken as a spy;
He did tell them, that when the Fleet was ready to set sail toward Greece. The
gods had demanded a Grecian to be sacrificed to them, that the voyage might be
prosperous, and that Ulysses his mortal enemy having caused the lot to fall
upon him, he was forced to run away and hide himself. Thus persisting in his
dissimulation, he did tell them that the design of the Greeks was to reconcile
themselves to the goddess Pallas, therefore they had dedicated unto her this
Horse, which they had caused to be made so big, that it might not enter within
the walls of the City, and that the Trojans might not make use of it to their
advantage, and to the prejudice of the Greeks.

This Discourse removed ou^t of their minds all jealousy and suspicion, and
caused them to resolve to break down a part of the Wall to carry in this great
Horse. Every one employed himself in this work with all their power, and then
they departed to drink, to dance, and to make merry, until the evening, and
until they were all overcome with a deep sleep.

When Sinon saw all things in this posture he opened the belly of the Horse to
let out the Soldiers, who had been there shut in and then he lighted a fire to
give notice to the Army which did hasten back again without noise. The Greeks
entered by the breach that had been lately made in the wall and soon dispersed
themselves into every part of the City to burn and plunder it.

Pyrrhus went directly to the Kings Palace to revenge his Fathers death, he
did there massacre Priamus and one of his Sons Polites before the altar of
Jupiter, and then he caused the throat of Polyxena to be cut as a sacrifice to
the soul of his Father, who had loved her. He spared the life of Andromache the
wife of Hector, and carried her into Greece, where he had by her a Son named
Molossus, who since has been King of part of Epirus, unto which he left his
name.

Cassandra was ravished by Ajax of Locres although she did embrace the Statue of
Pallas to save her self; but Agamemnon kept her alive and in his service
because of her rare qualities.

Menelaus received Helena again as his Wife after that he had stobb'd He was
betrayed to Menelaus by Helena, his nose and ears were cut off, and afterward
he was massacred by the Greeks. See Virg. 6. Aeneid. Helena crater A Merry Cup.
from her tears sprung up the herb Helenium or Helicampane
Deiphobus who had married her. Hecuba fell to the lot of Ulysses, and Helenus
a Son of Priam, who was a Prophet, was preserved by Pyrrhus from whom he
received many other civilities, because he had hindered him from embarking
himself in a Ship, whereof he had foretold the Shipwreck.

Some did also endeavor to save the life of little Astyamax the Son of Hector.
His mother Andromache had won the consent of all the Commanders of the Army by
her tears and s pplication only Ulysses excepted, who prevailed so much upon
them, that he was condemned to die, and to be cast headlong from the top of a
Tower, for fear, as he said, that he should undertake one day to revenge the
death of his Father. This was not the true reason, that persuaded him to this
cruelty, but only a blind passion had obliged him to (...)
it; for if that reason had been the cause, why did they not put to death
Helenus the Son of Priam, who was able to do as much mischief, and yet he was
preserved alive.

All these miseries with the burning of the City of Troy happened after ten
years siege, about three hundred years after that it had been built by
Dardanus. This Story is very Dictis was of Crete and Dares a Phrygian.
true, although it be mingled with Fables, and that Dictis and Dares two
Historians of that time have made no mention of the Soldiers, who were shut
into this great wooden Horse; that had been left by the Greeks before the City
of Troy.

Nothing remains to this Relation but only the knowledge of the adventures of
(...) He did entertain Serpents, who did feed at his table. In the hot
countries, as in Italy and Barbary Snakes do commonly run about the houses, eat
the crumbs of bread and hunt after Cats, as our Cats. The Moors have no other
Cats to devour their Mice. The truth is that Agamemnon fell in love with the
prisoner of Ajax, Cassandra, and took her aw^ by force, therefore he fled away
in a little boat, and was drown in a tempestuous Sea.
some of the Commanders of the Greeks and Trojans in their Voyages after the
destruction of the City, for the understanding of the Poets.

We have already taken notice how Ajax of Locres, had ravished Cassandra in the
presence of the Statue of Pallas, unto which she had fled for protection. This
goddess punished him for so great an insolency, when he was at Sea, in his
return homewards, for she having obtained from Jupiter, the favor of disposing
of his tempests and thunderbolts but once, she employed them in rendering the
Sea tempestuous, and in burning the Ships of Ajax to drown him. Nevertheless he
saved himself by swimming to the next Rocks, upon which he climbed and in a
rage against the gods he did declare, that he would free himself from this
danger, only by his strength maugre all the gods which words when Neptunus had
heard h^ broke off the top of the Rock, on which h^ stood with his trident, and
tumbled it into the Sea, so that he was there drowned, bu^ Thetys being moved
with compassion for him she took him and buried him upon the Sea shore with her
own hands.

Nauplius the Son of Neptunus and Amymone the Daughters of Danaus King of
Argos, endeavored to revenge himself upon the Greeks by persuading their wives
at home to make them cuckolds in their absence, and when the Army returned he
caused many ships to run a ground upon his Island killing all that came into
his power.
Nauplius also was very much displeased at the Commanders of the Army, because
they had unjustly condemned his Son Palamedes to death by the persuasions of
Ulysses, therefore he caused many fires to be kindled on the top of Caphereus
in the Island of Eueboa over against Hellespont, that the Fleet might bend
their course that way, and run against the Rocks of the Seashore, but his
design did not succced according to his expectation, for Ulysses and Diomedes
sailed another way.

When Idomeneus one of the valiantest Commanders of the Army was ready to be
shipwrackt, he engaged himself by a vow to Neptunus to sacrifice unto him, the
first thing that he should meet with, when he should enter into the borders of
his Country, if he would deliver him from the present danger. He was so
unhappy, as to see his own Son first, and when he went about to sacrifice him
according to his promise, he was opposed by the people of his country, who
would not suffer so great an inhumanity committed amongst them. Some say that
he did according to his wicked vow, offer his Son to Neptunus, and that for
this inhumanity, he was banished by his Subjects into Italy.

Addit. Notes.
There were several other famous men in the Siege of Troy not mentioned in this
place, Polydamas and Euphorbns the children of Panthus Hom. Il. 18.
a Trojan, were great Commanders, valiant in fight, and wise in Counsels.
Pythagoras in Ovid. says that his Soul had been formerly that of Euphorbus,
who had been killed by Menelaus. Ovid* metamor* l. 19*
Morte carent animae, semperque priore relicta.
Sede, novis domibus vivunt, habitantque receptae and postea.
Ipse ego nam memini Trojani tempore belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram, cui pectori quondam
Haesit in adverso gravis Hasta minoris Atridae.


It is not posible to describe perfectly the miseries and dreadful image of a
City surprised by an Enemy. Virgil represents the burning of Troy in verse. but
Nero caused it to appear more lively in the burning of Rome, which he kindled
for this purpose.

The poor Inhabitants of this unhappy City had no good Quarter granted them.
When Priamus their Prince with his Sons were cruelly murdered without any
respect to their qualities Some relate the Story of Hecuba otherwise ^irca
ruinas ^^^da latra^^ suas Troja ^^rses Hecu^^ Seneca.
and age, and in the holiest places. Hecuba outlived all these calamaties of her
people, and was transported into Greece, where Ulysses, whose life she had
spared, caused her to be stoned to death, but her Ghost haunted and disturbed
him for this great ingratitude. The Poets say, that she was metamorphised into
a Bitch, that barks continually, because in her life she never ceast from
bawling and cursing the Greeks, who had butchered all her Relations. Some say,
that she was drowned in the Sea, not far from See Auson in in his Epitaphes.
Oeuboea, therefore it was called Cynaeum, because she was said to be
transformed into a (...) a Barking Dog.

Helena returned with her Husband to Sparta, where she lived until he died. She
being afterward banished by the Sons of Menelaus, Var. Hist. cap. 13.
fled to Rhodes to Queen Polixena her old acquaintance, who suffered her to be
hanged on a Tree for her infamous and wicked life.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Adventures of Agamemnon and of Orestes his Son, after the Siege of Troy.
His head and face was like Jupiter, his shoulders were like those of Mars, and
his breast like Neptunes, Hom. Il. 2
WHen Agamemnon was returned from the Wars, with the Crowns and Laurels of his
Victories, he found more dangerous enemies at home, than abroad: For his Wife
Clytemnestra, who had shamefully dishonored herself by incest with Aegistus in
the absence of her husband, helped to ensnare and murder him as we have seen in
the twelfth Chapter of this books

Cassandra who came with Agamemnon from Troy forewarned him of the danger, and
during the Voyage did continually advertise him of the misfortune that waited
for him at home. But this Prophetess, who had received from Apollo the gift of
prophesying the things to come was never credited, because she had offended
this god by her unfaithful dealing, therefore (he punished her with this
disgrace, that no body should believe what she said, but rather the contrary.

Orestes did mightily concern himself for the massacre of his Father, therefore
in revenge of this inhumanity, he put Aegistus and his mother Clytemnestra the
Actors of it, to death, and although he did seem to have just cause to proceed
in this manner, the Furies, that is the remorsc of Conscience, did continually
torment him, and disturb his thoughts, representing unto him the foulness of a
Sons crime, who stob'd his own Mother.

He could no longer endure this torment of his mind, when he went to consult
the Oracle, who informed him, that the only remedy to his troubled Conscience
was to undertake a Voyage as far as Scythia Taurica to the Temple of Diana, and
to steal from thence the Statue of the goddess, and to bring it into Greece.

According to this advice, he went with his Dear Friend, Pylades, the Son of
King Strophius, who had always lived with him, and run the same dangers, and
espoused the same quarrels. Pylades continued his kindness to him in this
occasion, and expressed it, by venturing with him in this Voyage

The Law of the Country did condemn all Strangers, who were found within the
borders of the Province to be sacrificed upon the Altar of Diana, unto whom
nothing but humane Victimes were offered. Orestes and Pylades, were taken and
presented to Thoas the High Priest, who commanded there as a Sovereign Prince.
He condemned but one of the two to death, which caused a hot dispute between
Orestes and Pylades, for either of them was willing to lay down his life to
save his friend's. The lot fell upon Orestes, therefore he was given to the
keeping of Iphigenia, who was the She-Priest of Diana. But it happened that she
quickly knew and acknowledged her brother. Afterward they resolved both to run
away and to free themselves from the eminent peril, by killing the inhumane
Butcher Thoas, which they found an opportunity to accomplish, at the same time
Pylades came to them, and all three together fled away with speed, with the
Statue of Diana, which they hid in a bundle of Sticks, therefore she was
afterward named She was called by the Greeks (...), because she was bound up
in a bundle of willow branches, unto this Diana the Lacedaemonians did offer
humane sacrifices, which custom Lycur^u^ altered, causing the Maids and youths
to be whipped only until the blood did come, which they sprinkled upon her
Altar. Plutarch.
Diana fascelis.

In this manner Orestes returned happily again into Greece having freed himself
from the Furies that did disturb him, and he took upon him the Government of
his fathers Kingdom, building many Cities, and perticularly Oresta in Thracia,
which is now named Adrianople.

When Agamemnon departed with his Army to Troy he left with his Wife
Clytemnestra an excellent Poet and Musician to divert her amorous and
melancholic thoughts, while this Poet remained in her service, Aegystus the
Son of Thyestes mentioned in Chapter 12th. could never have any access unto
her, nor power to entice her to his lust; therefore he killed first the
Musician, and then he quickly prevailed in his wicked design. He lived with her
until Agamemnon was returned from Troy: Then his wife agreed with Aegistus to
kill him. A Feast was prepared to receive him with more joy, but as he was
stepping out of a bath she caused a shirt to be prepared for him that was sowed
up at the Neck and Arms: When he was putting it on, she cut him over the pate
with a great Hatchet, and killed Cassandra with the same, whiles Aegistus was
destroying the other Guests, the Friends of Agamemnon, who had been invited to
this bloody Banquet.

Pausan.
Some say that Clytemnestra was informed by a malicious Fellow Oeax, that her
husband Hygin.
was bringing with him a Rival, therefore she consented to his death with
Aegistus. Electra her Daughter saved Orestes, and sent him to her Uncle
Strophius, who was married to her Aunt Astrioche the Sister of Agamemnon in
Beotia, where he lived until he found an opportunity of revenging his Fathers
death, by killing the Murderers. Aegistus and his own Mother.

For that purpose he came with his intimate Friend Pylades in a disguise to
Mycenes, where Clytemnestra dwelt feigning himself to be a Traveller come from
Beotia with the certain Apollo persuaded him to kill his Mother; (...), Eurip.
in Orest.
news of the death of Orestes. Aegistus received them for that cause with much
joy, because he was apprehensive of the courage and displeasure of Orestes.
These disguised Travelers took their time, and killed both Aegistus and
Clytemnestra, for which deed they were both apprehended, and sent to Prison,
but the Inhabitants s^t them at liberty for Agamemnons sake. Orestes was
afterward tormented Euripid. in Iphigen.
with Furies, for the unnatural massacre of his Mother: to deliver himself from
them, he went to fetch Diana out of Scythia, where he killed the High Priest
Thoas, and after his return he caused his friend to take his dear Sister
Electra to Wife, and he was married to Tisamenes was the Son of Orestes.
Hermione the Daughter of Helena for whom he stob'd Pyrrhus, the Son of
Achilles, who had taken her by force. He was afterward a very happy Prince,
and succeeded his Father in the Government of the Kingdom of Argos.

Now this Thoas mentioned in the last Chapter, minds me of a strange and
pleasant Story mentioned by the Poets. The Women of the Island See Hygin. Chap.
25. Of the women of Lemnos and Orph. in his Argon.
Lemnos in the Archipelagus did forbear their accustomed sacrifices to Venus,
who was so highly incensed against them for this contempt and neglect, that she
caused them to be loathsome to their Husband; so that they divorced them, and
were married to others of Greece, they who were thus slighted and put away,
plotted the death and massacre of all the men of the Island, which they brought
to pass, only Hypsiphile sent away her Father Thoas, who landed afterward in
Scythia, and became the High Priest in the Temple of Diana. The Argonauts about
that time in their Voyage to Colchos landed at Lemnos, where they were
requested by the women during their stay to perform the Office of their
murdered Husbands. They were as kind as the others desired, therefore from
them did proceed a new Generation, which peopled the Island:

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Adventures of Ulysses, after the Siege of Troy.
WHen Ulysses had endured the inconveniences of a long Siege of ten years, he
had yet to suffer, and run the dangers of as long a Voyage, that could not be
finished before the end of ten years more. As soon as he was come out into the
main, a furious Tempest drives him on the Thracian Shore in the City of the
Ciconians, where he lost Hecuba as some do say, for this Queen understood there
how her Son in law Polymnestor the King of Thracia, unto whom she had sent her
little Son Polydorus, with her richest jewels in the first beginning of the
war, had cruely put him to death, and buried him near the Sea, to enrich
himself with the entrusted goods, therefore she resolved to visit him, before
she proceeded further, and that she might draw him to her with less difficulty
she thought it her best way to pretend ignorance of his perfidious dealing, and
to send privately word to him, that she had something more very precious to
commit to his keeping; but as soon as she saw him, she flew in his face, and
put out his eyes. At last when she could no longer endure the miserable estate
unto which she was reduced she murdered herself. Ovid says, that she was
stoned by the Thracians, because she had pluck^ out the eyes of their Prince:
Afterward she was metamorphosed into a Dog,

Ulysses was grieved for the loss and death of this Great Princess; whom he
esteemed We have related this death of Hecuba otherwise. according to the
opinion o^ other Authors.
more than all that he had brought from Troy, but this was the least
displeasure, that he was to receive, for first instead of sailing toward
Ithaca, the violent winds forced him into Africa, where he arrived in the
country of the Lotophagoi, so named from a certain fruit called L^tos, which is
so pleasant to the taste, and of such a strange virtue, that as soon as his men
had tasted of it, they lost the desire of returning home to their friends, so
that he was forced to oblige them by violence to repair to their Ships again.

He had no sooner set sail from thence but a sudden storm carried him into
Sicily, where he fell into the hands of Polyphemus, the most noted of all the
Cyclops mentioned in the Chapter of Neptunus. At his first arrival Polyphemus
eat up six of his men, and promised to do him the kindness to reserve him for
the last morsel, But he found a way to prevent the others cruelty, and his own
mischief, by overcoming him first with wine^, and then by putting out* the eye
that was fixed in his forehead. Afterward he escaped and fled to the god
Aeolus, who received him with all civilities, and gave him as a present all the
winds, the Zephyrus only excepted. They were there kept in great and large
Tuns, that they might not fly out nor oppose him, in his return homewards.

But the men of Ulysses out of curiosity opened these Tuns to peep, and see
what was within, by that means the winds escaped out, so that when he spread
his sails, they tossed him up and down, and forced him back again to the shore of
the Islands of Aeolus, who would not receive him again, nor grant unto him any
other favor, therefore he was constrained by the violence of the weather to
land upon the coast of the Lestrigones near When he arrived in Italy one of his
men was killed for ravishing a Maid: Ulysses being departed without paying unto
him any funeral rights, his Spirit did mightily torment and vex theinhabitants
so that to appease it they did erect a temple to him and expose every year, a a
Virgin of the Town, for the Spirit to destroy. Euthymus the Champion overcame
it, and delivered a Virgin which he married. Plin. mentions him lib. 7. c. 47.
that place where now is situate the Haven of Cajeta. There was a kind of
Antropophages a cruel people, who did inhabit there. Their Kings name was
Antiphates, he ceased upon some of Ulysses his men, and devoured them,
destroying all the Ships of the Fleet, only that excepted where Ulysses was
aboard.

This cruelty caused him to sail away with all speed to a little Island, where
Circe, the daughter of the Sun, and Queen of a King of the Sarmates did make
her abode. Some do ascribe to this woman the invention of enchantments and of
poisons, which she did give to her Subjects, and others. She did not spare her
own husband, that she might reign alone without control. Therefore her
Subjects sought to destroy her, and obliged her to fly for her life to a little
Island near the Dukedom of Tuscany in Italy. When Ulysses was arrived, he sent
up into the land some of his men, to discover what place it was, but this
Magician gave them a drink, as it were out of kindness to refresh them, and
transformed them by it, into Hogs, and other sort of Creatures. Only
Eurylochus of this Company, who had not tasted of her enchanted drink, escaped
away to acquaint Ulysses with this strange metamorphosis. Ulysses was mightily
astonished at the news. Therefore he resolved to go in person, and seek out
the Witch. Mercurius fnrnished him with a certain herb, called Moly, with which
the gods do use to preserve themselves from poison and witchcraft. Being thus
provided he went unto her with his naked sword in his hand, and forced her to
restore his men to their former shapes, which she did. Afterward they
contracted such strict amity together, that she bore unto him many children, of
whom Thelegonus was the Eldest.

Whiles he stayed with Circe he went down into Hell, by her assistance, to
consult the Oracles of the dead; where he met Elpenor one of his men, killed by
a fall in a drunken fit, since his depart from Circe.

He saw also there the Souls of his Mother Anticlea, and of Tiresias the
Sooth-sayer having sufficiently informed himself from them concerning his
destinies, and of the things, that should happen nnto him, he returned to Circe
to take shipping again in pursuance of his Voyage.

We have taken notice in the former book in the 11 Chapter, how he shunned the
charms of the Sirens, when he sailed by the Island, where thy made their abode
by causing himself to be bound fast to the mast of the Ship, and all his men to
have their ears stopped with wax, for fear that the pleasant harmony of the
Sirens should prevail upon them. Afterward they escaped through the Gulphs of
Scylla and Charibdis, and arrived at Sicily. Where they met with Phaetusa the
Daughter of the Sun, who was there watching over the consecrated Cattle of her
Father, Ulysses following the advice of Circe, gave a strict Order to his men
not to offer to touch them. But for want of other food, they stole some of the
Oxen of the Sun, when Ulysses was a sleep.

This action cost them dear, for the pieces of meat, which they had cut off did
give such grievous shrieks, when they were laid upon the coals, that they were
frighted, and run all away to their Ship to hide themselves. Afterward, when
they were at Sea their Ship sunk under them, so that they were all drowned,
only Ulysses saved himself upon a piece of the broken Ship, and arrived after
much ado to the Island Ogygia to the Nymph Calypso, who received him very
kindly, entertained him many years, and at last prepared a Ship to transport
him into his own Island.

But Neptunus to revenge himself for the loss of his Son Polyphemus's eye,
broke also this Ship in pieces, so that he was almost lost, without any hopes
of saving himself, if the Nymph Leucothoa had not provided him with aplank,
upon which he did swim to the Island of the P^^acks, which is at the entry of
the Gulf of Venice and now named Corcyra or Corfou.

Nau^^ae the Daughter of Arcinou^ the King of the Island found him all naked
upon the Sea shore, and having given unto him a cloak to cover him, she
conducted him to the Queen her Mother. Ulysses was known there by certain
marks, which were upon his body. Therefore the King and the Court received him
accoring to his quality and his worth. After a short abode in that place to
refresh himself, and recover his Spirits, which he had spent in his dangers, he
gave unto him a Ship, which carried him happily and safe unto the Island of
Ithaca.

This was the twentieth year of his wives expectation of him. She had heen all
this while in continual torment of mind and in an earnest longing to see him
again. Some had endeavored to persuade her that he was perished at Sea. Which
news caused many young Lords to woe her and seek her in marriage very seriously,
But she did preserve such a faithful love for her husband, which was
entertained by the hopes of his return, that she would never give unto them any
answer, and that she might put them off, she undertook the making of a piece of
cloth, promising to declare her resolution, when this work was finished, but to
delay it the longer, she did undo at night, whatsoever she had made up in the
day.

In the mean while Ulysses was troubled how to discover himself, with the
safety of his person and re-enter into possession of his own, for he did justly
fear to be slain by those, who were Suitors to his wife. Minerva advised him in
this occasion to disguise himself, and in the habit of a poor Country fellow to
make himself known first to Telemachus his Son, and to one of the old Officers
of his house, which when he had performed, with their assistance he put to
death all those of whom he was jealous, and so entered again into the possession
of his Estate and Kingdom.

But after all this his mind could not be in rest, because Tiresias the
Soothsayer had informed him, that one of his Sons should one day kill him.
Therefore to prevent this mischance, his resolution was to forsake the world
and to retire himself into some desolate and solitary place there to end his
days in peace. About that time Telegonus one of his Sons by Circe came to his
City and Palace of Ithaca to pay unto him his respects, and as he was striving
to enter, there hapened a great tumult, because some did stop him from going in
farther, as a person that was not known. Ulysses at that instant stepped out, and
Telegonus not knowing him ran him through with his lance, which was headed with
the ve^emous back bone of a Se^fish. Of this wound he afterward died.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Adventures of Aeneas.
When the men of Troy saw their City in a flame, and their native country
Spoilt, they were forced to seek their fortunes elsewhere. Some of them with
the Henetes a people of Paphlagonia followed Antenor a worthy Captain of Troy.
Others put themselves under the conduct of Francus otherwise named Francion the
Son of Hector, as some do relate. But the greatest part of the Inhabitants
ranged themselves under the banners of Aeneas, the Son of Anchises and of the
goddess Venus, as we have already said in the beginning of the 13 Chapter. He
was married to Creusa, one of the Daughters of King Priamus.

Antenor with his Fleet sailed into the Adriatic Sea called now the Gulf of
Venice, where the Henetes who came with him, laid the foundations of the famous
City of Venice. Antenor entered farther into the land, and built the City of
Padova named by the Latins Patavium.

This is a Fable of the vainglorious French
Francus marched as far as the River of Rhine, and afterward passed into
Gallia, amongst the Gauls, who have borrowed from him their name Francois.

Aeneas gathered together, as many as he could save out of the burning of Troy
where he lost his Wife Creusa* carrying away his aged Father Anchises upon his
shoulders with his domestic Gods, and leading his little Son Ascanius by the
hand. In this manner he marched as far as Antandrum a City of Phrygia not far
distant from the Mountain of Ida, where his Fleet of twenty Ships was prepared
and ready to set sail, when he was embarked with his people, he bended his
course to*wards the coast of Thracia, where he had a design to settle and build
a City. But he was diverted from it by fearful outcryes that were heard in the
place, where Polydorus had been murdered, and buried by Polymnestor the
treacherous and perfididious King of the Country, as we have already taken
notice in the former Chapter.

From thence he departed and sailed as far as Creta with a design to settle
himself there, but a furious pestilence gave him such bad entertainment in this
Place, that he was forced to fly away, his domestic gods did then warn him in
a Dream, that he should proceed toward Italy, and that there he should settle,
and make his conquests. As Soon as he had commanded his Sails to be hoised up a
furious storm drives him and his Fleet on shore, on the Islands called
Strophades where the Harpyes a cruel and strange sort of Birds did mightily
persecute him and his people. Afterward he sailed along the Coast of Epirus,
where he happily did meet with Andromache Hector's wife, who had been espoused
afterward to ^yrrus, when he passed into Greece. But he having divorced her,
gave her in marriage to Helenus with part of the Country of Epirus, where he
made him a Sovereign Prince.

After that Aeneas had been kindly entertained by Helenus, he received from him
instructions, how he should proceed in his voyage into Italy. He departed and
arrived at Drepanum in Sicily having happily past the coast of the Cyclopes,
where he saved a miserable fellow of the men of Ulysses left there behind by
this vagabond and unfortunate Prince. He passed also overagainst the
Promontories of Scylla and Caribdis without harm.

But this place was unfortunate unto him, for there he lost his old Father
Anchises, who ended his days in a very decrepit age: Acestes the Prince of the
Country did comfort him by granting unto him all the assistance and favor,
that his dominions or abilities could afford: And when Aeneas departed, he
furnished his ships with very good wine, and all sorts of Provisions.

About this time Juno the sworn enemy of the Trojans sent to Aeolus the god of
the winds to persuade him to let them fly out against Aeneas, and his Fleet
that it might be cast away. He was reduced to the last extremity, by this
Storm, and had infallibly perished, had not Neptunus been displeased, because
this tempest had happened without his privity or consent, therefore he pacified
the waves of the Sea, and left the Fleet of Aeneas scattered upon the Coast of
Africa near Carthage seven years after their depart from Troy.

At that time Elisa surnamed Dido the Daughter of the King of Tire, the Widow
of Sicheus had lately settled herself in Africa, overagainst Drepanum in
Sicily, for when she saw her Husband murdered by Her wicked Brother Pigmalion,
who desired to get his riches into his possession, and when she saw, that he
intended the same mischief to her, she embarked her self with all her riches,
which this Traitor had a design to take, and sailed with them into Africa,
where for a vast sum of money, she bought from the Natives, as much ground as
she could compass with an Oxes hide to settle there her dwelling, when she
could obtain no more from them, she caused the hide to be cut in very slender
pieces, so that they where able to compass in a very large circuit of ground.
There she laid the Foundations of the City of Cartbage, which was called at
first By^sa, because of the Oxes hide.

Aeneas and all his men went to seek Protection from his Queen, who received
them very kindly. She grew so amorous of Aeneas, that she was willing to have
made him her husband, notwithstanding the resolution, that she had formerly
taken to marry none after Sicheus unto whom she had devoted her heart and
affections, when therefore Hiarbus, King of Getulia, her neighbor, was a
Suitor to her, she sent him back with a flat denial, and by that means procured
unto herself his displeasure.

But when Aeneas had made some short stay in this place, Jupiter dispatched away
a messenger unto him to command him to leave Africa and obey his Destinies that
did call him into Italy. Dido endeavored in vain to stop him; when therefore
she saw him resolved to depart, she loaded him with the curses and reproaches
of a furious and despairing Lover, then having caused a pile of wood to be
erected, she ascended upon it and killed her self, with a sword prepared for
that purpose. Her body was burning in the sight of Aeneas, when he was under
sail. Virgil relates the Story in this manner in the Fourth Book of the Aeneids
after that in the First he had described that furious Storm that cast him after
his depart from Sicily upon the coast of Africa, where he was joyfully received
by Dido. In the second he relates unto this Queen, the manner of the burning of
Troy, and in the Third Book, he gives unto her an account of the several
particulars, that had happened unto him after his leaving of Troy, until his
first arrival into Sicily, for the next year after he was forced by another
tempest to put into Sicily, when he had left Carthage. At this time he paid
unto the memory of his Father Anchises many funeral Rites, celebrating several
sorts of plays and combats upon his tomb. Afterward he left all the weak and
decripit persons, useless in war, with Alcestes, with the rest of his
companions he passed into Italy.

He arrived very happily at Cumes, where he visited the Sybil in her Cave, that
by her means he might go down into Hell, and enter into the Elisian Fields, to
discourse with his Father, and learn all the passages of his life, and his
future adventures. He performed this Journey in the company of the Sybil,
having first found the golden branch, which was at the entrance of Hell, and
which was to be presented by him to Proserpina.

At his return from Hell he puts again to Sea, and sails with his Fleet to the
mouth of the River of Tiber, from thence he went to Laurentum to visit King
Latinus* who did command in that place. This Prince received him with all
expressions of kindness, and when he understood the cause of his coming, he
promised to bestow upon him his only Daughter, Lavinia in marriage, because he
had been informed by the Oracle, that the gods had designed her for this
foreign Prince. She had been nevertheless promised before to Turnus the King of
the Rutuli, and Amata the Queen her Mother, the Wife of Latinus, did mightily
favor him.

This happy beginning did increase very much, and raise the Spirits of Aeneas
and caused him to forget all the miseries, that he had endured in his long
voyage of so many years. But Juno was not a little displeased at his felicity,
therefore she sent for Alecto, one of the furies of Hell to kindle a war, and
destroy the hopes of the Trojans.

As Soon as Turnus had understood these passages, he gathered all his forces,
and those of his friends together to march against Aeneas, and his Trojans. But
their number being few, and not able to resist, the god Tiberinus encouraged
them, when they were ready to faint away for fear, and advised Aeneas to ascend
higher up into the Country to the place, where Rome was afterward built, to
visit King Evander, with whom he made a firm league, and from whom he obtained
succors, which Pallas the only Son of this Prince was resolved to lead in
Person to assist Aeneas. He departed therefore with them to join with the
Trojans, whilst Aeneas accepting of a favorable opportunity, that was there
presented unto him to engage the Tyrrhenians in his party, he departed into
that Country to persuade them, he found them all in arms against their King
Mezentius, who had committed most horrid cruelties, for he did join and tie the
living to the dead, placing their mouths and all the foreparts of the bodies of
the one against the same members of the other, and did cause them to languish
to death in this most cruel and loathsome manner.

The Army of Aeneas in his absence suffered many inconveniencie, for Turnus had
besieged them, and his Subjects had burnt up their Ships, which were afterward
turned by Jupiter into Nyniphs of the Sea at the request of the goddess
Cybele, who had received them into her protection. By this means the Trojans
were forced to suffer many great evils, and were reduced to many extremities.
But Aeneas came happily to their aid, with a strong party of Tyrrhenians, and
Venus his Mother did maintain their interest with Jupiter against the rage and
endeavors of Juno. Besides she caused Vulcan, to make such strong and sound
Arms for Aeneas, as did render him invincible in all encounters, and entertain
in his Soul a warlike and noble disposition, for in his buckler were described
all the glorious deeds and adventures of his successors, in a most artificial
and divine manner.

In this war a great deal of blood was shed on both sides. Aeneas was never so
much concerned, as at the death of Nisus, of Euryalus, and afterward of Pallas
Evanders Son. But he ^^venged their deaths by the slaughter of the King
Mezentius, of Lausus his Son, and of many others. Camilla the Queen of the
Volsci did mightily encourage and strengthen the Army of Turnus. It is reported
of her, that she was as generous as a Lion, and was so light footed, that she
did scarce touch the ground in running, but an unhappy blow of a Lance took
away her life in the heat of the fight. Her fall did astonish all the Army of
Turnus.

In this encounter Aeneas was wounded with an arrow, but Venus did then apply
the Herb Ditany so seasonably to his wound, that it was cured in an instant.
Afterward he did so effectually encourage his men, that Turnus seeing no other
remedy to his Affairs and Hopes, that were almost lost, he challenged him to
fight in a single Combat, to put an end by that means to their differences.

Aeneas was very joyful of this proposition therefore he encounters him hand to
hand* lays him upon the ground, and kills him. After this victory, he was
married to Lavinia, and took possession of the Kingdom of the Latine^ He built
and fortified the City of Lavinium, which was not far distant from Laurentum.
Julus Ascanius his son succeeded him in this Kingdom, and built the City of
Alba surnamed Longa, because of its situation, the Inhabitants were called
Albani, that City was the Metropolis of the Latin people, until the reign of
Romulus, who laid the foundations of the City of Rome, and conquered all the
Country round about it. Tullius Hostilius the third King of the Romans pulled
down, and leveled to the ground the walls of the city of Alba, so that
afterward there remained no signs of it.

Before we finish this Story, we must take notice that the truth is mingled
with many fables, for it is certain, that Virgilius relates the adventures of
Dido, only as a pleasant fiction to adorn his Poem; for Dido did live, and
Carthage was built, two or three hundred years after the ruin of Troy.

CHAP. XXI.
Of several other famous Men, frequently named in the Heathen Writers, and not
mentioned by Gautruchius.
I Wonder that in the last Chapter our Achates.
learned Jesuit has not mentioned a faithful companion of Aeneas, who loved him
so tenderly, that he could never be separated from him but by death; this name
was Achates. In all estates he did stick close to him, and did accompany him in
his greatest dangers: therefore he is styled Fidus Achates by Virgil.

Vocabatur (...) and (...) because he was a good Sheapheard and Husbandman.
Pindar His wife was Antonio, and one of his sons was Acteon, who was torn by
his dogs.
Aristeus the Son of Apollo, and of the Nymph Cyrene, the Daughter of Peneus,
taught the use of honey and of oil. He was a famous Shepherd in his time; a
great admirer of the Nymph Eurydice, whom he pursued to have taken, but she ran
away, and was unfortunately wounded to death by a serpent in her flight;
therefore her comrades sought revenge upon Aristeus for her death, by
destroying his Bees, in which he did delight. The truth is, he was a pious man,
and a great favorite of Jupiter* from whom he obtained the Etesian winds, to
cool the immoderate heat of the summer Sun, and to prevent the mischiefs which
Asopus was the Son of Jupiter and of Clymene; or of Neptune and of Ceglasa.
Not. Com. He discovered Jupiters desire by the means* of Sisyphus, who is
punished in hell for his indiscre^ion.
the Dog Star would cause in the hot Countries, without these favorable blasts.

Asopus was the Son of Jupiter, who nevertheless committed incest with his
Daughter Aegina; for he ravished her in the form of a flame of fire: Their
Father Asopus did hasten to her assistance, but to little purpose, for she
proved with child of Aeacus; and Jupiter for his impudency, to offer to oppose
him, struck him dead with his thunderbolts. What lascivious, what shameless
gods did the Heathens adore! the greatest promoters of incest, of murder, of
villainy, etc. Now this Asopus was a River not far from Thebs, or rather a
Prince who left his name to that River. He had another Hygin. Greg. Gyrald. in
Historia de Diis Genesis
Daughter named Plataea, whom Jupiter pretended to advance into Junos place,
only to oblige her to seek his favor, and be reconciled to him.

Ruffin* Eccles. Histor. lib. 11.
Canopus was the Pilot of the Ship which brought Menelaus back toward Greece,
when a storm had forced him on the coast of Egypt, Suidas.
after the ruin (...) roy. This Canopus went on shore, and was ^tung to death
by a Serpent; but afterward the Egyptian Priests, having performed a seeming
miracle with his statue, they caused him to be worshipped Vocabatnr Canobus, or
Canopus.
as a god; and gave his name to one of the stars of the firmament, and to a
famous Town of Egypt. And hence it is, that this Kingdom is called Terra
Canopi, and the people Gens Canopi. His image was worshipped by the Egyptians,
although Hesych.
it was made as a dwarf with a great belly, with short legs and a crooked neck.

Cephalus was married to Procris the Daughter of Hyphilus King of Athens;
Ai^rora was so fond of him, that she carried him away with her; but he would
never consent to her lust, because he kept for his wife an unparalleld
constancy; which caused her to send him home in a disguise, to be an eye
witness of his wifes ingratitude, and unworthiness of his faithful love; for he
surprised her in dishonesty, therefore he divorced her; but he was afterward
reconciled to her again. She grew in time as jealous of him, because he was
wont to rise betimes, and recreate himself in the woods in hunting: She
followed him at last, and hid her self in a bush, to see if she could discover
any female sex come near him. When he in the pursuance of his sport, saw a
creature moving in the thicket, he imagined it to be a wild beast; therefore
he discharged out of his bow a coup^^ of arrows; and struck his unhappy wife
(...) he heart.

Erichtheus the Son of Pandion, an Egyptian born, settled in the Province of
Attica in Greece, and taught the ruder sort of people many things belonging to
the worship of the gods. He instituted the famous festival of Athens, called
Sacra Eleusina, in honor of Proserpina, as some do say. The Athenians having
chosen him their King, Eumolpus Neptune's Son made war upon him, but Erichtheus
killed him, for which cause this god was mightily offended, and demanded one of
his Daughters to be ^acrificed to him as a satisfaction. The unfortunate
Erichtheus granted one, but the three others destroyed themselves, because they
had sworn not to outlive one another. Erichtheus afterward was killed by
Jupiters thunderbolts; and the Athenians honored his memory with a Temple and
an Altar, and worshipped him with his Daughters, for offering themselves to
save their Country Cicer. de Not. Deor.
from Neptunes rage.

Quique premit vocem, digit^que silentia suadet. Ovid.
Harpocrates was the Egyptian God of Silence, the Son of Isis; his Statue
stood near the Image of Serapis, with a finger on his lips, and a Wolves skin,
full of eyes, about his shoulders. Plutarch names him Macrob. Solin.
(...), and says, that the Peach-tree was consecrated to him. Amongst the
Romans the Goddess Angerona, or Volupia, was in the same esteem as Harpocrates
amongst the Egyptians.

Iphis was a famous Youth, as amorous of Anaxarete as he was beautiful, yet she
had the courage to give him a repulse, which cast him into such a fit of
madness, that he destroyed himself. When his Body was carried to be buried,
Anaxarete desi^ous to see it, looked out of a Window so ^arnestly upon him,
that she was turned into a Stone.

The Poets speak of another Anaxarete, who was by the power of Isis turned into
a Boy. This fabulous story is related of others as true by persons of credit.
The Physicians do say, that it is possible that Maids should become Boys by a
violent ex^ulsion of the Natural parts. In Vitry in France, Mary Germain was
betrothed to a See Mountaigne, Essays.
^opeful young man, who was in great expectation of enjoying her for his Wife,
^ut the poor Fellow was miserably deceived when the day of Marriage was come;
she happened to leap more violently than it did become her Sex, and was turned
from a Maid into a Boy, as my Author tells me.

Lycaon, the Son of Titan and of Terra, or of Pelasgus King of Arcadia, was so
cruel a Tyrant, that he murdered all strangers that did fall into his hands.
Jupiter being desirous to know whether he were as inhumane as the report did
make him, went to lodge at his House, with the rest of the Gods, in a disguize.
When they were asleep, Lycaon endeavored to destroy Jupiter; but when he saw
his wicked design could not be brought to pass, he took an Hostage that was in
his house, boiled part of him, roasted the rest of his members, and then laid
him upon the Table in dishes for Jupiter to eat. Jupiter enraged at this
horrible deed, leapt from the Table, and departed with his Heavenly Company in
a Thunder, leaving the Kings Palace in a flame, at which sight Lycaon was so
much affrighted, that he ran away and hid himself in the Woods, where he was
turned into a ravenous Wolf.

Lycus, the King of Beotia, was married to Antiopa, the Daughter of Nycteus,
whom Jupiter got with-child in the form of a Satyr. When Lycus her Husband
perceived her in this condition, and knew that it did not proceed from him* he
put her away, and married Dyree, who was so cruel to the poor Antiopa, that she
kept ^ier fast bound in Chains. Jupiter out of compassion released her, and
sent her to Mount Citheron, where she was safely delivered of Amphion and of
Zethus, twins, who became brave and renowned men of their time. When they grew
up to man's estate, they revenged their Mothers disgrace upon Lycus her Husband,
by dragging him at the tail of a Wild Horse, and by tearing his Body in pieces
in this cruel manner. Dirce was changed into a Fountain of her name, after that
she had been most inhumanely treated by Amphion and by Zethus, whom we have
mentioned before.

Or Lynceus or Lycus.
Lynceus was a barbarous Prince of Scythia, he entertained in his house a
messenger named Triptolcmus, whom Ceres had sent to him to teach him how to sow
corn, and till the earth. When he had understood as much as was required for
that purpose, he cruelly murdered him, that himself might have the honor of
the first invention of such useful Arts. Ceres punished him, and changed him
into a Beast, called Lynx. We have already mentioned this cruel King in another
place.

Nycteus was the Son of Neptunus, and of the Nymph C^lene, the Daughter of
Atlas; Nyctimene his Daughter fell in love with him, and by the means of her
Nurse made him drunk, and committed Incest with him; but when he came to know
it, he did so much vex and torment her, that she sled away into the Woods to
hide her self, and was there turned into an Owl.

Tereus, the Son of Mars, and of Bristoni^, ravi^^t Philomela his own Sister,
after that he had espoused Progne King Pandions Daughter: Afterward he was so
inhumane as to cut her tongue out of her mouth, that she might not discover his
Villainy. Philomela being deprived of the use of that member, employed her hand
to write a Letter to her Sister-in-law Progne, and acquaint her with her
Husbands inhumanity. As soon as she came to understand it, she killed her Son
Itys, boiled him, and presented him to Tereus for his Supper. This cruelty cast
him into such a fit of madness, that he ran to his Wife with a naked Sword,
with a design to kill her; but she was turned into a Swallow, and escaped out
of his reach: He was metamorphosed into a Lapwing* and Philomela into a
Nightingale, that yo^ laments for the loss of her Maidenhead. Ovid Metamorph.
lib. 6.
-- Ityn huc accersite, dixit.
Dissimulare nequit crudelia gaudia Progne.
Intus habes, quod poscis, ait, circumspicit ill^*
Atque ubi sit, quaerit, quaerenti iterumque v^canti, etc


Tityus, the Son of Jupiter and of Elara, w s said to be the Son of the Earth,
because he had been hid by his Father, when he was young, in the Earth, for
fear of Juno. He was killed by Apollo, because he attempted to ravish Latona
his Mother: He is now cast into Hell, where his huge Body covers, as the Poets
say, nine acres of ground, and his heart is continually tormented by the
beaking of Ravens. By this Fable is intimated the troubles and tortures of a
wounded Conscience: No Raven nor Eagle can cause more pain by frequent beaking,
than the sense of a grievous sin, when it is not accompanied with the hopes of
Gods mercy.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Hcathen Gods, who were proper ^^ several places and Countries in the
World, and who had been men.
I Shall not name Jupiter, Apollo, Mercurius, Belus, and other Gods, of whom we
have given a sufficient account before; I confess these universal Gods had been
but men, or rather these names of men had been translated and ascribed to the
Gods. I shall here* speak of the particular Gods, who were adored in many
places of the World, whose Jurisdiction did reach no farther than the bounds of
a Kingdom, or of a City, and to whose care and protection the places where they
were adored were committed.

Psapho was a cunning Fellow of Lybia, who lived in some reputation, but he was
desirous of more, unto which he attained by this act of policy: He taught
secretly in his dwelling a multitude of Parrots to say in the Punick language,
Psapho is a great God.

When they had well learned this Lesson, he sent them out into the Woods, and
into the Fields: By this means it happened, that these prating Birds that knew
no other language, by frequent repetitions, taught it to many other Birds, that
divulged and proclaimed it all over the Country. The ignorant people had no
sooner heard them, but they believed that Psapho was a God, therefore they
appointed unto him, in a part of Lybia, a Temple, Sacrifices, Priests, and all
other things belonging to the Worship of the true God.

Carmelus was the God of Mount Carmel in Judaea. Tacit. mentions him when he
relates how his Priest did foretell unto Vespasian that he should be Emperor.

Plin Nature. Hist. lib. 5.
Enenth Seir, or as some call him Enenthius, was a God of the Phoenicians.

Eusebius,
Epires was the great Interpreter of the Gods amongst the Egyptians: He was
painted with the head of a Hawk.

Dercetus was a Goddess adored near Askalon, and represented as a Beautiful
Woman. Ovid makes mention of her, lib* 4. Metam. -- De te Babylonia narret
Derceti, quam versa, squamis velantibus artus,
Stagna Palestini credunt coluisse figura.


Macrob.
Adad was a God of the Assyrians, his wife is thought to be Adargatis. Astarte
was another Goddess of the same Country, mentioned in the former Book.

Plutarch.
Adramus was the Tutelar God of Sicilia, as Conisalus and Minerva were of the
Athenians, Cabrus of Pamphylia, and Suidas.
Tanais of the Armenians. This Goddess did require the same Worship as Anaitis,
and Venus Syria, for the Maids were obliged to loose their Maidenhead in her
Temple, at her Altars, before they did dream of Marriage.

Sosipolis Deus, the God of the Eleans in Grecia, saved a City from the fury of
the Arcadian Army in the form* of a little Child, who was changed before them
into a Serpent. The sudden Metamorphosis struck such a terror into their minds,
that when the Eleans made a Sally upon them, they ran away*

Jupiter and Apollo were also named (...), savers of Cities.

Hesych.
Palmytius was a God of the Egyptians.

Cicer.
Alabandus was a warlike God of Caria, adored especially by the Alabandenses.

Tenes was the Son of Cyenus, killed by Achilles, as Plutarchus informs us;
therefore the name of Achilles was not to be pronounced in his Temple, which
was in the Island of Tenedos.

Coronis was a Goddess worshipped in some places of Greece, in the Temple of
Minerva: Some say that she was the Mother of Aeseulapius.

Herodot. Pausan.
Damia and Auxesia were honored by the command of the Oracle in Epidaurus in
Greece, that their Country might be made fruitful; for before it was so barren,
that it would not yield sufficient returns to the labors of the painful
Husbandman.

Drimachus, a famous Captain of Chios, was there worshipped after his death.

Amphiaraus the Sooth-sayer, and Amphilochus the Son of Nestor, were placed
amongst the Gods, and adored in Attica.

Ogoas was a God of Caria.

Zamolxis was the Law giver amongst the Getae, as Herodotus says: He studied
Philosophy under Pythagoras. When he was returned into his Country, he taught
the people the customs and manners of the Greeks, and for his good
instructions he was worshipped as a God, after his death, as Cencus was after
him in the same Climat, for excelling in the Magic Art, in the days of
Augustus the Emperor.

Plutarch.
Crephagenetus was the God of the Thebans in Egypt, whom they esteemed
Immortal. Herodotus relates, that they only of all the people of Egypt did
refuse to admit the extravagant superstition of other Cities, and that they
would never grant Divine Homage to the mortal Gods. This singularity may have
proceeded from those See Bochart. Geog. Sacr.
good impressions which the Children of Israel had left amongst them, for the
City of Thebs was next Neighbor to the Land of Goshen.

The name given unto this God by the Greeks is (...), and with the small change
of a Vowel (...), secretly born. From Herodotus and others we may perceive,
that the word (...) has been used for (...); for he calls an Asyle, or a place
of refuge (...), because men do secretly hasten to save themselves in them,
when they apprehend the pursuits of an Enemy. Now I conceive this name is but
an interpretation of the old Egyptian Title given to this God, for the
Egyptians did not make use of the Greek Tongue ordinarily, but only after the
Victories of Alexander the Great; therefore they must have had a name proper to
their language for this, as for their other Divinities. But there appears a
seeming contradiction in the Titles (...), and Immortal and Eternal, which were
the Attributes of Honor ascribed to this God. We Christians are taught, that
these Epithets are only proper to the Son of God, the second Person in the
sacred Trinity, who is (...), secretly begotten from all Eternity in an
incomprehensible manner, and yet he is Immortal and Eternal with the first
Person the Father. The sublimest Creatures can never perfectly understand or
pry into this Mysterious Generation, which has ever continued, and shall ever
continue to all Eternity; therefore only Christ can be said to be (...), and
Immortal and Eternal.

From hence we may justly conceive, that these Thebans had some understanding
of this great Mystery, the Generation of the Son of God; and that they
understood by this (...), the second Person of the Incomprehensible Trinity,
whom they acknowledged to be both Immortal and Eternal. It is certain, that the
Heathens were not altogether ignorant of the Trinity, as may be gathered out of
Plato, and the dispersed Relics of the writings of Sauchoniathon, and of
Porphyrius.

We may further take notice, that when this (...), our Divine Emanuel, was
pleased to take upon him our Nature, and was forced to fly for shelter into
Egypt, he came with Joseph and Mary his Mother to dwell in the Province of
Thebais, See the Journals and Relations of the Voyages of our English, of the
French, and Italian Travelers into Egypt.
not far from the ancient City of Thebs, in a place which is mightily frequented
by all Pilgrims that travel into those parts.

Tholesphorus was worshipped near the City of Pergama, in Asia minor, by the
Command of the Oracle.

Sangus, or Sanctus, or Sancus, was the God of the Sabins. S. Austin names him
Xanthus, L. 18. de Civit. Dei. Cap. 19. He was their first King, and had a
Temple standing in Rome. Ovid. Quaerebam nonas Sancto, fidio ne referrem
An tibi semipater, tunc mihi Sanctus ait.
Cuicunque ex illis dederis, ego numen habebo,
Nomina terna fero, sic voluere Cures.


And Sill. Italicus. -- Et laetipars Sanctum voce canebant
Autorem gentis, pars lauds ore ferebant
Sabes tuas, qui de patrio cognomine primus.
Dixisti populos magna dit^one Sabinos.


Tages was a God of the Hetrurians in Italy, of whom Ovid thus speaks, Lib. 15.
Metamorph. Indigenae dixere Tagem, qui primus Hetruscam
Edocuit gentem, casusque aperire futuros.


He was a pretended Child of Jupiter; he taught the rude people of Hetruria
several Arts and Sciences; therefore they worshipped his memory, and his
Statues.

Albunea was a Goddess inhabiting near the source of the River Tiber; adored in
that part of Italy as Feronia and Marica were. Virg* Aeneid. 1. 6.
Hunc fauno and Nympha genitum Laurente Marica.


Palicus was a God of Sicily: Antinous Plutarch.
the great Favorite of the Emperor Adrian, was worshipped in Bithynia; Bessus
was a God of Greece, Caelestus or Vranus of Africa. I should be too prolix if I
should name all the Gods of the Heathens, worshipped in every corner of the
World: What has been said will be sufficient for the understanding of the
Heathen Authors.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of some few famous Women of Antiquity.
THe Famous Queens of Antiquity were these, Alceste the Wife of King Admetus;
she freely gave her life to save her Husband from death.

Semiramis, that warlike Queen of Assyria, that enlarged the bounds of the
Empire, and built Babylon. Thomiris, Queen of Scythia, overcame Cyrus, and
caused his head to be chopped off, and cast into a bag full of blood, with this
rereproach, Satia te sanguine quem sitisti.

There have been many of that name.
Cleopater was a notable Queen of Egypt, the Curtisan of Antonius, overcome by
Augustus in a Sea Fight. She caused two Serpents to sting her to death, when
she saw that she could not oppose the power of the Romans, who were resolved to
lead her in Triumph.

Zenobia was a Queen of Armenia, the Wife of Radamistus, driven out of his
Kingdom by Tiridates, mentioned in Cor* Tacit.

Amalasuntha was a Queen of the Goths, Esther of the Persians. Irene, a Famous
Empress of Constantinople, who lived in the days of Charlemaign, and governed
the Eastern Empire. Odatis was a Famous Princess, the only Child and Heiress of
Homartes, King of part of Bactria: When she was fought in Marriage, she refused
all that came unto her, and was resolved to bestow her self upon a strange
Prince whom she had seen in a dream, and fancied so much, that she could not be
quiet until she had dispatched away messengers to him, to fetch him into her
Fathers Court.

Olympias, the Wife of Philip, and Mother of Alexander the Great, was
remarkable for her courage and bold spirit; she freely offered her*brest to the
weapons of the Soldiers who had been sent to murder her.

Caesara, a noted Empress of Persia, caused her Husband and all his Army to
become Christians, and mediated an agreement between the Sophy and the Emperor
of Constantinople.

Julia the Empress was famous for her Whoredoms at Rome; as Messalina, the
Wife of Claudius Caesar, was afterward.

Amongst the Amazons, these were the most noted Queens, Marthesia Lampedo,
Orythia, Menalippe, Hyppolite, Penthesilea, of whom Virgil speaks in the
Relation of the Worthies of Troy. Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis
Penthesilea furens, mediisque in millibus ardet.


Helena, the Mother of Constantine, was an excellent Princess, who did mightily
eucourage the affairs of Christianity in the beginning of the Universal
Conversion from Paganism.

These are the names of other noted Women of all Ages.

Aelian. l. 12.
Sapho did excel in all manner of Learning in Greece, but especially in Poetry:
She invented a kind of Verse which is called from her Saphick.

Cyborea was the Mother of Judas Iscariot, Canace was the Daughter of Aeolus.
She is infamous for the incest which she committed with her Brother (...)
Myrrha, the Daughter of Cynaras King of Cyprus, lay with her Father by the
means of a Nurse when he was drunk. She proved with-child by this incestuous
marriage of the beautiful Adonis; but when her Father understood her
wickedness, he sought to destroy her; but she nevertheless saved her self in
Arabia, where she was changed into the Myrrh-tree.

Lucrece was a Noble woman of Rome, who was ravished by the Son of Tarquinius,
and then killed her self, exhorting the Romans to revenge her death.

Cor. Tacit.
Arria, a Roman Lady, was married to Paetus, who fell into the Emperor
Tiberius's disgrace, so that he was falsely accused, and wrongfully condemned to
die. When his loving Wife saw him in this condition, she advised him to
dispatch himself; but he discovering an unwillingness to be his own
Executioner, she snatched the Sword out of his hand, and showed him what to do,
by thrusting it into her own bowels, with this exclamation, Paete non dolet*
Death is not painful. Martial has thought her worthy of an Epigram. Casta suo
gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto
Quem dedit visceribus traxer at ipsa suis:
Si qua fides, vulnus, quod feci, non dolet, inquit,
Sed quod tu facies, hoc mihi, Paete dolet.


See Martial lib. 1 Epig. 14.
Pompeia Paulina was resolved also to Lucan.
accompany her Husband Seneca, who wa^ condemned to die by Nero.

Faustina, the Wife of Marcus the Emperor, was in love with a Feneer, and
could not be cured until he was killed, and until she had drunk a draught of
his hot blood: She was the Mother of Antoninus Com^dus, who loved so much the
bloody sports of Fencing in the Amphitheatre.

Zantippe, the Wife of Socrates, is noted for a Scold; she was continually
tormenting him with railings.

In Greece, Lais of Corinth, Phryne of Be^tia, Rhodope of Egypt, Pythonica of
Athens, Aspasia of Natolia, Danae of Ephesus, Q. Curt.
Julia of Rome, Thais, who went with the Army of Alexander into Persia, Lamia of
Athens, Methra of Thessaly, Caelia, Cyrene, Lesbia, Manilia, and Phaebe of
Rome, and many more were Famous Courtisans. Martial l. 7.
Das Cattis, das Germanis, das Coelia Dacis,
Nee Cilicum spernis Cappadocumque toros.


CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Truth shadowed out in the Fabulous Stories, according to the Opinion of
Gautruchius.
TRuth is as the Sun, it destroys and drives away all darkness of Fal^hood, and
of mistakes: Nevertheless, many of these Fables are derived from the Truth, and
have been intended to set it forth: Therefore the Heathens did say, that Caelus
was the Father of Saturnus, the God of Time, because Coelum Heaven did measure
and limit out Time unto us, by its continual motions. And because Time does run
from us very fast, and because it does give a being, and destroys all things
that appear in Nature, and that nothing is able to resist its power: Therefore
this God Saturnus is represented as an old Senior, with wings upon his
shoulders, and with a Sithe in his hand, cutting down all that is before him*
He is represented swallowing his own Children with hard stones, because Time
eats and consumes the most durable substances.

Some think Janus to be Noah, otherwise called Vadimon Oenotrius, etc. and that
he was represented with two Faces, because he had seen two Worlds. See Delp.
Phenicizant of the Learned Edm. Dickinson.
The Heathens did paint Janus with two Faces, to express the Wisdom of a brave
Prince, who is to judge of the events of the time to come, from his former
experience of the time past, that he might act nothing amiss.

And because a wise man does take notice of all things before him, without
discovering or engaging himself, they did ^epresent him by Gyges, who had a
Ring of that extraordinary virtue, that when ^e did turn inwardly the precious
stone that was enchased on it, he did see all men* and was not soon by any.

I shall not weary* the Reader by a repetition of a great many more Mysteries,
and of some formerly mentioned in this Treatise; only let him take notice, that
the Heathens did declare how Prometheus had brought a Polite manner of life
amongst men, and had withdrawn them from savage and beastly customs, by saying,
that he had formed them of the ^mud of the Earth, and first caused them to
appear in the World. The Fable of Deucalion and Pyrrha has the same
interpretation; for it is said of them, that they changed Stones and Flints
into Men and Women.

The Poets do relate also how Amphion with the harmony of his Lute built the
Walls of Thebs, because he persuaded by his fair speeches, all the Inhabitants
of the Forests, and the wild people of the Mountains, to come and live
together in that City. Prometheus taught the way of drawing fire ^ut of the
stones, by knocking them together; therefore they did say, that he had fetched
fire from Heaven. He did make his abode upon Mount Caucasus* from whence he did
continually behold the Stars, and study their motions and influences: Therefore
the Poets did declare, that Mercurius had bound him to this Mountain, and that
an Eagle was put to consume his Liver. By this last Fiction, they did signify,
how the thoughts of his studies did eat him up. They did also publish, that his
Brother Atlas did carry the Heavens upon his shoulders, because he was a great
Astrologer, and did invent the use of the Sph^ar, which he did often handle in
his life.

About that time Argus built a City, which he called it after his own name, and
because he was a most watchful Prince, and very circumspect, the Poets did give
unto him many eyes.

We have already said in the story of Perseus, how he represents the qualities
of a brave Commander. Pegasus there mentioned, is nothing else but the Ship
that carried Bellerophon against the Chimera; and the wings of Dedalus, were
nothing else but the sails of a Ship which he invented to carry himself out of
Creta. What is related of his Son Icarus, and of Phaeton, represents the
Picture of the ambitious men; as the stories of Tantalus, and of the Harpies,
do shadow out unto us the Covetous, and the Sirens the Voluptuous. The Bird
which did devour the Liver of Prometheus, did express the torments of a wounded
Conscience, as well as the furies and discontent of Orestes.

If any did excel in Goodness, Power, Authority, or Industry, he was placed
amongst the Gods. By this means Jupiter, King of Creta, or of Candia, was
advanced amongst the Gods, with his Brothers Neptunus and Pluto. Neptunus was
held for the God of the Sea, because he did command the Fleet: Pluto was the
God of Hell, because he invented the Funeral Rights paid unto the Dead. The
Court of every King was as a Heaven, and the residence of the Gods. If any
happened to be driven from thence, he was said to be banished out of Heaven: If
any did escape from an eminent danger, by flying from it, they did publish,
that he was metamorphosed into a Bird: If any did hide himself in the Woods, he
was said to be changed into a Beast, as it happened with Lycaon the Son of
Pelasgus, King of Arcadia, who was pursued by Jupiter, because of his
Railleries and Jests which he did cast upon the Worship of the Gods: The Poets
therefore seigned, that he was changed into a Wolf.

In the fifth Chapter we did mention the vainglory of Marsyas, and of Midas;
unto these we could add many more examples to the same purpose; as of that
Fanatic Raven that had a very high conceit of her self, and did continually
glory in her beauty, although she was covered with the Feathers of others
Birds. The old Ass of Arcadia is also noted for its vanity: It had been
persuaded by the other Asses of the Country, that it did excel all the Birds of
the Air in sweetness of the voice, because he had long used himself to sing
according to his mode.

But it is sufficient to have shown by ^hese examples what use may be made of
^he Fables. We shall therefore take notice, that so many noted Philosophers of
Antiquity, did labor to cover the shame and the infamy of their Religion, by
causing the stories of their Gods, all the actions of their lives, and the
strange metamorphoses to pass for Allegories and symbolical representations.
However these things were first invented, it is certain that during many
hundred years they were published and believed for truths, therefore the
Heathens did acknowledge nothing more undoubted and sacred, because they had no
other Religion, ^or knowledge of then Gods to honor the^ their Temples, their
Sacrifices, and their Solemnities, were consecrated to these kind of
Divinities, as the holy Scripture, and all profane and sacred Authors do inform
us; as the Fathers of the Primitive Church of Christ did represent to the
Heathens, and as some of them, after their Conversion to the Faith, did openly
confess.

And let us not imagine, that these Fables were only popular errors, for the
Philosophers, learned in the Mysteries of Nature, and acquainted with many
discoveries of the true God, did nevertheless promote all manner of Idolatry
and Superstition, as S. Paul informs us in his Epistle to the Romans; for they
were afraid of the Laws of the Country, that did not suffer any to contradict
them; therefore they did hastily comply with the Opinions and sacrilegious
Tales of the people. It is strange, that the Monarchs, and the Commonwealths,
full of the wisest and most excellent Politicians, have been so blind, as to
adore the Stars, the Elements, and the Princes that reigned before them. Thus
the Chaldeans worshipped Baal, otherwise named Belus, who had been the first
King of Assyria. The History of Daniel does also relate unto us, that the
Emperor of Babylon, according to the Religion of his Country, did adore not
only the God Belus, but also a great Dragon which Daniel broke in pieces, to
show unto them who was the true God.

When the Egyptians were most Famous for learning, they did consecrate their
Temples to the God Serapis, which was an Ox^ marked in an extraordinary manner;
because they did believe that Osiris, one of their Kings, the Son of Jupiter,
had been metamorphosed into an Ox after his Death. From hence the Israelites
did derive their shameful custom and inclinations of worshipping Golden Calves.

Afterward the Egyptians did adore the Sun, and named him Osiris; and the
Moon, and called her his Wife Queen Isis. They did also believe, that the Cats,
the Crocodils, and the Onions, were to be reverenced as Gods, because the Gods
went into Egypt to hide themselves in the shape of those things during the War
of the Giants.

The Romans, by the Decrees of their Senate, placed amongst the Gods many of
their Caesar's, besides that infamous Varlet Antinous, the Favorite of the
Emperor Adrian. To flatter and alleviate the grief of this Prince conceived
for his death, they persuaded him that Antinous was changed into a new Star,
which appeared about that time in the Heavens.

Therefore from hence we may conclude, that these follies and impieties were
not only amongst the silly Vulgar, but also amongst the greatest Wits, and
Noblest men; and that they were esteemed as Maxims of Religion in the most
flourishing Empires and Commonwealths. This blindness and excessive folly will
appear more plainly unto us, by that which we shall declare in the first
Chapters of the next Book, concerning the worship paid to the Heathen Idols.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


The End of the Second Book.
The Third Book.
Of the Honors paid by the Heathens unto their Gods.
The PREFACF.
THE knowledge of a God does necessarily require from us Obedience, Worship,
and Respect: which we are bound in Justice to render to him as to a being
infinitely excelling all the rest, and to whom we owe our selves, and all our
enjoyments. From hence proceeds Religion, which is the sublimest and most
excellent of all the moral virtues. It teaches us how to adore our God with
outward expressions of humility, as well as with inward, that we may
acknowledge thereby his Sovereignty over us. It teaches us to make our
addresses unto him by Prayer, as to the first source from whence issue all our
good things. It teaches us to publish his Praises, to glorify his Greatness,
and offer unto him Sacrifices, because he is the first principle, and the last
end of all his Creatures; He is the absolute Lord of Life and Death. It
teaches us also for these reasons to erect Temples, and appoint Days to
worship him, that we might have both times and places to mind us of our
obligations to him. These duties we ought as his Servants and Vassals, to
perform with all diligence and delight.

But the Devils having banished from the world the true knowledge of God, and
established themselves in his room, they obliged man kind to adore them and
their Statues instead of God, and usurped by that means all the Prerogatives
and supreme Rights of the Godhead. For unto them all public and private
Prayers, and Vows were directed, for them the Temples and Altars were built,
and the Festival days, the Sacrifices, the public Plays, and such like
Ceremonies were instituted, as we shall see in this last Book of this Treatise.

Of the Honors rendered by the Heathens to their Gods.
CHAP. I.
Of the Statues consecrated to the false Gods.
THE rarest and most eminent Qualities could never free man from the Power of
Death, that buries all things in eternal forgetfulness by the assistance of
Time. Therefore the Images and Statues have been invented to continue the Dead
in our remembrance, and to cause them to live amongst their. Posterity, maugre
Death, and its tyranical Power.

These Images or Statues are visible expressions of Reverence: And because they
have a relation sometimes to Persons of Honor, who have deserved from us our
esteem, they seem to demand some kind of respect; and in process of time they
do appear venerable Monuments of former Ages. But the Honor done unto them, is
intended only to the Persons that they do represent.

Thus in the Church of Christ, He is expressed unto us by Images to raise our
mind to the contemplation of this Holy Savior, and to cause the ruder sort of
People to learn the mysteries of his Life and Death. But the Heathens did
commit two grievous Sacriledges by erecting Statues to their Gods; First, They
did acknowledge others besides the true God Almighty, who only is worthy of our
services, and of the supreme religious respect. Secondly, They did esteem these
material Statues as Gods, and did Worship and Adore the Works of their hands.

For we must take notice, that Idols properly are not Images of real things,
but of false Divinities, or of such as were unjustly Honored as Gods;
Therefore the Apostle informs us that an Idol is nothing, which cannot be said
of the Images of the Saints, because they do express Persons that are really in
being.

Besides, we must observe, that the Heathens did adore these very Idols as
Divinities, which was not only the mistake of the vulgar sort of men, but of
the Learned; Some I confess of them did acknowledge the folly of such
Practices. This is confirmed unto us in many places of Holy Scripture, in 14 of
Wisdom, and in the Psalms, where David upbraids the Idolaters because they did
worship the works of their own hands, Gods that had Eyes, and all the other
members of the humane body, but neither life nor action in them All the
Prophets do agree to this, and it was in this manner that the children of
Israel did adore the Golden-Calf in the Wilderness, and that the King of
Babylon, with all the Grandees of his Court did call upon Daniel to Worship the
Idol of King Belus. And for this cause S* Paul in his Epistles, labors to make
his new Disciples understand the extraordinary favor which Christ had
vouchsaved unto them, to have withdrawn them from the service of the mute and
insensible Idols* The holy Fathers of the Church did often upbraid the
Heathens, that their Gods were for the most part nothing but Marble and Metal,
which Arnobius and manyother worthy Persons did acknowledge when they had
embraced Christianity. And Trismegistue also, according to the saying of St.
Austin, did really believe that Idols were to be worshipped and sacrificed unto,
that Men might obtain favors from them, and decline the Evils which might
happen unto them.

We have taken notice of this passage, to oppose it to the Doctrine of Calvin,
who teaches the contrary, and who publishes to the world, that the Romanists do
Imitate the Heathens by Honoring Image of Jesus Christ; for he supposes that
the Heathens did consider the Idols but as the naked representations of their
Gods, without any other respect.

We might here mention the most Famous Idols of Antiquity, as the Colossus of
Rhodes, Diana of the Ephesians, Minerva of Athens; this last did bear in her
Buckler the Image of the workman, formed so artificially, that it was not
possible to remove or deface it without a visible prejudice to the whole Piece.
But as this discourse is not proper to our design, I shall not insist upon it.

Addit. Not.
I cannot let this digression of the Jesuit pass without an Antidote. He
pleads for the worship of Images, which he condemns in others; Yet he labors
to justify himself, and his Religion from that foul crime, of which the holy
Prophets, and the Fathers Concerning this ^case of Conscience. consult Rainold.
de Idololat. Romans Eccl^s. Sadel. contra Burdeg. Martyr. Loc. com. M^lancthon
etc.
of the Christian Church do accuse the Heathens. Whereas it is plain, both by
their Practices, and by the Confession of the most eminent of their Doctors,
that there is no difference between them and the most superstitious Heathens;
If there be, we must confess that the Papists do exceed the former in their
Idolatry, and are far more profane than the others ever were.

First, it is not difficult to prove that there is no difference in the outward
practices of the Heathens and Papists in this particular; We need but open our
eyes, and we shall see them both Cringing, Bowing, Kneeling, prostrate to the
ground, Incensing and. Offering to their several Images all the Divine Honors
that the Body is able to pay unto God. We shall see the Papists as well as the
Heathens pour forth their Prayers before the Statues of Wood and Metal, and
expect from them assistance in time of need, we shall hear them say unto the
Stock, thou art my Father, and to the Stone, thou have begotten me. The
Heathens did cut and lance themselves Jer. 2. 27.
before their Idols, they did load them with Garlands and Flowers: so do the
Papists in all the Dominions of the Pope. They do crown and set them out on
their Festival days, that they might oblige the People to more respect, they
do offer unto them their Riches. It is a common practice in Spain for a
Mendicant Friar to carry with him the Image of the Virgin Crudeles dij vestri
sunt qui delect intur vestro sanguine ac ^os impellunt ad vitam fundendam,
Clemens Alex.
Mary joined to his Box, that her credit among the ignorant multitude might
stir up their Liberality. They do also afflict and whip themselves before their
Images, cut their bodies with Knives, and put themselves to many other needless
sufferings for to please God and the Saints. We in England that are ignorant of
these follies and extravagant practices, are apt to be deceived with their
colorable pretenses; but in this particular they are more guilty than the
Heathens of Superstition, for they Adore and Pray unto the Images of those that
they acknowledge to be no Gods, whereas the Heathens never offered Sacrifice
nor worshipped any, but such as they imagined to be in the number of Gods, or
such as they desired should be promoted to that Honor.

S^e what God says to the bowing of our bodies to the Idols. Deuteronomy. 4. 19. And
S. Hierom against Ruffin. lib. 1.
But says the Jesuit, the Heathens did acknowledge the Image to be their God,
and so they did adore it, which we do not do; for if our Bodies do bow to a
representation, our minds do at the same instant convey our respect to the
Person represented. I am certain the Papists cannot say more in this case to
free themselves from the suspicion of folly; Than ^^nucius Felix.
a Heathen does in Minucius Felix where he wittily disputes with a Christian,
and tells him, that he is not so ignorant but that he knows the power and value
of the Image before which he falls, which is fashioned and framed by a
workman: I know, says he, that the Image is but Metal or Stone, but as it is
dedicated to represent such a God, or such a virtue of God named Jupiter,
Apollo, Mercurius, Juno, etc do not think that my homage does stop (...), was
the opinion of the Heathen.
there, my thoughts do direct my worship to God, and his Attributes that I
adore, in, and by such an Image. I am certain no Papist can say more for
himself than the Heathen does in this place. Yet these were they that all the
Prophets do cry against: How can therefore the It seems by the false Miracles
which the Papists do ascribe to the Images, that they do labor to persuade the
people that there is such a Divine virtue inherent in them.
Romanists reckon themselves guiltless?

Our Jesuit abuses Arnobius, to make him approve of Idolatry against his
will, we may see what he says in the 6. Book contra gentes. The Heathens do
affirm, that they do not worship the Images, but the presence of God in them.
For they did imagine that a Divine virtue was infused into them by a
dedication. Therefore I find the Heathens more rational in their practices than
the Papists, for the former did really believe that which did require their
Devotion, whereas the latter do pay the same respect by the Decree of their
last Council, Council. Trident. Sessio 25. De invocat^ vener at. and reliquiis
Sanctorum.
and yet declare that they imagine no such excellency in them, as should oblige
them to this humility. Bellarmine their great Goliath, affirms, more that the
Images of Saints are to be worshipped properly, and for themselves, and not only
with relation to the persons represented. The most superstitious Heathen cannot
say Imagines Dei Angelor. hominum Sanctorum proprie per se non autem tantum
respectu Prototypi colendoe sunt and quidem cultu religioso. Bell. l. 2. c. 12.
Disp. Tho. Aquinas is of the same opinion, so are all the Jesuitical writers.
Exodus 20. 4, 5.
more for his Idols, than this Doctor for his Images. I shall not heap up
together the horrid abominations, and grievous expressions of the Cross, of the
Virgin Mary in their Hymns and Prayers, and the other extravagant opinions of
the rest of their Doctors, who go beyond the Heathens in Idolatry, and in
robbing God of his Sovereign Right. It shall fuffice to see the unlawfulness of
bowing to Images. In the second Commandment God forbids the Israelites to make
to themselves any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven
above, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them. This is so plain
against them, that they have thought it convenient to dash it out of the number
of all the writings that appear to the people in their own Language. And to
supply the want of it, they have divided the 10th Commandment into two to make
up Ten. It is craftily done not to betray their own weakness, and to banish out
of their Decalogue a Commandment, that accuses them of Idolatry in such plain
terms.

God will not give his Glory unto another, we must not asso^iate unto him any
creature, His Divine Rights cannot without Profanation be ascribed to any
other being, therefore unto God only we must pray, and make our addresses, John
4. 24.
and as he is a Spirit, we must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

It is not possible to represent God with any Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
Image; Besides, it is forbidden, Moses warns the Israelites, that they should
not liken God unto any thing. In our Houses and Temples the Images of God and
of Christ have been esteemed as the prophanations of the sacred Persons that we
are to Adore by all sober Christians; Therefore the 7th Council did forbid the
Image Esaias 40. 18.
of Christ to be drawn; unto whom (says Esaias) will you liken God, or with
what resemblance will you represent him? He has engraven the Images of himself
in the great Fabric Romans 1:
of the world, and in the beautiful make and disposition of all Creatures, there
the invisible things of him are clearly seen, etc. Here it becomes us to adore
him by a continual contemplation of his Wonders, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness.
All other Images of God do beget in us a mean esteem of his Greatness, and
instead of benefiting the simple People, they steal away from him their hearts
and affections, which is the direct contrary design of the Gospel. They nourish
ignorance and error, for there is no place in the world where so many
absurdities of God, and of his Power are believed, as in Spain and Italy, where
Images are worshipped I could here mention all the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, and many worthy men since, who have abhorred this abuse that is crept
in amongst Christians Claudius Clemens, Bishop of Aventin. in Annal.
Auxere in France, opposed the Pope, and would not suffer Images in his
Diocese, Leo Isaurus, Constantine, Nicephorus* Leo Armenus, Michael Balbus, and
Theophilus the Emperors of the East, have been branded with Excommunications
from Rome, because they would not subscribe to this horrid Idolatry. And a
Greek Historian informs us, that when Frederick Nicetas Chron. l. 3.
I. the Emperor, who led his Army to the conquest of the Holy Land, entered
into Armenia, Anno Domini. 1180.
the Christians of those parts d d lovingly receive them, because the worship of
Images was not admitted Neub. l. 4.
amongstthem, as amongst other Northern People. I could here muster up an Army
of the most excellent men of all ages, who have detested this grievous abuse,
that renders Christians ridiculous to Mahumetans. We do not deny a civil
respect to the Pictures and Images of the Dead, but to make them or their
Prototypes share in any part of that Honor only due unto God, is an
extravagancy that we ought to abominate.

Besides, Our Jesuit is grossly mistaken, when he says that the Images of
Saints worshipped, or unto whom men do kneel, are not Idols, because they are
representations of real things. The LXX, and St. Paul are not of his judgment,
for they call many real things (...) Xenophon Exped. Cyr. lib. 2. Homer. Iliad.
6. Plutarch.* Appian. The Hebrews call Idols also (...) Nihilum, or Stercora,
dunghill Gods. For Jupiter was named Stercoreus by the Heathens
Idols. the word (...), is composed of (...) a Face, and (...) to serve, and in
all the Greek writers, it is taken for the Images unto whom we pay respect and
service; Nevertheless, St. Paul says that the Idol is nothing; I conceive he
borrows this expression from the Hebrew word (...) which signifies a thing
without form, or an insignificant thing: the LXX upon the 1 Samuel 12. 21. have
rendered it thus, (...), they call there, and in many other passages, ^dols of
the Heathens, (...), things that have no being, which relates rather to Images
than to the Originals. The Images therefore of the Heathens had no being; that
is, no real being, as they imagined them to have, no power, no virtue, no Soul,
nor motion, they were things void of life and action. They were but Wood,
Stone, or Metal, that could neither hear, nor deliver us: and are not the
Images of the Saints of the same kind? (...) things without Soul, things void
of sense and understanding. What qualities do the Papists fancy in them, that
do cause them to excel the Idols of the Heathens? But if our Jesuit will needs
apply this (...) to the originals of the Images, I am afraid the St. Katherine.
St. George, etc.
Saints will be found included in this expression. I will fay nothing of many
that are now adored in Rome, who were never in being, unless in the fancy of
some dreaming Monk, or of a religious Romancer. It is certain, that the Saints
as they are represented unto us, are not in being, the Bodies have been
consumed long ago into ashes. Their Souls are at rest, but unable to Isaiah 63.
16. We may find this (...), applied to the Dead and buried, in the 42. Genesis 36.
Joseph is not, etc.
hear our Prayers and groans, or to yield unto us any comfort: To what purpose
therefore do we make our adresses to these (...), or worship those that are not
able to receive our respects, or make any returns. Is it not better according
to Gods express command, to humble our selves unto him who is every where, and
in our need call upon his mercy, who has promised to hear us for Christ his
sake?

CHAP. II.
Of the Edifices and Temples dedicated to the Heathen Gods.
THe Pagans did commonly boast of seven stately structures, that were named
the seven wonders of the world. The first was the Wall of Babylon, and the
pleasant Gardens which Queen Semiramis planted: About Vide Martial Epigr, 1.
this Work 3 hundred thousand men were continually imployd for many years. The
second was, the Labyrinth of Egypt described by Herodotus, in which 16 large
apartments o^ su^ptuous Palaces were built, to equal the 16 Governments or
Provinces of Egypt; There were in it so many ways and artificial walks, that
it was no easy matter to find the way out again. Dedalus took his model upon
this to build his Labyrinth in the Isle of Crete. The third wonder of the
world, was the Pyramides of Egypt, which were of a prodigious height, six
hundred thousand men were buisy in the buildin gone of them during the space of
twenty years, as was commonly reported.

Plin. lib. 36. c. 5. Herod. lib. 8. Strabo lib. 13.
The next was the Mausolaeum of Caria, which Q. Artemisia built as a Sepulcher
for her deceased Husband Mausolaeus; she enricht it with so many rare
ornaments, that it was esteemed one of the greatest wonders of the world. All
Monuments of this kind have since been called Mausolaea. This Queen did love
her Husband so much, that besides this Edisice which she erected for him, she
caused the ashes of his consumed body to be put into a cup of Wine, and
swallowed them, to give him a lodging next to her heart.

The Colossus of Rhodes, which we have already mentioned, was reckoned amongst
these wonders of the world.

The sixth, was the Statue of Jnpiter Olymp. made by Phidias of a hundred and
fifty Cubits high. The head was of pure Gold, but the body was of Brass.

But the greatest wonder and incomparable work, was the Temple of Ephesus,
dedicated to Diana. A hundred and twenty large Pillars were to be seen there,
every one of them had been the sole enterprise and work of a King, who was
resolved to make his Piety and Magnificence appear upon his Pillar.

The Temples all over the world, were also stately. I shall not offer to number
them; It is sufficient to know that the Princes, and the Nations did employ
their Riches and ingenious inventions of Architecture, only in the building of
Temples to their Gods. In which there were always to be seen three Altars. The
first at the entry where the Victims were offered and burnt. The second in the
middle, and the third at the end of the Temple, in the enclosure called Adytum
and Sacrarium, or Secreta, and Penetralia. Upon these two last only Perfumes
and sweet scents were usually burnt. In this place Beds and Cusheons were
commonly placed, called therefore Lectisternia and Pulvinaria, that the People
might sit and lean upon them in the Feasts that were there dedicated to the
Gods. The Officers of this Ceremony were named Epulones. And as these Gods were
but of an inanimate substance of wood or stone etc, they could neither eat nor
drink, as Daniel proved to the King of Babylon in the Temple of Belus: so that
all these rare dishes of Meat that were offered, did turn to the advantage of
these wretched Ministers, who did feed instead of their Gods upon the Dainties
that were consecrated for their service.

Addit. Not.
In this last Chapter, these following particulars of the Wonders of the World,
are omitted, which may deserve our knowledge.

The Walls of Babylon built by that Warlike Queen Semiarmis, of a fat Clay only
found near Euphrates, were very large and high. Plinius speaks of 200 Feet in
height; Others o^ 250, and some of 300: But the ordinary opinion, is, that they
were 50 Cubits high, and so broad that two or three Chariots might go upon them
in a breast without danger. Diodorus says that they were three hundred and
five Stadia round, that is about 11 French Leagues. This stately Wall, and the
great Bridge that did reach over the River Euphrates, this Queen caused to be
built in a year.

Sands Journal.
The Pyramides of Egypt do remain to this very day, if we may believe the
Travelers that have lately been in that Country, but they are mightily
defaced by Time. There were three of them; The greatest was built by Chemnis
King of Egypt* as a stately Monument of his Power, and to be his Sepulcher
after his death. It was placed about 16 English Miles from Memphis or
Grand-Cairo: It was about the 1440 foot high
length of 6 Acres of Land in height, as Diodorus an eyewitness affirms. An
Italian Traveller Vinz. Lor.
speaks of 250 degrees high, and that it is built of a hard Arabian stone, every
one Belon.
being about 30 Foot long. Chemnis was torn in pieces in a Mutiny of his People,
and could never obtain the Honor of being interred in this Sepnl^oer. His
brother Cephus succeeded him, The Israelites were employed to build the
Pyramides, as some do think. (...), a vile fellow. Prove.
and imitated his vainglorious actions in erecting another lesser than the
former, four square. The last was built by King Mycerinus, or as some say by
that famous Strumpet Rhodope. Upon this appears a great head of black Marble,
of a hundred two foot round about the Temples, and about 60 foot high from the
chin to the crown of the head.

Labyrinthus, an intricate discourse.
The Labyrinth of Egypt was built by Menis, or Maros King of that Conntrey for
his Tomb. It is described by Herodotus, as that of Crete is by Diodorus, who
saw it in the time of Julius Caesar.

The Colossus of Rhodes was made by Chares of Asia minor, in the space of 12
years, Artus. Thom.
and was dedicated to the Sun. It cost about Philostrate.
44000 pounds English money, and was placed at the entrance of the Harbor of
the City, with the right foot standing on the one side of the Land, and the
left foot standing on the other; between the legs the tallest Ships with their
Masts, did enter into the Haven. When it fell down to the ground by an
Earthquake, few men were able to embrace the little finger of this prodigious
Statue.

The Mausoleum of Queen Artimesia, was built by four of the most excellent
Artificers of that time. It was square four hundred and eleven feet round and
45 Cubits high: the square looking East, was finished by Scapas, that toward
the West by Leocares, the S^u* the^n by Timotheus, and the Northern by Briax.
Upon the top another Workman placed a great Brazen Chariot, with many wonderful
and curious inventions.

The workman was Phidias the Athenian. Josephus.
The Statue of Jupiter Olymp. was the neatest of all these Works; It was
erected by by the Eleens a People of Greece, and placed in a Temple dedicated
to Jupiter, which was The upper part uncovered signifies how he is known to
the Angels, but the lower part covered, signifies how God hides himself in his
works to the inferior creatures. Suidas.
enriched afterward by many curious representations, and excellent Statues.
This of Jupiter was sitting in a Chair half naked, but from the girdle downward
he was covered, in the right hand he held an Eagle, and in the left hand a
Scepter. Sueton. in vita Calig.
Caligula endeavored to transport it to Rome, but those that were employed
about it, were frighted from their enterprise by some unexpected accident.

The Temple of Diana at Ephesus, was first begun by Archiphron, and seated (for
fear of the Earthquakes) in a Marish ground; It was 425 foot long, and 220
broad, and 127 stately Pillars were in it. It was rebuilt again by Alexander's
command, by his Ingineer, who laid the Foundations, and designed the ground of
the City of Alexandria in Egypt: his name was Dinocrates.

Several other places very remarkable, rich and stately were dedicated to the
Heathen Gods, the Temple of Athens to Minerva, and another in the same City to
Mars, where the Acts 17.
Judges did meet to examine causes of Life and Death, The Pantheon of Rome, to
all the Gods, and many more which the Poets do sometimes mention. Now there
were several sorts of these Religious houses set apart for the service Templum
signifies the Heavens, or the Air where Birds do fly, for the Augures to make
their Observations. Coel. Rhodig. Vide Cornelius Tacit. lib. 4.
of the Gods. Templum, from templando, or contemplando, signifies an Edifice
dedicated to a God, where the Image of a Divinity was to be seen and
worshipped, and which was to be Consecrated by the Augures with Prayers in the
presence of all the People. Aedes was an Edifice dedicated to a God, but not
consecrated in such a solemn manner as a Temple.

Fanum, a ^ando to speak, because there the People were instructed in the
mysteries of the Sistere fanum vel effari. Templum, is to appoint a place to
build a Church, which was done by the Augures.
Heathen Gods, or because their Oracles were given, and the God was made to
speak there by the crafty Priests.

Delubrum, signifies sometimes the Place where the Image or the statue of the
God did stand, and sometimes a Temple dedicated to more than one Divinity.
Aedicula, is a diminutive of aedes, a holy house; some think it It is called
Sacellum.
to be a little enclosure where the Image of a God was to be worshipped, open on
the top.

These were the names of the places where the Heathens did pay their Devotions
to their false Gods: But besides these names, there are several other Corners
and parts of holy houses that we must not omit; as Sacrarium, which is the
holiest place of the Church, or that where every one had not liberty to come,
as we may see in Cicero pro Milone; which place if you compare It is now taken
for a V^stry.
with that of Claudian. lib. 1. de Raptu Prof. Adytis gavis^ Cybele prosilit. It
will Aditus signifies an Entry.
appear, that Adytum and Sacrarium is the same in these places. Donarium, is the
place Aelian. v^r. Histo^. l. 2. c. 20
where the gifts offered to the Divinities were placed, called in Greek (...).
Lucus is a Porticus, or Pronaon was the Porch.
Grove, so thick with Trees planted near some Temples, that it appeared very
dark: There the Heathens were wont to worship their Gods, Altar quasi alta
area.
which the Israelites did imitate Ara, was a little Altar, upon which the Beasts
were burned to their inferior Gods. Altar* was the higher Altars dedicated to
the superior. Scrobiculus, was a round Pit, having in the middle a little
Altar, about which the blood of the Sacrifices did run. a fovendo ignem pro
aris and focis pugnare, to fight for God and our houses. (...), suspendere
clypeum, to live in peace.
Focus, is a domestic Altar, consecrated to the domestic Gods, or a Chimney*
Tholum, was a place in the middle, or on the top of the Temples, where the
soldiers did hang up their Arms, and dedicated their spoils, and where the
Pictures were placed, as may appear by this expression of Statius, figamque
superbis arma Tholis.

Now these Edifices dedicated to the Honor of the Gods, were not all of the
same Fabric; some were built with open Roofs in the middle, Strabo lib. 15.
others were shut as our Churches. The Persians had none for their God Mithra,
who is the Sun; therefore he was worshipped in a Grove.

Neither were Temples dedicated to all sorts of Gods: amongst the Romans and
Greeks we shall find this distinction, that the Altars and Temples were
consecrated to the Celestial Gods, and to those that were admitted amongst
them. The Foci, or Chimneys to the earthly or Penates, and the Caves, Dens, and
low Huts to the infernal Gods, and to the Nymphs and field Divinities, as
Homerus takes notice. Porphyrius.
Odyss. 13. (...)
(...)


CHAP. III.
Of the Sacrifices offered to the Idol Gods.
THe Devils the sworn Enemies of God, and of his Glory, were not satisfied with
the offerings of the fruits of the Earth, and of all manner of Creatures that
were commonly sacrificed to them; but they were so barbarous as to require also
human victims, Men and Women to be butchered, and burnt alive upon their Altars.

Virgil informs us how Aeneas chose eight young Gallants of the Prisoners that
he had made upon the Enemy, to sacrifice them to the Gods of Hell for the sake
of Pallas. This custom has been in use also amongst the Romans, as well as
amongst the other People of the world. The Parents did sometimes dedicate their
young Infants to the Household Gods, for the good of the rest of the Family.
The Scythians who did inhabit about that part that is named Taurica, did
sacrifice to their Diana all strangers whose unhappiness it was to fall into
their hands, as we have seen in the story of Orestes and Iphigenia. Bacchus
also had an Altar in Arcadia, upon which a great many young Damsels were to be
beaten to death with bunches of Rods. This was also practiced by the
Lacedaemonians, who scourged their Children in honor of Mercurius. The Germans,
and the Cimbri did sacrifice also Men, when they had cruelly tormented them.
Some of the Heathens did choose the aged, to cast them into a River to please
their Gods, and to free themselves from the trouble of their companies,
especially when they grew decrepit and useless, therefore they were called
Senes depontani. The People of the most Northerns Climates, did dress for them
a Feast, where they did make merry with their friends, and then they did crown
them with Garlands, and cast them down from the top of a high Rock into the
Sea. Caesar in his Commentaries speaks of the ancient Gauls, who did trim up a
great Statue made of branches of Ozier, and then did fill it with Men alive, to
burn them together to their Idols. Alexander ab Alexandro mentions a certain
Aristomenes, who in a Sacrifice caused 300 Men to be slain in honor of his
God. Many of them did offer their own Children, which was an ordinary practice
amongst the Egyptians, and amongst the People of Palestina. The Holy Scripture
does reproach it to the Israelites, who were so vile as to imitate these
abominable inhumanities, in causing their Children to pass between two fires so
often, till they were miserably scorched. They did also shut them up in a
hallow Idol of Brass called Moloch, that was red hot; and whiles these innocent
Victims were consuming in this manner, they did sound the Trumpets, and beat
the Drums and other Instruments, that the People might not hear the complaints
and outcries of the poor creatures; Therefore this place was called Tophet,
that is, a Drum. Achaz and Manasses Kings of Jadea, were so wretched, as to
cause their Children to pass through this Fire: From hence we may see, unto
what excess of impiety and wickedness they were arrived by the Devils
persuasions. The Sacrifices that were offered for the deceased, were no less
inhumane, for many Nations did keep this custom at the Funerals of Persons of
Quality, to kill and burn with them such as had been acceptable to them in
their lives, and such as were judged able to do them service in the other
world. Some did take in War as many Prisoners as they could, to sacrifice them
at this time, as Virgilius tells us; and Homerus relates how Achilles butchered
twelve Trojans to Patroclus his dear friend. Also that famous Gladiator
Spartacus, who was so industrious and daring, as to raise an Army of Slaves in
Italy, and to march against the People of Rome, did force 300 of his Prisoners
of War to kill themselves in honor of his Captains slain in the Fight, to
procure unto them the favor of the infernal Gods. This cruel Ceremouy became
so ordinary amongst the Romans, that scarce any of the Chieftains of the
Commonwealth, or of the Emperors did die, but several thousands of Gladiators
did follow them.

Now there were several Kinds of Sacrifices amongst the Heathens: When they
were made for the increase of the Fruits of the Earth, which was done after
that they had led the Victim round about the Fields. Others went about the City
and were named Amburbales hostiae.
These Sacrifices were named Ambarvalia, or Ambarvales hostiae. Sometimes they
did offer a hundred Beasts at a time; as a hundred Oxen, and this was called
Hecatomb. We shall not insist upon the different kinds of Offerings, but
proceed to the principal Ceremonies that were commonly observed.

First, a choice was made of the Animals according to the disposition of the
Gods unto whom the Sacrifice was to be offered. For Mars did love no creatures,
but only such as were furious and warlike; as the Buck which was not lawful to
be sacrificed to Jupiter. Neptunus did affect the Horse and the Bull. The
He-Goat was dedicated to Bacchus, because it is a creature that spoils the
Vineyards. The Cowes were killed in honor of Ceres, and of Juno. The She-Goats
were offered to Diana, and the young Kids to Faunus, etc.

They were to be very careful to see that the Victims had no blemish nor spot,
therefore it was to pass through a Ceremony called Lustration. This was also
practiced with them who were present at the Sacrifices. If they had any natural
default, they were to be gone. The Herald gave them notice, by crying Pocula
lustrabant sulphur and aqua pura and aliquando cum ovo and pisce.
Procul este Profani,

After wards the Priest did take a lump of burnt Corn, bruised with Water and
Salt, named Salsae sruges, or mola salsa, or libum adoreum: sometimes he did
take Meal mingled with Salt, to cast it upon the Victime, for without this, no
lawful sacrifice could be be performed.

At last, when the Beast was killed, it was laid upon the Fire, while those
that did Talibus orantem dictis aramque t^nentem Virg. 4. Aeneid.
offer it were to hold their hands upon it, and Pray with the Priest; afterward
Wine was poured into the Fire. If it was an Holocauste, all was consumed by the
Flames, otherwise a part of the Beast was laid aside for the Priests, and the
other for them that did give it.

After this, they did dance round about the Altar, singing Hymns and songs in
honor of the God unto whom the sacrifice was made. In these Hymns there were
three Stances or Parts; The first called Strophe, was sung in turning from the
East to the West: The other named Antistrophe, in returning from the West to
the East; then they did stand before the Altar, and sing the Epode which was
the last part of the song. All this while it did concern the Priest to be
wonderfully intent about his business. The Herald was wont to forwarn him by
these words, Age quod agis, as he did the People in the beginning, by telling
them favete linguis; thereby he did signify unto them, how every one was to
hold his peace.

Addit. Not.
There was a great difference in the order and manner of the Ancient
Sacrifices. The chief was between the Honors offered to the superior Gods, and
between those that were paid to the Infernal, the Maritime and Terrestrial Gods.

First, The superior Gods did require high Altars in eminent places, and their
Temples were to be built upon such high ground, that they might without any
impediment receive the first Rays of the Suns rising upon our Horizon. The
Priest was to appear in a Purple or a white Gown, and before he did approach
the Altar, This they Borrowed from the Jews, and most of their Ceremonies, see
Court Gentil. Theoph. Gale. They were to wash the Victims all over, and to
purify the vessels with oynions, water, brimstone, and an egg.
he was to wash his hands in pure water. The Heathens did fancy that this
washing did cleanse at the same time the Soul from its defaults, and render it
acceptable to the Gods. He did then lead the Victime to the Altar with Garlands
and Ribbons upon his own, and the beasts head, followed by a crowd of people.
The Purveyer of Wood had a care to provide such as was acceptable to the
Divinity. It was the custom, when Sacrifices were to be offered to Jupiter, to
offer some preparatory things, called Praecidaneae hostiae, to the Doemones or
Angels, that they might intercede and convey the Prayers safe up into the
presence of God: If they did not seem happy by some unluckie Sign, they did
then offer others, which were called Succidaneae hostiae. The Victime that was
to be offered, was to remain near the Altar a little space of time, during
which the Priest did offer a set form of Prayer to Janus and Vesta* then he did
mark the Beast with his Knife from the Head to the Tail, and if it did appear
unruly, and unwilling to stay there longer, they did imagine that God would
have none of it, therefore they did fetch another. From hence comes immol^tio.
After these, and other frivolous Ceremonies, the Priest did lay upon his Head
and Back his mola salsa mingled with Frankincense, and did himself taste of a
cup of Wine, causing the This custom is called libatio. libare to taste.
Assistants to do the like. The remainder he did pour between the Horns of the
Beast, taking from that place a few hairs, which he did cast into the Fire, and
this was called Prima libamina. The Priest did then command an Officer to kill
the Beast, which he did by striking him Wine was unlawful in the Sacrifices of
Ceres. Plautus.
down, or by cutting his throat, The Assistants did then help to flea him, light
the wood, and do other inferior offices, while the Priest or Soothsayer with a
long knife did turn the Bowels up and down, to observe them better, and to tell
his judgment, for it was not lawful to handle the Bowels with the hands: After
this the Priest did cast some Frankincense in the Fire with Wine, and did take
that part of every member which his Ministers had cut out in a Platter called
Discus, or Lanx, to cast it into Natal. Com.
the Flames. This action was named Litare, to appease or satisfy with
Sacrifices. Whiles, this was a burning, the Priest, and the Person that did
give the Victime did jointly make their Prayers to the God, with their hands
upon the Altar. Afterward they did go aside with the Assistants, to Feast upon
the remaining part of the Beast, singing the Praises of their God. After the
Banquet, they did return to the Altar, and cast into the flames the morsels of
me at They did offer Sacrifices also to their deceased friends, a barren Cow
was killed: blood, with Wine was poured forth.
that were left, with the tongue, and some Wine, and then did return thanks to
the God for the Honor and advantage of sharing with him in the Victime offered
to him. The solemnity was concluded at Rome with Prayers to Janus and Vesta,
the Gods unto whose protection the Empire was chiefly recommended.

The hair of the living was cut off, and offered unto them, etc. Natal. Com.
These Sacrifices were performed in this manner, in honor to the Superior
Gods, un to whom they did pray standing, as they did to the Infernal sitting.

The Gods of the Air did require some alteration in the Sacrifices; for the
Heathens did adore them with musical Instruments, and melodious Songs, more
than the former. The Maritime Gods were worshipped near the Sea, and the blood
of the Victime was reserved in a Platter, to be poured forth into the salt
water, which was not practiced in the Offerings of the superior Gods. Unto the
Infernal Divinities Sacrifices were performed in the night; their Beasts were
black, and they were offered to them in some Cave or dark place, unless it be
The Priest of Pluto was clothed in black. Tenque novas circium felix eat
hostia fruges. Virg. Georg. lib. 1. Numero Deus impare gaudet.
to Pluto, whose Sacrifices did differ from the Celestial only in this; that
instead of Wine, they did pour Oil in the Fire, and the Priest was clothed in
black. Virgil takes notice, and so do many of the Greek Poets, that the Gods
did delight in the number Three; therefore they did three times drink in honor
of their Gods, and did walk round the Altar thrice.

(...). Appollon. lib. 3. Argo^.
Unto the Nymphs and Divinities of the Fields, the Heathens did usually offer
Milk, Honey, and sweet Wine in their Sacrifices: And to the Male Gods they did
usually kill male Beasts, and the Females to the Goddesses.

These are the Vessels used in the Sacrifices, and the proper names that are
found in the Authors for things with which we are not acquainted.

Thuribulum, was a long Pot like unto a Pitcher, in which Frankincense was
burned.

Rosinus.
Praefericulum, a Vessel of Brafs not much unlike the former.

Sympulum, was a little Cup out of which they did drink in the Sacrifices.

Capis and Capula, was a Cup with Ears.

Candelabrum, a Candlestick.

Patera, an open Dish or Platter.

Secespita, was a large chopping knife wit^ a long handle, to cut off the head
of the Beasts.

Dolabra, was another cutting Instrument.

Enclabria, were the Vessels of Brass put upon the Tables of the Gods.

Aspersorium, a Vessel with small holes to sprinkle the Holy Water.

Aquiminarium, or Amula, a Vessel proper to keep Holy Water.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Priests of the false Gods.
THE Heathens had always Priests, that is, certain Persons dedicated to the
service of the Gods, to render their Sacrifices and Religion more stately:
These had the overfight of the things offered to their Gods, and the care to
keep the Holy Vessels and Instruments.

The Curetes or Corybantes, who were also called the Gauls of Phrygia, were the
Priests of Cybele, as we have said in the 2. Chap. of the 1. Book. Vesta had
her Vestal Virgins established at Rome by Numa Pompilius, who gave unto them
their manner of living, their Laws, and commanded them to keep always burning a
Fire, dedicated to this Goddess; For as Florus takes notice, He appointed this
Holy Fire to keep a continual Watch and Guard for the safety and defense of the
Empire, as God had the Stars that shine in the Firmament for the good of the
World.

They did run naked about the streets, and the barren women did strive to touch
them, fancying a blow from them able to render them fruitful, See Juven. Satyr.
2.
There was another sort of Priests called Lupercales, instituted by Evander in
honor of Pan; and Romulus chose the children of Acca Laurentia, to offer
Sacrifices for the happy increase of the Fruits of the Earth: Unto them
therefore and their Successors, named Fratres Arvales, the people did make
their addresses on such occasions. Numa Pompilius established in Rome many
sorts of Priests, to give more splendour and credit to Religion, and the worship
of the Gods. The They were named Crepi a crepitu Scutorum, and Germani by
Cicero.
Priests of Mars were the Salij, because they did perform their Devotions always
in skipping. They were entrusted with that little Buckler named Ancile, which
was sent from Heaven as a Token, to confirm unto them the Empire of the World.
While that was safe, the Commonwealth was to suffer no harm, but to continue in
prosperity.

Not to trouble the Reader with all the distinctions and several kinds of
Priests, we must take notice, that the Kings did exercise the office of Priest,
that it might appear more Honorable; And in the Sacrifices there was an action
proper for them to perform. Therefore Numa fearing that in Process of time,
that the Kings might come to neglect it, by reason of the weighty Affairs of
War that might otherwise employ them, he established to every God one to supply
the Creabantur a populo Comitijs curiatis. A. Gel. lib. 15. cap. 27.
Kings place, named Flamen from Filamen a woolen thread that was usually tied
about their Temples. These Flamines did bear the name of their several Gods
unto whom they were consecrated: Jupiter's was called Flamen Dialis, and the
chief of Mars, Flamen Matialis, etc.

The Flamen of Jupiter was the most honorable; therefore he was admitted to
wear a white Hat, with a purple Gown, called Trabea, which was the clothing
only of the Gods, Kings, and Augures, or Soothsayers in performing their Office.

When the Kings were banished out of Rome, one of the Priestly order had the
name of King while he was doing his Function, that the People might not fancy
that there was something wanting amongst them in the worship of their Gods,
therefore they did acknowledge a Royalty in their Sacrifices, but none in the
Government of the Commonwealth.

In Rome Priests were established, not only to serve in the Temples, and at the
Altars: Some of them were appointed for public Affairs of State* As the
Feciales, who were to assist in the treaties of Peace made with foreign
Nations. It was not lawful to conclude any business of Peace or War, until they
had pronounced it just. When the War was intended against any Nation, the chief
of these Priests called Pater Patratus, was sent to declare it. And when the
Articles of Peace were concluded, he did appear before an Altar, with a Hog at
his Feet, which he did knock down, desiring the Gods, that those who did break
the Treaty by any hostility might perish miserably, as that Hog.

There were also in Rome several sorts of Soothsayers, whose Office was to
foretell the things to come, and to enquire into the will of the Gods when any
business of importance was in consultation. Some of them named Haruspices, did
draw their conjectures from the sight of the Entrails of the Victims offered to
the Gods. The Augures did Prophecy by the flying and motion of the Birds in
this manner. The Soothsayer did ascend upon some eminent place with the Augural
Robe upon his back, and in his hand a crooked staff called Lituus, with which
he did limit a certain space in the Air named Templum; the Birds that did fly
within this space, did intimate the things desired, and they were called
Praepetes: but the other Birds that were consulted when they did sing, were
named Oscines.

Certant addicere sorts. Ov* Metam. lib. 15.
It was also the custom of the Romans to Divine by little Chickens while they
were feeding; if they did greedily devour their meat in such a manner that a
part of it did fall again to the ground, they did esteem it a most happy sign.
This was called Terripavium, or Tripudium solistimum, because when the meat did
fall back again, it did strike the ground: if these Pullets did eat nothing, or
but slowly, they did interpret it for a dangerous sign. This is that which did
cause the Roman Armies to March or stay, and which did govern the Empire; for
it was not lawful to resolve upon any business of importance until these
Oracles had been consulted.

But Numa Pompilius established above all these Orders of Priests, a Society or
College of Eight Pontifs, with a Chief, who was Supreme; His office was to
regulate all the Ceremonies that did belong to the Worship of the Gods: He had
in his custody the Books of Sybilla Cumana; She was one of those Virgins who
did show an innocent life in the midst of the corruption of the Heathens. They
being all inspired from Named Amalthea.
Heaven, did foretell many of those things that relate unto Jesus Christ, and
unto the chief Mysteries of his Life. But the Heathens did shut their eyes to
these Truths; so that they never came to understand these Predictions till the
preaching of the Apostles when they left Idolatry.

In this Discourse of the Priestly Orders, we have only mentioned those that
are proper to the Romans, and that were in greatest credit. Amongst the Greeks,
and the other Nations of the World, there were some that did the same Offices.
Diodorus, Siculus, Julius Caesar in his Commentaries, Strabo, Berosus, and
others, do mention sufficiently the Druids, who had an inspection into all that
relate to the Worship of the Gods amongst the Gauls. They were so cruel, that
they did ordinarily murder Men upon the Altars of their Gods. At the end of the
year their custom was, to go with great Reverence, and gather branches and
leaves of Oak, to make a Present to Jupiter, inviting all the People to the
Ceremony by these words, which they caused to be proclaimed; Come to the Oak
branches. The new year.

These Druids had the Tutoring of the young Children, who did commonly remain
under their discipline, and in their keeping about twenty years. They did teach
them many Verses, which they did learn by heart without the assistance of any
writing. Those who had not been instructed by these Druids, were not esteemed
sufficiently qualifyed to manage the Affairs of State. In their General
Assemblies, they practiced that which Pliny relates of the Storks, who usually
tear in pieces the last that comes to their Meeting, to oblige the rest to be
more diligent. This Spirit of cruelty, natural to the Devils of Hell, did
appear, not only in the Sacrifices of these Men, but also in their Schools; for
it is reported of one of their Doctors, named Herophilus, that he did teach
Anatomy in his life, over the bodies of seven hundred living Men, that he
opened, only to show the secrets and wonders of Nature.

Addit. Not.
The Superstitions of the Heathens were invented at several times, and by many
persons. It is probable, that Javan the Son of Japhet, did establish a Religion
in Graecia, where he fixed; but I cannot imagine how Noah, unto whom some do
attribute the names of Janus, Saturnus, Gallus, Vertumnus, Oenetrius, etc.
should leave his Vineyards and Plantations in Asia, to seek others in Italy,
unless he had been forced out of his Habitation by his Sons, which is not
likely; Therefore as Javan first planted in Graecia, and established Religion
there, we must imagine after the confusion of Babel, some did settle in Italy,
and appoint the Worship of the true God, for several ancient writers do assure
us, that the first Men of the world had neither Images nor Statues, nor any
visible representation to adore: In process of time, it is likely Religion was
neglected in Italy by the Parents, who did rather mind their worldly affairs,
than the eternal concern of their Childrens Souls: when the Country was
peopled with Inhabitants, Saturnus arrived out of Crete, and taught the People
a Religion suitable to the weakness of their Capacities, and the ignorance in
which he found them. The Posterity of Ham that planted in Egypt and Africa
first brought in the corruptions of Idolatry, as we may read Herodot.
in Herodotus; from thence the ignorant Phoenicians borrowed them, and
recommended them to the Greeks, who taught them to the Romans, and so they
spread by degrees all over the world. Ro^^aus.
Evander is said to be the first who established a Priestly Order in Italy.
Afterward Aeneas, Sil. Ital.
Romulus, and Numa Pompilius did increase the number of Religious men,
according to the number of the Gods whom they did worship. When Rome was in its
Zenith of Glory and Power, these were the Names and Offices of their Priests.

I shall not mention the Corybantes, the Lupercales, the Vestal Virgins, and
those that are named before.

Petitij and Pinarij were the Priests of Hercules, so named of two old men
called Petitius Rosin. lib. 3. C. 4.
and Pinarius, who were the first who entered into the Office.

Titij, Sodales, were Priests of Apollo, as Farnabius upon Lucan imagines, they
were Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 1. in fine.
properly Soothsayers, who did foretell from the motion of certain Birds the
events of the time to come, as may appear by Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.

There were several sorts of Flamines, the chief was that of Jupiter, called
Dialis, who had many extraordinary privileges, and a great power in the City.

The next was Flamen Martialis, of Mars, who was to be of the Family of the
Senators, Salios duodecim Marti gradivo Legit, etc. T. Livius. lib. 1
as Volcanalis was of a Plebeian race. Every God had a Flamen or Chief Priest,
in process of time.

ae Salij, were the Priests of Mars; their Governor was named Magister
Saliorum.

The Duumviri were under the chief parties appointed to keep the Books of the
Sybils,
Duumviri and Decemviri, were those that did keep the Books of Sybilla Cumana,
in a Chest of Stone in the Capitol, when they were burnt with the Temple. These
Men were continued, and increased to fifteen; therefore they were called
Quindecemviri. It did belong to their Office to oelebrate the Secular
Solemnities.

Rosin. Ant. Romans lib. 3.
Epulones, Were the Overseers of all sacred Banquets, appointed by the
Pontifices.

Camilli and Camillae, were under Officers in the Sacrifices.

Aeditumus, or Aedituus, is He that kept the Temples, and the Keys in his
possession.

Call. Rhodig. ver. Lestion.
Popae, are the under Officers, who did tie the Beasts in the Sacrifices. They
were called also Victimarij.

Praeficae, are the Women that were hired to weep for the dead.

Designator was he who did order the Funeral.
Vespa and Vespillo, was he that did place the Vrns or Ashes of the dead in the
ground.

Pater Patratus, the chief of the Feciales, did declare the War, by casting
upon the Land of the Enemy a Lance bloody at the end; Therefore Ovid* lib. 6.
Fast.

Hinc solet hasta manu belli praenuncia mitti

In Regem, and Gentes, cum placet arma capi.

The College of Chief Priests was over all the rest. Their Pontifex maximus,
the first of their Order was created by the People, until the time of the
Emperors, then this Title was annexed to the Chief Magistracy. When the
Emperors became Christians, they were called Pontifices maximi, nntil the time
of Gratianus, Bonis avibus, vel malis avibus agredi aliquid, Prove.
as Zofimus informs us. This Order was not subject to any Magistrate; they did
command over all the Priests, and did appoint the Ceremonies belonging to the
worship of the Gods.

The Books of the Sybils so often mentioned in the Authors, were Three, She was
a Prophetess who dwelt in a Cave near Cumes in Italy, far from all acquaintance
and society of Men. When she had composed nine Books of Folium recitare
Sybillae. Juvenal. Sat. 8. Her Oracles were written upon the leaves of a Tree.
the time to come, she brought them to Tarquinius Priscus to be sold, and asks
about three hundred pounds for them, which he refused to give, she burnt three
of the Books, and required yet the same price; but the King would not disburse
so much, she went away, and burnt three more, and then returned to demand the
same rate for her Books, which when the King had well considered, by the advice
of his Soothsayers, be gave her the money. In all difficult occasions these
Books were examined by the order of the Senate. We have yet some fragments of
this Sybil gathered out of several writers.

There are nine or ten Sybils in all; They did Prophesy concerning Christ so
plainly, that we have cause to suspect the Greek Verses that bear their name,
to be written after our Saviors Death. There have been Sybilla Persica, Lybica
mentioned by Euripid. Delphica, Cumana, Erythraea, Samia, Tyburtina,
Hellespontica, Phrygia, and Cumaea.

CHAP. V.
Of the Festival days that were appointed in Honor of the Gods.
THE Festival Solemnities of the Heathens were suitable to their belief and
fancy of the Gods; and the Ceremonies that they used, were nothing but
expressions of things proper to the Divinity whose Festivals they did keep. As
we have already taken notice, when we have spoken of Cybele, and of Bacchus. In
the Festival of Ceres, her Worshippers did run up and down with lighted Torches
in their hands, because that she did in this manner run about the world after
her Daughter Proserpina to seek her out* The Inhabitants of Eleusis in Greece,
appointed this Ceremony that was to be acted only by Women, who did in the
Temple of Ceres commit a thousand shameful pranks* And because Ceres did not
reveal her secrets, nor discover her design, until she had heard of her
Daughters welfare, it was not lawful to declare what was acted in her Temple
during the Festival. We cannot without blushing speak of the liberty that the
Roman Dames did take in the Festivals of Venus and Priapus. In some places on
the days consecrated to Pallas the Goddess of War, the Damsels were commanded
to meet together, and fight one against another, until some did fall dead to
the ground. At Rome in the Festival of the Lupercals, the Priests did run naked
about the streets with Goat skins in their hands, because heretofore the Romans
did happily recover their Beasts when they did run in this manner after them
who had driven them away, whiles they were sacrificing to the God Pan, whose
Priests were named Luperci, from the place Lupercal was the place where Romulus
and R. were nourished by a Bitch.
where his Altars were erected, called Lupercal.

The Saturnalia, were Festival days instituted at Rome in honor of Saturn, in
the month of December; while they lasted, the People did send gifts to their
friends, and the Slaves did Lord it over their Masters, and commit many
extravigancies and disorders.

The Greeks were mightily addicted to the observance of these Festival days;
as the Athenians in keeping their Panathenea, that were appointed in honor of
Minerva.

The Egyptians did consecrate their greatest solemnities to the God Apis, or
Serapis, which was an Ox, bearing upon his hide some particular marks: He was
to live a certain number ofyears, and then the Priests did drown him in the
River Nilus, and all the Land did mourn and lament for his death, until another
was found with the same marks upon him, which caused an universal rejoicing all
over the Country, expressed by all manner of Sports and Banquets.

Thus the other Nations did dedicate Festivals in honor of their Gods, to such
as were proper to certain places, called Indigetes; as also to their Domestic
Divinities, and to those illustrious Men, who were enrolled among the number of
their Gods. These last when they were consecrated by an Apotheosis, were also
named Indigetes dij, because they were freed from all want of earthly things.

The Consecration, was a Ceremony invented by the Romans in favor of their
Emperors, unto whom they did pay Divine honors: The manner of it is thus
described by Rosinus, and by Herodianus. The Body of the Emperor being buried
according to the usual custom, his Effigies of Wax was placed at the entry of
the Palace upon a large bed of Ivory, sumptuously adorned: The Physicians did
visit it during seven days, and treat it as if it were alive in the fit of
sickness. In the mean while all the Senate and Nobility of Rome were present in
mourning Habits. When these days were expired he was held for dead; therefore
they did transport him to a public place, where the Magistrates did quit their
Offices, there the new Emperor was wont to ascend to a high Pulpit, called
Rostra, because it was adorned with the Sterns of Ships taken from the enemies
in Sea Fights; from hence he did make a Funeral oration in hononur of the
deceased. Afterward they did carry this Image of the Emperor out of the City
to the Field of Mars, where a Pile of Aromatic wood was erected to burn it: in
the mean while the Roman Gentlemen did ride round several times in order. At
last the new Emperor with a Torch did set the Pile of wood in a flame; At the
same time an Eagle was dismissed from the top of it, which was imagined to carry
the Soul of this new God into Heaven.

When this Apotheosis or Conseration was ended, the People did Feast and divert
themselves with all manner of sports. And this day was appointed as a Festival
day, to be employed in particular Sacrifices or in Feasting before the Gods, as
we have said in the second Chapter; or in seeing all sorts of Plays.

Addit. Not.
The Festival days of Rome were many; these were the chief* The Kalends of
every Month were dedicated to Juno. On the first of January Strenae. New years
gifts
the Romans did send gifts to their friends, with good wishes for their health.
In this Month were the Agonalia, dedicated to the God of Action.

Carmentalia, in honor of Carmenta Evenders Mother. In the following Months
were the Terminalia, Consecrated to Dues Terminus. The Idus, or the 15th day of
March, in which Julius Caesar was murdered, was named Parricidium.

They were instituted by Romulus after the murder of his Brother Remus, and
called Remuria. Ovid. lib. 5. Fast.
Lemuria, in which they did Sacrifice to the Hobgoblins, was in May.

Bellonaria, were the Festivals of Bellona, in which the Priests did offer to
her nothing but their own blood. Lucan lib. 1. Phars. -- quos sectis Bellona
lacertis: Saeva movet --

Every God had a Festival appointed for him, called by his name, Ovid in his
Fast. mentions them all.

Juvenilia, were appointed by Ne^o at the first shaving of his Beard.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Plays of Greece appointed in Honor of the Heathen Gods.
THE Plays and the Combats in which the youth exercised themselves anciently,
were not invented only to fit men for the War, or to divert the People; but
they were instituded in Honor of the Gods, whose Festivals were kept with such
kind of fports. Therefore they did begin them in sacrificing to the Gods, and
did finish them in the same manner. Besides Homerus tells us how in the Temples
they did exercise themselves at many petty Plays, when he speaks of those who
did handle the Dice before the Altars of Minerva. He informs us how Palamedes
invented in the Siege of Troy, the play of Chess, not only to entertain the
Soldiers in action, but also to instruct them in the craft of War; so that this
was received instead of the play of Dice, which remained afterward amongst
none, but the ra^cality of the Army; for the Persons of Quality did commonly
pass the time away with this sort of Play, which was also used in the Temples
of the Gods.

Amongst the Combats and public Plays, besides the Instruments of Music, and
the Songs, there was the running in a Race, one of the most Ancient and chief
of the Exercises. The next was Skipping. The third was the casting of the
Stone, or of the Bar, which was of Iron, or of Brass, round, and of a
considerable weight; They who did cast it highest, or farthest, did get the
prize. The fourth kind of Play was Wrestling; when two Antagonists anointed
over with (...), vel (...). Harpastum, was round and rold on the ground. Sive
Harpasta manu pulverulenta rapis. Mart. in lib 4. (...), is either the place or
the exercise. (...), is the place where they did learn.
Oil, and all naked, did strive to cast one another to the ground. The fifth was
the dispute at Cuffs, the Combatants, named Pugiles, did tie about their hands
hard thongs of an Oxes hide, called (...). These last Plays were named
Gymnici, because the Parties did fight all naked. Palaestra, was the place
where they did exercise themselves to attain to a perfect Activity. The Masters
who did teach there, were called Gymnastae. Some were wont to act in 5 sorts of
Plays, (...) the sive sorts of Combats. (...) because they did employ all
their strength.
they had therefore in Greek the name of Pentathletae; such as did overcome
were styled Pancratiastes. This word is taken also for a strong wrestler.

The four General Assemblies, or sacred Games that were so famous in Greece,
and that were kept constantly at the appointed times for a long while, did
consist of no other sports. The most Illustrious, and the chief were the
Olympic Games, instituted by Hercules in Honor of Jupiter Olympius near the
City Olympia in the Province of Elide. There the Conquerors did receive no
other reward than a Crown, made with a Branch of an Olive Tree. Every five
years they did meet upon the place. Afterward the Pythian Games were
Consecrated to Apollo, in remembrance of the Serpent Python, that was killed by
him. In these the Conquerors were Crowned with Laurel. The Isthmian Games,
dedicated in the Isthmus of Corinth to Neptunus, were appointed by Theseus;
(...)
There the Conquerors were Crowned with the Pine Tree.

The fourth sort of Games kept in the Nemaean Forest, were instituted in
honor of Hercules, who had so valiantly overcome a Lion in that place. Some
say that these last Games were ordained in remembrance of Achemorus the Son of
King Licurgus; for when the Men of Argos did march with Adrastus against
Thebes, the Nurse of this little Prince having laid him down upon the grass
near a Plant of Smallage, to show the Army where they might recover some Water,
they being extremely afflicted with thirst in this place; A great Serpent in
the mean while killed him. Adrastus and the Captains of his Army after this
mischance, appointed these solemn Games in honor of the Child, to be
celebrated every five years, to comfort his afflicted Father Licurgus,
commanding that the Judges should appear in mourning, and that the Conquerors
Crown should be of hence the Prove. Herbam dare to acknowledge the victory.
Smallage. At last after a certain number of years: Besides these five kinds of
Exercises, ^amed Pancrace, or the Quinquertium. The Horse-race was added, and
the running with Chariots, which was performed in a Hippodromus, called
Stadium, because (...), or (...).
of its length, that was of one or more Furlongs; as also Circus, because it was
of an Oval Figure; from hence these sports were named Circenses in Latin.

The Circus of the Olympic Games, had the River Alpheus on one side, and the
other was Armed with naked Swords stuck in the ground. The place from whence
the Runners departed, was named Carceres; And many times there was nothing but
a Line, or a small Cord stretched before them, to keep in the Horses that waited
for the singal to run* In this manner they were kept in together, until they
did depart toward the Butt, where an Obeliscus, or a low Pillar was erected:
They were to run seven times round about it before they could deserve the
Prize. And if it did happen by mischance, that these Chariots in turning round,
did but touch at the Pillar, or at the other Chariots, they were immediately
broken to pieces, for they did run, and were drawn in a very furious manner.

They who did run on Horseback, did often lead two together; They were so
dexterous and so quick, that in the Race they did sometimes skip from one Horse
to another; for that cause they were named Desultores or Desultorij: From hence
it is that the Romans did borrow their Proverb, Desultoriae naturae homines,
that is, Men of a changing nature. Some intelligent and wise persons were
chosen in these Games, named (...)
Hellanodicks to be Judges, and to assign the Prize to him to whom it was due.
They who did obtain the Victory, were received in State into the Cities of
their habitations. It was the custom to cast down a part of the Wall for them
to enter in with more Glory and Pomp.

About this time there were in Greece, Athletes or Combatants of incredible
strength, as Milon of Crotone, and Polydamas. Arrichion was another, who is
mentioned amongst the Pictures of Philostrates. Although this last had been
cast to the ground, in a condition ready to breath forth his last gasp, he did
nevertheless destroy his adversary, and deserve the Prize of the Combat.

Milon carried a Bull of two years old upon his shoulders all along the
Stadium, and then knock^ him down with a blow of his Fist: Besides, it is
reported of him, that he eat up the Beast the same day. He held a Pomegranate
so fast in his hand without bruifing it, that no body was able to take it from
him. He did stand upon the decline of a little Rock with his feet close
together, and no man was able to remove him from thence: But at last, having
undertaken in a Forest to separate with his hands the two parts of a Tree slit
in the middle; he partly performed his enterprise, but they came together so
suddenly, that he was caught between them in such a manner, that he could never
free himself, so that he was there devoured by Wolves for want of assistance.

Polydamas in his young days caught hold of a Lion in Mount Olympus, and
strangled him with his hands. He did catch a strong Bull, one of the most
furious of the Country, and did hold him so by his tail, that he could not move
a jot forward. Thus he did stay with his hands a Chariot which was drawn by
strong Horses. We read also in Plinius, of a certain Valens, a Captain of the
Emperor Augustus, who was able to perform such like actions.

These Games and Exercises of Greece, did cause them to be such good Soldiers,
that with a small number of Men, they did defeat Millions of the Army of
Persia, who came against their country.

Addit. Not.
When virtue meets with reward and encouragement, it strives to excel. Rome
never had more worthy Generals, than when they were honored with the Triumph;
nor Greece never had more stout and valiant Soldiers, than when they were
recompensed with the esteem and applauses of Men, and with the Crowns of
Victory. Milon mentioned before, was a famous Combatant, and Polydamas the Son
of Nicias of Thessaly, had purchased by his actions so much the esteem and fame
of the World, that Darius having sent for him to see some visible testimony of
his strength, He knocked down in his presence three of the ablest Soldiers of
his Guard; but he was afterward stifled in a Cave, for neglecting to come out
when the ground did fa^ down upon him. Theagenes was another man noted for his
strength. Euthymus was another brave Champion; born at Locres in Italy.

CHAP. VII.
The public Pastimes of the Romans.
MAny Nations did imitate the Greeks in these sort of Sports, but especially
the Romans, from the first foundation of their Empire; for they did then
prepare Called Circus Maximus, ve Hippodromus.
many places to run, called Circus. The most noted was made by the command of
King Tarquinius Priscus, of 3 Furlongs in length. Euripus is properly the
strait Sea between Greece and Negropont.
Julius Caesar adorned it with stately and sumptuous Buildings, and with many
brave and pleasant Channels of clear water, called Euripi. All the multitude of
Beholders did see about without any let; for they did sit upon steps that were
placed one above another, rising in the manner of a Hill, so that the foremost
were no hinderance to the hindermost.

All Orders of Men had their places assigned unto them. The People were
separate from the rest; the Nobless, the Roman Gentry, and the Magistrates
according to their qualities, did take their seats.

The nearest, and the most convenient Place, was the Orchestra. Before it a
large Platform did stand named Podium, where the Emperors Throne was usually
seated. The Senate, the Tribunes of the People, and the Vestal Virgins were
placed in this Orchestra; (...)
And he also who did appoint the sport, and did furnish the expense necessary to
it, He was styled Editor, Munerarius, Agonotheta, or Brabeuta. And the Prize
that was bestowed upon the Conquerors, was called Brabium or Brabeum.

In the beginning of the Empire, the Kings were always the Agonothetae,
afterward that Office did devolve to the Praetor, in whose absence a Dictator
was created for this purpose. And when the Empire was arrived to its highest
Grandeur, not only the Emperors, Titus Livius.
but also the Consuls, and other Magistrates, did gratify the People with such
kind of sports at their first admittance into their employments.

The Romans did affect so much these Pastimes, that they did spend the days and
the nights to see them, without caring for eating or drinking. It is ttue, that
they who did give these sports, did also feast the People at the same time.

And although from all parts of Greece they did meet at the Olympic Games,
they were nothing near so sumptuous and stately as the Romans in their sports*
for they had not so many Combatants, nor Spectators, nor the Place was not so
glorious nor beautiful; and there was no Pomp in Greece to usher in the
Champions, as in Rome. For in this City all the Statues of the Gods, and of the
Worthies of the Empire were carried before, and then the Chariots followed in a
great number, succeeded by the Spoils that had been taken from the Enemies, and
by all the precious Jewels and Ornaments that were laid upin the Treasury-house
of the Empire: After this Train, the Priests, and Augures, and Pontifs did
march in good order, to Sacrifice to some of the Divinities according to the
times and occasions The Secular Games were every hundredth year; therefore the
public Crier, who was sent to invite the People to them, did Proclaim that
they were such Sports as none alive had ever ^een, nor should ever see again.

Time brought many alterations to these Pastimes of the Romans; for besides the
Gymnick Fights, and the Horse and Chariot Races, they did invent the Butchery
of the Gladiators, and the Naumachias, or the fight of Ships, and the hunting
of diverse sorts of Beasts; for that purpose they erected large Amphitheatres,
whereof the manner of building Called Visoria, because they were built
handsomely for all to see. The Seats were called Cunei from their form. Arena
vocatur etiam Cavea.
was much like unto that of the Circus, in respect of the disposition of the
degrees and steps, where the Beholders were seated, for the form of them was
almost round, approaching to an Oval. The sports were represented in the
middle, and at the bottom called Arena, because this place was covered over
with Sand, that the Blood that was there spilt might the sooner sink down out
of sight, and that it might be more easy for them to cover it by stirring up
the Sand.

In the bottom of these Amphitheatres, were large Caves and Dens for to keep
the wild Beasts, or to receive the water, upon which they did represent many
Sea fights; a little higher were the Vaults, and the Stairs by which they did
ascend to the seats. The entrance of these vaulted Galleries, were called
Vomitoria, because of the multitude of People who did commonly burst out of
that place at the end of the sports. They who by their late arrival were
excluded out of the seats, were named Excuneati, because they did shift
themselves into several corners, where they did see standing:

The Emperor Vespasian built an Amphitheatre of Stone, which was finished by his
Son Titus: It was able to hold ninety thousand spectators sitting, with twenty
thousand more upon their legs.

The chief sport of the Amphitheatre was that of the Gladiators or Fencers, who
were appointed to divert the People in spilling their own blood, in the same
manner as the Duellists of our time; A cruel custom introduced Bustuarij glad,
were those that did fight at the death of Noble Men.
by the Devil. Heretofore it was used only at the great Funerals, as we have
taken notice; but afterward it came to be an ordinary practice, for according
to the times, or the greatness of him who gave these Pastimes to the People,
you should have seen many hundreds of these Combatants appear upon the Sand one
after another. This extravigancy or inhumanity was so great, that some Emperors
gave a thousand, the others ten thousand Fencers, that they might fight and
continue the slaughter, to divert the People many days.

These Fencers were for the most part Slaves, kept for this bloody purpose. And
before they did bring them out, they were wont to send them to a Fence-master,
called Lanista, to prepare them for this Exercise. Their Fencing-School was
styled Batualia, where they did learn to handle the weapons, with a wooden
Sword called Rudis; so that rudibus batuere, is to Fence or Exercise with this
kind of Instrument.

These were named Thraces, or Parmularij, from their Target parma. Just. Lyps.
Tunicati Retiarij vel Laquearij
Now these Gladiators were of several sorts, some did fight only with a naked
sword in the right hand, and a Buckler in the left; others did appear in
perfect Armor; some did march to the encounter blindfold. These were named
Andabates. Others, called Retiarij, did make use of a Nett to trapan their
Adversaries. The Myrmillones had on the Named otherwise Galli, because they did
imitate the Gauls. Essedarij, were they who sought in Wagons. Familia, is
taken for a company of Fencers and their guardian, is called Pater familias.
top of their Cask the representation of a Fish: And if it did happen that they
were caught and wrapped into the Nett, it was not possible for them to escape
death.

Amongst these Gladiators, sometimes Dwarfs, called Pumiliones, were produced
to act their parts. And although these men were the basest and vilest sort of
People; many Roman Gentlemen, Members of the Senate, and Emperors also, did
often forget themselves so much, and undervalue their Persons, as to fight in
the Arena, and divert the multitude with the loss of their Honor.

He that did overcome, was wont to kill his Antagonist, if the spectators did
not save his life with the bended Thumb lifted up, by which they did make known
their pleasure; and when they did open the Thumb straight, it was a sign of
condemnation.

The oldest Fencers did obtain their freedom, and such as had given any
testimony of their valor and activity. This was the ceremony made use of in
this occasion: A wooden Sword was delivered into their hands. Sometimes they
did afterward engage themselves to fight for a Sallery, called Author amentum;
and he who did promise and swear for this Money to hazard his life, was styled
Authoratus, as they who had performed their oath and engagement, were called
Exauthorati.

The Chase of wild Beasts was one of the most pleasant Pastimes of the Circus,
or of the Amphitheatre when it was built. Sometimes three or four hundred
Lions, or a hundred Austriches were to be seen at once. The Emperor Titus
caused five thousand of thirty sorts of Beasts to enter into the Amphitheatre
in one day; Amongst them were Lions, Elephants, Wolves, Bulls, wild Boars,
Leopards, Rhinocerot's, etc. They did cause many times these Beasts to fight
one against another: Sometimes they did employ men to encounter them, and
sometimes they did expose unto these furious creatures both Men and Women, that
they might have the pleasure to see them torn in pieces and devoured. Many
Christians have thus ended their days for the Faith of Jesus Christ. Sometimes
they did bring into the middle of the Amphitheatre a pleasant Forest full of
these wild Beasts running up and down, and did cause at the same time several
artificial Pipes to be opened, to fill the Air with excellent scents and
perfumes, so that all the Assistants were embalmed to their great satisfaction.
Sometimes with certain Engines called Pegmata; they did show the burning of
Cities, bloody Battles, and many other wonderful things that did pass away in a
moment. They did cover the tops of these Amphitheatres with sheets of fine
Linen, or of Silk of a prodigious largeness, to keep (...) the violence of the
Sunbeams from the Beholders; And the Emperors did often cast among the crowd
many things wrapped up, when they were unfolded, they who did take them up did
find some precious Jewel, which he did bestow upon them; So that it is no
wonder if Titus at one time expended no less then eighty millions of money in
the sports that he gave to the Romans.

The third sort of Pastime of the Amphitheatre, was the Race, and the encounter
or fight of Galleys, that did sail in it as upon a Sea, sometimes it was all of
wine. Upon it they did represent the Tritons, the Sirens, who did sing most
delightfully, and play many pleasant tricks. It is reported, that they did
bring upon this Sea true Whales, and other Sea Monsters alive.

The Theater was not like the Circus, or Amphitheatre, although the People did
sit in it in the same manner; for the Theater was only for Stage Players, Hocus
pocus's, and Buffoons, for Musical Songs, for Dances, for Active tricks, and
all manner of Juglings, but especially for Comedies and Tragedies.

Proscenium, was before the Scene where a Pulpit was erected.
The Scene of these Theaters, that is to say, that part of them that did appear
in the Front, did turn round, supported upon Pillars, that the variety suitable
to the change of the Subject, and of the Actions, (especially in Tragedies)
might give more delight. The Comic Scene did resemble particular Houses, and
the Satyrick did represent Mountains, Caves, Trees, and Fountains.

Pliny informs us how Glorious and Magnificent were the ornaments of the
Theater, which Scaurus built. Another named Curio, could not equal him in Pomp
and Glory; but he did surpass him by the excellency of the Fabric, for he
built two Theaters able to contain all the People of Rome sitting, without
difficulty. They did turn round upon Beams in such a manner that they did join
together in the form of an Amphitheatre.

Pompeius built another that was far more stately than any erected by his
Predecessors; In Pompeiano ^ormis Levine Theatro. Mart. lib. 6.
for his Theater, as Tertullian says, did not yield to any other building of
the World in Glory. He dedicated it to Venus, and built also a Temple in Honor
of this Goddess.

But all these sports that were instituted chiefly for the Festivals of the
Gods, did represent only their Adventures, their Loves, their Thefts and
abominable debaucheries: As the Encounters of the Circus, and of the
Amphitheatre, did stir up the minds of Men to cruelty. By this means the Devils
did entertain the world in the belief and worship of the false Gods, and did
keep up a Public School, for men to be instructed in all manner of crimes, for
they did cause them to pass for gallant Acts, and did encourage the imitation
of them, by imputing them to the Gods whom they did adore.

Now that we have past through the Relation of so many disorders, which the
ignorance of the true God, and our Sins have caused in the world, we cannot end
it more advantageously, than in rendering unto our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
the Honor of having happily triumphed over these impieties upon the Cross; and
especially for that he has withdrawn us out of the dangerous Abyss of so much
wickedness by his Infinite Goodness, and has called us to the enjoyment of the
light of his Gospel.

Addit. Not.
The Sports and Plays of the Romans do deserve our further consideration.
There were two sorts, private and public: The private were many, whereof these
are the chief.

Latrunculi, the play at Chess; the Board is called Latrunculorum tabula,
invented by Called also Calculi palamediaci.
Palamedes at the Siege of Troy, to exercise the Soldiers in the art of War,
and of encountering an Enemy; and therefore the Play borrows its name from
Latrones, an old word for Soldiers. Martial. lib. 14.
Insidiosorum si ludis bell^ latronum
In Greek (...) unde (...) and (...) ta^is ludere.
Gemmeus iste tibi miles and hostis er


Tali and Tesserae, the Play at Dice was in use amongst the Romans and Greeks.
They did roll them in a little Box of Horn called Horace lib. 3. Od. 24.
Expellere pilam, to strike the ball. Tesseramilitaris, is the watchword of an
Army. Frumentaria, a Ticket to get Corn. Nummaria, to get Money. Tessara
hospitalis, was a Token, by which Friends and their Children did claim the
rights of Hospitality; therefore Tessaram hospitij frangere, is to break the
Laws of Hospitality. Tessera is also a Dye, and Talus a knuckle-bone.
Cornea, Pixis, Fritillus, Fimus, Turriculus, and Orca. This Play is called
Alea, it was prohibited by the Romans in the Festivals of Saturn.

Pila or Sphaera, is the Ball which was invented to exercise the body of the
young and lusty men; and not only Children, but also Princes and Worthy
Commanders did excel in this sort of Play, as Titus Livius notes of M. Scevola.

The Discus, the Harpastum, and the Halteres, were things of great weight,
which the Romans to show their strength, did cast from them.

Petaurum, was the Wheel handled by two, in such a manner, that one of them was
always under, while the other did skip through.

Cael. Rhodig. Var. Lect.
Par and impar, Even or Odd, was the sport of Children; as also Trochus a Top.
Martial. Capita vel navim, they called cross and pile Lege Rosin. de Ludis Romans
lib. 5. Antiq.
Iste Trochus pueris, at mihi cantus erit.


The Public Plays and Sports were invented to divert and oblige the People of
Rome; or they were appointed in honor of the Gods.

The latter were celebrated in the Circus, Amphitheatre, or Theater at certain
times of the year, at the Festival of the Divinities, unto whom they were
dedicated.

Pur^ura Megalensis Proverb. A stately Garment.
Ludi Megalenses, were the Sports instituted in honor of Ceres about the
beginning of April; in which the Roman Magistrates did appear in their Purple
Robes.

Turba quidem cur hos celebret meretricia Ludos, non ex, etc. Ovid. Fast. lib.
5.
Ludi Apollinares were in honor of Apollo. Ludi Florales were didicated to the
famous Strumpet Flora; On this Festival the Whores of Rome did run naked about
the streets, and were called together with the sound of a Trumpet.

Ludi Cereales were in honor of Ceres; they were to be performed in white
Garments.

Ludi Capitolini were consecrated to Jupiter Capitolinus. Consuales ludi, to
Neptune.

They were named Tarentini Ludi, from a place in Rome. Poeanas Canere, is to
sing praises to Apollo
Ludi Seculares were performed every hundred years during three days, in
honor of Diana and of Apollo. The young Virgins and Men were wont at this time
to sing Hymns to Apollo.

Ludi Plebei were appointed in favor of the People, for the remembrance of the
happy union of the People and Senate.

Ludi Compitalitij were Plays and Dances in the streets, acted by the ordinary
People in Honor of their Lares. Palatini ludi, were so called from the place
where they were kept.

called Bupetitia and Boalia.
Taurij ludi were ordained in honor of the infernal Gods by the first
Tarquinius, in remembrance of a great Plague that happened in his Reign.

Vota nunc^pare, or facere, to make a Vow.
Ludi votivi were sports promised by the Roman Magistrates, in honor of a God,
upon condition that they did obtain the victory of their Enemies. The Vow was
put in writing, Damnatus voto bound to the performance of a Vow.
and fixed to the Statue of the God with Wax; and this was called signare vota*
therefore the Poet says, Genua incerare Deorum to express this action.

Now these Plays and solemn Pastimes were sometimes kept in the Circus, near
the Walls of Rome, and therefore called Ludi Circenses, in which these are the
most remarkable particulars. In Thensis dij vehebantur.
Pompa the stately Procession of the Roman Gods, that were carried about, and
followed by the Images of all the Worthies, by Chariots, Pageants, Chairs of
State, Crowns, and the spoils of Enemies. Sponsiones, were Factiones Ruslatae,
Albatae, Venetae, and Prussinae.
the Wagers that were laid. Factiones, were the Players or Actors, who were
divided into four parts, and therefore they were to be distinguished with
different colors. At the end the Victors were crowned, and a public Crier
Virgil. lib. 5.
was ordered to go along, to declare the name of him who had won the Victory.

Besides these sports, there were also the Plays of the Theater, called Ludi
Scenici, Stage Plays, which are either Mimicae, Satyrae, Mimical, Satirical,
Tragical, and Comical, i. e. Planipedes, because their Feet were naked.
Attellanae, so named from Atella, a little town of Italy, from whence the
Satirical Actors did first come. Praetextatae, did wear a Robe named Praetexta.
They were called Tragaedia, because the Actors had a Goat (...) bestowed upon
them in regard of their pains.
Comoediae, or Tragoediae; or as the Romans do call them, Planipedes,
Attellanae, Praetextatae, and Tabernariae. The two latter do remain amongst us;
but we do not follow in the composure the strict Rules that the Romans did
prescribe in their Tragaedies and Comedies. The Actors were called Mimi,
Copreae, Parafiti, Saniones, Histriones, Pantomimi; all these are infamous
names, to denote the Flatterers, the Of them Plaut. says, Albo Rete aliena
captant bona.
Buffoons, the Fools, and Tale-bearers, who were admitted to the Feasts of the
Romans, to make the company merry.

But we must not forget to take notice of the difference between the Tragoedy,
and the Comoedy: The former did treat of Bloodshed, Ovid. lib. 3. Amor Eleg. 1.
Cruelties, Murder, etc. The other of some merry and pleasant story. Scaliger
mentions four parts in a Comoedy and Trag. Protasis, the Prologue; Epitasis,
the Entrance into the Story, or the appearance of the Actors; Catastasis, is
that part in which the design of the Comoedy is clouded with unexpected
passages. Catastrophe, is the conclusion. Chorus, is the Dance and Music.

Besides these Plays, there were also among the Romans, Ludi Castrenses, and
Trojani, Named Trojani ludi, from Ascanius, who brought the custom out of Troy,
Virg. lib. 5. Aeneid.
which were for the young Men, and Soldiers to exercise themselves at all manner
of Sports. They had a Captain over them of the Noblest Families of Rome, called
Princeps Juventutis, and they did sometimes skirmish and represent the order of
a Battle. Their Dance was named Pyrrhica Saltatio, because they did dance with
Sueton. cap. 39. de Julio Caesar.
their arms as Pyrrhus Son of Achilles in Homer.

There was always some judicious person chosen to overlook the Players, and see
that they might have fair play; He was called Campi-Doctor, or Monitor; so that
when any did appear either negligent or disorderly, he had the care to chastise
him.

The most cruel Sports were acted by the Gladiators, (...)
who were trained up, and reserved by several Noblemen for this bloody purpose.
Their Lords did signify to the People the time intended for these Pastimes, by
causing it to be published by a Crier, and by fixing Bills at the corner of the
streets.

When the Fencers were entered into the Lusoria tela emittere, or ventilare, to
jest with weapons; Decretorijs armis, vel versis armis certare, is to fight in
earnest. Palma Lemniscata.
Arena, their custom was before they did fight in earnest, to show their
activity, by casting Darts at one another, as in play; And when they had got
the Victory, they were sometimes received amongst the Citizens, a Hat, and then
a badge of Freedom was given unto them, with a Crown of Palm Tree tied with
Ribbons, called Lemnisci, and a wooden Sword of Exercise called Rudis,
mentioned before. Ovid. Amor. lib. 2.
Tutaque sed posito poscitur ense rudis.


A Treatise of the Roman Antiquities, and of the difficult Names relating to
their Affairs not mentioned by Gautruche.
CHAP. I.
Of the City and People of Rome.
Dion. lib. 1. Otho Frising. lib. 2. cap. 3.
ROME is not so Ancient as Famous. It was built about 4103 years after the
Creation of the World, in the days of Salmanassar the Eusebius. Chron.
King of Assyria, and of the Sea Tit. Livius. concerning the beginning of Rome.
Captivity of Israel, by Romulus and Remus, two Brothers, the Bastards of Rhea
Sylvia. The first Inhabitants were out Shepherds, and such mean People, that
Nutricemque Lupam Romae. Claudian. Because the Children (Romulus and Remus) did
suck a Wolf when they ha^ been cast away.
all their Neighbors did think it a high disgrace to give unto them their
Daughters in Marriage: when they could not obtain their ^esires by the usual
persuasions, they employed their strength and cunning to get Wives; For when
the Virgins of the Sabins ^ere come to see the Plays and public sports, they
stole them away by force. This act of Hostility was followed by a cruel War, in
which Romulus the King having the advantage, He forced the Sabines to unite
with the Romans in one Body, and to take up their dwellings in Rome; so by
degrees his Victories made him both Dreadful and Famous amongst the Italian
People. When his Subjects became numerous, He divided them into three Tribes,
and each Tribe into ten Curiae or Parishes. The Tribes did increase afterward
to 35 in the flourishing state of the Empire. The City he built along the River
of Tyber, as T. Livius informs us, with these usual Ceremonies observed in 12
Vultures did appear to the Augures, when they were making their Observations.
Titus Livius.
such occasions. The Augures or Soothsayers were ordered to make their
Observations to find out the most happy place to seat the City: Afterward the
Founder did take a P ow and mark out the compass of it, where the Wall was to
stand; When he did come to the place appointed for a Gate, he did lift up the
Plow, and from hence come Porta a Ovid. l. 4. Fast.
portande Aratrum. They did also sacrifice Beasts to the Gods of the place, and
perform many other needless Ceremonies.

Fundavit urbem Septicollem Romulus.
Romulus called his City Rome, after his own name; And because his Brother did
despise his first undertakings, by skipping over the new Wall, he caused him to
be killed.

The City was at first built upon Mount Palatine, where all the stately
Edifices were erected, and where the Senate did often Ter Capitalia curru,
invectus Lucan of Pomp. Thither did the Conquerors ride in Triumph to Sacrifice
to Jupiter.
meet; but by degrees the succeding Kings took in 6 neighboring Hills into the
Walls, so that it is often called septicollis Vrbs. These were the other six:
The Capitol, where a Temple was erected to Jupiter, and where stood Rupes
Tarpeia, from whence many Malefactors were cast down and executed. Quirinalis
mons, where Quirinus or Romulus had a famous Temple. Mons Caelius, where was
the Curia hostilia, the State-house, into which none but Senators did enter.
Mons Esquilinus, where a Watchtower was built by Romulus. Mons Aventinus, or
Murcius, or Sacer, because there were so many Temples erected upon it to the
Gods. Mons Viminalis; Vimen, a twig of Ozier.
From hence Jupiter is named Vimineus, because he had a beautiful Temple upon
that Hill.

Besides these noted Hills, there were three more added in time to Rome; Collis
Hortulorum, where the Circus did stand. Janiculus, from Janus, who was there
interred. Vaticanus Mons, where now the Famous Library of the World it placed,
and the most noted Palace called the Vatican.

These three last are far lesser than the others; therefore it did always
retain the name of septicollis.

In this glorious City, (the Empress of the World) many stately Palaces were
erected, whose Ruins do yet declare her Grandeur. ^n her flourishing Estate,
there was these Basilica facinora* Royal Deeds. Plaut in Triaum.
noted places; Arcus Triumphales, glorious Monuments of Victories obtained upon
the Enemy. The Basilisci, were Buildings supported upon Pillars of a Prodigious
height and largeness. Via sacra, the Holy way, where Romulus did conclude an
agreement with the Sabines, and through which the Roman Priests and Augures did
usually pass to perform their Public Ceremonies. Forum Haec est a Sacris quae
via nomen habet. Ovid. Trist. l. 2. Eleg. 1.
Romanum, the Guild Hall of Rome, where Causes were heard, and People did meet,
to walk and discourse of Business. Comitium, was a place that did belong to it,
where Justice was administered in the Ivory Chair, named Sella curulis; under it
stood inferior Benches, called subsellia. Near unto this Place was a stately
Building, in which was the Rostra, a Pulpit adorned with the stems of Ships.
Here was also a Sanctuary for Malefactors, dedicated to Castor. The Temple of
Saturn, where was the Roman Treasury, named Aerarium sanctius.

Campus sceleratus, was the Execution Place. Campus Martius was noted, because
the People did often meet there to choose their Magistrates. Thermae, were
stately Edifices erected for Pleasure. That of Di^clesian is yet to be seen at
Rome.

Nymphea, where the Men and Women did conclude their Marriages.

Senaculum, a Meeting place for the Senate, which was in several Temples of the
the Gods.

Patronus, signifies the same as our English Lord, or Hlasurd, a giver of
Bread* It signifies also an Advocate.
This fair City was Peopled with all sorts of Inhabitants; They were commonly
divided into Patronos; or Patricios, the Noble men; and Plebeios or Clientes;
the Vulgar or Common People. Romulus chose out of the first two hundred to
compose a Senate. In time this number increased to above 300, and then they
were named Patres conscripti.

The ordinary Division of the Inhabitants when Rome began to flourish, was into
Senatorium, Equestrem, and Plebeium ordines. The Equestris ordo, was a Gentile
sort of People, inferior to the Senate, honored with a public allowance, a
House, a Horse, and a Gold Ring, which was given unto them by the Censors. They
were obliged to serve the Public in War, and had the liberty to wear a Garment
of Honor, called Angufliclavium, as the Race of the Senators did carry another,
named Laticlavium. Besides these, there were the Ingenui, or Freeborn. The
Libertini, such whose Parents had been discharged of their slavery, and the
Liber, and Manu-missi Liberti, they that were freed from Bondage by their
Masters; The manner of it was thus. The Servant was brought before the Praetor
by his Patron, who was to pronounce these words, hunc liberum esse volo, adding
a slit to his Ear wi h a Knife. The Praetor after this strikes the Servant with
a Rod, called Vindicta; saying, Dico cum liberum esse more Quiritum. Upon that
he received a Cap or Hat in token of Liberty Rosin. lib. 1. c. 20 Ad pileum
vocare, or vindicta liberare, to set at liberty.
from his Master, and was immediately dismissed, and his name was enrolled
amongst the Roman People.

CHAP. II.
Of the Marriages of the Romans.
BEfore we mention the Burials of the Romans, I think it proper to speak
something of their Marriages, and of the Ceremonies observed by them in such
solemn occasions. All civilized Nations have been religious observers of a Form
and manner of joining Men and Women together, to prevent the great disorders
which might otherwise happen, and which Nature teaches us to abhor. They have
all thought that it did concern the good and the Nobility of our kind, that the
Male and Female should not come abruptly together, led only by their brutish
appetite as the unreasonable Beasts, but that they should observe a decorum in
this weighty Business.

The Ceremonies of the Jews, of the Turks, of the Greeks, and of all the
Eastern People have been related in other Treatises. (...), Prove. To be happy
and successful in Woing.
We shall here only set down the Customs of the Romans, and some few particulars
of the Greeks manner of Marrying, mentioned by their Authors.

The Romans were wont to seek the Women in Marriage from their Tutors and
Parents, after that they had obtained the Virgins consent: Then if their
desires were granted, the Fathers did solemnly promise their Daughters in
Marriage; and the Man did likewise engage himself. When the Age This was called
spondere filiam, and stipulari. unde sponsus and sponsa, two persons betrothed.
grew corrupt, for the more security they did write these Contracts, or Promises
of Marriage in Records, called Tabellae, and certain witnesses, named
Signatores, did subscribe to them. The Bridegroom did then offer to his future
Spouse Gifts, as well to confirm Tabulae Nuptial^s.
her in the opinion of his affection for her, as to oblige himself the more to
the accomplishment of Marriage. He did also deliver There were two sorts of
Wives in Rome, Matter familias, w^o was married Coemptione, and Matrona, who was
married otherwise.
or send unto her an Iron, or a Golden Ring, to express that lasting Unity which
should be between the married couple: And the Spouse did place it upon that
Finger of the left Hand that is next to the least, because there is a Vein in
it which has a direct conveyance to the Heart. Afterward they did appoint a
Day for the solemnity. They were superstitious in the choice of the Time, for
they imagined many days, as in the Month M^nse Majo^ nubunt male.
of May, and the Nones of every Month, etc. to be unfortunate seasons for
Marriage. Now there were three several kinds of Marriages: Vsu, coemptione, and
Confarreatione; If the Woman did join her self to a Man, with, or without the
consent of her Parents, and did abide with him constantly one year Nuptiae,
from Nubo, because the Virgin did appear covered with a yellow Vail.
without interruption, she did then become his lawful Wife, usu by use. When
she was thus married, the custom did oblige the Man to carry her away, or
snatch her out of the bosom of her Mother with a seeming violence, and the
Virgin did fain an unwillingness to depart. This was the ancient mode of
marrying established by Romulus, after the Coemptione.
ravishment of the Daughters of the Sabines. The next manner of Marriage, was by
Buying; for the Woman did bring and deliver Vis ne mihi esse paterfamilias?
Ans. Volo. Vis ne mihi esse materfamilias* Ans. Volo.
to the Man a piece of money, using a certain form of words, to require his
consent, which He did declare by saying volo: She likewise did express her Will
by the same word. Afterward the man took her into his Possession, by joining
hands. This ceremony did give the Woman right to all her Husbands Estate;
therefore it was the Custom, when she did enter into his House, to say, Vbi tu
Caius ibi ego Caia. The other manner was Farreatio, or Farracia. Marriage:
Diffarreatio, Divorce.
Confarreatione, so named, because the married couple did publicly eat
together of the same Consecrated Bread before ten witnesses before the Altars
of the Gods, and before the Chief Priests. This was the most sacred kind of
joining in marriage. Now before they did come to this performance, they did
Plin. l. 21. c. 8.
first consult the Augures, and employ the Soothsayers, to know the pleasure of
the Gods. Afterward they did meet to acomplish the marriage; and then the
Virgin did commonly appear covered with a yellow * Vail, and the man with a
Javelin in his hand. With the point of it he did part the hair of his Spouses
head, to expres how she did enter into the Protection of Juno, unto whom that
weapon Juno is called Dea Quiris, or curis, which signifies also a Javeline.
was consecrated. After these ceremonies, they did Crown the Bride with
Watercresses, and cloth her with a short Coat, called Tunica, girding her
about with a woollen Girdle, Some say that Four Torches were carried before the
Bride, Hence is ducere uxorem. To Marry. The Torch is named Taeda, or faces
jugales; Hence the marriage so is caled Unde uxor, quasi unxor.
which was not to be loosed until she came to Bed. Three Bride-men were usually
appointed to conduct her home; two to lead her, and Called Flameum Hastoe
Coelibaris
the other to carry the Torch of White thorn, or of Pine Tree toward the
evening. Plutarch speaks of 5 Torches that were usually carried before the
Bride when she did walk to her Husbands Dwelling. At the entrance some were
appointed to besprinkle her with Water; and she was obliged to anoint the
Posts of the Door with Oil. Then the Bride-men did lift her over the Threshold,
and the Company did cry out with a loud voice. Thalassio, thalassio, to
congratulate her arival. Live. lib. 1.
In her going thither, the Instruments needful to spin, were carried with her,
that she might not flatter her self with the hopes They did Pray to the Gods,
mentioned, lib. 1. cap 14.
of an idle life. The Keys of the House were presented to her at the entrance,
that she might thereby understand how the House was committed to her Care and
Government. The Water and Fire was to be touched by both, in Plutarch.
It was also the Custom to offer to the Bridegroom and to his Bride at this
time Water and Fire. At their arrival the Bridegroom did welcome her and her
Friends with a Supper* Fescennina Carmina, were the obscene Songs of marriages.
Dona nuptialia, are also Tokens sent by the Men to their Sweet-hearts. The
Greeks had also their (...), sent to the Bride by beautiful Youths. Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5.
according to his quality; and then the Bride wars carried to Bed, the Images
of several Gods leading the way before into the Chamber. The next day her
Friends did send unto her Gifts and Presents; they were called Nuptialia dona.
And the Husband did make merry with his Kindred; this was named Repatia. This
was the usual manner of the marrying of the Romans. There were several Laws
enacted to tie Men of an ancient Nobility to not disgrace themselves, by
marrying with the Vulgar sort.

In the time of Romulus, they did not observe so much Ceremony in Marriage; For
the Bridegroom, and his Bride did declare their union, and perform what was
required by sharing in the same Bread and Water. The Lacedaemonians did also
marry, by eating a piece of Bread that had been divided by a Sword. Some other
Greeks did accomplish this business, only by joining of Hands, or by drinking
to the Bride in a cup of Wine: But all Nations have observed an Order and
Ceremony in Marriage, without which, no union of Man and Woman was lawful. The
Greeks in some places did bring the Bride When all the Marriage Ceremonies were
not performed, the Marriage was styled Nuptiae innuptiae ^otem dicebat, or
promittebar.
home to her Husband in a Chariot, and then at the door did burn it, to show how
she ought not from thence forward to gad too much abroad. Before the Romans did
make any Contracts of Marriage, they did know the Virgins Dowry or Portion,
which was first promised by the Father, All Marriages in Rome, were performed
in the Evening, when it grew dark.

CHAP. III.
Of the manner of Divorcing the Roman Wives.
MArriage is a Union established upon a mutual Promise of Love and Loyalty, as
well as upon the Laws of Nature. Reason and Religion do recommend unto us the
preservation of it, and of that good correspondency which proceeds from it. But
when this moral union is dissolved, not only The natural union may be
discontinued, but never dissolved but by Death.
by an apparent breach of Promise, but also by a destruction of those things
which did first cause and entertain it; when Chastity, the only Principle upon
which this kind of union is grounded, is banished from the Marriage Bed, It is
lawful for a Man to dismiss his Wife. Christ judged it so; and all the Laws of
the World have deemed it necessary in such a case, to give way to a Divorce.
But because Men might not upon every slight occasion, and every frivolous
distaste run to this extremity, the Laws have provided Ecclesiastical Courts,
who are only able to Judge of the Truth of such Reports and Miscarriages.
Amongst the Romans, the Censors only did declare the lawfulness of Divorces;
For before the Woman was separated from her Husband, he did acquaint these
Divorcium vel repudium mittere, or renunciare, or mittere nunci um to divorce.
Magistrates with the Reasons of their Separation. Now the Authors do mention
two kinds of Divorce; the one before marriage, named Repudium; which did often
happen when the Soothsayers did declare any Marriage to be likely unfortunate.
In such a case, the Form of words used by the Men, in the dismissing of the
Women, was Condition tua non utar. The other kind was properly called
Divortium, which was after the Marriage, and all the solemnities of it. And as
there were three manner of Marriages, there was also three ways of Divorcing*
Vsurpatio usu capionis, which was, when it was proved that the Woman married
usu by use only, had been absent from her Husbands Bed three nights in the
first year; It was lawful for any, or for her Parents, usurpari eam, Macrob. l.
1. c. 3.
to take her to themselves. Diffarreatio, which was performed in a kind of
Sacrifice, in which they did act contrary to the Confarreatio. (...) was, when
the Man did restore unto the Woman the price of money which had been given to
buy him. The Man did then say to her, Res tuas tibi habeto, or Res tuas tibi
agito, meaning her mundum Muliebrem, her Clothes and Goods. It was also the
custom in such cases to break in Pieces the Contracts of Marriage, to restore
Tacit. l. 11. Annal
the Dowry, to take from the Woman the Keys of the House, and to put her out of
doors.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Funerals of the Romans.
IT appears by the Ceremonies observed at the Funerals of the Romans, and by
their care of the dead Bodies of their friends, that they had some small hopes
of a Resurrection from the dead; otherwise they would not have been so mindful
of the preservation of the Ashes of the deceased, nor so Religious in causing
the Relics of the dead to lie peaceably in their Graves without disturbance.
However the corruption of the Age may have effaced out of many of their minds
the expectation of that wonderful effect of Omnipotency. We may nevertheless
see how either Nature or Reason did persuade them to these performances and
Funeral Rites, which do suppose a Resurrection from the dead, and a future
appearance of our Bodies. This may better appear by these following Customs of
the Romans: When a person was ready to expire, all his Friends and Neighbors
did throng about his Bed; the nearest in blood did open his own mouth, and
receive into it the last breath of his expiring friend, and did close his eyes
when he was dead. Seven days were commonly appointed to keep the Body before
they did burn it; during this They did anoint the body with Honey, and melted
Wax. Cael. Rhodig. lib. 23. cap. 27 This is called collocatio corporis.
time all the Friends were wont to meet about the dead body, and frequently to
call upon him. And the Pollinctores did wash it carefully over with clear
water, and anoint it. Afterward they did carry the deceased to the entry of
his Gate, placing his Feet and his Face toward the street in the robes that
did become his degree and quality; near it an Altar was erected, to offer
Incen^e for the Soul of the deceased, and the Doors were hung with some
expressions of Mourning. The Noble men had their Gates covered with Cypress
branches, because this Tree is dedicated to Pluto; and because it is of such a
nature, that when it is once cut, it They who had care to provide for the
Funerals, were called Libitinarij, because they did belong to the Temple of
Venus Libitina, where the urns of the dead were placed.
will never bud again. When the eighth day was come, they sent a Crier about to
invite the People to the Funeral, which was called indicere funus. When all the
People were ready to march, the dead body lying upon a Bed, adorned according
to his ability, was carried out: The poorer sort were content with Feretra, a
certain Bier. Before did march the Siticines; who did sound with a Trumpet, or
a Pipe: They were followed by certain Women, called Praeficae; Their business
was to sing the Praises of the dead, and to lament for them. The kindred did
commonly bear the body to the appointed place, when the deceased was rich;
otherwise Poly. 6. lib. 6.
certain Men, called Vespillones, or Vespae, did perform this office. In the
Funerals of the Nobility, all the Ancestors of the deceased made of wax, and
all the marks of honor Justa pers^lv^re parentibus, is to perform Funeral
Rights to Parents. Funerals. Exequiae a sequendo.
which he had deserved in his Life, together with his Manumissed Servants, did
go before the Corpse in great State. After the Body the next kindred, and the
Heirs of the dead did follow in Att^ati.
Mourning Apparel: The Men with their heads covered, but the women uncovered in
their hair to the Rostra, where the Heir, or some for him, did declare the
praises of the Deceased. After the Oration, sometimes they did carry the Dead
Body back to the House: But when it was Enacted, that none should be buried in
the City, except the Vestal Virgins, the Emperors, and such as had deserved
from the Public a particular esteem by their worthy and Generous behavior,
that custom did cease. When the Body was to be buried, they did carry it from
the Rostra, to a Pile of flaming wood, raised the Pi^^, is called Pyra; when it
burns, it is named Rogus, afterward bustum This Pyra was erected in modum
Arae, of all manner of sweet wood. Rosin.
on purpose, round about stood the People; the Body was placed upon it, and the
Heir of the Deceased with his Face turned from the Pile, did set Fire to the
wood with a Torch; VVhiles it was in a flame, the Praeficae did fill the Air
with lamentable outcries, and Songs in honor of the Dead. In the Fire they did
cast Gold, Silver, Garments, and such like things, which the Deceased did make
use of in his Life. It was also the custom before the Fire was lighted, to open
the eyes of the De^d as he lay upon the wood, and to show unto him the Heavens,
putting into his mouth a piece of Money, which was This piece of Money is
called (...); Hence the Proverb, expediri Danacem, to prepare to die.
to be given by him to Charon for his Passage into the Elystan Fields. As the
Fire was burning, they did cause Bustuarij. Alterum peden in Charontis Cy^ba
habet. He is near death.
Gladiators or Fencers, to fight upon the place, to give satisfaction to the
Infernal Gods. This was styled Inferiae, sometimes for the same purpose they
did execute the Slaves and Captives in honor of the Deceased; But when they
were vvanting, they did tear their own skin, and cut their Bodies to please
the Infernal Spirits. Afterward, this effusion of Blood was prohibited to
Women, and too much expression of sorrow. When the vvood was consumed, a
Priest did collect the Ashes, Mulieres Genas radunto, neve lessum funeris ergo
habento. Lessus, is excess of grief and lamentation. Virg. l. 6. Aen.
and Bones of the Dead Body, which he did three times sprinkle or purify with
fair water, and then carefully lay up in a Pitcher, named Vrnae: Afterward
one of the Mourning Women did cry out with a loud voice, Ilicet, that is, ire
licet, it is lawful to depart: When this was heard, the company did take their
farewell of the Relics of the Deceased, by crying three times, vale, vale,
vale; adding this expression, we shall follow thee in the order that nature
shall appoint. This being said, they departed, either to their Homes, or to the
House of the Deceased, Coena funebris silicernium dicitur.
where a Supper was prepared for all his Friends and Relations; and sometimes
the Heir did cause some raw flesh to be given Parentatio, is the Honor rendered
to the deceased.
to the Poor, this was named Visceratio. And the House was cleansed by the
Everricatores, and a Vacation time was appointed for the Domestics, called
Denicales feriae; Besides, When these ceremonies were omitted, the burying was
named Sepultura insepulta.
the Nobles had Plays celebrated for their sakes, and stately Sepulchers
erected, in which their Urns were placed. After the Funerals, the Widows were
commanded to mourn a whole year, during which time, it was not lawful for them
to receive another Husband; And if they did, they were liable to the Law. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


Owls, Crows, and Ravens were unlucky Birds; they were esteemed the
forerunners of Death. Ovid. Met. lib. 9.
-- ter omen --
Funereus Bubo, Lethali carmine fecit.


CHAP. V.
Of the Apparel of the Romans.
NAture recommends unto us Apparel, and necessity does oblige us to make use of
it, that it might protect us from the violence of the heat and cold: But Reason
and Decency have taught men several sorts of Habits, to distinguish them and
their Qualities. The Romans, and all civilized Nations have had different kinds
of clothing, according to the degrees of men among them None but the
Barbarians, and the Savages of India can quarrel at this laudable custom
introduced amongst us. But I shall not undertake in this place to justify the
distinction of Apparel from the childish scofs, and ridiculous aspersions of
some amongst us: It shall suffice to tell you how the Men and Women were
clothed amongst the Romans. These were the most noted Robes of Men;

Pallium was a Cloak in use amongst the Greeks: Palliolum a little Cloak.

Rosin.
Amphitapae, the Vestments having a Furr on both sides.

Sagum, was a Coat of the Soldiers, put over their Armor.

Chlamis, was a short Coat used by the Soldiers, and by the Children.

Penula, a Cloak for the Rain.

Abolla, Laena, and Ricinium were garments of Soldiers.

Subucula, was a wast-coat or shirt.

Patagium, a precious under garment.

Supparum, a pair of Drawers open at the knees, such as the Eastern People, and
the Moors do wear.

Carbasus, a rich Cloak.

Stragulum, was a garment to lie upon, as a Carpet, etc.

Justin. l. 2. c. ^. Pellibus and ^^xis arcont mal^ frigo^a brach^s. Ovid.
Thrist lib. 3. Eleg. 10.
The first Garments were made of Skins. The Heathen Worthies are often
represented clothed with this kind of cover ng; But there was a great
difference in the Vestments of the Ancient Heathens; the Greeks did wear a
Palliunt, and from thence they are called Palliat^. The Romans a Gown, Toga,
therefore they are styled Togati. Some of the Gauls Britches, which gave them
the name of Braochati. Every Nation did scorn to borrow their Habit from
another invention. It is to be desired that our English Nation had the same
generosity, our Tradesmen would not send so often into France* to fetch from
thence their ridiculous Modes. Our wise Sovereign deserves no small
commendation to have put a stop by his good example to the variable and
continual change of Habits, which did render us ridiculous to all our
Neighbors. I could wish for the benefit of our Country, that the Women would
also find out some *Mode, as might so A difficult business.
please their fancy, that they might not change every day, and enrich the needy
strangers, when so many skilful and expert Natives want Bread for themselves
and Families, only for want of that esteem which strangers have got amongst our
Ladies.

The Romans, as the Spaniards did wear one sort of Habit, only their
Magistrates, and persons of Eminency had the liberty to carry in their garments
the Badges of their Office. It is true, in War they did take a Therefore ad
saga ire, is go to war.
sagum, a short Coat, which was more convenient for them to handle their
Weapons. In Peace they did wear their Toga, and the honest Women a long garment
called stola: Mulier Togata, a Whore.
only the new married Women of ordinary Estate, did wear a Toga pura; and when
Youths were escaped out of their childhood, they were admitted to wear this
Toga pura, which was also surnamed Recta, Libera, or It was of a perfect white,
therefore named pura, it was a badge of liberty, therefore called libera.
Virilis. The Persons of Quality did cloth it with much Ceremony and
rejoicing. It was the custom to take it, and put it on first in the Market
place, and then the Youth who was styled Tyro, did carry a piece of money into
the Temple of the God of Youth, as they did when Children were born, to Dion.
Halicar. lib. 7.
Ilithuya; and when they did die, to Venus Libitina. The young Princes were
wont to give Sueton. in Tyber. cap. 15.
Largesses and Plays to the People on that day. Seventeen years of age was the
usual time to take this Badge of Manhood, sometimes sooner at annus tyrocinij
15 years old, and sometimes before, as the Persons were eminent in quality, C.
Tacit. lib. 3. Annal.
they did claim to themselves more liberty than the common in this case. Before
the chi dren did wear a Gown bordered with a Purple Lace, and therefore it was
called Praetexta. The young Virgins had a Garment of that name, until they were
married, with some small difference in the make. And the Roman Magistrates were
distinguished also lib. 9. cap. 12.
by Toga Praetexta. Therefore Val. Max. informs us, how they did lay down their
Praetextam, which was their Garment of Joy when they were about so sad an
office, as to condemn a man to death.

Toga purpurea, was an Honorable Gown of Purple which the Roman Senate did
commonly send as a Present to Foreign Princes in token of Friendship.

Toga sordida, was in use amongst the Rascality, who could not be at the charge
of White Gowns. And when any Noble Man was arraigned for his life, he did
appear in such another foul sort of Garment, to move his Judges to pity his
condition.

Toga pulla, atra, or lugubris, was a mourning Gown used in Funerals. When the
Empire came to attain to its greatest power, the common sort did wear this dark
sort of Garment, and the richer another called Candida* which was of a shining
white. But we Hence it is that pullati signifies sometimes the poor* and
candidati, the rich.
find that th s latter sort was carried by such as did pretend to Offices and
eminent Imploys in the Commonwealth. That all the People might understand who
they were that did desire the Office they took upon None was admitted amongst
the competitors but such as were judged worthy, by the Magistrate who did
govern in the Assembly.
them, Toga Candida; and therefore were named Candidati: Hence it is, that a
Competitor or a Student in any Science, is called Candidatus. Their custom was
at such times to appear humble at before the People, and to salute every one,
that is nomeaclatio
calling him by his name; and that they might the better know the proper name of
every Roman Citizen, they had some body acquainted with the People, to suggest
unto them the names, he was called Nomenclator. They did besides to win the
Peoples favor, distribute Money, which was called Congiarium, by certain Men
named sequestres or divisores, because they were to be elected by their
suffrages and plurality of voices.

Toga picta, was used by such as were led in triumph after some notable
exploits and and glorious victory. Besides these Gowns* there was also Toga
militaris, which they did commonly use in the Field when their Armies did lie
in the Camp. Toga domestica, was a short kind of Govvn proper to the House.
Toga forensis, was another sort proper to the Lawyers. It seems it was the
neatest and most excellent kind, because Cedant arma Togae.
they were called by excellency, Togati who did vvear it.

Under these Govvns the Romans did vvear a Garment named Tunica, a close Coat
much like unto our Doublets with long skirts; some were without Sleeves,
others with Sleeves: some were proper to the Senators, as the laticlavia,
adorned before with large studs of Purple like Nailheads; or angustus ^la^us.
Hence they were named angusticlavij. It was called ^^cta.
Others did belong to the Roman Knights, as the Angusticlavia, a Garment
enriched with lesser ornaments than the former. * The ordinary sort were
plain, only such as were intended for Women, did reach to the heels, and such
as did be, long to Men, no further than the leg, or a little lovver.

Palmata tunica, was a beautiful undergarment sent by the Senate to the
Princes who were their friends and neighbors. It was so named, because it
was richly adorned with Palm-leaves of Gold.

Trabea, was an honorable garment which only the prime Officers of the Roman
Empire did vvear. It was like unto our Gowns of State. There were three sorts
of them: The first all of Purple, was dedicated to the Gods. The second, of
Purple, with a mixture of White, was the garment of Kings, and after them of
the Consuls, when they did sit in their Tribunals in the Army. The third was
of Scarlet and Purple vvoven together. The Augures were clothed with it,
when they made their Observations.

The Women had some garments, a little differenced from the Men's; as their
Tunica, which did fall down as lovv as their heels. They did also vvear a
kind of Cloak or Called pall^um, or palla, quia palam gestabatur. Rosin.
Mantle as the Men. But it has been the custom of judicious people, to
distinguish the two Sexes by different kinds of Habit. Therefore, as in
Greece, and Kingdoms of Asia, so in the Roman jurisdiction in Italy, the Women
had garments peculiar to themselves, more for ornament than for action. Such
was their stola^, which was a long Petticoat. Indusium, is a Smock proper
for Women, as subucula, a Shirt: supparus, was a kind of under garment by
which some understand a Smock. Capitium, was an ornament of the head. Zona,
the Girdle which they did vvear, until they were married; hence comes the
Phrase Zonam solvere, to Deflour a Virgin. It was named cestus, from hence is
incestus.
or Calaentica.
called in Greek (...).
called crinalis. Ipsa caput distiaguit acu. Claud. Cincinnatus and
calamistratus homo, was a reproach amongst the Romans.
Mitra, was an ornament of the Head, proper to Women. Their Hair was tied up
with Ribbons called F^sciae, taeniae, or vittae. Reticulum was another attire
of the head; as From hence is Flammearij, such as did make this attire Nubentes
flammeo velabantur.
also Ricae or reticulae. When they went to be married, they had commonly a
certain Vail called Flammeus. And as our Ladies in England, the Roman women
were careful to make use of such pleasant ornaments, as might rather add to,
than diminish from their Beauty. These things were commonly used for that
purpose, Casona, was a Bodkin for the head, acus cum margarita, was a long
Pin with a Jevvel at the end, such as the Morisco Ladies do vvear in Barbary.
Calamistrum, vas an Instrument made to frizle the Hair. The Women did commonly
adorn their Hair with Jewels and Pearls. -- Perque caput ducti lapides per
colla per armos. They had amongst them Tirewomen named Psecades.

The Romans did vvear 2 kind of Shoes Solea, and calceus. Solea was like the
Sandals of the Capuchins, the bottom of a shoe tied with leathern straps
about the toes and heels; It is called Gallica and crepidula a crepitu, from
the noise that it did make. The Shoes were either Mullaei, Lunulati, Vncinati,
Perones or Cathurni. Lunula tricalcei, were certain Shoes that did represent
Sacri calcei were worn only by Priests.
upon them, or under them, the figure C, or a half Moon. It was only proper to
the Senators. Vncinati calcei, were in use amongst Soldiers; they were also
named Caligae. Many of these Shoes did come up the leg half way in the manner
of Boots. Some were adorned with precious stones, and other ornaments; others
were plain. But of all these kinds of shoes and garments, you may see more in
Rosinus and Dempsterus.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Customs of the Romans in Eating.
Jentaculum is a Breakfast, prandium a Dinner taken about Noon. Merenda a
Beaver, coena a Supper in the evening, commessatio is properly a drinking after
Supper, which was much used in Rome.
IN every country there is a great difference in the manner of lying down, and
taking those things which are necessary for our sustenance. The Turks feed
sitting, as Tailors. The Jews did lie down upon Couches made on purpose; the
Europeans do commonly eat sitting at Tables. But my design in this place, is
only to describe the Roman manner, and to mention those words which may give us
a perfect understanding of the Authors which speak of their Banquetiugs and
Feasts.

The Men did eat but once in a day at Supper seldom twice, but not more:
Children and Women did eat three times.
The place where they did eat, was named Coenaculum, fron Caena; as our
Diningroom, from Dinner; because the Supper was the chief Meal of the Romans,
as ou^ Dinner is ours. It was also styled It was as near the top of the House,
as the (...) of the Jews.
Triclinium, from three Beds which were placed round a little Table standing in
the middle. Before Supper they did commonly wash their hands and face, change
their Clothes, and take off their shoes, that they might not spoil the Beds.
When the Table was furnished, the Master of the Feast did compel all those
that were invited, to sit or lay down, by Penulam mihi scidit.
pulling their garments with some kind of violence, which was interpreted an
expression of kindness, and a sign of being welcome: Tangere vestem is, to not
make a man welcome.
Whereas if this action was performed with indifference, and without
earnestness, it was a sign that the Master of the House cared not for the
company of such a one. Such as came of their own accord without invitation to a
Supper, were named Muscae, flies, or Vmbrae. The Guests did commonly lay upon
the Bed, leaning upon their The middle was the place of Honor. E^ ce^sus medio
conspectus in agmine Caesar. Lucan. lib. 1. Accumbebat uxor in gremio mariti.
left elbow, with their upper part raised up. There were two or three on every
Bed, the one at the upper end, the next had his head leaning in the others
breast, so was it of the third. In public Feasts where many hundreds were
invited, the Couches were made capacious, and fit to hold four five at a Table.
When they were thus ready for their Victuals, they did adorn their heads with
Garlands of Roses, and other pleasant flowers, Hungry fellows who were nimble
at their meat, were said to have calceatos dentes D^mpst.
to refresh the Brain, and preserve it from the ill consequences of the excess
of drinking, and the powerful operations of the Wine. They did also for that
purpose gird their heads with Fillets of Wool and Linen, to stop the Veins of
the Temples which do convey up to the Brain the evil vapors that do disturb
it. They did sometimes Cella, the Buttery; a cellandis rabus, was joining to
the T^iclinium.
make use of Colewort-leaves when they were resolved to drink much; for as our
learned Herbalist has taken notice, there is no greater enemy to Wine, or to
the operations of it, than Colewort, and Cabbage. Their supping room was
usually adorned with the Trophies and noble relics of their Predecessors, as
the other part of the House Seneca.
named Atrium, was with their Images. Propert. lib. 3. Eleg. 8.
Vel tibi Medorum pugnaces ire per hosts
Atque ornare tuam fixa per arma domum.


In all stately Suppers, there were three services or parts; The first was
called Gustatio Ant^^oena, or Promulsis. It was composed Quia dabatu^ ante
mulsum antiqui non nisi mulso primam fitim sedabant. Rosin. lib. 5. cap. 29.
of such Dishes as did whett the appetite, and prepare the stomach for more
corroborating Meats. The Fruits most in season, were then served on the Table,
with Eggs, Salads, Oysters, Spraragus, etc. The second Course was named Coena,
because it was the chief part of the supper, and the Principal Dish of it was
called Caput coenae, or fundamentum coenae; as the first was the Proemium, and
last the Epilogue. In the last Course they did present upon the table all
manner of Fruits, Cream, but especially Apples, as they did Eggs in the first.
From hence is the Proverb ab ovo ad mala, from the beginning to the end
Their Suppers were so ordered, that there was a convenient time between each
Course, to discourse of pleasant matters. It was not lawful to mention any sad
accident at such seasons, because there is nothing that helps Digestion so much
as mirth, and nothing is a greater impediment to a right use of Meats, than
sadness; They did therefore bannish from the Table all melancholic humors.

they did blame Luxury and Gluttony; the gluttons were surnamed Asini.
In the flourishing state of the Empire they were very expensive in their
suppers. Vitelli^ as Suetonius informs us, had a supper where ^ thousand rare
and foreign Fishes were presented upon the Table, and several strange
Phaenicopter mentioned by Sueton; are called by our English in Tangier,
Bee-eaters, they do come every Spring in pursuance of the Bees to devour them.
Birds fetched from the strai s of Gibraltar, by Galleys sent on purpose, to
transport them to Rome. And that they might not burden their stomachs with the
courser sort of meats; and neglect others more pleasing to their pallats. It
was sometimes the custom in the entrance of supper, to give unto every one a
little Note of the names of the several dishes prepared for them. There were
several officers appointed at Feasts, named Magister scribendi, obsonij,
Diribitor, Scissor Chironomantae, and carptor. Structor obsonij, was the
Garnisher of the Feast, who did adorn the Dishes with all manner of Flowers,
and pleasant sights. It seems the Carvers and Garnishers were instructed how to
behave themselves with ceremony, by persons who made it their Profession to
show such as would learn. Now in every Feast there was a portion for * Mercurij
sors vocabatur.
Mercurius, whose Image was placed at the entry of many Houses, as we have
already taken notice. And that they might please Sportula, was a Basket out of
which Meat was given to the People: It is taken for an imperfect Meal, whereas
coena recta was perfect Supper; as also coena dubia, in which there were so
many Dishes, that the Guests did scarce know of which to choose.
the ears with grateful sounds, as well as the Palate with dainty meats, it was
the custom to have a Consort of Music; some of their Instruments were named
Hydraulae. The word does make many conjecture, that water did contribute to the
sound; but I rather imagine that they were such kind of Instruments of Music
as they did use at Sea, to encourage men to fight, or to drowned the noise of
the dying soldiers. Our Trumpets, in which some of our Na^ion do much delight,
are derived from the Romans. Nam veluti resonante diu Tritone canor^
Pellit opes collectus aquae victusque movere
Spiritus, and long as emugit buccina vaces.
And in their Feasts they had pleasant Boys out of Alexandria, and fair Girls,
to give them all manner of delights which they did fancy. The Girls of Cadiz in
Spain, were famous at Rome for their sportful humor, which they did express in
great Banquets. At such times they made use of many sorts of Vessels to drink;
It was a common custom to have a Horn enricht with silver, or gold; (...)
but their common drinking vessels were made of the earth of the Island of
Samos, of Beech tree, of Olive Tree, of Glass, of Crystal, of Amber, of
Black-stone, of silver, of gold, of precious stotes, and of dead men's skuls.
This last kind of Drinking-vessels was in use, especially Scordisci in ostibus
capitum humanorum bibebant avidius. Amm. Marcel.
amongst the Scythians, and the barbarous Nations: For when they had destroyed
their enemies, they caused their skulls to be cleansed and tipped with silver,
for them to drink in. This insolent custom was seldom practiced, unless it be
amongst the Getae, the Hunni, and other Northern people. These were the names
of their ordinary drinking vessels; Calices pteroti, or pi^nati, or alati, cups
with ears. Trulla, or ^ruella, was a deep and a large cup, proper for
Husbandmen. Phiala, was a lesser cup* Cymbium was like a ship; scyphus was
another sort of drinking vessel come from Greece etc. They had several sorts of
Wine in request at Rome; some Wine they did perfume with smoke, to render it
more potable and pleasant to the taste; but Plinius does not esteem it
wholesome. Rosin. Dicitur opinianum Vinum quia opimius Consul morem illum
induxit. Tibul. l. 2. El. 1
Nunt mihi fumosas veteres proferte falernos
consulis, and Chio solvite vincla cado.


It seems they did preserve their Wine a very long while with smoke; for some
do speak of wine 100 years old. It may be that the Wine was not so old as the
vessels that were marked with such a Date. Vinum albanum, was very See Rosin.
lib. 5.
famous at Rome, as Vin de la Ciudad is at Paris. Cuidad is a little Canton near
Mauseils, It is a kind of Frontiniack.
that yields most excellent Wine; it costs at Paris twenty shillings a Quart.

From the Romans is come the custom of drinking Healths, which was first a kind
of invocation proper to their Gods and Emperors, whose names they did often
mention amongst their merry cups, with many good wishes. At the conclusion of
their Meetings, they did drink the cup of their good genius, which was the same
with that of Jupiter sospitator, otherwise called Poculum beni dei. Sophocl.
This custom was also among the Greeks.
(...)
(...)


CHAP. VII.
Of the Romans Assemblies, appointed for Public Affairs.
Comitia a coeund^.
THE Roman Assemblies were either Concilia, when there was a select number met
together; or Comitia, when all the People were called to the meeting. Of these
there were three sorts; Curiata, Conturiata, and Tributa: All of them were
named Caata; Calo, signifies to call.
for a public Crier did walk about the City, to warn them to an appearance.

The Comitia curiata, was when the People were separated into several Parishes,
called curiae, to consult of the Public business, and give their Votes. The
City of Rome was divided into thirty curia's or Parishes by Romulus; afterward
the number did increase when Rome began to enlarge its bounds and Dominion;
Unto every Parish there was a public Hall, a Meeting Place, or Temple, where
the Parishioners did come together to perform their devotions to their Gods;
Over every Parish an eminent person was appointed, as well to keep the
Inhabitants in order, as to see the Worship of the Gods duly administered.
These Assemblies were first appointed by Romulus to approve of the Kings, and
choose the Magistrates for the Government of the Empire, and for the confirming
of Wills, which were to be signed in their presence.

All sorts of People belonging to the Parishes, were admitted to speak their
minds, and give their Votes as private Men, Magistrates, Senators, and
generally all Free men, who did live within the bounds of the Parishes. The
place appointed for their meeting, was the great Hall of Justice, called
comitium, near uuto the public Market. They did assemble when they were
lawfully called by one of the Magistrates; and before that they did come
together, three Augures were to make their Observations, and approve of their
meeting, and of the business, they were also to be present. But in case any
sinister accident did happen, the people did then desire the chief Magistrate
there present, intercedere, that is, to hinder their further proceedings for
that time; for the Romans were extreme superstitious in the observance of all
casualties.

The Suffrages anciently were delivered viva voce; but since, there was a Law
made, to express every ones mind in a piece of Wood, called Tabella. If any
officers were to be chosen, they had as many as there were competitors, they
did cast in a po^, that upon which the name of him was written, whom they
intended to favor with their Vote. But if a Law was to be enacted, every one
did receive two Tabella's from the Distributors, named Diribitores; in one
there was V. R. that is, ut Rogas: In the Velitis, Jubeati* ne Quirites, etc.
Is it your pleasure Romans, that such a Law, should be made, were the words
used in the Rogatio l^gis.
other was a great A. The former signifies a full assent to what was required;
the latter intimates the contrary: for the letter A did stand for Antiquo. They
did cast that which they did like best into a Chest, out of which they were
taken to be numbered by the Nongenti, or Custodes, certain men appointed for
that purpose. The voices were numbered, and the plurality did obtain their
desires. The common Crier was wont to declare what had been decreed, or who had
been chosen. It was not lawful for any, except the chief Magistrates to prefer
a law, only the Praetor, the Consuls, the Interrer, the Decemviri, the
Triumviri, the Dictator, the Tribunes of the People, had this power granted
unto them. When they intended any such business, they caused their Law to Legis
promul^atio dicitur*
be well written in Tables, That is, de Coe^^ observatio, or Spectio. This is
^alled Nu^^iatio far legem, figere legem.
which were to be hung publicly three Market days for all men to view, and
consult about the necessity of it. But before he went so far, he did ask the
advice of several Men experienced in the Laws and Customs of the Romans; He did
sometimes employ the Augures, to see how the Gods would approve of it, and he
did propose the matter to the Senate, to have their approbation. All these
things being first performed, the Magistrate did recommend at the public
meeting the Law to the People, persuading them to it by a Speech. Sometimes it
was opposed by* Men of a contrary judgment: After that the business had been
sufficiently examined, they did proceed to understand the will of the
Praerogativ^ curia, or Tribus, was that whose name came out first. It is called
Mo^bus Comitialis from hence
People. In the mean while it was lawful for any of the Magistrates to forbid
the examinacion of the business, which they did always do when any body was
taken with the Falling Sickness at that time: or when the Magistrates did
observe any unlucky sign^ in the Heavens, or when the Augures di^ bring word of
any unfortunate omen, as o^ Thunder, which was always esteemed unhappy When the
Law was approved in thi^ manner, it was graven in Tables of Brass, an^ laid up
in the Treasury of the Empire, and published, by affixing it in the places of
resort in the City. They did make a prick at every vote when they did number
them, therefore Publicum punctum, is taken for Suffragium. Classici voca^antur;
From hence are the divisions of Scholars in the Schools, named Classes, and
the Authors read by them, are called Classici Authors. Proletari^.


The Comitia centuriala, was when the People were met together in Centuries, to
give their Votes: Now a Century was an hundred Men belonging to one of the six
Classes, into which Servius Tullius divided the Roman People. This was done
according to every man's Estate: The first Classis was the richest and the most
sufficient; for none was admitted into it, unless he was worth above eight
hundred Crowns, as every man of the second was to be worth above a hundred, so
proportionably of the other Classes. The lowest sort of People were named
tenuis census homines, men of a small Estate. In every Classis were many
Centuries reckoned; some mention 139 in all. When they were assembled, the
plurality of voices in the Centurie did overcome; and so when the Votes of all
the Centuries were collected, the Plurality did also carry the choice. Over
every Century there was a Centurionum vitis, was the Centurions staff, or Rod
of command.
^udicious and courageous person appointed named Centurio, as over the Militia
of the City of London, in every Quarter there is a Captain. There were many
belonging to these Centuries, who did not dwell at Rome, ^ut in places far
distant from it. They were called together to elect their chief Magistrates.
The first Consuls were created by Rosinus.
them, the Censors, the Praetors, the Pro^onsuls, the Tribun^s, or Colonels of
the that the People felt themselves overburdened with the cruel exactions, and
grieved with the severity of the Nobles, who kept not to the golden Rules of
moderation, which were only able to preserve Peace, they did cast off all
respect to their Superiors, and broke out into an open Rebellion. But all
dfferences were ended again, when the People had obtained such privileges and
fundamental Laws as might secure them for the future from the usur^^tion of the
better sort, and from those grievances of which they did complain. The Roman
Empire continued many hundred years in a flourishing estate.

It is supposed that this mixed kind of government was one of the main helps to
raise it to that excessive power unto which it arrived in the time of Julius
Caesar; for when there was a way open for every one to assend up to the Supreme
Authority, and that Virtue and Courage were the great promoters of such a
design. Every one who had a little ambition in him, did strive to excel in
that which did so well reward its owner^ with Honor and Profit. They did all
endeavor to assend as near the highes^ march of Glory, as their abilities
would give them leave, in obliging the public Interest by brave and Worthy
exploits. But this kind of Aristocracy could not continue for ever; for in
process of time, it could no^ be but that some Member of the Commonwealth, must
attain to a superiority in Power and Riches, which when it was popular and
obliging, it must needs make People forget the liberty to which they were born,
and incensibly bring in a Monarchy. At first, in such a Potent Empire, it could
not but meet with opposition. In such a case, what ever side gets the Victory,
the Public loses its Freedom, unless the opposition be managed by the
Public it self, and such persons of integrity be entrusted with the defense of
Liberty, as may not intend the making of their own Fortunes, rather than the
maintenance of the universal Interest. Therefore, if either Pompey, or Brutus
had overcome, it is imagined by all rational People, that they had never
restored unto the Romans that beloved liberty which they enjoyed before. The
truth is, that then the Empire was grown so great, and the Roman Citizens so
powerful, that if there had not been one above them, to moderate their
pretentions, and keep them from Divisions, the Roman Empire had been often
troubled with civil Wars. This was one of the reaons which Agrippa, a wise
Counselor of Augustus the Emperor gave unto him, to dissuade him from
resigning over his Supreme Authority to the Senate and People. We do all
acknowledge, that there can be no Government See this examined by du Haill^^.
in the beginning of his Hist. of France.
so happy as Monarchy; When the Prince and People understand one another well,
and when there is a mutual correspondency Appian.
Army, and several other Officers were chosen in these Assemblies, sometimes in
the others. They did also meet to Judge of crimes committed against the public
safety, Perduellionis reus, is one guilty of Treason.
as Treason. When any person had disgraced the Roman name, and that the Censor
had taken notice of him, he was blotted out of the Roll of his Century, and had
no more liberty to give his Vote in these Assemhlies.

Mars augusta sui renovat suffragia campi. Claud. In this place were several
enclosures, named septa, or ovilia, to separate the Tribes and Classes.
They did all meet with their Weapons out of the City in a place dedicated to
some God, and hallowed by the Augures. The Campius Martius, a large spot of
ground given to the City by Caia Terratia a Vestal Virgin, was the common
Rendezvous of the Romans on such occasions. It was situate without the City
near the River, and in it were many convenient things and places to exercise
Youth in all manner of Martial sports.

Et miserae macul^vit ovilia Romae. Lucan.
Whiles the Roman People were thus assembled in Arms about the Tent of one of
their chief Magistrates, who was always to sit there as a Judge or President;
There was a Flag hung out on the top of the Janiculum, and a Guard of armed Men
placed there.

Comitia Tributae, were the assemblies of the Wards or Quarters of the City.
They did meet either in the Field of Mars, or in the Capitol, or in the Circus
Flaminius; When there was urgent occasion, and when the Comitia cen^uriata or
curiata, were no^ permitted to assemble, either because of the unlawful days,
or because of some ominous signs in the Heavens that did threaten them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Roman Magistrates.
ROME was at first a Monarchy. Seven Kings successively did reign, until
Tarquinius Superbus was banished for his licentiousness. He endeavored to
recover again his Right by the assistance of the neighbor Princes; But the
Senate and People did oppose him with so much animosity, that He, and all his
Friends lost their labor in compelling them to receive him again. The Romans
did then agree to govern their Affairs partly in the manner of an Aristocracy,
and partly as a Democracy; For the Senate and Supreme Magistrates did rule but
in such a manner, that the People had a hand in most Affairs of consequence. So
that as the Romans were composed of several different orders of Men, it could
never submit long under a perfect Aristocracy, unless it had degenerated to a
perfect Tyranny, as Macchiavel observes upon T. Livius. This may easily appear
by their frequent murmurings, and the seditions of the People; for when the
Aristocracy did gain upon the Democracy, and spondency between them, of Love,
and Obedience.

P^oefect is vel tribun is Celerum
The Roman Magistrates were either Majores or Minores. The ordinary Magistrates
of the first Division, were at first the King, the Captain of the Kings Guard,
afterward the Consuls, the Censors, the Praetors, the Generals, the Caesar's,
the Tribunes, the Governors of the City. The extraordinary were the Interrex,
the Dictator, the Master of the Horse, the Decemviri, the Colonels of the Army,
entrusted with the power of the Consuls, and the Triumviri.

The Under-Magistrates commonly chosen, were the Treasurer of the City, the
Tribunes of the People, the Curats or Overseers of all the Tribes, the Aediles,
etc. Thief sorts we shall describe in order with the rest of the Underofficers
chosen upon special occasions. Whilst the Kings reigned in Rome there was an
absolute Monarchy, they made Laws with or without the consent of the People.
They had a Guard of young Soldiers called Celeres, from their swiftness, or
Trossuli, or Flexumines, to attend upon their Persons. Their Chief Commander
was named Praefectus, or Tribunus Celerum. He was next in place and dignity to
the King. Besides these, the Prince had 12 Men to wait upon him, called
Lictores; their Office was to punnish the Offenders, and put in execution the
Kings Commands* When he did go abroad, these Men were to march before him, and
to carry the Fasces, the bundle of Rods, and the Hatchet, which was bound up,
and appearing at the top of them. The different kinds of Instruments of Justice
did intimate, that some Offenders were to be chastised with milder punnishments
with Rods, and others, when there was no other remedy, were to be cut off with
the Hatchet. This bundle of Rods, with the Hatchet, was always carried before
Fasces deponere, to lay down a command. Fascihus abrogatis, the authority being
taken away.
the Consuls, and the other Supreme Magistrates of the Romans. The King had
Ornaments to distinguish him from the rest of the People; for He was clothed
in a Purple Gown, when He did do Justice, He did sit in a Chair of State,
called Curulis, or Eburnea, of Ivory, with his Guard of lusty Plutarch. in vit.
Romul.
and Noble Youths mentioned before, about him, who were chosen out of the best
Families of Rome, and recommended by the Suffrages of the People, to wait upon
the Prince. They were armed with such a kind of Weapon as His Majesty's
Pensioners.

T. Livius, lib. 1. Dion. lib. 1.
The Roman Senate was first elected by Romulus, to assist him in the management
of the Affairs of State, and in the Government of the City, whilst He was
employed in the continual Wars with his Neghbours. He caused an hundred of the
most sufficient and wisest Men to be chosen out of every Tribe, and to meet
together about the Public business; Patres vel Senatores vocabantur ob ^tatem.
this Assemby he called Senate. Afterward, when his Subjects did increase by
the continual coming in of the Malefactors of his Neighbors, who did shelter
themselves in his Asyle from the pursuance of the Justice of their Country;
And when he had added the Subjects of Tatius the King of the Sabines to the
Inhabitants of Rome, He chose one hundred more of the noblest Persons ^ionys.
lib. 2.
to the Senate. Tarquinius Prisons, to ingratiate himself with his People,
admitted one hundred more, so that then there were three hundred in all. About
the time of the Caesar's, there were above a thousand Senators: They were
sometimes elected out of the Plebeian Families; but as an Author informs us,
they were in such cases to be first enobled, and made Patricij, before they
could be admitted. The usual custom was, to choose a Senator when any was
wanting* either out of the Equestrian or Patrician Families. None was to be
admitted into this Venerable Assembly under the age of twenty years. There was
some distinction in the Senate; some were called senatores majoruus gentium;
they were of the Race of those who had been chosen by Romulus. Others were
named senatores minorum gentium; Allecti velpeharij Senato^es, were mean and
poor Senators.
such were of the Posterity of those who had been promoted to this Honor by
Tarquinius Pris^us, when the Kidgs were banished, they were all called Patres
conscripti. The Foreman of the Senate, who had been appointed by the Censor,
was to be chosen out of their number, who had been a Consul or Censor; He was
then styled Princeps senatus, the Prince of the Senate, because he was as a
President of this wise Assembly. It was a Venerable Company in the beginning of
the Empire The Plutarch in vit Pyrrlu.
Ambassadors o^ Pyrrhus King of Epir^s told him, that the Roman Senate, was
(...), a Company of many Kings. They were mig^t^ly esteemed all over the world.
It was a great crime to offer an affront to them: When they did assemble, They
did say* hoc been sit.
they did begin their Consultations with the Invocation of (...) The Sneton,
cap. 58. in Aug.
Votes of the major part did govern. When the Decree was made, it Was styled
sonatusconsultum. They did never meet but in a Temple of the Gods, in a
Sanctified place.

The power of the Senate was not always Polyb. 1. 6^
the same* In the time of the Consuls, the Senate did act without control; But
the succeeding Tyranny of the E^peroms destroyed this glorious Assembly. Their
chief business was to dispose of all Affairs relating to the public concerns,
only the enacting of Laws, the choice of Magistrates and the undertaking of
Wars, were left to the common People.

The Senate was wont to meet twice every Month; But before they did come
together, the Augures were appointed to make their Observations. When their
opinions were required, they did rise from their Seats, and pass over to him
of whose Referrem ad Senatum.

Illi Senatus datur, He is heard in the Senate.


Judgment they were, and whose advice was asked first; from hence comes the
Phrase, discedere in alicujus sententiam, to become of another man's Opinion.
When the Members of the Senate had committed some unvvorthy action, the Censors
did ejicere eum senatu, cast him out of the Senate. And when any of them was
absent, and could not give a just cause of his absence, he was sometimes fined
to pay a sum of Money.

Consulas.
The Consuls were the Supreme Magistrates in Rome, after the Kings had been
bannished. They were chosen out of the Noblemen or Patricij, and sometimes out
of the other Orders of Men. The People in their General Assemblies, called
Comitia, did name them every year. The Law did prohibit Scipio Afric. Pomp and
caesar, were chosen young.
any to be Elected under the age 42, or 43; And before that they could pretend
to this high dignity, they were to pass through all the meaner Offices of the
Commonwealth. It was no difficult business for such a one, who had behaved
himself well in his employments, and had obliged the Public by his generous
behavior, to obtain their Voices at this time. In this therefore appears the
Politic Government of the Romans, that they might oblige every Magistrate to
Justice and Equity, and to seek the satisfaction of the Public, they appointed
a Subordination of all the offices which were at the disposal of the People;
so that if in the meaner offices any did miscarry for want of ability; or if
any did commit Unjustice, He could never pretend higher at the next Assemblies.
None was to be made chief office in his absence; neither was any to continue
in that Office above a year, only Marius that brave Roman General, was elected
seven times, and once he was chosen when he did oppose the Cimbri, and other
Northern People, who intended the Destruction of the Roman Empire, and to
conquer all Italy, but they were all defeated by this excellent Commander.

But before the Consuls did enter into their Office, they did Sacrifice to the
Gods, and employ the Augures to make their Observations. This was practiced by
all the other Magistrates at their first admittance into their Offices.

The marks of the dignity of the Consuls, were the Bundles of Rods carried
before them by 12 Sergeants, as before the King, and the Sella eburnea, a Chair
of Ivory, placed upon an open Chariot, and therefore named curulis a curru. The
Consuls also were clothed with a Purple Robe called trabea* These Consuls
did command the Roman Armies, Viri Consulares, Men who had been Consuls. Polyb.
lib. 6. Cicero lib. 3. de legib.
dispose of the Revenues of the Provinces, punnish all offenders, call the
Senators together, assemble the People, treat with foreign Princes, and
manage many other Affairs of the Empire.

Censor.
The Censors were first appointed to ease the Consuls of part of their Burden;
for when the Empire began to flourish, and the Enemies of it began to
multiply, the Consuls were continually employed in the preservation of the
Public Interest from foreign Invasion, and in forcing the Neighbor Nations
to yield obedience to the Roman Eagles; so that they could not mind the
domestic Affairs: Therefore the Censors were chosen by the People, and enabled
with a Power not much less than that of the Consuls. Their office did oblige
them to look to the Public Revenues, to take an account of every Citizens
Estate and ability, to correct misdemeanors and public disgraces. They were
able to depose the Senators, to degrade the Equites, and take from them their
Ornaments when they did commit actions unworthy of the Roman name. This
discipline did encourage virtue, and prevent the mischiefs which Vice does
commonly bring upon a Nation.

If any did neglect his Patrimony and Estate, and make no improvement of it; or
if any did suffer his ground to be untilled; Agell. l. 4. c. 12.
or if any was not well furnished with Arms and necessaries for the War; Or if
any person did neglect his office, and spend his time in debauchery, the
Censors were to punish them according to their deservings. By this means the
Roman Empire did flourish, when there was an exact care taken to oblige every
man to his duty and employment. Idleness is a dangerous Vice in a Kingdom that
causes nothing but poverty and misery. I could wish that in this our Country
some order might be taken to employ our poorer sort of People, and drive the
wealthier from the Taverns and Alehouses, where many spend their days and
Estates. It is strange that most Corporations do svvarm with Beggars, whereas
they have most means to employ them for the advantage of the Public. Our Laws
are as good as the Romans, and as much conducing to the universal Interest, But
our Country officers, our Mayors of Towns, have not many times that Generous
Spirit in them, which their Offices, and the general Interest requires. We may
ascribe to the Idleness, to the Sloth and negligence, and to the small
employment of the native Commodities of our Land, all the evils and want which
do cause our murmurings.

These Censors did continue in their Offices Virgula Censoria was the Censors
Rod.

Lustrum, a Lustrando populum, was every five years.


five years complete. And as often as the Romans did take a view of all the
Censors and Members of the City. If any was left out of the Roll, he was
degraded for some misdemeanor. It was no little Honor to be named first omongst
the Senators and the Equites; they were named Principes senatorum, and Equitum.
The Censors were also to take care of the Ornaments of the Senatu m^ver^
aliquem, to banish or cast one out of the Senate.
Temples, of the Sacrifices, of the public Ways and Bridges; and to see that
all things relating to the Public Interest, might not suffer any damage.
Every five years the Censor was to Lustrare exercitum Romanum, to purge by
Sacrifice the Army of the Romans. The custom was to lead a Sow, a Bull, Cato,
was a very severe and notable Censor.
and a Ram round about the People encampped in the Field of Mars, and then to
Sacrifice these Beasts to this God of War.

The Praetors were appointed instead of the Consuls, to administer Justice to
the Public. Two were commonly chosen, Praetor major, or Vrbanus, for the
Affairs of the Roman Citizens; and Praetor peregrinus, or minor, to do Justice
to strangers. Before their admittance into their Offices, they did swear to
observe the Laws of the Commonwealth. Praetor Cerialis, was to provide Corn.

Praetor Tutelaris to command the Watch, and to provide for the safety of the
City in the night.

Praetores fidei commissarij, were to judge of causes concerning Feofments in
trust. Praetores quesitores, or Quaesitores parricidij were criminal Judges,
such as are the Provosts in France.


The number of these Praetors did increase in the flourishing State of the
Empire, to 16 or 18. The Praetors did judge of all sorts of Causes; the
criminal Causes were called Causae capitales. The Officers of the Court were
the Lictores, the Scribes, the Accensi or Baylifs; who did summon the people to
appear. Their Marks of Honor were a Sword and a Spear, which were placed by
them in the Court. When they first did enter into their Offices, they did
cause several Rules or Laws to be written in a Table, which was to be hanged
out in public, to give notice to every one how the Praetors did intend to
Judge. This was called Edictum Praetoris. At last, a certain Praetor gave Rules
for the rest to govern themselves by in the administration of Justice; his
Edict was called Edictum Perpetuum. When the Sentence was given against any
man, the party who did overcome, did lay his Hand upon the looser, or upon the
thing in dispute, and did use this form of words; Ego hunc hominem, or hanc rem
ex jure Quiritum meum, vel meam esse dico; then the Praetor did confirm his
saying, by adding addico, I do so adjudge it.

Addicu^t aves When there is a happy omen. Addicere bona, is to deliver up the
goods of any man.

Addictus, i. e. damnatus.


The Commonwealth at last was forced to yield to the ambition of Julius Caesar,
and his Successors, who were chosen Emperors. For when the Civil Wars were
ended, the Senate of Rome being moved by the Creatures of Julius Caesar,
bestowed upon him most glorious titles of Honor and Dignity, and established
him in the Supreme power during his life: they styled him a perpetual Dictator,
the Father of the Country, a Consul for 10 years, Sacrosanctus, and Imperator,
a Holy Person, and Emperor. This last name had been given after some notable
Victory to the Roman Generals by the Soldiers. Augustus added another Title to
the Emperors; for after Him they were named Augusti, a Surname proper to all
holy and sacred places and things. They were also called Pontifices maximi, the
chief Pontifs. Their power was far greatet than any other Magistrate before;
for they did what they pleased, without control.

Principes (...) ventutis.
The Princes of the Roman youth, were such as were designed for Emperors; They
were Honored with the title of most Noble Caesar's, when they had been chosen
to succeed in the Empire, and declared worthy of that Dignity in the Senate.
Augustus brought in that custom, which was observed by his Successors. In
England we have the Princes of Wales, who succeed in the Throne to our Kings.
In France the Dauphin, the eldest Son of the French King, reigns after his
Father. Thus in Germany, there are the Kings of the Romans, who are elected
during the lives of the Emperors, to succeed them in the Empire. The Governor
of the Prafectus urbis, Sueton. in Augusto. Dio. l. 52.
City of Rome, was first chosen and appointed by Augustus Caesar, to watch over,
and provide for the Affairs of the City. Unto his office it did belong to
examine controversies between Citizens, to sit as a Judge at the public
Plays, to do Justice to Slaves and Bondmen oppressed by the cruelty of their
Masters; to have an eye to the public Markets; and to concern himself with all
crimes committed within one hundred At every mile, there was a Stone fixed in
the ground; therefore 100 miles is named 100 lapides.
miles of the City. In the absence of the ordinary Magistrate, before Augustus,
there was a Praefectus Vrbis, who had only power when the King or Consuls were
absent in the War. They were not chosen by the People, but appointed by the
Consuls to T. Livius.
be their Lieutenants in their absence. Afterward it became an ordinary office,
especially Tacit. lib. 6.
when the Emperors departed to Constantinople* Agell. l. 19.
then the Governor of the City was as a Viceroy in Italy, the Emperors
Vicegerent.

Interrex.
The Interrex was appointed by the Senate when the Kings were dead, until
another Prince was chosen. And after the Kings Dionys. lib. 2. Interreges animo
erant december oonstituti ex decurijs Senatus unusquisque eorum insania habeha^ 5
dies itaque vocabatur magistratus quinqueduarius. Rosin. lib. 7.
had been expelled, the Title and Dignity did remain; for when a Magistrate had
quitted his Office, or when another could not speedily be chosen; or when the
Consuls could not be present to govern in the Assemblies. The Senate did
appoint an Interrex. The Dictator was chosen by the People, and the Senate in
the dangerous times of the Commonwealth, when some eminent danger did threaten
the state: He had a far greater Power than the Consuls; He was named Magister
populi: There was no appealing from his sentence to the People; He did continue
in his Office six months. There was another Officer chosen by him to be his
Lieutenant in his absence, He was Flor. Eutro ^i.
named Magister equitum. The Master of the Horse, because in the War he did
command the Horse, and the Dictator the Foot, as we may see in T. Livius.

It is worthy of our observation, that these Dictators, who were entrusted with
such an uncontrollable Authority, did never abuse it to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth; and that it was a very rare thing to see a Citizen of Rome
punished by them, either Dio^ys. lib. 5.
with Death or Bannishment.

Decemviri.
The Decemviri, who were enabled with the Authority of the Consuls, only to
make and establish Laws over the City of Rome, were appointed in the beginning
of the Empire for that purpose. The Kings who had formerly governed, did
administer Justice according to their pleasure; But when the Romans saw in what
inconveniency they would fall, if they had not Statutes and settled Laws to
govern their Magistrates; they chose ten Men to examine the Laws of the
Athenians, and cause the best of them to be graven upon ten Tables of Brass,
for to remain as the standing Rules of Government. Afterward two Tables more
were added; so that they were called Leges 12 Tabularum. These Magistrates did
succeed on another in the Government; for every one had the supreme Power by
turns: But they were put down about three years after their establishment, and
the Consuls did succeed them.

Tribuni mil^tum.
The Tribunes of the Soldiers were of two sorts; some did govern the Empire, as
the Consuls, and the others were only as Colonels in the Army. The former were
only chosen to appease the murmurings of the People, who did grumble because
they could not pretend to the supreme Magistracy, as the Patricij did, for the
Senate did oppose the election of Consuls out of the Plebeian Families;
therefore to content the Commonalty, they did suffer some to be elected out of
them, who should have the Authority of the Consuls, but not the name; they were
styled Tribuni militum consulari potestate praediti.

The Tribuni militum chosen by the Consuls, were called Rutuli or Rufi, because
Rutilius Rufus brought in that custom: they who were appointed by the Army,
were named Suffecti; and the others chosen by the Commons, were styled
Comitiati tribuni.

Triumviri.
Triumviri, were of many sorts; there were Triumviri capitales, called also
tresviri, or treviri capitales, who were as our High-Sheriffs: they had power
to Imprison, and release out of Prison; they did also pnnish all Malefactors
who were not Romans. Eight Bailiffs did commonly attend upon them.

Triumviri Minarij, were appointed to pay out of the Public treasury, money to
satisfy for poor men's Debts.

Triumviri coloniae deducendae, were to establish the Colonies of the Romans in
foreign Nations.

Triumviri Monetales, or Triumviri A. A. AE. F. F. as Rosinus calls them, i. e.
Auro, Argento, Aere, Flando, Feriendo, because they had charge of the Mint*

Tacit. l. 5. Annal.
Triumviri nocturni, were certain men, who were to go the Rounds, and give
notice when Fire did break out in the City of Rome.

Triumviri Reipub. constituendae, were established after the Massacre of Julius
Caesar; For when his adopted Son Octavius did labor to revenge his death, and
that he could not compass his design, unless Antonius and Lepidus did join with
him; He concluded an agreement with them to govern the Empire between them; to
divide the Provinces, and raise an Army which should pursue after M. Brutus,
and Cassius, the two most powerful murderers of Julius Caesar: they pretended
to settle the Commonwealth but they Triumviratus, alone, signifies this bloody
Government of Aug. Ant. and Lepid.
filled Rome with the Blood of all their Enemies, and proscribed 130 Senators.
The rest of the Senate continued unto them the supreme Magistracy with full
power for five years, because they could not oppose them, nor their
proceedings; for they had at their heels two well furnished Armies.

Quaestores Vrbani, or Aerarij, were the public treasurers, who had a
Commission to keep the Riches, and receive the Revenues of the Commonwealth
from the Officers of the Provinces. At first there was Live. l. 7.
two appointed; afterward two more were chosen by the People to accompany the
Consuls in their Expeditions. These last were as our Commissary-Generals, or as
Treasurers of an Army; for they were to provide all things necessary for the
Soldiers, and receive the In-comes of the Provinces; sell and dispose of the
Spoils of the Enemy.

When the Generals did return home before they could obtain the Honor of the
Triumph; they were bound to give an account of the number of the Enemies, and
of the Roman Citizens, who had been slain, to these Questores Vrbani.

Tribuni plebis.
The Tribunes of the People, were first estadlished at Rome, when the Commons
had been forced to a sedition by the cruel exactions of the Nobles. They
assembled upon Mount Aventine, and sent word to the Senate, that they were
resolved to leave their City, and settle somevvhere else, if they did not grant
unto them a Discharge of all Debts, and such Laws as might for the future
shelter them from the unjust usage of the vvealthier Citizens; with certain
Magistrates, whose business should be to mind the good of the People. The
danger obliged the Senate to condescend to their demands: two Officers were
chosen first out of the Tribunes, or Colonels of the Army; and therefore they
were named Tribuni plebis.

They were persons Sacro-sancti, most holy and sacred. It was no less than a
capitol crime to offend them by Word or Deed: They who had been so daring, were
by the Law homines sacri, devoted or condemned ipso facto, to be sacrificed to
the Gods. These Tribunes had power to Inter^^dere.
oppose the proceedings and Decrees of the Senate. They were not admitted into
this Venerable Assembly, but had their places at the entrance of it when any
Decree had been made; It was sent to them to receive an approbation, which they
did signify by writing upon it a Roman T. Their number did increase to 10, and
their Authority also became greater than at the first Institution; for they did
Enact Laws with the consent of the People, and commit many disorders to the
prejudice of the Senate, and of the Consuls; so that sometimes they were named
Pestes reipublicae. Their Houses were open both day and night, that they might
serve for a refuge to all that should fly unto them for succor. And whiles
they were in that Office, it was not lawful for them to be absent a day out of
the Macrob. lib. 4 ^aturn.
City, except in the Latin Festivals. Their Power also was limited within the
walls o^ Rome: They could not concern themselves with things acted out of the
limits of the City.

Aediles, were Magistrates who had a ca^ to see the Temples and Public Houses
in ^ good repair: From Aedes therefore Churches and holy Houses they have
borrow^ their title Aediles. There were three sort^ Aediles plebis, were
Magistrates under the Tribunes of the People instituted at the same time as the
former. Their Office d^ oblige them to wait upon the Tribunes (...) the People,
to judge of small matters, (...) restrain the violent humors of Creditor^ to
limit the number of Drinking-houses, (...) punish railings, and small offenses;
to so to the Weights and Measures; to provi^ Corn and Oil for the Provision of
the City and to cause all Public Houses to be due repaired; to order all
conveniences for public Sports and Plays, etc. Aediles Curules Asella curuli
qua vehehantur.
were chosen out of the Senate, as the former were out of the People: their
Office was the same, but they did take their turns: One year the Aediles plebis
did govern, the next the Curules; but afterward they observed no such order in
the execution of their Office. There were also in Rome Aediles They were named
also Praefecti annonae.
Cereales, Magistrates who had a care of the Corn and Victuals sold in the
Market. Besides these, there were certain Persons called Quatuorviri viarum
curandarum, Officers appointed by theenate to see that the Public ways might
be well Paved. These Pensabam pharium

Getulis messibns annum, i. e. annouam.

Africa, Egypt, and Gallia, did send to Rome Corn every year as Tribute to be
divided amongst the People.


men were under the Censors, unto whose office the care of the public ways did
belong. They were also called Curatores viarum. The Keepers of the Soldiers
Treasury, were established first by Augustus Caesar, when he saw it necessary
for the safety of the City, and of the Empire, to mantain constantly a certain
number of Legions always in Arms, that his ordinary In-come was not sufficient;
and that he could find no other way to furnish the Expenses, He promised to
cast into the Treasury every year a large sum of money, for Himself and
Successor. All the wealthiest Praefecti aerarij, Aerarium Gaza nominabatur.
(...) Custos. gazae.
Citizens, and the Princes subject to his command, did imitate his Example: But
when this was not yet sufficient, he commanded that the 20 part of all
Inheritances, and Legacies, left to persons who were not Duplex aerarium in
Roma vulgar and sacrum vel sanctius quod a Caesare ablatum ^uit.

Prafectus praetorio.

Wolfgang* Laz. Comment. reip. Romans l. 1.


near of kin to the deceased, should come into this Treasury. He appointed
three persons chosen out of the Praetorian Bands to keep it. The Captains of
the Emperors Guards were powerful men in the Roman Empire: they did raise and
depose their Masters at their pleasure, and commit many Insolences, for which
many times they did loose their Heads. Praetorium, was the Generals Pavilion,
or the Princes Palace, and Cohors praetoria.
Praetoriani milites, the Soldiers of the Emperors Guard; from hence their
Captain is styled Praefectus praetorio.

Praefectus frumenti dividendi, was an Officer appointed by Augustus to
distribute the Corn which he did give to the Public.

Praefectus vigilum, was the Captain of the City Watch: For there were several
Companies divided in the City, to prevent Sedition and Mutiny, and a Commander
over them, who was their Captain.

The Keeper of the Kings Exchequer was a considerable Officer in Rome; He was
named Advocatus sisci
Advocatus Fisci.

Aer^rium, is a Treasury for public Money, Fiscus, was the treasury for the
Emperors private expense.
As the Roman Empire did enlarge its Bounds, the number of Officers did also
increase every year. The People and Senate did send their Commissioners to
execute Justice in all the Provinces subject to their Jurisdiction. At first,
only the Praetores were required; But when they had conquered large Kingdoms*
they reduced them into Provinces, and appointed that such as should go out of
their Consulships, should depart Pro-consul, was either a Governor of a
^rovince, or a Consul, whose Commission was continued to him beyond the year;
Or a Lieutenant of a Consul, who did lead for him his Army.
into these large and Noble Divisions of the Empire, to do Justice, and manage
the public Affairs of Peace and War; Then these Governors were styled
Pro-consuls; sometimes they had an Assistant named Praetor, whose office was to
do Justice in the Province between dissenting parties. Now in the flourishing
state of the Empire, some Kingdoms were Praetoriae, belonging to the Praetors:
Others were Consulares; for such as were of a Consuls degree. Under the
Emperors of Rome, some Provinces were disposed of by the People and Senate;
the Governors of these were called Proconsules; and some by the Emperors, who
did give o t their Commissions to their Favorites, named Propraetores. Before,
when the Consuls Dion. l. 35.
did govern the Empire, they did Camparar^ Provincias*
agree amongst themselves about the Provinces unto which they were to repair:
when the time of their Governing was expired, or when they did * cast Lots
for the Provinces* If there was any dangerous War to manage, these
Pro-consu^s did choose a This word signifies an Ambassador, a Lieutenant, of a
General: or of a Propraet^r, or of a Proconsul.
Legatus, Idvocabatur sortiri Provincias.
unto whom was given a Quaestor, a Treasurer to have an eye upon the Expenses
and In-comes of the Empire. The Senate did send these Provincial Magistrates in
very great pomp, and did appoint unto them their Attendance, Furniture, Train,
Army, Wages, etc. They did always receive a golden Ring amongst their
Furniture, to Seal Agell. l. 15. c. 4. Their Notaries were persons of the
greatest eminency.
Letters and Dispatches, as I conceive. Their Train was composed of Colonels,
Captains, Notaries, Sergeants, Secretaries, Bailiffs, Cryers, Executioners,
Interpreters, Soothsayers, Physicians, and such kind of men. When they were to
depart, they did go up to the Capitol, to make Vovvs to Jupiter for the
vvelfare of the Empire; and then with their Lictores, their Officers bearing
before them twelve Hatchets, and bundles of Rods; they did go out of the City
Paludati, that is covered with a Cloak, and at the Gate they were complemented
by all their friends with many good vvishes. As soon as they were entered
into their Provinces, they did begin to command; and the Commission of the
former Governors did end.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Roman Laws, and of many particulars relating to their Judiciary
proceedings.
IT is not possible for a Kingdom, or a Society of Men to live without Laws;
Nature, and our Interest do recommend certain Rules of behaviors, upon which
much of the happiness of a Commonwealth depends. The Romans at first had no
other Laws, but the Pleasure and Will of their Princes and Magistrates, who
did govern them according to the light of Nature, and their Inclinations; But
this kind of ruling is subject to mistakes and injustice: therefore, for the
bene^it of the People, it was necessary that the Laws should be written. The 12
Tables were famous at Rome. Afterward the Supreme Magistrate did recommend a
Law, which was called by the name of the person who caused it to be published.
It would be too tedious a work to mention every Law of the Romans; several
learned Lawyers have given a sufficient account of them, as Baldunius,
Pomponius, Manutius, Prateus, and many others. I have here collected the
Statutes which are most remarkable, and which concern our present Estate.

Papirius caused these Laws to be established; that nothing should be done
without some adress to the Gods. That none but the Patri^ij should be suffered
to Sacrifice, and gov^rn the Commonwealth. That only the Kings should command
over the Worship of the Gods. That the Fables of their Divinities should not be
credited. That no foreign God should be Worshipped within the City, besides
Faunus. That none should offer to speak Bawdy in the presence of Women. That
all Murdrers were to be slain. That none should offer to enter into the City
but by the Gates, because the Walls were to be esteemed most sacred* That every
Woman lawfully joined in Matrimony with a Man, be a partaker of his Estate.
That if a Wife be found guilty of Adultery, it shall be lawful for the Husband,
and her Relations to put her to death as they please. That if she did drink
Wine she was to be punish as an Adultress. It was not lawful for the Roman
Women to taste of Wine; therefore when they did marry, they made an agreement
with their Husbands, to have that liberty at certain times; as when they were
brought to Bed, when they were sick, etc

It was not lawful for a Man to leave his Wife, unless she were guilty of a
grievous crime contrary to the laws of Marriage.

If a Child did offer to strike his Parent* he was to be devoted, sacer, or
sacrificed to the God. s

All monstrous creatures were to be slain.

In the 12 Tables were to be seen these Laws.

That no Roman Citizen should be condemned to die, but by the Sentence of the
General Assemblies. That the Command of the People should be a Law. That if a
Judge should take a Bribe, He was to be punished with death. That all false
Witnesses were to be cast down the Rock Tarpeia. That none should entertain in
the City Public Meetings in the Night. That if a Roman Citizen did encourage
the enemy against the Empire, or did betray a Citizen, He should be punished
with the loss of his life. That a Father should have Potestas vitae and neck
vocabatur.
power of Life and Death over his lawful Child. That every Father had power upon
his Deathbed to bequeath his Money to any body, and to appoint Tutors for his
Children. If any did 4 sorts, testamentarius, legitimus, Da^^v^^ vel
^iduciari^s* and honorari^s; The last was such as are appointed Overseers, to
see the Will of the deceased performed.

Si injuriam alteri faxit aeri^ poena sunto.


die without Will, or in a Frensy, the Kindred and Relations were to take
charge of his Estate and Children. That if any was a Prodigal, his nearest
Kindred should govern his Estate, when the Praetor had understood his
behavior. That if a Child was born within ten Months after the Fathers Death,
it should be legitimate, and Heir to the Estate. If any did offer Injury to
another, he was to be punished by his Purse: And if he did maim him in one of
his Members, he was to be requited in the same manner.

Si membrum rapserit e pact^ talio est^.
It was Enacted by Abenobardus, that the College of Priests should not receive
indifferently any persons into their Orders, until the People had sufficiently
approved of their behavior and honesty. It would not be amiss if this Roman
Law was in force amongst us. It was not lawful to beat a Citizen of Rome with
Rods, or to punish him indicta causa, that is, before he came to a hearing. The
Senators were commanded by the Law to abstain from all manner of trading.

There was 3 kind of Tithes
The Tithe of all sorts of Corn was duly paid to the Romans out of all the
Provinces; and that was named decumae, as the Receivers were styled decumani*

frumentum aestimatum, raised by a Tax for the Deputy of the Province.

Frumentum imperatum, was Corn exacted from the Province for the Army; and
frumentum decumanum, the ordinary ^enths


The Romans had also several Laws to limit the prodigalities in public Feasts.
They commanded that in the ordinary Banquets, none should spend above ten
asses, every assis being worth about a Penny English Money. They had a Law that
no Wife should enjoy above a quarter part of her dead Husbands Estate. And for
the better understanding of the Wills, we may take notice, that there were
Wills called Testamenta in Praecinctu made by the Soldiers in the Army in the
presence of their Comrades, Viva voce Testamenta calatis Comitiis, in the
presence of all the People assembled together; and Testamenta per emanci
pationem familiae, which was done by a pretended Sale of all the concerns of a
Family, to an intimate friend of the Testator; He is called by the Lawyers The
whole Estate is named As by the Lawyers.

In totum assen institutus haeres is an Heir to the whole Estate.

Ex lato Ass, is but to apart.


Haeres fiduciarius, or Imaginarius. When the other was dead, he was then Pater
Fudiciarius, and was to have the power of a Father, until the Children came to
be of Age.

Thieves were condemned to restore fourfold to the Owners: this Law was called
Lex quadrupli, and the Accusers, Quadruplitores. But if any had stolen so much,
that he old not make satisfaction, he was to give all his Goods.

Their manner of proceeding in Law was thus: First, the Plaintiff having caused
the Defendant to be warned into the Courc, he did present a kind of Petition to
the Judge that his cause might be heard before him; this was styled Postulatio:
when it was granted, Postulare aliquem decrimine, is to accuse one of a crime.
he did proceed to intendere actionem, or litem; or he did diem dicere, appoint
a day: this was followed by an engagement of the Defendant to appear, by giving
a Surety; Promittebat vadimonium.
when the day o^ appearance was come, which was commonly dies perendinus, the
Plaintiff was obliged to swear to the * Calumniam dejurare.
Judge, that he did not accuse the Defendant calumniandi gratia, only to
calumniate him. On the day of examining, the accusation both parties were to be
present, unless they were sick, if otherwise, they did Lite vel caus^ cadebat.
loose their Cause, and the Judge did give out an Execution against the party,
with * Edictum peremptorium.
an order to seize upon his Goods. But before the final Sentence was given, the
Judges did Sortitio Judicum.
cast Lotts, to know who should judge of such a Cause; and then if the Defendant
had any reason to think that such Judges would be partial, he had liberty to
except * Rejicere judices.
against him, and another was chosen in his room: when the Judge had heard the
cause, he did deliver a little tabella, where was written either a Roman C for
condemnation, or A for absolution, or N L for non liquet* Ampliatio, is a
Reprieve.
that did signify* that the Cause was to be heard another time. The Grecians had
also three Letters to express the Sentence that was given, ^ for Condemnation,
T for Absolution, and A for a Reprieve. Now in many Courts of Justice, a
Javeline stood at the Bar; they did also set up the same Weapon when they did
make sale of any Goods: therefore sub hasta vendere, or or praeconi subjicere,
is to expose publicly Goods to Sale by a Crier; the Buyers were named
Sectores, they did signify their desire of Buying by digitum tollendo, by
lifting up their Finger. Their ordinary Money was As, a M. S. is the Character
for Sestertius, or L. L. S.
Penny, and Sesterius 2 d. ob. Sestertium, a hundred Sestertij, that is about
eight or nine Pounds English money. They did number their Estates and Money by
these Sestertij, as december sestertij, ten sestertij; december sestertium 1000
sestertij decies sestertium ten hundred thousand sestertij.

CHAP. X.
Of the Roman Punishments inflicted upon Offenders.
THE lesser Punishments were loss of Goods, which was either the loss of all,
named mulcta suprema; or the loss of part, called a Fine, or mulcta minima!
Capitis They were fined by the loss of their Sheep and Oxen.
diminutio, was a degrading of a Man from a higher Tribe to a lower, which was
either minima, or media; to the lowest Tribe or a dashing of his name out of
the Romans Catalogue: this was maxima diminutio Capitis. Sometimies it was
followed by a Banishment of the Offender, unto whom interdicebatur usus aquae
and ignis, the use of Water and Lata fuga vel deportatio vocabaturr.
of Wine was forbidden. The other severer punishments, were Furca, Crux, Carcer,
Culeus, Equuleus, Scala, Gemoniae, etc. This we must note, that when the
Offenders were led to Execution without the Gates of the City, a little Bell
was tied about them, to give notice to every one to stand out of the way, that
they might not defile themselves by touching such a one.

Furca, was a common punishment of the Romans; they did employ it to disgrace
an Offender, either by obliging him only to carry it about the City, or
Supplicium more majorum vocabatus.
by whipping him in the way. These kind of People, whose unhappiness it was to
be thus treated, were named afterward Furciferes: they did also employ the
Furca in punishing to death; the poor Miscreant did bear it out of the City to
the place appointed, and at certain stages the Executioner did make him feel
the smart of his Rods; when he was come to the fatal place, the Executioner did
chop off his Head. Now this Furca was two Beams joined together, either in the
middle, or in the top. Justus Lipsius has written a learned treatise, de
Cruce, which was an Instrument not much unlike to the Furca. The Servile
supplicium.
custom did oblige every one to bear their Cross, upon which they were to
suffer, and then to be nailed upon it. There were many forts of Crosses in use
amongst the Romans, but none was for an ingenious Man. It was Vocabatur
patibulum.
a kind of punishment only proper for Slaves and men of the lowest rank. They
were nailed to this cursed Wood, and an Inscription over them, signifying the
Crime that brought them to this shameful punishment. Ergastulum, is a Prison
for Slaves and Fencers.
The public Prison where they were kept, was named Carcer; In it were to be
seen two Rooms. Tullianum, was the Dungeon where Malefactors were strangled
Robur, was a place of strength, out of which they could not break forth,
where they were sometimes put to Death. Nervus, was like our Stocks, where
the Feet were laid. Collumbar and numella, was a place to put the neck, that
resembled our Pillory. Codex, was a Block fastened to Malefactors, upon which
they did use to sit. Culeus, was a kind of punishment due to Paricides. They
did first whip the Offender with Rods, until the Blood did gush out of their
Veins; then they did sovve him up in a Leathern sack, called Culeus, with a
Cog, a Cock, a Viper, and an Ape; with this sad and loathsome company, they did
cast him headlong into the Sea and drovvnd him.

I^gn^m tortorium vel Stipes ^oxialis.

Fidicula, was an Engine like unto this with strings, to torture every joint


Eculeus, was an Engine proper to Rack and torment Offenders, whose Body did
appear as they that were crucified on the Cross. It was invented on purpose
to force men suspected of a crime to a confession of their Guilt. I conceive
this Engine was made in such a manner, that it did stretch every joint in the
Body. The Romans did sometimes increase the torture of the Persons racked upon
this Engine, by applying hot Irons to the Offenders naked Body. Lamina and
Vngulae; were Instruments made for this purpose, to add to the pain of the
miserable creature, whose misfortune had brought him to this torment.
Sometimes the Offenders were condemned to be thr own down headlong from the
Rock, upon which stood the Capitol, called Tarpeia rupes. There was another
place called Gradus Gemmonij, or Scalae Gemoniae, near the River Tiber, from
which they did cast the guilty persons to drovvnd them in the water. Some
describe thus the manner of this kind of punishment. The Executioner did fasten
a Hook in the mouth of the poor wretch, and did dragg him through the streets
from his Prison to this infamous place, and then he did cast him down
headlong into the River, or did burn him, as some do relate.

Tunica, was another kind of punishment. They did put the Criminal in a Coat
daubed with Pitch and Brimstone within and without; and in this manner they
did cast him into the Fire prepared for him.

Damnatio ad Gladium, was when a man was condemned to end his days with the
edge of the Sword; either by fighting in the public Plays amongst the
Fencers, or by receiving the fatal blow from the hand of an Executioner.

Restari^ nom^nabantur.
Damnatio ad Bestias, was the condemning of a man to be devoured by Lions,
Bears, or other wild Beasts, Sometimes they did expose them all naked to the
mercy of these Savage Creatures; and at other times they did furnish unto them
Weapons, to enable them to contend with the Beasts, and show some sport to the
gazing multitude.

Ergastulum, was a Prison for Slaves, who were to be kept there, and obliged to
work for their livelihood. Some did belong to Noblemen; they were designed for
the most part for the slaughter, to delight the People in the Amphitheatre in
fighting. They did* daily exercise themselves by Fencing. A certain Master of
Arms did teach them, as we have already taken notice. And that they might be
hindted from an escape, they had Pedes annulatos habebant and saepe
inscriptiones infronte.
Bolts and Chains night and day put upon their Legs. Many Offenders were
condemned to these kind of Prisons, that they might be exercised in digging the
Ground, in grinding Corn, in In Antliam damnari, is, to be condemned to be a
drawer of water.

Pistrinum, is a Hand-Mill.


drawing water, and in many other laborious and painful works. The Offenders
were also sent ad* Metalla, to the Mines, which was a grievous punishment. They
did also mark them in the Forehead with an infamous Letter; they were named
Stigmatici, or literati, or nebulones stigmatici. The Romans did also chastise
their Criminal persons with Whips as well as with Rods; and to increase the
pain, such did tie at the end of every thong, Nails, Bones, and other hard
things, so that many times the Patient did give up the Ghost under the strokes.
These Whips were named Scorpiones.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Roman Militia.
IT will not be amiss to know how the Conquerors of the World arived to that
excessive Power, and how they attained to an universal Monarchy over most part
of the known Nations. Their Martial Discipline, and the excellent order which
was established amongst them in their Armies, did assist them as much in their
Expeditions, as their valor and Courage. And first, we may take notice that
they did never engage themselves rashly in a War. Their custom was to seek all
other means to bring their Enemies to Reason; when they did see all their
endeavors frustrated, they did then make use of War, as the last and most
desperate Remedy. The Feciales, an order of Priests mentioned before, were
dispatched with a Commission to declare War to the Enemies, one of their number
clothed in a stately Robe, with a Caduceus in his hand, did make his address
to Jupiter, and the rest of the gods, as soon as he was entered into their
Borders, telling them, that he was there in the name of the Romans to demand
Justice of such a City or Nation. When he was come into the presence of the
Enemies Magistrates, he did openly declare his business to them, with
Imprecations and Curses. If they did give Tit. Live. l. 1.
him no satisfaction within 30 days after his arrival, he did then tell them
that the People of Rome would deliberate about that business, and endeavor to
oblige them to Justice; and then he did cast out of his hand a bloody Javeline,
with these words; In the Polyb. l. 3.
name of the People of Rome I declare War to such a Nation.

When the Romans did conclude a Peace, they did also send these Feciales, who
were to carry with them some Grass out of Rome; Rosin.
When they were come into the presence of the other party, the chief of them,
named Paterpatratus, did take a Stone, and knock a Hog on the head, Jurare per
Jove^ vocababatur.
swearing, and wishing that Jupiter would thus punish him, or that People that
intended any mischief or deceit by the Treaty; or that should first violate
their Oath, and break the agreement by any public acts of hostility.

When the war was proclaimed by the order of the People, and by the decree of
the Senate; the next action was to pitch upon a worthy General to manage it,
and Command the Soldiers that were to be sent against Mercri sub aliquo, to
serve in War under a Commander.
the Enemy. Servius upon Virgil takes notice of three kinds of warfar ordinary
in Rome. There was Sacramentum, ^o named, because all the Soldiers did engage
themselves by an Oath to fight for the Commonwealth, Miles e meritus, a Soldier
who had served his time in War.
to obey their Commanders, and to not depart from the War until it was finished.
2. Conjuratio, which was when there was some great tumult or rising in Italy,
or upon Sine Sacramento non licebat pugnare cum host.
the Borders. In such a case, because the General had not time to receive the
Oath from everyone, he was wont to say, qui vult salvam Claud.
rempublicam me sequatur, and to assend up to the Capitol the common Rendezvous
in such occasions, causing two Banners to be displayed, the one of a Rose-red
color Milites subitari^ or per conjurdtionem.
for the Infantry, and another of a Skie-colour for the Cavalry or Horsemen.
The third sort of Warfar was named Evocatio, and the Soldiers Evocati milites:
When the General to fill up his Army, did command several persons dispersed in
the Roman Dominions, to repair to their Colors, and come to his assistance.
Besides, the General did dispatch his Orders to all the People allied to the
Romans, to send their succors by such a time, and at a place appointed.

The whole Army was divided into Roman Legions and Auxiliaries. Every Legion
was composed sometimes of 3000, sometimes of 4000, and never above 6000 Foot,
with some few Troops of Horsemen, who were to wait upon their Legions in the
Battle. The Foot were divided into Cohortes, or Companies; in every Legion
there was wont to be ten Cohortes. Every Cohors did contain* three Maniples,
every Maniple two Centuries, From Centum, they are named Centuriae.
and every Century an hundred Men. The Centuries were subdivided into
contubernia, certain Files of Men, who did lodge always together; their
Corporal or Sergeant was named Caput contubernij, or Decanus, as his Captain
was named Centurio. At the Rear of every Century, did march a Commander next to
a Centurion, called Tergiductor, of the same power as our Lieutenants of
Companies. The Horsemen did appear in Troops called Turmae, and every Turmae
had three Decuria's, and every Decuria ten Decurio, a commander of such a
number of Horse men.
Horsemen. The Captain of every Troop was named Praefectus Equitum, and the
chief Commander of the Army Imperator; especially when he had been so happy as
to obtain a Victory, where one thousand of the Enemies were slain. Over every
Legion there was a Tribune or a Colonel under the General.

In this Army, none was received amongst the Legions; but after 17 years of
Age; and every one was to be a Roman born, a Freeman. I confess that in cases
of necessity, they were forced to Muster in their Army Slaves and Fencers.

The number of the Roman Legions did vary according to the occasions of the
Commonwealth: Sometimes there have been 25 Legions belonging to the Empire,
dispersed round about the Borders near the Enemies Country.

But we must take notice, that before the Armies did march to find out the
Enemy; the General, with the rest of the superior Officers, were very diligent
and careful in the placing of their Men, and disposing of them to the best
advantage. The poorer sort, and the weakest bodies they did pick out of the
Army, to put them together in Companies separate from the rest, they called
them Velites. These kind of Soldiers were the most contemptible Soldiers, and
such as were exposed to all the dangers. As in the Turks Army, there are
multitudes of a certain vile sort of Soldiers, who are placed in the Front of
the Battle, and beaten to the assault, to fill up the Ditches with their
Bodies, and cause the Enemy to spend their Fury upon them: So was it in the
Roman Army, there were certain Companies picked out of the rest, to be employed
in assaulting the Enemy, and in receiving the first onset. They were lightly
Armed, and therefore from their swiftness in Retreats, they were called
Velites. When the Army was ready to Fight, such did appear at the VVings, or in
the Van, as our Forlorn* Hope. They were never required to stand to a Fight,
and oppose the Enemy without stirring; neither d d the Generals repose any
great Trust in them. The chief strength of the Army was in the Roman Legions.
Afterward the General did choose out of the Army, the strong and lusty Bodies,
to match them also together; and they were named Principes. The Triarij were
elected next, out of the oldest and most beaten Soldiers, named Veterani. They
were placed always in the main Body of the Army; And to them was committed
Primum pilum, is the first Century.
the Roman Eagle, which was as the Royal Standard amongst us, the chief Ensign
of the Army. The first Centurion of the Triarij was called Primipilus, and
primus Centurio; he had the charge of the Roman Eagle. The second Century was
named secundum pilum, and the Centurion, secundi pilus. The Principes, who
marched before them, were named Antepilani.

Besides the former Commanders in the Army, there was Praefectus Legionum a
Major General next to the Legatus, the Lieutenant General of the Army. When
the General, and his Lieutenant were absent, he did command in Chief over the
Colonels, and over the rest. There was also Praefectus sociorum, a certain
Commander of all the Auxiliary Forces, sent to the Army from the friends of the
Roman Empire. There was also Praefectus Fabrorum, and Praefectus castrorum,
the Camp-master General, and the Chief Engineer, whose Office was to have an
Eye to the Instruments and Engines of War, and to the Laborers. The Romans
Accensi milites, were supernumerary Soldiers who did wait upon the Officers.
did overcome their Enemies, and take Towns, more by skill and art, than by
plain force and Valor; therefore it was necessary that they should have great
numbers of all sorts of workmen in their Armies, and Cornicularij, were the
Deputies of the Tribunes, ordered to go the Rounds for them in the night.

Ferentarij, were Soldiers, who did fight a far off as the Slingers. Duplicarij
milites, did deserve a double portion of Victuals. Volones, were voluntary
Soldiers.

Signifer, the Ensign-bearer. Aquilifer, the Eagle-bearer. Tesserarij, the
bearers of the Watchword. Metatores, they who did appoint the places to
Encamp. Calones and lixae, are the Soldiers servants, such as are called in the
French Army Goujars. They did prepare wood and water, and did wait upon the
Soldiers.


one over them all to command them to their business.

In the Roman Army there was an excellent varieyt of Weapons fit for all sorts
of encounters and occasions. In this the wisdom of their first Warriors did
appear in inventing such convenient Arms, as might be suitable to the strength
of their Bodies, and might be able to defend them with advantage against other
People. Besides the Sword and Buckler, they made use of a certain Dart named
Pila, which they did handle so dexterously, that according to the report of
Caesar, it did sometimes pierce through Bucklers two inches thick of Iron:
Especially the Triarij, the best Soldiers, who were always kept for a Reserve,
were furnished with this kind of Weapon, and a small Target called Parma. Some
of them were armed with a Javeline; others with Pikes. They were careful to
provide their Army wi^h all manner of Weapons, that according to the different
occasions, they might oppose such as were best furnished, to encounter the
enemy.

But before a General did undertake an Expedition against the Enemy, it was the
custom, not only to consult the Augures, but to enter into the Temple of Mars,
and there to beg the assistance of that God. When he did march with his Army,
they were commonly ordered according to the dangers, or the safety which they
did apprehend. Every night the Army did Encamp in a convenient place. Pyrrhus
King of Epirus taught the Romans the Art and use of lodging their Army within a
fortifyed Camp every night, for fear of a Surprisal. The Generals Tent was
usually in the middle, Castrametari.
and the Horse and Foot placed round about at a convenient distance, in such a
manner, that there was from the Generals Pavilion so many straight Lanes
reaching as far as the Fortifications There were commonly four Gates, or places
to go out; in every Roman Camp. The greatest and largest was called Decumana.
The other three were named Praetoria, Questoria, and Porta principalis. At
every one of these Gates was a Guard placed, and Sentinels, at certa^n
distances upon the Rampire. When they intended to fight the Enemy, aciem
educebant; They led their Army out in order of Battle, which was not always the
same: Sometimes the Enemy with which they were to fight, or the nature of the
place did cause them to alter their Army. The Spear-men called Haflati, with
the Velites did usually begin the Fight; and if they were worsted, they did
retreat to a space left open behind the lusty Principes, who did then succed in
their room, and maintain the Quarrel against the Enemy. After them the Triarij
did fight. Ad Triarois ventum est.
Every wise Commander had commonly some Reserves, which were not brought to the
Battle, but in case of necessity. When the Enemy was sufficiently weary in the
Fight, the Generals did then give order to these Reserves, named Subsidia, to
fall upon them and end the dispute. Caesar in his Commentaries, speaks of a
certain order of Battle, called Orbis, which was in case of necessity, Orbis
vel Globus vocabatur.
when the Enemies were numerous, and too powerful for the Romans, they did cast
themselves into a * round Body, that they might more conveniently resist the
multitude of their Enemies, who did attach them on every The Banner was called
Bandum, or Vexillum.
side. When in such a case their design was to march forward, and pierce
through the great Bodies of their Enemies, they did fall into another Figure,
named Cuneus, because Manipulus militum, a small Company of Soldiers.
they did appear as a Wedge. In this manner they did more easily compass their
Design, and save themselves from being overpowred.

But there was nothing that did more enlarge the Bounds of the Roman Empire,
and increase their Power, than their skill in the taking of Fortified Towns.
Many times, although the number of the Enemies within, was far greater; and
although they had all things necessary to oppose the Besiegers, and were lodged
within such strong and walls, that it did seem a madness to offer to take them
by force; Yet the Romans did often sit down before such places, amd when they
had fortifyed themselves within their Works, they did undertake the Besieging
of them with such success, that within a few days their Flags and Banners did
fly on the top. If the Town walls were low, and the opposition not great, they
did take it usually by Assault with their Ladders. But if the Besieged were
numerous, and the ways to the Town easy, they did raise high Towers of Planks
and Beams, covered with raw Hides which they did drag close to the walls of the
besieged City. And then they did bring on their Companies under their Bucklers
to the Tower, upon which they did assend by stairs, and steps within, to the
top, that was equal with the walls; so that by that means they did Fight
without the least disadvantage.

They had several ways to take Towns, according to the nature and disposition
of the Ground, and the situation and strength of the VValls, they did
accordingly employ such Instruments and Engines as were most convenient, These
are the chief Engines employed in the Siege of Towns. Agger, was a high Mount
which they did raise near the wall with Earth and Stakes to support it: From
the top of this Mount, the Romans did fight against the besieged, and kill
every man that did appear upon the wall. The Stakes used in this occasion, were
named Valla, and From hence comes Intervallum, a space between the stakes or an
interval of place or of me.
Valli. They did commonly draw a Line round about the besieged City, and did
build strong Castles and Towers at convenient distances, to keep off all
correspondence with Forreiners; but when the Roman Army was not numerous* they
did Loricae, were the Breast-works.
sit down close before the wall, and did neglect the great enclosure that was
required round a City, and did endeavor to enter into it by one place. They
had many moveable Towers made of Boards, and covered with raw Hides to hinder
them from burning, which they did dragg upon wheels near the Walls, to give the
assault. They did make their approaches under a large covering made of Hurdles
and Planks, called Vinea. Testudo, was an Engine, representing the upper part
of a Tortoise, under it the Soldiers did hide themselve; when they did either
draw near the Walls, or when they did undermine them. Sometimes these Engines
were made of the Bucklers of the Soldiers joined together. Musculi, were other
Engines of Defense, to protect the Soldiers in making the Works for a general
Assault. Plutei, were other Inventions, to bring the Soldiers to the Walls
without danger. Their Mines were named Cuniculi.

The other Engines for Battery, were first Or Catapulta.
Balista, which was made of Beams, Cords, Iron Bars, and Skrews, in such a
manner, that it did cast Darts of a considerable bigness into the City, and it
did require but 3 Men to manage it. Onager, was an Engine to cast Stones.
Scorpio, was another to send forth small Darts: Some do confound these two
names, because they were made almost of the same make, with this difference;
the former was for Stones, and the latter for Darts. Aries, their Ram, was a
noted Engine in War, made of several Beams; that which was on the top was
headed with a large piece of Iron, as a Rams head with Horns. The Soldiers did
cast down the strongest Walls by the frequent blows which they did give with
it. Malleoli, were a kind of Arrows with a large belly, full of Wildfire, to
burn any thing upon which it did light, and nothing was able to extinguish the
Fire but Dust* Falces murales were other Engines to fasten upon the wall, and
pull down the stones.

When the Romans did besiege a City, they did before the taking of it, desire
the leave of the Tutelar Gods of the place, and did invite them to dwell at
Rome, promising unto them Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, etc. They were better
Soldiers at Land, than at Sea; nevertheless, they have had great success, and
have obtained famous Victories by their Ships, upon which they did endeavor to
sight as at Land, by joining their Ships together, and causing them to afford a
firm standing. In the first Punick war, the Romans ventured their Fortunes in a
Seasight against the Carthaginians. In process of time, they had People as
expert at Sea, as at Land.

When the Enemies were overcome, the Romans did reduce them commonly to that
estate that they had a will, but not a power to revolt from their obedience.
When they did spare a City, and grant unto the People their Lives, they did
sometimes sell them, Quia captivi coronati solebant venire, Agel. l. 7. cap. 4.

vel quia Corona militum circumstabat.


sub Corona, under a Crown which was placed upon their heads when they were led
to the Market. Sometimes they did cause the People of a City to pass without
Arms, sub jugum, under a cross Spear, supported with two others, and
representing a Gallows. Sometimes the Citizens, and the Nation that had been
conquered, were driven out of their Habitations and their Dwellings, and the
Land granted by the Roman People to some old Soldiers, who had well deserved
from them in the wars. Such a place afterward was named Romana Colonia. It was
governed by a public Counsel, composed of every Tenth Man, chosen out of all
the number. There is a difference between a Colony, and Oppidum municipum; for
the latter was a certain Town that had obtained Some Municipia were cum
Suffragio, they did send to the election of the Roman Magistrates
the Honor of being reckoned amongst the Roman Citizens, but none of them could
claim any right to give his voice for the Election of Magistrates: nor was any
of them to be burdened with the extraordinary Imposts. Besides the Municipia,
had particular Laws amongst themselves, and were not bound to the observance of
all the Roman Statutes.

These are the noted Weapons used in the war. Verutum, a kind of a sharp bar^
of Iron.

Ora^ducis suffixa veruto, Sil. Ital. lib. 17.

Hasta, a Javelin, was a weapon of many Nations.

Pilum, a Dart, was only used by the Romans, Phalarica, was a Spanish Dart,
described by Livius, lib. 1. Soliferrea, was another kind of Dart of the
Spaniards. Ges^m, was a Dart of the Gauls.

-- Gallia -- binaque gesatenens animoso pectore fatur. Claud. Lancea, was a
Lance like unto a Half-Pike. Sparus, or sparum, was a Countrimans weapon.

Ag^estisque m^^us armat Sparus, Virgil.


And because the Romans were the most powerful People of the world, several
Cties and Nations did seek their feiendship: They were afterward named
Foederati populi, or Foederatae civitates. The frequent Alliances which the
Romans did make with their Neighbors, did often administer occasions of new
Quarrels, and by consequence of new Conquests: For when these People, and their
friends were grieved or oppressed by any Enemy, they did implore the assistance
of the Romans, who were glad of such an opportunity of enlarging their
Dominions. When the Kingdoms were subdued, they did reduce them into Provinces
of the Roman Empire, and if they did suffer the Inhabitants to enjoy peaceably
their Estates, they did lay upon them many yearly Tributes. Besides, the Tenths
of all the Fruits of the Earth, called Decumae, They had an Impost named
Portorium, upon all Goods Transported and Imported; Every Head did pay a
certain Tribute, and the Senate would sometimes lay upon them grievous
Bur^hens, and exact large sums of Money according to the necessities of the
Empire. Such People were afterward named stipendiarij, Tributaries to the
Romans. But we may take notice that they did carefully treat every City
according to its deservings. If the Inhabitants had resisted their Power more
than the rest, they were sure to suffer for it, and to receive such punishments
as the Romans did think that they had deserved. By this means Falces, were
commonly used in War by the Eastern People about their Chariots, that were
armed with Sickles round about. Framea, was another kind of Dart. Romphaea, is
taken either for a Dart, or a Sword.

The Gladius, or Sword was the most Honorable weapon; therefore it was given
to the Emperors and Generals as a mark of Power, and of Authority.

Sarissa, was a Javeline of the Macedonians. Pugio, a short Dagger. Contus, was
another kind of Dart or Javeline longer than the former. Fer^atasque sudes and
acuta cuspide contos expediunt, Virgil. lib. 5. Aeneid. Sagaris, was a weapon
of the Scythians like unto our Javelines. Sica, was a sh^rt Sword used by
Thieves. Acinax, was like the Cimiter of the Turks, and carried by the Medes
and Persians in the War. Sudes. were Sticks hardened in the Flame, and sharp at
the end. Misc^bant usta praelia nuda sude. propert. They had many names for
their Bucklers and their defensive Weapons. Clypeus and Parma, were the common;
the first was large, the second was but little. Cetra, was the Buckler of the
Africans; and Pelta was a short and little Buckler of the Amazons. There were
many more Weapons both Defensive and Offensive in use amongst the Eastern
People; but these are the names of the ordinary Arms.


^hey did strike a fear into the minds of their Enemies, and did oblige them to
seek their friendship, and to yield to their incroaching Power, that they might
not be reduced to the same Estate.

It is no wonder if their Armies were so successful, and their Soldiers so
obedient* They had such an excellent, and such a severe Discipline to govern
them, and such glorious Rewards assured to their virtuous behavior, that they
were thereby as much animated to seek the latter, as they were afraid of the
punishments infl^cted upon offenders. They had several sorts of Chastisements
proportionable to the Soldie^s faults: Sometimes when they had shamefully
demeaned Dimissio ignominiosa.
themselves, the General did Dismiss them, and Disband them, by taking away
their Soldiers Girdle, and their Arms; sometimes he did deprive them of their
daily Sallery: Such were said to be aere diru^^, deprived of their Pay, which
was cast into the public Treasury. Censio hastaria, was when the Soldier was
commanded to resign up his Spear, and depart out of the Army. When the Company
had lost their Banner, they were commanded to feed upon Barley-bread for
several Months, and the Captain did loose his Girdle, which was a notable
disgrace to an Officer. If the crime was bu^ small, the Soldiers were forced to
stand before the Generals Tent with some marks of dishonor upon their Heads; or
they did di^half naked in the presence of the whole Army. Sometimes they were
condemned to Winter abroad in the Fields, and to not enter within a Roof in the
sharpest weather* If a Soldier had been a Coward, or inconsiderate in his
attempts, they did open a Vein and draw some Blood from him. These were the
small punishments due to lesser crimes greater faults were chastised with Rods,
and Death. Sometimes they did cut off their Hands, whip them with Rods, beat
them Fustuarium mereri.
with Cudgels. All Run-aways were to los^ their Heads without mercy. And where
there had been a grievous Mutiny, they did condemn either the tenth, or the
hundred^ Man to Death; this was called Exercitus, or Legtonis decimatio, or
Centesimatio. The strict observance of the Military Laws, preserved their
Armies from Rebellion, and Ruin; and caused every Soldier to obey his orders,
and follow his Leader.

The Rewards granted to the Courageous and Valiant Soldiers, were many, and
suitable to their well-deservings. The meanest Soldiers were advanced to the
Commands of the Army, when they had done some brave Action. But besides these
Offices of Profit and Honor, they did receive an increase of their Pay. Their
General did bestow upon them Bracelets, a white Lance, Collers, and such like
Ornaments to Honor their Virtue with some distinction from the ordinary kind
of Soldiers. There were also many sorts of Crowns given to the brave Soldiers
of the Roman Army; when a Captain Obsidi^nalis coro^a.
had freed a City from the Siege of an Enemy, and had forced them to depart, the
Citizens did bestow a Crown, not of Gold, or of any other precious metal, but
of Grass upon him, by whose means they had been Herbam po^rigere, is to
acknowledge the victory.
delivered. Nevertheless this Crown was looked upon as the most Honorable. The
Grass was to be gathered out of the City that had been freed from the Siege.
Civica Corona, was a Crown given to a Roman for preserving a Citizen from the
enemies hands. It was made of Oak branches and Leaves. When a Soldier had
generously advanced his Muralis corona.
companions in an Assault, and gained the top of the Wall before them, he was
Honored with a Crown of Gold, representing the battlements of a City wall.
Another of the same substance was given to such as did enter first into the
Enemies Camp, and this was called Castrensis Corona. Thus after Corona navalis.
a Victory at Sea, the Admiral, named Navium praefectus, did give Crowns of Gold
to such as did enter first into the Ships of the Enemy. The Romans were very
careful to Soepe duces mentis bello tribuere coronas, Hunc cingit muralis honos
hunc civica quercus, nexuit, hunc domit is ambit ^ostrata carinis.
reward and encourage Virtue in those Men who did manage their Public Interest;
or in such as were engaged to maintain their Quarrels. By this means they came
to have the best Soldiers in the world. But the Rewards granted to the meanest
sort of Soldiers, was nothing in comparison of the Honors and Recompenses
which they did bestow upon the generous and successful Commandess. After a
famous Victory, the Army did grant to their Generals this Title of Honor,
Imperator. Afterward, they did send Letters adorned with Laurel to the Senate,
to require from them the Confirmation of that Title, with public Processions
and Prayers, at which all the Roman Decernere sup^licationes, or triumphum, to
appoint these Processions, or the triumph of a Conqueror.
People did assist in Pomp, marching to all the Temples of their Gods, to pray
for the prosperity of their General. This was performed in his absence: At his
return home, they did sometimes receive him in Triumph. In the lesser Triumph,
named Ovatio, a Sheep was led before him up to the Capitol, where he did
sacrifice it to Jupiter. Then he was to enter into the City upon a Horse,
crowned with a branch of Myrtle, because he had been successful, and victorious
without much Bloodshed. The greater Triumph, was the most glorious in the
world, and the greatest expression of Honor and Grandeur. It was allowed by
the Senate to their Generals abroad, when they had enlarged the Bounds of the
Empire, and killed in encounters with the Enemy above 5000 Men. The General,
with his Army did enter Corona Triumphalis.

Ite Triumphales circum mea tempora lauri.

Ovid. l. 2. Amor


into the City in great Pomp. All the Soldiers were crowned with Laurels, and
clothed with stately and rich Attire. The General with a Crown of Triumph of
pure Gold, which the Senate did send unto him, was to ride into the City upon a
stately Chariot. Some have been drawn by strange Beasts, as Elephants, and
Dromedaries. He was clothed in a Purple Robe called Trabea, with a Tunick
richly beset with Gold, Pearls and Jewels, and a branch of Laurel in his hand.
Sometimes before, and sometimes The Conqueror was to offer his Crown and his
Laurel to Jupiter. Rosin.

Dabit ille Coronam Ingraemio Jovis excisi depone^e poenis.


after him, were led in Chains the Captives. The Princes and Kings, who had
been overcome and taken, with all lheir Spoils and Riches. All that could serve
for ostentation, was then publicly carried in Pomp, to Honor the Triumph of
the Conqueror. The City being then full of all the Inhabitants of the Country
round about, who Ibant ante duces onerati colla catenis.
did flock together to be eyewitnesses of the Glory of the Roman Empire, that
did then appear to the world. The Senate, and Quatuor in niveis aureus ibis
equis. Ovid, i. e. Triumphabis.
all the Persons of Quality were wont to welcome the Conqueror home at the
Gates, and to lead him to the Capitol through the Acclamations, and wonderful
Rejoycings of all the People that did besiege the ways: When he came to the
Capitol, he was there The Bull was to be White.
to sacrifice a Bull to Jupiter; And if he had been so happy, as to kill with
his own hand a General of the Enemy in Battle, he did take from him his Armor
and Weapons, called then Opima, not Optima spolia, and did Dedicate them in the
Temple of Jupiter Feretrius, causing them to be hung up in remembrance of his
valor and success. When the Conqueror did pas through the Streets, he did
sometimes cast Medals of Gold amongst the People, and did divert them many days
with public sports. Afterward the Senate did cause at the Public charge
Vocabantur fornices.
Arcus Triumphales, stately Monuments of Triumph to be erected in Honor of the
victorious General, with Trophies of Spoils, and Weapons of the Enemy. They did
commonly conclude the solemnity with a Capitolinae dapes vocabantur.
great Feast, unto which all Persons of Quality were invited. Martial. lib. 12.
Non albana mihi sit commessatio tanti,
nec capitolinae, pontificumque dapes.


A Short COLLECTION Of the FAMOUS MYSTERIES Of the EGYPTIANS, Named
HIEROGLYPHICS.
The Preface.
ALl humane Sciencies hare flourished amongst the Egyptians many years; Abraham
first brought unto them the Rudiments of Philosophy, which (...), quia
inseritur ornatus gratia: It is composed of a Picture, and of a Motio.
his Grandchild Jacob fully taught unto them: His son Joseph, a great favourer
of Learning, furnished their Priests with such Revenues, as might entertain
them (...), is an obscure Sentence representing things by Metaphors and Signs.

It is derived from (...), and (...), because this kind of Writing was proper
to holy things, and holy persons, only the Priests of Egypt did express the
Mysteries of Nature, and of their Gods with Hyerogliphicks.


in their Studies, and in the performance of their Offices. The Graecians in
the days of Solon, of Pythagoras, of Heredotus, and of Plato, did fetch from
Egypt all the knowledges of Nature, which rendered them so Famous. But the
Egyptian Priests, unto whom it did belong to teach, did not suffer their
Doctrines without a shadow, or some dark Emblem. Their manner was to discover
unto their Auditors the Mysteries of God, and of Nature in Hieroglyphics,
which were certain visible shapes and forms of Creatures, whose inclinations
and dispositions did lead to the knowledge of the Truths, intended for
Instruction. All their Divinity, their Philosophy, and their greatest secrets,
were comprehended in these ingenious Characters, for fear that they should be
profaned by the inquisition and acquaintance of the Common People. The Learned
of Antiquity seem not willing to make them share in any part of the profound
sciences; therefore Alexander was displeased at his Master Aristotle, for
publishing some of his Treatises that contain the Curiosities of Nature in the
common Language. Doubtless the Heathens had very good reasons to keep from the
Vulgar some of their Mysteries; for they did see what we have experienced to
our sorrow, That too much knowledge is as dangerous, as a stupid Ignorance,
when such do possess it, who have not wisdom to make a right use of it. Sublime
Mysteries in the shallow pates of the Commonalty, do serve but to fill their
minds with lofty conceits of their excellency; For as their worldly Affairs
cannot suffer them to make it their business to study, they can never attain
but to the imperfect knowledge of a few Notions, which are apt to bewitch them
with an invincible fancy of their own sufficiency, and to make them despise the
wholesome admonitions of their Teachers. I consess we are not to opppose Gods
command of permitting the People to enjoy the benefit of his holy word, but I
think it the concern of this divided Nation, to have such prudent Ministers in
every Parish, that can know what to Preach to their Auditors. I think it very
dangerous to declare indifferently any Mystery unto them. S. Paul's wisdom
could pro-Vide Milk for Babes, as well as strong meats for grown sttomaks.
Knowledge is to be fitted to the capacities of every one, and some Truths are
more useful concealed than divulged. It is neither just nor proper that the
sublime Inquiries of the learned Brains, concerning many Mysteries, should be
as ordinary as A B C. The wise Priests of the Egyptians for this cause, did
vail their knowledges of God, and of Nature, under the shadow of their
Hieroglyphics, from the view of every Mechannick. But these ingenious
Inventions were contrived, not only to hinder the sublime knowledge of
Philosophy from being profaned, but also that they might abbreviate the
diffused Notions of that science, and fit them for a more easy comprehension,
and ^or a better retention of them in our memories. Every name is an
abbreviation of a Thing, but it is not able to give such a perfect Idaea of the
Properties and hidden Qualities of the Things intimated, as the Picture of them
in a witty Hieroglyphick. The Great Creator of all things has been pleased to
discover unto us in this manner his Divine pleasure, and all the excellencies
of his Being. In the Old Testament the Mysteries of the Gospel were delivered
to the Children of Israel in Types and Figures. And in the great Book of Nature
God teaches us by Mysterious Impressions of himself by Natural Hieroglyphics,
by certain significant Images of his Glorious Being. We may therefore say, that
these witty contrivances of the Egyptian Priests, were designed to bring men to
a more easy discovery of the meaning of all Gods works in the World. They were
as the Elements to enable us to understand the Glory, the Power, the Wisdom,
the Goodness, and the other Attributes of God.

These Hieroglyphics are also useful for our Belief, and to persuade men to
embrace Virtue and Piety; for when they shall see Brute-Beasts inclinable to
good manners, They cannot but think it a great Disgrace to the reasonableness
of their Nature, if they did suffer them (...) ^xcell in this particular.

The Egyptians had also a design to render their Knowledges immortal, by th^se
Inventions. I am certain for that purpose they did engrave their Hieroglyphics
upon Obelisks upon Pillars of Marble, as Lucan says, Non dum flumin eos
Memphis conte^ere libros
Noverat, in saxis tantum volucresque feraeque,
Sculptaque servabant magicas animalia linguas.


But they did not only express Things, and some secret Knowledges by their
Hieroglyphics, but also whole sentences. They did write all their Rules and
Precepts relating to the Worship of their Gods, or to the Government of the
Kingdom in this manner. I am informed by some Worthy and credible Persons, who
have been Factors in India, that at this day there are three or four Nations,
whose Languages are as different as Greek and Hebrew, and yet they understand
the Writings of one another: so that what one writes in one Language, the other
can read in another, (...) be but by certain Hieroglyphics (...) Characters,
Representing the (...) of things which are known to men of all (...) ^ongues.
It is not long since the (...) had a Writing of this nature sent to him from an
Eminent Person of the Court of France, for him to interpret. But that we may
treat of these Hieroglyphics with order, we shall view those that relate to
God, and to his outward Works. 2. Those that concern man. 3. We shall consider
several other Inventions of this kind concerning Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, etc.

CHAP. I.
Of GOD, and of His Works.
THE Egyptians did look upon the World as the great Image of God. One of their
Divinities was named Kneph, He was represented Jupiter est quodcunque vides.
as a beautiful man with Feathers upon his Head, a Girdle, and a Scepter in his
hand; out of his mouth did proc^ed an Egg, which was the Hieroglyphick of the
World; For the shell of it expresses very well the Heavens, that do shut in
all visible things on every side; the white is an Emblem of the Air and Water;
the yellow of the Earth, which contains in it a secret virtue that causes it
to produce living Creatures, by the assistance of a natural heat. Its coming
forth out of the Mouth, shows how he is the great Creator of the universe, and
how all visible Beings have been formed by the Power of the Eternal Word of God.

They did also Picture Almighty God, as the Body of a Man covered with a long
Garment, bearing on the top the head of a Hawk: For the excellency, the
courage, the nimbleness, and the good qualities of this Bird, do shadow out
unto us the incomprehensible Perfections of its Great Creator. The Sun was also
represented by this Bird, that is, a perfect Emblem of its Powerful influences
in the World: some do observe that this Creature can steadfastly look on the
Sun, and that the Bones of it do draw to them the Metal of the Sun, Gold, as
the Lode*stone, Iron. God was also adored in the form of a Crocodile, because
that Creature only is without Tongue: The witty Egyptians therefore did
represent by it, how God beholds all things in Heaven, and in Earth, with a
Profound silence.

Coel. Rhodigin.
The Capacious Heaven they understand to be an expression of his Divine
Majesty; therefore some of the Egyptians did Adore the Circle of the Heavens.
The Light is an Emblem of his Wisdom; the Roundness of his Power and
Perfections; and the Caelestial Heat of the tenderness of his Love.

The Egyptians did sometimes Represent the Providence of God, by a Basilisk
with a Hawks head and eyes, because there is no other Creature fuller of
spirits and of vigor. It is said that it kills at a distance, only by sending
out of its eyes, a secret Poison, which it conveys to the Creature, with whom
it is displeased.

The Power of God they did express by ^anus, with three heads, and with a body,
having neither hands nor feet; because Almighty God governs all things, only by
his Wisdom and Pleasure. He needs no visible Members to act in the World, and
produce his Wonders; all the Elements, and the most Rebellious Creatures shall
fulfill his Divine Pleasure against their will.

The Providence of God, or the Favor of Gods Providence, was represented by a
great Star in the Air; because it is often clouded with adversity, and never
shines long upon us without interruption. And because God has hid the secrets
of his Divine Nature in the works that appear to our eyes, the Egyptian Priests
did represent him by a Man sitting upon his heels, with all his lower parts
covered.

Quisquis habet nummos secura navigat aura fortunamque suo temperet arbitri^ O
cives cives quaerenda pecunia primum est. Virtus post nummos:

Haec Janus ab imo perdocet: haec retinunt Juvenes dictata senesque. Horat.
lib. 1. Ep. 1.


The Phoenicians, who were famous Merchants, and who scarce knew any other God
besides their Gold, Painted their Idols with large Purses at their sides full
of Money. Jupiter was sometimes Represented without Ears, to express how God
seems not to listen nor take notice of the Profaneness of Men, nor of their
impious Discourses. One hundred hands were given to him, and as many feet, to
show the multiplicity of Effects which proceed from his agency, and how he
sustains all things from falling into a confusion.

The Goddess Isis was full of Duggs, to signify the Benefits that Men do
receive from the happy Influences of the Moon, which was worshipped by the
statue of Isis in Plutarch. in Isid. and Osirid.
Egypt. In the City of Sai this Goddess had a famo^s Temple, where was to be
seen this Inscription; I am all that was, that is, and that shall be, my Vail
no Mortal has yet uncovered. These Heathens did Profanely ascribe to their
breathless Idols, and to their Prototypes, that which only belongs to Almighty
God, the invisible Creator.

(...). Hom.
The Sun, the most glorious of all visible Beings, was adored as their chief
God, and represented sitting upon a Lion, with Rays of Light about his head,
and a Bundle of Ears of Corn in one hand, to express the Power and goodness of
the Sun, that causes all the fruits of the Earth, to bring forth their
increase.

The perpetuity and durance of the Heavens, was signified by a Heart, placed
upon a Cha^ing-dish of burning Coals, where it did remain, without receiving
any prejudice; Thereby these wise Egyptians did intend to intimate unto us, how
the World, and the Heavens subsist entire, notwithstanding those powerful
Elements and Beings, who do struggle together, and dispute the place one with
another.

The Sun was also Pictured in this manner; A beautiful young Gallant, standing
half naked in a Ship, neatly trimmed, supported on the back of a great
Crocodile, with flames of Fire round about it. These several particulars are
mysterious expressions of the power and estate of the Sun in this lower world.
The swiftness of his motion was shadowed by a winged Horse running a race. A
Beetle, a vile insect was put therefore called (...).
to signify the Sun. This kind of Beetle bears the perfect image of a Cats-head.
Now the Naturalists have observed, that Cats do see best when the Sun
approaches, and that their Eyesight decays as it goes down in the evening.
The Egyptians did also put the rarest of all Birds to express the Sun, the
rarest of all visible Beings* for they did paint a Phoenix to be the
H^eroglyphick of it, as they did a Raddish and an Onion to express the Moon.

It is a kind of Ape.
A Cynocephalus, was also the Enigme of the Moon; for by the different postures
of this strange Animal, the different motions of the Moon are signified. To
express the rising and increase of it. It was painted standing right up, upon
its hindermost feet, and to show the decrease, this Beast was laid upon its
back as dead, for Naturalists do observe, that the Apes do Sympathize with the
Moon: Therefore some were nourished in Egypt by the Learned, for them to
discover more easily the Mysteries relating to the Moon, and the time of its
Conjunction with, and Opposition to the Sun, A Cat was another H^eroglyphick*
of the Moon, for that cau^^ Cats were so highly honored amongst the Egyptians,
as to receive their Sacrifices an^ their Devotions, and to have stately Temples
erected in Honor of them. It seem^ that their witty inventions occasioned the
extravagancy of their Devotion, and rendered them ridiculous to all Nations* for
when they were possessed with an O pinion that God was to be adored in those
Creatures, where he did manifest himself, the^ did fondly abuse that homage,
which wa^ only due unto him, by ascribing it to the V^lest Beings. The World
was represented (...) a round Temple, because Divine Majesty has created it
for his own Glory, to receive in it the Respects of all Creature^ and because
it appears like a large and (...) beautiful Edifice, excellently well adorned
supported by the Power of God, covered with the Heavens, and distinguished into
several apartments: But to express the Harmony and rare correspondency that is
in the World between the several parts that compose it, they did put the
Picture of Pa^ with two Horns upon his head, and a Ran^ of seven slender Pipes
in his hand, so joined together, that (...) M^sick could make a pleasant
Cons^r^. The two Horns are taken for the Sun, and the Garment of ^ Leopards
skin about ^is shoulders, did represent the beaut^ful variety of the Sta^s* The
ordinary H^eroglyphick of the World, was a Globe, in which were represented the
Circles of the Zodiac, with the Signs in it, and round about, a multitude of
Stars. This Globe was supported on the back of a Man upon his knees, which were
covered with his long Garment, to show how the World is upheld by the Power of
God, who seems to be covered to the lower Ranks of Creatures with diverse
Emblems and dark shadows. When they intended to point out the continual
mutation of Creatures, and the change of one Being into another in the World,
they d^d put a Snake representing an Orb, biting and devouring its Tail,
because the World feeds upon it self, and receives from it self a continual
supply of those things that Time consume^h. Claudian was acquainted with this
Hieroglyphick, which he does ingeniously express, Perpetuumque virens squamis,
caudamque reducto
Ore vorans, tacito relegens exordia morsu.


The Year was also signified by a Serpent, which did bite its tail: because it
did run round, and end where it began.

The World was also represented in the Temple of Serapis in Egypt, which stood
in the City of Alexandria, by the Image of this God, made of all sorts of
Metals, of such a prodigious bigness, that it filled the Temple, and reach^
with the head to the Roof, and with the hands to both sides. The Golden Head of
this Idol did signify the Heavens; the Shoulders and Stomach, the Air; the
Belly, the Sea; and the Earth was expressed by the Feet, as the Idol speaks of
it self. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).


The excellent agreement of the Elements in the Generation of Creatures, was
represented by an Otter or an Austrich, because they subsist by, and in two
Elements*

Here it will not be amiss to examine a difficulty which we do frequently meet
with in the Heathenish Authors, as in these Verses of Lucan, Ignotum vobis
Arabes venistis in orbem,
Vmbras mirati nemorum non ire sinistras.


(...). Galen.
The Right Hand and the Left Hand of ^he World are often mentioned. There is a
dispute amongst the Learned concerning this particular. But it is certain, that
the difference proceeds from their different manner of beholding the Sun and
the Stars. The Philosophers, as Aristotle and Plato, do make the East to be the
Right Hand, and the West to be the left, because they consider the strength of
the Stars, and of Nature, which is far greater in the Oriental parts, than in
the Occidental, because there is th e beginning of motion, or because the
Philosophers and Astrologers did continually observe the motion of the Stars,
and the Northern Pole, which caused them to stand in such a manner, that the
East was on their right hand, and the West on their left. Now the Poets do
adore the rising Sun, therefore to them, the South is on their right hand, and
the North on their left. The Augures, and the Egyptian Priests ^id thus
consider the Sun in making their Observations, therefore the left hand of the
World, in all their writings, is the North, and the right hand is the South;
from hence it is, that sinister the left, signi^ies unhappy: For the Heathens
lodged all the evil Demons under the Northern Pole, and in these frozen
Climates that are subject to it; whereas they did imagine, that the good Genij
did commonly converse in the Southern Countries. The Holy Scripture seems to
favor this Opinion, when it says that all evil shall Jer. 1. 14. 4. 6. etc.
come from the North; and in another place, from the North all evils shall flow
upon the earth. It is certan, that the Northern Nations are more Warlike, more
fierce and cruel than the Southern People, because the coldness of the Air
hardens both their Minds and Bod^es. All the Armies of People, that have over*
run and d^str^yed the World, proceed from the North. The Go^hs and Vandals, and
before them, ^he Scythians in Asia, the Normans the Huns and Longobards, the
Turks and Tartars* have plagued the Southern Nations, and forced them out of
their Dwellings. The Sar^cens and Romans may be excepted; but the ^atter may be
reckoned amongst our Northern People, and the former never made any great
progress in their Conquests, until the Turks, and other Scythian Nations had
mingled amongst them.

At the entry of all the Temples of Egypt, a Sphinx was to be seen, which was
to intimate, that all the Gods there worshipped, were mysteriously represented,
and that the common People could never understand the meaning of all the
Images, and of their postures, without an Interpreter.

(...); Do seek the paths of a Lion. Prove.
A Lion wiping out with its Tail the impressions of its Feet, was the
Hieroglyphick of the great Creator, covering over the marks of his Divinity by
the works of Nature, and hiding his immediate Power by the visible Agency of
inferior Beings. It is reported of the Bear, that Nature has taught unto it
that cunning, to slide in backward into its Den, for fear of being discovered
by the greedy Hunter.

A wicked Angel is signified by a Viper; for as the Poison of Vipers is quick
and powerful, so those destroying Spirits are nimble, in bringing to pass the
ruin of mankind, and nothing can oppose them, but the Grace and Power of God.

The Egyptians did put a Vulture to express Nature; for the Naturalists do tell
us, that this kind of Bird conceives not according to the usual manner by
Copulation with with a Male, for they are all Females; they do therefore bring
forth Eggs, by receiving into their Bodies the Northern wind, or as some say,
the Western, which causes them presently to conceive. Thus Nature brings forth
many Creatures by means not known to us.

When it is in its full it ripens the Fruits of the earth, therefore it had an
ear of Gorn in one hand.
Diana, or the Moon, was represented with three Heads, the one of a Dog, the
2d. of a Horse, and the third of a Man, to show the different effects of the
Moon, in Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell, or in the bosom of the Earth.

Wisdom, was painted as a beautiful Woman with four Ears, and four Hands, but
with one Tongue, which was hid within her lips, that were shut close.

We may here take notice, that when the Priests of Egypt did Pray to the Gods,
they did appear in black Clothes, whereas other Nations did make their
addresses only to the infernal Spirits, with Garments of that color.

Truth, was expressed by a Heart, upon the Lips of a Man.

Unity and Wisdom, were represented by the Sun, and its beautiful Beams. Peace,
and Worldly Felicity, by the fruitful Olive^ree. Liberty and Pleasure by the
Vine Chastity by Beans. A plentiful increase by Mustard Seed, that grows up
into many branches.

Argus with a Head full of Eyes, did signify this great World. The Eyes of our
Creator are every where; all things do take notice, and are witnesses of our
behavior.

The four Elements suspended in the Air, were intimated by Juno hanged up by
Jupiter in the Sky, with weights at her Feet.

CHAP. II.
Of Man, and of things relating to him.
Man's Condition in the world, was expressed by these Five Hieroglyphics; the
Head of a young Infant, an old Man's Head, a Hawk, a Fish, and a River-horse.
The Infant, and the gray Hairs do signify his Death, which succeds his Birth;
The Hawk, Gods love to Man; the Fish, his Death and Burial; and the
River-horse, the irresistible power of Death, that ^pares no Body.

A furious Man was intimated by a Lion, eating up his Prey. A Religious Man, by
a Lion running from a Cock; A Whore, by a Lion with a Woman's Head, because her
Countenance is fair, her Speech most pleasant, and her Allurements powerful,
but her nature is ^ierce and cruel, and she intends only to prey upon both Body
and Estate. A merciful Man, was painted by a Lion, having compassion on a Lamb,
lying at his Feet. The fury and impatiency of a Lover, by a Lion devouring a
Heart. A King was signified by an Elephant, because this Beast is very Noble in
his carriage, and can never bow the knee: besides, he is a great enemy to
Serpents, as Princes must be of Thieves and Robbers, who are the Serpents of a
Commonwealth. The Elephants are very bountiful, for they will deliver into the
hands of their Favorites, such things as they can get. The Elephant is very
temperate and just, a great enemy of Hogs and filthy Creatures. He seems to
have a greater measure of Knowledge and Judgment bestowed upon him than other
Brutes; and it is reported, that he does worship every new Moon toward Heaven,
and express by his outward actions, some sense of a Supreme Being; therefore he
was the Hieroglyphick of Piety, as well as of a kind, and harmless nature, for
the Elephant never offends creatures, that are not hurtful of themselves. It
will march amongst innocent Lambs, without offering the least injury to them;
whereas if it be offended, it will spare nothing, nor dread no danger, that it
might seek a revenge: For that purpose, some do say, that Nature has provided
the Elephant, with two Hearts, the one inclines him to Peace, to Mercy, and
goodness; the other when he is affronted, moves him to take Vengeance. All
these Observations of the Elephant, caused the Egyptian Wi^e-men, to make him
the Hieroglyphick of a good King, who is a promoter of Justice, a protector of
Peace, a friend of all moral Virtues, an Enemy of voluptuous swine. He is
harmless amongst Lambs, unmerciful to Dogs, courageous in the ^rosecution of
his just designs, resolute in overcoming difficulties, merciful to the humble,
and severe to such as withstand his Royal Authority and Power.

A Priest, or a Man, whose Office did oblige him to give his attendance in the
Service of the Gods, was expressed by a Cynocephalus, riding upon a Fish in the
River. The Priests of Egypt did abstain from all kind of Fish. Some have
thought that this Hieroglyphick therefore did signify abstinence, which was
thereby recommended to to such Persons: I rather think that the River is the
unconstant world, the Fishes are the Passions of the Soul, and the Pleasures of
the Body, which such must master and overcome, who intend to offer acceptable
Sacrifices to Almighty God, and be worthy of that most Divine Office of
Priesthood.

(...) a ^imorous man Prove.
A Learned and an accomplished Man was signified by a^^ag, lying upon its side,
chewing its Meat. The Horns of this Beast are the Hieroglyphics of Power,
Authority, and of Dignity, unto which, such deserve to be promoted. A cunning
Server of Times, was expressed by a Hedgehog, because this Creature has
always two or three holes, where it retreats; when the wind is cold, and
b^isterous at one hole, it creeps to the other, and thus it changes its
dwelling with the weather.

A Babbler, an enemy of good manners, and a Profane Person, were represented
by a grunting Hog, whereof the filthy disposition caused it to be hated by all
the Eastern People, insomuch that it was a great crime, for some Priests, who
did wait upon the Altars of the Gods to touch a Hog. A voluptuous Man living in
ease and carelessness had the honor also to be expressed by this Animal. Some
Nations did Sacrifice a Hog for such as grew mad, and when any had killed a
Man, and was tormented with the furies of his Conscience for his crime, he did
commonly to satisfy the angry Divinities, burn Sucking Pigs upon the Altars,
and wash his hands with their Blood. They did imagine that the foul stains of
Murder were thereby washed away, as you may see in these Verses. (...) Apollon.
lib4*

(...)
(...)
(...)


A Man with an excellent faculty of Learning, was signified by a She*Goat,
because that Creature has a very acute hearing.

(...). Prove.

To live like a Fool.


A Fool was expressed by a Sheep, therefore oviles mores are stupid and silly
customs, because there is no Beast simpler than Sheep; but the Ram was the
Hieroglyphick of a good Governor, and of War.

The shameful manners of a Whore were intimated by a Wolf; from hence therefore
Lupa signifies such an impudent Woman: and Lupanaria, a Bawdy House.

Lupus ante clamorem festinat. Prove.
A fearful and a timorous Man, was also represented by a Wolf; for the least
accident will startle this Beast: and although it wants not courage to
encounter with an enemy, it is afraid of a Stone.

A Man encompassed in with difficulties and troubles, was signified by one who
held a Wolf fast by the Ears.

An unconstant fellow, was expressed Lib. 8. cap. 30.
by a Hyaena, a Beast mentioned by Plinius, of the color and bigness of a Wolf.
It is of the Male Sex one Year, and the next it becomes the Female, as
Tertullian witnesses, Hyaenam si observes, sexus animalis est, marem and
soeminam alternat. This Creature was also put to signify a brave Courage that
can defy all difficulties, and look upon the frowns of Fortune with a generous
contempt, for as the naturalists do say, that the skin of this Animal, can
procure unto us the privilege of passing through the greatest dangers without
harm, the man so well resolved, and so well strengthened against the attempts
of Adversity, can receive no damage from those things, that bring others to
destruction.

A great Hypocrite, or a notable Dissembler of wicked intentions, was expressed
by a Leopard, because this Beast does craftily dissemble and hide its head from
being seen; for the Beasts are as much frighted at it, as they are taken with
the pleasant scent of its Body. When therefore they come toward it to delight
themselves with the Perfume that it yields, it will cover the Head with his
Paws, until they come within its reach.

An incorrigible Person, was also expressed by a Leopards Skin, because there
are such spots that no art can remove or whiten.

Asinus Egyptius Prove. A great Dunce
A stupid and an ignorant fellow, an enemy to Piety and Religion, was signified
by an Ass.

The Bazilisk was often placed in the presence of the Gods, at their feet, or
about their middle, or winding their Tails upon their Heads, to signify their
immortality, for this Serpent is of a long life. The Kings of Egypt had Asps
usually represen^ed upon their Crowns, to express the holiness of their
Persons, whom none ought to dishonor or injure without a signal punishment,
for they are the most Sacred Images and Lieutenants of God upon Earth. A
Powerrful and a Warlike Prince, was dignifyed by a Serpent in an Orb,
carefully looking to every thing within its Sphaere. The wisdom of this
Creature shows how necessary wisdom is in the Government of Kingdoms and States.

When the Egyptians did intend to express an evil effect out of a good cause
well designed, they did put a Bird called Ibis, and a Bazilisk together, for
they do say, that out of the Egg of an Ibis, the Bazilisk does often proceed;
for that reason they did break all such Eggs when they did find them, for fear
that they should increase the number of such venomous Serpents.

Crocodili lacrymae, are deceiptful tears.*
A sloathful Man, was signified by a Crocodile, bearing on the head the feather
of an Ibis, for it has such a secret power upon the Crocodile, that when its
Body is stroakt with it, this Serpent, that is naturally cruel and rapacious,
loses its former dispositions, and becomes extreme sloathful and idle for a
time.

A Reformation, was represented by a Phoenix that rises out of its Ashes, when
it has been consumed by the violence of the Sunbeams, as it is reported.

Good Parents, were expressed by the Pelican, that casts it self into the
Flames kindled about the Nest where her young do lie, to deliver them from the
eminent danger.

The Hawk is the Hieroglyphick of natural life, because it lives many years.

An old Musician, is commonly represented by a Swan, because they say, that
when this Bird is at the ^ve of its death, it takes its farewell of the world by
singing most melodious Tunes*

The purity and noble disposition of the Mind, was signified by a Cock, for
there is no Bird of a more generous and braver Courage, undaunted at the sight
of eminent dangers.

A seasonable silence, is intimated by the Picture of a wild Goose; for it is
reported by Ammianus, that when this Bird flies over the Mountains, where great
numbers of Eagles do make their abode, knowing their natural inability of
keeping silence, they take into their Bills a Stone, which hinders them from
making a noise; and when they are out of danger, they let it fall.

An Impious wretch, was represented by the Hyppopotamus, a Creature that lives
in the water as well as in the Air, and is like unto an Horse; for it is so
wicked, that it will kill Father and Mother, and tear them to pieces with its
Teeth*

A^ ignorant fellow, who was acquainted with the manner of living in the world,
was painted with an Asses head, and Asses Ears. The Egyptians were wont to put
the heads of Animals upon Men's Bodies, to express the inclinations and
dispositions of those Persons who were like unto such Beasts.

An honest Man did carry his Heart hanging by a Chain upon his Breast.

The life of a Religious Man, was expressed by the Palm Tree, whereof the Root
is unpleasant to look upon, but the Fruits and Branches are grateful both to
the Eye, and to the Taste.

The Priests of Egypt did wear nothing but Paper Shoes, therefore it was the
Hieroglyphick of Priesthood amongst them.

The Nature of Man, was represented by a Woman, having her Hair standing
straight up, and showing the Image of a Tree turned up side down. The Hair is
in lieu of the Roots; this therefore declares how our Country is Heaven, from
whence we have derived our beginning, and thither must our affections and
endeavors tend.

CHAP. III.
Of several kind of Hieroglyphics drawn from the Disposition of Living
Creatures.
THe Lion is bold, courageous, strong, and terrible to all other Animals; He is
therefore the Hieroglyphick of a stout Commander, and of a brave Conqueror.
Leonem ^arva territas. Prove.
It is reported of the Lion, that when he is sick of a Fever, his only remedy
is an Ape, which he does naturally hate, because the Ape plays with him, that
is the King of Beasts.

The Rhinocerote, is the Unicorn of the Scriptures, for there is no such Brute
as is described unto us, like a Horse, with a straight Horn in the Forehead,
as the Learned Bochartus has proved. This Animal is not much inferior to the
Elephant, neither in strength, courage, nor bigness of Body. It is very
choleric, therefore it is put to express anger.

A Horse covered with his Harness, is the Hieroglyphick of War, of Speed; and
amongst the Soothsayers of the Supreme Command, and of Victory, as we may see
in the Dream of Darius related by Curtius: He saw Alexander riding into Babylon
in a Persian habit. The Soothsayers did then declare, that Alexander would get
the Victory.

A Prophet, or a Prophecy, was expressed Talpa Caecior. Prove.

Blinder than a Mole.


by a Mole, a Creature that is without Eyes, to show how Man is naturally
bl^nd, and can have no clear foresight of the time to come by the works of
Nature, without a Divine Revelation, and then the intricate events of the
future, do appear unto them with many doubts and dark shadows, which hinder us
from a perfect and a clear discovery.

A Dog, with a Diadem upon his hea^, was the represent^t on of a Lawgiver, and
of a diligent Prince. The Nature of this Cre^ture teaches us diligence, care,
and watchfulness in our imploys, obedience and love to our Superiors, and
faithfulness to our trust. (...). Ho^.
As a Man with a Dogs head signifies an impudent fellow, and an Ape an
Hypocrite. The Ants, are the wisest of all in^ects, they are laborious,
provident, loving to one another, willing toyield their assistance to their
distressed Nature, therefore their virtues have deserved a place amongst the
other Hieroglyphics of Egypt, and our daily imitation.

Rivals were expressed by two Rams, running at one another.

The Hyaena mentioned before, is a strange sort of Animal put to signify
contention, or unconstant dealing.

Revenge, was intimated by a Tygre devouring a Horse, a good eye sight, by a
Lynx, which is a Beast near of kin to a Wolf.

The Bear comes into the World with misshapen parts: The Mothers do so lick the
young, that at last the Eyes and Ears appear; therefore the wise Egyptians have
made it the Hieroglyphick of a good Proficient, whom time and labor do bring
to perfection. It is also reported of the Bear, that it eeks Bee-hives, not out
of a desire of Honey, but only to provoke the Bees, and oblige them to sting
its laizy body, and let out the corrupt blood that troubles it.

Vigilance or* Watchfulness, was expressed either by the Head of a Lion, placed
upon an Altar, or by a Hare. Of the first, it is said, that it sleeps with the
eyes open.

The Female Viper destroys the Male at the time of Copulation, and the young
ones do revenge their Fathers dearh, by gnawing out the Belly of their Mother,
and opening a passage that way, to enter into the world; therefore the Viper
expresses the danger of too much love, and of ingratitude.

A Scorpion, is a little Creature more fierce and venomous than strong, nothing
can cure the wound but its blood. It is cunning in watching a fit opportunity
to wound an unconsiderate Passenger: therefore it is the Hieroglyphick of
mal^ce, and wicked subtilty.

The Salamender l^ves in the flames without receiving the least prejudice from
the violence of the heat, because, as Munsterus relates, and as other Authors
observe, it is of such a cold and moist constitution, that the Fire cannot
speedily have a power to prejudice it. The Egyptian Priests d d therefore put
it to signify a brave and generous courage, that the Fire of affliction cannot
overcome nor consume Plinius observes of this Beast, that it infects all Fruits
that it touches, and leaves them some impression of its cold nature, so that
they become afterward as dangerous as Poison.

The Owls are enemies of the Storks, when therefore they did s^e in the
evening. Aelianus says, that they do arm themselves with the leaf of a
Plain-tree, which has the virtue of protecting them from the violence Owls;
for if they offer to touch this kind of Leaf, they are deprived of some of
their Senses as if they were bewitched. This Bird is of an excellent
disposition, the young ones do help the old, and furnish them with Food when
they are not able to provide it for themselves, therefore in Hebrew David calls
them (...) Psalm 104. 17. from the Root, (...) Mercy or Goodness, because this
Bird is of such a compassionate and merciful Nature, as to support the weakness
of their Parents: This good Bird shames the ill dispositions of Mankind.

There are also many remarkable things related of the Cranes when any of their
company do fall into disgrace, they all fall upon it as the common People are
wo^t in every Nation; for they will strive to injure him, whose unhappiness is
to have an ill Report; therefore this Bird was the Hieroglyphick of Democracie*

The vulture signifies Mercy, for the Naturalists do say, that she never seeks
any Prey, nor flies from her Nest, until the young ones come to a handsome
bigness, in the mean while she nourishes them with her blood, which she causes
them to suck out of her Thighs and Breast.

(...) i^ n^bibus. Prove.
The Eagle was the Hieroglyphick of Prosoerity, of Majesty, of a Noble Mind,
and of Liberality; Munsterus says, that the Eagle freely gives of its Plenty
to the rest of the Birds, that come round about it, when it has any thing to
spare.

The Owl is an ominous Bird, the Hieroglyphick of Death, and of unhappiness, of
a wicked Tyrant, or of an Hypocrite, that hates to be seen in the light of the
Sun; nevertheless, when the Owl is perceived flying, the Augures have observed
that this was a sign of Victory, and of Prosperity.

Noctua volat. Prove.
The Soothsayers did never look upon the Goose, as a happy Bird, because of its
importune and unpleasant cry: the Egyptians did thereby express a vain Babbler,
or a silly Poet.

A Quail was the Hieroglyphick of Impiety, because they say, that this Bird
does furiously chatter and torment her self, as if she were offended when the
cressent of the Moon first appears.

The Ostrich did signify Justice, because most of her feathers are of an equal
lenghth, A Bat, a Man raised from the dust to an undeserved degree of Honor.
An^ because these kind of Creatures do assist one another, and stick close
together when they apprehend any danger, they are represented together, to
intimate mutual love and friendship, which should oblige us to give succor to
one another.

It is reported of the Lapwing, that it is a great devourer of Grapes,
therefore many Plin. l. c. 2. 21.
times it is giddy; but Nature has taught unto it a secret, to remedy and
prevent the mischief, when it perceives some Operation of the violent Grapes in
its Brain, it seeks Plin. l. 2. c. 21
an Herb called Capillus veneris, and by the Greeks (...), which has the virtue
to stop the working of the Wine, and keep the vapors from the brain*

See the History of Bees, By Charl^s Butler.
The Bees have amongst them a most ingenious Commonwealth, and a good
Government, for they are all obedient to their chief Commander, and never do
revolt against his Authority. They do submit to his Sentence, obey his
Commands, follow his motion and leading; therefore they do represent a Kingdom
^ubject to their lawful Sovereign.

Aelian.
The Ephemeres, are Creatures its live a day, and therefore they are excellent
Hieroglyphics of the shortness of our Lives.

Delphinum natare doces. Prove. Thou teach thy Master.
The Dolphin has obtained amongst Men, the Honor to signify the King or
Emperor of the Sea, because they say that this Fish is kind to our Nature; and
because it is so swift in swimming, and so grateful to Benefactors.

The Head of Man, signifies sound Judgment and Wisdom* His Hair cut off,
violent grief or Bondage, if growing, Liberty* Baldness and gray Hairs, are
marks of old (...).
Age. The Forehead, is the seat of Pride and of impudency. The Eye wide open,
was the Hieroglyphick of Wisdom, of Justice; It is the seat of Contempt, of
Love, and the discoverer of the passions of the Soul. The Nose is a mark of the
nimbleness of our apprehension, and of the excellency of our understanding. The
Mouth is the Hieroglyphick of modesty; the Heart, of sincerity; the Shoulders,
of strength; the washed hands of Inocency; the right hand* of Power, of
Fidelity, and of favor. The Knees, are to express Humility, the Hat, freedom;
a Crown, Dignity; a Scepter, Power; a Buckler, Defense; an Arrow, speed; a
Spear, War, or Valor; a pair of Balance, Equity; a Sword, Revenge or Cruelty;
a fitting posture, intimates Security; a Chariot, Honor; a Ship, Help in need;
an Ankor, Hope; the Caduceus, Truce, Peace, and agreement; Chaisnes, Bondage, a
Key, Security, and freeedom of egress and ingress. The Palm and the Laurel, are
Emblems of Victory, and of deserved Honor; the Myrtle, of Pleasure; the Cedar,
of Eterni^y; the Oak, of Strength; the Olive Tree, of Fruitfulness, the
Vine-tree, of Delight and Joy; the Lilly, of Beauty; the Globe, of Perfection;
a Pyramide, of the nature of the Soul of Man, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Of some few notable Observations of several places of the World, and of
Animals.
PHilost. speaks of a Water named Asbamaea aqua, which is sweet and pleasant to
such as are honest and faithful, but dangerous to all wicked and unfaithful
Persons; for if these last offer to drink of it, they will fall into a sudden
distemper. Pindar.
The Lake Asphaltites in Judaea, is pestilentious; the Vapors that rise out of
it are so deadly, that they will not suffer any Bird to fly over alive, nor
endure any living crea^ in the water.

In Epirus, there is a Fountain, whereof the Water has the virtue to
extinguish a lighted Torch, and light it again, if it be dipped in the Water.

Joseph. l. 7. c. 24
The River Sabbatius which is in Syria, is very remarkable, because on the
Sabbath day the Stream does remain still, without moving one way or the other;
but during the six days of the week, it runs with as much rapidity as other
Rivers. Plinius mentions it, lib. 31 cap. 2.

Aristotle tells us of a Fountain in Sicilia, which did kill all the Birds that
were cast into it, but did cause the other Animals to rereturn to life when
they were expiring.

The Fountain of the Sun, mentioned by Herodotus in Africa, did yield water of
a different Plin. lib. 2.
temper, according to the motion of the Sun in the Firmament; at Noon it was
cold and sweet, but at Night it was hot and bitter.

Stat. lib. 1.
Virgo Aqua, or the Virgins Stream, had a pleasant and an excellent virtue upon
Maids, whose unhappiness it was to forget themselves, and loose their
Virginity. If they did wash their Bodies in this water, they did recover again
the stolen Jewel, and become as perfect Virgins as before.

Lib. 2.
Strabo speaks of the Woods of Juno, and of Diana, which were upon the Confines
of Dalmatia; That all the Wild Beasts that did enter into them, became came
and mild, and did loose their fierce and savage natures; so that afterward
they did not offer the least injury to Man or Beast.

Aelian. lib. 4. cap. 42.
It is observed of the Bird Attagen, that it can open its Bill, only to express
its own name amongst Men; therefore it may be compared to the vainglorious,
who are continually singing their own praise. Many Authors do speak of a
strange Bird that has no Feet, but a most beautiful variety of Colors. In
India, they name it the Bird of Paradise. It seldom rests upon the ground,
Plutarch.
but it is always to be seen flying in the Air. Gesnerus describes it in a Poem.

Gesner.
The Egyptians have taken notice of the Dogs of their Country, that when they
drink of the River Nilus, they lapp up the water running, for fear of the
Crocodile. Nature has furnished them with so much sense of the danger of
abiding still upon the Banks of that great River.

It is reported of the Elephant, that it has a great respect for beautiful
Women. If it comes into their presence when it is in its rage, the Divine rays
of their eyes will oblige it to a mild and a peaceable behavior. Aelian.
It will stand amazed at the fight of their fair faces; Therefore it seems that
an excellent beauty is able to calm the fury of this powerful Animal, and to
act wonders amongst Beasts, as well as amongst Men and Angels.

These particulars, and many other strange things of natural Beings, are
related by the Authors. He that will see more of them, may find them Registered
in Plinius, Albertus Magnus, Cael. Rodigin. Aelian. Aristotle, Munster. etc.

FINIS.
Errata.
Book. I.
P. 30. Marg. l. 3. r. (...). l. 7. r. deliver. p. 40. l. 19. r. (...). p. 41.
m. r. (...), novices designed for the Priesthood, (...), Priests received into
into the Function. p. 46. l. 13. r. (...). p. 77. m. l. 8. r. inops. d. 83. l.
19. r. Magne. p. 102. m. l. 9. r. Sacrificia Daemonum. p. 106. m. l. 18. r.
(...).

Book. II.
P. 143. m. r. (...). p. 147. l. 29 r. that. p. 166 m. l. 10. r. natus. p. 167.
l. 6. r. (...). l. 7. r. (...). m. l. 2 (...). p. 183. l. ult. r. (...). p.
184. l. 19. r. (...) p. 186. m. I. 4. r. cernuntur. p. 228. m. l. 31. r. (...).
p. 233. m. l. 12. r. Helenae. p. 236. m. l. 9. r. rabida. l. 11. r. Superstes.
p. 237. l. 7. r. (...).

Book III.
Page 22. l. 4. r. Bull. p. 35. l. 11. r. Potitii. l. 12 r. Potitius. in m l.
11. r. Priests. p. 44. m. l. 9. r. (...). p. 45. m. (...). p. 46. m. (...). p.
57. l. 28. r. erit. p. 62. m. r. (...). p. 72. l. 8. r. Repotia. p. 78. m. l.
13. r. mulieres ne. p. 79. l 13. r. (...). l. 14. r. (...) p. 88. m. l. 16 r.
vix tangere. p. 104. m. r. pedarii Senatores. p. 107. l. 4. r. choice of. p.
109. l 23. r. Centnries. p. 113. m. l. 3. r. autem. l. 8. r. imperium. l. 11.
quinqueduanus. p. 125. m. l. 18. r. poenae. p. 126. m. l. 19. r. assem. l. 24.
r. toto. p. 154. m. (...).

Advertisement.
This useful Book is designed for the Press; A seasonable Catechism for this
divided Nation; or the Church-Catechism Expounded and Enlarged in such a
manner, as may furnish every Person with a Reply to all those Errors and
Mistakes that do trouble the Quiet of the Church of England. Wherein you shall
have a Rational account of all Christian Religion; Of all that is to be
Believed and Practiced; and the sublimest Mysteries of our Faith confirmed by
Reason; with all Cases of Conscience proper for our corrupted Age examined.
Necessary for all Families that are lovers of Truth, and of the Public Peace.

AN INDEX OF THE NAMES and PLACES.
Part Page AByla 1 135 Absythus 1 162 Acca Laurentia 2 20 Acestes 1 252 Achates
1 259 Achelous 1 137 259 Archemorus 2 44 Acheron 1 71 Achilles 1 208 Achoren 1
102 Acrisius 1 13 Acteon 1 38 Accensi 2 110 Adeona and abeonadeae 1 87 Admetus
1 27 Adonis 1 111 Adramelech 1 97 Adrastus 1 170 A^amas 149 Part Page Adytum 2
13 Advocatus fisci 2 120 Aeacus 1 74 Aecastor Aedepol 1 151 Aetha 1 160 31* 63
Aegeus 1 143 146, 164 Aedituus 2 36 Aegistus 1 239 Aegina 1 260 Aeneas 1 250
Aeolus 1 23 Aeson 1 163 Aesculapius 1 26 Aedes 2 17 Aediles 2 118 Aell^ 1 78
Aerarium 1 120

Part Page Aglaia 1 23 Agamemnon 1 106 Aganippides 1 31 Asopus 1 260 Agger 2
142 Agave 1 47 169 Agenor 1 168 Agonius Deus 1 86 Ajax Son of Telamon 1 216
Ajax of Locres 1 215 Ajus 1 89 Alba 1 259 Alcethous 1 47 Alagabalus 1 99
Alpheus 1 41 132 Altar 2 18 Alecto 1 73 Alexander 1 200 Alcmena 1 128 Amalthea
1 137 Amata 1 256 Amathus 1 52 Amazones 1 131 Ambarvalia 2 22 Ammon 1 91
Amphiaraus 1 179 Alcides 1 141 Amphion 1 169 Amphitheatre 2 51 Part Page
Amphitrie 1 59 Amphitryon 1 128 Amula 2 28 Anchises 1 25^ Andabates 2 5^
Andremon 1 16^ Andromache 1 252 Androgeos 1 64 145 Anaxarete 1 263 Amphisibea 2
18^ Andromeda 1 124 Ancile 2 28 Anculi dii 1 86 Angerona 1 263 Antandrum 1 251
Antenor 1 250 Anteros 1 54 Amycus 1 151 Apotropaei 1 151 Antigone 1 180 187
Antinous 1 284 Antiphates 1 245 Apis 1 92 Apollo 1 25 Apotheosis 2 40 Anubis 1
51 91 Argo 1 161 Argus 1 18 161

Part Page Arctophylax 1 58 Argonauts 1 160 Ariadne 1 145 Arion 1 154 Aristeus 1
156 260 Arrichion 2 46 Arsinous 1 247 Artemisia 2 15 Ascanius 1 251 Assaracus 1
200 Astrea 1 3 Astyanax 1 233 Asilum 2 64 Asima 1 110 Astarte 1 108 Auctorati 2
44 Augures 2 31 Atalanta 1 178 Athamas 1 62 Atlas 1 48 Atreus 1 192 Atys 1 69
Atropos 1 73 Aurora 1 55 Authoramentum 2 44 Aquila 2 138 Arcinous 1 247 Arcus
triumphales 2 66 Averruncus Deus 1 87 Ashtaroth 1 108 106 Part Page Augias 1
132 Horn of Plenty 1 137 Archigallus 1 8 Aspersorium 2 28 Alcmeon 1 181 Arena 2
51 Alea 2 58 Authoramentum 2 54 Angusticlavium 2 67 Amphitapae 2 79 Abolla 2 80
Antiquo 95 As 2 126 Ampleatio 2 127

B
Baal 1 98 Baalim 1 105 Babylon 2 12 Bacchus 1 42, 45 Bastarides 1 44 Baal
Shalisha 1 106 Baal Pheg^r 1 110 Baal-Berith 1 102 Baal-zebub 1 102 Baal-Gad 1
100 Belenus 1 117 Belus 1 98 Bellonaria 2 42 Belatucadrus 1 117 Beelsamen 1 96

Part Page Berecynthia 1 7 Belides 1 75 Bellerophon 1 125 Bona dea Cybele 1 8
Bimater 1 42 Botes 1 58 Brabenta 2 49 Briareus 1 11 Briseis 9 Bromius 1 43
Brontes 1 17 Busi^is 1 133 By^sa 1 253 Balista 2 143 Bestiarii 2 44 Bustuarii
Glad. 2 52 Bacchanales 1 44 Battus 1 49 Bubona dea 1 88

C
Cadmus 1 168 Caduceus 1 48 Cajete 1 245 Calisto 57 Calliope 1 30 Caesar 2 100
Calc^i 2 86 Calydonian Boar 144 Calais 1 78 Caligae 2 87 Part Page Camilli 2 ^6
Campus Martius 98 Campiductor 2 61 Candidatus 2 83 Canopus 1 261 Cassiopea 1
128 Castor and Pollux 150 Capitol 2 65 Cassius 111 Career 2 130 Carceres 2 45
Carptor 2 90 Catapulta 2 143 Cavea 2 51 Camilla 1 258 Capaneus 1 180 189 Capys
2 27 Chaos 1 73 Charon 1 72 Carthage 1 253 Cassandra 1 237 Golden Calves 1 93
Calypso 1 247 Charibdis 6^ Cardmenta 86 Catius Deus 87 Caeleno 1 78 Cecropes 1
4, 14 Ceglusa 1 26^ Centaurs 1 7 C^pheus 1 12

Part Page Cephalus 1 261 Cerberus 1 72 Castor 1 156 Ceres 1 ^9 Celeres 2 100
Chesse 43 Censor 2 109 Centurio 2 76 Cestus 2 43 Chalcas 1 216 Chersonesus 1
199 Chimera 1 17^, 125 Chiron 1 26 Chryses 1 228 Chemosh 100 Circenses ludi 45,
48 Circus 1 45 Clotho 1 73 Classis 2 79 Cliens 2 67 Calpe 1 135 Clytemnestra
150 Cyrene 1 260, 22 Cupidon 53 Coena 2 87 Copreae 60 Coelus 1 1 Cornea 1 58
Cocytu^ 1 72 Colossus 1 32 2 12 Cohors 2 135 Part Page Collumbar 2 130 Collonia
2 145 Comessatio 2 87 C mitia 2 93 Compitales ludi 2 59 Confarreatio 2 74
Conscripti patres 2 67 Consules 2 106 Corcyra 1 247 Contubernium 2 136 Cortina
1 30 Coronae 2 151 Muralis 2 150 Navalis 2 150 Obsidionalis, etc. 150
Corybantes 1 2, 70 15 Coronis 1 35 Ciun 1 113 Creon 1 136 Creusa 1 25 Culeus 2
130 20 Cuneus 2 141 Cruces 2 129 Cuniculi 143 Cumina 86 Curiae 2 64 Curetes 2
Curulis sella 2 66 Cybele 1 2 Cyllene 51

Part Page Cynosura 1 57 Cythera 52 Cytheron 52 Cyclopes 1 17 Comedia 2 60
Carceres 1 45 Cymbium 2 92 Calceati dentes 2 89 Calices 2 92 Congiarium 2 84

D
Danae 1 13, 23 Danaus 75 Damnatio 2 131 Daphne 1 27 Dardanus 1 199 Dares 1 127
Dedalus 1 50 Deianira 1 137 Dei^hobu^ 1 221 Decimatio legion. 149 Decumae 126
Decuriae 2 136 Delubrum 2 17 Depontani 2 20 Desultorii 2 46 Dialis flam. 2 35
Delos 1 25 Delphos 1 30 34 Part Page Deucalion 1 32 Diana 26 Dido 2 53 Dictator
2 113 Ditany 258 Diomedes 1 133 Dione 52 Dionysus 1 91 Dioscouroi 1 150 Discord
1 203 Dodone 1 16^ Doris 1 6^ Diminutio cap. 2 128 Discus 2 58 Diributores 2 90
Divortium 2 73 Duumviri 2 35 Dreams 184 Drepanum 1 25 Druids 2 33 Dryades 1 61
Dulichia 1 207 Dyndimene 1 7 Dactyli Idaei 1 21 Dyctimnis 40 Dirae 73 Demophon
14 Dolphins 157 Deiphile 182 Dolabra 2 27 Dice 2 43 Divorce 2 73

Part Page Diffareratio 2 74 Denicales f^riae 2 79 Decemviri 2 114 Dyrce 1 264

E
Echo 1 71 Editor 2 49 Egeon 1 11 Electra 1 171 Eculeus 2 130 Edictum 2 111
Elephantini libri 2 Eleusina 1 260 38 Epulones 2 13 36 Equestris ordo 2 67
Equitum magist. 2 133 Ergastulum 2 130 Elysian fields 49 76 Endymion 1 38 Elisa
253 Enceladus 1 11 Epeus 1 216 Ephesus 2 12 Epimetheus 1 12 Epode 2 23
Erichthonius 1 57 Eridanus 1 32 Erastratus 1 39 Part Page Esculapius 1 20, 35
Eteocles 1 175 Evadne 1 189 Evander 2 34 Euboea 1 210 Eumenides 1 73 Euripi 2
49 Exequiae 2 77 Europa 1 13 Euryalus 1 258 Eurydice 1 260 Eurylochus 1 246
Eryphile 177 Eurystheus 1 262 Excuneat 1 52 Etesian winds 1 260 Eumolpus 262
Eros 1 54 Echo 1 71 Epaphus 1 91 Ermensewl 1 116 Enigma 174 Euthymus 2 43
Exauthorati 2 54 Edictum 2 111

F
Faunus 1 68 Factiones 2 60 Familiae 2 4^ 69

Part Page Fanum 2 17 Farracia 2 70 Feretra 2 76 Fasces 2 103 107 Feciales 2 30
Feronia Dea 1 89 Flamines 2 29, 95 Golden Fleece 1 162 Feriae 2 79 Fidiculae 2
130 Fidius 1 60 Fiseus 2 120 Flora 1 89 Fortuna 1 81, 84 Francus 1 250 Francois
1 250 Fratres areales 2 29 Flexumines 2 102 Focus 2 18 Forum 2 16 Fornices 2
152 Funerals 2 75 Frumentum 2 126 Furcifer 2 129 Furcae 2 129 Friga 1 115 Flint
1 116 Fidegast 1 116 Flammeum or Flammeus 2 86 Part Page Faseiae 2 86

G
Galli 1 8 Gemoniae Scalae 2 131 Genius 1 82 Gladiators 2 52 Glaucus 1 62
Globus milit. 2 141 Gladius 2 147 Gorgones 1 124 Gymnastae 2 43 Gemini 1 150
Ganimedes 1 13, 22 Geryon 1 133 Gustatio 2 89 Roman Government 2 99

H
Harmonia 1 171 Harpocrates 1 263 Harpies 1 2, 78 Haruspices 2 32 Hastati 2 138
Hamadriades 1 1 Hebe 1 17, 22 He^cate 37 Hecatomb 2 20

Part Page Hector 1 229 Hecuba 1 243 Helena 1 147 150 Haeres 1 126 Helenus 2 52
Helicon 1 126 Hell 1 71 Hell 1 63 Hellanodicks 2 46 Hellespont 1 63 Harpastum
2 58 Henetes 2 50 Hercules 1 128 Heroes 1 121 Herilus 1 133 Hermaphroditus 1 50
Horta dea 1 87 Herophilus 2 33 Hiarbas 2 54 Helmsteed 1 116 Hesione 1 28
Hesperides 1 133 Hesperus 1 50 Hesus 1 116 Hippolyte 1 132 Hyppolitus 1 26 148
Hyerax 1 90 Hippomedon 8 178 Hippodamia 173 192 Part Page Hippona dea 1 88
Hostia 2 23 Hyacinthus 1 27 Hydra 1 130 Hymeneus 1 52 Hylas 1 162 Hypocrene 1
125 Hyreus 1 58 Horacius 1 21

I
Janus 1 34 Janiculus mons 2 65 Jasius 1 199 Jason 1 151 160 Icarus 1 50
Ilythia 1 22 Idea 1 69 Idols 2 9 Idomeneus 1 215 Ilium 1 199 Ilus 1 199 Ino 1
62, 66 Jentaculum 2 87 Ilicet 2 78 Images 2 2 Imperator 2 111 Incestus 2 86
Indigetes 1 121 Iuferiae 2 78

Part Page Interrex 2 113 Intervallum 2 14^ Jocasta 2 173 Iphiclus 2 129 140
Ismene 1 175 Isis 1 90 Ionia 1 91 Ithaca 1 207 Iphigenia 1 210 Iphis 1 263
Judges of Hell 1 74 Judgment 2 127 Julus 1 259 Juno 1 213 16 Juno^es 1 83
Jupiter 1 1^2 10, 14 Justa solvere 2 77 Ixion 1 76 Inter^edere 2 117 Indigetes
1 85 Iugatinus 86 Ida 1 153 Jocasta 1 172 Juvenilia 2 42 (...) games 2 44
Intendere actionem 2 127

L
Part Page Labyrinthus 1 145 2 11, 15 Lachesis 1 73 Laerthes 1 212 Laius 1 172
Lanista 2 52 Lapides 2 112 Laquearii 2 43 Lararium 1 84 Laocoon 1 231 Laodimia
1 217 Laomedon 1 28 Roman Laws 2 123 Lares 1 81, 84 Latinus 1 255 Latium 1 3
Levana 1 86 Laverna 1 87 Latona 1 25 Lavinia 1 255 Lavinium 1 256 257 Laurentum
1 255 Lausus 1 258 Leuticlavia 2 67 Latrones 2 52 Latrunculus 2 52 Legatus 2 1
8 Legio 1 136

Part Page Lemnos 1 17 Lemura 2 42 Lectistemia 2 13 Leda 1 150 Lenoeus 1 43
Lestrigones 1 245 Lethe 1 49, 76 Liber 1 46 Leucothea 1 24, 63 Lictores 2 110
Lipara 1 17 Lituus 2 31 Lotos 1 244 Libitina 2 76 Lucina 1 38 Lessus 2 78 Leges
Romans 2 122 Libanima 2 25 Liberti 2 67 Litare 2 26 Literati 2 132 Ludi Romans 2 59
Lupa 2 63 Lupercal 1 68, 2 39 Lucifer 1 56 Luna 1 42 Lustration 2 23 Lustrum 2
109 Lycaon 1 264 Lycus 1 136 Line^us 1 152 Part Page Lycomedes 1 209 Lychas 1
138 Lusus 1 46 Lenaea 1 46 Lerna 1 130 Lucus 2 18 Ludi compitalitii 59
Castrenses 61 Capitolini 2 59 Cereales 59

M
Macaon 1 139 Magistrates Romans 2 99 Maia 1 48 Marriages 2 68 Marathon 141
Manipulus 2 136 Manumissus 2 67 Mars 1 23, 24 Marsyas 1 155 158 Mausolus 2 12,
15 Medea 1 162 164 Medusa 1 125 Medus 1 128 Megalesia 1 7 Megaera 1 73 Megara 1
136 Meleager 1 144

Part Page Memnon 1 55 Melicerta 1 62 Melpomene 1 30 Menades 1 44 Mancipatio 2
126 Megalesia 1 7 Merenda 2 87 Milites Romans 2 135 Meneceus 1 178 Menelaus 1 205
Mercurius 1 27, 48 Mercurii Sors 2 91 Mezentius 1 257 Midas 1 155 Milo 2 47
Minerva 1 17 Mimi 2 60 Montes Romae 2 65 Morbus Comitialis 2 96 Mulctae Romans 2
128 Mullei 2 87 Morea 1 192 Mnemosume 1 30 Moloch 2 21, 96 Mola salsa 2 23
Momus 1 8^, 85 Morpheus 1 73 Muncrarius 2 38 The Muses 1 30 Minos 1 145
Minotaurus 1 144 The seven Miracles 2 14 Part Page Mirrha 1 277 Mirmidones 74
Mirmillones 2 53 Mirtilus 1 192 194 Municipium 2 145 Muscae 2 88 Muses 1 30
Murica dea 1 86 Mellona dea 88 Mazol Tob 1 101 Marnas 107 Mero Merodach 1 113
The Moon 1 114

N
Naiades 1 61 Napeae 1 61 Naumachia 2 51 Nauplius 1 235 Nervus 2 130 Nascio 1
86 Nausicae 1 247 Nemea 1 44 130 Nemesis 1 82, 85 Neoptolemus 1 265 Nephele 1
63 Neptunns 1 3, 60 Nereus 1 60 Nereids 1 61

Part Page Nessus 1 1^7 Nestor 1 216 Niobe 1 191 Nisa 43 Nisus 1 258 64 Nongenti
2 95 Nuncium mittere 2 74 Nuptiae 2 72 Nymphs 1 87 Numa Pompilius 2 35 Nycteus
1 265 Nyctemine 1 265 Naxos 1 145 Naphtha 1 166 Nectar 1 72 Nox 78 Naaenia dea
1 87 Nilus 1 95 Nisroch 1 110 Nibchaz 1 110

O
Oceanus 1 61 Oedipus 1 172 Oenomaus 1 192 194 Oenus 1 41 Oeta 1 138 Ogyges 33
Onager 2 143 Part Page Opima Spolia 2 152 Ops 1 7 Oileus 1 215 Olympias 1 275
Omphalis 1 136 Orci galea 128 Orestes 194 Orchestra 2 49 Orgia 1 46 Orion 1 58
Orbis milit. 2 141 Orpheus 1 154 Osiris 1 46, 91 Oscines 2 31 Ovatio 2 150
Ovilia 2 98 Olympic games 2 44 Ouranos 1 1 Oxen of the Sun 1 247 Ocypete 1 78
Oanes 1 107

P
Pallas Evandri fill. 1 256 Patavium 1 250 Padus 1 32 Palaestra 2 43 Palamedes 2
57 Palam mediac i coluli 57 Palemon 1 67

Part Page Pales magna 1 10, 68 87 Palladium 1 9 Palatinus mons 1 65 Pallium 2
80 Par and impar 2 53 Pan 1 155 68 Panathenea 1 18 Parma 2 147 Pandora 1 12
Pancratiastes 2 44 Paphos 1 52 Paris 1 203 Parnassides 1 31 Patina 86 Par^ae 1
72 Parthenopeus 1 178 Pasiphae 1 31 Pat^ra 2 27 Paterpatratus 2 30, 36 Palagium
2 80 Patroclus 1 228 Patroni 2 67 Pegasus 1 50 Pelops 1 192 Penates 1 81
Penelope 1 248 Pegmata 2 54 Peleus 1 62 Penula 2 80 Pelias 1 160 Part Page
Pelops 1 190 Pelopidas 1 170 Peloponn^sus 1 192 Penetralia 2 13 Pentathletae 2
44 Perduelionis reus 2 98 Pentheus 1 47 Penthesilia Periander 1 154 Perseus 1
123 Phaedra 1 148 Phaeton 1 31 Phalaris 1 143 Phidias 2 16 Phorbas 25 Phlegrean
fields 11 Phleoeton 1 72 Phoebe 1 38 Phoebus 30 Phollus 142 Philomela
Philoctetes 138 Phineus Phoci 1 62 Phrixus 1 63 Picus 1 68 Pluto 1 71, 77
Pirethous 1 146 Penula Platea 261 P^ssinuntia 1 70 Petaurum 2 58

Part Page Pila 2 58 Pindarus 1 170 Pinarii 2 35 Pistrinum 2 1^2 Planopedes 2 60
Plebiseitum 2 95 Pocula Romans 2 92 Poena Romans 128 Pollinct^res 2 76 Pompa 2 50
Pollux 1 150 Polyphemus 1 244 Pontifex Max. 36 Popae 2 36 Porta 2 64 P^rtorium
2 146 Postulatio 2 127 Potitii 2 35 Praecidane^ hostioe 24 Praefectus urbis 2
112 Praefectus Praetor. 120 Proefectus annonae 119 Praefectus aerarii 119
Praeficae 2 76 Praerogativa Trib. 2 96 Praetexta toga 2 82 Praepetes 2 31
Praetores 110 Praetoriani milit. 120 Prandium 2 87 Podium 2 49 Polites 1 232
Part Page Polybius 1 173 Polydamas 2 46, 47 Polydorus 1 251 Polymnestor 1 251
Polynices 1 175 177 Polyxena 1 202 Priapus 1 53, 54 Priests of the gods 2 20
Priamus 1 202 Procustes 1 144 Procyon 1 58 Prometheus 1 12 134 Pegasus 125
Progne 1 266 Pros^rpina 1 71, 39 Princeps Juventutis 1^1 Princeps milit. 2 138
Proconsul 2 121 Propraetor 2 121 Proletarii 2 97 Promulsis 2 89 Prooemium 2 89
Promulgatio leg. 2 96 Prosoenium 2 55 Proteus 1 142 Provinciae Cons. 2 121 Et
Praetoriae 2 121 Pulvinaria 2 13 Puncta publica 2 97 Prothesilans 1 217

Part Page Pugiles 2 43 Pumiliones 2 53 Pigmalion 1 253 Pylades 1 2^8 Pyracmon
1 17 Pyramides 2 14 Pyrrha 1 38 Pyrrhus 1 232 Pythia 1 30 or Pythonissa 1 30
Pyra 2 77 Python 1 26 Praefericulum 2 27 Poeulum boni dei 2 93 Prono 1 116
Protervia 2 23 Pyrrene 1 41 Protheus 62 Praeconi subjicere 2 128 Roman
punishments 2 128

Q
Quadruplatores 2 126 Quaesitores Romans Judges Quaestores 2 116 Quirinus 2 86,
65 Quiris 2 71 Quatuorviri 2 119 Quinquereium 2 45 Quirites 2 86

R
Part Page Raia 1 158 Retiarii 2 43 Rhadamanthus 1 74 Rhea Sylvia 1 17 Rhesus 1
214 Rhodes 1 29 Rhodia 1 29 Roma 2 63 Romulus 2 64 Rostra 2 66, 77 Rosa 2 111
Recta coena 2 91 Repotia 2 72 Repudium 2 74 Rex Romans 2 99 Rexsacror 2 29 Robur
2 130 Rudis 2 52 Rude donatus 52 Rusina dea 1 88 Rimmon 1 111 Remphan 1 113
Robigus deus 1 88 Rogus 2 77 Ricinium 2 80 Ricae, Reticulae 2 86

Part Page Sabins 2 64 Sacer homo 2 124 Sacrarium 2 17 Sacrificer 2 23
Sacramentum 2 135 Sacrosanctus 2 111 Sagum 2 80 Salii 2 35 Salmacis 1 50
Salmoneus 1 75 Sarpedon 1 214 Saturnus 1 1 Satyrs 1 69 Scaurus 2 56 Scamander 1
199 Scena 2 60 Scenici ludi 2 60 Scriba 2 1^2 Scrobiculus 2 18 Secespita 2 27
Sella curulis 2 66 Semones 1 86 Senaculum 2 66 Senatus 2 104 Senatores 2 105
Fedarii and 2 104 Allecti 2 104 Septa 2 98 Part Page Scylla 1 64 Semiramis 2 14
Semele 1 4^ Serapis 1 91 Sybele 2 37 Sicheus 1 253 Seige of Troy 1 2^3 Sigeum 1
229 Silenus 1 69 Sirens 1 66 Sysiphus 1 76 Sinon 1 231 Sinois 1 199 Si^plegades
1 162 Sol 1 42 Sparta. 1 195 Spartacus 2 21 Septicolis urbs. 2 64 Sepultura 2
78 Sequestses 2 84 Sestertius 2 128 Sica 2 147 Signa 2 139 Signatores 2 69
Silicernium 2 78 Sinistra pars Mundi Siticines 2 76 Solea 2 86 Sphinx 1 91
Sponsalia 2 69 Stipendiarii 2 146

Part Page Stipes noxiales 130 Stola 2 95 Stadium 2 44 Sthelenus 1 215 Strophe
2 2^ Steropes 1 17 Styx 2 72 Sylvanus 1 6 Suffragia 2 97 Supplicationes 2 150
Supplicia ^ 128 Suyphus 2 92 Sucubula 2 8^ Supparum 2 80 Stragulum 2 80

T
Tantalus 1 190 (...) ^ 139 Talismans 1 9 Tartaria 1 73 Temples 2 11 Tabella 2
95 Tabul^ 2 9^ Taeda 2 71 Talio 2 125 Talus 2 58 Torentini ludi 2 61 Taurii
ludi 2 59 Tarpeia Rupes 2 61 Part Page Tergiductar 2 1^6 Terminalia 2 41
Tessare omnes 2 58 Testamenta 2 125 Testudo 2 143 Theaters 2 55, 60 Theasae 2
60 Titii 2 35 Togae omnes 2 8^ Togeti 2 82 Tormenta 129 Telamon 1 215 Thespius
141 Teleg^nus 1 2^9 Telem iohus 1 249 Telephus 1 211 Tenedos 1 224 Teu^^r 1 199
Ter^ipavium 2 31 or Tripudium Solistim 31 Thalia 1 30 Thaea 1 42 Thebs 1 154
Theagenes 2 48 Themis 1 32 The damas 1 135 Therpsicore 1 ^0 Thersites 1 217
Theseus 1 233 Thetys 1 61 Thassus 171

Part Page Thoas 1 130 Thyades 1 44 Thyestes 1 194 Tiresias 1 249 Tisiphones 1
73 Titum 1 2, 3, 75 Tithonus 1 55 Taphet 2 21 Tytius 2 35 Trabeae omnes 2 85
Trident 1 60 Trieteria 1 44 Tritons 1 59 Triarii 2 138 Tribuuni 2 114 Tribut 2
98 Triclinium 2 88 Trivet of Apollo 1 34 Triumphus 2 151 Triumviri omnes 2 115
Troja 1 199 Troas 1 200 Troilus 1 202 Tros 1 20 Trojanus ludus 2 61 Trophaeum 2
152 Trossuli 2 102 Tullianum 2 130 Tunicae genera 2 85 Turma 2 136 Part Page
Turres ambulator 2 142 Tutors 2 115 Turnus 256 Tydeus 179 Tyndarus 150 Typhocus
1 11 Tyrocinium 2 82 Trulla 92 Tragoedia 2 60 Tyberinus 256 Teraphim 1 95
Thalassius 54 Thammuz 1 111 Tholum 2 18 Tuisco 114 Tharamis 115 Theutates 116
Tmolus 142 Thuribulum 2 27 Typhis 161

V
Vadari 2 127 Vadimonium 2 127 Valla Orvalli 2 142 Vaticanus 1 86 Venus 1 109 2
23, 52 Vectigal 137 Velites 2 137

Part Page Ventilare 2 62 Vertomnus 1 62 Vespae 2 76 Vesper 1 56 Vesta 1 2, 4,
8 Vestal Virgins 1 8, 9 Vexilla 28 2 236 Vicessimatio 149 Victimae 2 22, 26
Viminaeus Jup. 2 65 Vindicta 2 67 Vinea 2 143 Viri placa 1 53 Visceratit 2 78
Vertumnus 1 62 Victoria 1 71 Ulysses 1 243 Vomito^ia 2 51 Vmbrae 2 88 Votireus
2 59 Votivi ludi 2 59 Vr 1 109 Part Page Vrna 2 78 Vsus 4 72 Urania 1 69 Vulcan
1 17, 23 Vxores 2 71 Vrticordia 1 53 Vsurpatio Vsucapionis 2 74 Vncimnati 2 87
Woden 1 115 Walls of Babylon 2 11, 14 Vinum 2 92 Vitellns 2 90

X
Xanthus 1 214

Q
Zetus 1 78 Zephyrus 111 Zonam solvere 2 86

FINIS.

