Prince-Protecting PROVIDENCE: OR, A COLLECTION OF SOME Historical Passages,
Relating how Several Princes and Personages, (Born for Great Actions) have had
Miraculous Preservations.
Made Public upon Occasion of the late Memorable (and Miraculous) Deliverance
of His Royal Highness, JAMES, Duke of York.
Numb. 23. 23. Non est Incantatio; non est Divinatio contra Jacobum. Prove. 21.
30. Non est Concilium contra Dominum.
[And, first, Some out of Sacred Writ.]
JOseph's Brethren conspire his Death: Reuben (of all the rest) is against the
Bloody Cruelty; but advises to put him into a Pit, (as a means either to be
starved, or devoured by some Evil Beast.) Judah, afterward, advises to sell him
to the Midianitish Merchants; and They carry him into Egypt, and sell him to
Potiphar, the King's Steward: Being in his Service, he has an unjust Accusation
framed against him by his Mistress. He is imprisoned; and, in Prison,
Expounding the Chief Butler and Baker's Dream, he is after made known to the
King; and Expounding his Dream also, is made sole Govenour over all Egypt. [So
to save, not only the Egyptians from starving; but also his Father, and
unnatural Brethren.]

Moses (when Born) is hid Three Months; then exposed in a little Ark upon the
River Nile: Pharoah's Daughter spies him, causes him to be taken up, and Nursed
as her Son; Heb. 11. ^ As a Presage of his future being a Prince, and good
Justicier, he kills the injuring Egyptian; for which Pharaoh seeks to slay
him: He flies to Midian; Marries the Priest (or Princes) Daughter: God appears
to him, induing him with a Spirit, working Wonders; makes him the General
Conductor of the Children of Israel through the Red Sea, (a miraculous
Passage!) and afterward institutes him their Governor.

David is delivered from the Paws of the Lion and Bear, from the Sword of
Goliath; [and after of other Philistines,] from Readiness Javelin, and his Lyings
in wait, and continued Persecutions, [from the Envy of the Philistine Lords];
from all these, to fight the Lord's Battles, and be King of Israel, at the
appointed Time.

Athaliah puts to Death all the King's Sons, except Joash; for his Aunt takes
him, and hides him Six Years in great Privacy; [the Seventh Year the People
rise unanimously, slay Athaliah, Crown Joash King.] This was that good Prince;
that Repaired the Temple, and did that which was Good in the Sight of the Lord,
2 King. Chap. 11. Chap. 12.

Paul, Ordained to be the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and to die a Martyr for
the Truth at Rome, (the Mistress of the World) is miraculously Converted, and
as miraculously oftentimes Preserved. Act. 9. a Conspiracy being to Kill him,
his Friends let him down over the Wall in a Basket. Act. 14. is stoned, and
supposed to be dead. Chap. 16. whipped and imprisoned, with a succeeding
Miracle. Chap. 18. accused by the Jews, excused by Gallio. Chap. 19. escapes
the Sedition raised against him by Demetrius. Chap. 23. delivered by the Chief
Captain, from a Conspiracy of Forty. Chap. 27. escapes Shipwreck: and lastly,
arrives at Rome, which was his Terminus ad Quem, to Receive the Crown of
Martyrdom.

Josephus tells us, The Divine Protection appeared in Titus, the Son of
Vespasian, (destined to ruin Jerusalem, and subdue the Jews); before he
besieged the City, he went about to discover, and fell into an Ambuscado of his
Enemies: At which time (if ever) it was known; God disposes of the Moments of
War, and Lives of Princes. He had neither Helmet on his Head, nor Armor on his
Body, (because he went not to Fight, but to discover,) of an infinite Number of
Arrows, that were shot at him, not one lighted on him, but fell beside him, or
at his Horses Feet; though the Jews, encouraging one another, Sallyed out,
charging and re-charging him which way soever he turned.

Suetonius tells us, That Augustus Caesar escaped a Great Danger; for one of
the Chief Men among the Gauls, confessed to some of his Friends, That he had
fully resolved to make, as if he would have parlied with Augustus, in his
Passage over the Alps; and that at his coming within him, he would have thrown
him down: but the Amiableness and Majesty of the Emperor, detered him in the
very moment. Valerius Maximus, lib. 9. chap. 11. makes mention of such another
Treason intended against this great Prince, which was likewise frustrated.

Gabriel Fondulo, Lord of Cremona, confessed (before his Death) That he had
once resolved with himself, to throw down headlong from the High Tower of
Cremona, the Emperor Sigismond, who was gone up thither, to see the City and
Country thereabouts. But at the very Juncture and Moment, his Conscience was
affrighted: ( Historia Italica.) All Historians say, He was a most excellent
Prince: He it was, that to cure the great Schism in the Papacy, procured the
General Council of Constance.

The Famous Emperor, Charles the Fifth, (born for Great Actions) escaped just
such a Design of being thrown from the Top of the Temple of Pantheon in Rome,
by a certain malevolent Italian; but his Heart failed him in the Nick of Time.
( Camerarius.)

Henry the Third, Emperor, (a Famous Prince, and a Manager of great Wars) was
Entertained and Lodged very sumptuously by the Countess Richilda; and as she
was making a Request to the Emperor, and he reaching his Hand to her, in token
of Appeal, the Chamber-Floor suddenly brake under them; the Emperor fell into
a Bathing-Vessel, that was in the Room underneath, and had no Harm: But Bruno,
Bishop of Virtsbourgh, Alemannus, Bishop of Eversbourgh, and the Countess, were
so bruised, they died in few days. ( Aventinus.)

Frederick the First, Emperor, being in St. Peter's Cloister in Erford, had
Occasion to go the Privy, (some of Quality accompanying) suddenly the Floor
sunk, and the Emperor had miscarried, if he had not suddenly taken hold of the
Grates of a Window, where he hung till some came, and relieved him. Some
Gentlemen fell to the Bottom, and perished; among others, Henry Earl of
Swartzenbourgh, who carried the Presage of his Death in a common Imprecation;
which was this, If I do it not, let me die in a Privy. [This was that Famous
Emperor, styled Barbarossa, (recommended to the States by his Predecessor
Conrade) famous for his Wars in Italy, Sicily, and Armenia; and who also
escaped a great Danger, accompanied only with one Servant; for a desperate
Fellow of a sudden rushing upon him, (out of an Ambuscado) close by a River,
endeavored to cast him in: but not prevailing, leapt himself into the River,
and swam away. Albertus Crantzius.]

Henry the Fourth, Emperor; This famous Prince was fain to put his Hand to the
Sword at Fourteen years of Age, and fought Sixty-two Battles, ere he laid down.
Aventine writes of him, he escaped a great Danger, near to Spire; for having
been by the Plotting of Hanno, (Archbishop of Collen) brought into a sumptuous
Boat, trimmed and provided to carry him away Prisoner; misdoubting that some
ill Turn was meant him, he cast himself into the Rhine; where he had been
drowned, but for the kind Endeavor of his Kinsman Egbert, who got him a Shore.

This same Emperor used to go often to Prayers in St. Mary's Church, in Mount
Aventine. Pope Gregory the Seventh, (who carried a watchful Eye over this great
Princes Actions) commanded one to take notice of the Place where he was wont to
pray, and got a certain Fellow to go up upon the Top of the Church, and there
upon the Beams, to place certain great Stones, which should be so fitly laid,
that with the least touch they should fall down upon the Emperor's Head, and
brain him at their Fall. The Villain went so hastily to work, that as he
thought to have rolled down a very great Stone, the said Stone (with his
weight) drew him too: So that Man and Stone came down together upon the
Temple-floor; where the Man was killed with the Stone that fell upon him, and
the Emperor escaped. The good Emperor notwithstanding, would have the Wretch
to be buried.

Bodin tells of a certain Gentleman of Normandy, who once resolved to have
killed King Francis; but the Divine Power operating, he repented him of his
wicked Purpose. This was that Famous Francis, the great Emulator of Charles the
Fifth, and opposing him in all his Ambitious Undertakings.

Justin tells us, Astyages, upon a Dream, caused his Grandson to be delivered
to Harpagus, to be made away; which he unwilling to do himself, delivers him to
the King's Shepherd; he also unwilling to kill the Infant, exposes him in the
Woods, and afterward finds a Bitch suckling of him, and defending him from
Beasts and Birds. His Wife persuades him to expose her own Son, and bring up
the other; which is consented to. Thus was that great Conqueror of Asia
(Cyrus) preserved, whose Birth was foretold by Isaiah Three Hundred years
before it happened. Isa. 44. 28.

Justin tells us also, Gargoris (King of the Curetes) his Daughter was got
with with Child; he commands the Innocent to be made away: First, It was
exposed in Solitary Places; and the Wild Beasts they suckle it, instead of
devouring it. Secondly, It is laid in a narrow Way, where droves of Beasts went
to, and returned from the Field; they trod not on him, but contrary, Goats and
Cows stand still, and suckle him. Hungry Dogs spare him: And cast to Sows, they
suckle him. Then he is cast into the Sea, where he floats, and the Waves carry
him a Shore; and a Hind nourishes, and brings him up. Finally, After sometime,
he is taken in a Toil, or Net, and presented to his Grandfather; and known by
certain Marks, is proclaimed Heir, and proved an Excellent Prince.

Procus Silvius had two Sons, Numitor and Amulius; Amulius having chased his
Elder Brother, Numitor, out of the Country, caused also his Daughter Rhea to
become a Vestal-Virgin; she becomes great of two Sons, and delivered. These
Amulius exposes; Fortune provides 'em for Nurse a Shee-Wolfe, bereaved of her
Whelps, and willing to have her Duggs drawn, who often suckles them. Faustulus,
the King's Shepherd, takes notice of this wondrous Accident, and brings them
up in a Country way. At length, they revenge the Injury done to Numitor, and
restore him. [These Miraculously nourish't-Twins, were ordained to be Founders
of the City Rome, (the future Lady of the World:] And so by an unexpected
Providence, were preserved, (as Justin, and other Authors.)

Hiero, King of Sicily, was a Bastard, and exposed by his Father Hieroclitus.
Wanting Humane Helps, the Bees nourish him; which his Father knowing, and
consulting the South-sayers, holds it for a good Omen; takes him home, and
gives him agreeable Education. This was he, that succeeded the Great Pyrrhus,
(in the Sicilian Kingdom, and of whom Justin gives a most Royal Character.

Homay, Queen of Persia, left with Child by her Husband, at five Months end is
delivered of a Son. The Astrologers are convened, who consult the Stars, and
find, He should cause great Miseries and Ruin to his Realms; so as many were of
opinion, he should be put to Death. The Mother would not yield to that; but
caused him to be put in a little Cradle, enclosed within a Coffer or Ark of
Wood; in which she put many precious Jewels of great value; to the end, if any
poor Man found him, he might the rather afford to bring him up. He was carried
far from thence, upon the River Jehun; and was taken up by a poor Landerer, or
Washer of Linen. He brings him up; when he was grown Great, nothing would
serve him but the Profession of Arms. He enters into the Army of his unknown
Mother; performs Wonders; is brought before her; and after Questions aks't, is
by her acknowledged, and succeeds in the Kingdom. [Exceeding all his
Predecessors in Bounty and Wisdom, contrary to the Opinion of the Chaldeans or
Astrologers, who do not always Preach the Gospel.] Ex Chronio Persico.

Kozrar. King of Persia, (upon a Dream) caused Jazdegard, his Grandson, to be
carried into a Solitary and Desert Place; exposed to the Mercy of Wild Beasts;
where certain Herdsmen passing by, took him, and gave him Breeding according to
their poor Quality. Coming to Age, he found means to know his Beginning; and
having a Mind agreeable to his Birth, he went to Court; where he carried
himself so bravely, that at length he was acknowledged for what he was; so as
after he was made King, and Governed exceeding well.

On St. Dunstan's Day, 1251. E^^anor, the Queen, (Wife to Henry the Third)
sitting with her Children in a Chamber at Windsor-Castle, a mavelous Tempest
of Thunder and Lightening beat down to Dust the Chimney of the said Chamber
where they were, they receiving no harm. She was a devout and good Queen, (and
the Children are supposed to be Prince Edward, then some Twelve Years old,
Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Margaret, after Queen of the Scots, Beatrix,
afterward Duchess of Britain.) Stow.

Anno 1287. The foresaid Prince Edward, (now become King) sitting with the
Queen together in a Chamber, a Thunderclap entering the Window, passed between
them, and slew two of their Household Servants; they remaining unhurt. Stow.
This was that Famous Edward, that tamed the Scots and Welsh: See Weaver, page
456, 457, 458, 459. During his being in the Holy Land, he was wounded by a
Saracen, with a venomed Knife, the Poison whereof was sucked out by his Queen,
otherwise the Wound thought uncurable.

Fox the Martyrologist, in the Beginning of his Discourse of this Princes
Reign, has a Memorable Passage: That he once playing at Chess with a certain
Soldier, suddenly (upon no occasion given) rose up, and went his way; when
presently a mighty Stone fell down from the Vault, directly upon the Place
where he sat, which had undoubtedly brained him.

Henry the Eighth, following his Hawk, leapt over a Ditch with a Pole, which
broke; so that, if Edmund Moody (a Footman) had not leapt into the Water, and
lift up the King's Head, which stuck in the Clay, he had been drowned. (This
Footman was rewarded both with Means and Arms, speaking his Service done to
his Prince.) And the King lived to perform afterward a Deed of grand Concern.

I could mention some notable Deliverances of Queen Elizabeth; but her
Sufferings and Life having been Printed not long since, I shall forbear.

But I will recite what Camerarius says concering King James. His words are: We
must not forget the Divine Protection, and miraculous Deliverance of James the
Sixth, late King of Scotland, and Now King of Great Britain, upon the Fifth of
August 1660. This Prince giving Credit to the Words and Protestations of
Alexander, Brother to the Earl Gowry, fell into an Ambush, laid for him by
these two Brethren, and other their Confederates; where, being unarmed, and
assaulted by two (that were intent to Murder him) he so defended himself for a
while by his Royal Port, and forcible Speech, they had no Power to bind him.
And adds, That Andrew Hinderson (appointed to be the chief Assassine) seeing
Alexander, the Earl's Brother, with his naked Poniard threatening the King, he
lost all Courage, and fell into an exceeding Horror and Fear, etc.

I might mention here the Miraculous Restoring of the Royal Family: I shall
only mention some Verses of a Panegyric to his Royal Highness, upon His
Majesty's late Declaration, concerning the said Duke's Pretensions; which
Verses hint the said Restoration: God's wondrous Hand, after a long Exile,
Them hand in hand reduced to Native Isle:
When Wisest Men esteemed Their State forlorn,
They saw Them stated in the Land where Born.
A strange Agreement They have underwent,
Sometimes of Bliss, sometimes of Discontent!
Viz. The King and Duke.

Day-Fatality, page 7. says thus of his Royal Highness his going to Holland:
The Gods Thy Exit have Ordained; and also They,
Thy Blessed Return have 'firm'd, Born on a Lucky Day.


He adds also, The Third of March, the Day of his Departure, was Dedicated to
St. Maximus, St. Marinus, St. Lucius; and says, Quod hic Maximus princeps,
gestis Marinis Maxim Lucet, and alias Lucebit; This most Great Prince is
extremely Illustrious in Sea-Matters, and shall yet be otherways most
Conspicuous.

I think the Late Shipwreck has made him so; and proves, God has set his
Titular Angels over him. It Is true, he lost his Ship; but that is like the
Snakes casting off his Skin, (foreboding a Renovation of Felicity.) St. Paul
religiously boasts of his Shipwreck; 2 Cor. 11. 25. Thrice (says he) have I
suffered Shipwreck: And why may not his Royal Highness rejoice in this
Disaster, as St. Paul does Ver. 20. of the said Chapter? Great JAMES, whom
Shipwreck lately has assailed;
But whom, Divine Protection never failed;
And upon whom, great Glory is entailed;
And at whose Presence, all his Foes are quail'd:
Still Trust in Him, who is of Kings the Shield,
And to Good Princes, always Help does yield.
Those that presumed, thou were of God forsaken;
Must now confess themselves Fools, and mistaken.
The Malice of the Devil, Wind, and Sea,
To check Thy Fortunes, can hold forth no Plea.
Good Omens still, accompany Thy State;
And God himself forbids Distast'rous Fate.
The Malice of Thy Foes has now an End;
And They, with the lost Frigate, downward tend.
But Thou (buoyed up with Providence Divine,)
Shall float above, [and fear no Undermine.]
He whom the Seas did dare, but could not harm,
Need not to fear the mean Phanatick Swarm.
A Sign from Heaven has those Jews confounded,
Whose Cancre once against Thy Face rebounded.


Tutus sit Augustissimus Rex Carolus (Sancti Foelicis Festo prospere natus)
Celsissimus Illustrissimus Dux Jacobus; (Quem stellam Borealem ante multos
annos Praedixere Vates) and Vniversa Stirps Regia a turba Phanatica
Anti-monarchica. [Introduct. ad Latinam Blasoniam, page 165.]

It Is remarkable, His Royal Highness Arrived safe at London, on Saturday the
Twenty-Seventh Day of May, after his so Memorable Escape; which Day is
Dedicated to Venerable Bede: A good Omen, that hence-forward the People shall
Eum Respicere and Venerari, quem non ita pridem visi sunt Despicere and Venari;
Reverence and Respect Him, whom so lately they Despised and Persecuted.

A Book very lately Printed, (styled, Introductio ad Latinam Blasoniam)
mentions in its Prologue to the Addenda, a Pamphlet Published upon his Royal
Highness's Return from the Low Countries; whose Title should have been, Dux
Bonis Ominibus Appellens, or The Swan's Welcome. But there was a strange
Mistake, not only in that, but in other Material Circumstances; so that many
suppose, the Printer could never have done it himself, but borrowed the
Assistance of the Evil Spirit, to render it Ridiculous; and not only so, but
the very Duke himself, and the Loyal Artillery.

The Explanation of the Title was this: Some Remarks upon that Note-worthy
Passage, mentioned in the True Domestic Intelligence, Dated October. 14. 1679.
concerning a Company of Swans, more than ordinary gathered together, at his
Royal Highness's Landing.

The Printer smelt he had befoul'd himself, withdrew his Vent, and smothered
the far greatest Number of them; so that (for some Reasons) I have thought good
to Reprint it; and it follows: I Hope my Flagellum Mercurii Antiducalis, has
given the World some Satisfaction, as to my Day-Fatality, so much carp'd at by
Romes-Packet, September. 5. as also, by the Touch of the Times: I shall only say,
That even the pure, sincere Cloak-party themselves, have taken notice of the
Fatality of Days; for page 367. of the Memoires of the Lives and Actions of
James and William Dukes of Hamilton, says; That the Rout of Duke Hamilton 's
Army was received with great joy by the Kirk-Party in Scotland; who Religiously
observed, That the Division of the Duke's Army (which was its Ruin) was upon
the 17. of August; which was the Day on which the Covenant was made; thence
called by some, St. Covenants Day.

But to my present matter.

I concluded my Decastich in the Fatality, with this English Version, Great
Duke, rejoice in this Your Day of Birth;
And may such Omens still increase Your Mirth.


Since which Composition, some kind Omens have befallen His Royal Highness; as
the Third of March's Dedications, which (though derided by the Time-Toucher)

St. Felix Day, the 29th. Day of May, observed by the Publisher of the Royal
Effigies, and since recited by me in my late Flagellum. And

Also, St. Lucie's Day, memorably observed by the two eminent Brethren St.
Marthes, in the Birth of Henry le Grand, King of France; sufficiently excuse,
allow, and protect; the words are these, He was Born the 13th of December, St.
Lucies Day; as if, by a good Augury, to be the Light and Ornament of the
Princes of his time: A Day remarkable for the Winter Solstice, and esteemed the
most happy point of all Nativities. Thus they.

And again, the Accidents of the Swans accosting the Duke at his Landing.

That Birds, some are Male-ominous, some Bene-ominous, (ill or well boding)
Authors give many instances, (and I am able my self to particularise) I will
only mention three or four, from the Authority of others.

Chrales (from His Stature called the Little, a Man of admirable Courage and
Conduct) King of Jerusalem and Hungaria, and many other Provinces, had at his
Coronation several ill Omens; among many others, a multitude of Crows seated
themselves upon the Royal Palace; and immediately after his Coronation, he was
traitorously and miserably Massacred. See the fore recited Authors, in their
Genealogick History of the House of France.

H^ylen, (speaking in Chaldea, of Divination or Southsaying) says, a Company of
Crows accompanying home Sejanus, with great Clamours and Croakings, was deemed
Fatal to that great Favorite and so it proved.

Ovid, lib. 5. of his Metam. in his story of Ascalaphus, terms the Owl, Ignavus
Bubo dirum mortalibus Omen.] Lib. 6. he calls it, Prophanus Bubo; and says, It
sat upon the Bride-bed of Tereus and Progne, fore-boding the unluckiness of
that Marriage: So Lib. 10. Funereus Bubo. And Lib. 15. he terms, Stygius Bubo.
Tristia mill locis Stygius dedit Omnia Bubo.

Virgil. Georg. Lib. primo versus finem. And again Aen. Lib. 4. The First
hinting the Death of Caesar, the last of Dido, by diverse Portents: Among the
which, the Owl acts her Part.

Learned Seldom, p. 36. of his Comment upon Poly-olbion quotes Silius Italicus:
(Obseditque frequens castrorum limina Bubo.) a presage of the Romans Overthrow
at Canna.

Look the Book of Martyrs, ( sub. H. 5.) and you find the Pourtraict of the
Council of Constance, and the ill-ominous Owl that appeared there, prodigiously
presaging the Deposition of Pope John 24. But see Camcrarius, p. 244. who
elegantly relates the Story, and highly praises the excellent Qualifications of
this Pope.

Heylen, in the Place before recited, observes an Owl screeching in the
Senate House, was deemed Ominous to Augustus.

Mellificium Historicum says, Two Eagles sat upon the Pallace-top a whole day,
when Alexander the Great was born; which the South-sayers averred, to portend
the double Empire of Europe and Asia.

A certain Monk foretold to Philippicus Bordanes, that he should be Emperor, by
the Augury of an Eagle, which he saw Shadowing the Head of the said
Philippicus, as he slept. ( Les Estats du Monde.)

The Roman Histories tell us, That the snatching off the Cap of Tarquinius
Priscus by an Eagle, and the putting of it on again, was by the Augur
interpreted as a Presage of his future Possessing the Roman Diadem.

And Justin reports, That Hiero, that excellent King of Sicilia (whom Livy also
highly extols) was foretold to be a King, by an Eagle lighting upon his Shield,
when He first entered upon the Military Employ.

The Dove was accounted Fortunate among the Heathen, and Recorded for Blessed
in Sacred Writ.

But let us see what Authors say of the candid Swan; All esteem him for a
Bird-Royal; and oftentimes, in Coats and Crests, we meet him either Crowned, or
Coronally Collar'd. I could give several instances; I will only mention that of
the Famous Duchy of Stormaria, which the Learned Civilian Vredus Blazons thus,
Cygnus argenteus aurea circa collum corona in Solo Caeruleo: Bl. a Swan Ar.
Collared with a Crown Or. And he was the Badge of several great English
Princes; of which, anon.

Mr. Guillim (but indeed Dr. Barkham, as Mr. Fuller avers in his Worthies)
says, He is a Bird of great Beauty, and Strength also; and this is reported of
him, That he uses not his strength to prey or tyrannize over any other Fowl,
but only to be revenged of such as offer him wrong: In which case, says
Aristotle, he often vanquishes the Eagle.

Pierius says, He signifies Purity of Mind; nay, Apollo himself.

Now in ancient time he was consecrated to Apollo, Apollo signifying nothing
else but the Sun, which is Oculus and Lux Mundi, Genesis 1. 16, 17, 18. Apollo is
sometimes called Liber Pater, a Liberal Father, (the Latin word bears that
sense as well as others) and that is confirmed, Deuteronomy. 33. 14. Astrologers term
him, Rex Planetarum, and says, He gives Rule, Riches, and Honor, (is
Significator of Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc.) The Swan is the Bird of the
Sun, and also of his Royal Highness.

Martianus says, Shipmen take it for good luck, if in Peril of Shipwreck they
meet Swans. I hope the Attendance of these Swans (the Matter in hand) forebodes
his Royal Highness's happy Deliverance from all his stormy, tempestuous,
vexatious Troubles.

Let us see what brave Princes have used this happy Bird (commended by St.
Ambrose) for their Cognizance.

First, Edward 3. (a brave Prince as ever was, and concerned in the Auspicious
Fate of 14th. October.) used it at a Tournament, being embroidered on his Shield
and Surcoat, with this Motto, Mr. Ashmole his Garter, 885.
Hay, hay, the With Swan;
By God's Soul, I am thy Man.


Secondly, Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, used it continually; John
Gower, that Famous Poet, much bewails the Murder of that excellent Prince;
Stiling him, Cygnus de cord Benignus, oftentimes giving him the Epithet of
Swan. See Weaver, 638.

A Swan, with a Coronet about his Neck, was one of the Supporters to King Hen.
4. (as Mr. Sandford in his Genesis History, 258.) A Prince of singular Valor and
Clemency; for he refused not the Duel with Tho. Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, (see
St^m, Anno 1^78) And Secondly, He pardoned Owen Glendowrdy, that had so
damnably plagued him; (see Stow, Anno 1401, 1402. Bis. 1403, 1404, 1405, etc.)
at the request only of David Holbech, Esquire that was but a Servant of his own,
and formerly Acquaintance of the said Owens, (ibid. 1404.)

Certainly he was an Admirable Prince, by that wise and honest Advice he gave
his Son upon his Deathbed, (as R. Brook, p. 27) viz. To Minister the Laws
indifferently, To ease the Oppressed, To beware of Flatterers, Not to defer
Justice, Nor to be sparing of Mercy: Punish (quoth he) the Oppressors of the
People, so shall thou obtain Favor of God, and Love of thy Subjects; who
whilst they have Wealth, so long shall thou have Obedience; but being made poor
by Oppressions, will be ever ready for Rebellion. But let me not forget, that
before he came to be King, the Swan was his Badge, and was imbroider'd upon his
Caparisons, when he entered the Lists aforesaid, against the Famous Duke his
Adversary, (as a Mss. given to the Heralds Office, by Sir William Dudg. Garter.

The Seal of Cicely Nevil Duchess of York, (a little Woman, but Famous among
our Writers, for her great Spirit) was supported by a Swan; (see Mr. Sandford
Lancast. Herald, p. 352.) She was Mother to Edw. the Fourth, and Rich. the
Third, as also to George, Duke of Clarence, (Princes of great Valor and Wit)
She saw first her Husband, and third Son slain. Secondly, She saw the two
Princes, her Grandchildren, Murdered (by their own Uncle, and her Son.)
Thirdly, She saw her said Son also slain. Yet bearing all these Crevecoeurs
with a most even and invincible mind, she lived to the 11th. of Hen. 7th.
admirably making good -- Mala sunt superanda ferendo.

Ladislaus, King of Jerusalem, Sicilie, Hungaria, and many other Provinces, had
for his Devise a Swan treading under his Feet, and biting an Eagle; with these
words, Inculpata tutela: And agrees with what Aristotle asserts, (by me before
mentioned) concerning the Bravery of this Bird. The Genealogick History of
France, recites Two Epitaphs for their Magnanimous King; and mentions another,
made by the Famous Italian Poet, Sannazara, greatly to his Commendation. And
such as these were the Princes of the SWAN.

There was an Order of Knighthood of the Swan in Cleveland, (as says Favine)
who also affirms, the Princes of that House have ever borne that beautiful and
generous Bird for their Devise, Crest and Supporters.

Richard de Vassebourgh, in his Antiquities of Belgia, makes mention of the
Ancient Knights of the Swan, instituted by one Silvius Brabon, (of whom, as
some hold, Brabant took the Name) giving them this Bird for an Hieroglyphick of
the Love and Concord he would have among 'em; Amoris and unionis Symbolum, etc.

I need make but little Comment upon what has been said. I have hinted before,
the generous Nature of the Swan, being like that of the Heroic Lion; and he
cannot but be the Duke's Bird. My Advice is: Desistant Ranae torvum irritare
Leonem. The Lion is by Nature kind, though bold,
If that the Beasts themselves in duty hold.
Cygnus de Cord Benignus.

Ovid, lib. 2. tells us, That Cycnus, King of Liguria, grieving for his Kinsman
Phaeton, was turned into a Swan; a Royal Bird then. And he describes his Nature
thus; Stagna petit, patulosque lacus, ignemq, perosus.
Quae colat elegit contraria flumina flammis.
Rivers and spreading Lakes are his Delight,
Which are to Flames and Fires quite opposite.


This Great Duke has been Lord High Admiral of Arragon, and also of England,
(Maximus Marinus Maria petens) has had great Command upon the vast Lake of the
World, ( viz. the Sea.)

He has been Immensi Ashm. p. 119.
Tremor Oceani, (as Sir Tho. Higgens, in his Excellent Ode, which henceforth I
shall call Swan-Song, (imitating Leland.)

And as to that damned Reflection, imposed upon the World by a late Knave, (
September. 5. 1679. Romes Packet) this Poet, by a Divine, Praevious Inspiration,
long since has foretold the contrary. And the Divine Providence will in due
time, (as in the Case of Joseph and Susanna) confound the Faces of impudent and
seditious Detractors.

A later Motto (of King Charles of Blessed Memory) as upon His Royal
Pourtraicture in his Book, and in several Churches may appear, was Clarior e
Tenebris. Even so his most Illustrious Son, e tenebrosis Calumniarum Cimmeriis,
clarissimus, purissimus, ac Columba innocentissimus (ad instar Cycni
candidissimus) olim orietur. Out of the black and dark Sullies of ignominious
Calumniations, he shall arise clear as the Sun, innocent as the Dove, white as
the candid Swan.

In my Flagellum Mercurii Antiducalis, I mentioned the evil Spirit that we read
of, Judges 9. And I now add, His Royal Highness's condition, at present, is
like the Kingly David's (so much celebrated by the excellent Marquess Virgilio
Malvezzi) 1 Samuel chap. 30. verse. 6 The People, etc. But he comforts himself in
the Lord his God, Acquiescat and videbit salutem Domini, Isa. 52. 10. According
to the Reverse and Anagram of His Title Yorc, being Croy in French, id est,
Credo: I believe, etc. Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. Ovib. lib.
7. sab. 10.


Since I had finished this, I heard of the Artillery's Solemn and Cordial
invitation to His Royal Highness, to congratulate his happy Return -- The Duke
was usherd into the World with Medals, intimating the very Circumstance --
Mill Cohortes, (see Mr. Sandford, p. 562.

Neither am I now such an impertinent Wizzard, as Rome's Packet, September. 5.
1679. would make me; for I averred, the Duke's Return would be accompanied with
Joy and Feasting.

And it seems, the Artillery Cohort begins it. ^reat Duke, Thee safely home
returned we see,
Feastings and gladsome Healths intended be.
The Military Band make first their fair Address,
The Senators and Citizens must do no less.
Their Swans have shown them what they ought to do;
They are Apollo's Birds, their Lore, an Old English Word, and Signifies
Instruction, Advice, or Document.
Lore is true.


In my Fatality, I would have mentioned the good Omen of the Medal and Motto,
(for I have it in my Notes) but I was afraid the capricious, malicious,
Anti-Monarchical Crew, would have made malevolent Reflections upon it, as
tending to a standing Army, and Gladiatory Government.

But Providentially this Auspicious Invitation intervening, I become bold, and
daring to Publish it.

And so much for the Welcome SWANS.

P. 72. of the Weekly Packet, or Advice from Rome, Printed 1679. There Is a
scurrilous Reflection made upon the Day-Fatality, and Blaspheming His Royal
Highness, viz. In the mean time, let that impertinent Wizzard read and apply, 1
Kings 22. 22, 23 Verses. The Author of the said Fatality replied; I shall then
(and not before) prove an impertinent Coxcombe, when such as you come to have
the Rule of That Providence, that attends His Royal Highness; and will then
apply to my self your 1 Kings, etc. (See The Touch of the Times.) Now, what
Providence that is, that attends His Royal Highness, can by no means be better
understood, but by his late Miraculous Deliverance; and (since that) His, and
His Duchess safe Arrival, and by Sea too: His Highness no what dismayed by the
former peril.

At contra audentior (...)
Confisusque Deo; Scit quod sibi militat Aequor.
Et Conjurati Veniunt ad Classica Venti.
But on He Bravely goes.
He trusts in God, who makes the Sea His Friend;
And Winds Conduct Him to His Journey's End.
Page the Seventh, foregoing, I have spoken something of the Dove; but was
very short, as to that Blessed Bird: But forasmuch as very many took notice,
That at His now MAJESTY's Proclamation, at the very instant when it was
performed at the Royal Exchange, a great number of 'um were there flocked
together. I cannot omit what Jacobus Capellanus (quoted by Fern, page 236.)
says of it, viz. It Is the Emblem of Gratitude.] Nor be silent in what Monsieur
Segoigne (in his Traitte des Armoiries, page 39.) averrs: Says he; C' est l'
Image de l' Humanite and Douceur. The Image of Courtesy and Sweetness.

As for the Gratitude and Courtesy of His Majesty, He was always highly
commended for it, whilst yet only DUKE: What may we expect of Him, now a KING,
less than what Caelius (Lib. 7.) says of Alexander the Great; and Panormitane,
of Alphonsus, King of Arragon and Sicily; A nemine unquam Gratitudine and
Officio^se vinci passus est? He never suffered himself to be outdone in
Gratitude, and Good Turns. ( Panorm. l. 1. de dictis and factis Alphonsi.)
Luckily Presaged by this Columbal Concourse, or Flocking together of Doves: But
He must be used like the Herb Basil; of which Heylyn tells you a notable
Story, in his Description of Genoa; and I have Moraliz'd in the First English
Distich of the Page preceding.

FINIS.

