TEARS SHED In the behalf of his dear Mother the CHURCH of ENGLAND, And her sad
Distractions: gathered, and brought into this small Paper vessel, for the Use
of the vulgar, and Common people, not to play with Religion. By her adopted
Son, DANIEL GETSIUS Minister of the word at Stoke-Gabriell in Devon.

Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby they ly in wait to deceive.

OXFORD. Printed, by A. L. Printer to the University, for Tho. Robinson, Anno
1658.

TO THE Venerable FRANCIS ROUS Esquire; one of the Honorable Council of State,
and Provost of Eaton College. Also to the Worshipful ARTHUR UPTON of LUPTON
Esquire; And the Worshipful JOHN HALE of BOWRINGSLEIGH Esquire; Justices of the peace,
in the County of Devon.
Daily experience proves that of Seneca too true: None is so happy in giving,
but that sometimes he is deceived, For the greatest part of men are thus
affected, says the Comic, humble they are, and promise much whilst they are
suitors for favors, but as soon as they have obtained them, of all men they are
the worst and most deceitful: men even make have to forget good turn's, as God
himself complains by the Psalmist of his Israel; a vice of vices, Ingratum si
dixeris, Omnia dixeris: Non digni dandis, quia ingrati datis; unworthy of any
favor, because unthankful for the least. Invitat ad magna qui gratanter
accipit modica, and spem de futuris recipit, qui transacta beneficia
recognoscit. Many are the favors I have received of your hands, Honorable and
Worshipful of which I may truly say as Seneca of Furmius to Augustus; Lib. 22.
de benif. c. 25.
Hanc unam Caesar habeo injuriam tuam, effecisti ut viverem and morerer
ingratus. I well hoped before this time to have freed my self in some sort by a
small testimony of my thankful heart, but the multitude of impediments and
second thoughts made me to lay it aside for a while. And now at length I
humbly present this as a mea^ and innocent monument of my gratitude. In magnis
voluisse sat est. It may proclaim and publish my obligation to you. And assure
your selves that besides these few lines to the common and vulgar people, I
shall always contend and strive by my daily prayers to my good God for you, to
be privately thankful: I humbly take my leave, and unfainedly remain.

To you Honorable and Worshipful in all humility devoted DANIEL GETSIUS.

To the Christian and Charitable Reader.
MAny have excellently written of the emendation of time, I wish we had such
effectual motives and persuasions to amend ours; For in this Crisis of
distempered humors, such is the condition of most hearers, that men of God,
lovers of God, and their neighbors, can hardly bespeake the enemies of the
Church, and consequently State (seeing that when the Churches quiet is
disturbed the Commonwealth will not long be settled) but he shall procure many
enemies to himself. Every one is jealous that somewhat is meant against his
Diana or Helena. For my part, though I am no Native borne, yet with a great
sum obtained I freedom, as he in the Acts. 22.28. Not to interpose my self
between the affairs of the times, leaving them to them, to whom they belong,
as a Stranger I am (...), non praescribo, sed subscribo: yet ad publicum
incendium omnes concurrant. Therefore I thought it my duty as a son of the
Church, to endeavor to lessen (if I cannot quench) the fire. Some it may be
see smoke, in favilla est, the fire is covered: But I must tell them it is
wildfire. The sudden and violent operation former times have discovered in
both Germany's High and Low. Concerning the materials in this paper, I say as
I. Lipsius of his Politic Cento, nihil meum and omne meum, regard the end, and
that is all: Farewell, and pray with me for unity, which is the preserver of
Church and State, if it be in the truth.

The Contents.
1. GOd wrought all, for himself, man, and to have a Church. 2. The Nature, and
Members of the Church. 3. What it is that makes the Church, with her marks.
4. The prerogatives of the Church. 5. The good things which are afforded to a
Nation and place, where God gathers a Church. 6. Sins exposing a Church and
Nation to Gods wrath. 7. Signs general, and particular of Gods anger with a
Nation, and the Church in the same. 8. The means to recall God from departing,
and to keep him with us. 9. Of false Prophets, or Teachers. 10. A brief
historical relation of the reterated troubles in both Germany's, by
Anabaptists, and other Sectaries. 11. A short ejaculation to God for the
Church.
Tears shed in behalf of his Dear Mother the Church of England, etc.
CAP. I.
ALmighty and all-sufficient God, willing to manifest his glory abroad, or
without himself, was pleased to do it by diverse means; the first is the
Creation of all things out of nothing, but man especially to his Image, that
is, holy, wise, and righteous, yet mutable by his voluntary fall to mafest his
Makers glory.

The Glory of God is twofold.

First, Exodus 33.18 Isa: 42.8.
this Moses out of infirmity desired to see: And God will give to no other.
This glory Christ had with the Father before the world was, that is, Ioh. 17.5.
divine Majesty from all eternity; which toward the world was for a time
clouded by the vail of his flesh, Phil. 2.7.
in the form of a servant.

Secondly, Act. 7.2.
by which God cannot but be the God of glory (...). But his outward glory
depends from his most free will and pleasure, working all things after the
Counsel of his own Will. Ephesians. 1.11.


By outward means, illustrating his inward glory, diversely and sundry ways;
the Creation one way, the fall of man another way: In respect of this, as the
wisdom of God is called (...) manyfold, Ephesians. 3.10
or having curious variety in it; so may this outward manifestation of Gods
glory, not unfitly, be said to be manifold and full of variety.

1. The first way then or mean is creation, first in execution, and therefore
without doubt, first also in the Creators intention, whereby this infinite
wisdom, goodness, and power is set forth.

2. The next place we assign to the Creation of man, to evidence his goodness
in a more special way, as having in a manner made all for him, making him to
have dominion over the works of his hands, Psalm. 8 6.
putting all things under his feet.

3. The third place we give to the permission of the fall and sin, having
given him not impotentiam cadendi, an impotencie to fall, but potentiam non
cadendi, a power not to fall if he pleased; which, he abusing brought himself,
and all mankind into death and misery, by transgressing the command given him,
and so becomes a mean to set forth Gods justice and mercy; his justice in
punishing this rebellion with eternal fire; and his mercy, in giving his only
begotten son, that whosoever, of the now lost off spring of Adam should
believe in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, as a gift of his
infinite mercy: John. 3, 16, 17, 18.
but he that believed not, should be condemned, because he believed not in the
name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is a third way, whereby God
sets forth the outward glory of his Justice and infinite mercy.

4. A fourth way is consisting in the free gift of his word, and ministry, to
acquaint lost man with his forlorn estate, and to discover a way how to get
out of the same; The law is given to discover the first; and the Gospel shows
a way how to get out.

1. 1. the Law
The word of the Law takes place first, which being preached, does first bring
man to a sight of sin, Romans 3.20. Chap. 7.7.
Romans 3.20. discovering to man his manifold defects and swervings from the law.

2. After this it proposes Gods curse due to sin Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
3ly. Whence arises anxiety, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
fear, and that grief the Apostle calls according to the world 2. Cor. 7.10.
4ly. By all which acts man is prepared to entertain the grace of the Gospel,
which is appointed for sinners, 2. Cor. 7.10
Mat. 9.13. 1 Timothy 1.13. for them who labor and are heavy laden Mat. 11.28.
Mat. 9.13.
Mat. 11.18
For those who are poor and of a contrite spirit Isa. 66.2. Then the Gospel
takes the second place, 2 the Gospel.
which

Offers to the sinners contrite with the sense, revealing the mystery which
was kept secret since the world began, Romans 16.25. chap. 10.16
Romans 16.25. showing how by faith they may become partakers of the same. cap.
10.16.

Then secondly, Romans 1.16. by the word preached and heard, Romans 1.16. chap.
10.17
cap. 10.17. and thus,

Thirdly it applies grace to the believer, Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Ioh. 5.24.
he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.
From this arises in our hearts.

Joy, being justified by faith we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ.
Romans 5.1.
Romans 5.1

Grief; wherewith he has offended him. This is a far other grief from that
of the world, which therefore the Apostle calls the grief according to God 2
Cor. 7.10. 2 Cor. 7.10.
Bringing with it a new man, in mind, will, affections and all his actions,
from evil to good, Psalm. 34.15. Ps. 34.15.


And here again the Law becomes subservient to the Gospel. For seeing this
change is not to be wrought after man's pleasure, but according to the will of
God expressed in his Law. Isa. 8.20. Ezc. 20.18.19. Mat. 15.8.9. Col. 2.8.18
Psalm. 119.105. Ier. 31.33. Romans 6.
Isa. 8.20. Ezekiel. 20.18, 19. Mat. 15.8, 9. 2 Col. 8.18. Therefore the Law here
offers it self again to be a Rule to us in this new life Psalm. 119.105. Jer.
31.33. Romans 6. Thus it plainly appears that God Almighty does all for man.
For man 1. All things were created, Psalm. 8. Even Angels to be his Ministers,
Heb. 1.14. 2. Heb. 1.14.
Gods Son divested himself for man, and came down from Heaven, submitted to
that shameful death of the Cross to redeem him, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. 3. For man's sake, God has committed to writing his will in
his Law and Gospel. That so man might


See his deformity by sin, Romans 7.7.
and punishment deserved; to seek for mercy. That man might secondly

Get faith,

Gather men into a society, who should be his peculiar people, Tit. 2, 13.
zealous of good works. Which people called out of the World and believing in
Christ, make up his body spiritual, the Church, of which he is the head: And
thus we see all was done for the Church.

CHAP. II. The Nature and Members of this mystical body of the Church.
THe Church according to these premises, is an assembly or Company of men, whom
God by his Word and Spirit calls out of the State of sin, to the State of
grace and glory. God calls men ordinarily by men, his Ministers, who are his
Ambassadors, beseeching and praying men in Christ's steed to be reconciled to
God. 2 Cor. 5.20.
The Church then is a number of Called, and calling does make up this Assembly
we call the Church. From this Act of calling the Church has her name in Hebrew
(...) a Congregation or Company, called together; in the Greek (...) from
calling out, namely of some from others: Ioh. 15.19. Chap. 17.6. verse 14.
I have chosen you out of the World; because they were given him out of the
World: And being thus called out, they are no more of the World. They are now
to be a particular peculiar Assembly or Company distinguished from the former.
Genesis 12.1.
Thus was Abraham called out of Ur of Chaldea, Paul out of the Assembly of
Pharisees, others, yea all out of the Company, and state of sinners, the power
of darkness, Col. 1.13. Act. 26.18.
Col. 1.13. The power of Satan, Act. 26.18. To be of the number of Gods people,
who are in the state of grace, to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. 2 Pet. 3.9.
To Gods Kingdom, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 1 These. 2.12.
We may observe here by the way, the high dignity of every one effectually
called; he is by calling entitled to the Kingdom, and glory of God: an high or
supernatural calling, Phil. 3.14.
Phil. 3.14. An heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1.
Heb. 3.1. Compare Chap. 12.22, Chap. 12.22, 23.
23. The Church then properly is the Assembly of the Lord, or the Lords
Assembly. This Assembly has Christ loved, and given himself for her, Ephesians. 5.25.
Ephesians. 5.25. He has purchased the same with his own blood, Act. 20.28. Act.
20.28.
Her he purifieth, and bestows eternal life upon, Ephesians. 5.23.
Ephesians. 5.23. The matter therefore of the Church is an Assembly of men, elected
and called, 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1, 2, 3. Romans 8.28. If the
Church be 1. An Assembly, one alone cannot be a Church, as Elias conceived, 1
King. 19.10. For one is not a people, flock, a multitude of believers, 1 King.
19.10.
a holy nation. City of God, the Congregation of the just, as the Church is
said to be 1 Pet. 2.9. Chap. 5.2, 3. Ephesians. 2.19. Act. 4.32. 2. The Church again
is an Assembly, of men, not of Angels, who neither are men, nor chosen, or
called as men. 3. Thirdly, the Church is a Company, or Assembly of the elect or
chosen, 1 Pet. 1.2. Romans 8.28, 29, 30. 4. Fourthly, It is an Assembly of men
elected and called, and therefore it is not sufficient to be elected, calling
is required also. Election appoints them, but calling makes them actual
members, and declares them. Thus Paul by destination was a member of the Church
in his Pharisaisme, even then when he persecuted the Church: But by calling he
became an actual member, Gal. 1.15. To the contrary, whereas excommunicated
persons, and such as are newly come into the Churches pale to be instructed,
but are not as yet baptized, may be elected and called; as may appear by the
example of those, who were excommunicated by the Jewish Church, John. 9.22. Of
the Thief on the Cross, Luke 23.43. And Cornelius, Act. 10.2, 34. These
therefore may be also members of the Church, and are indeed, as many as have
true faith. Children also, and mad men belong to the Church.


Outward by Condition of their birth, Cor. 7.14.

Secondly, Romans 11.29. By which known to the Lord are those who are his, 2 Timothy
2.19. 2 Timothy 2.19.
Those who are deaf may not only be partakers, of the inward, but also outward
calling; not by hearing indeed, but by sight: as often as Christ Crucisied is
set forth to the faithful in the Gospel and Sacraments, Gal. 3.1.

CHAP. III. What it is that makes the Church, with her true marks.
THat which gives being to this holy Assembly, the Church, is, that the same is
called by the word and spirit of God, out of the State of sin, into the state
of grace. All and every member of the Church are such by calling. Thus Abraham
is called out of Vr of the Caldeans, Paul out of Pharisaisme, all that are
Members of the Church, by being called out of the state of sin, into the state
of grace. Outwardly by the word, whereby also are called eve^ these that are
not elected, Mat. 20.16. and 22.14. Inwardly by the holy Spirit according to
Gods purpose, Romans 8.28. and of election Chap. 9.11. belonging only to the
elect, Romans 11.29. 2 Pet. 1.10. Hence is the Church called and said to be, 1.
Visible, according to outward calling by the word, being sensible or subject to
sense. And 2. Invisible, in respect of the inward calling by the Spirit, not
being sensible, or subject to sense, only known to him who calls, 2 Timothy
2.19. The Lord knows who are his; and is also discerned by those who are
called Rev. 2.17. For none knows that new name in the white stone, saving him
that has received it. Christ therefore says; the Kingdom of God comes not
with outward observation, or show, but is within. Luke 17.20, 21. that is in
secret Psalm. 45.13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, and so we
confess in our Creed to believe the Church; and faith is of things not seen
Heb. 11.1. Yet the Church is visibly known by a mark purely divine, the word,
which marketh out the Church two ways infallibly and sensibly.


1. Infallibly, because the Church is a body, or company of those, who embrace
the word of God; and every company or body embracing the word of God, is the
Church; according to Christ's word Joh. 8.47. He that is of God hears Gods
word, and verse. 31. If you continue in my word, then are you my Disciples
indeed. Chap. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and v. 5. they know not the voice
of strangers.

2. Secondly, the visible Church is known sensibly by the word, which may be
seen, read, and heard. The preaching of the word, and profession of the same,
as also the use of the Sacraments are secondary marks, together with order and
discipline flowing from the former, which is purely divine; But these are of a
mixed nature, partly divine and partly humane, in respect of man's help in the
administration of the same: whence they are more or less pure and incorrupt,
according to the dispensers of the same.

CHAP. IV. Of the Prerogatives of the Church.
HAving showed the nature of the Church, in the next place, let us view the
privileges, and dignities of the same; for God has graced this Assembly we
call the Church with special prerogatives above all assembly's in this
universe: all must be subservient to her, Kings must be nursing Fathers, and
Queens nursing mothers. Isa 43.23. These dignities may be considered either in

1. General. Isa. 54.1. we read of the enlargment, and advancement thereof
under the name of a tent, wherein anciently they dwelt; the stretching out the
Curtains, the lengthning of the cords, the breaking forth on the right hand and
on the left, inheriting the Gentiles, and making the desolate Cities to be
inhabited; what means it but the enlargement of the Church Christian;
consisting jointly of Jew and Gentile. There was a time when it did belong to
the Jews, and to those that did join with them, but now Christ has broken down
the partition wall, and has laid all the world common; Ephesians. 2 13.
now he has enlarged the Church, and spread it all the world over. This is
that Peter speaks of Act. 10.34. Of a truth I perceive, that God is no
accepter of persons, but in every nation he that fears Him, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him, see Mat. 8.11. The particular dignities and
privileges of the Church are these.

1. First the Church is Christ's body, namely mystical, whose head and very
soul is Christ, quickening the same with his spirit, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Hence
whatsoever is done to any of the Church, he takes it to himself, Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Membris adhuc positis in terris, caput
clamat in coelis, and non dicebat, quid persequeris fideles meos? August. Sermon.
11. de anct. Whilst his members were as yet on earth, the head cries out in
heaven, and he says not, why persecutest thou my faithful ones, but why
persecutest thou me?

2 Secondly, Ps. 45.20. Ephesians. 5.31.
Spouse, Sister and Queen, Daughter of a King, yea his Wife. This is a near
relation and partaking: A man shall be joined to his Wife, says the Apostle,
and they two shall be one flesh. This is an ineffable mystery, the Believers
heart may feel it, no tongue can express it, here all language is lost, and
admiration seals up every lip: Principality and powers, nature and reason, men
and Angels stand amazed at it.

3. Children to Christ, 1 Pet. 1.23
by the seed of the word, and ministry of the same; therefore is she called the
Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. And after they are borne. she feeds her Babes by
the same word, 1 Pet. 2.2.
as with milk and strong meat. The sincere word of God being of this nature,
that without any mixture of humane addition, it serves for a most fit
nourishment of our souls; whence is that saying of old, Qui non habet
Ecclesiam matrem, non habet Deum patrem: He or she who acknowledges not the
Church for his Mother, has not God for his Father. These her Children are a
Kingdom of Priests, a holy nation, Exodus 19.6. The Lords inheritance, and his
flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. John. 10. All which and many more expressions the Seripture
affords; whereby it plainly appears how dear and precious the Church is to God:
I am my beloveds and my beloved is mine, Cant. 6.3. All true believers, members
of this Church are his, by a peculiar propriety: We are thine, thou never
barest rule over them, they were not called by thy name, Isa. 63.19. The
Devils are his vassals, the wicked of the world his prisoners; The faithful
only are his Jewels, friends, brethren, members, his Spouse; His by all the
relations of intimatenesse, that can be named.

CHAP. V. The good things which flow from this near relation to the Church and
place where the same is gathered.
SAmpson (who was a Type of Christ) comes not empty handed to his Wife; Christ
Jesus who has chosen the Church for his Wife, lov's his Wife with a true love,
and therefore she is sure of abundance of blessings. All grace to our souls,
all good to our bodies, all peace that may concern this life, or that to come
is derived to us through Christ the Husband of the Church. Whatsoever good
descends from God to us, is granted through Christ, we are elected in Christ
as the head, redeemed by Christ from all iniquity, and purified to himself to
be a peculiar people (that is the Church) zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.
We are ingrafted into Christ as Members of his Body, and at length we shall be
saved by him. God gives to all gifts, but they are only true comforts, to
those which enjoy them, as members of Christ's body the Church. Amongst his Love
tokens, which Christ bestows on his Spouse the Church for grace and ornament,
the Jewel of the word and ministry is the chiefest, so the Psalmist 147.19,
20. He showed his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his judgments unto
Israel, he has not dealt so with any nation. The benefits of this are
expressed in the 19th. Psalm. by six Couples; where your are to note, and
observe.

1. That David speaks especially of the word of the Gospel, Verse 7, 8.
which converts, and rejoices the heart. Mark likewise 2. The names he gives
to the word. Then 3. The benefits of it by couples; and that by way of
opposition to all other instruction out of the pale of the Church, that is in
opposition to all mere humane learning: plainly showing the happiness of them,
who are made partakers of the word.
1. The first name is (...) Thora a (...) jecit, projecit. To cast forth from
him: hence Thora a doctrine uttered, cast forth by a Teacher to instruct
others, here especially concerning the will of God, wherefore the word Jehovah
is added. Verse 7.
It Is two excellencies, and effects are, integrity and restitution, or
restoring the soul, Conversion.

1. only the knowledge of God, by the Creatures, Sun, Moon, Stars, and others
on Earth, in the Air, and the Sea, whereby God did evidence his goodness,
wisdom, and power: his will and nature is not evidenced fully or perfectly.

2. Excellency, Theophrastus to utter this complaint, that nature was rather a
Stepdame, then a loving Mother to mankind. Thus men out of the Church are left
without any remedy, spending and wasting themselves with most sad and
sorrowful complaints; Whereas Gods word shows to those of the church a plain
way to get out of their wretched estate.

2. The second name given to the word is (...) from (...) Gnud, to testify; the
Law or word is called a Testimony because it bears witness of Gods will,
which he manifests to us in his word, chiefly the Gospel. Truth, and making
wise the simple, are the two excellencies of this Testimony. The Word of God
witnesses first 1. What is that good, acceptable, and perfect will of God.
Romans 12.2. 2. Secondly, being applied to our thoughts, words or works as a
witness in our consciences, it either accuses, if they answer not the
pattern, God has given in his Word: or else excuses, if they be conformable
to the word.


3.

1. Truth (...), faithful, certain, firm, incorrupt, which is always the
same, a singular excellency of the word expressing fully the nature of the
Author of this word, who is Amen, yesterday and to day, Heb. 13.8.
and the same for ever. By this Christ prays the Father to sanctify his
Disciples, Ioh. 17.17. Sanctify them by thy word, thy word is truth, as if he
said; only that doctrine which is delivered in thy word, is the truth; All
other doctrines are erroneous, whence it is that the consciences cannot be
settled by them, but are left uncertain, always doubting, never fixed and
settled, and so at length are precipitated into the gulf of everlasting despair.

2. 1. Reveal Gods will toward us, which no other doctrine can. This 2.
Shows us our wounds and diseases, and withal prescribes the remedy. 3. This
discovers the plots and stratagems of Satan against Mankind, and teaches us
how to avoid, or to meet them. To be exercised in the word is the way to
attain true wisdom, which the worldly wise never meet with; except he deny
his earthly wisdom, and become simple, as a babe, a very fool, humble, lowly,
harmless, not examining things by the weak rule of his crooked reason, but
suffer himself to be guided by Gods Word, although the same seem never so
foolish. Then will he find indeed, that the word, which the men of this World
despise as foolish, has more wisdom in it then all the World. They shall
acknowledge, that, which in their esteem formerly was but weak, and of no power
or efficacy to salvation, to be more strong and powerful then all conceited
eloquence.


3. The third name, or title of the word is, (...) visitations, statutes,

1. (...) from a word signifying right or straight, even and plain; and
therefore pleasing the eye, and so the heart: things crooked, rough, and uneven
do displease. Gods word is right, communicating to us the straightest rule of
life. It leads us not per Ambages in ways far about, but in the directest
line to heaven: whosoever keeps the same cannot choose but enjoy a quiet, and
therefore a rejoicing heart, and joyful conscience. The doctrine taught in the
Chuch is plain and perspicuous, having noe knotty, and obscure quirks in it,
leading out of the way, into precipices: But to the contrary humane doctrines
are various, doubtful, of inextricable labyrinths; out of which the wit of man
is not able to get. Heavenly doctrine, especially that of the Gospel, freeth
the Conscience formerly entangled, removes all doubts, scruples, perplexities,
and anxieties of mind, contracted by humane learning. It does bring them into
the right way to the safe haven of rest; which cannot but rejoice the heart:
And this is the sixth excellency, of the Cross, yet it is joined with such
comforts, which keep up the heart, and make it overcome at last all difficulties.
The fourth name or title of the word is (...) precepts, commanding or
forbidding with authority and power to bind, or giving advice by way of
persuasion, and direction; the two excellent effects are purity, and light. It
commands that which is good so plainly, and forbids that which is bad, that
it may not be hidden, except it be from those who are lost, in whom the God of
this world has blinded their eyes, lest the Gospel of Jesus Christ should
enlighten their minds 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Spartans admitting adultery; the
Lacedaemonians permitted theft, and other filthiness. But the Law of God is pure,
allowing no wickedness, and the Gospel is not only pure, but shows also and
discovers the fountain wherein we may wash and cleanse our selves.

5. The fifth name or title of the word is, (...) fear, reverence; piety to
Godward expresses her self a reverentiall fear: the Excellencies are purity
and perpetuity; enduring for ever. The fear or reverence, that is, thereligion
and worship prescribed in Gods word, is clean from all filthiness, because
God requires to be worshipped in spirit and truth, and with pure hands. But man's
wisdom, which is attained by meditation upon the creatures, may come to the
acknowledgment of a God, but who that God is, what he is, and how he is to be
served or worshipped, here they are divided. Some of those destitute of the word
feign a plurality of Gods, serving him rather like beasts, or devils, then
men, by their humane sacrifices, and all manner of abominable lusts. But, Gods
word is pure, allowing no multitude of Gods, but one only, and prescribing a
pure and clean worship, spiritual, and besitting his nature. The tenth
excellency of the word is duration; its spiritual purity, which admits of
no variation much less corruption, and therefore must of necessity abide
forever. All humane inventions, have not only varied, but came at last to
nothing.

6. 1. The word does contain Gods judicial sentence concerning our thoughts,
words, and works. Then 2. Secondly, according to the word, we shall all be
judged. 3. Thirdly, And according to the word, we are to judge of our thoughts
words and deeds.


The two excellencyes are truth, and righteousness; the word does declare Gods
truth and righteousness, in his providentiall administration of all things.

The Eleaventh excellency of the word, to the same we order our life, and
conversation; other instructions given by man are full of error, falsehood and
deceit, so that those that follow that crooked rule, must needs be much out of
the way. The Twelfth and last excellency of the word is righteousness: there is
nothing in the word you may find fault with, but is absolutely perfect; whereas
humane laws, ordinances and statutes, are unjust, and filthy, allowing that
which is wicked, and forbidding oftentimes that which is good. But the word of
God with it is testimonies, doctrines, precepts, and commandments, teaching the
fear of God, is altogether just and righteous, happy therefore is that nation,
where God has been pleased to gather a Church for himself, and is pleased to
continue the same; this is it Moses presses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6,
7, 8. I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God
commanded me, that you should do them in the Land where you go to possess it.
Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in
the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes and say, surely
this great nation is a wise and understanding people, for what nation is there
so great, that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all
things, that we call upon him for? And what nation is there so great, that has
statutes and judgments, so righteous, as all this law which I set before you
this day? By these and the like Moses evidenceth, that he is not able to
express the greatness of the blessing of the word, which God does grant to
some nations, it is a privy blessing, which the Psalmist in a singular manner
sets forth Psalm 147.19, 20. Having mentioned many temporal blessings God had
afforded to the Jews, whereof some were.

1. Common to them with other nations, Verse. 16.17, 18. Snow, hore-frost, and
Ice, all for the fruitfullnesse of the earth, in common to all good and bad,
within the pale of the Church, and without.

2. Peculiar to the Jews only; and the same.

1. Temporal, the building of their City, ruined before by the Chaldaeans and
the bringing them back out of the Babylonian Captivity. Others were. 2.
Spiritual, Verse. 19, 20. The giving to them his word, wherein he reveals his
will to his Church, a favor not afforded to any nation besides.
The Jews had three Crowns which made them renowned and famous. The Crown of
the Law, King, and Priest; of all three the Crown of the Law was most glorious,
because by her Princes reign, Prove. 8.15, 16. David therefore meditat's therein
night and day, Psalm. 1.2.
and makes the same his Counselor, in the morning when he rose, and at night
when he went to bed, Psalm. 119.

I will add one excellency more assorded to this Nation, before all others in
the World.

1. This Nation was one of the first received the Gospel. 2. This Nation did
yield to the first Christian Emperor Constantine the Great, born at York, who
gave peace and honor to the Church. 3. The third and greatest Light, that did
shine forth in darkest Popery to all the World was Wickliffe. 4. The first
royal Martyr was Oswald, who united the two Crowns of England and Scotland,
after he had much enlarged the bounds of Christ's Kingdom with his own; in the
end exchanged his Princely Diadem for a Crown of Matyrdome, and so signed the
Christian faith with his royal blood. 5. It was the first Kingdom, that shook
Antichrist fully out of the Saddle.
Now besides these blessings afforded the Church; Empires, Kingdoms States and
Commonwealths prosper and flourish with the Church; God has a special care of
such Lands, where his Church, and true religion find entertainment; The
Kingdom of Israel flourished even to the admiration of others, as long as true
Religion flourished in the Church. But as soon as they fell off from God, and
gloried only in the Temple, the place was turned into an heap of stones, and
the people were dispersed, without a King or Prophet, or any show of a people
of God. Asia was once famous through the World, by reason of the Churches in
the same; the fame of their faith sounded far and near. Their place now is
become a Receptacle for Mahomet, a Synagogue for Satan, and a Temple for
Turkish Idolatry. That Nation then, Empire, Kingdom, and State flourishes,
where the Church flourishes in maintayning the truth of the word.

CHAP. VI. Sins exposing a Church and Nation to the wrath of God.
1. FIrst, Barrenness 2. Cruel Usage of his Saints and Messengers. 3. Light
esteem of the word of God.
These strip a Nation of those blessings wherewith God has graced them, and
expose it to scorn and contempt.

1. Barrenness, whether carnal or spiritual, has always been accounted a
Curse; John's Mother insinuates the one Luke 1.25. The Lord has looked on me
to take away my reproach amongst men; and when God gives salvation, he is said
to take away barrenesse; Sing O barren; thou that did not bear, Isa. 54.1.
But what are our fruits? the Catalogue of them we have Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
works of the flesh, specially these, variance, hatred, emulation, wrath,
strife, sedition, heresy, envyings, murder, drunkenesse, and revellings:
better to be barren, then bring forth such fruits. These were the fruits, of
Sion and Jerusalem, the Jevvish Nation, and Church in our saviors days;
therefore in his love to the people of Israel, zeal of their salvation, and
knowledge of their final destruction at hand, in grief and pity he burst out
into tears: Oh that thou had known in this thy day; a passionate speech
abrupt or broken off, he could not speak out the rest for weeping, by reason
of those things that were to come upon them. Abundance of affectionate thoughts
as it were thronging the heart, like some violent press of people at a door,
hinder each others passage, he blames and vvithall pittyeth them. O if thou
had known, at least in this thy day, that is thy visitation, this time
wherein God calls thee to repentance, and offers peace to thee; understand
how happy had thou been, thou had escaped the determined destruction. Our
savior shows the end of such barrenesse plainly, John. 15.1. In the parable
of the Vine. which speaks of every one in the Church, into which they are
implanted by Baptism. We Will note these follovving degrees.

1. They are barren, bear no fruit, this is the first step into Hell; After
which 2. They are cut off from the Vine, cut it down, says Christ, Luke
13.7. Why cumbreth it the ground? as if he should say, they do with their bad
example but mar others, and make them unfruitful. 3. Being cut off from the
Vine, they are cast out of the Vineyard, that is the Church, they are not
suffered to suck in Vain the breasts of her Consolation, nor partake of her
prayers; The Lord is moved to reject them, his labor not being answered, he
will pull down the fence, break down the wall, leave his own Vineyard to
vvast, own it who will Isa 5.6. What more fearful then for a man to be left
by God, to become a Lodge for Devils, lusts, and vvasting sins, till at last by
death he is cut off. The Lord brings on them this judgment in manner
follovving.
1. By death, cut him down, bring the axe, the pruning knife has done no good,
hew him down by death, from the Ministry under which he has been so long
fruitless. 2. Taking away the means of fruitfullnesse, the Clouds shall not
rain upon it. Isa. 5.6. The means of salvation his word and Ministry shall be
taken away. 3. Blowing on the gifts they have already, they shall do them no
good; the unprofitable servant had his Talent taken away.
This curse is so eminent upon many men, of good parts once, that comparing
themselves with themselves now, a man may say with the disciples of the
Fig Tree Mat. 21.20. how soon is the fig tree withered. And this a further
degree.

4ly. They wither receiving no life of sap from him that gives the sap of life
to all. And being

5ly. Withered, they are bound up into faggots, like the tares into bundles
Mat. 13.30.

6ly. Thus fagotted up they are cast into the fire.

7ly. Where they burn and frye in these quenchlesse flames, ever frying, never
dying.

The second provoking sin is cruelty, a sin wherewith the Land is justly
charged, and whereof I wish it were discharged. God is never well pleased with
too much Cruelty. It may many ways be committed, and that against beast and
man, enemies and others, but especially against those that fear God, and his
Ministers. Against

1. Dumb beasts or Creatures without reason, we little think it; But the
first words of the Angel to the unmercifull Prophet Numb. 22.32. Wherefore
have thou smittten thine ass? do plainly show that God shall call us to an
account, for the unkind and cruel usages of his poor mute Creatures. He has
made us Lords over them, not Tyrants; Owners, not Tormentors: He has given us
leave to kill them for our use, not to abuse them at our pleasure. They are so
our drudges, that they are our fellows by Creation. A righteous man says
Solomon Prove. 12.10. regards the life of his Beast; The Beast is to be fed
according to his labor, and labored according to his strength, and in both
his life is regarded; he does not overworke him, and affords him good keeping.
God who saves man and beast Psalm. 36.7. has commanded they should rest from
their toil on the Sabbath Day, Deuteronomy. 5.14. See also Chap. 22.6. how God
provides for Birds.

2ly. Secondly, cruelty against man either 1. Condemned Deuteronomy. 25.2. To one
whose offense was not capital Forty Stripes were only to be given, and not
above, to dravve our cruel rage, and fierce affections to pity and
compassion, Cruelty in deeds, or bitter words, even tovvard evil doers, that
are already adjudged, or stand at the Bar to be judged, is barbarous and
inhumane. To insult over a poor prisoner, or a condemned person, carried to
the place of execution, stands neither with a humane disposition, nor with
a Christian affection, or brotherly Compassion. Yet how common now a days is
this cruelty, even in, and at the place of Justice and Judgment, from whence
all gall and bitterness should be banished.

2ly. Cruelty against our Brother who is at liberty, free, and his own man.

1 Levit. 24.19, 20. If a man cause any blemish in his neighbor, as he has
done so shall it be done to him, breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, such a blemish as he has made in any, even such shall be repaid to him;
If then any fight with, or beat, or maim his Neighbor, he is cruel.

2ly. If by any means you procure the death of your Neighbor, whether it be
by sword, famine, poison, false-accusation, or otherwise, you are cruel, and
for it to be ranged with Cain who rose against his Brother and slew him.

3ly. If you play upon your Neighbors infirmities, making him your
laughing stock, or subject of your mirth and sport; these deserve pity and
should move us to thankfullness: It is but an unhappy wit that makes sport of
another misery. It is a kind of persecution which arises of contempt of our
Brother, and a degree of murder Mat. 5.22. He that says Raca to his Brother
is guilty of a Council. Raca signifies all signs and gestures that express
contempt, as snuffing, tushing, jeering. The Children of Bethel mock Elisha
the Prophet.

1. For his person, calling him bald pate. 2, For the favor of God showed upon
Elias his master, in saying ascend bald pate as thy master Elias did. Kings
2.23.
4ly. Molesting widows, or fatherless, Zach. 7.10. Oppress not the Widow,
break not over where the he dge is lowest, do no wrong there especially, where
we have most ease and advantage to do it, by reason of their weakness, and
inability to save themselves harmless, or to resist and offend us. Therefore
God in his Law gives charge so often, and takes so great care of them Exodus
22.21.22. Isa. 1.17.23. Ier. 5.28. Deuteronomy. 10.18. whosoever molests widows and
fatherless Children, is cruel in a special manner.

Fifthly, if you injure strangers you are cruel Exodus 22.21. Thou shall
neither vex a stranger nor oppress him, Exodus, 22.21. Stangers.
a word signifying to make a spoil and prey, to oppress by might and violence,
applied usually to the rich and mighty, that vex and spoil the poor,
fatherless, and stranger, whom God loves, and commands us to love, even as
our selves, Deuteronomy. 10.18. Lev. 19.33. Deuteronomy. 10.18.
If a stranger sojourn with you in your Land, you shall not vex him, Lev. 19.33.
Verse. 34. The stranger that dwells with you shall be as one borne amongst
you, and thou shall love him as thy self, Jer. 22.3. Do no wrong, Ier. 22.3.
do no violence to the stranger who is most exposed to wrong, such therefore
has God taken into his more special protection, Zach. 7.10.

Zach. 7. to.
one of these four ways: Either.

1. Cruelty against tho poor.
Lending him money upon usury; Exodus 22.25. If thou lend money to any of my
people that is poor by thee thou shall not be to him as an Usurer, neither
shall thou lay upon him biting usury.

2. Secondly, we are cruel to the poor, if we pay not the labourer his hire
Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou shall not oppress a needy, and poor hired servant: thou
shall give him his hire for the day, the Sun shall not go down upon it, for he
is poor, and therewith sustaineth his life: Lest he cry against thee to the
Lord, and it be sin unto thee: See also Lev. 19.13. Deuteronomy 24.14. Of this Job
7.2. A Hireling looks for his work, that is for the reward of his work. By
Jeremy Jer. 22.13. A woe is proclaimed against such oppressors, woe unto him,
etc. That uses his neighbors service for naught, and gives him not his work,
that is, his wages, Jam. 5.4. Behold the hire of the laborers, which is by you
fraudulently kept back cries. Christ amongst other weighty Laws names this
for one, Mar. 10.19.

3. Thirdly, we are cruel to the poor, if we restore not the pledge of the
poor, Exodus 22.26. If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall
restore it to him before the Sun go down. Observe that by raiment is meant.

1. That, which either he wears by day, or lies in by night: understand also

2. Secondly, by proportion all other things, whereof he has present use, as
tools and instruments to work with, and such like. But things necessary for to
feed the life, as the Millstone which grindeth Corn, or any the like may not
be taken to pawn, Deuteronomy. 24.6. The Millstones are named but for an instance
forbidding all others of like sort, as pots which they boil Meat in, etc.

4. Fourthly, we are cruel to the poor, if we withdraw our Corn from them,
Prove. 11.26. He that withdraws Corn the people will curse him; he who
withholdeth Corn, holds as it were the gracious hand of God, yea puts it back
by his covetousness, when God in bounty has stretched it forth to a Land: and
therefore by diminishing plenty to the people, they most justly pull down upon
themselves the curse of the people. But he that sells Corn lengthneth as it
were the reach of Gods arm, and enlarges his bounty sent unto a Country.
Wherefore the prayers of the people shall fetch down a blessing upon his head
from heaven. Now what is said of the Countryman concerning his Corn, let the
Citizen also mark concerning his wares. Non vincat honestatem utilitas, sed
honestas utilitatem. Let not profit overcome honesty, but let honesty overcome
profit.

Seaventhly and lastly, 7ly.
cruelty may be used and exercised, by those that are in any place of
authority; even a petty Constable and Tything man, especially if he conceive
himself in favor, with some he or she great one, then where the sheeps-skin
will not serve, the Foxes must supply, and if that be discovered, then is he as
a roaring Lion and a raging Bear, Prove. 28.15. The right which he pleads is
nothing but his Office; the mercy which he shows, is only where he cannot
exercise more cruelty; the help which he affords is to expect worse usage.
The mischief of wickedness is great where it is joined with power.

3. 3ly.
The third provoking sin is Cruelty exercised against his immediate servants,
his Saints and Ministers, only under that notion; If God be provoked with
these and the like cruelties against beasts and ordinary men, how greatly is he
incensed against that cruelty which is exercised against his immediate
servants, his saints, the righteous and upright in the Land, who walk uprightly
with God and Man, not turning to the right hand nor to the left; who show their
holiness by their upright and just dealing, not in mimicall gestures and
words. Yet there are some worse then infidels even next to Devils, who hate all
those in whom they see the least goodness, even for their virtues and graces,
such they most dislike, reproach, traduce, shun, and avoid; keeping company
with any other, though never so vile, but stand in direct opposition to the
Godly. The Heathens after Christ's time did cry out against his followers.
Christians were the causes of all public plagues and calamities. If Nilus did
not overflow the field, if the Heavens staid, the Earth quaked, if famine
increased, by and by the poor Christians are cast to the Lions. But his
Ministers they are the thorns in the sides of many now a days; they are
accounted the scum and offscouring of the World; their Message and Persons
alike spitefully rejected, by men of an Anabaptisticall spirit, who having
never found or felt their spiritual misery, dream nothing but perfection, and
conceive themselves not to stand in need of them. Carry he himself never so
peaceably and meekly, even to the loosing of the half of his livelihood,
having no dealing with any in the matters of the World; I speak by experience;
Yet he is a man of strife, and a man of contention, whom every one curses,
Jer. 15.10. If we threaten we are cruel Law preachers; if we promise, we
slatter; if mild, we are fearful, and so despised and trampled on by every
unworthy Ass; If bold we rail: prove we by arguments undeniable, we wrest
Scriptures, and are Sophisters. Our assability is lightness, our austerity
madness: Nothing can please them, who resolve not to be pleased. Harvest is
done, the reapers must be discharged, and as for the time to come, we will have
such as will be contented with handfulls of barley and pieces of bread, Ezekiel.
13.19. This some hope for, who I hope will miss their hope. But no marvel,
the quality and matter of their doctrine is so opposite to man's corrupt nature,
that there upon it is exasperated to enmity against it self, and the publishers
thereof. There goes besides with their Ministry a kind of gall and wormwood
to men unreformed. The two edged sword in their mouth searches to the
discovery of the most hidden, and best beloved corruptions. Hence Elias by his
doctrine troubles Israel, 1 King. 18.17. Paul is accused by Tertullus to be a
pestilent fellow, and mover of sedition; Christ himself the great Doctor of the
world, is accounted a Sorcerer, Samaritane, drunkard, glutton, deceiver, devil,
an Enemy to Caesar, and a troubler of the public peace. It must needs be very
good, which Satan and his instruments hate and persecute so much.

4. with any Nation, who will acknowledge him for their God, that if they will
hear his voice indeed, and keep his covenant, then they shall be his chief
treasure above all people, a Kingdom of Priests and a holy Nation.

But how did his people of old keep his and their Covenant? They took no heed
at all to this Covenant, Law, or word of the Lord, but accounted it as a matter
of no consequence. Every one followed that way he liked best; Sometimes they
heard it more for a Custom, then any purpose to amend things amiss; Wherefore
the Lord grieved, that ever he gave them his word. Certainly in vain made he
it, his Law, the pen of the Scribes is in vain, as if be should say, the Law
is enacted in vain, and by appointment of God put in writing by Scribes
thereunto assigned for the use of his people, in regard of any use they made of
it, or benefit that thence redounded to them by it, because it was by them no
whit regarded, Jer. 8.8. And by his Prophet Isa. 65.2. I have stretched out my
hand all the day unto a rebellious people, which walked still in a way that was
not good. God did labor from time to time to reclaim them, and to reduce them
to the regard of his word, and covenant he had made with them, but in vain;
they followed not the motions and directions of the word, and spirit, but their
own mind and lust. Therefore now he was fully resolved to reject them, as not
his children, but the seed of the Adulterer, and of the Whore. Isa. 57. that
is, not begotten by his word and spirit; but such as forsook God, their rather
had Satan for their father; Thus they of old, and are we better? Is not the
word disesteemed by most, as nor worth the hearing, but only that the Law and
custom is so. Do not men in the general proclaim it openly in their
practices, that they will not be controuled, but do as they see best. Are not
men in wordly matters witty, and of great apprehension and judgment, yet as
blind as beetles, and very blocks in religion? Eyes they have, and see not the
things belonging to their peace; as bats and owls see best in the night, so
their best understanding is of wordly matters. As a mole is nimble and quick
within the ground, but above ground can make little shift; so talk or deal
with these men of worldly matters, and they are cunning, but speak of religion,
and you pose them as with a strange language. What is the reason of all this,
but because the word is not regarded? Again, have we not others who go another
way to overthrow the word? The word they confess is profitable and necessary to
gather a Church, but not to continue it; To begin Faith, but when it is begun
and begotten in us, we need not hear still: we have faith already by the word
of God, we shall not therefore need to frequent the preaching of it still, we
have that wrought in us, which the word is appointed to work. May not we apply
to these that in the Comic, faciunt nae intelligendo, ut nihil intelligant? In
showing themselves to have faith thus, have they any? Is not this under a
color of having faith, to scorn and deride the preaching of faith? the word
begets us, 1 Pet. 2.2.
and the same as food sustaineth us; It is to the weak milk, and strong
meat to riper years: He never had faith by the word, that seeks not the
strengthening of it by the word. Have you faith? then seek to increase and
continue it; which is done by the same means, that it is bred and engendered:
This Peter teaches in his first Epistle, Chap. 1.23. where he calls the word
immortal seed to regenerate us, and Chap 2.2. sincere milk to nourish us. So
that we have as well our growing, as our first birth by it, and therefore stand
always in need of the preaching of it. The end of preaching is, 1. Not only to
convert us, but continue us. 2ly. Not only to raise us up, but to uphold us.
3ly. Not only to beget us to faith, but also to strengthen us in the faith.
4ly. Not only to give the first life to us, but to renew us after our manifold
slipps, and often infirmities. In this life we have not attained to perfection,
we always lack somewhat, we stand still in need of renewing and repairing Phil.
3.12 The cause standing thus with us, can we any way imagine to escape that
like condemnation, Let the Apostle decide the matter Heb. 2.3. He makes you
judges, how shall we escape? He does not say, if we contemn secretly, or
openly, but if we neglect; the careless neglect shall pull judgment on us;
neither does he say, so great a word, but so great a salvation. The Gospel is
the power of God unto salvation Romans 1.16. These which contemn it, contemn
their own salvation. Behold the despisers, says Paul and Barnabas Acts 13.41,
as your forefathers by despising the word, brought heavy judgment, and plagues
upon themselves, even so shall you: besides this, by this despising of the
word, you judge your selves unworthy of salvation. ver. 46. this your unbeleife
and contempt of the Gospel, speaks you unworthy of eternal life, this your
own fact judges you not worthy. 5ly. And lastly; Divisions amongst our selves,
cause the Almighty to enter into a controversy with his people. Hos. 10.2. This
is that which weakness and lames us, and lays us open to the insulting triumphs
of our adversaries.


The war of the Church is the peace of heretics; our discord is their music;
our ruin their glory: Oh what a sight is this? brethren strive, while the
enemy stands still, and laughs, and triumphs. If we desired the grief of our
mother the Church, the languishing of the Gospel, the Extirpation of religion,
the loss of posterity, the advantage of our adversaries, which way could these
be better effected then by our own dissensions. Only charity, humility, and a
sincere mind will allay these broiles, that being persuaded to correct, and
reform those things wherein we have manifestly transgressed.

CHAP. VII. Signs general and particular of Gods anger with a Church and
Nation.
IN all Gods proceedings to judgment, he is pleased to give warning; he ever
leaves a latitude between his sentence and the execution of the same, this is a
special mercy to give us warning: He might come and never tell us, out of
mercy he tells us of it, before he comes. God never comes to a blow without a
word, to an execution without a warning. Had not those of the first World who
perished in the flood, a fair and merciful warning, one hundred and twenty
years, all the time Noah was building that vessel, which should preserve the
World in the general destruction of it, Genesis 6.3. Before that most grievous
Captivity of Judah, and destruction of Jerusalem by the Babilonians, the Lord
gave manifest tokens of his displeasure, and indignation: in Ezekiel. 8.4. Chap.
9.3. Chap. 10.18, 19. Chap. 11.23. We find the glory of God had forsaken the
Temple, and was come to the midst of the City, where it stood to make one trial
more to se whether the people would call him back by invocation, and lively
repentance. All which diverse motions of the glory of God, what do they else
but evidence Gods displeasure, and purpose to leave a people, and that his
vengeance is at hand, when he begins to withdraw the most lively and sensible
tokens of his presence, from those places where he was wont to show himself
most familiarly? Lastly, what fearful, and prodigious signs of his wrath and
indignation, went before their final and utter destruction by the Romans,
recorded by Josephus, a great man of their own, Eyewitness, and actor of that
Tragedy. A blazing star like a sword, and a Comet for a whole year together; A
light, in the night about the altar, and the Temple as clear as day; A Lamb
brought forth in the Temple by an Ox brought in to be sacrificed; The East
gate of the Inner Temple, of brass, so heavy that Twenty men could hardly shut
it, opening of its own accord; Stange sights of iron charriots, and armed
troops in the air compassing the City about. Yet their misery of miseryes did
not overtake them, until upon the day of Pentecost in the night; the Priests
celebrating their holy rites, they heard first some motion or noise, then a
voice saying, let us depart hence: after which they had not a day of comfort,
nor a gracious look from their God, but a fatal unparalleld destruction by
the svvord of the Romans under Vespatian and Titus, Father and son: without
the svvord, and civil dissensions; famine, and pestilence within. All which
plainly shows that when God vvithdravves the lively tokens of his presence,
he is sore displeased, and ruin is at hand. But let us see the signs of his
displeasure with us? peruse the Chronicles of latter Centuries, and if you
meet not with many you are blind: I shall cull out a fevv; After religious
King Edward the VI. decease, did not the Lord threaten this land and Church, in
and by Qu. Mary? whose heart did not then faint and quail within him for the
little hope that was left? was it any less then desolation he did threaten
in LXXXVIII by that same blasphemously so called invincible Armado? were not
Church and State, as a firebrand snatched out of the fire of that hellish
Powder plot? I confess these are merciful Terrors and threatenings, because
turned off by mercy into mercies. But I pray, what meant the building of James
Chapel by King James; and afterward sending his son the late unfortunate
King into Spain, contrary to the advice of learned Divines and Statesmen at
home, and Ambassadors from abroad residing here, who were rejected as men out
of their little wit, because out of their estate, by Gods visitation of the
Church in foreign parts. Did not the Lord play the Lion amongst us, by
suffering our sins to prevail to an unnatural civil war, wherein father
and son imbrewed their hands in each others blood, brethren did butcher one
the other; of all the Vials of the wrath of God powered down upon sinners, it is
one of the forest, when a man is fed with his own flesh, and made drunk with
his own blood, as with sweet wine Isa. 49.26. I conceive none will deny this to
be a general token of Gods wrath with this whole nation. Again usually before
some great calamity good and worthy men are taken away; Isa. 12.3.2, 3.
this is a fearful presage, (says godly Dr. Gibbs now with God) that calamity
is coming: Hence at all times the surviving godly have lamented the death of
such: Psalm. 12.1.
as David, Help Lord, the righteous are failed amongst the children of men
Micah 7.1.2. Woe is me for I am like the summer Gatherings, and the Grapes of
the Vintage, the good man is perished from the earth: the reason of this
mourning is rendered by Isaiah Isa. 57.1. The righteous perish, and noe man
considers it in heart, and merciful men are taken away and no man
understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. their
death presageth an evil to come. You will say it is a mercy for them to be
taken away from evil; but what hurt comes to us? Let Ioash a great wicked
one, because a wicked King show the reason in his Lamentation over old Elisha
now departing 2 Kings 13.14. O my father, my father, the Charet of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof. They are the pillars of the Church, and the Strength of
the Weal public, they are those who make good both places and time wherein
they live, they keep away evil, and do good by example and prayers. Job.
22.30. the innocent shall deliver the Island; the good man delivers his
neighbors amongst whom he lives by his prayers: or it may be read he shall
deliver him that is not innocent a good man by his prayers sometimes turns
away Gods judgments from the ungodly. We see how far Abraham prevayled with
God for Sodom Genesis 18.32. Also Moses for a whole sinful nation Exodus 32.11. to
ver. 14. A good man is Gods favorite, see Ier. 5.1. What he will do for the
same, even spare the whole City. It is also a sign of Gods anger with a
nation, when he suffers the Church in the same to be corrupted either in
purity, corrupting the doctrine with heresy. All politicians hold this as a
sign of a Churches, and Lands falling, when the old Enemies of truth
increase: Or when the worship or service is corrupted by Idolaters and
Schismatikes, who by division break the unity, which is a preserver, dissension
in judgment will soon come to dissension in affection, and ruin will be the
end Hos: 10.2. Their heart is divided, their accord is gone, that cord is
untwisted, they cannot stand; As soon as men divide from God, he takes away
his spirit; for he is the spirit of peace and concord: and then they give
themselves to seditions, and factions, never contented with any present state
and condition, till they have ruined all, and themselves with it.

CHAP. VIII. The means to recall God, from departing further from us, and to
keep him still with us.
1. THe first is fruitfullnes. Is God provoked with our barrenness, and begins
to depart from us, then certainly fruitfullnesse will keep him with us, and
stay him from departing further: fruitfullness in good works must make amends
for our former barrenness, not one fruit or the other, or one good work, or
as many as may be numbered (as many content themselves with, and anticipate
their revvard by glorying all their life time in one good work or the other)
but as our bad fruits, our sins, are without number, so much more must our
good fruits be numberless. In fruitfullness is a fullness.

1. Fullness of Duty, or Dutifullness. 2. Fullness of shame, for our former
barrenness: that is shamefullness. 3. Fullness of care, or carefullnes for our
former negligence. 4. Fullness of pity, or pittyfullness for our former
harshness. 5. Fullness of mercy, or mercyfullness for our former
unmercifullness. 6. Fullnes of joy, or joyfullness for Gods sparing us. 7.
Fullness of thanks, or thankfullness for loading us notvvithstanding our
unvvorthiness, with the choicest of his mercies and favors. It is observable
in the Scripture, that the Children of women long barren proved most famous and
excellent.
1. Of Sarah, Isaac from whose loins were multitudes deduced. 2. Of Rachel,
Joseph, that wonder of men and Angels. 3. Of Hannah, Samuel, that great
Prophet and Priest of the Lord. 4. Of Elizabeth, John the Baptist of whom the
Lord himself testifies, among them that are born of women, Mat. 11.11.
there has not risen a greater. So these Saints that have been begotten of
spiritual barrenness, and converted from a sinful life have proved most
notable instruments of God glory. As
1. Mary Magdalene, the receptacle once of Seven devils, after she was freed
from them, had the honor to be the first Messenger of Christ's resurrection,
and to have her memory propogated with the glorious gospel Mat. 26.13.

2ly. Zacheus a publican, an extorting publican, yet how gracious was he to
Christ? yea how gracious was Christ to him? Luke 19.

3ly Paul born out of due time, 1 Cor. 15.8. yet outstript the rest, and was in
labors more abundant then they all, verse. 10. Thus the last have been the
best, as the last grapes make sweetest wine. It is fruitfullness the Lord
looks for, the same must be answerable to our former vanities.

4ly. Add to the former Converts Manasses 2 Chronicles. 33.6.

5ly. Holy Augustine a great sinner first wrote after his conversio^ twelve
books of repentance. Is Sion (the Church) his Vineyard, the same must be
fruitful? Is the Church his garden, he goes thither to gather fruits Can.
6.11. Are we the spouse of Christ, we must be fruitful for we are married to
Christ, that we should bring forth fruit unto God Romans 7.4. But what are these
fruits? Gal, 5.22. Love, Peace, Joy etc. Let us with double diligence
endeavor to redeem our former barrennes, that so the Lord our God may
continue with us.

2ly. A second means to keep God with us, and his blessing, is to acknowledge
Gods superlative mercy in gathering and settling a Church here, passing by the
greatest part of the World, and leaving them Aliens from the covenant without
any hope, Ephesians. 2.12. We might have perished in ignorance and blindness. This
has been the practice of Gods Children.

1. It was the blessing that Noah gave to his Son Iapheth for his dutifullness,
Genesis 9.27. God persuade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem, that is, to be
united with the Churches of the Jews, the posterity of Shem, which was
fullfilled when the Gentiles became joint heirs, and of the same body, and
joint Partakers of Gods promise in Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6. The
partition wall being broken down Chap. 2.24. They became fellow Citizens with
the Saints, and of the household of God; and were no more strangers and
foreigners Verse. 19.

2ly. Joseph became a great man in Egypt, might have made his Sons great also,
amongst infidels, but his chief care was, to adopt them into the true Church of
God to be partakers of her blessings, Genesis 43.13.

3ly. Moses, Heb. 12.24. by faith when he was come to age (...). By
interpretation of Stephen, Act. 7.23. Full forty years, refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs Daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the
people of God. Whatsoever Moses did being a Child yet when he comes to
discretion he refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter and had rather
live in the Communion of the faithful, then to be a Prince amongst
unbelievers. The expression is singular, (...), he looked off from.

1. The honors, riches, profits, pleasures, that were appertaining to a Crown,
from the pomp and honor of the World.

2. He looked off from the afflictions and miseries of Gods people, which he
was to undergo with them.

3. He looked to the recompense of reward future. He looks off from the
reproach of Christ, which would be but for a season; as well as the riches and
treasures, to that which would be everlasting. Therefore seeing it is such a
great blessing to live in the society of the faithful, we ought to be
thankful to God that he made us members of the Church. Be not like to many,
who have lived and died in the bosom of the Church, yet have never tasted of
the blessings and graces of the Church; like fishes in the Sea never tasting of
the saltness of it. This is the reason why many depart from the Church,
because they have not tasted how sweet the Lord is in the same. Seeing that God
gives more where he has given much, let us praise him all the ways we can
discover. The manner of praising God is six fold.

1st. In mind, when we bear in mind the favors of God. Thus David Psalm. 77.11.
I will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of
old. It was cursed unthankfulness in Israel to make have to forget his works,
Psalm. 106.13. What can he remember, that forgets the mercies of God.

2ly. When we erect monuments, pillars, and Trophies to continue the memory of
Gods mercies. This shall be written for the generatio^s to come. Ps. 102.18.
Thus Jacob reared an altar: Genesis 33.20. to be a dumb Catechism to posterity,
or a grateful memorial of Gods favor in giving him power not only to
prevail with himself for a blessing; but with his Brother Esau to divert
destruction.

3ly. When we praise God upon instruments Psalm. 150.

4ly. When we praise God with our hearts, this enlivens all the rest, if it
come out of a pure heart. Bless the Lord all that is within me, Psalm. 103.1.
All that is within me, and all that is without me, but especially all that is
within me, bless the Lord O my soul. He loves little that can tell how much he
loves.

5ly. When we praise God with our lips or tongues Psalm. 35.28. My tongue shall
speak of thy righteousness, and of thy praise all the day long.

6ly. When our lives praise God 1 Pet. 2.12. Let our conversation be honest,
that they beholding your good works may glorify God in the day of Visitation.
Noli gloriari, quia lingua etc. says Augustine, never say you praise God with
your words, when you dispraise him with your works.

A third thing we must do if we will stay the Lord, and keep him with us,
is to pray for the Church, and to do all we can to keep the same amongst us,
I have made it plain; That all which God has done was first for himself,
next for his Church. Now will God continue that amongst us, which we regard
not? Remember that in Haggai 1.4, Is it time for you to dwell in seeled houses,
whilst Gods house lies in the dust; a sharp pointed reproof. O ye filly
worms, ungrateful wretches, so lately, and graciously delivered to delight
your selves in your seeled houses, your graunges palaces, and to be so
ungrateful to your God, as not to let him have his own house: do you not
only seek necessaries, but also your pleasures before Gods honor. Did God
regard the material house so much? No it was for their sakes who did meet in
it to praise the Lord. I do not-deny but it is a great blessing the Lord
affords us in giving us material public houses, which we call Churches, from
the Greek (...) as it were the Lords house; which some corrupted in mind, or
yielding themselves to be abused so far by Popish Antichristian Emissaries, as
to destroy those places of public worship, that men might be driven into
corners to their no small advantage, as the Apostle imtimateth 2 Timothy 3.6. by
creeping into houses they work closely in corners, which openly they dare not
adventer upon in our public oratories. Pray then with the Church, we must with
David Ps. 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, that is the Church of God,
the whole Church, and every part and portion of the same, every branch and
member through the world, more specially those members that are eminent, not in
outward profession of religion, and Christian name, but those that are really
such, eminent in place, worth and service, singularly we are to pray for our
own Church which we have relation to, and the Principalls of it, Cities also
and Universities, and Schools Seminaries of the Church, for those now in
Parliament, for the Common good, and so the Churches also, that God would
strengthen and enable them against all opposition they are like to meet with;
for all that labor for the settlement of Christ meet with opposition from
Satan and his Instruments, and are tormented by them. Neither are we to pray
alone for Jerusalem mystical, but also for Jerusalem literal, the conversion
of the Jews, Cant. 6.13. Return, return O Shunamite; an earnest invitation
and persuasion which the Church of the Gentiles makes to the Jewish Synagogue
to come off from her former worship and administrations to the Evangelicall
Covenant, that so both may be made one in that fullness and union, this is
promised Romans 11.25. and not yet fulfilled, therefore it is our duty to pray
for it. And as we are to pray for Jerusalem the Church, so likewise
collaterally against all enemies of the Church, for it is with the Church and
her enemies, as it is with a pair of balances, when one scale goes up the
other goes down so that those prayers that are made for the Church directly,
reach collaterally against her enemies.

Quest.
But what is the thing we must wish, or pray for in behalf of the Church.

Ans.
David calls it peace in the forequoted place which according to the Hebrew
phrase comprehends in his lap all good things; protection of the Church,
freedom of those who are in dangers, preservation of those who are out of it.
That God would restore those that are overrunne, refine and purge them which
remain: That God would enlarge the borders of Christ's Kingdom and add daily
to the Church such as shall be saved. But more properly if we consider, the
peace we are to pray is threefold.

1. Peace with God, to cause his Churches to walk in the purity and power of
his ordinances; to maintain true religion in doctrine and worship, which being
left, all other things must needs decay. Tamper with that and all other
blessings will be gone, they will betake themselves to their wings, and fly
away; Except we keep our peace with God, all other peace will fall asunder.

2. We pray also that we may be at peace amongst our selves, enjoying civil
peace, free from dissension, divisions, and distraction, that all think the
same thing, go the same way, and all unanimously mind the glory of God.

3ly, We understand also peace foreign, from all opposition from without, that
there may be no hostility, no invasion of foreign enemies upon the Churches of
God, and our Church specially. One thing more by way of Caution, and that is,
if we dream of temporal peace only, and the blessings upon that, it is not
worth the while to pray for the peace to the Churches of God, It may better
prosper in war and misery. The primitive Church as long as it was persecuted
by the Dragon, was clothed with the sun, crowned with a Crown of twelve
Stars, having the moon under her feet, she contemns worldly things, But
that woman Chap. 17. is all clothed in scarlet, and gold, outwardly rich,
poor and beggarly within; we must therefore pray for a sanctified peace, and
that we may make good use of it. I had almost forgotten that which David
remembers in his 51 Psalm. 18. That God would build the walls of Jerusalem,
walls are fences against enemies; the Churches walls are discipline and order;
this is that hedge keeps out the wild beast out of the Lords vineyard, late
experience has made it good; I will say nothing but as that Roman Emperor; si
disciplinam amittimus, nomen Romanum amittimus, and as it is in an Army and
Commonwealth, so we daily find it in the Church.

Motives to pray for the Church.

1. In General; There cannot be a better employment for Christians then
prayer, and we cannot aim at a better blessing, then a sanctified peace and
settlement both of Church and State. There is not a nearer relation we have to
any for whom we should wish all good then the Church. The nearest relation that
a Christian has to any for whom he should wish good, is the Church, the
greatest blessing is a good peace and settlement; The most effectual means to
attain this, is fervent prayer.

2. He that loves the Church will pray for her, it is a most certain sign, we
do not love the Church, nor Gods glory, if we will not so much as pray for
her, even then when others seek her ruin.

3. Our prayers for the Church give us a share in all the Churches prayers, no
prayers, no share.

4. All our prosperity depends on the prosperity of the Church, all the good
that God does is for the Churches sake. Out of Sion God blesses, and true
prosperity belongs only to such as love the Church. The Church I have showed
is.

1. Gods house, the spouse of Christ, and can there be a nearer and dearer
relation to a Christian then this, to tender the house of God, and spouse of
Christ.

2. The Church, if we be true Christians, is the Mother of us all, all saints
Sons and Daughters, Gal. 4 26.
have the Church for their Mother: whosoever denies her, denies also God to be
his or her Father; In her we are born, in her we are new born: He is an
unnatural Son, and she an unnatural Daughter, who will not pray hard for her
Mother in danger, who will not open their mouth to keep harm from their Mother.

5ly. Such is the efficacy of fervent prayer that it stays the hand of the
Almighty, and (with greatest reverence be it spoken to the divine Majesty) in a
manner binds the same: Prayers rule God. Let me alone says, God to Moses,
Exodus 32.10. The prayers of the faithful stay his punishments, not by the
prevayling of humane force above divine, but by condescending of divine grace
to the desires of the Godly. By prayer we obtain all things of God, whatsoever
Gods divine power is able to bring to pass, a Godly Christain may obtain by
his fervent prayer.

6ly. We must of necessity pray, if we will obtain; Look for no blessing of God
without prayer, Psalm. 50.11. Thou shall call on me.

7ly. In praying for the Church, you pray for your selves, if you be a lively
member of the same.

By these motives you may easily find of what temper and mould you are off,
that shall read this; all pretend to Christianity, and to be members of Christ,
now try the truth of this by your affection to the Church. The Church is
Christ's body; He is the head, you and others, if believers are members; If so
then you feel, are sensible of the breaches made in this body: can a rupture,
can a breach be made in a body, and a true lively member of the same not be
sensible? It is a dead member that has lost feeling, or at least benumbed and
stupefied for the present; whatsoever you have done hitherto, yet now remember
your duty to pray for the welfare of your Mother the Church; observe the sad
estate of the same: what the eye sees the heart will mind: If we do not mind
the Church, we will never carefully make our expressions to God for her. Take
heed of the World, which like Ivy will clasp about your heart, and hinder it
from thriving in Christianity; Be not like that Canniball of Christians, even
the best Protestants, bloody Alva, who when Henry demanded of him, whether he
had taken notice of the great Eclips? Replied, he was so much taken up with
matters on earth, that he had no leisure to mind heavenly things. I fear we
have too many such amongst our Common Christians, who whilst heaven and earth
are on fire about their ears, and the Church in ruin, and themselves in
danger, yet like the Syracusan Archimedes, they are in the dust, minding
nothing but earth: what is the Church to them, let Churchmen employ their time
this way. Such I would have to consider the words of Mordecai to Queen Hester.
Hest. 4.14.
If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall the Churches
enlargement and deliverance arise from another place, but you and your Fathers
house shall be destroyed.

To close up all, do but consider, that it is but almost the only thing left
us that we can do for the Church abroad, and our Brethren in the Jaws of
Antichrist, to pray for them. It is an easy thing and of little cost; none
therefore may stick at it, to give his contribution of prayers and sighs that
way. If we neglect it, it will be a foul blot, we shall get as much credit by
calling our selves to be Christians, Members of the Church, as Pilate has
gotten to be named in the Creed.

4th. A fourth mean to keep God with us is to add to Godliness, Brotherly
Kindness, 2 Pet. 1.7. This is the Daughter of Godliness. He that loves God
for his own sake, will love his Brother for Gods sake. This is the touchstone
of piety. This is a demonstration that we love God, and his Church, his spouse,
and our Mother, with one and the same love, we love God, and our Brother; the
difference is in the degrees and respects. God for himself, others for him and
in him; I wish I might as truly write to you of this duty, as the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. As touching brotherly love, we need not that I write unto you, for
ye your selves are taught of God to love one another: Indeed ye do it toward
all the Brethren which are in Macedonia, (in other parts of Christendom.) But
we beseech you Brethren that you increase more and more, as you are taught of
God to love one another. It is a thing very unpleasing to God for Brethren to
be at variance amongst themselves. By natures light, though dim, the very
heathens have acknowledged one God, and him the Author of unity and friendship
Plato in his Lysis; from the same parents, one Father, and one Mother, as from
one seed, one root, one beginning by natures ordinance do spring two, three, or
more Brethren; not for discord or contrariety, but that being many, they might
the better one help the other. That Brother that warreth with his Brother,
says Plutarch, does voluntarily cut off a member of his own flesh. All enmity
breeds within our soul a thousand tormenting passions, especially that enmity
which a man bears toward his own Brother, as that which is most
prodigious, and unnatural. Xenophon. May not many now a days complain with
David. If mine enemy had done me this dishonor I could have born it, Psalm.
55.12.
if my adversary had exalted himself against me, I would have hid my self from
him; but it was thou, O man, my companion, my guide, my familiar; we walked in
the house of God as friends. Of all the vialls of the wrath of God poured out
upon sinners, it is one of the forest to be fed with his own flesh, and made
drunk with his own blood, as with sweet Wine, Isa. 49.26. When one shall
destroy the other, and shed the blould of each other as eagerly and greedily,
as if it were meat and drink to them, yea the most delightful drink to them
that could be, to be making havoc off, and spilling the blood either of other.
But what will be the end of this? O the misery of civil dissensions! I had
rather mourn for this breach, then meddle with it. God knows how willingly
would I spend life and all that little my good God has blessed me with, for
this earthly paradise, or Canaan flowing with milk and honey, if it would
avail any thing; But I well see that tears are fitter for this, then words;
only I beseech you (not to lay open the evils, which have already come upon us
by the discord of Brethren, it would be over long, and tedious,) note the
chiefest evils of this enmity. It is

1. A joy, and an encouragement to the enemies of the Gospel, our discord is
their Music; oh what a sight is this! Brethren strive, While the enemy stands
still, laughs and triumphs; Bellum haereticorum, pax est Ecclesiae, says
Hilary of old; we invert it upon our selves, our war in the Church is the peace
of heretics. As it is in an army of men at deadly variance amongst themselves,
the adverse party against which they should wholly together bend their forces,
will say, we shall not need to do much, they will pull down and destroy
themselves; This is their joy.

2. The wounding of the weak is another great evil, arising from the discord
especially in religion, many if they are not cast down, or turned out of the
way, at least wise are much hindered: would to God I could either deny this with
truth, or amend it with tears; oh the woeful case! How many do learn to fit
their faith to the times, and are more impatient of a remedy then of the
disease.

3. Again. This discord brings contempt to both parties, the Ministers of the
Gospel especially, which should be had in precious account for their work sake.
The vulgar does not distinguish between the substance of Religion and the
Ceremony. But praised be God our differences are those of Paul, and Barnabas,
not those of Peter and Magus. Rome is cried up for unity and peace; yet
Bellarmine a witness without exception, acknowledges and reckons up 237.
Contrarieties of Doctrine amongst Romish divines. But that which is worst of
all by discord.

4. The glorius Gospel of Jesus Christ is disgraced, in the disgrace of men,
the power of the Ministry is weakened, for where the teacher is despised the
Doctrine is little regarded.

5. A fifth mean to pleace God, and stay him, is delivered by the Apostle 1.
These. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and meddle with your own business, and to work
with your own hands: (...) seek after peace and quietness, with a kind of holy
ambition (even as the ambitious forhonour,) thinking it our honor to live at
peace. To calm our turbulent spirits, and to live at peace: we have here

1. the duty (...) study to be quiet.

2. Means availeable to perform it. Hither to turn the stream of our
ambition, and if we will needs be judging, to use our judgment in this, not
to put a stumbling block before the weak Romans 14.13. The quiet recommended unto
us imports not only peaceableness, and shunning contentions and vain
janglings, but a contented calm conversation, opposite to tumultuous
turbulency, and restless intermeddling with things that concern us not: as God
has distributed unto every one, says the Apostle, so let him walk, and so
ordain I in all Churches: 1 Cor. 7.17.

1. God has ordained the several places and callings.

2ly. He has given gifts of ability to men to perform the things he
requires in the same.

3ly. He has also set the bounds and limits within which every one is to keep
himself, and to walk orderly, meddling with that which appertains unto him:
this is an holy thing and comely, a preserver of unity wherein God delights. A
duty much to be endeavored; in no age, or Church more necessary to be urged
then our own; abounding with so many busy spirits, and restless
malcontents. Athens it self was never so mad upon novelties as England
now, whence it comes to pass that some through their ambition to be singular,
and popular, to draw disciples after them, have as it were gone down to hell
for new faith and heretical doctrines, not contented with the old. Churches in
foreign parts have complained of it, diverse years ago when things were
nothing so bad in this respect, as since they have been, the Walachian Churches
in an Epistle sent to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, set forth the
haynousness of the crime. Let your conscience judge say they) how all kind of
heresies can pass unpunished, manifold seeds of schisms be sown, and profane
doctrines of errors commonly vented abroad in that City, yea in that nation,
which by so express, sacred, and severe an oath has bound it self before God,
to cast out all errors, heresies and schisms from the house of God. I wish
with all my heart, we had not made our selves a reproach amongst Papists, and a
scandal amongst the enemies of the Gospel. But let the unseduced consider the
judgment of Christ, and his Apostles. Concerning such novellists, Christ calls
them Joh. 10.8. thieves and robbers; ravening wolves in sheeps clothing,
Matthew. 7.15. as if he should say in appearance harmeless, but whatsoever shows
of good will they make, they seek to destroy your souls. The Ap. 2 Cor. 11.13.
terms them deceiptfull workers because whatsoever mask of zeal they put upon
them, as if they sought nothing but Gods glory, yet indeed they sought their
own gain, and wrought upon advantage, Phil. 3.2. Bew are of Dogs that is
false Apostles who barked at the light of truth, snarled and bit sound and
sincere preachers, with their slanders Ezech. 13.4 foxes in dry places, that is
in places where no poultry or other birds are to feed upon; whereupon being
hungerstarved they gape after prey, and seiz upon the meanest food, verse. 19:
handfulls of Barley, any light reward, and pieces of bread, Horum genus aliud
domesticum and oceultum est, aliud externum and manifestum; Illud vero long
nocentius, eorum inquam, qui in Ecclesia contra Ecclesiam sentiunt, Hieron.
Tom. 6. in Micah. cap. 6. Some of them are close within our walls, others
without and manifest: of the two those are the dangerest, who being in the
Church speak against the Church: have not we such as the Apostle says crept
in, private persons, which would seem very religious, and to seek the holy
unity above others, which leave the duty of their places and callings, and
busy themselves with those matters which do not belong to them, such the
Apostle commands.

1. To do their own business. And

2.ly. To work with their own hands. These are means availeable to preserve
unity, quietness, and peace, cause the way of God, true religion to be well
spoken of, and win them that are without the truth, that is, unbeleevers,
insidels. Although such in things spiritual know little or nothing, because
they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14. Yet have they written within their
hearts some natural principles of the Law moral, by which they are directed
to order their own Lives, and enabled to judge of other men's; but those account
the matters of their trades and sciences, to which God by their inclination,
disposition natural, and instruction of their Masters has called them, too
base; or as if the Care of their family were a thing over vile, they set these
aside and neglect them, and take upon them greater and higher business. They
labor not with their hands, nor meddle quietly with their own business, but
bind all the powers of their mind, to except against Church and State; As if
God had made them to be overseers of the Governors and Teachers, they dispute
and reason about Government, and the duties of Governors and Teachers,
wandering about and seeking to persuade and draw others to their mind. But who
has given them power to dispute with this rule of the Apostle. Let such
answer to the following particulars.

1. Has God called them, and set them on work, about greater things and freed
them from these.

2. Is there not labor, and pains and care to be taken in instructing their
Children, and servants in the way of God? In providing earthly things,
necessary for himself and them lest they deny the faith, and be worse then
Infidells. 1 Timothy 5.8?

3. Is not he more worthy blame that finds fault with the greater, and does
it not in the lesser. When the greater is more difficult to perform? To
neglect his own little family, and his own defects, and to give himself in
words and deeds to deprave the public guides.

4. Is the truth obeyed, or God well pleased by such ways? When the Ruler and
guides of Gods people do amiss, a man is to be sorry at it, and he is to look
to his own ways that he keep upright before God. But when in reprehending that
which others fail in, he neglects his own calling how shall he free himself
from that of the Apostle, Romans 2.1. Thou art therefore inexcusable, O man, that
judge an other, for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, for
thou that judge do the same thing; lament and sorrow for evil, consent not
in any wise, follow the ways of the Lord, obey the rules of the word; and let
all men keep their place and standing which God has set them in, and so walk
as that they may Answer before the high judge, and give account how they have
discharged their duty.

6. Sixthly. If you would have God stay with you, and his blessings, separate
not from the Church his people, God blesses out of Zion, If by the Ministry of
the Gospel God daily adds to his Church, member, society and external
communion of the faithful such as shall be saved; then it is a dangerous
symptom of their reprobation, who separate from the Church: I showed formely
some of the priveleges of the Church, lo here an other dignity of it, There is
no salvation out of it: it is like to Noah's Ark, for as in the World all
perished that were not gathered into the Ark, their wisdom, Towns, Castles and
goods could not save them, so all that are not gathered into the Church they
shall perish, the Church is the Ark of God there is no salvation but in Sion,
that is the Church of God: therefore the holy Word says, of those God had a
purpose to save, he added to the Church such as should be saved, and that from
day to day he added them, Ephesians. 5.23. It is said that Christ is the savior of
his Body, now the Church is the Body of Christ, therefore there are none saved
but the Church, that is none but they which are joined to Christ the head, and
become members of him, hold therefore still communion with, it, and suffer not
your selves to be drawn from the society of it, John. 6.68. When many slipped
away, Christ said to the twelve, will ye also go away, Peter answered; Lord, to
whom shall we go, thou have the Words of eternal life, when you see others to
go out of the society of the Church, say you, whither shall we go? Here are the
Words of eternal life, here are the means to get faith and repentance, here
are the means of salvation: remember what the Apostle says, Heb. 13.9. Be not
carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, for it is a good thing that
the heart be established. As God has upheld Religion among us strangely, and
miraculously does yet, so let us hold it fast and persevere in it, to the end,
Though an Angel from Heaven, much more though a Priest or Jesuit from Rome, an
Anabaptist, or a sectary Preach unto us any other Gospel, be carried by none of
them all: carry to Christ, be not carried from Christ, take heed therefore of
false Prophets.

CHAP. IX. Of false Teachers.
THe state of Christ's Church militant here on Earth, never has been, nor is
now, nor ever shall be so happy, as to be free from false Teachers; She cannot
escape this grand evil, so long as there is a Sheeps skin to be gotten for a
Wolf to mask in: or a Sorcerer Elymas can usurp the name of Bar-Jesus. Acts
13.6.


These have been and will be, till Christ has housed all his friends, and
imprisoned all his enemies. This is a true Prophesy of a false Prophesy. But
you demand what is false Doctrine, and who are the Teachers thereof? 2 Pet. 2.1.


1. False Doctrine has diverse names in holy writ; according to the diverse
conditions of the same, arising from the Authors, matter, and degrees.

1. For first Christ calls them Mat. 13.38. to 41. tares (Zizania) says a
learned man is blasted Corn or deaf ears which grow up with the good corn,
and cannot be discerned from it until the harvest, and then it proves naught.
So will all false doctrine, though pleasing now prove false in the end;
together with all hypocrites verse. 41. scandalls, which is the bridge in a
trap, which when the mouse or any other vermin puts down they are taken; false
doctrine then gives scandal, that is sets a trap in our brothers way to take
and destroy him.

2ly. The Apostle 1 Cor. 1.10. calls the same schisms or divisions.

1. False doctrines in a manner divide Christ and tear him in pieces by making
him the head of two diverse and disagreeing bodies, himself being but one. 2.
They divide themselves from Christ by going to a false Christ.
3ly. They divide themselves in heart to be found faulty Hos. 10.2. and verse.
11. he styles them contentions or strife. Boni Catholici, quod ad fidei
doctrinam pertinet ita quaerunt, ut absit decertatio periculosa, says August.
Good Catholic Christians do question, as that they avoid dangerous contending;
But men of corrupt minds and destitute of the love of truth, contend not that
error might be overcome of the truth, but that their sayings may go for
current, and other men's be put down, Salamander-like they are so cold in
charity, that they cannot live but in the fire of contention: out of it they
are as it were dead, but if engaged in some contention then are they lively.
This is the way to ruinate the Church, Altar against Altar, Professor against
Professor, who gets thereby? Satan, the Papists, to whom we have given
this staff to smite us with, namely our contentions. A grievous sin
Companion of the blackest iniquities Romans 13.13. Romans 13.13 1 Cor. 3.3.
The mark of carnal men 1 Cor. 3.3. The doctrine then of false teachers is
like themselves, deceitful making show of good, and wholesome corn for food
of the soul, but in truth it is blasted and deaf; yea the same is full of
danger, hiding traps to take and to destroy, dividing from Christ, yea Christ
himself, and their own hearts, to the ruin of the Church and themselves.

2ly, If the doctrine be so deceitful and dangerous, what are the teachers?
The Scripture describes them also both in the old and new Testament. Ezkiel
names them foxes chap. 13.4. Subtle, ravenous, of whom the spouse complains
2. Cant. 15. that they Spoil her vines, that is members of the Church, the
faithful, the Churches. And that false prophets, or false teachers, are such
appears by their fruits and natures having not only the craft of that beast
transforming themselves. 2. Cor. 11.13. carrying a Fox in their bosom, when
they are lambs outwardly; but also the bloody rage and cruelty, where they
get power, none being like them: for never did the Church of God suffer more
from the maddest and blindest heathen, then she has done from heretics and
schismatics, that were among them. In the new Testament Christ calls them
theives and robbers, seeking to destroy, slay and kill Joh. 10.18, ravenous
wolves verse. 15. (...) from (...) to tear in pieces; (...), rapaces, ravenous,
Act. 20.29. grievous wolves not sparing the flock. Horum genus longae nocentius
qui in Ecclesia contra Ecclesiam sentiunt, says Hieron. Far more dangerous
are they, who in the Church hold against the Church. Great danger is intimated
by Christ, to be imminent to poor Christians, from false teachers. They as
wolves are of a bloody nature, and their enmity and cruelty to the sheep is
such, that strings made of both their guts, and joined together in one musical
instrument, will never be consonant; such enmity and contrary nature is between
faithful Christians and false teachers. The wolf invading the flock, never
leaves till he have killed all. In like manner false teachers seek to infect
and destroy all. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Like the devil their Father they go up and down like a roaring Lion seeking
whom they may devour. Paul describes them exactly Act. 20.29.

1. They are wolves, who both by their doctrines and manners, seek to destroy
the harmeless and innocent sheep.

2ly. Grievous they are and ravenous, by which their cruelty is noted, which is
also explained by him in these words, not sparing the flock.

3ly. Of our own selves shall such men arise, they shall not come from
without, such deceivers are the more langerous.

4ly. They shall speak perverse things, broaching false and heretical
doctrines.

5ly. Ambition and pride shall cause this, to draw disciples after them.

Christ gives us two marks, by their Garments and fruits, not of life and
manners, so much as of doctrine Mat. 7.15.

1. What are those sheep Clothing.

Ans. 1. In general, by clothing whose use is to cover, we understand their
close coming in, their creeping into houses, 2 Timothy 3.6. Their chiefest care
is to cover, hide and conceal at first, that which they chiefly intend to bring
in.

2. Their good words and fair speeches, by which they deceive the hearts of the
simple. (...), good words, when a man makes show of much goodness, in words,
but is nothing so in substance, and deed. (...), many good prayers, and
eloquent counterfeit zeal, which heretics and schismatics use, to draw the
simple to their side and opinions. Beware of such sugared and fair tongues,
thus such subtle Merchants do vent their bad wares, show their errors not
naked, but cloaked with good works, and fair speeches. Mat. 23.14.
Thus did the Pharisees under pretense of long prayer devour widows houses.

3. Their using or rather abusing the Scripture, wresting, corrupting, mayming,
eluding the same, and thus with Satan the Arch-heretick they cover their
errors. Sub nomine Christi, docent, quae contraria sunt Christo, nec mirum si
aliquos seduci videamus ah his, cum Dominus dixerit, multos seducent. Under the
name of Christ, they teach things contrary to Christ, and shall we wonder to
see some to be seduced by them, when our Lord has foretold they shall seduce
many? Ierom, Aliunde suadere non possent de rebus fidei, nisi ex rebus fidei.
Whence should they persuade matters of faith, if it were not out of those
writings of faith: says Tertullian. Thus firmos fatigant, infirmos capiunt,
medios cum scrupulo dimittunt. They weary the strong, take the weak, and the
middle sort they leave distracted with doubts.

4. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Fourthly, formality is meant by Sheeps clothing (...) not (...); not the true
form and essence of Godliness, but an outward conformity, a resemblance,
vizard or show of holiness. All their outward carriage is so composed, as if
they only were true Christians, they profess Religion, speak well of God, of
Christ, and discourse well concerning outward righteousness, and holiness of
life; that if all Religion were to be measured by the outside, they could not
choose but go for good Christians. But what says the Apostle of such, Tit.
1.16. They profess indeed they know God, but in works they deny him, they
express no such things in their lives and conversations they have only drawn
a fair glove over a foul hand, such were Baals Priests, 1 Kings 18.28. And the
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.27. They made clean the outside; that is, Hypocrite-like,
they made much ado about Ceremonies and outward indifferent things, but for
the inward, and most necessary parts of Gods worship they are very careless. The
Apostle therefore in this place gives certain marks whereby we may try our own
hearts and spirits, then others: It is a very hard thing to know a Hypocrite,
being a lurking sin, so masked, as there is little, or no outvvard difference,
betvveen the sound and unsound. They are very Divel-like, who dare range every
professor under this title, and mark him with the black cole of Hypocrisy.
For though it be true that a Hypocrite must be a Professor, yet it is false,
that every Professor must be a Hypocrite.

The Apostles marks are.

1. They Profess they know God; a Hypocryticall false Teacher, is a great
Professor of Religion, his care is to seem to be that he is not.

2. By works they deny him; all his Religion is in outward profession,
separated from the inward sincerity of the heart. That which God delights in,
an humble and contrite spirit, they regard not, and that which God detests they
offer to him, a naked outward formality; he is swanlike, white without, but his
flesh within is black, Christ's comparison sits them best, they are Foxes whose
skin is better then his flesh.

3. Thirdly, disobedient, or want of the obedience of faith: they make a great
show of faith, much knowledge, much talk of Piety, but secretly in their
course depart from the word with pretense of obedience, like the Son in the
Gospel, Matthew. 21.28. Being bidden of his Father to go into the Vineyard, said
yea, but for all that went not, such profess much readiness and willingness
to serve God, but do it not.

4. Fourthly, The fourth mark is (...), reprobate, not as opposed to the
elect, but to those things they undertake, as true Christians, when they shall
be brought to the touchstone, they shall be like reprobate silver, unaprooved,
without proof, all naught.

5. The fifth thing meant by Sheeps-cloathing, is pretense of instinct,
revelations immediate, and extraordinary from the Spirit of God, Micah. 2.11.
If a man walking in the Spirit, that is, say, he have divine inspiration, yet
ly falsely, impudence of false Teachers is seldom less then blasphemous, what
blasphemy greater then to give out to be guided by the Spirit of truth, when it
is the Spirit of error all this while; Thus Simon Magus had his Helena,
Mahomet his dove inured to fetch food out of his ear, is pretended by him to be
the holy Ghost, whispering into his ears, what he should enact for the people.

6. The sixth thing meant by sheeps clothing is mentioned by the Apostle 2.
These. 2, 2. word and letter. These false teachers pretended they had heard it
from Paul's own mouth, and withal forged letters and fathered them upon the
Apostle: forgery is noe new thing in false teachers, and other impostures:
Apostles yet surviving, they published under their names Evangellicall stories.
Is not the cause deplored, which but by such base shifts cannot be supported?

The Second mark by which false teachers are known is expressed by Christ in
the 7ht of St Mat. ver. 16.20. by their fruits you shall know them, that is by
their false doctrine, self seekeing and wickedness, ver. the 23: they work
iniquity 2. Pet. 2.1.2. etc. which at last show what they are, as ripe fruits
do trees. Every one then must with the Nobler sort of Berea, Acts 17.11. bring
the doctrine of false teachers to the touchstone of the Scripture, and he will
soon find whether they be true or false.

1. Thus the doctrine of the Papists concerning the Lords Supper will soon be
found defective, if you compare the same with Christ's first institution Mat,
26.26. Mark. 14.22. Luke 22.19, and 1 Cor. 11.24. Their worshipping of Saints,
and praying to them, will be found contrary to Scripture. 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 John 2,
1. So all other points wherein we differ.

2. In like manner Swenkfeldians and Anabaptists leading men from the Scriptues
to enthusiasmes or private revelations, will soon be found false by these
following rules.

1. In matter of Prophecy, as is prediction of future things, not interpreting
Scriptures, the event must try it. Deuteronomy. 18.22.

2ly. In matter of Doctrine. To the law, and to the testimony, If they speak
not according to this word there is noe light in them Isa. 8.20. though with
signs and wonders they should confirm their doctrine, yet if it lead to other
Gods Israel must not attend Deuteronomy. 13.1.2, 3. Is it another Gospel, but
different, not contrary to that already received? though Isaiah, or Paul, or
Peter, (...)
yea an Angel from Heaven should publish it, we must hold him accursed. Gal.
1.8.9.

Quest.
What shall simple and plain people do, who know not the points in question
between either side?

Ans.
1. Let them not be careless therefore, but remember the caveat of the Apostle
Acts. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, it concerns your souls
danger; It is your fault if you be infected and seduced: False doctrine is like
a Cancer or Gangreene, it frets all that is sound and in the end kills. 2 Timothy 2.17. false doctrine puts men beside their mind or right wits; madness
seizes them who give way to unsound doctrine 2 These. 2.2. This needs no
further evidence then our present days, in Anabaptists, Quakers, their running
out of their cloth, shows the running out of their wits. Paul sticks not to
impute madness to the seduced Galatians c. 3.1. and conceits a kind of
witchcraft, and strong enchantment to possess them. 2 Timothy 3.8. He says they
are without Judgment, and ver. 9. fools. That clause of the admonition in the
fore-quoted 2 These. 2.2. should diswade levity and unsettledness in matter of
faith and religion, because it breeds anxiety, and trouble of mind,
restlesness they do but trouble you that bring in another Gospel. Thus much by
way of caveat.

2. Secondly, common people are not so simple as many make themselves. I am
sure they are more to be studied then books, they have skill enough in Law, in
buying and selling you shall find them wary and crafty enough. Let them then
give attention to the word, this will make them wise unto salvation; let them
learn their Catechism, which we may not unfitly call the little Bible, and
out of the same they may discover falsehood. Catechism is that form of Sound
words, 2 Timothy 1.13. A short summing of the chief heads of faith and charity,
unto which we may refer all things of Religion; the Syriack calls it holes or
boxes, a speech borrowed from Merchants, who have their diverse boxes or holes,
wherein they put their several sorts of money. The chief heads of Catechism
are such common places.

1. Learn well to understand the articles of your faith, and you will easily
perceive a false doctrine against faith.

2. Learn the ten Commandments and you shall know, how to carry your selves
toward God and your neighbors, and easily discover sin in thoughts, word and
deeds.

3. Learn to understand the Lords prayer and you will know what to pray for to
supply your wants, and what to pray against.

4. In like manner the Doctrine of the Sacraments, to seal, not to scruple your
faith. Parents do Satan great service, in keeping their Children off from this
so profitable, so necessary an exercise; directly contrary to that Ephesians. 6.4.
Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; Parents cannot do more
for their Children, then make them the Children of God. It was an heroic
Mother who said of a cowardly Son, Malo filium habere mortuum, quam bello
mutilem, she wished her Son dead, because unfit for war to fight for his
Country. How much more ought Christian parents rather wish to have no Sons,
then they should not be Gods servants. Aulus Fulvius when his Son was taken in
the Conspiracy with Catiline, spoke thus unto him, Ego te non Catilinae, sed
patriae genui. I begot thee not to side with Catiline, but to serve thy
Country against Catiline. Much more ought we to labor that our Children may
fight under Christ the Captain of their salvation, against the World, the
flesh, and the Devil, and not against their God: Zeuxis having painted a boy
carrying grapes, in a basket, observed the birds to peck at them, was angry
with himself for not painting the boy more lively, which was his chief intent;
then sure the birds durst never have been so bold; If parents had but so much
care to form their Children with grace, as they are willing to set out their
bodies with needless curiosities, truly those birds of prey, the world, the
flesh, and Devil, would never dare so boldly to pecke at their souls.

Fathers and mothers, will you have your Children to be servants to be servants
of God, and heirs of heaven, take this course

1. Be settled your selves in religion, be not carried about with diverse and
strange doctrines; for it is a good thing that the heart be established with
grace.

2ly. Then acquaint your Children with the grounds of truth necessary to
salvation, by catechizing: Inure them to read the Scriptures, and to mark such
places as confirm Religion, or check corruption of life. Join issue in this,
that as your Children wax in strength and stature, so they may grow in grace
and favor both with God and man. Then you parents may style your selves
Naomies, beautiful, Ruth.
if you perform this; If you neglect it, you will be Marah, full of
bitterness; And your Children Ichabods, for the glory of God is departed from
them. and so they are Lo-Ammi, Hos.
not Gods people.

3ly, Let common people who have not their senses exercised Heb. 5.14. namely
in the Scriptures, as appears by the opposition. They that use milk, are
inexpert in the word of Righteousness, that they may be able to discern
between doctrine and doctrine, between the purity of the Gospel, and the
impuritie of Popery, and all errors and heresies whatsoever: such then I say,
that are not exercised in Scriptures, and points questioned are in a specieall
manner to beware of false teachers, as Christ bids them, carefully to mark,
and avoid false teachers and Brethren, Romans 16.17. The Apostle puts this
admonition in the very end of the Epistle, to note that amongst all other
things formerly written of, this in especial is not to be forgotten. We may
not keep company with such, lest we be corrupted and perverted by them, for our
nature is prone to error, and slow to truth; It is spoken to all; Let them
alone, they are blind leaders of the blind Mat. 25.14. Beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees c. 16.6. All are commanded to try the spirits 1 John 4.1. To try
all and keep that which is Good 1 These. 5.20. Neither to be carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines Heb. 13.9. nor to be tossed too and froo, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine. Such are the Chafe Psalm. 1.4.
light, exceeding unconstant, vain, uncertain, mutable, and changeable, they
have noe certain stay. Therefore the wind of Gods wrath will suddenly
scatter, and drive them away. The Apostle 2 John 10. directs his blessed Lady.

1 Not to participate with such indeed that bring not the doctrine of Christ;
Receive him not into your house; why? this seems incivility, may we not
receive such till they discover what they are, and then turn them out?

Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes. You shall have more a do to
eject such, then to keep them out at first: therefore shut up the doors of
your house against them.

2. Not to participate with such in word ver. 11. neither bid him God speed, as
if he should say, be sofarre in showing him any kindness in deed, as vouchsafe
him not a kind word or greeting, wish him no joy, no comfort afford him not a
good word, or familiar speech, show no token of familiarity to him. He renders
a reason; for he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds, and
if we be partakers of their sins, we shall be partakers of their plagues.
Salutation is a sign of love; we may not love them, therefore not so much as
salute them. Marcion the heretic meeting John the Evangelist, and asking if he
knew him; I know thee, replied the other, to be the first born of the Devil.
We must not salute such familiarily as we do the saints of God, and Brethren
in Christ, but rather show a detestation of them and their Doctrine. As they be
our enemies, we ought to love them, and may salute them; as they be Gods
enemies we must hate them: David, Psalm. 129.21. Shows the manner; do not I hate
them, O Lord, that hate thee? yes, I hate them with a perfect hatred: We must
love the nature which God made, hate the evil which the Devil made. Our houses
should be open to the Preachers and Professors of the Gospel, but not so to
corrupt teachers. Reasons given are these.

1. It is a thing displeasing to God, to give entertainment to his Enemies:
Iehu the seer reproved King Iehosaphat for joining with Ahab: would thou help
the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? 1 Chro. 19.2. God gave us our
houses, they must be for his friends, and not for his Enemies.

2. The Godly will grieve at it, and shall we grieve them for whom Christ died?
Romans 14.15.

3. It may bring a bad report upon our selves, that we like of them and
approove them, whereas we ought to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1
These. 5.22. And provide things honest before God and men, 2 Cor. 8.21.

4. It may endanger our own souls, their word fretteth as a canker, 2 Timothy
2.17. It may overrun us and infect us, ere we be aware.

5. It may encourage them in their wickedness, Ezech. 13.22.

6. It may pull Gods wrath on our houses, and us; God blessed Potiphar and his
house for Joseph's sake, Genesis 34.5. etc. and 30.27. Laban for Jacobs sake: So
the Shunamitish woman for Elisha's sake, 2 King. 4.17. His curse will light on
those houses where the adversaries of his Gospel are harbored, Therefore when
John the Evangelist heard that Cerinthus the Heretic was in the house with
him; let us fly (says he) lest the bath fall on our heads, this was the
practice of Gods saints at all times.

Quest. May we not at all converse with wicked men, and the Enemies of
Religion? Indeed the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 5.11. Seems to affirm the like, I have
written to you not to keep Company, if any man that is called a Brother be a
fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater with such a one no not to eat: Did not
our savior eat with publicans and sinners?

Resp. 1. The Apostles meaning is, that we ought not to have any intimate
familiarity or common usage, and conversation with such: other wise in some
case we are not forbidden simply to eat with such. Since neither the bond of
matrimony is broken by excommunication, nor such duties hindered, much less cut
off thereby, as we owe one to another, children to their parents, subjects to
their Prince, servants to their Masters, and neighbor to neighbor, to win one
another to God.

2. Concerning Christ's conversing with sinners and Publicanes, this the
Pharisees catch up, to calumniate him to his disciples, and so to alienate
their affection, which many now adays make use of to excuse their
dissolutnesse; but let Christ's answer serve both them and us. They who be
whole need no Physician, as if he said, I must converse with these because
they are spiritually sick, and I am the souls sole Physician. They are sinners
I am their savior: Christ then converseth with sinners not to approve their
sins, but to bring them off by his exhortations, taking all occasions to do
good, so we should take great care to better man. His nature was so pure that
he could not be infected. Take a Crystal glass, pure and clean, fill it with
clear water, shake it never so much it will continue clear, but a little mudd
in the bottom fouleth all, especially being stirred: so it is with us, the
original dreggs of sin, are in our nature, and will soon mar all, we must
therefore take great care how we converse with others.

Lastly, Let the great danger of false Doctrine persuade men to beware of false
teachers, like a canker it soon spreads, and if not looked into kills
eternalie, breaks the bond of nature, cuts all sinews of humane society, puts
variance and implacable discords in families, sows seeds of sedition in the
state, and ruineth all.

You will say God forbid! I shall be brought to this. I answer; this is but
your conceit.

1. First, when Religion is once gone, humanity will not long stay after, what
can be looked for from inconstant persons: those who cast off Religion, and so
their God, will soon forget, and so cast off their nearest and dearest friends.
Besides, this Irreligion is the next way to disobedience.

2ly. Hazael conceived so well of himself 2. Kings 8.13. Elisha foretold all
the evil he should do to the people of Israel verse. 12. burn their strong
holds, and slay their youth with the sword, dashing their Children, ripping
their women with child. Hazaell said, but what is thy servant a dog? namely, as
a dog, fierce, cruel, merciless? that he should do this great thing; such
barbarous and inhumane cruelties, as no reasonable man would do, but savage,
ravenous, and unreasonable beasts. Hazael at this time did not think he should
do such cruel acts. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it? Ier. 17.9. The following history will confirm it. The
occasion whereof I shall show.

1. 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
There is a generation of whom two Apostles Peter, and Jude speak, that
despises all Government, and speaks evil of dignities, out of an erroneous
judgment, seduced by false teachers. Anabaptists utterly mislike all
Government and subjection amongst Christians: It is not without cause that Jude
calls such ver. 8. dreamers for so indeed they are, and their dream is this,
that sin is the cause of subjection, And although it were ordained and allowed
to the Jews because they were but infants, yet fits it not us Christians that
are in the state of perfection: A mere dotage, is it not amongst those blesed
Spirits who are free from sin, and still persist in the truth. There are
Thrones, Dominations, Powers, Principalities, Angels, and Archangells, Coll.
1.16. over who^ Christ is far advanced in the heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
And if man had continuin his integrity, yet government should have been Vxor
viro, liberi utrisque, inasmuch as man naturally is sociable, and
disciplinable. The moral law commands to honor Father and mother. The end of
government is peace with piety, and honesty and on man even then should have
stood in need of another. Finally there is now as great a necessity of
magistracy as was amongst the Jews; and the new Testament would never have
commanded subjection to magistrates, or to pray for them, if it were a sin
for a Christian to be a magistrate. A Christian therefore

1. May be a magistrate.

2. Is only fit to be a magistrate, because no man better knows the duty of a
magistrate.

3ly. No man can so completely and perfectly perform the office of a
magistrate, but he; because no man understands the true religion which he is to
maintain, and by which he is to Govern but he, Having thus confirmed this
truth in opposition to the former error, I proceed to the History.

CHAP. X. The History.
IN the year of Christ Jesus 1422 and and thereabout; God was pleased to
excite, and stir up many learned and godly men, who as other Moses's, should
deliver his people out of the Popish, more then Egyptian (because spiritual)
servitude. These teaching the liberty of the Gospel, obtained by Christ only
from sin, Satan, and consequently eternal fire, a spiritual liberty merely:
Certain fanaticall and fantastical people in Germany took occasion thereby
to shake of all subjection corporal or bodily, wresting and perverting the
former doctrine of grace, they utterly refused to be any more subject, neither
would they pay any tribute. Arms were taken up first in Swevia a country
bordering on the upper Palatinate, where they took the field with two
armiesone of them was with much slaughter scattered, the other about Hall took
the town of Weinspurge causing the garrison and Earl of Helfrustein to pass
through the points of their pikes, thence some marched to Wittenberge, others
into Franconia. The former were overthrown by Trucheser, and with the loss of
many thousands fell into the hands of their own, who made them pay with their
lives for their rebellion. The other after they had burned 200 castles, and
noble and gentlemen's houses innumerable, invaded the city of Wirthpurge, and
besieged the Castle, Jews Prince of Palatine overtook them twice at
Pfedershrine, with singular clemency calling off his men from slaughtering
them. But the Bishop of Trevers did not only animate his, but also went before
them in cruelty. Thence this fire crept into Lorraine, where Duke Anthony
quenched it with the slaughter of 1500 of them: the parts of the Rhine being
quieted, on a sudden all Thuringia and Hassia were in arms, one Munzer being
the ringleader who with Enthusiasmes and strange revelations, he pretended to
receive by night, stirred up the multitude to take up Arms against their
Prince and Gentry: one Piper furthering his madness, affirming, to have
received promise divine in a dream, which assured him of the victory. the
beginnings were succesfull, and the greatness of the prey made them Joyful:
When on a sudden the Prince of Hassia, Duke of Saxony, and Duke of Brunswicke,
made toward them with their Forces; met them on a Mountain near Frankhaufen,
where they had fenced themselves with wagons, and carts, as they conceived,
sufficiently. The Princes pitying the seduced multitude made proclamation of
pardon, on condition they should lay down their arms, and every one repair
home, delivering up the Authors of this rebellion. Munzer was now in danger of
life; Wherefore in a long oration, he confirms his vocation, and bitterly, as
it were with great zeal, inveighs against the Princes. Wherefore these
obstinate Rebels were set upon, who being terrified with the roaring of the
Canons, sang that vulgar hymn Come holy Ghost, eternal God, etc. and most of
them earnestly waited for help from above: Which not appearing any where, but
to the contrary death on all sides; then fled. Thousands were slain in the
pursuit, 300 were taken with their Prophet Munser. Who being examined and
charged with the blood of so many thousand; laughed, saying; they would have it
so. At his execution he acknowledged his fault; exhorted the Princes to
clemency, and the reading of the Scriptures, Especially the books of Kings, the
rest of the Prisoners received also their punishment. Ten years after 1535. the
same fire was Kindled again at Munster in Westphalia, by Bernhard Rothoman
Preacher of the Gospel there, who being seduced by John of Leyden a Tailor,
(whom at first he had opposed strongly) began to Preach and to press
Anabaptisme, a fained sanctity, public repentance, together with the tale of
Rebaptization, begat respect and authority to both; whose Accomplices and
followers of the City and Country about, allured with the rich prey, took the
Town house, where the Senators met about matters of their State: Depose the
Bishop Lord of that City and Country about it, turn out the Senate, and so were
Authors of a Civil war, putting to death all who refused to be Baptized by
them. Cnipperdolling acted the Prince, burned and pulled down Churches; to him
came Seraphicall or divinely inspired John Matthew, who commanded all gold and
silver, and books, especially the Bible to be brought forth under pain of
death, which two young She-prophets discovered. The money was put into the
treasury, but all the books were burnt publicly; at which when a Smith laughed,
he was forthwith cruelly put to death by the Prophet, who not long after was
himself slain, making a Sally upon the Bishops forces besieging the City. Him
succeeded John of Leyden who removed Cnipperdolling from his Office of
Magistracy, appointing him to be executioner or hangman; after this being
awaked out of a three days sleep, he appointed twelve Judges by revelation;
and polygamy to have as many wives as they pleased. These twelve governed so
long, till he had gotten into his hands by his Revelations all Kingly power,
promising no less to himself then the Monarchy of the World. Consecrated he
was, and solemnly inaugurated, receiving the imperial ensigns, Crown,
Scepter, Sword, and Robe. He sat in Judgment under a Tent at certain days,
having his Executioner Cnipperdolling still at his elbow, by instinct. All this
while the Enemies without were not idle; wherefore he prepared his forces to
sally out, inviting them to a Feast, and celebrating the Sacrament of the
Supper of the Lord, himself giving the brad, and his Executioner gave the Cup;
but remembering one in Prison in the midst of this action, he goes out and
beheads him with his own hand. Being returned he ordaines eight and twenty
Apostles to Preach the Gospel through the World. Who coming abroad were
apprehended and executed as Rebels for sowing discord. After a long siege,
famine daily increasing; one of his Queanes discovering her Husbands deceit,
lost her head. After he Prophesied concerning the Cities deliverance, but in
vain; the City betrayed by two was taken, Rothoman perished in the tumult; King
John and Cnipperdolling were apprehended, and torn in pieces with fiery tongs,
their carcases were put into Iron Cages, and so hanged from the Top of an high
Tower, for a warning to us, and succeeding Ages.

The Prayer.
BLessed Lord God, who have made all for the glory and honor of thy most holy
name, and the good of thy Church which is thy spouse, and dear one, under her
feet thou have put all, in an especial manner: but that which surpasses all
is the Committing to her the oracles of thy word, a favor not afforded to
every, no not to any Nation in that clearness as unto us. By this we cannot
but take notice of thy love to us, in bringing us into thy Church, and adding
us to them that shall be saved, Lord suffer us not to flatter our selves by
reason of the outward luster of thy favors into security: cause us to remember
thy process with Shilo, Jerusalem, and those famous Churches of Asia. Teach us
thankfulness whom thou have reserved for these times of so clear revelation;
Oh give us grace to consider the rock out of which we were hewn, our
forefathers the Gentiles, from whose loins we all descended: O let it be a
shame to us in the days of so clear light and revelation, to be found in the
ways of darkness, as Gentiles in the vanity of our mind, having our
cogitations darkened. Give us grace to make this our chiefest care to please
thee with a double diligence in the duties of our calling General and
particular, and so redeem our former time misspent. Grant we may acknowledge
thy special favors, thou have afforded unto us, before others, in bringing us
into thy Church, and unity of faith. O leave us not to levity or instability of
Judgment in matters of faith, let us not be hurried about, weathercock-like
with every blast of vain doctrine; establish our hearts that we may hold fast
the confession of faith, without any so much as wavering, and grow in grace,
and while means continue in the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.
Good Lord, open the eyes of those that are seduced, that they may see, give
them hearts to bewail and forsake schism, heresy, and infidelity, that so they
may come out of the snare of the devil, and fly from the wrath to come. Bless
our Governors supreme and subordinate; Be thou a Protector to him, and us
all: Grant they may use their power for the encouragement of those that do
well, and the terror of evil doers, that we under them may lead a peaceable
and quiet life, in all Godliness and honesty. And because that all who labor
for the settlement of Christ's Church meet with opposition; Satan and his
Instruments are tormented by them: Lord be thou pleased to enable and
strengthen them, make them men of another Spirit. Give them humble Spirits,
that thou may delight in them; and they that are now met in that Counsel of
the Nations, may not seek their own glory, but be content to stoop for any
service of thy Church and people, and think no office too mean. Give them
loving hearts, full of invention, how to glorify our God, and further the good
of his servants in spite of flesh and blood; that they may evidence to all the
World by the fruitfullnesse in their places, that they are good Christians,
living for others, and not only for themselves. Let thy Thummim and Vrim be
upon thy holy ones; Open, O Lord, a door of Utterance to every faithful
Minister, giving him inward faculty and fitness, all those gifts which may fit
him for thy Ministry, give him a mouth, and wisdom which all his adversaries,
which are increased shall not be able to gainsay, or withstand: none is fit of
himself, all sufficiency is of thee, who do make able Ministers. Open a door
to thy word to pass, remove all lets and obstacles of Satan, the World, and
the flesh; Give thy Gospel a free course, Open the heart of every hearer, that
thy word may enter; give him the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of the same; enlighten the eyes of their understanding, that they may
know the hope of their calling, and the riches of that glorious inheritance of
the Saints. Perfect the good work thou have begun in us, to the day of the Lord
Jesus, and confirm us blamless to the end. So be it.

FINIS.

