The FIRST LECTURE being an Introduction to the Military Architecture, or
Fortifications.

Read Publicly at Sr. Balthazar Gerbiers ACADEMY.

PSALM. 144. ver. 1. O de Davidis, Benedictus fit Jehova rupes mea; qui docet
manus meas praelium, digitos meos bellum.

Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.

Imprimatur,

Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti.



Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1650.

TO HIS Excellency, the Lord General THOMAS LORD FAIREFAX.
May it please your Excellency.
SHould I not proceed Methodically in the Dedication of the Lectures which are
read in my Academy, for Languages, Sciences, and Noble Exercises (as in all
affairs and Sciences, seems most requisite I should neither remain
blameless, nor be freed from Your Excellencies just censure, and Dis-favour,
if what concerns Military Architecture or Fortifications, should appear to
the Public View under any other notion then your high Protection. And
therefore it is, that I do now presume, to expose and submit to your
Excellency this first Lecture concerning Military Architecture, with intent to
proceed upon all the following parts, which as it makes its entrance by the
Properties belonging to a Governor of a Frontier Town, describing how that the
maine consequence is in the choice of the Person, so that he must neither be of
too greaters, (...) to my Academy, which (...) the glory of God, as well as the
Honor of this Nation, the Encouragement and Improvement of all Lovers of
Virtue, are interested. Cannot but promise to it self, that so great and
eminent a person (as Your self) will not only countenance and promote the
same, for the completing of all those who practice in Wars, but also for the
benefit of all such as strive to be endowed with any other laudable Virtues.
Such a Public good, serving for example to (strangers,) and not to boast, that
they only possess, or are capable of those qualities, when the English Nation
is every whit as able in body and mind as they can be. And this being Truth, I
shall with the more confidence endeavor to continue in this undertaking, on
the hopes that truth will make good what is and ever shall be my aim, by the
settlement of such an Academy; so that your Excellency may please to take to
Your self the due Title, not only of its Mars, but of its Mecenas, since all
the Virtues in Your Excellency so fitly occurring, make you both in general,
and in particular, a true Lover of all what is honorable, generous, useful,
and necessary: And as my self to remain

Your Excellencies most humble and most obedient Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.
From the Academy this 28 of December. 1649.

THE FIRST LECTURE TOUCHING FORTIFICATIONS Read Publicly at Sir Balthazar
Gerbiers Academy: The Introduction
AS by the holy Writ it appears that God, who is the Creator of Heaven and
Earth is likewise termed the Lord of Hoasts, and Battles, so the Royal Prophet
David sought him, that he might teach his hands to war, and his fingers to
fight. God permits men to find out inventions, and engines to wage war
withal: And that ever since Caine brake the league of amity and brotherhood
with Abell.

Experience is only gotten by length of time, and not by birth, nor courage:
For if so be the first Rabins were well grounded in what they affirm of Caines
death, Lamech slew him with an Arrow, which time had taught men to make.

The several pretenses of waging War are various: Nature warrants the first,
which is Selfe-defence; Religion the second, Laws and Liberties the third.

The Germans rose against the Romans, for the defense of their Liberty; the
Thebans against Alexander; Charlemaine for Religion, warred on the Saxons for
the space of thirty and three years; Pippin King of France took up Arms
against Adolph King of Lombeardy for the point of Religion: King Lewis the
second, for Pope John the third: Geffery of Bullon for Religion warred on the
Turk. But it would require too long a discourse to insist on the rediculous
slight pretenses which have been made use of to wage War: That between the
Suisses, and the Earl of Burgandy, proceeded from the taking away of a Cart
load of Skins, which the Lord of Romond took from a Suisse

Alcibiades his ambition was but a pretense to persuade the Athenians for to
attach Sicilly. Scilla and Marias only warred out of an ambition to reign: And
as Cyrus and Alexander, so did Caesar and Pompey. But Theseus he purged the
land of Robbers, and Hercules of Monsters.

Abominable warriors there have been, who made their Wars detestable (as the
Switsers did in the Romans time; when they wasted the land by fiering) and the
Campanians were no less to be abhorred, when Agatotles fighting in Cicilly
being entered Messina, under pretense of friendship, he caused the greatest part
of the Citizens to be put to death, only to get their means. Nor was it less
odious in Hanniball, when after he had given his word to Gerion a Town near
Misena, that afterward he put all the Inhabitants to the Sword.

My glory said a great Captain is to vanquish, and to pardon. As it is one of
the most glorious and necessariest parts of a great Captain to have the like
hands, as the Italian famous Poet Marino describes those of Emanuel Duke of
Savoy to have been: Mani che si stringianno al Ferro, e si oprano al Oro, Hands
that cling to the Iron, and open unto the gold.

Let a Soldier fight well, and let the Generals hand distribute gold, and
reward. Let me have gold said a Captain to King Phillip the second, and no
fortress shall hinder me its entrance. All such places into the which an Ass
laden with gold can enter, are pregnable said Phillip King of Macedone.

But Marcus Curtius his ambition was to command those that had gold, for
thereby he commanded all, and such a General, or Commander, is like a Lion
that commands an Army of Stagges, since nothing runs swifter then gold. Yet
better is it, said a great Captain, to have an Army of Stagges commanded by a
Lion, then an Army of Lions commanded by a Stagge.

But before we enter into the field, display colors, and draw forth our
Armies: as we find God to be the Lord of Hoasts and Battles, preservation,
the first law of Man; the defense of Religion, the next strong tie; Laws and
Liberties the third grand interest and greatest concerment of Nations. Let us
then take along with us the prescriptions of the Scripture concerning wars,
Deuteronomy. 20.11,12. When thou come nigh a City to fight against it, then
proclaim a peace unto it, and it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace,
and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that are found
therein shall be tributary unto thee, and they shall serve thee: But if they
will make war against thee, then thou shall besiege it. Neither was this
Commandment without a restriction, as we read in the 19. v. of the said
Chapter of Deuteronomy. When thou shall besiege a City a long time, in making war
against it, for to take it; Thou shall not destroy the Trees thereof by forcing
an Axe against them, for thou may eat of them, and thou shall not cut them
down, for the tree of the Field is man's life, to employ them in the siege;
only the trees which thou know that they be not Trees for meat, those thou
shall destroy, and cut them down.

Thus duty fitly appearing in the Front, its most proper to begin with that
duty proper to those, who are to command both in the Field, and within the
Towns; and so proceeding with the duty of those that are to be commanded: We
shall afterward treat of all the particulars appertaining to the Military
Architecture, or Fortifications; as likewise of the Divisions of the several
parts belonging unto the same. Of the explaining of such terms and words as
are proper to Fortification; of the maxims or general rules to be observed in
Fortifications, what we are to consider before we begin to Fortify; of the
several seats, or scituations of places, of the qualities, and properties of
the soil: and lastly, how to Flank, and secure ones self.

All which consisting in demonstrations, it will be necessary to proceed with
the names and terms proper in Fortifying, as well in the Scenography, as
Orthography; The manner to find out the Angles necessary in all Fortresses,
and that by four several ways, according to the four most famous Authors
that have written on that Subject; to wit, Merolois, Fritach, Errard, and
Deville.

How to divide a circumference, and therein to mark the several Polygones of
all regular figures: The manner how to stake out, or trace the principal parts
as well within, as without any place; and so forth: For that it will avail but
little to know what is to be don, when the maine is unknown, and the way how to
perform it, which ought to be learned by any man who desires to be a perfect
Soldier both for his honor and use; for as ignorance is despicable, so its
prejudicial: Let not any Soldier then persuade himself, that it can any
ways suffice him to go but just as far as the pronunciation of the Alphabet;
for that it will avail them no more, when they shall come to be put to the
practical part, then it will to any Auditory when they shall only be told,
what follows, viz.

That the Orthography, or Purfile of a Fortress, is a section, or a
perpendicular line, running eaven with the Horizon, and that which represents
unto our view the several parts of a Fortress.

That the Scenography, it an explaining of the Names and Terms properly used
in the Art of Fortifying.

That a walled place, where store of houses are seated together, whose
inhabitants are governed by a Civil Magistrate, may properly be termed a Town.

That a Fort, is a place, environed with Motes, Ramparts, and with Bulwarks,
wherein a few Men, may defend themselves against a greater number, and the
assault of many.

That a Cittadell is a Fortress of four, five, six, or more Bastions, which
is joined to a Town for to command, and keep it in awe.

That a Castle is an ancient kind of building, with several Towers or
Turrets, and a Mote or Ditch about it, either dry, or full of water.

That the Hold is the Block-house, or Redout in a Castle, unto which usually
the last Retreat is made.

That a place of Arms, is an empty space within the walls, whereunto the
principal streets do lead, and where the Soldiers do assemble to receive
orders for the Guards or any other Commands, and likewise there to be exercised.

That a peculiar place of Arms, is a certain space near unto every Bastion,
or at the foot of the Rampart whither the Soldiers are sent from the maine
guard, to repair unto their several Posts, as well to relieve those on the
Guards, as to refresh, and relieve them that fight.

That the Rampart is an elevated earth, which incloses the place, and is
capable to resist the Canon shot.

That a Panapet, is a bank of Earth raised on the Rampart, behind which the
Soldiers may give fire in safety.

That the Banquet, or Foot-banke, is a little height of Earth, on which the
Soldiers stand when they give fire.

That the Maine breadth, or walk, is that part of the Rampart which is made
eaven, and sollid, for the recoil of the Cannon, and on which the Soldiers
march in a body.

That the way for the Rounds, or false bray, is the space between the Rampart,
and the List or Berme, where an Enemy is to be resisted when he draws near the
Town, and when the shot from the Rampart can do no more execution on the
Assailants. That its Panapet, is like to that of the main Rampart, with its
Foot-banke.

That the Listor Berme, is the support of the False-bray, next adjoining to the
Mote. That the Mote or Ditch, is an empty depth, or full of water, environing
the Town, or Fortress. That the little Ditch or Cave, is a small overture in
the midst of the great Mote, deeper then the said Mote.

That the Conidor, or covered way, is raised on the Counterscarp, and secured
by its Panapet, its foot-bank and the sloape. That its Panapet is the outmost
Breast-work beyond the Mote; and that it termineth it self, slantingly, or
shelvingly with the plain Field.

That Cavalliers or Platformes, are raised eminencies, or rather naturallones,
either on the Curtain or Bulwarks, over-topping the rest of the works as a
Horseman, may be said to do one on foot.

That Half-Moons are small Works advanced toward the Fields, and are usually
placed before the points of the Bastions for their re-inforcement, having small
Flanks.

That a Ravelin is a piece of Fortification consisting only of two Faces,
usually placed in the Mote, before the Curtains, and Gates.

That Flatformes are all kind of Fortifications built on outward Angles.

That Horn works, are advanced toward the Fields, having half Bastions at
their heads, and are usually placed on the weakest parts of a Fortress, to
hinder and retard the approaches of an Enemy toward the maine Works of the
place.

That Crown works are advanced into the Fields, much like the Horn works,
broad before, and narrow behind, with one, two, or more Bastions, in the
midst, and on each side a half Bastion; and they are placed on such Eminencies
as chance to overtop any Fortress. That Tenalies are much like Horn-works,
save that they have no Bulwarks. That Star Sconces, have only flanking sides,
either of four, five, or six Angles, and derive their name from the
resemblance of a Star, being usually placed on the Trenches.

That Redouts are little square works, placed here and there in Trenches and
approaches, for the strengthening of them, and are also sometimes advanced on
the advenues in the Fields.

That Trenches are Works containing and enclosing the whole Camp, by a
continued line, called the line of Circumvalation: As also they serve to
environ and fortify the whole Army, or any part thereof.

That approaches are lanes dug through the Earth, by the which an assailant
may with security advance unto a Fortress, without being endangered by the
Enemies shot.

That Counter approaches are such like lines which the besieged make, to cross
and interrupt by their Sallyes the Enemies approaches.

That a Gallery, is a covered way made over the Mote, it being filled with
Bavens, and Earth, whereon Gabents are placed at certain distances to uphold
the Gallery; which being lined on the sides with good Oken Planks, and likewise
boarded on the top, is secured from the Enemies shot, and Grenades, and
thereby the Soldiers are safely conducted over the Mote, to storm a breach,
or for the Miners to open a Mine.

That a breach is a Rupture, which either by Canon shot, or by the springing of
a Mine, is made in some one part of the Bulwark or Curtain, and by the which
the assailants may enter the Fortress.

That a Mine is a Trench or secret hidden Alley, sunck under the face of a
Bastion, Curtain, or any outworke, wherein a Chamber being made, and powder
placed, it serves to ruin and blow up an enemies work, and so to facilitate an
entrance, Which art of undermining has been made use of both in the Greeks and
Romans time.

That Gabions are defenses made of Baskets, filled with earth, and they are of
several heights, and thicknesses, as to resist Cannon shot on batteries,
musket shot in approaches, or Sconces.

That there are other Countermines or Cavernes, Vaulted lanes, or Allies,
called Trenches, which are usually made under the foot bancke, running along
the rampart, with many vents, reaching from the bottom to the top of the
Rampart, for to hinder and break the force of the powder, and also to swallow
up the ruins of the Mine, which otherwise would render the breach more large,
and its access more easy.

That re-Intrenchments are fresh works, made to defend the ruined rampart,
being separated from the same within the place, and such like are to be
provided in time, to sustain an enemies assault, and make good the place, till
the capitulations can be made.

That all eminencies or places commanding each other in a Fortress, are only
heights of nine foot, or there abouts, over-topping the rest of the works,
that these eminencies may be made either simple or composed, steep and
precipitated, flanking the breach, either in front, sidewayes, or backwards.

That Candlestickes, or blindes, are high pieces of timber stakes, which serve
to uphold either branches of Trees, Rice bushes or Planks, and by the which,
blinds are made to hinder the enemies viewing or discovering of the Assailants,
Approaches, or Sappings.

That Pallisadoes are a defense of high stakes of Timber, set together like
pales, shod on the top with Iron forked heads, which are for the most part
placed on the outsides of the Fortress, as also at the foot of the Curtains,
Rampart, and oftentimes of the levelled outworke, or Esplanade, some two or
three foot distant from the Conidor or covered way.

That Baracadoes on Turn-Pikes are to be bodies of trees cut in several
squares; and are fortified with several staves of an half Pikes length shod
with Iron, which are passed through the said bodies of trees, facing to all
sides on which they were severally placed, as on passages, advenues, or
breaches, both for to hinder the advance of Horse or foot

That there is also another kind of defense, or Pallisadoe, called a Ruff,
consisting of wooden stakes, shod with Iron pegges, and that they are placed
sloaping wise, on the middle height of the faces of any Fortress, as also on
the out-workes.

That these defenses are very necessary to discover an Enemies intended
surprise, or sudden attalke, as also to hinder any Soldiers from running out
of the place, or stealing away by night.

And therefore to proceed methodically, we shall begin with the Governor of a
place, and with those qualities which he ought to possess.

Of the Governor.
AS the Governor in a place, represents either the State or the Sovereign, so
of his Fidelity, Diligence, and Courage, depends questionless the preservation
of the Inhabitants of the land, as well as of the place, and it is therefore
one of the most importantest charges to a State, for that in effect the
preservation of a shire, nay, of the whole Country is often concerned in that
of one particular Town, as the loss of such places prove oftentimes no less
prejudiciable then that of an Army: After a battle is fought men may be
rallied, and an Army may be made up again, by a retreat unto an adjacent
strong place, which when once fallen into the possession of an enemy, is
neither so easy, nor so soon recovered again, therefore great care must be
taken in the election of Governors, for such places of importance: And that a
State may not be deceived, their persons must be well known to be men of
godliness, and that they may possess as much as possible can be, all the most
necessary qualities requisite in a Governor.

Men of two great power and credit must not be put into strong frontier Towns,
for that a Sovereign or a State would otherwise be constrained to yield unto
them in all that they may demand, for if they should but seem to displease
them, its then to be feared that on the least occasion, suspicion, or
discontent; they would be apt to revolt.

Those of a low rank, except they have some notable virtue which makes them
commendable, as their long since known honesty, and tried fidelity, are worse
then the former; for that being men who have little to loose, are not to be
relied on in that they may be soon wrought upon by the proffers of an enemy.

Those of a mean or indifferent condition between both are the fittest for
such a trust, since they are not subject to the foresaid faults; being not
powerful enough to make a party for to revolt, and though they should do so,
yet can they not make their party good, besides that, diverse considerations
will hinder them to render themselves to an Enemy: having their friends, their
kindred, their family, their means, their houses, in regard of which they
will not so soon venture to loose all those certainties, for a doubtful hope.
When they must (by the betraying that trust reposed in them) submit themselves
to the mercy of an Enemy, who is apt enough to embrace that treason which
brings him profit, and honor, but ever dispiseth, nay hates the Traitor.

King Henry the fourth of France, among many great actions, is to be remembered
eternally in this particular, that he sent notice to the Duke of Joyeuse of a
Traitor, who came to the said King with an offer to kill that Duke, and many
such like examples may be alleged to confirm that Traitors are always to be
had in abomination.

And it is altogether necessary to consider how those persons, who are to be
chosen for Governors, have lived, Nature cannot be forced, for a long time
will scarce serve to discover men's inclinations, and those who have all their
life time lived honorably, will hardly commit a base action, when they shall be
put into such a place of trust; but such as are of an ill disposition will soon
fall into relapses, and shake off that constraint which made them to disguise
their vices: Nature always comes to its self, neither can dissimulations last
long.

Such as have always approved themselves true, and who have had several
employments whereby they have given a testimony of themselves, are to be
preferred unto all others. And many have been found, who at first could so well
counterfeit their humors as they have made themselves to be esteemed brave
men, and by their impudence in forging lies, have obtained the Government of
most important places, which they have most miserably lost so soon as they
were set upon, and though their heads were taken off, yet the Towns were not
thereby re-gained.

And if any Government be conferred by way of reward for services done by aged
men, its not fit to put them into Frontier Towns, for that instead of
procuring rest unto them, they would be put unto turmoyles and labors.

They must be men of vigor, and such as may bestirre themselves, and are able
to endure hardness, pains, and take care both for the preservation of the
place, and of the land, and for its defense in case it be attacht: He that
will acquit himself well of this charge, ought not to sleep in the nights,
but must keep both the Soldiers and the Inhabitants in a perpetual fear,
he must take a continual care of them, and often visit the Walls and Rounds.

Those that are old, are fittest for such places as are in the maine body of
the Land, wherein the cares and pains are not so requisite.

And besides these natural qualities they ought to have others, partly
acquired by study, and partly by exercise and experience, they ought above all
things to know their charge and duty, for its altogether absurd, to give
Government to such persons as know not what they are to govern, and how they
are to command, neither is it then time to learn, since it proves of too
dangerous a consequence, for that the faults then committed are of too great
consequence, and cannot be redrest.

Neither will it justify, that they have read or heard say: they must have
seen diverse sieges, and especially they must have seen how Towns are set
upon, whereupon they will have discovered and observed both the offense and
defense of places, for that such a one who has not been in the like occasions,
finds himself pusled, and knows not what to resolve unto, for that all events
surprise him, and all that an enemy does affrightens him, a potent Army that
summons him, so many Canons that incessantly batters him, Trenches so suddenly
coming upon him (at least the first) all which makes him apprehend, that his
Town is set upon by some other way then ordinary, and that its impossible to
hold out against such on-sets: Then they easily believe they have done their
duty, and that they may render themselves up, when they ought but to begin to
defend themselves in good earnest.

To the contrary, a man that has seen diverse sieges persuades himself, that
he shall in a little space see the great part of that Army perish, and all the
continual shooting of the enemies Canon, can do him but little harm, that
the first works are easily advanced, and so never is astonished at any event,
for that he well knows what an Enemy can do, and in case any thing should
happen contrary to his expectation, yet his expereince and judgment affords
him means to remedy the same. He well knows how the Enemy must advance, what
they can attempt, and how he can oppose them, as also to what extremity or
pass he ought, or can hold out, so that he never yields until he has done
all what a man of honor is capable of.

Neither shall we need to speak of courage, since to tell you, that a man
pretending to a Government ought to be courageous, would be as frivolous as to
say, that a Soldier ought to have a Sword, for that the one and the other
ought to be inseparable, so when one is said to be a Governor, its to be
supposed that he is courageous, and consequently free from the two vices which
are the two extremes of that virtue.

Those that are to be (...) handed, and who must only execute, can never have
too much courage, and the excess thereof is very good in them, but such as
have all the command, and are alone, must not be presumptuous, especially those
who defend a place: For if they go rashly to work, and if they make daily
sallies, without taking the advantages both of time and place, and if they
continually hazard themselves, they will soon cause the loss not only of
their best Soldiers, but of themselves, and so consequently the place will be
taken.

They must consider that they are constituted in the place, for to keep it, and
to defend it as long as they can, so that if they chance to occasion the loss
thereof, either out of a vanity, to manifest that they fear nothing; or on the
contrary by too much timerousnesse, they are then equally guilty, both in the
one, and in the other particular, and so the State or the Sovereign, chances
to lose the place by either.

A Governor then ought to be prudent, of an undaunted mind, who starts at
nothing; who gives courage to others; who when its requisite for him, to prove
a bold man, must at the same time remember his own preservation, as well as
that of the place, to defend it as long as he can, and in case will perish in
the same, rather then survive its loss, That it be at the last onset, and
utmost resistance.

What Vices a Governor ought to shun.
There are certain Vices of which all honest men ought to be free:
Ungodliness the first, since those cannot expect Gods assistance, who do not
acknowledge him, and that place is guarded in vain, if God do not guard the
same.

Covetousness in a Gove^our is unsupportable, for that he will rack the
Country, he will not pay his Soldiers, he will acquire the hatred of the
inhabitants and so be odious to all men, and be abandoned of all his Garrison,
and moreover such a one is likewise subject to be corrupted.

Drunkenness is no less to be abhorred, for that a drunken man is void of
reason, and if in that moment a place should be set upon, it must be lost of
necessity for want of Orders, besides that, all other do easily follow his
example; and so give an Enemy just cause to watch for, and take their advantage
at their usual times of Meriments; for that no place ought to be entrusted to
a man that cannot conserve himself.

A Governor ought to be versed in the Military Laws, for to order, and punish
according to the Soldiers misdemeanour; he ought likewise to understand the
Civil Law to order all fit establishments, and to cause them to be observed;
as likewise to decide such differences as may chance to arise between the
Soldiers themselves; or between the Soldiers, and the Inhabitants.

The first, its true, are ready framed; to that its only needful to reform
them according to the exegency of times, and occasions; and for the other, a
man may remit himself to Jurists, since neither the one, nor the other do
properly belong to the preservation, or defense of the place.

A Governor ought to esteem his place as the most dearest thing in the world
to him, and whereon his honor, and life depends: And at his entrance therein,
he ought to represent unto himself, that he deserves not to live after its
loss, so that he ought to have as much care of it, as of his own preservation;
and he is bound in duty continually to think on the bettering of his place,
how it may be best guarded, best provided; and to think in peaceful times,
what he might stand in need of when the Wars should be renewed, and so to
provide for all; for that no man of sense, or reason will leave any thing at a
venture; nor ever say, who would have thought this, or that.

The greatest honor for a Governor.
To conclude, I shall say, that there is no place in the Wars, wherein more
honor is to be gotten, then in a Governor, when he is set upon, and defends
himself well in a good place. For that in Combats, Fortune has the greatest
share; parties are often equal, the courses are not regular; so he that
besieges has always a divided command, for that diverse onsets are to be
made, which are to be performed by sundry Commanders; and it is to be
presupposed that the besieger comes with sufficient forces to take the place.

And finally, that all besieged places must be taken; so that he that takes it
not, deserves more blame, then honor, when he shall have taken it. For that
the one is directly contrary to that which was expected, and supposes a
default; and the other was a thing which was sure to come to pass.

The great advantages in standing out a Siege.
Now he that defends a place; first he is alone in power, and all what he does,
is attributed directly unto him, be it well or ill done; the defense depends of
his person, and of his carriage, and but very little of Fortune; so that if he
defends himself in such a manner, as he constrains his enemies to raise the
siege, it must needs be admirable; since it was against the opinion of all men,
in that he held longer then it was expected he could; all which is attributed
unto the person that commands in the place.

Lastly, it may truly be said, that he who stands out a Siege, gets more
honor, then he that wins a Battle; for that by his gallant resisting, he
destroys an Enemies Army, saves his own men and place, and secures the State,
etc.

In the next ensuing Lectures on the Military Art, there shall be treated, of
that which a Governor ought to do at his entrance into a place where he is to
command. Of the orders he is to give concerning the Civil Government, unto
what duties the Soldiers are to be kept; his forecast to discover the
disposition of his Soldiers, and their Officers.

What number of men he ought to have; how they are to be armed, and what spare
Arms he ought to be furnished with, what care he ought to have for the
preservation of his spare Arms. Of the necessary Ammunitions of War, as well as
those of Victuals, and the like.

How he may discover the defects of his places. What he ought to know of
Fortifications, and wherein its perfection does consist.

Of its construction, and its defensive Lines; and consequently on all the
necessary parts thereof; all which by the grace of God, shall be declared at
large.

So that for the present, we will close this with a short Meditation fit for
all good Christians; That if so be it be necessary, to have so many qualities,
and to take so much care for the preservation of a small compass and parcel
of clay, loam, and of a few houses within the circumference of a Wall or
Bulwark: What care ought we then to have (but mere dust and ashes) for the
preservation of our souls, placed in an habitation, continually beset by an
Army, compassed by legions of Princes of the Air, by Spirits of darkness and
destruction, who are never to be tired, who need neither to borrow or buy any
Victuals, for their subsistence, who have numberless engines at hand, who
have placed their Petards and murdering pieces at all the gates of our Senses,
and never run any danger themselves of being surprised, though they have
millions of deceits, to ensnare the only two Sentinels of our body, our Eyes,
by giving a world of false alarm; To surprise our Hearing; and who at the very
first, strike at the maine Fortress, the Heart, and the Mind of Men: And if
so be the gaining of all the world, be nothing, in comparison unto the loss of
one soul; O what a precious task must the preservation of that Soul be against
the grand and common Enemy to mankind; and what an honor is the preserving
thereof! as it ought to be Man's sole bliss; who can never miscarry therein, so
long as he fixes on his strong Tower, and Fortress of defense; and that he
does continually watch, pray, and manfully fight the good combat of Faith;
hereby the greatest honor is to be acquired, for that by so doing, the grand
Enemy will be forced to break up his siege, and retire.

It was the servent, zealous, and most pious prayers of the Royal Prophet
David, That Gods enemies might be confounded and be put to flight; And what
can we desire more, then that by his unspeakable mercies (we that are the
precious gems for the which Christ Jesus has spilt his most precious blood)
have made the grand Enemy of our souls to retire, etc.

The end of the first Lecture of FORTIFICATION

