A CENSURE UPON Lilly's Grammar: Wherein, besides a DISCOURSE Of the Reason of
EDUCATION; ARE SHOWN, The Contradictions, Falsities and false words, Omissions,
Repetitions, superfluous Rules, and misplaced words in our Grammar.

By R. G. formerly of the Free School in New Castle.

Obest plerumque iis qui discere volunt, autoritas eorum qui se docere
profitentur. Cic.

Sapientiam sibi adimunt, qui sine ullo judicio inventa majorum probant.
Lactant.

London, Printed by B. W. for George* Downs, at the three Flower de Luces over
against S. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street. 1684.

A Catalogue of those Authors and Grammarians which I have perused for
composing this Censure and Epitome of Lilly.
AUTHORS.
ANgelus Politianus. Ausonius. Aurelius Victor. Boethius de Consolatione. Cato
de* re rustica. Catullus. Caesar, with A. Hirtius. Cicero. Claudian's Epig.
Columella. Cornelius Celsus de Medicina. Cornelius Nepos. Cornelius Tacitus.
Curtius. Eutropius. Florus. Fulgentius de prisco Sermon. Gellius Noct. Attic.
Horace. Jornandus. Isidorus Originum. Julius Exuper. Justin. Juvenal. Lactantii
Instit. Lipsius. Livy. Lucan. Lucretius. Macrobius. Martial's Epig. Marcellus
de propriet. Sermon. Osorius de gloria, etc. Ovid. Paterculus. Palladius de re
rust. Pompeius Festus. Petrarcha de remed. fortunae. Plautus. Persius. Pliny's
Not. Hist. Pliny's Ep. Propertius. Quintilian. Rufus Festus. Salust. Suetonius.
Seneca the Philosopher. Seneca the Poet. Terence. Tibullus. Valerius Flaccus.
Valerius Maximus Valerius Probus de notis Romans Varro de lingua lat. Varro de re
rustica. Vitruvius. Virgil.
GRAMMARIANS.
ALvarus. Despauterius. Farnaby. Johnson's Sciagraphia. Linacrus. Oxon. Notes.
Vossius; and several others.
To the Right Worshipful and Worshipful Aldermen Nicholas Fenwick, Esquire May. Sir
Rob. Shaftoe, Knight. Record. Sir Ralph Carr, Knight. Sir Ralph Jennison, Knight. Sir
Nathanae Johnson, Knight. Henry Brabant, Esquire Timothy Davison, Esquire Matthew
Jeffreyson, Esquire George Morton, Esquire Timothy Robson, Esquire William Blacket, Esquire
William Aubonee, Esquire Nicholas Ridley, Esquire Sheriff.
And to the rest of the Common Council of the Town and County of New Castle
upon Tine.
SIRS,
THE deep obligation you have laid me under, in the time of my sickness, does
not a little move me, to take the first occasion wherein to acknowledge my self
indebted unto you.

What I present to your Worships, is a strict survey of Lilly's Grammar, which
has bin viewed by several judicious persons and Masters of Free-Schools; and
not without their good liking: And I doubt not, but it will giv satisfaction
also to you my Worthy and learned Patrons, who are able to judge in the matter,
and of competency to put a decision to the point: for, did Athens flourish more
with men of learning, than does New Castle? what City in the Land givs like
encouragement thereto, and carries on her affairs with such unanimity and
prudence.

I beseech you then allow it the shadow of your wing, and accept this
acknowledgement of my gratitude, as a testimony how great my desires are, to
manifest that I am unfeignedly,

SIRS, Your most obliged, humble and very grateful Servant, R. G.
Aug. 4. 83.
A Copy of a Letter written to a Master of a Free School, and of thirty six
years standing.
SIR,
HAving finished my Censure and Epitome of Lilly, which I told you of some time
since: I now send them you, desiring that what oversights you meet with
therein, may be impartially corrected.

None can say, I have bin severe upon him; having used less aloes than honey;
and don but as others before me: Strabo Nulla salis mica est, nec guttula
fellis in illa.
found fault with Eratosthenes; Galen with Thessalus; and what School of
Philosophy, is not at daggers-drawing with those who went before? yea, Horace
sais, Grammatici certant -- and why not I with Lilly? so with Heraclitus we may
say, Omnia secundum litem fieri; and as Seneca observes; Tota hujus mundi
concordia, ex discordibus constat. This then Not. quaest. l. 7.
was my task, by the help of those Authors prefixed, to expunge what has not
bin of use among the Ancients, or rather contrary thereunto: and to show what
latitude the Romans took in writing: for Apud nos nulla magis haberi verba and
usit ata debent, and recepta; quam quae de veteribus illis magnorum Authorum
thesauris proferantur.

Macrobius tells us plainly, Veteres indulsisse copiae per varietatem: as when
they said, Exanimos and exanimes; Saturnalium and Saturnaliorum: and that Homo
magna eloquentia is neither full nor perfect, but so taken: Quae custodiam
attinent. Val. Max. Quod ad sordes attinuerat, id. Inter coenam. id. Inter
coenandum. M. Sen. Hortor amare. Cic. for ut ament. Consilium coepisse hominum
fortunas evertere. id. for evertendi. It visere. Ter. for visitatum. Charidemum
dicere audistis. Cic: for dicentem. Viginti millium, and centum millia. Corn.
Nepos.

After perusal, I pray return them stamped with your learned pen, which will,
not a little, add credit and authority to them, and oblige me to be,

Sir, Your real Friend and Servant.

The Answer.
SIR,
I Have perused your Censure and Grammar, and cannot but approv of that
undertaking, which tends both to a quicker acquiring all necessary Grammar-
rules, and givs us an account of that liberty the Romans did, and therefore we
may use.

As for the first, experience shows that too many years are spent in learning
Lilly; even though the Master be industrious and skilful; and the Scholar apt
and teachable: which puts me in mind of the complaints of many bemoaning, that
by neglect, after leaving the School, they had almost lost all their Latin:
whom I advised to begin with their Grammar and get it by heart; but they
replied it was a task insuperable: and doubtless the repeted necessary rules,
with others, wholly useless, greatly burdens the Scholars memory, which your
Epitome has cured.

Now as for the second, even modern Writers, do not confine themselves to
Lilly' s rules; but take a greater latitude, as the old have don; of which you
have given account at large, and that, out of the Authors themselves: so that the
case is clear: for, came not rules at first from reading?

One thing I cannot approv, namely, that Laus and Vituperium -- should be
expunged; for the Genitiv case, the latter of two Substantivs, is, as it were,
possessor of the former: thus, Facundia Ciceronis, shows that Cicero possesses
his Eloquence; but Puer boni ingenii, notes that the child possesses the wit.
So that in this I cannot accord with you.

As for your Grammar, the undertaking is ingenious, and stored with many right
good observations; as the Learned at Cambridge have Uncharacterized it to you: and
sure it is the most useful way in writing, to comprehend multum in parvo, and
most helpful to the learner. Thus you have the opinion of,

Sir, Your Friend and Servant.

A CENSURE UPON LILLY'S Grammar.
1. LET it not seem strange to any that I pass a Censure upon Lilly, while I
teach him; his method, indeed, is more distinct than others: but the world
knows, his rules are faulty: and I cannot conceiv it injustice, either to
examine or refute, the doctrine, of our predecessors: for pecudum more non
ducimur, sais Lactantius. And thus in our own profession, did Hippocrates,
above 2000 years ago; and Galen no less the like, who yet were as little
infallible as they. Which seeing it falls in my way, take this following for a
digression.

2. Celsus De Med. l. 3. c. 4.
telling that Hippocrates accounts, if a Fever abate on an other day than
Critical, a relapse was wont to return: sais, Asclepiades did justly repudiate
it as vain, etc. and a little below, adds that he keeps not to his purpose:
thus gravely reproving him for his fancied critical days. After the same manner
Helmont Tract. de Temp.
speaks plainly, that he alwais observed with diligence, that there is never
any crisis at all, where the Physician being Master of his Art knows how to
take away the diseas before the usual time: and elsewhere De Feb. c. 11.
sais; It is the part of a good and faithful Physician not to giv any regard to
crises: but rather to prevent them: For nature never intends a crisis, but when
she is left to shift for her self. Shall I tell you how his 24 Aph. is
contradicted in the second Book Aph. 29. The 23d in the second Book by the
19th. And see how little truth is in Aph. 31. l. 5. Thus with Sanctorius
Method. vitand. error.
I do not account them of such verity as men cry them up to be: but many of
them rather, as Cicero expresses it, Vix d^gna lucubratione anicularum: than to
be of the monument of Physic: How are they then aeternae veritatis? Yea Galen
himself, sticks not to contradict Hippocrates about Eunuchs having the Gout,
and growing bald: Whereat Sen. Ep. 95. breaks forth, saying; What a wonder is
it, that the greatest of Physicians should be taken in a lie? Nor is Galen less
without his failings; whose 2000 pulses (as Dr. Primrose computes them) are
more intelligibly known by their strength, greatness, frequence; with the
contraries, and means of those extreems Sylvii prax. med. l. 1, c. 26.
. And were it not too tedious, I could show ten of his for one of Lillies
contradictions. Then they who deify either, must needs be but children in the
art: And if, as for certain they have erred, and speak contrary to our senses,
why should we not reject them? and so we may do with Lilly; for the way to
redeem our art is (as my L. Bacon Novum Organ. Aph. 31.
has it) to attempt an instauration ab imis fundamentis, from the very
foundation: and first to take of that superstitious reverence, which has bin so
long paid to the antiquated Masters of the profession. In which undertaking, if
I happen to mistake, consider, that even the Roman Orator confesses himself
incident Difficile est, in longa oratione non aliquando it a dicere, ut sibi
ipse non conveniat. Brutus.
thereunto: and as Lactantius Institut. l. 1. c. 5.
observes, Aristotle though styled the Prince of Philosophers, yet saves others
the pains to refute him, and contradicts himself: l. 2. c. 9.
Nec enim ab ullo poterit Cicero, quam a Cicerone vehementius refutari. But to
return.

3. The complaint of our Countries slow instructing Youth, in the Latin tongue,
is not without cause: which though it be a great ornament in a Gent. and such
an accomplishment, as alone will man him abroad; yet is, I confess, purchased
at an over high rate. But the fault may be as well in the Scholar, as in the
Master: the duty of the latter, is easily discharged, seeing advice and
instruction, may sooner be given and enjoind, than followd and obeyed: the work
and task of the former (I mean of the Scholar) may be retarded, and like
Aristotl's pons asinorum, made unattainable; I mean where the Boy has a genial
indisposition, and weak capacity; and withal affects not his Book: It is as
hard a matter for a Master to penetrate that thick skull, as for a Boat to row
against tide: If he com to some smatterings, they shall be as impertinent
Laudamus verba been rebus accommodata. Quintil.
as Plin. Ep. 14. l. 2.
Pliny's Attilius; or as hald as an Augean stable is impure. We need not revive
Origen's or Philo's allegory, of singeing his tonguesend, with an hot Iron,
Moses like, to make him a stammerer: Ex quovis ligna non fit Mercurius; he is
not fit (...).
timber for polishing: such should be remanded to the place from whence they
came, with a true account of their dullness, ere they be besotted by severe
correction Caedi discentes minime velim, quia deforme atque servile est: quod
si cui tam est men's illiberalis, ut objurgatione non corrigatur, is etiam ad
plag as, ut. pessima quaeque mancipia durabitur. Quintil. Institut. l. 1. c. 3.
. For there are, not only, particular Boys; but whole Nations indisposed for
learning, whereunto is required, not only education, but a pregnant Minerva,
and teeming constitution. For the wisdom of God, has divided the genius of
men, according to the different affairs of the world: and varied their
inclinations, according to the variety of actions, to be performed therein;
which they who consider not; rudely rushing, upon professions and ways of life,
unequal to their natures; dishonor not only themselves, and their sunctions;
but pervert the harmony of the whole world. Brown's Enquiry into vulgar errors.
For if the world went on, as God has ordained it; and were every one
employed, in points concordant to their natures; Professions, arts and Kingdoms
would rise up of themselves; nor needed we a lanthorn to find a man in Athens.

4. Others there are, I confess, whose wits, like wax, will take a full
impression, and be cultivated by their Masters daily instruction; upon such has
nature bestowed a good memory, the chief fign of wit in a Boy (as Quintilian
observes) adorned with those excellent properties, to apprehend the Masters
dictates, with facility, and keep them with fidelity. Now these although by a
long ambages and many weary paces, yet at last show the true and genuin stamp
of the Muses: and even such, you will say, make a tedious work of it; and
scarce compass that part of their education, in less time than a seven years
apprentice-ship: If they were to learn the China language, which consists of
50000* words; or Mithridates his 22, Valor. Max. l. 8. c. 7.
sure they would need Methusalems years to acquire them in, although it were
their only work, being freed of State affairs, wherewith he was encumbered. We
likewise find, that a year or two, is time enough, to acquire the French or any
foreign language: all which I must confess is true, and seems not strange to
me, while we are such strangers to the thing we pretend unto, and never
practice what we teach, I mean, speaking of Latin. As if with Aristotle in his
Physics, we affirm (...), we taught and did not teach: whereas we know all
things are perfected by practice Quarum omne opus est in faciendo, atque
agendo. Cic. Ac. quaest. l. 4. Rerum omnium magister est usus. Caes. de bello
civ. l. 2.
. Thus if I see a Surgion open a vein, it will instruct me better how to do the
same, than the reading in Books, where the arm should be strait bound, how the
lance is held and guided in the breathing So, Quantitatem syllabarum Poetarum
tectio multo facilius quam regularum multitudo suppeditabit. Saisour Greek
Grammar.
, and thus it is in every thing, Practice is the only Mistress, and want of use
will cause our Mother tongue to rust. Thus Montaign affirms of himself Essais l.
1. c. 25.
, that he learnt Latin from his infancy, without any rules of Grammar, and only
by discourse with his Master; the servants and others being all forbid to talk,
unless some Latin words, unto him; and when he was six years old, he had got as
pure a Latin tongue, as his Master could express; being then able to reduce bad
Latin into good. So much does the life of every Study, Art, etc. depend upon
use, that by practice, it becoms habitual; which ceasing, it is subject to
decay, although it were attained before, unto perfection: What being is it
likely then to have, where it has never bin put into practice? Skill in Physic,
cannot be attained unto, without an Hospital of sick people, whereby to give the
Students insight into practice: for those (...). Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 1.
things, which they who learn ought to practice, while they practice they will
best learn. Even thus, if our Scholars were to board with us Plus viva vox and
convictus, quam oration, proderit Quia longum iter est per praecepta, breve and
effir ax per exempla. Sen. Ep. 6.
, or we with them, and instead of gabling English, all their discourse were
turned into Latin, in a year or two they would be expert, if followed closely,
and corrected wherein their speech is incongruous; which would no less tend to
the advantage of Masters, and breed a race, that could readily entertain any
Forreiner with discourse in Latin; and shake off that opprobrium of the British
I Will.

5. Another impediment, no less than the former; and therefore not to be passed
over slightly, is the long journey from In Speech to Prosodia; a greater Task
than learning Latin (as a Reverend Dr. of the Church did lately tell me) and
too much toil for a generous mind to be enslaved with; which makes so many of
our Youth to nauseat School learning; being as glad to be taken from School; as
a Prisoner to be set at liberty from a Gaol; rather choosing to be branded with
the name of a dunce, than to be so enslaved with daily repetitions of parts,
and making of Themes and Verses, all which must be drawn out of another
Fountain; and this must surely dull and confuse their young and tender wits;
the rather seeing as Montaign Essais l. 1. c. 25.
remarks, half our age is consumed that way. Many years being spent in learning
bare words; I mean more, than an illiterat Nurs will be in teaching a child the
English tongue, and as many years after, ere they can succinctly know, how to
mingle and join them handsomely into one coherent orb: Much of which must be
trifled in their learning without book every thing, while within Book they
understand very little, as Ascham observes.

6. Now in detecting those repetitions, omissions, contradictions, and falls
Latin, I meet with in Lilly, I shall offer such things, as upon reading Latin
Authors Grammaticas recte si vis cognoscere leges.
Discere si cupias cultius ore loqui;
Addiscas veterum clarissima scripta virorum:
Et quos Authors turba latina docet --
Quos qui non didicit, nil praeter somnia vidit,
Certat and in tenebris vivere Cimmeriis.
Lill. de moribus.

and perusing other Grammars Sed tu nec stolidos imitabere Grammaticastros,
Ingens Romani dedecus eloquii.
id. ioidem.

I have collected, which I judgemay somewhat satisfy the curious: For Magna
pars studiorum amoenitates quaerimus, sais Pliny, leaving cavillers to abound
in their own sens; who, quia ipsi errant, irascuntur iis, qui veram viam
sequuntur, Lact. Inst. l. 5. c. 1. To my King, and Parliament, it does belong
to new model, to rescind or alter for public use, what by their authority, has
been, for so many years established. And this perhaps with my Grammar, may make
way thereunto.

7. First, Then I have observed several repetitions; some only of which I shall
here name, and add the rest to the following Sections.

Those Figures Appositio, Syllepsis, Zeugma, Synthesis and Synecdoche are made
rules in the Syntax, and yet set down at large after it; both of which the Boys
are enjoined to learn.

The rule, Praepositiones cum casum amittunt -- is thrice in the Accidence, and
once in the Syntax; although there be one that might serve for all in the Adverb:
Moreover he givs it a plain contradiction by post in Longo post tempore venit,
under adverbia diversitatis -- where post which governs only an Accusativ, must
there being an Adverb, govern an Ablativ: although the same words be under
Praepositiones cum casum -- to show that post governs not tempore. Quorum
participia frequentius dativo gaudent, is included in Verbalia in bilis -- and
Quamvis in his usitatior est dativus.

8. Again, there are sevral omissions, contradictions, etc. of which as they lie

In the Accidence.
IMuch question filia and nata ending in is: and as much agnus, lucus, populus,
-- being Vocativs. I read often Dei and Deis in Sen. Tragoed. Ovid, Livy,
Martials epig. Ausonius, Tacitus, Lucan, etc. Yea Ter. Varro sais hi Dei. and
l. 7. Vt hic Deus, sic hi Dei. Thus Dugard renders (...). in Lucian, (...) 4.
hominesve deive. Genius though no proper name has its Voc. in i sais Tibullus,
and so Mercurius, if you dare credit Hor. and Cic.

Meridies an example for the 5th. decl. is said, not to have the Plural.

Vnus is joined to words of the singular; as Satis una superque vidimus
excidia. Vir. Tabulae testamenti, unae erant allatae, alterae relictae. Caes.
which tabulae for a will, Cic. has in the sing. as Tabulam ceratam dari, cera
legitima: and a little after, he sais Tabulae unae. So duplices loci; uni e
rebus ipsis. Cic. Or. Vnae literae, but some will say it is in the sing. only
poetice as with Ovid often. Vnae decumae. Cic. and ad unas unius agri decumas;
and plus decuma. id. Vnis moribus vivunt. id. Vnis vestimentis lautus es. id.
Vnis vinculis duos alligat. Sen. controv. 19. l. 3. So that it seems to be a
piece of elegancy, and as Priscian terms it, a peculiar property in unus, to be
in the plural, with words taken as if in the singular: Thus in English we say,
They are good ones: Lillies rule must then be inconsistent with Latin.

Some question nostrate in the Nom. seeing Cic. sais, Iter Arpinas: and Livy,
bellum Privernas: for after words in atis were contracted into as, as kept all
genders: and it was hic and haec nostratis and hoc nostrate of old; as Lilly in
Prosodia clears.

We may either use the Future Se Gell. noct. At. l. 1. c. 7.
Infinitiv; or Participle in rus; as, Hanc sibi rem praesidio sperant futurum.
Cic. or futur am.

Cum with amarem he calls a conjunction, and in the Syntax he would have it an
Adverb, but without any reason.

We may as well say, there are Jurativ, dubitativ, permissiv -- Moods as
Optativ and Potential, which two in Latin with the Subjunctiv have but one
termination; different from the Greeks, which therefore must not be a precedent.

The present, preterperfect and future subjunctiv, may at any time supply the
Imperativ: why then are they not set therein? or an hortativ and permissiv Mood
annexed? seeing Lilly sais it is called so then: and why want we the first person
sing. (for peream commands as much as amemus) seeing we have the first plural? or
rather why have we any of the Subjunctiv Mood therein? and ero an Indicativ, put
to amatus in the Fut. Subj.

The same is in fiamus, fer at -- all which want authority and reason for their
place: Thus Gellius sais, Exul esto; not sit. Fortunis careto; not careat: and
Cic. about the end of his works has Verbs in nto near 100 times; as Pietatem
adhibento: opes amovento --

The signs of the Pot. Mood, and Fut. tens Indic. must be used with discretion:
for Cic. yea all Authors frequently make use of possum, volo -- beyond what is
allowed in Schools, where they are generally taken for signs: although volo
should be used when one is purposed to do a thing: A Fut. tens notes what is
like to com to pass. Possum shows power in the person: the sign may, the
lawfulness of the thing, or if the party have got leav, that then he may do it.
But can is expressed by possum; as you may see below: and ought by debeo; so
would by volo; as, Pompeius munitiones Caesaris prohibere non poterat, nisi
praelio decertare vellet -- and a little after, Caes. sais, Si acrius insequi
voluisset, bellum eo die potuisse finiri. So Juv. Omnia far si potes and
debes. Illud debes cogitare. Cic. Haec nota esse debebunt. id. Vult emere
agellum. Plin. in ep. Nihil volo de amico arrogantius dicere. id. Habere amicum
volo. Sen. ep. 35. Ego volo discere. ep. 121. You shall find Cicero in his Off.
full of such expressions thus, Quid habes dicere? and Sen. Non habeo tempus.
Thus also the Greeks, S. Luke 13. 31. (...), so S. John 8. 44. (...).

I could never learn the difference between multum the Adjectiv and Adverb, in
that repeted sentence Multum lucri in the English Rules:

Nor can I distinguish between est; in Orantis est, a personal in the English
Rules; and est in Prudentis est, called an Impersonal under Haec tria
Impersonalia --

In Orthographia, and those By-Rules.
9. Safter x must needs be ill omitted, because it obscures the simple word: as,
in expes, exanguis: who knows whether they com of pes or spes; anguis or
sanguis? wherefore it were better used, as it is in foreign prints.

Ctesiphon a Greek name, is a far fetch to prove the spelling of do-ctus; do
having the sound of broad Scotch, a shame for English men to teach: so it were
better spelt doc-tus and more naturally, being the true division of the word by
its sound.

So A-bdomen is not a simple word as Lilly would have it, but coms of abdo, and
should be spelt ab-domen.

Sisenna bids write patres familiarum: yet Caes. Cic. Livy, A. Hirt. Sen. in
his Ep. Macrob. Festus, alwais write patribus familias, patrum or matrum
familiae or familias.

We read Quinquatruum, Tac. Quinquatribus, Juv. and Cic. Quinquatriis, Cic. and
ad At. 17. l. 9. Pridie quinquatrus: and per Quinquatrus serere. Plin. Not.
Hist. which Call. tells us is of the second and third dec. and I think of the
fourth also: though Lilly confine it to the second. Cic. and others say iens,
and why may not we?

Animans, which he declines with haec or hoc, is also masc. by Hor. Quenquam
animantem. Ser. 2. so by Cic. A quo animante reliquos contineri vellet
animantes. de Vniv.

He sets abundans lactis for an example of Participls made Nouns when they
govern another case than their Verb; and in Syntax he makes the Verb govern a
Genesis in the same words. The rest you may expect in my Grammar.

In Propria quae maribus.
10. ALbula, Garumna, Lethe, Matrona, Sequana, Vistula rivers are Fem. so latae
Garumnae. Auson. Jader is Neuter. Subur is a river and a town. Plin. Daphnus a
city is masc. so Croto, Narbo: Pessinus is only masc. in Cic. Pliny sais, Hippo
regius; utraque Hippo: and Hippo, quod Vibanus appellamus. Pontus the country
is masc. Argos a country is neuter.

I find no need of Sunt etiam volucrum -- for though mus, elephas, passer,
anser -- are Epicens, as are all beasts, birds and fishes specified by one word
in both Sexes, as is told in the Genders; yet are declined with hic, by other
rules: so hirundo, tigris, vulpes, cetus, ostrea (or ostreum) have other rules
for their articls.

Natalis is called an Adjectiv by Call. having dies alwais either expressed or
understood.

Virus is an Aptote.

Penis and menses words seldom used, might with modesty be left out; as the
Lacedaemonians exported Archilocus his Books, being accounted immodest: not
willing their children should be corrupted by them, lest their manners might be
more depraved, than their wits improved.

Pelagus is also masc. by Val. Flacc. I read not halcionis Tanquam scopulum sic
fugias inauditum, atque insolens verbum. Gel. noct. At. l. 1. c. 10.
but haec alcion; so that he has changed both the word and special rule to save
his verse.

Ficus a fig. Lilly sais is of the fourth dec. and in Quae genus -- the fig and
its tree are of the second and fourth: and so Cic. has it; Qui arborem fici
nunquam vidisset, fiscinam ficorum objecisti, and suspendisse se de ficu.

Ficus an ulcer is of the second dec.

Lar is masc. by Cic. and should be among the monosyllables.

Mulier is confessed by Lilly to belong to the third special rule, though set
under the second.

In o, signantia corpus -- is obscure, for corpus there is physicum, to differ
them from words of passion, or action, as lectio, corruption.

Ausonius makes sal Neuter, Quibus additur aequoreum sal: so Donatus would have
it n. as it is used by Physicians at this day, to distinguish it from hic sal a
jest: so sal nemo exigat. Vopiscus in Aur. Idsal. Varro in Fab. yet Celsus
uses hic sal salt.

I find Python to be hic vel haec, though some deny it.

Cupido is often masc. by Hor. so Sen. Tragoed. Nullus hic auri caecus cupido:
yet it is commonly Fem.

Plin. l. 2. c. 5. sais tres siseres.

Lilly givs hic and haec, only, to dives -- and yet ingenium dives. Ov. Opus
superstes. Lucan. oppidum locuples. Cic. why then not hoc also? degener ends in
e or i, in the Abl. as Adjectivs of the third dec. Degeneri sub host. Lucan.
Comes I find alwais used as a Substantiv, and Lilly has it under Communis
generis -- Statius sais also de paupere regno. and Sen. uberi solo.

In Quae Genus.
11. PErgama coms of Pergamum used by Sen. and Pliny.

Supellectilia is of old supellectile used by Ter. Varro.

Gargarus and Taenara sais Alvarus, were never red: but Gargarum Macrob. Sibila
coms of sibilum in Seren.

I would gladly know the difference between instar the aptote and Adverb. We
read hic astus, us: and hi astus, astibus, Cic. Astu is a city.

Nil is by Syncope for nihil, which by Apocope is for nihilum, which Lilly
affirms.

I am at a stand, whether to teach hoc verber in Propria quae maribus; or the
diptote.

Angelus Pol. sais meae preci: so Ter.

Frugi and opus are of both numbers.

Ausonius has frux, and Ter. Varro sais frugi rectus est natura frux.

Mill an Adjectiv wants the sing. but when a Substantiv, it has both numbers;
we read also millia an Adjectiv pl. aptote.

Centum is an aptote, but its compounds are declined, ducenti, tae, ta;
quingenti, etc.

Ditio is in Dictionaries.

Lac being moist, and gluten sold by weight, should not be in Nec licet his
neutris --

Hesperos is a proper name with Cic.

Pliny sais Conjectare crassitudinem gelus, so gelu is no aptote; and if the
Romans had needed its other cases, no doubt we had had them.

Tacitus has gratibus.

Cicero sais effatum.

I am to seek for his flexile cornum; yet read cornus and cornu; so cornus
Cervini. Plin. not. hist.

I find no plebis, but only plebs and plebes; plebes jejuna. Lucan, so Cic.
often, and Tac.

Pulver is old. Verborum delectus origo est eloquentiae. Cic. in Bruto.


Sen. not. quaest. l. 2. has manubium.

Ausonius mapale.

We read tapetium, and tapetus as well as tapes.

So hoc sinapi, is: haec sinapis, and sinapi, the aptote.

Lacus, ci; is denied.

Fores said to want the sing. is used by Hor. Exclusus fore, shut out of doors.
Forem cubiculi. Val. Max.

It is an abuse to say nemo wants the Genesis Lilly notes it not, and Plaut. sais
neminis misereri; thus also the Translators of the Minor Poets, Neminis o
Conjux.

In As in praesenti.
12. PLevi is obsolete.

Delevi is by Praet. dat. idem -- which rule would make elicui to be elexi.

Levi seems to be of old leo, rather than of lino.

Cumbo, is, is not red; nor pegi, its compounds belong to Haec si componas --

Psalli I read not, nor nexo, is: nor crepo, is. So Cello is only in the
compounds; and if so, what need Grammatica recte loqui docet; nec insuetas
loquendi regulas commiaiscitur; sed quae plurimum in loquendo videt observari,
eorum loquendi rudes, ne contra morem loquantur, admonet -- si sana est. Morus.
we them?

Sapui is by syncope, so sapisti often used in Mart. Epig. Capessi is by Apocope,
as lacessi, so incessi or sivi.

Tacitus has Accucurrit. and Sen. de ben. l. 4. So A. Hirt. annexed to Caesar
has adcucurrisse and accurrit; Concucurrissent, and concurrissent. A. Hirt.
Live. L. Florus, Vell. Paterc. Val. Max. Decucurri. Live. Suet. A. Hirt. Sen. ad
Marc. Plin. Tacit. decurrerit. Sex. Aur. Vict. and Val. Max. Curt.
Excucurrerunt Live. A. Hirt. excurrissem. Plin. l. 3. Ep. 4. Live. l. 2.
Praecucurri. A. Hirt. Plaut. Live. Sen. and Caespraecurri. Plaut. Cic. Val. Max.
Procucurri and procurri. Caes. Plaut. Florus. Transcucurrit. Sen. controv. 2.
l. 1. transcurrerat. id. controv. 6.

Except retracto, pertracto, ablacto, because they change no vowel into e.

Also supersedeo and circumago from that of ago, emo --

Compounds of sto make stitum and statum; praestiti and praestavi. Am. Marc.
praestitum, and statum, stiturum, Sen. de ben. and staturum. id. and also
Quintilian. So constitum, constatum and constaturus, Sen. l. 1. de Clem.
Martial and Plin. extatura. id. obstatum, obstatura.

Linquo he sais, makes lictum; and had he said only in the compound, he had not
said amiss; for it wants the Sup. as in Haec raro aut nunquam -- Thus we learn
dreams; and must teach them by authority.

Pinso has pinsum, pistum and pinsitum.

Exculpo seems to be of sculpo, for scalpo forms excalpo in the compound.

Merui coms of mereo; Quid mereas? Cic. meritus sum of mereor, as may be seen
in Mereor cum adverbiis --

Quod dat ui -- omits intonatum.

Passus coms not of pateo a neuter, but of pandor a passiv; so Passis velis
provehi. Cic. which Vir. renders Velorum pan dimus alas.

We want authority for titubatus, which is but a participle.

So for suetus, venditus, vidi of cerno, which yet he sais has crevi, and is
used in the compound.

So for percussi of ferio; for minxi of meio; though Martial say Meiere pedes,
l. 11 and meibat. id.

And were it not better to say, quatio wants the praet.? for percussi coms of
percutio: and that Ferio wants both praet. and sup. than to go beyond the Moon
for percussi, which none can prove who use it?

Sido has sedi and sidi among Authors.

Sisto makes stiti not steti, sais Call. and wants sup. for statum sais he is of
sto; and he reasons the case at large.

Taedet forms taesum est, and pertaesum est must com from pertaedet; thus Gell.
has pertaedebat.

Furo, vescor, liquor, medeor -- want the praet. for insanivi, pastus sum --
are too far fetched.

Potus, tutus and tutum, fessus defessus, are nouns: and fatiscor is old. Call.

Antecello, pateo, and viso want sup.

Resputum, Call. Suctum, whence suctus, us, Plin. Not. Hist.

Renutum, luitum, in. Dictionaries. So satactum. Call.

I never knew the difference between Cedo, cedite the Verb and Adverb, nay have
grounds to think it cannot be an Adverb, seeing it has both numbers, a thing to
which Adverbs are strangers; it must then be only a defectiv Verb; the like I
judge of age, agite: (...).

Some think inquio no Latin word and those places in Cic. and Catull corrupted.

Fer, he sais, is by Apocope for fere; and why then does he teach fer ferto?
There he tells us furo is not red, and yet he has it in As in praesenti, but
pass it, he sais insanivi after it.

In Syntaxis.
13. THe second and third rule were fully expressed by Rectus saepe subauditur.

In Aliquando Oration supplet locum substantivi, audito seems to be absolute,
and set for re audita; and who can show me any difference between it, and
Audito Christum venisse, under Ablativus absolute sumptus? I confess it answers
to What; but what is that to the purpos, seeing it is without concord, and as
little needed.

Rerum in Quod omnium rerum est primum; breaks that claus in Nomina part.
genito a quo and genus mutuantur, gaudent; which sais the Genesis rerum will make
primum to be of the same gender: Now this claus fails also in heteroclits,
collectivs, and when an Adjectiv regards a preceding Substantiv.

Aliquando relativum is difficult, and needless; its latter example belongs to
Haec possessiva --.

Res is sometimes used; Tres sunt res. Cic.

Laus and vituperium -- when in a Genesis is by Quum duo substantiva -- when in an
Abl. then praeditus, ornatus, perfectus or such a like word, is either
understood by Ellipsis; or expressed by Dignus, indignus -- or Forma vel modus.
-- So we have it in our chois to express or omit them, and that with elegancy;
yet Cic. in Verr. and indeed all over more frequently expresses them;
Adolescentibus bona indole praeditis, sapientes senes delectantur: which Lilly
in the English Rules has without praeditis. And whether makes the better
authority? without doubt the Roman. Orator Ille se profecisse sciat, cui Cicero
valde placebit -- Qui non bominis, sed eloquentiae nomen habet. Quintil.
: for the Broad Seal was never intended to countenance Errors. We may also use
the Nom. Rufus homo doctus, (and Dativ) and philosophiae deditus.

We say Similis tui, like thee in manners: similis tibi, like thee in person.

Caesar sais Proxime Rhenum incolunt; and Proximi Rheno. and Curt. Proximi
Aethiopum: and Ovid, Proximus ad dominam -- sedeto. the first as it coms of the
Preposition prope: the second by Adjectiva quibus commodum -- the third, by
Quaedam ex his -- the fourth, by Natus, commodus -- and Sen. sais, Proxima ab
his sunt. l. 1. de benef. and Prope ab ultimo est. id. Ep. 15.

We may use or want quam with a Comparativ; Tu eruditior quam Piso, prudentior
quam Cotta, abundantior consilio quam Crassus.

Cic. so unam moestiorem, quam caeteras. Curt. or caeteris without quam. Yea
Virgil for quam, has ante with its case; Scelere ante alios immanior omnes, for
aliis omnibus: which I find also in the Superlativ; Ei unus ante alios fuerit
charissimus. Corn. Nepos.

Nomina ex Con -- as Commilito Pompeio. Cic is fully comprehended in Est ubi in
dat. vertitur, being general.

Quaedam ex his -- have also their contraries; Sectani dissimilis es. Hor.

Interrogativum and ejus ^redd. so Mei, tui, sui -- Meus, tuus -- Sui and suus
-- Ipse and idem -- are guides in making, not in parsing Latin: for there are
other rules which teach them in parsing: thus Mei, tui -- is by Quam duo subst.
Meus, tuus -- by Ad eundem modum -- Again ille is often used for se the
reciprocal: Possessivs for primitivs; Mea causa fecit. Cic. Nostra causa
faceremus. Ter. Odium tuum. id. Invidia mei. Cic. sc. de qua mihi invidetur.
Linacrus will show you that one Case, Number, Mood, Tens and part of Speech is
often put for another: and by Ellipsis that any of the parts of Speech are
understood in Authors.

Haec possessiva -- makes sui have a Genesis after it; and yet he writes Suo sibi
jugulo gladio; so Cic. suo sibi victitant succo: now in both, ipsius were
Grammatical and also Roman: so we se that rule Haec possessiva -- does not
alwais hold; and those Genitivs ipsius, solius -- are seldom used, and then
only ad pompam.

The rules would then bin more teaching, if they had shown the liberty of a
Roman in this and others: for as Alv. the Jesuit in his Grammar remarks; We
must observe the right use of Authors, which supplies, yea exceeds all Grammar
rules.

Iste I find used in prais; and ille in contempt. Istum pene solum lego Cic.
Adulter ille. Sen. in Trigoed. Fingite aliquem, qui isti par ad nefarias
libidines esse possit. Is erat Apollonius ille. Cic. Ridiculum est illud
Neronianum vetus in furace servo. id. Ridentur imagines quae in deformitatem
ducuntur, ut meum illud in Helmium, id. so you may se ille is only used to
point at one remote, and iste at one near him I speak to: as is most plain in
those Orations of Cic. in Catil. who being in the Senate, Cic. sais, si iste
unus tolletur. And in the next, being banished Rome, he alwais styles him ille;
though no less notorious, than when pointed at iste; Vicimus cum illum ex
occultis insidiis conjecimus: and a little after, Nec ego sum ferreus ille.

Instead of hic and ille, we may use alter and alter; Praeter Aeduos and
Rhemos, quos honor habuit, alteros pro vetere fide; alteros pro belli
officiis, nulla fere fuerit civitas non suspecta nobis. Caes. or ille and ille;
Credc cum vidisset qui homines in hisce subselliis sederent, quaesisse, number
ille, aut ille defensurus esset. Cic. Or, unus and alter; Elis duas familias
habet, Jamidarum unam, alteram Clutidarum. id.

Infinitum utrinque -- is false: for although it will admit of a Nom. after it,
yet never before it; but when it is put for an Indicativ by Enallage modi: and
the Nominativs in its examples com before the principal Verb, and not before
the Infinitiv; which often has an Acc. before and after it.

The three last examples are contrary to the Rule; and patched by the next.

Sum with a Genesis has officium, proprium, or such a word understood; which
Cicero more frequently expresses than omits; Proprium est stultitiae. Oratoris
est officium, so Pecus est Meliboei, sc. pecus. which is as plain an Ellipsis
as any examples he has in Ponitur genitivus tantum -- the former Substantiv
being understood.

The next Rule, Meum, tuum, -- is only adjectivum in neutro genere -- neither
did any ever read est, with mea, tua -- or with a Genitiv, otherwise than is
here set down: so that Haec tria impersonalia -- must be but duo, or else it is false.

Vterque, nullus -- wants good authority; for Grammarians (as Laurentius who is
said to have made this Rule) are invalid without the concurrence of Roman
Authors.

Misereor with a Dativ, I judge, not to be imitated; seeing the best Copies have
hujus, not huic misereor, his only example, which is in Sen. de vita beata, c.
24.

In Ex his quaedam efferuntur -- he has juvat, as if it were commonly red with
a Dativ; whereas juvat whether personal, or impersonal has only an Acc.
according to him: indeed Plautus givs it a Dativ, but that is obsolete.

Do tibi literas, is said to a Messenger: Do ad te, is said to him they are
sent to: yet Ovid sais, Hanc -- tibi mittit Ulysses, which to salv, you must
call poetice. So Martial, Miraris docto quod carmina mitto Severo: the title
being ad Severum.

Under Verba obsequendi -- are three examples, which belong to Dat. postulant
--

The like in the next Rule, which besides, has one belonging to In Dat.
feruntur -- viz. Saevis inter se convenit ursis; also its first, Adamorem nihil
potuit accedere, owns Verba composita cum a, ab, ad --

Thus few Rules between Omnia verba -- and Verba transitiva -- have all their
examples suitable; and were more intelligible if drawn into two Rules.

Verbs compounded with been satis and male, are plainly Verbs of profit, or
disprofit.

Praeiret exercitui. Ter. Varro. and Vt mihi praeeatis, sais Cic. though Lilly
confine praeeo to an Acc.

We may use habeo as well as est for habeo, which is frequent with Cic.
Quintil. -- Habeo opus magnum in manibus. Cic. Haec fere dicere habui de natura
deorum. id. De nostris somniis quid habemus dicere? id.

Two negativs in Latin do affirm; nemo non eadem volet. sc. omnes volant.

Sum in Comp. either has a Dativ by Dat. postulant -- or which is as common,
has its Preposition repeted by Verba composita -- Inerant in urbe. Cic.

A Verb transitiv is such, as passes into an Acc. of the person suffering.

Vestiendi verba -- with a Dativ, is acquisitiv; with an Ablativ, is by Quodvis
verbum --

Per with his Case, is used for the Ablativ of the instrument, and of the cause,
etc. Id facinus auctum per stuprum. Cic. Per vim expulso socio. id. So the
agent with a passiv, Ab imprudente, aut per imprudentem interfectus. Quintil.
Judicium per eum corruptum putabatur.

Delector I find only once with a Prep. ab altero delectere. Cic.

If there be no Preposition with Verbs specified under Quaedam accipiendi, as
Abstinuit Venere. Hor. say Praepositio subauditur: which Lilly might have noted,
seeing abstinuit with a Prep. is set under the former Rule.

Some question his examples in Vertitur hic abl. -- and call them old Ablativs:
but for aliquando he might have said saepe; thus Claud. Abest urbi.

Eripiamus huic aegritudinem. Cic. Abstulit urbi. Juv. And indeed Quaedam
accipiendi -- is of little use, only as it founds Vertitur hic abl. -- for the
Verbs there noted, commonly belong to Verba composita cum a, ab -- or (as
before) the Preposition is left out, by Praepositio subaudita -- Aqua prohibet.
Caes. Abstinet concubitu Juv.

The Ablativ absolute commonly has a word in ing with it.

Cic. uses Adjectiv verbals in bilis, as Verbs Passivs; Separabilem a corpore
esse.

His first Supines absolute, are Impersonals.

Part or Continuance of Time, is indifferently used in the Acc. or Abl. Case by
Authors.

Time answering to quamdiu seldom has an Abl. but an Acc. Septem regnavit
annos. Live. Yet Sexaginta annis regnasse. Plin. Vixit annis 29. Suet.

Time answering to quando, has an Abl. Datum est anno superiore. Cic. This by
many is thought the best and surest Rule.

Omne verbum admittit genesis is often broke: Habitaturum putas fuisse in Vtica.
Sen. Ep. 51. In Cajeta est parata. Cic. Ad Corfinium gestae. Caes.

Humi, domi -- fail as much; Resedit humo, Ov. Corpora devolvunt in humum. id.
Maneant in domo. id. Neque ducem in bello, nec principem domi res magnas gerere
potuisse. Cic. Thus Sen. In bello meas, in domo etiam filii manus perdidi. l.
1. controv. 4. and relating the same story again he has domi perdidi; which if
Roman, why not regular? Livy also writes domi, belloque. Nequam esse in domo.
Plin. Not. Hist. In domo clari hominis adhibenda est cura laxitatis. id. Domo
moestus. Cic. Salust who was Cicero's contemporary, uses humi, for in the
ground; Duodecim pedes humi depressus. and Quae humi gignuntur. sc. arbores. id.

Domi non alios -- is as little kept as either; Vix credens potuisse illum in
domo sua nasci. Sen. de benef. l. 3. Vt in sua domo duae parts essent. id. l.
5. Si modo nostra in domo unquam fuisti. Sen. in his Tragedies. In suis domibus
servat. Val. Max. In domo sua haerentem. Suet. In domo mea convaluit. Cic. and
Pliny l. 7. Ep. 16. has the same words. Erat in domo nostra locus. Quintil. Non
licuit in domo sua spiritum effundere. id. In domo mea ageretur. id. This
Quintilian was Master to Pliny the younger, and taught School 20 years; yet se
how little he observes this Rule: sure his Grammar had it not. Nay where he once
observes one of these three last Rules, he breaks them thrice; and very seldom
sais domi, but in domo. The like does Seneca, Nero's Tutor: and so do all I have
seen greatly neglect them, as also those following Rules of To, and From a
place.

The meaning of Domi non alios -- is, that with other Adjectivs than meae, tuae
-- it is never a Genesis but commonly an Abl. Sola domo moeret vacua. Vir.

Priscian, Alvarus, and others, will have the Dativs in Verum si proprium -- to
be old Ablativs, and account it safest to speak in the Abl.

Verbis significantibus motum ad locum -- have the proper name often used with
a Preposition, and so domus: Profectus sum ad Capuam. Cic. In domum
multiplicatam non repulsam solum retulit. id. Inque patris duxere domum,
whether the place be expressed without a Preposition, or with in, apud, ad,
Authors oft-times mean the same; Haec non in tuam domum, sed Romam in publicum
deportasses. Cic. Apud Isson superfuerunt. Caes. Ad domum praecucurrisse, and
dominam suam ante se egisse. Sen. de ben. l. 3. Reliquit me ad paternam domum.
id. Proficisci ad doctas Athenas. Propert. which cannot stand for ante or
prope, as Vossius confesses. And although Historians use ad for ante, yet
Caesar has Ante Vticam miserat; and without ad, makes Vticam to mean before the
place; Vticam exercitum ducit, and prope opidum castra ponit: so A. Hirt. de
bello Alex. sais, Alexandriam ad Caesarem contendit. When Caesar besieged it,
and Pompey was in it: Brundisium veni; ad murum castra posui. Cic. l. 9. Ep. ad
At. 16. Vticam pervenit, atque extra opidum ea nocte mansit. A. Hirt. de bello
Afr. Oricum proficiscitur -- portis clausis. Caes. de Bello Civ. l. 3.

Thus you may se these rules are not to be taken exclusivly, and what liberty
the Romans took, often putting the Noun into what case best suited the matter,
or Verb; Vectus esset Alexandriae. C. Vell. Paterc. Productus Romae. Macrob.
Vticae appropinquare. Cic. and Caes. Vticae subduxerat. A. Hirt.

From a City or place, has a Prep. as frequently; Ab Roma venerunt. Live. Ab
Roma profectus. id. Ab Vtica venire. Sall. A Brundusio. and Ab Athenis ire.
Cic. Ab Alexandria profectus. Curt. Ab domo venerunt.

Live. Profectum ab domo. id. Abesset a domo. Cic. Abesse ab domo maluit. id. A
rure profectus. id. Ex domo prodire. id.

Now seeing custom Consuetudo certissima loquendi magistra. Quintil.
is the best guide, why may we not say as Quintilian did? Whom should I imitate
but Cicero? Whom should we follow but these famous Authors, before Grammarians?

What need we Nonnulla impersonalia -- seeing it contradicts in terminis his
rule, in the leaf after As in praesenti -- where pudet is expressed in both: and
first said to be alwais an Impersonal; and in the latter, sometimes a Personal.

Coepit, incipit -- is as needless; it being a standing Rule in Latin, that a
Nom. Case makes a Verb to be a personal, and without one it becoms an
Impersonal: besides his Infinitivs in the examples are no Impersonals, as the
Rule would have, which to me seems impertinent.

Natus, prognatus -- are as often used with a Prep. as without; A te prognatum.
Hor. E centurionibus orti. id.

En and ecce exprobrantis -- are red with a Nom. En causa, cur regem fugitivus,
dominum servus, accuset! Cic. En memoria mortui sodalis! id. Some think they
govern no Case, but by Ellipsis have a Verb understood: and Cicero often has
them with a Dat. Ecce tibi. So Pliny in his Ep. Ecce tibi Regulus! where
advenit, or such a Verb is understood.

Instar is no Adverb, but governs a Genesis by Adjectivum in neutrogen. and is an
Acc. when it has ad.

Tempori, luci, vesperi are old Ablativs; Abii mane cum luci, Plaut. Luci
claro. Varro Epheb.

Cedo I showed to be no Adverb in As in praesenti.

How Plus can be an Adverb I admire; and as much how it should govern those
Cases given it in Plus Nom. genitivo -- seeing the Verbs there do it: or if
plus, then you must borrow quam, and so make them Ablativs, by Comparativa per
quam -- thus Hor. uses it as an Adjectiv, Plus aequo liber; and when it has a
Genesis as Auxilii latura plus. id. it is by Comparativa and superlativa accepta
partitive -- The first hominum in his examples depends on millia; the latter on
quinquaginta, by Nomina partitiva -- Passus in the next example follows the
Verb abierat: In that and the first example it governs no word: In the last,
Plus eo, is plainly by Comp. per quam -- which quam is expressed in the third;
and by Conjunctiones copulativae cum quam -- is of the same Case with
quinquaginta.

Some reject the four first Rules of Conjunctions, as really making no Cases, or
Moods alike; but where they are, there is Syllepsis or Zeugma; as, Docuit
Xenophontem, and docuit Platonem. Vixi Romae by Omne verbum -- and vixi
Venetiis, by Verum si proprium --

The like may be said of the question, and its answer; for if I ask Quis est?
and answer Petrus, est is understood to make Petrus a Nom. and no otherwise
depends it on quis the Interrogativ.

Besides those Prepositions noted by Lilly to be set after their Case I have red
these, Micenum apud. Tac. Quos advorsum ier at. Sall. Ripam ad. Tac. Hanc
circa. Sen. in his Trag. Ovilia circum. Vir. Quem contra veneris. Cic. Eo
coram. Tac. Quo de ambigitur Cic. Vertice in. Sen. in his Trag. Quos inter
controversia est. Caes. Metum juxta. Tac. Hamum infra. id. Transtra per. Vir.
Te propter. Cic. Te sine. Vir. Thalamo sub fluminis alti. id. Hunc subter.
Plin. Ep. Quos super. Tac. Dubium ultra. id.

Lilly writes Interseritur inter rel. and verbum: and yet omits inter in Verba
comp. cum a, ab -- though inter, per, sub and trans be so in use among the
Romans: Inter horum aetates interjectus. Cic. Vide quid inter te and hunc
interest. id. Inter eos atque Ariovistum intercederent. Caes. Per ea permeat.
Cic. Per haec perventum est. Plin. Ep. Per nos percipere. Cic. Pernassia laurus
Parva sub ingenti matris se subjicit umbra. Vir. Sub acumen styli subeant. Cic.
Cum bonis omnibus sub praecone subjiceretur. id. Trans Taurum arma transmissa
sunt. Fest. Rufus. Trans Euphraten trajectos vastavit. id.

Sub for ante, we find has an Abl. Sub oculis domini suam probare operain
studebant. Caes. de Bello Civ. l. 1. Sub oculis accepto detrimento. ibid. Sub
ipsa die invia petunt. Plin. Not. Hist. And for post an Acc. Ille sub haec.
Vir. Aen. 5. Sub haec, non ut ante. Hor. Sub hoc tempus. id. which Bond renders
paulo post.

So super for ultra an Abl. Et paulum sylvae super his forent. Hor. sc. ultra:
Bond. Nocte super media. Vir. sc. ultra.

In I find variously used; and servs to both Cases sometimes: without to; Esse
in amicitiam P. Romans Cic. In te.

For inter; Reponere in Deos. Cic. In adversariis relinquebas. id.

For contra; In eam invehi solent. Cic. Ostendi disparem fortunam negotiorum in
Muraena, atque in Sulpitio fuisse. id. In matre peccas. Sen. Tragoed.

For ante, or ad; Vereor coram in os te laudare. Ter. In oculis summersa. Curt.
In anchoris constiterunt. Caes. Viam in Suevos monstrat. id.

For erga and contra; Accipit in Teucros animum. Vir. Lapsa est libido in
muliere ignota. Cic. sc. erga. In hoc reo finem accusandi facere. id. sc.
contra.

To an Acc. only, if it note passing into a place; Via ducit in urbem. Vir.

For pro; Multis parcit in poenam Plin.

For apud; Non probantur in vulgus. Cic.

For vice; In praesidem esse jussit. Curt.

For formam; Curvatus in antrum. Vir. se. in formam antri.

For usque; In december annos pariunt. Varro.

For super; Oner a in jumenta extollere. id.

For interpretation; Servius in Virgilium; which I think is not among the
Ancients.

To an Abl. only; for cum; Quid inter est in matrona, ancilla peccesve togata.
Hor. In puellis urere. id.

For action in a place; Lucus in urbe fuit. Vir. Spectatur in ignibus aurum.
Ov. And In tempore veni.

In with to, serves to an Acc. In without to, to an Abl. is the only short Rule
for a Boy.

Horace has heu with a Voc. Heu posteri negabitis! and Ovid, with a Dativ, Heu
mihi! Amor. l. 2. Eleg. 19. and de Ponto l. 4. Eleg. 6.

Seneca controv. l. 3. has pro with a Voc. Pro bone Jupiter! yea, Lilly has the
like in his examples of Proh, while he forgets it in the Rule.

In Figura.
14. I Take Apposition to be no figure, and so place it in Quum duo subst --

Evocation is either a Substantiv put in the same Case, with the first, or
second person expressed, or understood; or an Adjectiv agreeing with it; or else
is implied in Synthesis, and so is expunged.

By Syllepsis we are taught to make the Verb a Plural, where and is between two
Nominativs: yet Cic. sais, Vos and Senatus restitit. Odium and molestia est
perferenda. id. which are by Zeugma, and though Lilly say it not; yet we may
turn a sentence spoken by Zeugma into Syllepsis, and on the contrary: For
Zeugma regards the word; but Syllepsis the sens. Thus, we may say, Rex and
regina beati; sc. sunt; by Syll. Rex and regina beata; or Rex beatus and
regina; sc. est: by Zeugma.

And thus you may se the liberty of the Latin tongue.

In Prosodia.
15. LEt me now tell you, what an excellent salvo Caesura is, making a short
syllable long after a due foot, if the Poet need it; otherwise he may giv it a
go by.

Ovid can break Vocalis ante duas consonantes -- if it were then invented.

Vadit ad artificem dirae Polymnestora caedis.
Hor. can make a dactyl of an anapaest,

Militat in sylvis catulus nunc a^dhi^be^ puro.
Also Virgil can omit synaloepha twice in a Verse.

Ter sunt conati imponere Pelio So
Ossam.
Et succus pecori, and lac subducitur agnis. id.
Et longum formose vale, vale, inquit Iola. id.
Arctius atque haedera procera astringitur ilex. Hor.
Which three last make good the tradition in Schools; that when Synaloepha is
omitted, the former vowel is common, as here.

Thus Lilly uses a Proceleusmatic foot (that is four short syllables) in one
verse.

Pro salto salio salui, e^t a^mi^ci^o^ a^mi^cu^i dat. and with spo^spondi
breaks Vocalis ante duas consonantes: for Primam praet. geminantia, cannot
alter Position.

Ta in occulta spolia -- is long by Caesura.

Systole makes a long syllable short; Tu cave defendas quamvis mordebere
dictis. Ov.

The last syllable of a verse, ending with a vowel, or m and his vowel, if the
next begin with a vowel, it may be cut off, which is called an Hypermeter,
having a syllable too many:

Nilus and antiquo sua flumina reddidit alveo Aethereoque -- Vir.

Poets often make the 5th foot a sponde; Cecropiumque thymum and grave olentia
centaurea. id.

The last syllable of any verse is common. If a verse end with a vowel, and the
next begin with one, you may use or leav the former, but scars use Synaloepha
four times in one line;

Atque Ephyre, atque Opis, atque Asia Deiopea Et tandem -- Vir.

Thus also the Greeks take a like liberty with the Latins, whether necessitated
or not; which is quodammodo infinita Se the Greek Grammar.
(...) Hesiod. (...), Solon.

Apostrophe they value not, and cut off Vowels and Diphthongs, before
Consonants at pleasure -- for all which, Figures and Poets licens were devised:
And what greater liberty, could a Boy desire? but alas! he must only know it
and be Tantalized.

Thus Hor. further takes his liberty; saying, tondentes for contendentes.
Moenia Catili, for his Brother Tiberis. Vnde domo; from what house. So Martial,
Leporem rumpes equo, for delassabis.

The third foot of an Heroic, should not end with a word.

16. Had Books bin exactly Printed, I had saved my self much toil in comparing
Editions; for errors of the Press are grown so common, that it puzzles the best
of wits sometimes to make sens of Print; thus In oleastro quadam, for quodam
Cic. has deceived many; and from these words in Cic. Verr. 4. Quid ego injurias
colligo? quae in furtis istius, versata esse videantur? a famed Critic, whom I
name not for shame, made this Rule; that Sometimes one single antecedent is
followed by a Neuter relativ: whereas versata is versatae in good Copies. Hor.
in page 232 published by Macock 1660, has damnos ebibimus: for damnose. So S.
Mat. 11. 7. Arundinem qui agitetur: sais our little Latin Test. Now qui say some
must be an Adverb, and yet spoils the sens: and foreign Editions have quae. So
S. Luke 6. 38. has metietur a Passiv, which opposes Lilly's Rule; for metimini
in the same Verse is Dep. and Deponents admit only an activ or neuter
signification. Not much unlike to these, is the denying those Books of Rhet. ad
Heren. to be Cicero's, though Quintilian call him the Author. Inst. Or. l. 2.
c. 17. It were tedious to insert more testimonies, only that School Books do
groan for good Correctors of the Press. It were then to be wished, that they
whose right it is, would settle exact Correctors, men of known parts, for every
Press; seeing public good, not private gain, is the design thereof. This would
prevent the reception of runagates, and other ignoramuses, who are better at a
full Table, than with the Correctors pen; and do wors become the Pulpit. But
these are chiepest, and will play at small game. What need is there then of a
wary admission!

17. I know, many, at first, will say, this savours too much of novelty; and as
the Roman Emperor Quae volumus, and credimuslibenter, and, quae sentimus ipsi,
reliquos sentire speramus. Caes. de bello Civ. l. 2.
said; Men fancy others think, what they would have be so: yet have I rather
affected to speak the truth, though with a Pythagorean; than be in an error
with Plato Cic. Tuse. quaest. 1.
; looking upon it a foul crime, that Grammar should authorize falsities Si
Grammaticum se professus quispiam barbare loquatur, hoc turpior sit, quod in eo
ipso peccet, cujus profit etur Scientiam. Cic.
and coin new words: to prevent which I hope this Essay will contribute not a
little.

18. And thus I have given a survey of Lilly, which will be more satisfactory,
when he shall be viewed as Epitomized in my Grammar; which to be complete, the
Reader will perhaps find shorter, than he could have expected: for I have
abridg'd from In Speech, to the end of Prosodia, into less than this, with all
those By Rules at Orthographia, which lock nothing that can be called
Instructing, and have large Notes added.

19. Yet is Antiquity, the mortalest enemy unto truth and knowledge; having don
its greatest execution, by establishing our belief on its dictates: as though
the authority of the one, should exceed the reason of the other; even when it
has deviated from the track of truth. So prevalent is persuasion, that Lilly
allowed must be like the Pope, sine crimine; and we may not detect him, as
though it were beyond amendment, or all its errors authorized. Sure his
Champions cannot make it a point of Faith. Ought not the Boys then rather save
themselves, cum bona venia Praeceptoris, than defend old Priscians head? For as
you have seen, our Rules com short of what they pretend unto: and although there
be as many Grammars as Grammarians, yea, more; for Aldus set forth abov five,
Moria Erasmus in Moriae encomio.
calling him Son for his pains; and although likewise ours have bin composed
since, and had the help of all before, yet is it thus faulty Quot enim
Gramaticorum nugae aspernabiles?
: and hence puerorum lacrymae.

20. Now if this charge be true, as, true it is, how does Youth spend, or
rather mispend their time? and what need is there of altering our Rules, both
for their length, and also oversights? Lilly then thus purged Addiscend a est
(sc. lingua lat.) and facile potest, si Praeceptor adsit judicio probus, qui
non circumducat pervaria and supervacua praecepta. Pauca haec, and lectio, in
brevi eam dabunt. Lips. no^ae ad l. 1. Pol.
and abreviated, as that an ordinary capacity may learn it in about four
Months; and understand it so much the better Brevitas est amica memoriae.
Petrarc. Si causa permittat, nihil aeque ut brevitas placet. Plin. Ep.
, as it is the shorter: whereas the common Grammar is near three years a
learning. I say it must needs greatly conduce to the breeding of Youth, and
credit of our learned Masters. For then might they proceed to the Volumes of
Classick Authors, a while after they have begun the Accidence: whereas now, they
are one day after another toiled with repetitions, of this and that part of
their Grammar, and whipped for not understanding and believing superfluities and
falsities: and indeed to confine it within so narrow a compass, as the Rules of
Grammar, were both to bereav it of its excellency, and as Erasmus In Moriae
Encomio.
sais, is enough to make a man spend his lifetime, in tortures, and be a cross
to his ingenuity; not but that the Rules are good, and must be had and taught,
yet rather by practice, without such toilsom drudgery, of learning them from
end to end: For as Cicero persuades Or. l. 1.
us, the common sens of custom and usual form of speech, heeding the sound of
words in sentences, is to be our guide, which would facilitate the study, and
make it delightsom; the reasonableness of which I shall now subjoin.

21. If a sentence of bad Latin be uttered, it is first observed to be faulty
by its ill sounding Voluptate aurium judicatur Oration. Cic. Or. Mihi placet
Latina^ rationem sequi quousque patitur decor. Quint. l. 5. c. 5.
, which grates harshly in the ear; and if you require a reason for it, the
answer must be, that it is against the usual way or idiom of speaking; against
which excursions we are now fenced with Rules; not that they were ab origin,
for as Erasmus In Moriae Encomio.
sais wittily, what need was there of Grammar, when all spoke the same
language, and nothing was more desired, than to be understood? And where Rules
are not particular, and cannot reach the matter, there is no other test, than
custom and use: for Rules were borrowed from them, and invented out of a
proportionable correspondency to Art; not it guided by Rules, which some as Lud.
Vives De corr. Art. l. 2.
sais, by doing would draw the unbounded stream, of Use and Practice, through;
and so pollute the Latin tongue, with foul enormities, by following Art, which
cannot comprehend use, as is sufficiently shown in those oversights of the
Grammar; whereby we se that he who follows Authority runs often against rule, and
he who observes rule, disturbs Authority Si been discutias doctorum scripta
virorum,
Multa seus cernes, quam lex vult Grammaticorum.

, without whose Hand and Seal, the best of Rules is but irregular, hence Aliud
Grammatice, aliud Latin loqui.

22. Yet this, as Suetonius de claris Gram.
observes, drew many after it, through the novelty thereof, having an appearing
likelihood of reason: whereto it is very remarkable, what Cominius asserts In
Ep. Rest.
, that whosoever observes the dialect of ancient Writers, shall find that the most
learned of them, did never concern themselves with Grammar, so as to approv it,
by following its Rules: for neither did Quintilian l. 1. Inst.
undertake to compose an art thereof: Art being found out, at first, as is
abovsaid, after men spoke, and as well, as could be, reduced into Rules, which
as they com short of their purpos, did only show that S. Peter's Successor was
not Prime in the consult; else would a Bull bin published against Priscian, for
condemning his Predecessors (for Tacitus sais, he kept a fearful stir) another
would bin sent against Valla, and those after him; Stoa, Phineas -- as also
against Alvarus, who is said to have inveighed against Lilly: and seeing all are
so full of mistakes, who but the blind would follow such guides?

23. For, it is evident, that the Roman tongue was well penned, before the
invention of Grammar; yea, that the excellency of its speakers gave it a
midwifry, such are Plautus, Naevius, Livius, Lucretius -- Writers of elder date
than Grammar, which owning its birth to forreiners, becoms a suspected
offspring; and so as to the rigor of it, might be laid aside: the tongue
being still attainable by custom, authority, and exercise Vsus optimus dicendi
magister. Plin. Ep. and magistorum praecepta superat. Cic. Assiduus ingenium
and artem saepe vincit. id.
; all which are governed by the ear, which is in this kind pleased or
displeased by an inbred, secret and impenetrable harmony in nature. I confess
it may be nourished by Art, but in its infancy.

24. In vain it is then, to say, that we must speak and write by Grammar, not
by those Classick Authors, for so they confute themselves, seeing it was invented
out of a correspondency to their writings; and so, if not them, we must follow
none at all; for their waters came from the others fountain. Let them trifle in
Rules, we have somewhat else of greater import, to speak latin as a Roman, not
as a Grammarian, sais Montagin Essais l. 1. c. 25.
, and find there are some who know neither Case, Tens, nor part of Speech, and
yet can entertain you in elegant Latin; and defend Priscians head from a blow,
as well as those, who have for many years bin trained up in that Fencing-school.
After which said, he puts an opprobrium, upon such Bragadocians of their
Grammar, who yet, can neither write nor speak the Latin tongue: making it his
observation; that he found those the choicest men, who least used it: and these
were most accurate in Speech, and the most eloquent Orators, who no doubt would
have recommended it to posterity, had they looked upon it with another eye, than
as milk for a Babe, or as spelling for a Reader.

25. Thus Ascham sais plainly of Q. Eliz. who though she borrowed nothing of
Grammar, but Declension and Conjugation, yet had a most ready way of expressing
her self; and that both smooth and elegant; so that, he must be more than
ordinary, who could do the like. Scaliger also, is said, without Grammar to have
attained the Greek: and so, for many thousand years, were all languages learnt,
and still may be, with greater expedition and less toil, where Grammar is less,
and Authors more used.

26. Thus Schorus sais also, that Children may by imitation, example and
custom, (not only come to speak, but) be made better linguists, than by
Precepts: and if so, what need this toil upon Grammar? this Cicero De Or. l. 1.
sets his hand unto; and Quintilian Or. l. 1. c. 10.
tells us, it has no ground or foundation other than custom: to which Gellius
Noct. At.
givs his suffrage, saying, that among the best of Writers, the sweet sound of
words (Euphonia) was more observed, than Grammar Rules. And lastly, Corderius
l. 3. Coll. 34.
affirms, that Latin consists, rather in Use and Authority, than in Reason or
Rule. Say not then, that Latin differs from all Languages, because of
Conjugations and Declensions; as if others wanted them; or they could not be
better kept by use, when once, they are got without Book. It is also frivolous
to say, that use may do much in others, but Latin being mainly founded in the
works of ancient Authors, no expedient can be deviz'd like to Grammar; as
though it did not rather follow, that those Authors are the fitter for us to
learn by; for it is best drinking at the Fountain Head, as the Poet has it,
Dulcius ex ipso font -- but this is like the Papists locking up the Bible:
Whereas practice makes the impression, when Rules are not so effectual: and sure
it were more tolerable, as Fabius sais, to speak after the example of Cic. or
Caes. or Virgil -- though we com short in imitating them. For any by a secret
feeling, may discern without art, what is right or wrong by art, and so in
Latin.

27. Thus I have set down the reason of our Youths slow proficiency; and
ignorance even in the idiom of Latin. Let me now chalk out that way which is as
ready, as easy and delightful: in which one years recreation will recompens the
toil of many; without preposterous tasking the Boys Inopes rerum nugaeque
canorae.
to compose Themes, Orations, or Verses: acts of ripest judgment, and the
product of an head well stored, with great reading Ex rerum cognitione
efflorescat oportet, and redundet Oration; quae nisi subest, res ab Oratore
percepta and cognita inanem quandam habet elocutionem, and p^ne puerilem. Cle.
de Or. l. 1. Quinque faciunt quasi membra eloquentiae; invenire quod dicas;
inventa disponere; deinde ornare verbis; post, memoriae mandare; tum ad
extremum agere ac pronunciare. Id.
, and diligent observance of elegant Maxims digested into common places
Verbaque provisam rem non invitasequentur.
: Which alone, can make a copious invention; and without which they cannot be
squeezed out of raw Youth: For Nemo potest de ea re, quam non novit, non
turpissime dicere. Cic. de Or. 2. and neither are Boys so confident as to think
with the Poets, Ad rem non pertinere, verum dicere; who being either straightened
of necessity, or by grace in speaking corrupted, id quaeque vocari jubent, quod
belle facit ad versum. Sen. de ben. and hence it was called Ineptia poetandi,
by Ausonius: so Angelus Pol. sais, scribat Joan. Scotus, and quidem carmine ut
sit ineptior: so Ter. Varro, Poetae transilire lineas impune possunt.

28. Were a Child to take it in, as his Mother tongue, from his infancy; the
only way to make him prompt, were to follow Montaign's, whose Father took in a
Master into his House, of which se. 4. and experience tells us, a Nativ tongue is
soon attained, and if we follow the same Method, we shall no question accomplish
our purpose.

29. But where a Boy can read English well, he may learn to decline Nouns, and
conjugate Verbs; with the Syntax: which are not taught for lov of themselves In.
Gram. sufficit, eas observationes didicisse, quibus possis and ipse latin
loqui, and quae ab iis latin scripta sunt, intelligere non dutem anxie
innumeras loquendi regulas aucupari, literasque inter and syllabas insenescere.
Morus.
, but to be our guides in Construing, and so will better be taken in, by use,
than by so frequent repetitions: the Master may then use him to talk in the
same language, having a well composed Pueriles Sententiae, the way I learned
French.

30. It were not amiss, if at the same time he carried about him, a Vocabulary,
with the Latin of the most usual words, we frame our discourse in: for with
Erasmus Ep. de utilitate Coll.
, I know not whether any thing be better learnt, than what is learnt by play:
not that I would have it got off Book, as now at Schools; for that is like to
making a rope of sand; words being winged, if unchain'd by a sentence Erasmus
de Art Notoria.
: but to look a word upon occasion, as discourse brings it in. By this means,
having learnt his Grammar, which is but a few months task, I would enter him
upon some good Latin Author, the matter of which should be suited to the
Scholars capacity; still the longer, he should proceed to the more sublime, and
so, Latin would be as ready as English; for, Vsus promptos facit.

31. Let no man laugh at this, and call it a difficult work, or impossible;
while I am ready to demonstrate the truth; as I think I have in a pretty good
measure some years before I taught in a Free School; upon a Youth, who had bin
three years from School, in all which time he had laid aside his Latin: whom,
notwithstanding, in four months time, with only one hours instruction daily, I
led to the reading of a Physic Book, needing the Dictionary (and that but in
some words) more than my help; and in the Greek to an handsome improvement, so as
he could Construe me six or eight verses in the New Testament in a morning:
should any question the truth hereof, the young Gentleman is not far remote.
While I write this, I am credibly informed, that in the late times, Dr. Tully
taught School in Glocestershire after this method; and did far outstrip other
Masters. Neither know I any difficulty, in practicing this method, even in a
Free School, were there authority for it: I am sure, they would have like
benefit, if not with advantage to what a private Master can make; for good
Masters Magni interest quos quisque audiat quo tidie domi, quibuscun loquatur a
puero. Cic.
like a rich soil, will make the plant of a taller growth.

32. And as we have so many famous Schools in our Land, I wonder, how it is,
that runagate rabble, suoque simillima coelo At Emollit gentes elementia coeli.
, com so thick in among us? having more need, themselves, to be taught English,
and our Royal Grammar, than to be Masters: these are the pest of our Country:
by these have our Boys their learning so mangled, that in Free-Schools we are
forced to make a seat of every one, sent from those petty places.

33. By the former method, a Child might be taught, almost without a Book, in
one year, playing: which noble things, if we made our aim, and brought to pass;
we should leav no room for those pedling merchants, to possess or insinuate
into the heart of an English man; but rather if they will, like Hornets, swarm
in among us; we should employ them as Gibeonites.

34. When Latin were thus understood, they might proceed in their Studies; and
in a little time, it would appear what peculiar gifts of nature they were
endued with: and if there were any secret excellency A puero adamaram, (...).
Cic. ad Fr. Q. l. 3. Ep. 5.
among them, it would be fetched out; and a fair opportunity be given, to
advance it self by; which must greatly redound to the good of this Nation; and
bring, even into fashion, the old admired virtues, with much improvement Sic
honor and nomen divinis vatibus a que
Carminibus venit: post hos insignis Homerus,
Tyrtaeusqut mares animos in Martia bella,
Versibus exacuit -- Hor.

, now in this purity of Christian knowledge.

35. Neither should we need the Mounsieurs of Paris, to take those flowrs of
our Country, into their slight and prodigal keeping; and send them back again,
transformed only into Mimics and Apes: but other Nations then, would be glad to
visit us, for their breeding; or at least would imitate us, in their own
Countries.

36. I do not say, they will in this time, com to an excellent well composed
style, in speaking or writing; for with Plutarch (...).
(...) As natural disposition, without institution, is blind; so instruction,
without a genius and disposition, is defectiv; and exercise without both, is
lame and imperfect. Without which three things, a man cannot be accurat, in any
art or discipline: And sure I am, the readiest way to attain it, is by being
well verst in those Authors; to which, if the Mother have luckily contributed
store of her wit, they may in time imitate Tertullian, for his sententiousness;
Cyprian for his gravity; Jerome for his resoluteness; Chrysostom's mellifluous
flowing; Divine Ambrose; devout Bernard; Heavenly Augustine, who alone is all
the former; Courtly Esaias; learned Paul; elegant Luke; facetious Erasmus; pitthy
and concise Bishop Hall, like a second Seneca.

37. Or to com to our School Authors; it is a commendable part in Scholars, to
be grave as Cato Senior was in his praises, sharp in his reproofs, witty in
discourse, subtle in teaching, illustrious both in words and matter; eloquent as
Laelius and P. Africanus; majestical as Scipio; of a flagrant wit as C.
Gracchus, and learned from a Child; and with M. Anthony, relate things to best
advantage; with M. Crassus, to be accurat in the Latin tongue, and copious in
discourse; with Hortensius to have a vast memory; studious as Piso, Tully's Son
in Law; and with Julius Caesar, to take the advantage of a good light, for well
drawn Pictures; by these they may in time be admired with Salust, a Prince
among the Latins, for his nervous brevity; and could they com to the^ height of
eloquence with Cicero, they might be compared to the Roman Empire, and run
style it self, unto the uttermost very perfection of Eloquence: Their prudence
and judgment, with Corn. Tacitus's, would be in esteem; their great eloquence
like Livy's in discourse, would not be concealed, whom though Lipsius call
(...), and frigid in some places, yet is he copious for the grandeur and majesty
of his Work before others. Curtius for his admired plainness in speech, and
grace in discourse, subtle and clear, without care most accurat; Thucydides
almost divine in his speech, grave and brief in elocution; and Polybius not
much unlike him, were sit examples for them. I were injurious should I pass
over Homers excellency, given him by the best of Writers; Solon's great liberty
in speaking; Pisistratus his golden Fishing Net; the palms of Themistocles his
eloquence, and laurels of Victory: Herodotus in History, compared to a Garden
full of trees; whose walks are decked with flowers, casting forth perpetual
odors; or Theopompus his perspicuity; Plato's eloquence abov what is human;
whom Jove would imitate, were he to speak unto us; Aristotle so neat a flower
of eloquence, in Isocrates his style; whose glory none could equal; Lycurgus
his prudence; Demosthenes as bright as the Sun; polite Phalereus; heroic
Virgil; smooth Ovid; great Theophrastus; sweet Xenophon, whose praises none can
sing, without his Muse.

38. And whosoever can equal any of these, were he born a Prince; then Brutus like,
would grace the Crown; for as all have an inbred propensity, to this or that
strain; so might our Youth be improved, beyond what is ordinary, would but the
Masters shorten the way, and release the prisoners, from such drudgery, as
Erasmus terms it.

39. And thus, I have presented the Reader with what I had to say, concerning
this Subject. Overlook the mistakes with candor, and account me not imperfect
Neque est omnino ars ulla, in qua omnia illa, quae ar te effici possunt, a
doctore traduntur. Cic. de Or. 2. For (...). Arist. 2. Pol. c. 6.
or deficient, because I have left him work who shall com after: And seeing I know
there are many who will be displeased hereat; I have therefore chosen, to bring in
the learned speaking, and tell mine opinion in their words: And if, as I
confess Est enim plenum ingenui pudoris, fateri per quos profecer is, non ut
plerique ex iis, quos attig^, secerunt. Plin. ad vesp:
, I have transscrib'd most of what is written; I do but as the Latins did with
the Greeks; and the Greeks with the Latins; Thus Justin borrowed all from
Trogus Pompeius: and Julius Solinus, much of Pliny. Eratosthenes wholly
translated Timotheus de Insulis, not reserving the very Preface. The wittiest
piece of Ovid is beholden to Parthenius Chius: yea even the magnified Virgil
has borrowed in all his works, his Eclogs, from Theocritus; his Georgics, from
Hesiod, and Aratus; his Aeneids, from Homer; the exploit of Sinon and the
Trojan Horse, as Macrobius (x) notes, he has verbatim (n) Saturnal. l. 5. c. 2.
Se him compared in c. 3, 4, 5, 6 --
derived into his second Book, from Pisander. Our own Profession is not
excusable herein; Thus Oribasius and others, have greatly transcribed Galen.
Marcellus Empyr. has word for word, transcribed all Scribonius Largus, de
comp. med. with his very peroration. Thus Lucian and Apuleius, served Lucius
Pratensis, in those Books entitled Lucius, by the one; and Aureus Asinus by the
other. Clemens Alexandrinus has observed many examples hereof, among the
Greeks; and Pliny In praef. ad Vesp.
sais, that conferring his Authors, he generally found those that went before,
verbatim Transcriptos ad verbum.
transcribed, by those who came after, and their originals never so much as
mentioned; which I have not thought shame to do; Getting stone and timber of
others, yet have I contrived and shaped the edifice my self: I have been the
Builder, while I sought matter in every place; neither is it the wors, because
like the Be, we have gathered ex alienis hortulis.

Contenti simus inventis: aliquid veritati and posteri conferant. Sen. not.
quaest.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
MVla and equa, have the Dat. and Abl. pl. in is, as well as abus: Ex his equis
pulli. Varro de re rust. Deem his mulis parturam. id.

Propert. sais, Deis. Val. Flacc. Dei and Deis. so manibus ab unis, and Lucret.
Moribus unit.

Cato de re rust. and Lucret. have sal in the Neuter.

Garumna is also Masc. Magnus Garumna. Tibull.

Varro de re rust. writes, verris, not verres in the Nom. which also would
sound better in Lilly, being set with natalis and aqualis. Verris octo mensium
incipit salire.

Calepine sais Pelagus, is as much Masc. as Neuter, and quotes Flaccus lin. 169
-- pelagum quantos aperimus in usus: yet the Dutch Ed. writes pelagus however,

Divitis ad mensam pelagi sylvaeque feruntur.

The Ancients from Buceriaeque greges in Lucr. say hic and haec grex.

Although Dictionaries afford us not Cures, etis: yet Propertius sais Jovis
Curetis.

Tibullus and Varro de re rust. have gelum, li: Cato also sais ne gelus noceat,
and I do not remember that I have red gelu in the Nom.

Suet. sais, discucurri; Livy discurri. Suet. and A. Hirt. say percucurri: and
Pliny in Ep. percurri.

Suet. sais lacessi against Lilly.

Many think Gerunds in di, have a Genesis sing. as well as pl. so Lipsius in ep. Vt
otium sit Italiae ipsius and amicorum videndi.

Lucret. makes luci an Abl. -- in luci quae poterit res Accedere: and Varro,
vesperi: Farciunt meridie, vesperi: so Columella, Se vesperi celant; and se
vespere celat: vesperi and vespere exoritur: vesperi and vespere occidit: they
are then far from being Dativ adverbials.

Suet. givs an Abl. to sub for ante; Sub exitu vitae voverat: and an Acc. to
super for at; Non amplius ter bibere eum solitum super coenam, which Curtius
uses often.

These Prepositions also are red after their Case.

Quibus e Lucr. Te praeter. Tibull. Te supra. Lucr. Aequora long Trans abeunt.
Flacc.

Circum I read in Comp. and Apposition.

Circumponito circum radices. Cato.

The Ancients used to cut off s, ending a word, if a consonant followed;
Fontibu' magnis, Lucr. And s, with its vowel before a vowel; Success' indignos
noli tu far moleste. Cato.

Lu in Luceo is long, yet Vivaeque producent lu^cernae. Hor.

Among the Comics, we read venu^stas and volu^ptas: and smara^gdos in Mart.
Sardonichas, smara^gdos, adamantas, iaspidas, uno Portat in articulo.

Lucret. (like the Greeks, with (...) -- quibus nihil est negatum) makes
syllables long and short at pleasure;

Crassaque pugnabant liquidis and liquida crassis. and Hor. takes the same
liberty: but with Mart.

Nobis non licet esse tam disertis
Qui musas colimus severiores.
Taliambics are often used, as by Live. Andronic.

Dirige odorisequos, ad certa cubilia ca^nes:
so Virg.

Quanquam animus, meminisse horret, luctuque refu^git.
which refugit cannot be of the Preter tens, as Servius would have it. Thus he
also givs us a dactyl in the sixth foot;

Et spumas miscent argenti, vivaque sulphura. In all which cases the Greeks go
beyond the Latins.

FINIS.

