Irelands Advocate: OR, A SERMON PREACHED AT A PUBLIC FAST HELD BY Authority,
July the 27. in behalf of bleeding IRELAND.

BY John Geree, Pastor of Tewkesbury, in GLOUCESTERSHIRE.

2 Chronicles. 19.11. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.

Published by Authority.

Printed at Dublin, and reprinted at London for William Bladen, 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir John Temple Knight, MASTER OF THE ROWLES, and One of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
SIR,
THis pious Advocate of ours (like the good Samaritan at a dead lift stirred up
by God to be so charitable) do I with the more humble boldness thus send
abroad in your Honors Name, that (in so great a work) it may help to further
Him, who (to my knowledge) much honors it, (both in Your own Person, and
honored good friends in England.) His own Worth makes him most welcome where
ever he is known, (his sweet disposition and great gifts:) Here (where he is a
Stranger) Your Honors Countenance will ingratiate him to all pious minds, and
every where much advantage the Cause that he has in hand. Which I recommend to
Gods Blessing, together with Your Honors Zeal, Praying for more Blessings
thereon, than to

Your Honors many ways much bounden Servant, Joh. Harding.

Irelands Advocate: OR, A Sermon preached at a Fast held by Authority July 27.
in behalf of bleeding Ireland.
JUDGES 5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty.


THe special Occasion of this days solemn Assembly, is for the People and
Cause of God in Ireland. Great Might is there raised against Gods people; and
so against the Lord. They sue for help to Our dread Sovereign and Parliament.
Help is spiritual or temporal. This latter is restrained to fewer; the former
belongs to All. Both have their seasons. On this day we are assembled by the
gracious Command of Authority to yield our Brethren spiritual help: which
that we may be earnest and hearty in what can be more moveing then this censure
of the Holy, Ghost against all that desert God and his Church in the times of
grand Opposition. Curse ye Meroz, etc.

These words are part of Deborahs (...), or Song of triumph for their victory
over Sisera. Wherein

1 Chief Glory is ascribed to God as the Author of all the good which they
received, which is amplified by the greatness of their miseries before
deliverance. verse. 2.8.

2 Due thanks and praise is given to the instruments of this deliverance, which
is illustrated by their freenes, they were all Volunteers. verse. 9. etc.

3 There Is an expostulation with the Tribes who did not put their helping hands
to this work. There Is an Action of unkindnesse (as it were) commenced against
them. And yet because they were not without excuse, by reason of distance of
place, there is no severe censure denounced against them. verse. 15.16, 17.

4 There Is more sharp dealing with Meroz, a City (it seems) near; who had
opportunity and wanted only heart to the work, so there was either coldness
or falsenesse, and therefore their burden was heavy, as you hear, Curse ye,
i.e. pronounce misery and mischief upon her from God; says the Angel of the
Lord, that is, Barac, say some; All that are endued with the Spirit of God, say
others; Or, what if we understand here the Angel of the Covenant, the Redeemer
of his Church, who appeared to Joshua with a drawn sword, as the Churches
Deliverer and Avenger. Josh. 5.13, 14, 15. whom ever we understand in
particular: it imports thus much in the general, That this was no ^arnall
Curse, flowing from any carnal spirit of revenge, but dictated by the Spirit
of God. And as it was not carnal, so neither was it rash, for it is reiterated
and aggravated, Curse ye bitterly, Let her undergo the bitterest censure
without remorse. But what is the Reason of this so great severitie? Were the
Merozites persecutors? or abettors of the malignant party? No, there is no such
intimation. But they were not helpful. They went not forth, they would be at
no cost, pains or danger to help the Lord. Why has the Lord need of help? or
was the war against him? Answ. The war, in as much as it was against the
Lords people, was against the Lord. And God, as in an ordinary way he works by
means, may be said to need help, that is fit instruments to serve his
Providence to effect his pleasure. His Church needs help, and that is the Lords
need. And here again is a rhetorical repetition, or musical expolition, to
the help of the Lord against the mighty. The Greatness of the enemies, that made
help needful, its likely discouraged these faithless cowardly Merozites, that
they pulled in their horns, as many now adays do; being afraid to show
themselves in the Lords Causes against the mighty. So then, here you see 1. A
Curse denounced. 2. The injoyner of it; which shows the Purity and Validity of
it, The Angel of the Lord. 3. The iteration of it with aggravation, Curse ye
bitterly, showing the seriousnes and certainty of it. 4. The Object, Meroz and
her inhabitants. Vrbs and Civitas; as though Meroz should be made like Jericho,
desolated in regard of building and inhabitants, unless we understand a
Metonymie in the first. 5. The Cause; for not helping the Lord against the
mighty. I will not now insist upon all the points that this Text holds forth. I
will not stand to enlarge my self on this, That the Churches enemies and
battles and needs are the Lords. Nor will I stay to show you, that the enemies
of God and his Church are many times mighty. Though points neither unusefull
nor impertinent, would the time permit the handling of them. But being it is
now the latter end of the day, I shall study rather to be lively than long,
and therefore content my self with this one observation.

Not to yield aid to the Lord against the enemies of the Church is a most
accursed Sin. Doct.
This omission exposes to the severest judgments. Judge. 8.6, 7. When Gideon
had discomfited the Midianites, and was in the pursuit of his victory, he and
his men waxed faint, and he required help from the men of Succoth, but they
rejected him: wherefore they were first threatened, and after felt a most
fearful punishment, being torn with thorns and briars of the wilderness,
verse. 16. to teach them, more to respect the Lord in his battles. Into the same
sin ran the men of Penuel, verse. 8.9. And they received answerable misery,
verse. 17. Judges 20. When such folly was committed on the Levites Concubine,
and the Tribes were ass nbled to put away sin from Israel by punishing the
sinners, which was to be done by War, because the Benjamites would take upon
them the protection of their brethren, children of Beliall, verse. 12.13, 14.
The children of Israel then vowed a vow, that whosoever came not up to help the
Lord, should be put to death Judge. 21.5. And the men of Iabesh Gilead being
found delinquents, verse. 9. They fell every mother and mothers son; none were
saved but 400. young Virgins. So unworthy a thing was it esteemed, not to help
the Lord against the mighty. Deuteronomy. 23.34. There Is an heavy curse laid upon the
Ammonites and Moabites, verse. 3. and why? because they helped not the Lord in
his Church; they met not his people with bread and water, verse. 4. But hired
Balaam against them.

Reas. 1. Because not to help the Lord in his Churches quarrel s discovers a
traiterous and rebellious heart against the Lord and his people. And you know
treason and falsenes against a King and his liege people, how odious and
dangerous it is: it draws the weight of the Kings displeasure on the guilty.
And Christ our King hates treachery, as much as any. He that is not with me,
says Christ, is against me, Mat. 12.30. And he that is against Christ, does
deserve and will not avoid his Curse. He whose heart is right, accounts Christ's
cause his own, and cannot choose but be active. Want of help discovers then a
traiterous heart to Christ's Kingdom. By the like reason, in this present Irish
Rebellion, if any will not put his hand against the Rebels, may we not as well
conclude, his heart is with them; and so it is traiterous to Gods people, and
in them to the Lord.

Reas. 2. He that comes not to the help of the Lord, does, as much as in him
lies, expose the Name of God to dishonor, and the Church to ruin; and so
will be Accessorie to all the dishonours of God, by the insultation and
blasphemy, and all that the Church suffers by the cruelty of their enemies.
Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet; he that hinders not when he may,
commands; and he that helps not the Lord, hinders not his enemies. Here, for
ought that the Merozites did, the Church might have continued under the bondage
and cruelty of Iabin King of Canaan; and the Lord thereby under reproach and
blasphemy. Yea, Barao and Deborah might have been overthrown in this service,
their innocent blood shed, the Tyrants more enraged, and God more dishonored,
if every man had sit at home like the inhabitants of Meroz. And is it not a
sinful and accursed thing not to help the Lord against the mighty?

Reas. 3. He that comes not to the help of the Lord in the quarells of his
Church, breaks many bonds and engagements. We are the work of Gods hands; made
after his own Image; in him we live, move, and have our being; we profess
Redemption by him; are in league with him; and should we desert this Lord? what
ingratitude were that? For Subjects to desert a gracious King, in a good cause,
wherein he will take good care for their indempnitie; how vile were it? so is
the case between us and Christ. And is it not an accursed thing not to help the
Lord? Besides, we also neglect the bonds and engagements between us and the
Church, which are many, great and precious.

Reas. 4. Neglect to help the Lord comes from such evil Causes as do discover
it to be an accursed sin. For whence arises it, but either from Hypocrisy,
when our persons are with the Church, but our hearts with the enemies? Or from
prophanenes, when men are not affected with the dishonours of God or his Cause;
as it is like the men of ^abesh Gilead were not, Judge. 21. Or from an heart
hardened against the miseries and moanes of the Church. Or from carnal fears,
arising from the enemies greatness; as it is like it was with the men of
Succoth, Judge. 8.6. Or from diffidence of Gods protection. All which roots are
of so hateful a nature to God, that he cannot choose but cast his curse on so
foul a sin flowing from them.

Quest. How many ways may help be afforded to the Lord in his Church?

Answ. Help to be yielded to the Church is either Spiritual or Temporal.
Spiritual are Preces and lacrymae, Prayers and Tears.

1. Repentance. Lacrymae, Tears for sin. The worst enemies of the Church are
her Sins. Their Sins strengthen their enemies, and weaken their friends. Dan.
8.12. An Host was given the grand enemy of the Church to cast the truth to the
ground: and why? because of transgression. And he practiced and prospered. See;
Transgression makes Error to prevail against Truth. So Isa. 59.1, 2. Sin
weakens Gods hand, as it were, who is our best friend. Hence Psa. 78.58, 61,
etc. for the superstition and prophanenes of his people, Gods strength is said
to be delivered into captivity and his glory into the enemies hand. They then
in the first place do the Church great assistance, that help to take a course
with Sin; that drown sin in the Sea of penitent tears; that kill it by
mortification. For were it not for sin, one would chase a thousand. Deuteronomy.
32.30.

2. Preces. Supplication to set God on work. God can overcome, if he would but
stir: but he will not stir for us, unless he be set on work by us. We must
overcome God by our prayers, and then we shall overcome by Him. Genesis 32. When
Esau was coming with an Army against Jacob, Jacob stays behind, as is
conceived, to wrestle with God in prayer, and thereby he prevayled with God,
and so with men. See Genesis 32.24, 28. Hos. 12.4, 5. When Israel was fighting
with Amalck, Moses did so help by holding up his hands, that victory depended
more on that, then on Joshua's Valor. So those that can Pray well, are as the
Horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof, and help the Lord against the
Mighty.

There is also Temporal help; which is either, 1. in the purse, by gift or
loan, to support the oppressed, or to maintain the war. For which God will
give you opportunity shortly for Ireland. Or 2. It may be in person, when men
are called, as Barac. Yea, Deborah would go rather then fail. And the Princes
and Tribes are praised that offered themselves willingly. All may help some of
these ways: and some may help in all of them.

The Cases where in God has need of help, are either of an higher nature, as
in open murdering wars: or of inferior alloy, as when the Christian and
Antichristian party are striving in our land, like twins in the womb of
Rebeccah, who shall have the upper hand, and advance the Cause they profess.

Use 1. To inform us what a Curse this land in general lies under: which to
take off ought to be one special work of this day. There Is a quarrel this day
in Ireland, between the limbs of Antichrist, and the Lord Jesus in his truth
and members. And the Lords enemies are mighty; if not in their particulars, yet
in their multitude. Insomuch that the Lords flock is driven away, and the Lord
has been (as I may say) put to the worse. And have we helped the Lord against
the mighty? or helped in any measure considerable in reference to our ability
and engagements? Oh no! my brethren, I tell you a sad thing, not fit to be
mentioned, but (as St. Paul spoke of the profaneness of some Phillipians) with
tears; Our Brethren in Ireland have fled into diverse parts, not only three
months from before their enemies (which was one of the great burdens that put
David into such a strait. 2 Samuel 24.13.) but almost twice three months now;
And we have been as the waters that fail; Nay as Egypt that broken reed, that
did not support but wound those that stayed on her: Even so in some respect and
degree have we been to them. Read that excellent Speech of one of the Worthies
of our Nation, the renowned Pim, which he had before the Lords at a Conference,
and you will see confirmed what I say. How long have their and our Brethren of
Scotland, (Christianly forgetting the supplies that Ireland rashly offered
against them in the day of their calamity, truly honorable for that
forgetfulness) How long did they stand offering assistance, before it was
effectually accepted? Was this to help the Lord, to delay the help of others?
Are not our delays the cause why Ireland may sadly lament before the Rebels,
as David before Absalom, Psalm. 3.1, 2. Lord how are they increased that trouble
me? Many are they that rise up against me. Many are they which say of my soul,
there is no help for him in God. Selah. Are not our delays the causes of those
many heart-cutting insultations of the Rebels over the Loyal? Where Is your
aid from England, your hope, your God? Have we not had a Call from God, as well
as Barac and the Princes of Israel? Have not their moanes and cries come in
their Petitions to King and Parliament? Did not they rely on Us? Are not we
engaged to them? and is not the quarrel Religion, and so the Cause the Lords?
Are not we then in Meroz her sin? Oh! may not much of the blood of Ireland, and
Gods dishonor there be charged on England for want of our coming forth to
help the Lord? And what shall I do now? make intercession against England, as
Eliah sometime did against Israel? Romans 11.2. What shall I say now? Curse ye
England? O God forbid! We are come together for deprecation of evil, and not
imprecation. But I must tell you, or I should not deal faithfully; that the
Curse of Meroz hangs over England for this, till it be bewailed and deprecated.
Oh then now bewail this sin, pray God to pardon this Omission this day. If we
truly bewail it, God may make this sin find out the Actors of it, and we
may be free: but unless it be bewailed, it is Englands sin. We have this to
comfort Us: The King of England cried, haste, haste, (when he was yet in
Scotland) or else Ireland will be lost. The Commons of England offered aid more
then Ireland asked, within as short a time as could be expected. The Petitions
from all coasts cried for speedy help for Ireland. This is some clearing of the
Nation; yet, help was not afforded, where was the stay? Popish Lords and
Prelates (hearken ye Petitioners for Prelates) stayed all in the Lords House.
So the Lord in Ireland was not helped against the mighty: England did not help,
though many in England would have helped the Lord. This sin then is committed
in England, and will be the sin of England till it be bewailed. Oh then, above
all sins, lament this day this desertion of the Lord. What if a foreign enemy
had come in all this while, where had Ireland been? Nay, where England? Under
what guilt and danger? Therefore lament this omission. Unless we do lament it,
God will not respect our Prayers this day of Intercession. If we pray mercy for
Ireland, yet we shall pray none for our selves. This Curse will prevail
against the Blessing. Blot it out therefore with Tears of Repentance.

Use 2. For Terror and Reproof of such as help the mighty against the Lord.
They must need be subject to a double curse, having double guilt. But are there
any such? Answ. Yes, Too many; and they of diverse sorts.

1 Those Popish Lords and Prelates, and all that malignant party, that have
laid blocks in the way to hinder help from Ireland, hindering thence either men
or money. Those helped the Rebels in Ireland, Encouraging and strengthening
the hearts and hands of those Murderers, and giving them opportunity to act
their cruelties, and increase their party; But greatly discouraging the hearts,
and weakening the hands of the Lords side, (of Gods poor people and party
there.) Those therefore are worse then Meroz.

2. Those, that (when help had been long delayed, and the House of Commons had
discovered the maine cause of the sticking of this, and other of Gods causes to
be the opposition of the Popish Lords and Prelates in the house of Peers) would
yet petition for the Prelates, and so labor to keep up those, that hindered
help for Ireland, and so did themselves hinder God, and help the mighty; (To
say nothing what mighty enemies many of them have been against the Lords
Servants and Ordinances in this Nation;) They were part of the Mighty against
Ireland. Nor will their plea of not-Petitioning for the evil, help here: for
in this cause they must light a candle to find out a good in their office (not
to prejudice their persons) unless they may possibly be thought to be on the
Lords side, that are justly in durance for Protesting against the Parliament, [
the maine Refuge, as things stand, both for Ireland and England.] And
therefore, Brethren, (I speak not in passion, but compassion) Those that have
endeavored to uphold them, have helped the Mighty against the Lord. The only
Plea left is Humiliation and Confession, which we in this place have cause to
be careful in this day; because, notwithstanding our light and profession, yet
(by what means you know) we have been deep in this transgression. Blot out
(this day) this guilt and stayne with penitent tears.

3. Those people that go on impenitently in any crying sins, Drunkenness,
whoring, swearing, etc. Those Magistrates, that protect and countenance
sinners, (Whores, Drunkards, Sodomites, Murderers, etc.) These help the
Mighty. Our sins strengthen our enemies, weaken our friends, as we have
showed from Dan. 8.12. Isa 59.1, 2. Therefore sinners that repent not, help the
Mighty against the Lord. Sins make God as a Mighty man that cannot save, as
appears by Jeremyes complaint, Cap. 14. Quest. Why should thou be as a
Mighty man that cannot save? and Gods reply, verse. 10. Thus have they loved to
wander; Therefore the Lord does not accept them. As holy Prayer does hold Gods
hands that he cannot strike, Exodus 32.10. Let me alone: So foul sins hold him
that he cannot help. He is burdened with our sins, Amos 2.13, 14. Good
Magistrates, by punishing sin, save the Lords flock; as Phinchas did; and
then those that protect evil, make them a prey. Now those that bring
spiritual or temporal weakenings, help the Mighty against the Lord. Oh
consider this! To be more guilty then Meroz; deeper under Gods Curse then they,
what an evil thing and bitter is this? Oh lay it to heart and repent!

Use 3. To reprove those that help not the Lord against the Mighty enemies in
Ireland, (or elsewhere.) That help not spiritually or temporally. For Temporal
help to Ireland we have had yet but little opportunity. And therefore I shall
more press our defect of spiritual help. They then are reproveable that
labor not to kill their own sins. The Sins of Ireland and England, these are
the greatest enemies; and our Repentance is their death. It was never said,
that the Lords hand was shortened that it could not help, Isa. 59.1, 2.
in regard of the strength, rage, or plots of enemies; but in regard of the
sins of the Church. They then that suffer sin to live and sway, help not
against the most dangerous enemy. Is not it help to disarme Enemies? the sting
of sins is their guilt; which repentance takes off, and so disarmes them they
can do no more hurt. Will you suffer then a sting in the hand of the Lords
enemies? You then that repent not of Personal and National Sins, especially
the growth and countenancing of Popery, which has given Papists advantage to
rise up, arm, and plot against us, and may move God to sell us into their
hands, you I say help not the Lord. You also that play not the Jacobs, striving
with God in Prayer for Ireland. You that have not held up your hands with Moses
against Irish Amalekites. You that have not with Nehemiah fasted and prayed,
nor journeyed neither for the Church of God, you have not yielded all that help
to the Lord which was within your sphaere. You are guilty of that sin that
holy Samuel put an absit, a God forbid, upon. 1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid that I
should cease praying for you. Hearken to this all ye that have not counted
Germane, and especially Irish misery, a just Occasion of humbling and praying
you have not helped the Lord; and how will you avoid Meroz Curse? Oh then, see
your sin in this, and repent; yea, carry this home to your Neighbors, that
would not set this day apart, nor here afford their presence. Tell them, I say,
that this was a day appointed for the help of the Lord against the Mighty, and
they not coming forth to it, they are surely and justly under Meroz Curse;
press them therefore to fear, repent, and reform so foul, so dangerous a
neglect.

Use 4. To press all upon all occasions in all ways to help the Lord against
the mighty. Should we not fly all sin, but especially such as be Crying, as
this is? Should you not fear, and avoid the Curse of God, especially such a
bitter one? then help the Lord. Would you not be found false in the Brotherly
Covenant with the Church, Amos 1.9. nor treacherous to the Lord Christ? then
help the Lord. What are you when your day comes without the Lords help? With
what face can you expect or challenge help from God, when you have deserted
him? Oh then help the Lord against the Mighty with all manner of help within
your power.

1 Yield spiritual help by Repentance, disarming and killing sin; and by
Prayer, awakening, setting God on work. This day is set apart for this purpose,
(think not much with it, though a Market day, if it be employed in humbling and
prayer; it will be better in regard of soul and safety then a Fayre-day.)
Improve then this day for the bewayling of thine own sins, and the sins of
others. Pray God for the pardon of Englands and Irelands sins; to sanctify
their sufferings and trials for refining, that sin this day may be
vanquished, and then the work is the better-half done. Play the Israelites this
day; deserve the title of the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16.
by wrestling this day even to prevayling over God. Take from him the burden
of your sins, Jer. 14.9. Psalm. 62.11.
that make him as a man that cannot save. Oh, if you thus behave your selves,
God will be grieved for you, and deliver you. Power belongs to God. His will
overrules all: and this is the way to rule with our God. If the work be not
done this day, other Fast days will succeed; and when they come, remember then
that they are part, a chief part of the help of the Lord against the Mighty:
See you do not dare to be weary of them, or neglect them, for fear of the
Curse of Meroz.

2. Help the Lord with your purses. You will be called on ere long for gift or
loan to Ireland. Remember when that comes, it is to help the Lord against the
Mighty. And then can you, dare you be sparing? Is it not the Lord that gives
all, keeps all, blesses all; and can blast all; or take away all? and dare
you be hand-bound? If you look no higher then poor Ireland, you know what the
Apostle says, 1 John 3.17. He that has this worlds goods, and sees his
Brother in need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion, how dwells the
love of God in him? Would not this move you? But it is to help the Lord in
Ireland against the Mighty. Will you not be glad of an Opportunity to express
Bounty? Its the Lord (who has not made you Proprietaries, but Stewards of what
you have) that calls now to you to lay out for him in Ireland. Can you be
slack, and not unfaithful? We read 1 Chronicles. 29. of a voluntary Contribution,
(and it was a mighty one) and when it was effected, the people rejoiced, and
especially David, and blessed God most affectionately, that gave them first
substance, and then hearts to offer. Now there is as much Necessity in this
offering, as Excellency in that; and should not we be as forward as they. Read
and study that Chapter, and it will enlarge your hearts, (or fill your faces
with blushing) by your forwardnes in this to give your Sovereign and Parliament
occasion to rejoice in you, to bless God for you, as they did to David. Nay,
you of this place have one peculiar way of helping your Brethren in Ireland,
without hurt, it may be with benefit to your selves. For, behold here an
Ordinance of Parliament, for such as carry any provision into diverse ports of
Ireland, to receive their money for it in convenient time out of the Chamber of
London. And therefore let this incline you to traffic that way, to help your
Brethren in want and your selves at once.

3. Help with your Persons. You that are pressed, or may be pressed, or may have
friends in that service, see, it is to help the Lord, our great Sovereign, our
best friend. He is in distress in Ireland in his members; withdraw not, go
cheerfully, do valiantly. You see, rather then the Lord should be deserted,
Deborah (a woman) would go forth to War, Judge. 4.8, 9. and who shall
withdraw? You are not now going (through mistake) against the Lord, as in the
Scottish expedition. Wherein, you and we may bless God and his instruments, as
David did Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. that prevented shedding of Blood. But you
are to go against Antichristian, bloody, unjust, filthy, barbarous Irish
Rebels, many of whom have deserved an hundred deaths. You cannot fight, dye,
or overcome in a better, or more honorable quarrel. Now every good Christian
will pray, Gods blessing on you. They will honor you returning prosperous,
pity and help you and yours, suffering. It Is next to martyrdom to dye in such
a Cause; and the most glorious and comfortable Victory to overcome in such a
quarrel; and therefore let all be encouraged, that have a just call, with
Zebulum and Nephtali, Judge. 5.18.
to jeopard their lives in the high places of the field; because it is to help
the Lord against the Mighty,

Need you any more Motives then this, that it is for the Lord? Shall I not
disparage and displease you, if I should think you need further encouragement?
yet, when the Spirit is willing, the flesh many times is weak; and therefore,
give me leave to add a few Considerations more to quicken you to the help of
the Lord against the Mighty in Ireland.

1 Consider, In helping Ireland you help your selves. For you cannot or need
not be ignorant, what Irish Rebels aim at; or what they threaten. If England
help not Irelond, then Ireland is utterly undone; lost: and what will become of
England? but to be the next bit; all our Privilege will be to be devoured last.

2. Consider the forwardnes of the Scots; willing of themselves, and praying
that their help might be accepted, as the Macedonians in another case, 2 Cor.
8.3.4. May not then the forwardnes of the Scots be made a Motive to Us, to help
the Lord in War, as well as the Macedonians Example was used by the Apostle,
to excite the Corinthians to relieve the Saints in want? 2 Cor. 8.8.

3. Hereby we shall especially manifest our piety and charity: that, to the
Lord; this, to his Church. And so we shall much refresh our Brethrens souls;
and occasion much prayer and thankesgiving to God, as the Apostle excellently
expresses the fruit of help and supply to Christ in his members, 2 Cor. 9 12,
13. All charity and mercy is precious; but that is best, where need and
misery is most; and such is theirs that are under the Oppression of the Mighty.

4 Consider what a mercy it is unto Us, that it is our part to help Others. God
might have made it our lot to have needed help. Therefore since we are set on
the better side, shall we not be careful and cheerful in dischargeing our
duty?

5. Consider how God has helped us, to engage us. God has done for England
above all the Nations under the Sun. Many a time have we been in straits, but
did God ever leave us in the suds? Remember 88. The 5. of November: The 4. of
Iannary; all the Plots and attempts of late; yet we live, we prevail, we
flourish. And shall England desert God in the Opposition of the Mighty? God
forbid! Rather let us say with David against the oppositions of carnal Michal,
2 Samuel 6.21
It was for the Lord who chose me, etc. So let us say, Its for the Lord who
has chosen us to profess the truth, and protected and helped us so many
times; therefore (by help of his Grace) we will be forward, answerable too, yea
(with the Macedonians) above strength, 2 Cor. 8.3.
in the help of the Lord against the Mighty.

6 Consider, the Lords side is the better and the stronger side; and therefore
help the Lord. Newters you may not be, for in this case Newtrality is no better
then treachery. Good men will take the better wise men will incline to the
stronger side. If then you would manifest either Goodness or Wisdom, help
the Lord. None can doubt, that the Lords side is the better side, who is not
Atheistical. And by the same faith we may believe it the stronger side. Those
that are on the Lords side, may say as Elisha to his man, there be more with us
then against us. 2 King. 6.16. With this, Hezekiah encouraged his people. 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. With this, Isaiah aforehand insults over the strongest
opposition; Associate your selves, etc. and you shall be broken, for God is
with us. Isa. 8.8, 9. The enemies may sometimes prevail a while for the
humbling, and trial of his people, and that their own sins may be full and
ripe. But God in his good time will take notice of their rage, and put an hook
into their nostrils; especially being sought (as now he is) for Ireland. And
therefore make sure of victory at last. Though our enemies were as the Anakims,
though Pope and Spain, etc. should bandy together, yet so long as we are on the
Lords side, we may encourage our selves, Numb. 14.
and show Joshua and Calebs faith, that they shall be but bread and spoil for
us. The blessing of Gad, Genesis 49.19. shall be the portion of Ireland, Gad, a
troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last. 1 Samuel 4. The
Philistines prevayled against the Lord, and carried his strength into
captivity: but see Chapter 5. and 6. could they keep it, were they not glad to
give glory to God, and send it back? Thus God will regain his honor in the
ruin of his enemies, they shall fall before him. And then what comfort will it
be that we have helped the Lord? what comfort and confidence have they in this
Nation, who have petitioned, and have been against the mighty enemies of Purity
and liberty, above those that have sided with them? Now we see God making his
Servants to prevail, and so will it be much joy of heart that we have helped
the Lord against the Mighty in Ireland. When God has returned the captivity
of his people, and made his enemies his footstool, be encouraged then to help
the Lord against the Mighty in Ireland, and every where. Because we are this
day especially assembled for Ireland therefore I more particularly apply the
doctrine to them. But you may in your med itations apply it proportionably to
Germany, to all the Catholics in our own Nation which are for God, to stir
you up to help the Lords side against the Popish, by all the means you can,
power or prayers. And in our own land our Protestation is an inviolable
engagement. I will now add some Means to enable to duty.

Our hearts may be helped in this duty by these Means following. Means.


1. Let us consider the near Bonds that are between us and the Lords people, in
reference to whom this help is to be afforded. Between Us and All the Lords
people, there is the bond of one body mystical, and one Spirit. One Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. We all are
of the same City, the heavenly Jerusalem; of the same household, the household of
Faith; and Brethren in that household, Ephesians. 2.19. But the oppressed in Ireland
are also under the same King; of the same Nation; and many of them, of our
dear friends and allies. Will not so many bonds duly pondered, draw help from
us? Undoubtedly they will. If one be oppressed that is near of kin to us, do we
not count it a shame to let him be trampled upon, and we not help him? If we be
what we profess, shall not Spiritual engagements excite us as well as civil
and natural?

2. We must labor to get a sympathizing heart; an heart moved with compassion
to their misery: a thing expressly required, Romans 12.15. Nehem. 1.3, 4. We
shall find Nehemiah first inquiring after the state of the Church, then
sympathizing and compassionating, whence flowed first the Spiritual aid of
Fasting and Prayer, verse. 4. to the end of the Chapter, and then civil help
with the expense and trouble of a long journey, and other costly, tedious and
courageous endeavors, as largely appears in the sequel of the story, in
Chapters 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Compassion is the root of all relief. That moves the
heart, and she commands in chief. Oh then, labor to have sympathy in your
hearts, and you will help the Lord in his members. And my Beloved, if you would
but a little consider Ireland, you would see in them all Motives of Compassion
so concurrent, that your hearts cannot choose but be moved for them. Things that
move Pity, are 1. Arist. Rhet. lib. 2. ca. 10.
some things in the evils suffered; as when they are (says the Philosopher)
(...) destructory; as (...), diverse kinds of death; (...) unworthy beatings of
the body, such as St. Paul met with, 2 Cor. 11.25. (...) deforming or
dismembring the body, (...) famine. (...) to be deprived of friends. (...) to
be plucked from friends and familiars is pitiful. Now which of these is
wanting in Ireland? Nay, which is not there to be found in the superlative
degree? They are destroyed heaps upon heaps, and many times with fearful
kinds of death; hanged, starved with cold, famished to death, and what not? So
that Ireland may complain with Israel, Psalm. 79.2, 3. The dead bodies of thy
servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of heaven: the flesh of thy
Saints to the beasts of the earth. Their blood have they shed like water round
about Jerusalem. Their bodies likewise are sometimes disdainfully beaten,
sometimes dismembered, and which is more disgraceful and miserable, the virgins
and women are ravished by barbarous villains; and daughters of the Nobility
and Gentry of best account (and some Wives too) forced to be married to them.
For loss of friends it is in the highest degree. They are pulled one from
another, to be slaughtered before their eyes: yea, the Infants pulled out of
their mothers belly to be murdered in a cruel manner with them. And how can
they be free from famine being so many driven from house and home, stripped not
only of sustenance, but vestments? And this to have been in the Winter, Mat.
24.20.
(an aggravating circumstance which our Savior taught the jews to pray
against) when darkness, cold, bogs, water, frost and snow increase the danger
and discomfort of such naked flight. Can any heart choose but be moved with
compassion at such sufferings? If they should, may not Ireland justly renew the
Complaint, Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, Lam. 1.12.

2. Pity is moved by consideration of the parties suffering, where two things
chiefly move pity: one, as they are considered in themselves, the other with
reslexion on us. 1. In themselves, indignity does move pity; when such suffer
as it is not meet should suffer, as if godly men and women, and godly Ministers
suffer; so when the Ancients and Infants suffer. Hence the Prophet in the
Lamentations labors to move pity, Lam. 4.7, 8. and 5.11, 12, 13. and does not
this circumstance concur to move pity to Ireland? Are not they most subject
to misery that are Protestant's, and will not renounce their Religion? Are not
the best Ministers, and best people worst used? There also neither have the
young been spared, nor the Ancient honored, nor the Honorable respected. 2.
If you consider them with reflection on our selves; and there two circumstances
chiesly move pity. 1. Unity. 2. Parity. (...) Familiars.
When there is nearness, and when men are of the same condition. How near
they are in bonds to us has been formerly showed; and there be amongst them to
suit the conditions of every one of us: to move virgins to pity, virgins have
suffered rapes and violence: to move wives to pity, They are moved with pity
(...). Arist. ubi supr.
they may hear the miseries of wives in the loss of husbands, suffering
heinous things before their faces: so Fathers sufferings may work on Fathers:
Childrens suffering on childrens: for they may reslect, this might, this may be
my case.

3. Consider the Parties that be apt and should be most moved to pity, and you
shall see something in that to move pity. There be chiefly three sorts of
people that should be compassionate. 1. They that have had experience of evil.
2. Those that are sensible of their own infirmity and danger. 3. (...), those
that are instructed, because able to judge of misery. Now do not all these
call on us for sympathy, who have escaped lately, if not the feeling, yet the
fear of such dangers, having had not long since two Armies in our Nation, and
many Plots against it? And do we not know how subject we are to the like? Have
not we (as the Prophet said) sins also amongst us; 2 Chronicles. 28 10.
yea, and Papists too, and discontented spirits likewise? And has not God
afforded us ingenuous breeding to judge aright of things? you see then, as
sympathy will produce help, so how sympathy may be wrought in us for Irelands
present misery.

3. Labor to stir up in you zeal and love to the Lord. For where that is,
what will we not do where the Lord is engaged? this will constrain us, with
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14 15. 2 Samuel 6.21 22.
to give our selves to any thing wherein we may serve him: It Is the Lord, says
David, to whom I am thus and thus engaged, therefore he would do more and
more. And thus will zeal to God work on us.

4 Add to these Faith and Courage. Mighty enemies are apt to stir carnal
fears which must be cured, ere we can put to our hands: by Faith we must
apprehend Gods assistance, and thereby cure fears; grow Courageous, and then
we will own and help the Lord.

Use. 5. Then hence (last of all) it will follow, that they are Blessed that help
the Lord against the Mighty. They do not only avoid a blot and a Curse, but
get honor and a blessing. God out of his graciousnesse is more ready to Bless
then Curse. So Judge. 5.9, 24. The Princes are honored that offered themselves
willingly: and Jael is pronounced blessed above women for putting her hand to
the nail; and so it is now. Blessed then be our Gracious Sovereign, that has
so often and earnestly called for help to the Lord in Ireland, and now at last
manifested increase of goodness in offering his own Person willingly, to help
the Lord in his bleeding Church; if the Parliament shall think fit, (but they
will more tender the light of Israel, that it be not quenched!) Blessed be the
House of Commons, that have offered so largely, and been so studious to further
help to the Lord! And blessed be the Noble Peers, who have joined with them in
so good a work! Blessed be the Royal City, who have been so forward with their
Petitions and Purses to afford this help! yea, Blessed be they and the Shires
near, who might and did offer themselves willingly not only to Petition for
Ireland, but to help the Lord in his Worthies of Parliament against the
Plotters nearer hand! Blessed be they that give or lend liberally for the Lords
assistance! Blessed be our Sovereign, that religiously commanded, and All you
that have religioussy observed this day of Humiliation, to help the Lord
against the Mighty in Ireland Blessed (I say) be all the Lords helpers, in
their names, estates, bodies, souls, now and for evermore. Amen! Amen!

FINIS.

