THE Art of well speaking, BEING A LECTURE Read Publicly at Sr. Balthazar
Gerbiers ACADEMY.

COLOS. 4. ver. 6. Sermo vester semper cum gratia, sit sale conditus ut sciatis
quomodo oporteat vos uni cuique respondere. Let your speech be always with
grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man.
etc. Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier
Lane, 1650.

TO THE Right High, and Supreme Power of this Nation, the Parliament of
ENGLAND. AND In particular to the Right Honorable their Speaker William Lenthal
Esquire And to every Individual Member of their ASSEMBLY.
THe Ancients considering in man the faculties ordained to good, distinguished
them in two. The one of well-doing, and the other, of well-speaking.

The Moderns have esteemed the latter less considerable and more dangerous.

As for me, I shall not undertake to judge, as if they had done amiss.

But for as much as I look upon the one, ordained to the acquiring of the
other, and that I highly esteem the faculty of Wel-Speaking; not to make a
vain ostentation of its Art, but as an Instrument and means to provide in Man
the desire of Well-doing, and to teach him the way to accomplish the good which
he has propounded to himself.

I have freely addicted my mind to teach in this your Academy, the Art of
Well-Speaking, to this end only, in testimony whereof, and for a full
justification of my sincere intentions I do humbly present you with the first
Lecture in the which I do but declare, that rich quality wihch is in
Well-Speaking, to wit; to be the Image and principal sensible argument of what
is in us, a Rational, Intelectuall, and Inmateriall Soul, which is all one as
to say Immortal, As for the Rules and Documents which shall be taught
hereafter in your Academy to the Lovers of Wel-Speaking, to incite them to do
well, It shall be in imitation of those who having little pocket Watches
subject to fail in their Motions, and to be out of course, are repaired and
set in order againa; by the Sun which cannot fail in his splendour, nor his
Motion.

You are this day (Most Honourables) the light of the State, you are the Movers
of the great Body of the Common wealth, You are (I say, the Public Voice, and
Your Voice is as the Voice of God.

And therefore those Orders which I intend to give to such who desire to learn
to speak well, shall all wait the Dictates of Your Votes and Commands. Else I
should rather choose, to teach, and to learn Silence: continuing still.

Your most prostrate humble and obedient Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.
From the Academy this 6 of January 1649.
The Art of well speaking, being a Lecture read gratis at Sir Balthazar
Gerbiers Academy.
Prove. 8. 6, 7. Audite nam praestantia eloquar, and aperura labiorum meorum
eloquar recta; nam veritatem meditatam effert palatum meum, and abominationi
labiis meis est effere improbitatem. Hear, for I will speak of excellent
things, and the opening of my lips shall be right things; for my mouth shall
speak truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
Lovers of virtue:

I Shall at this present declare the Natural desire in man, to speak well.

The difficultnies which it meets withal, and the means to overcome them.

What is sought for, is commonly the thing desired, and hat which is most
desired, is seldom attained; for that the thing desired with the greatest
eagerness, is the more difficult by us to be found.

To prove this there will need but little labor, since doubtless many of you
in seeking what you earnestly desire, have found what you sought not after; and
might easily perceive that what you aimed at, was in a manner hidden from you.

And the cause hereof may well deserve our inspection, since doubtless the
desire in us can be no other then an effect of the matter by us desired.

How then should it happen that our desire being in its own effect,
nevertheless does seem to withdraw it self from us?

Desire is the coveting of one and the self same thing, yet notwithstanding
its very strange that the desire, and the object desired (as though they were
two contraries) seem to shun, and be separated the one from the other.

Contraries (as is said) they are not, since between the desire and the thing
desired, there is a mutual attractive simpathie and correspondence, yet
notwithstanding its so obscure, and disguised, that its very difficult to find
out its grounds.

Therefore, as you may have had many and sundry experiences of this doubtful
case; I shall (whilst you may be pleased to meditate on its resolve) treat of
one of the greatest, powerfullest, and most common effects of Appetites in this
world, to wit, of well speaking, and give you the proof thereof.

For that desire is an appetite, all appetites are reduced into three sorts;
as, a Natural appetite, a Sensitive appetite, and a Rational appetite.

The Natural appetite, belongs only to a body without a soul.

The Sensitive appetite, is proper to a sensible body.

And the rational appetite, can only be appropriated unto man, endued with
reason; nay all three are proper to Man, as well the Natural appetite, as the
Sensitive, and the Rational; for that in man the Elementary nature
co-opperates, and has its natural appetite, as you see man being heavy
descends.

The Sensible nature likewise is predominant in man, and has its sensible
appetites; for man as a sensible Animal touches, feels, hears, smells, and
tastes.

And above all the rest, he is endued with a rational nature, which according
to all reason is consequently an appetite likewise.

Now all the appetites which are universally sensible being but three, and
those three being perfectly placed in man, he therefore, both by a natural,
sensitive, and reasonable appetite, desires, seeks, passionates, and runs with
all his might after Eloquence, I mean the Art and Science of well speaking; it
is that he aims at, and what he fixes on.

True it is, that he does not always meet with that which he seeks for; have
I not told you so? And more-over, I can assure you, that in a State there may
be found a great number of Philosophers, Speculatists, and Moral men, nay
Divines, Doctors in Law, and in Physic; yet you will meet with a very few of
all these Professions, that have attained to the Art of well speaking; and its
more to be admired, that having so little of this Art, they make no better use
of it.

Whereof at the close of this Discourse I shall give you the reasons, and
likewise the means how we may obtain what we desire.

Let me but represent unto you the extent of the desire, and you will find,
that we shall not need to despair in our success.

For my scope is to open unto you (in time) all the ways which may contribute
to the accomplishment of our desires.

The appetite then is a desire, and the desire is a reciprocal appetite; this
is very easy to be comprehended, but not so easy to be understood, how that
naturally men incline to the Art of well speaking. For as I take it, all men
being of one kind, do generally desire to profess the Art of well speaking,
because that all men naturally long for the same thing, and Nature cannot but
desire its own good.

See you not how its appetite is universal, those that serve God in his
Church, are the first who are obliged, to endeavor to attain unto that gift;
for that its written, The lips of the Priests shall keep knowledge; and who
has ever heard, or found that any other Science is contained in the lips then
that of well speaking; for all other knowledge is in the Soul, and
understanding of man.

Well speaking does depend on the Lungs, and the channel which receives and
issues forth the Air, it depends of the Tongue, and of the Teeth.

Observe the Jews, whose Language is the most ancientest known to us; its
Consonants and Vowels are divided into letters depending of the throat, teeth,
and lips, and these three parts are most requisite, as being the organs of
Eloquence.

But the Letters which are pronounced by the lips, are such which are properly
and distinctly pronounced; and God in ancient times recommending the property
of the lips, says, It was to teach men to speak clearly, and pronounce
distinctly the Divine Mysteries.

This Science may be properly compared unto Justice in Monarchs, and Princes,
as being most powerful to keep Subjects in a due obedience, and absolutely
necessary in the great Body of a State; for that well speaking in a Princes
mouth, is that which above all other things captivates the hearts and
affections of his Subjects; and I dare say, that though a man were endued with
the knowledge of several Arts, and Sciences, that wanting the gift of
expression he will neither be regarded, nor esteemed of; for, Scire tuum nihil
est, nisi tescire hoc sciat alter: And when this gift meets in what Subject
soever, either by Nature, or by Art, its capable to make it sufficiently
commendable. Behold the Feminine Sex, and though silence be far more
commendable in Women then Eloquence, yet notwithstanding, when any of them
excel in that Art, she is so much the more to be admired as its unexpected
from her: So that the speech of the Woman to our Savior, True Lord, but the
dogs eat the crumbs that fall from the table, etc. ought to be remembered with
admiration, since it was observed by him who was the eternal Word, and by
which all things had their first being: And ought we not to admire that
transcendent civil expression of Abigals, That she would be the most humblest
Servant of all her Husbands Handmaides,

Certainly, the Art of well speaking, be it on what subject soever (so it tends
not to shift off the duty of doing well) is very highly to be esteemed, and
consequently greatly to be desired.

No sooner is an Infant laid on its mothers lap, but it strives to speak, and
that well too; yet wanting speech, it cries, whereby it may be conjectured to
have many things to say; even so, though contrariwise, when man begins to lose
his speech, its taken for a sign of privation of life, for that we then say,
the man is dead, and gone.

So that speech, and well speaking, being signs of a livelihood in Nature, I
therefore make no difficulty to term the desire of well speaking to be a
Natural appetite; common unto all men, extant in all men, at all times,
forasmuch as concerns the desire.

The nature of man is not like unto that of Savage creatures, retired and
solitary; but its civil, and domestic, nay familiar; and wherefore should she
then be bereaved of her universality?

I hold for certain, that among the Fowls, and Beasts of the Earth, there is
a common speech in their several kinds; for many times the Fishes have been
heard to utter a voice: And there have bin learned Philosophers, that have
observed a kind of correspondence in all Animals; in the Birds, Cocks, Hens,
Sparrows, Lenets, Canary Birds, and even the greater inhabitants of the Fields;
as Bulls, Oxen, and Kine, seem to converse among themselves; And why should
they not? since they have inward sencible appetites, the accomplishment whereof
depends of another individual of the same kind.

Universal Nature would have failed greatly, had it not afforded them some
external instrument to cause their desires to be understood; neither can we
expect that Birds, or Beasts should have so great a variety of sounds, words,
or terms; that they should need Dictionaries, or Vocabulers; the Greek,
Latin, or Chaldean Tongues, for their natural discourse, as men have, and the
reasons hereof are only two or three; First, that their familiar conversation
is but with a few, who are only capable of the same appetite they have. But men
converse with diverse Nations, amidst which, Nature foreseeing, capacities of
envy, jealousy, and enmity one against the other; though all men are of the
same kind. For though we see a man, or a Lady of a fair, beautifully, Lilly,
Rose-like complexion, as we English generally are; or that we behold a black
Ethiopian, as those are who live under the Torrid Zoane. We must not imagine
to our selves that such Creatures differ in their species, or kinds; and since
all, and each of us, and of them are possessed with reason, which distinguishes
the humane Creatures from all other kinds.

Now Nature (as I said) having foreseen, that all the singulars of one and
the self-same kind would not love each other, has not been only pleased for
our securities, to divide, and to separate us, by distances of places, and
other powerful Mediums, as great Seas; vast Forests, and inaccessable Hills,
but also by diversity of Languages, as well as of terms, and of the manner of
speaking; and for my part, I have no other reason why most expressing Nature
has provided so many sorts of Languages, but only to distinguish a friend from
an enemy, foreseeing that, Homo homini lupus, one man would be cruel to
another.

And here I shall take the freedom to say (reserving entire and uncontradicted
what has been said in the precedent Lecture, on all the Languages, Sciences,
Arts, and Noble exercises) that its almost a wonder Nature has not made a
dialect, and common proper Ideotisme to so great a Body as that of a whole
Nation.

The diversity of speech (as a man may properly say) serving man, as the guard
about the handle and pomell of a Sword. For that in these times a Father is not
in security among his own Children, nor a Wife in company of her Husband; so
that the perverseness of this Age might well require as many Languages in a
house as there are persons, for as the Scripture says, Frater venatur in
fratrem. Therefore let no lover of virtue think it strange, that amongst the
Academicall Orders, there is an Article inserted, prohibiting the speaking of
any matters of State: less, the discoursing of any passages of the times past,
or present, for that the Academy is only to instruct; and not to entertain
Disputants, which only cause contentions, hatred, and enmity: Pardon this
small digression.

Neither let us accuse Nature which has taken care for all common occurrences,
nor was she obliged to reflect on particulars, for the malice of particulars
detracts not a jot from universal wisdom.

She has not only provided in particular for the continuance of generation,
but also for the universal good; which is the conservation of the Species, or
Kind.

There remains yet a second consideration, Why it is that in the Animalls of
the Earth, the Birds in the Air, nor the Fishes in the Sea, we find not such
a rich, or abundant explication of Language, as amongst men, and herein I shall
venture to tell you a thing; which may seem to be a mere Paradox; or to excuse
my self better, you will believe, that I do but allege it by way of
comparison, or by a Rethoricall figure, by the which at the close of this
discourse, you will judge that all that I say is free from Amphibology.

Now, forasmuch as I know, the beasts have but two or three applications, which
they cannot accomplish but by themselves. As the appetite of eating, for to
sustain themselves: I would say (as you know very well) for to repair that
which it loses in it self, of its proper substance, and this appetite is the
individual appetite.

The other Appetite, is that of the kind, to wit, its conservation by it
generation, which are all the internal appetites I can perceive; the
conservation of its species and of its self, so that having but these two
appetites they have no need of any great eloquence to express themselves. And
the same would be in the species of man, if he had no other desires.

My self having been so curious as to inquire, and dive into the Languages of
the Savage Nations, I found that all their Rethorick was to be learned in one
hour, and by what one of them had set down in one sheet of paper, I collected
that it contained all their terms, their destinctions, phrases, and manner of
speech, And replying unto him, that it seemed to me a thing impossible, that in
so small a quantity of words, the Speeches, and terms of those Savages should
be comprehended.

He answered thus; and very much to the purpose: That Nature had provided them
with as many instruments and words as they stood in need of, for as they go
naked, and need no clothes, so they need not the words requisite to express a
hat, bands, cuffes, shirts, stockings, shoes, and the like, belonging to
accoutriments.

And as they dwell in Huts, under trees, and Caves under ground; so they need
not those propper terms in buildings, as the Foundation, Walls, the Roof, the
Seeling, the Hall, Chambers, Parlour, Cabbinets, Kitching and the like. And as
they make no great use of Kitching, so likewise need they not Larderies,
Pasteries, nor Lardry-houses, in that they foul neither Table-cloathes,
Napkins, nor any other linen: And thus he made it appear, that they needed
not those words, nor those offices, as things not in use with them.

So I remained satisfied of my Schoolmasters, and the more, when I reflected
on my self, as we may all do on our selves: the manner of our lives being
considered: For that in a moment I found, that if we should stand in need of
as many terms, as we do of several things, either of instruments, or the
like, comprehended in our own preservation; then there would be as many
terms necessary, and words to express our necessities, and desires, as there
may be drops of water in the Sea. Now this will seem to be a Paradox, and you
will hardly believe it.

But to instance herein, let one but enter the Warehouse of a rich Merchant,
see how many several sorts of Ware^ ^t contain^, think on all the several
Species. Again, go into an Apothe^aries shop, reckon the shelves, the Pots,
Drugs, Compositions, Simples, and the various ^ngredients. Then view a Joyners
Budget of Tools, and so make a general progress through all the several
Trades, and vocations amongst men, within and without doors, both by Sea and
Land, spare not Ladies Closets, and Cabinets, wherein you will find a world of
things, the names and properties whereof themselves hardly know, nor remember;
and then do but consider with your selves, what an eloquence, and what a
superfluous abundance of words there are requisite in these times, because that
both in men and women there daily increases new desires, which to excuse, I
shall term new necessaries, either invented by Nature, Art, or the fond
Conceit of people, the terms and names whereof are so many, as that the
National languages cannot sufficiently furnish the store as is requisite.

Do but observe the Hebrew as ancient as it is, it cannot express Sugar in
its own Speech, but calls it Honey, Manna, not Sugar; because that in those
ancient times men had not tasted Sugar.

The Latins have no word for the Lute, only they call it a Viol, or Violin,
because the Lute was not in use in their days. And in some occasions the Greek
borrows Latin terms.

Therefore we must, as aforesaid, apply the necessity of terms, to the
several necessities of occasions, and appetites; which are three in number,
natural, sensitive, and rational, all three in man, and every one
particularly in man, as possessing an infinite number of objects, of ends,
means, and incessant occasions for to express himself by.

Now to purchase and make use of them, there must be a Language, there must be
words, and those words do signify; and they are the more significant when
they are distinctly pronounced, methodically disposed of, proper in their
significations, graceful in Preachers, and pleasing to the hearers, so that
they may both benefit the speaker and the hearer. And in this point consists
particularly the Art of well speaking, being the greatest, the most eminentest,
and common'st Art and Science in the world, though the hardest to acquire, and
the most difficult to attain to.

And unless it be infused (as it were) into us by a special grace of Nature,
it will be very laborious to attain unto its perfection. By Art men become
Philosophers, Mathematicians by study, and Masters of Art by exercise.

But the Art of Eloquence, and of well speaking, require both Art and Nature
together; as also reading, studying and experience; as likewise a disposition
in all the Organs, abundance of fluent conceptions, memory for the remembrance
of the terms, cleernesse of throat, volubility of tongue, freedom of
expression, a moist palate, teeth equally ranged, open lips; all these being
as so many Natural tools, absolutely necessary; besides Art, and Study.

All lovers of this Art may be amply instructed in this Science, so they be of
a natural good disposition, since all the Art that can be taught, teaching to
the perfection of well speaking, requires such persons as are endued with
requisite Organs to utter speech, before the Art of well speaking can be taught
unto them; since Art only serves to accomplish the appetite of Nature.

Now what I have told you is but very little of the excellency of well
speaking, for that its in man an extreme sensible appetite, and in this
consideration it surpasses as far the first, as the sensible Nature
surpasses the simple elementary Nature; or that of the simple elements which
are mixed.

Well speaking, nay only speaking, is a sensible vocal action, I mean not the
intellectual speech which is likewise proper unto God, as to Angels: Speech,
is the cogitation of the intellectual, and is placed in the rank of the
skillful objects, as their Image is an intellectual expression; I mean that
speech which you now hear, proceeds from me, the vocal word; and though this
kind of speaking is sensible, yet is it not one of those five Senses, by us
termed, the Sight, the Hearing, the Smelling, the Feeling, and the Taste.

Speech then being a sensible thing, though not a sense, we do perceive, and
know its excellency by that sense whereof speech is the object; and by the
nature of the object you may discover how that well speaking is as pleasing,
and icheth more the senses then all other sensible things in the universal
world.

Speech has its source in the bowels, and has the birth of its conception
close unto the Lights, its refined through the channel into its passage, I
mean the Throat, and makes not its issue by the Nostrils, nor by the Ears,
nor by the Eyes; but it rubs against, and joins it self unto the Palate, and
is issued out by the very self same way as the Taste is; which is the most
delicatest, most necessariest Sense in all Animals.

And this is worthy to be observed, how that some instruments which do serve
for the Taste, are likewise necessary to the production of the speech, and what
a rich instruction may we all reap hereby? That meats over hot offend the
Palate, too bitter distasteth it, too flat stupifies it, too sharp disturbs
it, too salt offends it, too moist hinders it, too dry retards its operation,
and quite abolishes the taste. By all which arguments we may gather, that the
too high speech hinders, the too low profits not, too disdainful offends, too
sweet and amorous corrupts, too harsh irritates; for as it is most necessary to
season that meat which is presented to the taste, most exquisitely, so its also
very necessary to be verst in the Art of preparing, and seasoning our desire,
too much Eloquence is vain; ostentation savours of a Mountebank, no Eloquence
at all, is just like green Fruits, sour and unpleasing.

The taste is an equal sense with the feeling, though according to our account
we make them to differ; which if they do, its only in this, that the one is as
a perfect, and the other a more perfect thing; for that the Taste is a sense
more perfect then the universal feeling throughout all the body. Now wherein I
pray consists this perfection? the Physician will answer you; That the
perfection of feeling consists in the temperature, to judge of all the
extremities which it touches; for were it excessively cold, it would not be
sensible of the cold matters which might touch the same; and if it were
extremely hot, it would not be moved by the hot objects; the action here is
made by some contr^riety to the object, unto the power, so that the sense which
touches, ought to be very temperate in it self, for to discern so many
objects which it does touch.

Above all the parts of Man's body, the palm of the hand, and the sole of the
foot are most temperate, and fittest to feel withal; but above all, the place
where the taste is framed, for that is the Physician of the stomach, the judge
of the meat, and the arbiter of all what is presented. And since that Nature
has so mixed the taste and the speech, think you not Lovers of virtue, that it
is a most faithful advertisement, fore-warning us how that all our discourses
ought to be tempered; and as health does consist in the temperature of the
body, so likewise he that speaks well, is temperate in his tongue, and the
temper of the tongue, either in matter of discourse, or of speech, is true
eloquence.

Therefore if it be asked, why a man ought to be well instructed, and well
informed, for to speak well, I shall reply; Why must the taste be temperate?
you will say, that it is because of the nouriture which does first pass by the
essay of the taste; and I will answer; that as the nourishment of the body
ought to pass by the proof of the taste, which in its self is a perfect and
a temperate sense; that so likewise the speech being a nourishment of the
Soul, as Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior said to the Devils; Non insolopane
vivit homo, sed in omne verbo quod procedit exore Dei, must pass by the Art of
well speaking; for that the words by which well speaking is framed are the food
of the Soul. And wonder not though I tell you more, that notwithstanding
speech and well speaking are all but words, Verba and votes, as another says,
yet those that speak a good word, id est, that speak well, receive a sensible
pleasure by their mouths.

Of this I am certain, and have a thousand witnesses; I say not, that a man
feeds on the good words of another, for all that is but air; and its not only
air whereon our mixed bodies do nourish themselves, but the words are tasted
by themselves; whereon you need but to examine a Poet hereon, and doubtless he
will tell you, that he does in a manner know, and eat his words, there being
somewhat in them agreeing with the taste; and certainly, that person that has
spoken somewhat amiss, cannot choose but consequently remain very much
distasted.

And for the greater demonstration of the delicateness of speech, I shall
add; That since well speaking is conceived by so delicate a sense, as the
taste is, and that the mouth, where that sense resides, gives it its birth; nay
that in its very birth, and production, it is received by another sense more
delicate then the former, to wit, hearing; Nam auditis per verbum, so you need
not to doubt of the delicacy of its temper, since its that sense which judges
of all the harmonious reasonances in the universal world. Neither need we to
dispute on the largeness of its ample Spheres extent, for that very often it
does not only hear that which it regards not, but also those things which
are not seen by the eyes of man; neither need we to question its power, both
on the bodies, senses, and also on the soul of mortals.

True it is, that this sense is in the body of man, and in that part of the
head which we call the Ears; but no sooner are they stricken with some noise,
but that this sense is so powerful, that it forms and communicates both its
species and Images unto all the inferior senses; and having once got a footing
in the Commonwealth of man's fancy, or cogitation, its the sense which moves,
stirs, imbroyles, and commands all our passions unto their material being;
and to say more, even from their off spring, and formal being.

But on what grounds or consequences does this little parcel of sense move,
and stir all the body, since it imployes not it self in the body of all
Animals as feeling does? Certainly, no otherwise but by the speech, and by a
pronounced discourse; and this we ought more to admire, that the Soul as
substantially intelectuall should only produce (though without it self)
Spiritual and intelectuall things, and that likewise the Soul which receives
all things, should only receive proportionable ones, as Spiritual accidents;
but because the Soul in this state only receives by the means of the senses,
that is to say, such things which one man may communicate to another; for
doubtless God may agitate immediately in the Soul of man without the senses.

All what she receives for her Spiritual food was at first sensible, as being
made so by its passage through the several Organs; and therefore it must of
necessity follow, that one Soul agitating toward another, and producing some
sensible thing, must be so Spiritual, or approach so near unto a Spiritual
being, that it may even reach the Soul, and as it were touch it; for that it
belongs not to that part which receives, for to agitate, but only to receive,
and to suffer.

Now, that which my Soul can produce and form of it self, for to agitate
toward another Soul, during this material condition, different to that which
shall be hereafter of the Spiritual bodies, is nothing else but a speech, and
a well composed discourse. Observe I pray, and consider what I tell you; the
Soul does not agitate toward another, but by well speaking, for that she
cannot do any other thing.

One man touching another body with his, may beget some alteration therein,
but this happens not unto the Soul; one may look on another man's body, but
that only terminates it self on its superficies; but let him do what he will,
he can only pretend to agitate on the intelectuall Soul of another, by the
speech which proceeds from his mouth; its that which shakes a man, moves,
alters, changes, turns, and winds him, and leads him to that which the
agitating Soul pretends unto.

This is that only sense, and that only part of the body, to wit, the mouth,
which by the Art of well speaking animates, and excitates another man's Soul.

I say not, that man is insensible of what he sees, touches, smells, and
tastes, for I know that man is a sensible Animal, and that the Soul (which by
the means of the senses attaineth to the knowledge of things) makes use of the
several actions of the senses, even for its own instruction; and all those
other parcells do only tend directly, immediately, and totally for to move the
body; but another man's speech, and his formed discourse, is framed by the
Tongue, for to express the Souls meaning, and by its passage through the
Ears, it tends to inform, and instruct the Soul.

Now if it happens that the bodies be first moved, and distempered by the
hearing of another man's discourse, it is because the Soul being either
incitated, or appeased by good words, does afterward by a straiter union, and
more entire communication between the one and the others Soul, and Body,
reconcile, or separate it self; and hence it proceeds, that man's body is
sometimes distempered, that his blood is over heated, that his heart beats and
panes, and that his Eights do I well beyond measure.

Finally, speech is only proper unto Man, and in no ways unto Beast; which
argues, that speech is only to express the Soul; and what regards the Soul
instructing the same, and nourishing it, according to the lesson hereon read by
the Master of true Eloquence, Jesus Christ; I say, that lesson which he read to
the enemy of Mankind, who willing his great Master to change stones into
bread, it was answered, that, Man lived not only by bread, but by every word,
etc. and by this term Man, the Soul of man is meant, which makes the man.
Bread is directly and immediately proper for the bodies subsistence, but speech
is the substantial, proper, and sole food for the Soul; and not all kind of
speeches neither, but the divine Word, that which comes from God, which
informs us of his Will, which instructs us in the knowledge of his Mysteries,
and serves to conduct us to him.

And in this manner the Savior of our Souls, and the Master of true Eloquence
spoke; and he spoke not only well, but also did well; for it is said of his
miraculous works, that never any man had cured those that were borne blind;
And as concerning his Eloquence we find thus; that never any man spoke so
well, nor in such terms, for that they were all words of eternal saving life.

And since we have now attained to the highest degree of perfection in this
Science, we may say, that well speaking proceeds either from an earnest desire,
or from an extreme reasonable appetite.

Man desires to be known for what he is, and nothing vexes him more then that
he should be misconstrued, or taken for what he is not; and hence proceeds the
usual saying, What? or for whom do you take me? for a Sot? a Beast? a
brutall? a Knave? or a man bereaved of his senses? To be poor, and to be
thought so, sick, old, or young, are things which should not trouble us, though
its very lawful for us to desire the contrary; as to wish for means without
superflulty, as for to be poor, or rich; in health, or sickness; those are
things which concern the exterior, our interior is that which troubles us.

Nature has given unto man, and placed in man no other sign, nor a more
certain proof of his being a man, then that amongst men he is able to
discourse.

The Beasts they go, gnaw, chew, eat, run, see, and the like; and some labor
with their bodies, since we make use of them to Till our grounds, carriages,
and such like actions and functions, in the which they excel, and far
surpass men. For the Eagle has a more sharp eye, and excels in sight; a
Hound a stronger scent, a Cat a more subtle ear, and so surpasses man in
hearing, and the like.

Man he only speaks, the Beasts have a kind of a feigned natural voice, and
understand one another, each in their several kinds; Parets, and such like,
will by Art utter some words, and not by reason; for that speech appertains
only to God, from whom we received it; and to the intelectuall creatures, as to
Angels, and unto men; yet its disputable whether there be a Spiritual and
intelectuall reason in man, for that man is endued with a body like as Beasts
are; and how shall we discover then whether in such a Vessel there be Wine,
Beer, and not simple water; and we cannot prove that there is any more sense
in men then in beasts, save only by the speech; therefore Lovers of virtue, you
may see, that the sole argument to prove ones self to be a man, is speech; the
Tongue is the sole instrument, which assures by what it utters, that a man is
reasonable; and if that should be taken from him, I can hardly find any other
evidence: Since its most apparently true, that in the dark we cannot discern
whether we are near unto a Beast or a Man, for by feeling of him we may be
deceived, but never by hearing of him speak.

Consider but the Argument, how that we may discern by the speech, not only
that its a man, but also distinguish of what Nation he is; as whether he be a
Frenchman, a Spaniard, a Dutchman, an Englishman, and the like. You may
remember, how that in the Gospel, a simple Maiden, in Pilates house, could
discover Peter to be a Galilean, and this by his speech; though he protested,
and swore the contrary.

You may all know, that not only Nations are distinguished by their speech,
which is no small benefit in this world; to wit, the being verst in Languages,
thereby to discover a Stranger, who in all other things can, or may distinguish
himself; be it in his clothes, carriage, or in his manner of proceedings,
which he may suit very easily to the humor of the several Nations he
converseth with; but its impossible to disguise a man's speech. Nay, besides
this, by speech one particular person may be distinguished from another, though
his features should be by us forgotten; yet by speech even at the first
meeting, he renewes his old acquaintance.

Speech therefore is the most assuredst mark, for that men may be deceived in
all other signs. Remember the good old Patriarch, whose age had bereaved him
of his eye sight, leaving unto him only the other four senses; when he was to
give his blessing (by Nature due to the first borne) unto Jacob, who by the
counsel of his Mother, under-tooke to defraud Esau of his Birthright; Jacob
though disguised, for to deceive all his Fathers remaining senses, yet he could
not be defrauded in all; for Jacob, we read, clothed with his Brothers
rayments, embalmed by the Lillies, and a sweet savouring scent of the Field,
endeavored to deceive his scent, and thereby to oblige his Father to believe
that he was Esau. Secondly, by the taste, because he had brought him the
savoury meat he delighted in; and also by the feeling, though the good old man
apprehending as it were the deceit, said, that he might be sure of it; My
Son, come near that I may feel thee, and let me try, and assure my self
whether thou art my very Son Esau indeed; but Jacob having covered his hands
with skins, and Isaac touching them, and finding them to be hairie as Esaus
were, took Jacob to be his eldest Son; though the good old Patriarch seemed
to doubt thereof, as he well might, and said; The hands are indeed Esaus hands,
but the voice is Jacobs. So that as you see, the voice distinguishes not only
a Socrates from a Plato, but likewise it discovers the disposition and
composition of man, both in his Physical humors, and in his Moral actions. A
subtle and a knowing man will discover the disposition of any other, nay of
any great Prince, so soon as he shall have heard him but speak, and this
far better then a Physician can judge of the constitution of a man's body by
the feeling of the pulse; as also by men's handwriting, their disposition may be
guest at; the handwriting in diverse, bearing a great resemblance with their
mind, for that its the Image and representative picture of the voice, or
speech.

But these are the first witnesses by the which the interior, individual
qualities are discovered, when a man speaks as well naturally as morally; That
his discourse be consonant to its subject, that his Phrases and terms be
proper, that his pronountiation be quick, slow, clear, or obscure, as the
subject may require; as also by his accent, manner, and the framing of his
voice; doubtless all these above named particulars may enduce much, to the
discovering of a man's mind; that great Lord and Master before named, has even
taught us the same; saying, that the words which proceed out of the mouth, do
denote the interior good, or bad qualities of any man.

The Naturalists did think, that only the Air, and the Water were capable to
describe the qualities of such grounds as they past through; if the Water
passes through a Mine, either of Brimstone, Vitrioll, or Salt-peeter, the Air
when the wind blows, will sufficiently denote whence it comes.

But the Moral Philosophers may object against the Natural ones, that a man's
speech does more assuredly manifest, and clearly declare that which is in the
entrails of man's body, and the inward parts of a man's Soul; then either the
Air, or the Water do the inward substance of Mines.

In man there are several external notions, and actions, which argue either
the perfections or imperfections of the body; but the speech does explain the
temper of the Soul: Wherefore the speech framed in the mouth of man, and
proceeding from the Lights and the Stomach, is in some kind both corporal and
sensible, and in this manner it makes the temper of that body which utters the
voice to be understood.

But the life of a humane voice, the very Spiritual Soul of that voice, that
is to say, its sense, is partly Spiritual, and partly Intelectuall; its that
which enters into the pores by permission of the corporal air, where it
remains; and having knocked at the door, and obtained entrance, the spirit
then of humane speech, which is the speeches sense, bereaves its self of that
Corporeal robe, and is conveyed unto our intelectuall parts, and there
manifests it self, as in a true draught, the very being, thoughts,
conceptions, desires, inclinations, and the other Spiritual passions of him
that speaks.

Speech, in a word, is the true interpreter, and a most certain witness of
the Soul, which is not to be seen in its self, being hidden under the clouds
of the body; but so soon as a man speaks, its just like unto Thunder and
Lightning that breaks forth.

The eyes of man which give attendance to the knowledge of another man, are not
those placed in the front of man's aspect; but they are his ears on the sides
of his head, which must serve to discern him. Our eyes may discover unto us
our exterior parts in a Looking-glass, but our ears must conduce to the
knowledge of those we converse withal.

Speech is the child of the Soul, its own first borne, conceived in its
self, though it be formed in the mouth of man, and it comes not into this
world to succeed its Parents; but speech only produces it self to manifest
its Father, and therefore we must all confess it to be a great benefit of
Nature, in that having received an intelectuall, Spiritual, and most
Divine-like Soul, though this Soul as it were hidden from our sight, which is
only capable of material, corporal, and sensible things; yet thus it is, that
having received an instrument, a medium, and a witness which does assure us,
that in this body (though it be earthly) there is something celestial, though
our said bodies be material, yet they contain something which is
intelectuall; though we be but Animals, yet there is something in us which is
Divine, to wit, an intelectuall, Divine, free, and a reasonable Soul.

And to manifest this truth, that is to say, that in our bodies there is such a
substantial quality contained; Nature has given it a passage, and a means to
make it self both to be heard, and understood, to wit, by speech.

The Angels are not environed with this corporeal cover, for they have no
bodies that hides them, and makes themselves to be understood among themselves
without any vocal voice; that they speak is most certain, for that an Apostle
says, Though he had the eloquence of Angels, etc. But they speak not as men
do, with a moving tongue, with a shrill throat, their speech is wholly
Spiritual; but our Souls being in these Bodies like as in a Prison, Nature
having hidden and enclosed it, has nevertheless left it that little passage
of the throat, and of the mouth, by which the Prisoner calls for all he stands
in need of, as also manifests his justification, or clearly confesses his
guilt, and want, for that by his speaking he is known for what he is, and his
deserts or demerits are thereby laid open.

If now all this, whereby I have entertained you concerning Eloquence, and the
Art of well speaking, has not been capable to move you to an appetite and
desire, it may be a question whether or no you have a Soul, or whether there
be any virtue in your Souls; for since speech is the portraicture of the
Soul, and of all those beautiful excellent virtues which she possesses; why
should they be kept smothered and hidden? since its most proper to virtue for
to manifest her self, and those virtues which are purely in the Soul; I mean
mystical, and intelectuall virtues, which actually are termed speculatives,
and have no other means to show themselves unto the world, then by the Art of
well speaking. Let a man know all what may be possibly learnt, let him have
the knowledge of God, the skill of the heavenly revolutions of the Planets, of
the Elements, of the simple and composed Bodies, the perfect and imperfect
ones. Finally, let him have an insight in that universal Science, the
Metaphisicks, who will be able to judge whether or not he possess all these
qualities, nay whether or no we have a Soul; if so be we want the Art and
manner to make it known, and by what shall we give a sensible evidence that we
are men, that we possess a rank amongst them, unless we give a testimony of
this our knowledge, which of it self is a bare nothing so long as others know
not that those gifts are extant in us; for as we said before, Scire tuum nihil
est, nisi te scire hoc sciat al^er. Truly I doubt not but that the desire to
speak well, by the infiniteness of Nature, by the appetite of man's senses,
and by the suggestion of reason, possesses a great influence on all men, as I
have amply set before you.

And though all that hitherto has been alleged should not suffice, what
greater evidence can there be given then the universal practice hereof; which
is as an infallible argument of a natural reasonable desire.

So soon as man is sensible of his being, and begins to know himself, the
first desire wherewith he is taken, is to learn for to speak, and for to
obtain this Science; he despises the tenderness of this Age, the kind usage
of Parents, the ease of his house, and all the other pleasures which his birth
and condition may afford him; he leaves his native Country, passes the Seas,
crosses the Hills, and puts himself within the enclosure of an Academy, in
which the Art of well speaking is taught.

Neither contenteth he himself with the conversation of those Masters, but he
is continually busied in the perusing of great Orators; he speaks, writes,
and imployes his Pen in this Art, by noting the Sentences, and best succinct
Speeches of Orators and Poets, and the Histories of all learned and famous
men, who have left behind them a gage of their rare qualities, to wit, their
memorable works. Hereby he may attain to the Art of well speaking, when any
occasions shall present themselves, wherein a Gentleman may express himself
with admiration.

More-over, to speak well is a desire, which at all times cleaves to all
Lovers of virtue, and this desire of theirs is so great, as that I dare say,
there are diverse who are more curious of this then any other; for as all men
naturally have an ambition to speak well, so you will find the opinions of
the most ablest and learned men to join in this; That to know much, and to
want the Art of expression, is even nothing; and on the contrary, that to know
little, and to be able to make ones self to be understood, is a great glory;
whence I do conclude, that according to the esteem of most eminent persons,
Eloquence is not only an ornament to that which a man knows, but that it also
serves for a covering to disguise an ignorant man.

How many are there that pass for able Philosophers, excellent Logicians,
experimented Physicians, for great Statesmen, who all this while have no more
knowledge, nor understanding, but a bare way of expressing their superficial
conceits, imitating Merchants, who endeavor to give a fair luster to their
Wares, the better to put them off.

It is not such an Art this Academy intends to teach, but true Eloquence,
Sciences to improve reason in men, and Eloquence to maintain reason before
men; Sciences for a man's own government, and Eloquence to serve the public;
Sciences to compose man, and Eloquence to manifest ones self to be man: We
must seek both after the one and the other, for to glorify God; since that
the several Sciences assist us to know him, and Eloquence makes us able to
dilate his knowledge unto others.

Let us accompany Eloquence with Sciences, well doing with well saying; the
last without the first serves for a man's condemnation, the first without the
last tends to our justification; and he that knows as much as is necessary
for himself, and who by his good Language is able to instruct others, cannot
choose but reap a great deal of contentment, satisfaction, and glory.

The Master of all Arts, Sciences, understanding and knowledge, Jesus Christ
our Lord, taught his Disciples first to do well, discovered unto them at the
same time the Mysteries of eternal life, and immediately infused into them the
Art of well speaking, the gift of Eloquence, that is to say, he endued them
with his most holy Spirit, that their well speaking might prove efficacious and
useful; and why think you that the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles in
the shape of Tongues? for no other reason but to assure them that Eloquence, I
mean true Eloquence is a gift, that came down immediately from Heaven, a gift
proceeding from the Holy Ghost, neither from Nature, nor from Art.

I do not deny, but that a good disposition of Nature, and the strength of
study must contribute thereunto; but that Eloquence, or that Science is merely
vain, that has not the glory of God for its aim, and his gift for a
principle.

Among the Gentiles there have been eloquent men, among Worldlings there are
great store at present; but will you know the difference betwixt the heavenly
and earthly Eloquence? Its just like a Cannon discharged with a Bullet, and
another only laden with a Ball, which makes as great a noise as the former, but
no impression at all.

The ancient Orators were only talking men, like unto Parrets; but those that
have obtained this gift from Heaven, carry with them a speech, which not only
makes a noise, but also a deep impression in the Auditory; these men speak
with knowledge and understanding, and this is man's true speech; the sense, and
intelect of what we have said, is a perfect manner of speech, both knowing and
learned. In old times they spoke with a certain knowledge, but not with a
perfect Science, a Science not to be compared unto that which God gave unto his
Apostles by the Holy Ghost, for they were said to have the true science of the
Voice, which is no other but a true sense of what is said.

In all our necessities and wants, let us always have our refuge to the
Almighty, and especially that we may obtain this gift of well speaking; for
none can ever pretend to be a good proficient herein, or in any other Science,
except he receives the Grace from Heaven.

And since its a gift which we ought to desire above all other gifts; yet all
our desires, and endeavors will ever be able to make us attain unto its
perfection; for as I have told you from the beginning, and you may have had the
experience hereof; what we most desire, is that which we seldom obtain.

The reason hereof you shall have in a word, and its because we believe that we
are not able to obtain it, by our own industry, labor, and pains, by
reading, and by the help of good Tutors; but we shall come far short of our
expectations, unless we have our recourse and refuge to the true and only
Teacher, the Holy Ghost; for let us but accord our hearts unto the Almighties
Rules, and Ordinances, and doubtless our tongues being our hearts
interpreters, will uttermost eloquent and pleasant things, etc.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1, Line 5. for aperura read apertura. l: 15: for it r: he. p: 2: l: 2:
for more r: most l: 5: for desires, r: desired. l: 29: r, now. p: 6: l: 3: r:
weld^ing. l: ^7: r: which. p: 7: l: 9: r: each. p: 8: l: 3. r: in its entire.
p: 11: l: 27: r: even. l: 31: r: ^ we have said. p: 12: l: 6: for do r. mu^. p:
3: l: 25: for itcheth* r: delights. l: 29: for into. r: n. p: 14: l: 8: r:
as. l: 25: r: t. p: 15: l: 3: for to, r: twixt. l: ib: for unto r: ^. d. l: 31:
r: it: p: 16: l: 6: r: even. l: 12: dele hereon. l: 4: for know r. even. p: 9:
l: 7: for incitated r: ir^itated. p. 20: l: 2^ for as r: but. l: 23: r: (...).
p: 22: l: for which (...) it is. l: 3: for to w^t the being, r: to be. l: 5:
for distinguish r: (...). p: 2^: l: 21: r: to wit. p: 2^: l: 3: r: (...). l:
(...): r: corporeal p: ^5: l: ^5. r: p: 2^: l: 21: r: p: 26: l: 4. for makes,
r: they make. p: 31: l: 7: dele no^. In the Epist: for againa r: again.


