An Impartial Disquisition, how far CONQUEST gives the Conqueror a TITLE.
Reader,

THis is an abstract of a Treatise written by Mr. Ghest, a learned and pious
Suffolk Divine, when the Usurpers over: Charles the Martyr pretended a Title by
Conquest.



CHAP. I.
COnquest is no sufficient Title to Rule; for then all Conquerors are lawful
Princes; but they are not, for

1. Justice only gives right, and the rule of justice is suum cuique, we are
commanded. Romans 13. 7. to Render to all their dues; but here in the Case of
Conquest right is pretended to that, which is another, only by taking it from
him, and so Justice founded upon Injustice.

2. Right continues, as long as the Cause remains, and force cannot reach that,
for it cannot destroy the gift and donation of God, nor bring to pass, that a
Father shall be no Father, or an Heir no Heir, or one Lawfully chosen not
chosen.

3. If Conquest be a sufficient title, then there never was an Usurper in the
world; for, till he prevails, he is but an Attempter, and as soon as he
prevails, he is a Lawful Prince.

4. Then it would not only be Lawful for the Usurper to withhold another
Right, but unlawful for the wronged King, or his friends to seek the recovery
of his own, which is contrary to what 2 Samuel 18. 1.
David did in the case of Absalom, and 2 Kings 11.
Joash in the case of Athaliah.

5. If Conquest gives a title, then a strong Thief has right to all he takes
away by violence; or else God has left every private man in better condition
than his own Deputies See Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
, since force can take away the Royalty of these, but not the property of those.

6. If Conquest give a sufficient title, then that devilish Maxim is true,
Prosperum scelus virtus est, that wickedness crowned with prosperity commences
virtue; and there is no difference between good and evil, but event. A Rebel
falls, and is a Traitor; he prospers and is a lawful Prince; which pricks up
apace toward Atheism.

7. This proclaims liberty to all ambitious, and covetous persons to embroyl
the world, if whatever they can get is their own. Certainly God, who loves
mankind, and delights in order, peace and righteousness, never made this Law.

CHAP. II.
GOD's word allows not of any title by Conquest, for

1. It forbids all violence, rapine and wrong, nay, so much as coveting that
which is another, commands all to be content with their own, requires
restitution of what is wrongfully taken away. Nor must we say with Apud Sueton.
Sect. 30.
Caesar, Si jus violandum est, regnandi causa violandum est; if right and
equity be to be trampled on at any time, it is, when a Crown is to be acquired.

2. What is said, John 10. 1. He that enters not in by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber, is
universally true of all Governments; Kings are Cons. Psalm. 78. 71. Isai. 44. 28.
Shepherds too, and the same common rule of justice holds in the Shepherd's
title to his Flock, and so every where both in Church and State.

3. It is said, Romans 13. 1. The powers that are etc. the word is, (...), not
(...), (now (...) signifies only lawful, and just power, while (...) signifies
the power of an Usurper) so that we must be subject to him, who has the right
and authority to rule, even though divested by the force of an Usurper. Such
powers are said Verse. 2. to be the ordinance of God, (...), which signifies an
Edict, or a Law, so that no Usurper is God's ordinance, unless he can show
either some particular Charter from God, or some general Law in favor of
Usurpers. -- Again, in the same Verse it is said, they that resist, shall
receive to themselves damnation; not a right, or title to the supreme power,
that would make the Law both partial, and useless, restraining none, but those,
whom Princes might restrain without it. -- Once more, in Verses 4, 5, 6. These
powers are said to be God's Ministers, (...). Now none can enter into God's
service, or Ministry, but by his leave, unless we think, that Usurpers may
seize God's Commission too.

4. We are commanded Mat. 22. 21.
to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, (...) here signifies to
restore to the right owner, what is unjustly taken away, or detained from him,
(so the word is used by the LXX. in the Old Testament) Genesis 20. 7, 14, Levit.
5. 6. Number. 5. 7. Judge. 17. 3, 4. 1 Samuel 7. 14. and cap. 12. 3. 2 Samuel 3. 14. 1
Kings 20. 34. Nehem. 5. 12. Isai. 42. 22. Ezekiel. 33. 15. and so in the New
Testament also, Matthew. 5. 26. chap. 18. 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 34. Luke 19. 8. So
that it binds not only to the payment of all dues to the owner, that accrue to
him, while the possession is undisturbed, but to restitution also, of what he
is unjustly deprived of.

5. Christ's actions are our instructions: Now, when one would have put our
Lord upon the doing an act of power, Luke 12. 14. He answers, Man, who made me
a Judge, etc. It seems, a Governor must be duly made, or set in the place, he
cannot set himself there; it is above the pitch of a Creature to create his own
power by his own force, it must be derived from another; nor can every one's
appointment give a title, but his only, who has right to appoint: it is not,
Has any one? but, Who has appointed me?

6. Men of all sorts, and of all sides (just, and unjust, Plaintifs, and
Defendants) have taken this for granted, that force, and conquest gives no See
1 King. 20. 34. Judge. 11. 13, 15, 21.
title.

7. God himself has given sentence in the case. Nimrod was the first Usurper,
he got all by might; (...) Gibbor, as he is called, Genesis 10. 8. yet a double
brand there is upon him, Verse. 9. that he was, 1. a mighty Hunter; till men
turn into beasts, a mighty Hunter will not be turned into a lawful King. And
then, 2. (...) Lipne Jehovah, (...), against the Lord, so it should be
translated; for it is evident, that it is spoken to his Infamy. -- God expressly
forbids the Israelites to invade the Edomites, the Moabites, or the Ammonites,
Deuteronomy. 2. 4, 5, 9, 19. the precepts are particular, but the reason is universal,
and holds against all invasions of the rights of others, (because God gave them
their lands for a possession) and as to the Ammonites, who long after invaded,
and conquered part of the holy Land, Thus says the Lord, Jerem. 49. 1. has
Israel no sons? has he no heir? why then does their King inherit Gad, and his
people dwell in his Cities? as if he should say, Though the King of Ammon has
gotten possession by the Sword, yet the right remains still to the heir, though
dispossessed: it is therefore that such Conquerors are compared Nahum. 2. 12, 13.
to Lions, that tear in pieces, and fill their holes with prey, and their dens
with rapine; and, behold, says the Lord of Hosts, I am against you, my sword
shall devour the lions, and I will cut off the prey from the earth. It Is
therefore also, that the Habak. 1. 6.
Chaldeans, who possess the dwelling places, that are not theirs, that keep not
at home, that enlarge their desires as Hell, and as death, and cannot be
satisfied, that gather to them all nations, and heap to them all people, Hab.
2. 5, 6.
have heavy judgments denounced against them, Woe to him, that increases that,
which is not his, how long? etc. See also, Jerem. 51. 35, 36. Ezekiel. 35. 10, 11.
and chap. 36. 5. and Amos 1. 13. in all which places sore punishments are
denounced against Usurpers; and it were absurd to say, that the divine Justice
would punish any for useing that, which is the direct, and immediate way to get
a good Title.

CHAP. III.
Conquest proves not a right by God's donation immediate. Some men pretend,
that God by the Event of the War, giving victory, gives right withal to the
Conqueror, and for this they have two Colors. The first Argument is deduced
from Reason; Providence governs all, therefore this victory, and so it is God's
Will. To which I Answer. It seems the Alcoran has not been Englished for
nothing; with the Mahometans indeed all is their own fish that comes into the
net: but if every attempt crowned with success, proves, that God gives a right,
then he, who destroys the true Religion, and sets up a false; he, who kills,
ravishes, robs, has right on his side; it is par casus, unless they show, that
Event shows God's Will in one thing more than another, which it does not,
since all comes alike to pass by God's Providence: Should it be objected, that
this Assertion must be restrained to Kingdoms, because War between those, who
have no superior on earth to judge them, is an appeal to God to determine the
right: I Answer, 1. Then this extends not to Subjects, who have a King to judge
them. 2. If it be meant of all those, who acknowledge, or pretend to have no
Superiors, then all wicked men may make use of it; since it is but to pretend,
and then appeal to God, and, if they prevail, God, it seems, gave them leave.
3. It Is to throw God's Law (the rule of right, and wrong) behind us, and to
tempt him to give a particular sentence; against Matthew. 4. 7. Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God. 4. How knows the Objector, that every King, who fights
for his own, makes such an ungodly appeal? 5. Suppose both parties are so
presumptuous, how knows he, that God is bound to listen to every presumptuous
Appellant, and give judgment at his beck? the Truth is, Event shows no more;
but that God permits it, because he can work good out of it, and fulfill his own
wise, and just, though hidden counsel; but to say, he approves whatever he
permits, is blasphemy.

2. The second color is from Scripture, Dan. 4. 17, 25, 32. The most high
rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. To this I
Answer,

1. If you mean this of God's gift of right to rule, it is not said, he gives
it to every one, who is in possession, but to whom he pleases. 2. If you mean
it of possession (and so it is to be understood, as it appears from verse. 25.
and the whole Context) it follows not, God gives possession to whom he will,
therefore he gives right, whenever he gives possession; the scope of all was to
cure Nebuchadnezzar's pride, and to show him, that whosoever possesses a
Kingdom, does it by a Providence which can dispossess him. Indeed no one
possesses a Kingdom without some gift from God, but it is often only permissive,
it creates no right. Thus 1 Samuel 24. 10. c. 26. 23.
Saul in the Cave was by God delivered into David's hand, and Christ was Act.
2. 23.
delivered by the determinate counsel of God; had David hereby a right to kill
Saul, or the Jews a right to kill Christ. Nay, though Nebuchadnezzar was out of
possession (Dan. 4. 25. They shall drive thee from among men) Yet still it is
his Kingdom, and his Counselors, and his Lords, ver. 26. 36. His right it
seems remained.

CHAP. IV.
COnquest in a just war gives no just title: A just War is that, which is made
by a Sovereign Prince for a just cause: while both conditions are wanting in
our Case; but suppose they were not, if such a Conquest gives title, it is 1.
either by extraordinary Donation, and that none, I think, can now pretend to.
Or, 2. By the Law of Nations. But 1. that Law, according to those who allege
it, gives only an external show of Justice, true internal justice obliging at
the same time to restitution, of which restitution, See Grot. de jure belli,
and pacis, l. 3. c. 6. Sect. 1. Jure Naturae quidem bello justo ea nobis
acquiruntur, quae aut paria sunt ei, quod cum nobis sit debitum, aliter
consequi non possumue, aut etiam quae nocenti damnum inferunt intra aequum
poenae modum. -- conf... 2, 3, etc. and cap. 10.. 3.
Grotius proving it to be the opinion of Jews, and Mahometans as well as
Christians, and that the Holy Scripture, Isai. 58. 6. averrs, that those men's
fasts are not acceptable to God, qui non jure captos detinebant, who do not let
the oppressed go free, and who (Jon. 3. 8.) do not turn from the violence, that
is in their hands.

2. Show us this Law of Nations, where is it, or how is it morally possible,
that all Nations should meet to give it: if you interpret common practice to be
the consent of all, I presume, the dispossessed do not consent, and the rest
are either gainers, or unconcerned.

3. The Law of Nature gives not this right, for then it must be either by way
of reparation of the wrong, or punishment of the fault; the first allows no
more then an equal recompense for the injury, and leaves the rest to the enemy
still; the second supposes Authority, for who has power to punish, must have
power to examine, and to judge the merits of the cause; but a Superior to the
Supreme implies a contradiction; Par in parem non habet imperium; equals have
no authority one over another; Romans 14. 4.
who art thou, that judge another man's servant? 1 Cor. 5. 12.
what have I to do to judge them, that are without? are most sure maxims of the
Law of Nature.

4. The Law of Scripture gives no such right. Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 15. There is a rule
given, how the Israelites were to deal with all Nations (except the seven,
which were given up to utter ruin) and the case is double; if they will treat
take Tribute of them; if they will fight it out, and you Conquer, take the
Spoil, but in neither case a title to the Government.

Tribute may be given, and service may be done by one King to another (as
appears from Genesis 14. 4, 8, 9. 2 Samuel 10. 19. 2 Kings 3. 4. and chapter 18. 7, 14.)
and yet those who pay the Tribute, and do the service be Kings still, as
appears by the above cited places; so then the Conqueror may exact tribute
sufficient to make amendment for the injury; but whatever be meant by Tribute,
or Service, the Conqueror acquires no title by Conquest but by the consent of
the Conquered to the Articles of peace, of which in the next conclusion.

CHAP. V.
Qu. WHether the consent of the people conquered, and their submission to the
Conqueror gives him a title?

Ans. It is a kind of destiny upon people, that their name is used, their
benefit pretended, their power to create right to govern magnified, and all to
their hurt, Isai. 3. 12. O my people they which lead thee, cause thee to err;
and so again, chapter 9. 16. in the Septuagint it is (...), and so in the Hebrew,
and in the margin of our Translation, they which call thee blessed, and
undertake to make thee so. People are never in greater danger, than when they
listen to these same (Beatificantes) men, who promise to make them blessed, so
it has been here, and after the misery that is come upon us, the peoples
consent is pretended.

To show what really the people has to do in the giving title, or right to
Government, we will consider in general the means of acquiring dominion; -- All
power is from God, we take that for granted, therefore whoever has a title,
must show some manifestation of God's will for it; now this in the case of
Governors must be either by extraordinary supernatural designation, as in
Moses, Joshua, the Judges, Saul, David, Jehu, etc. or by a general Law, that
may hold in all ordinary cases; (for as to event, that manifests only God's
permission, not his gift, as I showed before) as for the first of these, it was
good, where it could be shown, which now it cannot: The second cannot be any
humane Law; for though just Laws are in their kind, and degree significations of
God's will, who will have us obey his Deputies for conscience sake, yet in
giving title to supreme power they have no place. For 1. National laws
presuppose it, and are made by it. 2. The law of Nations is either the same
with the law of Nature, which is God's law, binding all Nations, or if it be
taken for a humane law, enacting that, which the law of nature has left at
liberty, it is a mere empty name, for there is no humane supreme power, to which
all Nations are subject, that should enact such a law. Jus gentium indeed, or
right of Nations there is, but no Lex gentium; one Nation may have right
against another, either by the law of Nature alone, or by mutual Pacts, which
bind by virtue of the law of Nature, which obliges all to perform their
covenants.

So then none can claim right to Government, but by the Laws of God, and they
are twofold, of Nature, and Scripture, but both to be used here promiscuously;
the rule of both is, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which subjects the
children to both Parents, but first to the Father, as supreme; no place is left
here for popular election, it being impossible, that children should choose
their father, who are in subjection as soon as they are, and to govern whom the
Father has a natural capacity, even before he has them.

In this Paternal right is founded the government of whole Nations, as appears
from Genes. 10. 5, 20, 31, 32. where it is often observed, Vid. Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
that by those three sons of Noah were the nations divided in the earth after
their families, and generations, which confutes the common dream, that Nations
were constituted by collection of several Families into one Mass, (like
Epicurus's world out of Atoms) for the Scripture makes it clear to have been
quite contrary, by spreading one root into many branches, (see Acts 17. 26.)
and this will be easily believed, when it is considered Cons. Genesis 11.
, how long they lived in that Age (six hundred, four hundred, all even to
Nahor, above two hundred years) and that Exodus 6. 16, 18, 20.
in four generations from Levi to Moses Seventy Genesis 46. 27.
men were multiplied to six hundred thousand, that were men Exodus 12. 37.
, besides children, and you will see, that one of those Fathers might live to
be by his mere Paternal power King of a populous Nation.

Nor did those Kingdoms upon the Father's death cantonize after the number of
his Sons, the Elder brother was Heir of his Father's power, and governed the
Families of his brethren also: So Genes. 4. 7. God says to Cain, subject to
thee shall be his desire (sc. thy brother's) and thou shall rule over him:
Hence Isaac in blessing, as he thought, his firstborn, Genesis 27. 29. says, be
Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee. And so
Jacob also in blessing Judah, (who inherited the regal power) Genesis 49. 8.
expresses himself: nay, even our Savior's kingdom over his brethren (that is,
the members of the Christian Church) is often put upon this title of
primogeniture, as being Romans 8. 29. Col. 1. 15, 18. Hebr. 1. 6. Revel. 1. 5.
the firstborn among many brethren; so then the people have no more to do to
make a King, than a child to make his father; God the sole giver of life
disposes of what Parents every one shall be born, who shall be heirs of Kings,
and whom they shall inherit for their subjects; for the word Inheritance is in
Scripture language Psalm. 16. 5. Colos. 1. 12. Act. 26. 18.
(...) that is, a lot, and the whole disposing (judgment, or right) of that is
from the Lord: Prove. 16. 33. The people have no part in it, so that if they
presume to give this inheritance to another, let them take heed of that woe
Isai. 45. 9, 10.
Woe be to him, who striveth with his maker, etc. and Woe be to him, who says
to his father, what begettest thou? etc. namely, while they have one of God's
appointment; for when he has left them destitute, then they may interpose, and
elect, but let them not be fond of wanting one, that they may please themselves
in choosing, for they cannot be damned to a worse condition in this world, than
to be without a King. As it is threatened, Hosea 10. 3. They shall say, we have
no King, because we feared not the Lord. Numb. 27. 17. That the congregation of
the Lord shall be as sheep, that have no shepherd Vid. Lam 5. 3.
: and Isai. 3. 5, 6, 7. The people shall be oppressed every one by his
neighbor, and then follows the people's part in choosing a King; a man shall
take hold of his brother, saying, be thou our Ruler: Now, when people come to
choose, if they will put the power into the hands of many, (too many to keep
counsel, or agree upon action) and so serve many Masters at once, if they will
choose for a head the beast of many heads, that monstrous form of Polity, where
the whole body is all head, and every single limb the body, where all are sons
of the people, all are father, and every one a son; be ruled by the many, that
can believe any thing, and judge of nothing, that have the wit of a child, and
the fury of a Giant, the silliness of an Innocent, and the rage of a Tyrant; be
governed by most voices, who are sure to choose the worst, since there are more
fools, and knaves, than wise and virtuous; or if they will be ruled by a
Senate, and for fear of one Tyrant (whom death will end) submit to four
hundred, that for one head lopt off will supply two, and make slavery immortal;
or if they do see Monarchy the best, and yet will mix it with some trick of
their own to spoil it (as by making it elective, etc.) though these forms of
popular contrivance be but degenerations of that paternal power in one, (which
is always chosen, when God chooses for us, as best suiting with his universal
Monarchy) yet when the choice is left to the people, it is valid, as well as
that, which a foolish woman makes of a bad husband.

Thus much of the means of acquiring supreme power; now, how far the people's
submission can operate toward the making the Conqueror's title good.

1. While they have a King of God's providing by paternal right, they have
nothing to do either to confer, or transfer that right. 2. Though, when the
people have chosen a popular government, and are lawfully settled under it,
their submission (perhaps) to the Conqueror may transfer a right (because then
they are in two capacities, being both Sovereigns and Subjects, so that their
submission includes the consent of all that are interessed) yet in other forms
of Government, where the people are mere subjects, the supreme power is not
theirs to give, they cannot give away what is another man's, much less what is
God's, and by his immediate gift conferred on the lawful King. 3. When people
are destitute of a Government, and choose one, the King chosen holds not his
power from them, but immediately from God; their choice, 1. proves not, that
the King derives his power from them; the wife chooses her husband, and the
Parish the Constable, yet the first has his power from God, the other from the
King; and therefore the power not being derived from the people, they cannot
resume or transpose it, any more than the wife, etc. 2. The people's choice
hinders not the King's receiving his power immediately from God, though their
choice be an instrumental act, by means whereof God's power is conveyed to the
King's person which is chosen, yet it argues not, that God first invests the
people with the supreme power, and seats it inseparably in them, and that then
they derive it to the King in subordination to themselves, as the King does to
an inferior Magistrate: only when they want a Father by Inheritance, they
choose and make an Adoptive one, who derives not his power from them, but
immediately from God by that Law of Nature, which gives the father power over
his children.

Obj. But how is this immediately from the Law of Nature, when there comes a
voluntary act of man between?

Ans. That voluntary Act of the people is not done by virtue of any supreme
power seated in the people, but by allowance of the Law of Nature, which, as
other laws, contains in it concessions, as well as precepts.

1. It teaches, that power to rule is necssary for the preserving of mankind,
which cannot subsist but in society, nor that without order and government. 2.
It allows us to provide necessaries by any means, that may be used without
impiety against God, or injury to man, and therefore to appoint themselves a
King, when they are destitute. 3. It commands them to be subject to the King
thus chosen; so that from first to last this power is founded immediately on
the law of Nature; now not only this, but almost all the laws of Nature suppose
a voluntary act of men to constitute the matter of their precepts and
prohibitions, and yet bind merely by their own force. Prayer, oaths,
dedications of holy things, all external acts of religion suppose acts of men
to give words their signification, to administer and take the oaths, to
dedicate the holy things, but yet the precepts commanding the duties, and
forbidding the abuse; bind immediately without any help from humane authority.
So theft supposes propriety of goods, adultery supposes marriage, etc. but
yet the commandments, that prohibit those sins bind expressly by virtue of the
Divine authority.

CHAP. VI.
Qu. WHither Kings, etc. can deprive themselves of supreme power, or give it
from the right heirs?

Ans. Here three questions arise, one touching resignation, whither a King can
give up his power? and two concerning succession, whither a King can invert the
natural order, and disinherit his lawful heir, and whither he can give a
stranger right to succeed by adopting him. In deciding these three questions,
there is great diversity both of precedents, and humane laws, but it is not
material, since only divine laws can regulate such translations. If God has
given Kings power to dispose of their Kingdoms at pleasure, they have no
Superior upon earth, that can take it from them; if not, they can neither
create it themselves (for there is no power, but by the gift of a Superior,
Joh. 19. 11.) much less can their subjects, being inferiors, give it them.

Therefore for the resolution of this question, distinguish, 1. Between the
effect such an act of a King may have upon himself, or upon others, for though he
may divest himself of his Regalities, it follows not that he can deprive his
heir of his title, or give it away to another. 2. As to his devesting himself,
distinguish between the lawfulness of the act, and the validity of it; it may
be, Fieri non debuit factum valet, what ought not in justice to have been done,
is notwithstanding valid, when it is done. Compare Genesis 25. 33, 34. with Heb.
12. 16.
Esau lost his birthright by selling it, yet sinned in doing it, sc. by
undervaluing the power which God had given him, and whatever damage did hereby
accrue to Esau's posterity, was from God's immediate designation, not from any
power in Esau, 3. Distinguish of Kings; those, whose Progeny was in their
lifetime multiplied into a Nation, could not divest themselves, because they
could not cease to be Fathers of their children, who by the law of Nature are
subject to them; but an hereditary King may relinquish his title, as well as
any other Inheritance, Psalm. 106. 40. He abhorred his own Inheritance: Jer. 12.
7. I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage. Shepherds of men may
break their staves, and cast off their flocks, Zech. 11. 10, 11.

But notwithstanding all this an hereditary King cannot deprive his Heir, if he
have one, nor hinder the peoples choice, if he have no Heir.

1. He cannot divest his Heir, for God designs him by making him firstborn, or
next of blood, nor can the father alter his inheritance any more than his
primogeniture; Cons. Jos. 1. 2. Hebr. 3. 5. Ps. 89. 20. Jer. 27. 6. Wisd. 6. 5.
Romans 13. 4, 6.
the King is but God's servant, and so cannot make void his Lord's choice; by
God's Law the rights of primogeniture are the first-born's, (Deuteronomy. 21. 15, 16,
17.) nor can they be taken from him while he lives; even if he deserves to be
deprived, it must be a judiciary proceeding that removes him.

2. If he wants an Heir, he cannot transfer the inheritance to whom he will
without the peoples consent; they are Sons and not slaves, and therefore cannot
be alienated at pleasure, Joh. 8. 35. The servant abides not in the house
forever, but the Son abides ever. There are three degrees of Dominion. 1. Over
goods inanimate or irrational; we may sell these, or destroy them, Matt. 20.
15. 2. Dominium despoticum, vel herile, the dominion over slaves, whom we may
alienate, but not destroy, Exo. 21. 20, 21. 3. Dominium Regale, the dominion of
Kings over their Subjects, which neither enables to destroy nor alienate, being
instead of the paternal; the King can no more make another King over his
subjects, than a Father can make another man the father of his children.

The sum is; a King may relinquish his power, but not invest a stranger with
it without the consent of the Heir, if he have any, or, if he have none,
without the peoples accepting the person. Possession belongs to the King in
being, Succession to the Heir in being, Election to the People, when destitute
of both, and none can be deprived of their proper due without their own
consent. Indeed (as was said before) when the people is both Sovereign, and
Subjects, their submission includes all; as Sovereign they may resign, and then
as a body without a head they may choose, and no Heir has any injury; for the
body of the people have no Heir.

CHAP. VII.
Qu. WHither a long possession can make the Conqueror's title good?

Ans. It Is absurd to think, that prescription can justify wrongs; for the rule
of Law is, Non confirmatur tractu temporis, quod de jure non subsistit ab
initio, that no length of time makes that lawful, which was not so from the
beginning. It Is true,

1. In time all obstacles may be removed, and so the Usurper acquire a Title,
the right Heirs being all extinguished, or relinquishing their right, and then
the peoples submission does it, but time it self gives no title.

2. Long possession may be, though not the ground, yet the proof of a title; but
such a proof, as admits of diverse exceptions; for if there be a right Heir,
that claims, or else would claim, but that he wants either notice of his title,
or power to make it good, here prescription proves nothing; but Possession may
continue so long without any claim, or attempts to the contrary, that it may be
(though no title, yet) a proof, that either the Possessor is the Heir, or that
the People have chosen him upon the failing or cession of the Heir; and thus
only do man's Laws approve prescription in private inheritances, not as if they
preferred an Usurper before the right owner, who continues his claim and proves
his title; and this was the case between Isra^^ and the Moabites, Judge. 11. 25,
26, 27. which case duly weighed will easily solve the Objection.

FINIS.

