THE FALSE FAVOURIT DISGRACED.

And, the REWARD of LOYALTY, A Tragi-Comedy, Never Acted.

LONDON, Printed by Will. Wilson, for Robert Crofts, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Crown in Chancery lane, under Sergeants Inn. 1657.

The Scene, Florence.
The Persons.
Duke Duke of Florence. Sicanio, Prince of Sicilie. Sebastiano, Cosen to the
Duke. Hippolito, Favourit to the Duke, and in love with Lucebella. Pausanio,
The Exile, and father to Martiano and Lucebella. Martiano. Ausonius, Friend to
Martiano. Honorio, A stayed Lord, loving Rosania. Leontinus, A Commander under
Sicanio. Fumante, A Creature of Hippolito's. Vatinius, Pretender to Rosania.
Carlo, Servant to Fumante. Iacamo, Servant to Vatinius. Soldiers, Citizens,
Page, Attendants, etc. Iulia, Sister to the Duke. Lucebella, Her Associate.
Rosania, A Lady attending the Princess. Dianetta, Another Lady, and Compa^ion
to Lucebella. An old Crone.
The false Favourit DISGRACED. AND, The Reward of Loyalty.
Actus primus.
Scena prima.
Enter Duke, Iulia, Rosania, Hippolyto, with Attendants, and Flourish. Duk.
We Will hear no more in his defense:
Did not our cousen's speedy flight upon
His banishment, confirm both guilty?

Hip. Your pardon, I have done.

Iul. Yet (gracious Sir) --

Duk. Sister, desist from the renovation of our vain petition, formerly denied,
or many weighty reasons, still retaining
Their necessary virtue; and employ
Your urgent prayers for somewhat, that may win
Our free consent, yet not detract from justice:
And, what our power can give, be confident
You may command. But, for Pausanio's doom,
It was decreed irrevocable; then
Press not our resolution for remission.
But with his punishment, behold his crime,
And you will find Justice, when it sentenced him,
Was more then merciful, our stricter Laws
Exacting life, whose rigor we appeased
With gentler banishment. Let it suffice,
That your quotidian intercession has
Moved us to such a mercy, as the most
Will rather censure partiality,
(His ill is known so well). And by your fair
Persuasions, do not seek in the worlds eye,
To make us impious. Our transmarine friends,
(The still admirers of our purer Laws,)
Do not more seek for peace, then desire us
A precedent for their perverted justice,
Whose bright sword we have so continued from
The infectious rust of innovation; and must do so.
Therefore (virtuous sister)
Press it no farther. Fate, in its decree,
Is not more fixed, more resolute than we.

Iul. I have taught my busy tongue an obedient silence;
Yet, were your eyes spectatours of those tears,
Those tear-begetting tears, my sad-sweet friend
Hourly paies her fathers memory,
'T would mollify your heart, (thought on it does mine)
[weeps Were your kind ears the attentive auditors
Of her faint sighs, and you not echo them,
Your heart were heartlesse rock. Oh Sir, vouchsafe
Her grief but hearing, and her sweet-tongu'd sorrow,
Will charm your restrained pity.

Duk. What, statuiz'd Hippolyto?

Hip. No, royal Sir, a little womaniz'd,
I sucked it from my mother, and 'twill out.
We are not made of marble, but are men.
And, but I know your zeal to sacred Justice,
I should (with hope t'obtain) presume to beg
Compassion, with her Highness, from your Majesty,
For the late exiled father, of that yet sorrowing Lady. --
But --

Duk. But what, Hippolito? Recollect thy self;
Pausanio was thine enemy.

Hip. But how deserved, omniscient heaven can witness,
Best knowing the religious sympathy
^ have with his sad sufferings.

Duk. Spend not the least of thy too precious thoughts
On such a worthless subject. Let him suffer,
And unpi^tyed. His mere ingratitude to thee,
Setting aside his great offense,
Is offense great enough to pull down an affliction
Beo^ nd infliction: he suffers worthily.
No more of him. -- Yet, sister --

Hip. Ha! surely his resolution cannot so soon stagger:
[aside. Pray heaven it prove so, or all my plots miscarry,
And I am miserable.

Iul. I use my possibility; but alas,
To one, whose griefs distract her, comfort is,
As Physic to the dead, effectlesse:
Who by sage counsel, would suppress her sorrow,
Are heard, but not regarded. Fruitless are
The hours spent in persuasion. But who sooths
Her melancholy with fair hopes, that time
May repossesse her Father, with his yet lost honors,
Not, alone, attracts her eye and ear,
But gains her heart.

Hipol. Oh blessed intelligence!

[aside Duk. Trust me, I pity the poor Lady, and wish,
Her lavish fathers prodigality,
To Enrich her brother, and her fair self with virtue,
Had not forced him turn bankrupt.
Her then needless sighs,
Had not raised up such floods of cruel tears,
To drown her joys. We wore him in our breast,
Whilst loyal; but, when he left his virtue,
We cast him off, dreading a further danger.
But for those pair of spotless innocents,
His children, they still survive, receiving
Warmth from the sunshine of our favor,
Which they enjoy deservedly: Martiano
Has a spirit, as bold,
As temperately resolute, which we must cherish;
And his sisters; souls,
(Like a huge Diamond in a mount of Ore)
As rich in virtue, as her exterior parts in pulchritudes perfection.

Hip. Though It be pure truth, from him I like it not.

[aside. Duk. Pray let her have all due respect from you,
As she shall have from us.

Iul. Her merits challenge more, then my performance
Can pay her virtue, though my endeavour's aim
Be wholly for her grieved hearts tranquillity.

Duk When next you see this sorrow-clouded Beauty,
Let her sweet sadness know, our self in person,
Before expected, will persuasions bring,
To alienate her griefs.

Iul. Gracious Sir, I shall.

Duk. Come my Hippolito.

Exeunt Enter Fumante dressing, and Carlo. Fum. Laughed at'm?


Car. Oh sir, extremely -- she laughed until she leak'd, she wept with
laughing.


Fum. It could not be, at them; they were too serious; upon mine honor, I
never composed a copy of more pure poetry, and dressed in such rich language; in
my opinion, they were exquisite


Car. No doubt, Sir, and yet she might laugh at'em. Our women of this age are
grown so wise, that what we think meritorious, they believe ridiculous; and
sometimes it falls out so, they err not ever.


Fum. Pugh! the style was too lofty, and the conceit tickelish and profound;
her weak capacity could not reach the meaning.


Car. It may be so: What was the subject?


Fum. Her self the general, and every part particularized.


Car. Why there is it; will you tickle a woman's profundity with a lofty style,
and she not laugh at the conceit? it is impossible.


Fum. Well, I do hope to nose Vatimius yet, and marry fair Rosania my self.


Car. And leave the Lady Dianetta to wear the willow?


Fum. No, I Will court her for a Mistress, the other for a Wife^ it is
providently usual -- Who Is that knocks?

[knocks. Some needy Tailor in his
Exit Carlo. Apprentises threadbare cloak; or Seamster, in pitiful foul
linen, is come (with lamentation) to woo for money.


Enter Carlo. Car. Signior, your Shoo-maker, very importunate, desires some
short conference with you.


Fum. Say ^'me abroad.


Car. Sir, it boots not, he knows your constant hour too well; says, you are
never caparrison'd till twelve.


Fum. Tell him, he is a rogue, and he lies.


Car. Not I, Sir, 'twill bear an action; call a man a rogue for telling truth!
If you have not what he comes for, money, at least give him good words.


Fum. I never shall endure his importunity.


Car. I have a present means to give him sudden motion. --


cuts one of his boots cross the toe. Fum. What do mean?


Car. So now, be angry, that the straitness of your boot, forced you to cut
it, or you could not have worn 'em: and seem impatient.


Exit Carlo, and reenters with the Shoemaker. Fum. Let me alone.


Shoo. Good Morrow to your Worship.


Fum. In good time, Sir. What? you come for money, but are like to go without.
Pox on your neat work; I must cut new boots, or cannot wear 'em; besides, incur
my Lord's displeasure; who verry now in great haste sent for me. Another would
return 'em on your hands, but I am merciful, and you know it well enough,
therefore presume: but have a care, for if this trade hold, you will quickly break.


Car. I am afraid so.


[aside. Shoo. Sir, I desire your pardon for these, your next shall make amends.


Fum. They shall? and when?


Shoo. By tomorrow this time.


Fum. Go to, fail not, if you fail me, I Will fail you.


[Exit Shoom. Car. Nay, that is sure enough.


[aside. Fum. Thou necessary villain; let me hug thee.


Car. Peugh, this is nothing, I have seen a hundred of these tricks in Town.
Now must you make a virtue of necessity, and neatly tie it up with this new
fashioned Ribband; and, ere tomorrow at night, 'twill prove a fashion.


Ties it up, and puts on his Boot. Fum. Excellent Carlo! Again? who is there
now? But it is no matter, now I know the trick on it, I shall be even with some
more of ye.


Carlo goes out, and re enters. Car. The Lord Hipolito has sent for you.


Fum. I attend.


Exeunt. Enter Martiano and Ausonius. Mar. Tax not my courage (dearest friend)
I dare
As much, as man; when warranted by virtue.
The day's not more antipatheticall
To night, then my bold Soul to coward Fear.
But often we see temerity overthrow,
What wise delay might have prevented.
Protraction is not ever dangerous,
But sometimes advantageous; nor is
My sure revenge remitted, 'cause deferred:
No, no, it vegetates, and when mature,
With ease, I Will shake the vengefull fruit, that bears
A certain ruin with it, upon the heads
Of the conspirators, and all at once
Crush them to dust. But my design, as yet, is green.

Aus. I not suspect your courage, Martiano,
But tardity^ for, though our Proverb says,
He that goes slow goes sure; yet, he that hastes,
Has first his ends. I can but counsel you,
And proffer my assistance.

Mart. Both which, Ausonius, I accept with gratitude:
I may have just occasion to put
Your noble friendship to a trial:
Till when, I ever shall acknowledge
The great engagement my demerit has
Unto your goodness.

Aus. Do, put me to the proof;
Then shall my actions speak my real heart
Better, then my harsh tongne, unpractique in
The ceremonious falsities of France,
(So much in fashion with our antic age.)
My All is thine, and when I prove perfidious,
Kill me; till then, trust me.

Mar. Thou art all constant goodness, and my Friend.
In that poor Monosyllable, th'inestimable riches
Of our love, lies thesauriz'd.

Aus. Importunate affairs which envy me
The pleasure of thy company, exact
Me, for some few hours.
Be circumspect, and underneath your thoughts,
Your secretest thoughts, let our discourse ly couched;
There Is danger in the appearance. Passion
Too often drives man beyond his reason;
And a rash tongue betraies a resolved heart.
Good counsell's ever seasonable. Be wise.
And diffident. Hippolitus feigned friendship
Portends no good, his aime's beyond your reach.
Be confident, your fathers enemy
Can never be your real friend, his tongue
And heart must needs be dissonant.
Credit not his soft language; for most sweet
The Sirens sing, when they intend to slay.
Be firm in your revenge, th'injurious wrongs
Of good Pausanio cry loud for it; let him have't.

Mart. Could I conceive his injuries grew from that root of
Malice, I would --

Aus. You are not ignorant, it is more then whispered

Mart Were he the man, though skulk'd in some obscure
And unknown cavern, in the remotest part
Of the wide Universe, my impetuous rage,
More swift and terrible than lightning,
Soon would find him out;
And soon as found, dissect him into Atoms,
Which my just hand should dissipate about
His silent Mansion, that the guiltless earth
(Abhorring such commixture) might entreat
The furious justice of some stormy gust,
To snatch his ashes from her purer dust.
And hurry them to hell.

Auso. Passion transports him. -- Reassume your reason,
And once again be vigilant.

Exit Ausonius. Mart. My thoughts afflict me, sure it cannot be,
Hippolito should wear so smooth a brow^
And have a craggy heart; experience
Yet often proves the contrary. The Sea,
But now calm as a standing Lake, flattering
The secure Mariner, in few minutes space,
Furrows his front, and threatens him with wrack.
And among a thousand seeming friends, it is rare
To find one pair, whose meaning's their expression,
Among formal friends; then what can I expect
From a known enemy? Ha! -- ^tis doubtful --
But my revenge must not be idly grounded,
Upon slight thought, but fundamental truth.
I would not for the world, blur my pure soul
With any black mistake; -- yet ^'le suspect what may be,
And it is wisdom; hasty fools
Build on the ^ottile-sand of self-opinion,
Whilst the patient prudent laugh at their sad ruin.
I must make farther trial, then if I find
Him guilty, I Will soon ease my troubled mind.

Exit Martiano. Enter Hippolito, solus. Hip. I Am now securely fixed in the
Duke's bosom,
My power equals his; his greater title
Only distinguishes. So politic Syres,
To Advance their sons low fortunes, by a Match
Deserving better, let them bear the name
And glorious sound of Land lord, when th'entrado
Runs the old course into their Coffers.
It Is my command that executes, the Duke
But countenanceth the act. Petitions flock to me,
And, as my pleasure shall decree, are granted or opposed.
I Have dressed my self in such humility,
That all men's hearts are mine. Our neighbor Cardinal,
(That favored Prelate) from the opressed people,
Has not more hourly imprecations,
Than I prayers, smiles, and obsequious cringes
What content, to perfect my beatitude, affords
The world that is yet deficient,
But beauteous Lucebella? the rich crown
Of all my joys, for whose unvalu'd love
My honor lies at stake, nay, my dear life,
Were I discovered: whose wilful Father
Despised my humble suites, and with denial
(Cold as a Northern congelation)
Nip'd my then germinating hopes; besides,
When but a Neophyte in our Masters favor,
Maliciously he sought to eclipse my glory
With a cloud of ruin; which to retalliate,
My timely plots have sent him far enough;
Yet knows he not who hurt him. So wise men
Vengeance take, whilst th'inconsiderate fool
Threatens, and fails. Pausanio I am now
Above thy malice, and resolved to win
Thy peerlesse daughter, or grow old in sin.

to him, ^umante Fum. Summoned by your command, (my honored Lord)
My ever-ready duty brought me, to wait upon you pleasure.

Hipol. Fumante, thus in short^
I have perceived, and often, your jealous eye
Has glanced at Dianetta more of late,
Than any other Lady of the Court.

Fum. My Lord! --

Hip. And she deserves respect, she is fair; besides,
You have enjoyed with freedom a vouchsafty,
That others dare not hope for, many hours
Of sweet discourse with her, a certain symptom
Of mutual affection -- You are happy,
Whilst I --

Fum. My Lord, I Have many Mistresses;
But, who is most courteous, she predominates.

Hip. No jealously, Fumante,
I know the boundless love you bear her, and
The power you have with her; how that your absence
Does not more torture her afflicted soul,
Than presence hilarate her heart. Therefore
I sent for thee, on whom my hopes depend:
For now is the time wherein thou may express
Thy gratitude, for all my liberal favors,
Profusely shewr'd on thee: Nay more, endear
Me to thy love, and our two souls unite,
For perpetuity.

Fum. (I scent the project, he would inoculate.
[aside. Now must I turn pimp, -- hum -- well:
Would I were the first had undergone,
That now much practiced function for a Patron.
It Is a familiar age
For you, (my gracious Lord) to whose great bounty
I owe more, than the too-short remnant of my life
I wish to live, that my whole care and study,
Employed for your contentment may effect it.

Hip. Grateful Fumante! Oh -- my troubled breast,
Does nourish flaming sulphur.

Fum. Wee^l have it quenched, and speedily.
Her quick rolling eyes are characters of kindness.
The other day, (speaking of my Verses) she said,
My words were charms, and that the Lady must be
Insensible, -- of stone, -- that could withstand my method --
I Will put her to the proof -- Courage my Lord!
The Lady's yours

Hip. Mercy pronounced to the Delinquent, bears
Nothing so sweet a sound, -- I am all joy --
Dearest Fumante! -- imagination
Of what is to come, transports me -- prithee how,
How, my Fumante? enform me of the way.

Fum. With admiration, often I have heard
Her speak your merit, and affirm, the Duke
Looked with her eyes, when his election made
Your worthy self the object of his favors.

Hip. On! -- prithee on!

Fum. The Court (not without cause) might boast of you;
For Florence, nor the world, could ever produce
Your Honor's parallel.

Hip. My hopes best comfort! On.

Fum. Added t'your gifts of nature, goodl^ feature,
Were those of the mind, sound judgment, tempered valor,
Relieving bounty, and humility,
Attracting hearts: in fine all graces, which
Required are, to make a man complete,
Unanimousl^ flocked into your breast,
As to their proper center, and there fixed, dwell.

Hip. Oh! I shall surfeit with excess of joy.

Fum. Were It possible, her willing tongue could stretch
A praise beyond deserving, you should hav't;
Which is a proof sufficient she affects you.
N^w 'twere a necessary policy, my Lord,
To tickle her in th'ear with th'like report,
From you, concerning her, it cannot choose but take:
And if that fail her mean condition,
Being far beneath your honors;
Large promises, (lusts sugared bait) and some ^erformance,
(The life of expectation) will forcibly prevail.
Despair not, for the stuff we have to work on, is
Malleable -- My Lord, she is a woman.

Hip. Whom means Fumante?

Fum. Fair Dianetta.

Hip. Dianetta?

Fum. Yes: was it not she your honor spoke of?

Hip. Erroneous apprehension, dull Fumante,
Thy jealousy, and my credulity,
Equally fool us. My now present griefs,
Exceed my late imaginary joys --
Why did my rage procure the Generall's banishment?
Was It not for beauteous Luc^bella's love?

Fum. Your Lordships word obliged me to believe so.

Hip. It Is a pure truth, then turn not an Apostate:
For my sublime soul fixed in the pure heaven
Of her transcendent beauty, (where does shine
The glory of perfection) disdaines
Inferior community.

Fum. Your naming Dianetta, made me
Suppose the contrary. For, we of the Court
Are rarely bondslaves into constancy.

Hip. It Is a confessed fault, would 'twere amended.
But now take my intentionst
My virtuous fair, with much impatiency,
Brooks her loved father's absence, and admits
Of no society, but sadness, whilst
My grief-swoln heart does languish.
Now to avoid suspicion (for I doubt
Martiano's haughty spirit) and to confirm
Me in her good opinion, with haste,
Repair to Dianetta, that she, through you --

Fum. Now I conceive: may give intelligence
To Lucibella, of the constant faith
You have vowed unto her goodness --

Hip. Right -- and withal,
(For this point is the soul of my design)
How my assiduous supplication is,
To impetrate the Dukes remission for Pausanio.
Let her speak comfort plentifully, for
Thus assure her, I Will never cease my suit,
Till I obtain his gracious grant. Do this, and --

Fum. And more, (my Lord)
Be confidently cheerful, and expect,
Ere long, a prosperous issue.

Exit Fuman Hip. Go, and kind fate wait on thee, if she prove
Kind, I am too great, ever to know remove

Exit Hipolito. Enter Vatinius and Iacamo. Vat. Love has a strange consuming
faculty,
Vatinius wit^ a ribbon tie^ upon his boot as had Fum. Wastes not alone the
spirits, but the purse.
Variety of change, will shortly make me
Change variety. It has cost me, since that I
First made love unto Rosania, at least
Two thousand pistolls in very clothes; and
Yet she cannot fancy me; it is strange -- I
I wear 'em well enough -- ha!

Iac. Yes, Sir;
(For I can get none of them till they be
[aside Past wearing.

Vat. And
My judicious Tailor tells me, I become my cloths.
I Am open to thy view, deliver thy opinion.

Iac. Faith, Sir, your cloths become you.

Vat. Your clothes become you, villain.
[kicks him. He swears, that the compaction of my body is beyond
Compare, and takes delight to look upon my waste.

Iac. (I cannot blame him, he lives by your great waste.)

[aside. Vat. And yet, your clothes become you!

Iac. Your Pardon, Sir; the phrase is usual.

Vat. Use it no more, because it is so: When any thing is
Common, it is worthless.

Iac. That Is a Court Maxim.

[aside. Vat. Go, Sir, discharge the Tailor presently
gives Iac. a key. ^ will not, as most Gallants do, still spend,
Whilst I have where with all, but pay,
That when I want to spend, then spend I may.

Iac. Per-lady, no small policy.

Exit Iac. Vat. This suites the forward issue of a new fashion; yet, am I
almost confident, she will make it elder by a month, then that I gave my man a
year since. Well, I must humor her; but if she continue thus, when we are
married, we must wear my woods upon our backs, or (like thTortoise) carry our
houses about us. It Is rue mor'd, I shall have her, which I Have confirmed,
although she never made me any promise, and I strongly believe 't; for I am
termed the object of the Ladies, and the exact Courtier: Should it go
otherwise, I should be bravely laughed at. But I Will to her, and know a
certainty, for I can scarcely hold out any longer.


[to him, Honorio. Hon. Vatinus, well mett^ So early ready? and so quaintly
dressed? Trust me, this is not ordinary, but I suppose, the Dukes intended visit
to Lucibella, with the Princess, with whom Rosania goes, occasioned this
unaccustomed expedition.


Vat. I do confess ingenuously, it did!
But I must wait. My Lord, your humble servant.

Exit Vat^nius. Hon. That such a solid judgment, and sweet beauty,
Should rashly throw the treasure of her love
On a mere glorious outside, troubles me past wonder.
Imperious love! placest thou charms in clothes?
Are gay apparel, and a rich-loind purse,
Such powerful attractions? Yes, it is plain:
Whilst the reward of virtue's cold disdain.
When I discovered my religious flame,
With an unfeigned passion, and my soul
Almost expiring with each heartless sigh;
What answer, but, she pittyed me: whilst he
Must quaff the Cordial, that should comfort me.
Women, your love admits no other Laws,
But this, ye love not therefore, but because
[to him, Martiano. By this, my Lord the Duke is on the way,
To pay his promised visit to your sister.

Mart. She Will take your personal information, for an honor.

Hon. It Is the least service I can pay her merit.

[Exit Honorio. Mart. There goes an honest Lord; and, but Ausonius,
There Is scarce another in the Court.
Where might a man turn his eye to find a third?
[to him, Hipolito. Torment unto my blood, Hipolito.

Hipol. (His rising must prevent my fall^ he shall
speaking unto himself. Be General -- hal it is concluded: and see a
Most opportune recountre.)
What, wedded still to sadness, Martiano; ever alone?

Mart. Better alone, then ill accompanied.

Hip. How Is this?

Mart. My honest thoughts are constant subjects to
My upright soul; Treason and Adulation
Were never known to them. You Will say, it is strange,
But it is a simple truth. Now should I slack
The awefull reins, and let 'm rove, they might
Rebel, having so great a precedent (my Lord.)

Hib. Is this disjoynted talk to us? know you; who we ar^?

Mart. Disjoynted talk to us? know you, who we are?
Yes: I do know, Hipolito: our names have b^t an equal sound.

Hipol. However, more manners and less familiarity.
Would well become you; else you will grow contemptible.

Mart. More manners less familiarity; contemptible?
(draw. My potent arm (where in the purple blood,
Of wronged Pausanio lively flows)
Shall chastise thy mad folly, and maintain
My fathers Son the Nobler -- now is the time for trial.
(aside Who (though unjustly exiled) has a breast
Harboring more real worth then the carved
Monuments of all thy decease'd Ancestors
Can brag off -- heaven he weeps!
(aside. This may be but delusion -- on!
What though you be our Masters Minnion?
That does not lend addition to your blood,
It Is Virtue that enobles; every way
I am at worst, your equal; which denied.
Let our impartial swords the cause d^cide.
What means Hipolito?

Hipol. I never hear your banished Father named,
But grief through my kind eyes, evaporates,
The sad mist from my kinder heart, and leaves
It obvious.

Mart. This cannot be dissembling --
(aside My Lord your pardon! my rash credulity,
And filial love to parent,
Enforced my heart to a foul misconstruction,
How that your power which the Duke contrived
My fathers sad remove; the reason, this:
Because you held him for an Enemy;
And in a supposed just revenge, I thought
To kill you; yet not ignobly.

Hip. Adulterated age! Monstrous ingratitude!
Is my so noble friendship, pious sorrow,
Uncessant mediation, all my services,
Both to, and for your father, thus rewarded?
Arm! for I Will teach thy rage a better temper --
(draw. Was it for this? my long continued prayers,
For your advance (yet until now effectlesse)
At length, have wone the yielding Duke to make
Your worthlesse-selfe his general? nay brought
His Royal person to confirm it on you,
Brought him an honor to your habitation,
For this? -- but I tryffle -- betake you to your
Guard^ Why do you not put forward?
Does abject fear restrain your fury?

Man. No it is a thing I hate, as I do love
True vallour^ the late War proclaimed it: nor
Because you are f^vourit to the Duke for could,
It enter in my thought, you wronged my father?
Were you Jove's Ganymed? my noble anger
Would force mere attempt high-heav'ns invasion,
And from the O^ympicke thunders riffled arms
Throw headlong my revenge to ^artarus.

H^p. O^ -- thou'st damned spirit

(aside. M^^t. T^ prosecute sweet vengeance,
I could do things, me thinks impossible:
B^^^u^^less be that hand, usurps a sword;
Against a friend! now I am calm, and beg,
What must not be denied, your goodness pard^n;
And, henceforth, I vow to wear you next my soul.

Hip. First -- Nay, pray receive my sword!
{Proffers his Sword. And if you doubt of my reality?
Rippe up my breast, where you shall find a heart
Worthy your friendship.

Mart. Kind Sir, enough: I am all faith -- The Princess.

{^o them, Iulia. Iulia. Martiano, the Duke, within expects you.

Mart. Madam, I attend.

Julia. The Lord Hipolito will deserve your love,
Whose faithful mediation has accompanied
Our long important suit, for the old General.

Exit Julia Hipol. As sent from heaven.

[aside. Mart. This confirms all the rest:
What devil suggested me to this mistake?
Once more, Sir, your forgiveness?

Hip. Martiano, take it, and a friend! but hence
Let reason rule, and not be ruled by sense

(Exeunt. Desinit Actus primus.
Actus secundus,
Scena prima.
Enter Honoria, Fumante, Vatinius. Hono. WHat think ye, Gentlemen of Lucibella.

Vatin. She spoke sweetly and wisely.

Hono. Well, she is the glory of her sex.
I never heard a suite of such importance,
Urged which like modesty ^t'was strange the duke
(After to powerful aplea) could still,
Remain inexorable.

Fuman. Sir, nothing less: justice best speaks a Prince,
When mercy yoakes his great Prerogative
With vulgar censure: should he, now, reverse
(At a fair Ladies prayers) his former doom,
And call Pausanio home, which all the Lords
Entreaty, could not win him to, do you think
The busy-Commons gravidated heads,
(Which generally, from nothing, coin conceits)
Would not bring forth foul whispers, since they know.
Him for a Traitor.

Hono. I Have heard a Tenent (besides that of his sanctity)
How that a Princes great Prerogative,
Maintains him not-erronious (the truth
Of either, I dispute not, since authouriz'd)
Which believed, the people dare not murmr.
However, mercy no less becomes a Prince.

Fuman. Faith Sir, their insolency, here of late,
Is grown to such a height, that Majesty
Lies trampled on; they dare do any thing.

Vatin. It Is too true.
And more then time their great impiety,
Were by a stricter hand suppressed

Hono. Here are a pair of Statesmen, such another
Not to be called out of Christendom, to over throw it,
Aside One a fool, ^' other a flatterer, I must not
Leave them, for my mirth;
But hark ye Gentlemen! it is more then thought.
That the the old Gennerall, is grossly injured

Fuman. Fools are of that opinion.

Vatin. Yes, yes, fools; none, but fools.

Hono. I am of that opinion; am I a fool?

Both. You a fool, my Lord?

Hono. I do protest I hold Pausanio noble.

Fuman. Come, come, my Lord, it is unsafe
To harbor such opinions, when the laws
Have proved him guilty of foul treason.

Hono. Hum -- are you of that faction?
I shall observe you more hereafter.
Aside I only speak to ye, my grave judicious friends,
But no more of that.
What think ye of the great honor, late conferred
On Martiano? he is now created General;
And has a haughty spirit.

Fuman. Spirit too much, I fear; but yet the duke.
Was ill-advis'd, until a farther proof,
So great an honor, rashly, to bestow,
Took from a Traitor, on the Traitors son,

Vatin. Right: who (for ought we know) may be a Traitor?
The Duke was much too blame, and without question,
The whole Court are of our opinion.

Hono. Yes, yes, fools; none, but fools.

Both. How Is this?

Hono. Now I hope you will not question me, for my opinion;
I am even with ye.

Both. We? not we, my Lord; we are your friends.

Hono. Nay now ye dare not
Vatin, Fuman: Coures Rosania. Dianetta To them Rosania, and Dianetta, And I am
glad on it
See the ladies.
Such seemed the beauteous Goddess, when she got.
The golden ball, on happy Ida's top;
Else had the Trojan-youth bestowed the prize
On Juno, or the Martiall-maid.
Rosania, well; how e're you slight my love,
My captived soul will your true martyr prove.

Dianetta. I Have not neglected the performance of
All your desires.

Fuman. You much oblige me.

Rosania. Enough, enough, I do not like the subject.

Vatin. That Is but an evasion, because she would not have
Aside. Her love to me discovered: how shall I be blessed, with wit, and beauty?

Rosa. Your serious thoughts (my Lord) are taken up
To Honorio. With business for the state; you have left courting.

Hono. Lady, I was projecting --

Rosa. Oh purge your brain of projects, I advise you.
They breed contagion, that infects the state;
And will, or make you deadly sick, or kill you.

Hono. But mine is lawful.

Rosa. Law it selfe's unsound.

Hono. Yet, Lady, mine is just and honest.

Rosa. That would be rare and strange: what is it? --

Vatin. She fi^s him every way and she has ashrew'd wit,
{Hon. and Rosa. whis^er. And I shall love her the better for it: even thus.
(Aside. Will she cross me, to exercise her Genius --

Rosa. You love a Lady, and would have her give you the
Monopoly of her heart; and, for the obtaining
Of the Pattent, give her yours.

Hono. I would: Is it not fair, and equal?

Rosa. As't may fall out: yet you may pay too dear; --
But it concerns not me.

Hono. She Is yet immovable: hard-hearted fair! --

(Aside. Rosa. Signior Fumante, I had your amorous verses.

Vatin. He send her verses? --

(Aside Rosa. But the exuberance of your praise, was only due
To Venus self; and (if my memory fail me not)
The Author so intended them, in the last Court-Masque.

Fuman. The Author Madame?
How, has she found out that? --

(Aside. Rosa. Yes Sir! the major part of them I Am sure were none.
Of yours: but blush not! you're not the first, by
Multitudes, guilty of this fellonious fault, it is common.

Dian. Yet nere the less absurd.

Fumam. By Phoebus self, I swear!
The invention genuinely was my own.
I not deny, but mine might simulize
The others learned-straine.

Dian. Yea; good wits will jumpe.

Fuman. For now the sterile soil of forced invention.
Is over-wrought, therefore not, so productive
Of variety: what theme can you propose.
That largely has not bin discussed on?

Rosa. Scarce any: therefore your excuse is the more passable.

Dian. The duke --

Enter duke, Iulia, Lucebella, Hipol, Martiano, Ausonius, Attendants, Flourish.
Duke. Madame you have exceeded in our entertainment.
Which you may judge ill recompensed, having denied.
Your only suite: but consolate
Your greived heart, which better hopes: for when.
Your Presence, shall, an honor bring, with it,
Unto our Court, our gratitude shall give
Your bounty a just proof, that we deserve it.

Hipol. What means the duke? --

(Aside, kisses. Duke. Till when-I think 't an age-your leave --
The Arabian gales breath not so sweet a scent
On blushing Roses.

Luceb. Your Grace leaves too much honor which your handmaid.

Duke. Fairest -- farewell!

Looks steadfastly upon her, pulls his hat over his eyes then goes away which
Hip. M. A. Ho. F. Va. Diana. The duke departed strangely.

Iulia. Some thing has crept into,
His noble breast, that troubles him,
What ere it be?

Diana. I partly guess the cause.

Luceb. Pray heaven no want in us, or misperformance.
In his entertainment, has wrought this alteration!

Iulia. Be feareless!

Dian. No; rather your abundance: in plainer terms,
^adame, I think your beauty has subjected
His stouter heart, and doubting, now your loves
Reciprocation, since his great opposing.
Your sad petition, his obduracie
Feeling the heat of Cupids flames become
More flexible: witness his kind invitall
To the Court, his grateful promises of all
Due performance, and his encouragement
To lively consolation; but most,
His Heart-betraying salutation
Just at parting: through which I well perceived,
(As if his breast had bin transparent crystal)
The rankling relic Loves kind cruelty
Had left behind -- nay (Madam) we can judge

Julia. Propitious be thy divination!

Luceb. I would not for the world.

Julia. Why? could not love him?

Luceb. Yes, before any He living:
Nay set aside the attraction of his person
Which, though external, is most powerful;
With all the internal virtues, that enrich
His nobler mind: as he is your brother
He might share bliss with me: but as he is
A tyrant to my virgin tears effus'd
In such abundance, me^kely at his feet.
Whereby to expiate my fathers guilt
From his too strict remembrance and reduce
him to his native home, that so mine eyes
(Happy in their aspect) might strain the rest
through my excess of joy; as he is thus
Merciless to deny me this I could be pity l^s, --

(weeps.) Julia. Sweetest shake off this misbecoming sorrow^
And these sad weeds, that shrowed it for, than now,
Never more cause of gladness: tyer thy self
Like to thy self! and help revive the Court
(Grown dull through thy long absence)
With thy presence!

Dia. (Dear Madam) do! for if the Duke be taken?
As certainly he is (or I have no inspection)
Believe your father now at home! for that must follow.
He never can expect love from you,
'Till he have made him recompense.

Rosa. Very true: therefore pray be advised!

Dian. Good Madam!

Iulia. Nay come, you shall be ruled, and go to Court.

Luceb. Chiefly, to give a demonstration
Of my obedience to the Duke his summons;
Next to pleasure ye; and last (if possible)
Too lose part of my grief, which heaven knows
Is in supportable^ I will wait on you -- But by our sacred friendship!

{Takes Iulia by the hand. Iulia. To me no exorcisms.

Luceb. Then Question not your brothers passion!

Julia. I shall observe --

Exeunt. Enter Duke and Page. Duke. Come gentle boy, thy untouched heart is
light,
Thou can express another's sadness in
A pleasing tone, and yet remain unmoved:
Sing me the melancholy ditty, which thou said
Would please me.
(Sings. Song. Weep on, sad Soul! and may thy tears make thee memorative of
hers! yet notxs to grieve thee;
For though thy disrespective beams carrouz'd, unsatissi'd, those streams her
goodness may relieve thee: Th'obdurate stone,
By often distilling drops, is wrought upon:
Sigh on! until thy frozen breast, be with dissolving -- warmth possessed! then
weep again!
Till thy repentant sorrow show each tear, and sigh, from her did flow has
bin repayed with ten; and then she must.
Or love again, or lived esteemed unjust.

(Exit, Page. Duke. It Is well: leave us!
What a combustion rages in my breast!
And how small hope to quench it! righteous fate!
What horrid sin, unknown to my clear soul,
Have I committed, meriting so great
A punishment? than which, none -- temporal
More cruel: to love and be disdained!
Is there prevention? she, whose sea of tears
(That might have melted Rocks) the abyssus of
My greedy rigor has carrous'd without
Sense of satiety; can she have left
One drop to pity me? --
She whose sad sweet complaints, could not but charm
The bloody Moore, and teach his fierceness, mildness;
I Have heard neglectingly: can she retain
Compassion, for one has bin so cruel?
Superfluous question! -- but stay better reason:
Say I call home her father -- if at length,
After whole years, great pains, large sums, consumed
In the delaying law, we but recover
The desperate principal! travel nor charge
Is thought on, we are contented: why maint she
(Forgetting her past greefes) be satisfied?
I am resolved -- but then where is Justice -- oh! --
No matter^ -- ye celestial dwellers,
In Capital Letters, register this truth!
I fall to frailety, but by a temptation
That your divinities, if upon earth, could not withstand:
Which seen I may find pardon

Hi. There is no safety can associate sin;
To him Hip: speaking to himself. Some thing must be done.

Duke. Hipol to discoursing to himself?
Thus obscured, I may over hear him.

Duke behind the hangings. Hipol. The Duke is strangely changed: his wonted
mirth
Forsakes him; and his mind-disclosing-speech
Speaks him all sadness: his dejected looks,
Soft lingering pace, and sollitary loneness,
Faint-heartless-sighs, and jealous apprehensions.
Are the true badges of a deepe-struck-Amorist.

Duk. There you rubbed my wound.

Hipol. Hum -- it troubles me extremely,
To know the certain cause of his distemper.

Duke. Kind Hipolito, thy whole care's for us,
Whereas we are grown quite careless of ourselfe,

Hipol. May be the peereless Lucebella.

Duke. What of her?

Hipol. (The splendor of whose eye might enfuse warmth
In the half frozen Cossack, and enforce
Him throw away his friendly furrs) has caught.
H^s yielding soul -- I would not for a world --

Duke comes forth. Duke. Why? I can hold no longer.

Hipol. Ha? -- how easily might my secure thoughts
Have bin surpised?

Duke. Be not amazed! but feareless! we have heard.
Thy kind expressions tending to our welfare;
My dear Hipolito, what recompense,
For thy continual care, can there be, worth
Thy acceptance? when as my dukedom is
Too poor a restitution.

Hipol. Gracious Sir, all I can does but duty,
Therefore too well rewarded by your royal notice.

Duke. Thou art all virtue. But when you pronounced
The very cause of my sick hearts disease,
Naming fair Lucebella, why stopped you?
Then with a faint conclusion (I would not for a world)
Blast my hopes?

Hipol. I Am put to it; but am armed --

(Aside. Duke. Say (my H^polito) -- wrack not my expectation!
Do thou suspect her virtue?

Hipol. What, If I confirmed her vicious? it would worke^
(Aside. But oh that were a sin, for which damnation
Would seem a punishment too easy -- I have't

Duke. Why muttu^'st, to thy self?
And leavest our demand unsatisfied?

Hipol. Sir, your pardon!
My anxious thoughts, with which my brest's replete;
Caused this neglect of duty.

Duke. Then answer us: do thou believe her such
As the best femall, through temptation, may be, Frail?

Hipol. Chaste and religious, as the virgin Nun,
For ought I know.

Duke. She is, she is; my soul for hers, she is:
With haste, dispeed our letters to Pausanio,
Entreat him home, woe him to pardon our
Not pardoning him! tell him we are his friend,
Intend to call him father; restitute
Him any thing -- all things -- Jam 'ore joyd.
But what? do thou repine at our felicity?

Hipol. No: but, rather, pray for its increase.

Duke. What then, writes coffeehouse, on thy brow?
We do command your nearest thoughts.

Hipol. (Great Sir) you know my homebred nature, blunt
As simple, not enured to sooth error
With flattery, so heap sin on sin; but prone
T'extirpate vice, and cherish virtue: then
Shall I behold, with violating hands,
Your self, that should maintain justice, usurp
Her sacred-sword, and, with the desperate point,
Wilfully vulnerate your precious soul,
When as you may prevent it? and not be truly greev'd?
Oh no! these tears (the intrusive witnesses
Of the fixed love I bear him) do lament
Pausanio's absence: yet my pious heart,
Limitts my ready wishes, for a squared rock,
Of perfect Adamant, I Would not have him here,
And the impardonable sin upon
Your tortured conscience, with the living scandal.
Devouring your noble name, and Ancestors;
When as Posterity
Viewing the annalls of your happy reign,
Among your better deeds, there registered,
Shall find this matchless piece of partial justice;
And, in the ears of your surviving offspring,
Read, Here have we the else good Cosmo,
For a Precedent of ill: will they not curse you?

Duke. Oh --

Hipol. But my too-forward tongue willing to express.
My zeal to goodness, has transgressd; and now
I have discharged my duty, if you please?
Cut off my head! --

(Kneeles. Duke. Rise, my divided soul! would the great trains,
That throng the Courts of Princes, were like thee!
But, now, what means to keep me from thi^ guilt,
And yet be happy? my Hipolito.

Hipol. This only: of late young Martiano,
With great entreaty often has urged
Me to desire your Majesty's consent,
That he might visit his long absent father:
Now, give him your grant! and for the rest
Let me alone: his fair sister
Affects your Grace, suffize it, that I know it:
But her brother opposes all that bashful virgins --

Duke. We understand thee: and thy words bring comfort;
Tell him he has our leave, with power to use
Our Galleys, when, and where, he please:
We long to hear of his departure.

Hipol. I Will hasten it: Sir, be you but cheerful,
For if I fail? hate me!

Duke. Be prosperous! --

Exit. Hipol. So: now to Martiano, then the games on foot;
I must not trust his friendship, but at distance.
Had not the good evil spirit furnished
My great necessity? from what a precipice
Had I fall'ne headlong to perdition?
I Am deeply in, then on! if I must fall?
Better for treason, then things trivial. --

Exit. Enter Rosania. Rosania. To be married to Vatinius? this false report
Puts me besides my patience: the very man I
^oath above all the imitating A^es in the Court:
It Is true, he and Fumante both, have often with
Oaths, professed they loved me; which I ever slighted,
And plainly told them, that I could fancy neither.
I wonder upon what ground it is fabrick'd! --
Upon my life, merely his own report; no
Otherwise; but I shall fit him; this comes of
Public Courtship: it is well it is no worse.
I would not have it reach the ears of the Princess
For any good --. Honorio, I am now resolved to
Make amends, for my long past unkindnesse,
Thy constancy does challenge it.

(Exit.) Enter Hipolito, and Martiano. Mart. Hell to my soul? -- whore my
Sister?

Hip. Let reason cool your boiling blood; lest that
Impatience rob you of sweet revenge.

Mart. It cannot:
My virtue's proof against all opposition:
Bring him before my rage, though payled round,
With a^^ed milions, ^augre their resistance,
I Will heiw him peace-meale, then to revenous Kites
Throw his luxurious Carcass -- wast for this
His Siren tongue envited her to Court,
To strumpet her? -- bette his lust had chose
His only sister to make black with guilt.
Or mounted his own mother -- who r my sister?
These the promised hopes of consolation? --
Dishonor Lucibella?

Hip. For heavens sake moderate your fury?
Or, we both are lost.

Mart. Perish the whole world with us, rather than
One grain of our dear honor! fiery flames
Run through my frighted veins, and consume me,
Before I shall do justice; patience
But a little; I Will instantly return,
And bring the libidinous heart of this moechatour
A present for you, poynted on my Steel.

Hip. First you must cut your passage through me?
This is childish rashness; and not the fruit
Your vows to patience, and secrecy,
So fairly promised: had I known your temper
To be thus volatile? no torment should
Have forced persuasion, or the name of friend
Have wrought this secret from me: giv't me back?
(draws. Or I will ransack all your In^rals for it.

Mart. Why I am your friend, and (but for you) had lived
In ignorance, whilst the lascivious Duke
Might have brought black dishonor on our house,
And I lost my revenge, but, to your love,
I owe more then a thousand lives; for now
I know his dark intentions, and can
Prevent th'm, by killing them in the bud.
Perform then your free proffer, join with me!
Remember it alike concerns you -- you
He would have made his cursed instrument,
The damned Bawd to his soul lust (my Lord)
You -- oh heavens! -- the good Hipolito.
Can you hear this, yet not be moved?

Hip. I can seem so, and compass my revenge
With greater safety; when you rashly run
Your neck into the nuze; and not alone,
Your own; but seek to ruin him, that was
And would be, your best friend. It is unsafe
To play with the awful Lions curled maine,
When waking; but a sleep, your pleasnre may
Command his very heart.

Mart. I am to blame: Forgive me; Sir,! the cause
Must needs distemper the most able brain:
You were about to counsel me, pray on!
You said the course was sure, and might be sudden:
I vow all patient observance.

Hip. Then thus.
Some twelve Moons since, you may remember
The solemn vow Sicanio freely made
Unto your father, whose supply preserved
His person, people, galleys, from the yoke
Of Turkish bondage; when Reo^bbassa
That proud commander, with his whole Armado
Set on his weaker power, which (by multitude)
'Ore Mastered, after a cruel fight,
Sicanio, and the Sicilian Cavalleirs
Ready to yield themselves unto their mercy,
Pausanio, and his power were discri'd
A loofe, making from Malta; when the wind
Favoring their course, ere a full watch was out,
Brought them inken of the Turks; your father by
Their flags, knew them for foes, and freshly charges
Upon their Admiral (till then victorious)
Who (after many) by one dangerous shot.
Received 't wixt wind, and water, quickly sunck.
The rest (disabl'd by the former: and
More weakn'd by the latter fight) revenge,
Not valor animated on; and now
A bloody fight begins; but seven short hours
Declares your father Victour: for the Turk
Beat out by new supply, clapps on all sail,
And flies; leaving their intended prize unto
Your father: who (proud that it was his fate,
To serve the Prince) makes himself known,
Supplies what war had made d^ficient,
And takes leave to whom Sicanio, thus:
Valliant Pausanio, our great Preserver,
May heaven be just in sending thee like streit^
Not that we wish thee ill; but that we may
Express our gratitude, for this deliverance,
And your great love:
For all our lives, and force of Sicilly,
Are tied to your disposal: So, parted.
Now, Martiano, haste you thither, and make known
To him your griefs; and if that he be noble,
Now Is the time to show it.

Mart. But if in case, alleging he is friend
To Florence, he deny me his assistance!

Hipol. 'T were sin to doubt his Princely word -- how 'ere,
Upon your first advise of ill success,
I Will have the duke dispatched; and't will be safe.
For, in your absence, what suspicion can
Move any to think you interested therein; -- ha?

Mart. Rare, above thought (...) my constant letters
Shall acquaint you withal passages:
I will away to night; the wind sits fair.

Hipol. Indeed your business does require wings.
Success wait on you? --

Exeunt. Enter Ausonius and Lucebella her Clothes changed. Auso. This better
change, will much rejoice your
Brother; who, 'bove his own, preferrs your welfare.

Luceb. May it prove wroth his joy; I rather fear.
My greefes increase, than their redress -- I go
Unwillingly -- and yet I know not why --
But 'cis the Princess swayes me.

To them Mart. Auso. See Martiano's come to wait upon you thither.

Mart. To Court! rather to a Bordello -- Sister,
This bravery becomes you well -- yea and abroad --
But best at home: let not my plainness cause
Your amazement! the duke has undermined you,
And wants but putting to the burning match,
Of blowing up your honor:
Anon you shall know more; I must this night
For Sicilly; my dear Ausonius
Will supply my room, till my return, whom I
(By letters) will inform of all proceedings -- away.

Luceb. Is this the joy! will unkind fate for ever
Lowr'e! is there no mitigation^

Mart. Be wisely patient! or you be^ray
My else-sure revenge.

Auso. Now thou speak like my friend.

Mart. But I lose precious ^ime:
In, and know all: oh gods, be now but just!
Then shall this lustful flame burn him to dust.

Desinit Actus Secundus.
Actus Tertius.
Scena Prima.
Enter Honorio and Rosania. Hono. LAdy your seeming cruelty, has much.
Afflicted me, but your now real promise
Of mutual amity, and protestation
That 'twas but for aitrial of my faith,
Dissolves my frozen hopes to melting joy: and heart
I do present you with the constant'st heart.
That purest vows, e're plighted to a Maid -- Sallute.

Rosa. It Is but exchanged for one, whose as firm faith
Resolves the chastest love, that virgin -- blushes
Ever betrayed to Man.

Hono. May permanent felicity crown both,
Our resolutions! Madam, your persuasive reasons.
Command me patience till the Princess leave,
And your then ready love, shall perfect this
Our begun happiness: in the interim,
I will endeavor some quaint stratageme.
To shame my brace of boasters, whose jactations,
Have, with your modesty, abused my passion.

Rosa. The very project my slight vengeance aimed at:
Would 'twere affected!

Hono. Oh doubt it not! their policy's not so preventive,
But we may easily compass it:
Only, thus far, be pleased to be assistant;
When that Vatinius courts you, let your praise
Be of Fumante, and his Poetry:
And when Fumante, Vatinius in your eyes
A complete Courtier, and becomes his clothes
Be best in Florence: and for the rest, let me alone:

Rosa. I shall observe: and so I take -- my leave.

Exit Rosa Hono. All joys wait on you: now for my mimique gallants.
To him Fum. and Carlo. And luckily heeres one, fretting, as if some busy
Waspe, had with her stinging tail, offended his
Worshipps nose; unseene, I will observe him.

Hono: behind the Arrass. Fuman. It can not be.

Carlo. It Is credibly so reported Sir.

Fuman. Vatinius marry her?
What, in the name of merit, can her eye
Discover in that indigested lump,
Worthy so sweet a purchase? but uncase
His disseas'd body, and the dullest eye
Will soon perceave what a Consumption
Intemperance has bred there: out of boots,
His legs are, but a booty for a Buzzard.
And, but take off his artificial locks
The french men (that first wanted) first invented;
And against the sun perspicuously you may
See, what a plenteous lack of brains,
His noddl's stored with; which causes him conceit himself a complete
gentleman.

Hono. How right his malice has described em both!

Carlo. What imperfections gay apparel covers?

Fuman. True: whilst deserving virtue, unregarded,
Walks in a thread bare vestment.

Hono. This is observable: it is not the goodly outside speaks a man.

Carlo. But I have heard, Sir, that he is possessed with a very great.
Estate; and who has wealth has all things: he
Shall be reputed virtuous, valiant, noble, wise,
What not? and questionless it is that she aims at: as for
His defects, she may (as other Ladys) supply them in
A proper, able, well limbed, gentileusher, who with
Alacrity and fidelity shall discharge his office, to
The no small contentment of his Madam; yet
Seemingly-be-check'd, and rayl'd on in his feellows
Presence, for now performance of his duty.

H^^. A bitter knave.

Fum. But are there, who do so?

Carlo. Are there? why where will you find a
Lady that does
Nor so? (I mean, I Florence) nay worse in sport
With their Marmosits, and smooth skinned dogs,
A beastly, quality for a Lady: though the now frequent
Custom of it; lessons the crime.

Fum. Well, it vexes me beyond all patience, to be
Thus affronted, by such a worthless Widgeon;
Would I durst fight with him!

Hono. 'T would prove a foul Combat; a woodcock with
A widgeon.

Carlo. Why sir, what should cause your fear? upon my
Knowledge, the fight of a drawn sword will make him swound.

Fum. I will not trust him: nor is it good jesting with
Edged tools.

Carlo. Yet have I seen you quarrel; and on the Piazza,
Draw upon a gentle man, for smiling (as you thought)
At your new fashioned ha^t, or spur leather: and with
Vociferous language, threaten inevitable slaughter.

Fum. 'Thats been, when some have held me, them?

Carlo. That's very true -- and he without a sword too

(aside. Fum. Nay I dare quarrel with the best; and with uncivil
Language abuse any man; nay I dare yet go
Farther (rather then be thought a coward) send
A challenge; but under hand, take up the quarrel,
Though at the expense of a Collation of ten
Pistoletts. I cannot endure these dangerous passado'^.

Carlo. But if, with honor the affronted cannot put it
Up but you must fight, or be esteemed pusill animous,
How then?

Fum. Then I acquit him with the severe law's against
Duels, and what great want of judgment it is to
Undertake them, when for a slight word-reputation,
We commit a murder, yet not obtain our vengeance
Without loss of our own lives, which mere temerity
Forfeits unto the Law; requesting him to entertain
The Noblest thoughts of me, I am a Gentleman,
Ready to give best satisfaction when but called in
Question, on any ground, but Tuscany; where the too
Rigorous laws makes it unsafe to combat, etc.

Carlo. This may prevail with some: but say he be implacable?

Hono. I how then?

Fum. Why then, with politic patience, I resolve rather
To suffer a dry private beating, which breaks no bones;
Than ^un the arischa of my life, with dangerous poking.

Hono. I shall try your temper.

Carlo. Then y' are resolved to let him have your Mistrisse?

Hono. No I Will forbid the baines.

Fum. Not so: but, first, I Will hear this news confirmed,
And then I may do something: mean time you
Must give out that Lucebelia's desperately sick.
It is the Lord Hipolito's Command: their's a reward --

Exit Carlo. To Fum. Hono. Hono. Fumante, met as wished!

Fuman. What is Honorio's pleasure?

Hono. To pleasure you, my friendship hitherto has still confirmed it.

Fuman. Which ever l've acknowledged, and for which
I place you next my heart.

Hono. And theirs a peace of service now in my power,
Will deserve that place; if you dare venture on it,
But I err to Question, knowing your courage, and
Impavid spirit; when honor bids you On.

Fum. I both have propenfitude to dare, and power to do.
Say! what is it!

Hono. Vatinius, whom fame gives out for truth
Shall wed Rosania, conceives that you
Have grossly injured him; sor it appears
She now begins, to slight him, of which neglect
He judges you the Author; because
Flowting him to his face; for the bad wearing
Of his good clothes, she emulates your garb;
Vituperating his dull courtship, applauds
Your fluent vein; reputes him worthless, and
Your self deserving; and upon this ground's
Resolved to challenge you to single Combat.
Now if my friendly counsel (only tending
To your dear credit, and future good) may
Be prevalent; 'twere not amiss you did prevent
His peremptory challenge with another;
Which greatly must disanimate him; denoting
You are truly sensible of the wrong he has done you,
In basely skandalizing your merit to your Mistress.
-- Oh! oche torto? -- which he
Has often in my hearing done: so shall
You justly chastise vice, and re-obtaine
Rosania's favor.

Fum. But there is danger in it.

Hono. No more then in beating an English Spannel, which
Will love you the better ever after for it. Vatinius is
A true bred Courtier; and had rather see an evil
Spirit, then an unsheathed Spado -- however, let
Me know your place of meeting, and I Will see there
Shall be no bloodshed: for a wholesome beating
Will do him most good, nor would I have you
Purple your bright sword, in blood of a poor Coward
'Twere dishonor.

Fum. I am resolved.

Hono. The time, and place?

Fum. Six in the Evening, in the grove behind the palace.
You Will not fail to meet!

Hono. Fail! -- I swear I would not miss the sport
For any good -- yet use him gently -- for
I pity him.
Only it is against my honest nature to hear my
Friend abused, and see so sweet a beauty subject
Her self to such a glorious nothing -- when
Suggested to it, only, by fraudulent information.

Fum. I Will inform him, and reform him too,

Hono. 'Twould prove an easier tasque to teach an english.
Bear speak French -- you say you think she loves you!

Fum. Think!

Hono. And has bestowed upon you many favors!
As leave to kiss her hand --

Fum. Her hand!

Hono. Yes! that is a favor: but I understand you -- you
Have been more familiar, you are happy! --
And she has graced your many presents with
Her kind acceptance!

Fum. She has

Hono. And all this Vatinius contradicts -- oh lying Raseal!

Fum. I Will contradict him, and presently about it --
You will not fail to meet?

Hono. Doubt it not! -- but when you have greatest need --
Exit Fumante. Be confident I Will prove a broken reed. --

Exit Honorio. Enter Hipol. and Lucebella. Hipol. You could have loved him then!

Luceb. Before he fell from virtue, as my self
Divided, might affect the other half.
But since stained with corruption,
His memorie's most loathsome.

Hip. Whence then proceeds this strong oppugnance to
My fair proposition^ efflagitation? if from your hate?
Be, what your angel-form does seem to speak
You, mercisull^ and with one stroke dispatch
Me, and my greefes! but say, I cannot love you;
And that subverting blast, shall (in a trice)
Shake my hie flaming heart to frigid earth
So ease me: whereas merciless delay
But torment adds unto affliction:
Say (Lady) do you hate me!

Luceb. That were to make me worse then ungrateful,
No (my Lord) I cannot be so irreligious, as
To hate the man that loves me; I do honor
Your great virtue, and with a perfect zeal
Respect your worth: be then but confident
Of your own merit, you may be assured
You have an equal interest in my heart,
With any he that breathes: but for reply
To your great suite, thus.
By that firm love, your seeming pious vows
Induced me to believe most real, and
By what is more dear to you; urge it no further
For I Have no power to grant, what you request.

Hip. Madam you much amaze me.

Luceb. I Have vowed virginity (my Lord) till it shall please
Hard fate to be more gentle, and exchange
My injured father's infortunity,
For's former dignities; it misbecomes
My sad condition to entertain, till then,
Least hope of joy: therefore (good Sir,)
Desist! my faithful vow is fled beyond recall

Hip. Not the least word falls from that powerful tongue
But does predominate over my strongest passion,
Teaching it subjection -- Madam,
I am all patience and obedience.
Yet give me leave to hope!

Luceb. My Lord, I would not be so sinful, as
To counsel to despair.

Hipol. Then, till another meeting shall revive me, divinest fairest,
Permit my loyal lip, on your pure hand,
T'inscribe the figure of my perfect love,
Obvious to none but you, that when those eyes,
(For this hands sake) do glance upon the print,
You may remember, reading there your servant --

Exit. Luceb. As for the rest, I Will follow your advice.
The dukes unbridl'd lust rages beyond.
Suppression, and (but for this brave Lord)
Had driven him hither, to my honors ruin:
Bad age! what dare not sinful man attempt?
I must admit no visits, his report
Has made me dangerously sick; which may
Work with his wild distemper, and preserve
My honor free from blemish; if that fail?
Here is a noble hand that will -- prevail.

To her Ausonius Auso. Lady, you brother, with first favorable wind,
Will reach our Port; here is letters which advise
Of all occurrents, please you retier, and peruse them.
Your brothers letters have enform'd your father,
Of this design, who connot long be absent.
I must, with speed, dispatch one to Legorne,
Unto my Substitute, to render up
The Fort to Martiano: '^is of great importance:
The Prince, in person, to express his zeal
To your deserving father, with great power,
Accompanies my friend, and vows redress.

Luceb. Heaven thou have heard my -- prayers.

Exit Luecb. Auso. Immediately I follow.
Martiano, thou 'rt hicher to successful;
Nor would I have thy rash credulity
Overthrow this great defigne, and so betray,
Thy weakeness to eternal shame:
Which to prevent I must detain these letters
Directed to Hipolito; it is unsafe.
To trust his smoothness: if he be our friend?
We nobly shall embrace him, in -- the end?

Exit Ausonius. Enter Vatinius and Iacamo. Vatin. How look^d she on thee?
Iacamo.

Iaca. As a fleet street-Barber, on a twopenny Customer;
Or a Clyent-cloid Lawyer, on a half fee: bad me
Tell you, she scorned your glorious jewel, and inglorious
self; only this short precept, rellisht of kindness, if not of love.

Vatin. What was it?

Iaca. Marry to follow the example of Fumante; he is
A complete Gentleman, and (in her eye)
The most deserving man in Italy.

Vatin. Shame, and fear possess him! -- here --
(gives him a letter. Deliver this unto his proper hands.

Iaca. It would be strange, if this should prove a Challenge.

Exit Iaca. Vatin. It Is as Honoria told me -- well I have followed.
His advice, upon his faithful promise of assistance,
But if he fail? -- Fumante will perform --
I shall be sure to have't how ever -- would,
'Twere to do again! -- but here is Honoria. --
To him Hono It Is done my Lord.

Hono. Spoke like a Conqueror.

Vatin. But. --

Hono. But what man?

Vatin. Nay, do not think I fear him!

Hono. Pugh^ let Cowards fear!

Vatin. I so they do --

(Aside. Hono. And such, whose smutty souls the wildfier of
Foul guilt corrodes! (as it does his) best innocence is guard against all
danger.

Vatin. Yet I could wish -- Hono What?

Vatin. I were more valliant --
Aside. But it is no matter -- I am resolved. --
Y' have past your word to bear me out? --

Hono. I have; and will perform.

Vatin. Faith -- I have no stomach to it.

Hono. Even as you please: the shame will be your own;
Yea; and the loss too: the loss of such a one,
As not the Court can parralell -- udds foot,
You Will make your self the common laughing stock
To all the Pages, Lacqueys -- nay the Grooms
When they want matter to stir up their mirth,
Will teihie out your name.

Vatin. Pages, Lacquyes, and the Grooms -- hum --

Hono. But, above all, Fumante.
(Whose heart's no bigger then a small pin's head)
From this your fear, will collect courage, and
Every minute publicly affront you;
Whereas your letter will make him look
Far paler then the paper, seconded
By an undaunted-Spirit.

Vatin. I marry -- there is it.

Hono. Sufficiently I Have truly told you what he is,
A mere man of March-peine; if you dare venture
On him? so: if not? and he deceave you of your Mistress,
It concerns not me: I have discharged the office
Of a friend; think on it! farewell!

Vatin. Nay Sir -- I will meet him!
I Will not be beat, and laughed at too.

Hono. I Will want my will then --

(Aside. Vatin. Yet he was a Commander, in the last employment.

Hono. Why so might you, or any man had money:
Desert not ever wears the Plume: he knew
There was no danger in 't, yet certain pay:
Such wars would make every faint heart
Turn soldier. Well prepare! the time draw^s on.

Vatin. You Will meet at Six? I build upon your promise.

Hono. If I fail, flea me! Coraggio --

Exeunt. Enter Carlo, and Iacamo at two several doors, they meet hastily, and
jostle. Carlo. Are you blind, you Buzard?

Iaca. Are you blind you Buzard?

Carlo. Is your Master at home?

Iaca. Is your Master at home?

Carlo. I have business with him.

Iaca. I have business with him.

Carlo. Do you mock me? ha?

Iaca. Do you mock me? ha?

Carlo. Yes, my Master is at home.

Iaca. Yes, and my Master is at home.

Carlo. Y' are verry pleasant, but I Will change your note.

fight and hurt each other: then to them Hono. Iaca. Say you so? then have with
you.

Hono. What uncivil broil is this! for shame put
Up your swords! the street's no place to quarrel in.
How fell ye out? (my honest friends)

Carlo. An't please your honor, I have a letter to deliver to Vatinius, whom
this man serves; and fairly asking him Whether his Master were at home, or
not? he echoed still my words: I loved not to be jeered, and thus it grew.


Iaca. And I have another letter for F^mante, whom that man serves. I
questioned him a like, but jeered him not: yet I could do no less then to
defend my self.


Hono. A more fit occasion, I could not hope for --
(Aside. That two such noble spirits, as your selves,
Should serve such worthless Patrones^ --
Here Is a reward -- I love to cherrish virtue.

gives money Both. We are your humble vassalls.

Hono. Come, come, join hands! your business to each.
(Shake hands, Others Master caused this mistake: be friends!

Both. Now we perceave it did.

Hono. And now I have a undertaking for ye, which performed, I Will make what I
have given ye fifty pistolls.


Both. Do but command? it is done.

Hono. Well; first perform your Patrones charge! it is duty: then dress your
wounds; which are not many, nor yet mortal: and two hours hence, down in the
walks, behind the grand palazza, meet me! where I Will instruct ye.


Both. We shall attend your Lordship.

Hono. Be firm, and private!

Both. As your own thoughts, Sir --

Exit Hono. Carlo. Jacamo, I cry thee mercy: we are good friends again, I Will
stay for thee at Catarina's, where I Will spend my crown, for confirmation of our
after friendship.


Iaca. And I Will not fail to meet thee instantly --

Exeunt. Enter Rosania, and Dianetia. Rosania. I much rejoice to see this long^
wished alteration in your Lady: may heaven, by a continual addition of new
comforts, confirm her joy.


Dianetta. I, with my soul, desire the same^ poor Lady she does need it.


Rosa. 'T was much beyond my expectation (hearing the late report) to see so
many decent smiles dimple her cheeks; and hear such pleasant accents flow
from her long greefe-ty'd tongue.


Dian. Indeed the change was sudden, yet for some private end, known only to
her self; she desires a confirmation rather than contradiction, of this report.


Rosa^ I cannot keep so great a comfort from the Princess; but they are one
soul.


Dian. How bears the duke his passion? they say he is near distraction.


Rosa. So please you walk, I Will tell you my opinion:
We must not miss the Combat, and the houre's at hand.

Exeunt. Enter Duke, as in his Chamber, attended by Hono. and others. Duke.
What stare ye at? do ye make us your wonder?
Begon^

1. So please your Grace. --

Duke. Yes, it does please us, leave us!

2. We obey --

Exeunt Attendants. Hono. I guess the cause of this distraction,
But must keep sealed my lips, until his passion
Vent somewhat that may warrant my expression:
Wherefore, thus obscured, I will observe him --

[Behind the Arras] Duke. Can the virgins, and their goodness great protectess,
(Sacred Diana,) suffer foul disease,
(That fatal Minister of certain death)
T'enthrone himself, in the Majesticke-seat
Of my faire's rosie-excellence, and there
(With a tyrannicke-quatefaction) threat
The sudden dissolution of so pure,
A vivid temple, where her honored name
Lives with a reverentiall fear, yet not
Be moved to pity? such an omission,
Forbid perfection! where is your wonted power
For your own glory, make it manifest!
Lest your bare Altars know no Votarie.

Hono. If the least trespass done to majesty
Be treason, Hippolito's a Traitor in the highest.

Duke. But oh -- my praye'r is sin: All powerful love,
It Is your divinity Mortality
Thus Rivals, death's an inamorat turned
And wo's, to's chill embraces, a beauty
Far fairer than thy Mother, quick let fly
A leaden headed shaft procuring hate
In his cold breast! lest his, more ready, should
Prevent thy vengeance, and deprive thee of
The sweetest sacrifice that e're enriched
Thy hallowed shrine -- see where the ghastly fiend
Sits proudly on her couch, and uncontrolled
Sawcily courts her -- (may contagion
Be thy companion! and the horrid grave
Your place to couple in!) whilst the afflicted
Shrinks at his grim aspect, and turns away
From's frozen-salutations -- now he is moved
And levels at her heart -- divinest Love!
(kneeles. Ceaze his destroying dart! and in its room
Place thine of Gold, then wound him with his own,
Even to destruction! so shall thou prove
A glorious victor, I, she, live and love.

Hono. It is, as my prophetique soul informed me,
And now for my discovery

(To him Hono. Duke. How durst thou interrupt our privacy? Have we no power?

Hono. But calm that stormy brow^ your grace forthwith
Shall feel the ease I bring you.

Duke. Do thou mean to kill me?

Hono. Perish my soul! rather then prove a harbor
For such Rebellious thoughts.

Duke. Nay I believe thee loyal; but alas
My greefes are at that height, that naught but death
Can slack them.
If thou bring'st comfort? (good Honorio)
My needy soul lies open to receive it. Prithee speak!

Hono. I know your griefs; and therefore come to tell you
You are abused, and nourish in your breast
Infection that will kill you.

Duke. Leave this abstrusenesse, and be plain!

Hono. 'Twil startle you, but your command's my warrant.
Hippolito's a Traitor, and does wrong
The royal trust your goodness has repo^'d
In him.

Duke. How Is this! no more: you are not a weary of
Your burdenous breath, that you thus wake our anger

Hono. Sir, what I Have spoke, to the last warm drop within me
I Will boldly justify: nor is it opinion,
Fond supposition, or regardlesse malice,
Poorer revenge, or hope of ayry honor,
That thus imbold'ns me, but a religious care
My pious duty has for your Highness safety,
That it is truth; but honor my advice with your acceptance.
I will inform your Majesty a way
Shall make your eyes, and ears my witnesses.

To them Hippol^to. Duke. Thou should be honest!

Hono. When I prove otherwise, may my perfidious trunk
On the disgraceful tree, feed carrion!

Duke. I am resolved! wait us within; but take heed!

Hono. My All lies on it --

(Exit Honorio. Hip. Honorio, so intimate! I like it not

(aside. Duke. If he prove false, there is no faith in man;
Religion is but form, and prayer hypocrifie

Hip. I cannot expect the fruit of my laborious plots until
(aside. I h've made sure Martiano; which now I will endeavor.
So please your Grace I have some words to speak
Will --

Duk. Trouble us: our thoughts are taken up --

(Exit Duke. Hip. Is it even so? -- then -- how am
I changed
Timorous flesh -- why shak'st thou! -- conscience,
I know thee too -- too soon -- I Will after
And submit to gentle mercy -- but
My proud spirit rebels, and whispers me
You Are safe! -- Fear; thus I cast thee off;
My soul has but one partner in her secrets
And he is a tried honest knave -- I Am yet secure;
Heaven how this bugbear conscience did affright me
To him Fumant. Fumante, saw you the Duke!

Fum. He, and Honorio, are now in private conference.

Hip. Let your intelligence be ubiquitary!
There may be something now compounding, that
We shall not relish: I like not this Honorio --
Have you heard naught fall from him might concern
The prejudice of our affairs!

Fum. But what I told your honor touching Pausanio.

Hip. Better he had bin tongue-ty'd!
Pray let your care be waking! the time requires it --

(Exit Hipo. Fum. Fear not! my gracious Lord!
What from Vatinius!

(Reads. Fumante, If our proverb be true; that says, there is no smoke but
where there is some fire, you should be valiant; for your denomination as well as
action, denotes you to be vapor; consequently full of choler: Whether that
be, or no valor! I dispute not: our Sudden trial will prove the better
Touchstone. That you have affronted me, and grocely, is, and that I will be
revenged for the affront, shall be, most certain: therefore at six in the
evening, in the grove of Sicamores, expect such fury, as provoked justice can
inflict on so notorious an offender! which is (at least) death, by the hand of
the injured and therefore enraged

Vatinius. I cannot doubt Honioro's friendship,
I will meet him, and the hour's at hand

(Exit. Rosa and Dianetta, in the Music room. Rosa. From this balcone, we
shall behold all passages.

Dian. Pray heavens they do no harm!

Rosa. Hang 'hem painted parrats! they will but prate.
But who be these?

Enter Hono, Carla, Jaco with disguizes. Hono. Why this is all.
For both are so hen hearted --
That I much doubt if one dare look on the other.

Jaca. I Will swear for one, is to other do but frown?

Carlo. And I as much for to other.

Hono. There Is it: then but consider the insupportable abuse.
They Have put upon the Lady, and my self;
Ye must confess, yet truly, my revenge
Is too -- too -- merciful.

Both. In truth, and so it is.

Hono. Nor shall ye pleasure me alone, but both your Patrons: when each (like a
good servant) shall beat his Master's Enemy; which themselves, will be afraid
to do: besides revenge the hurts you have received; through their occasion.


Jaca. It will be rare.

Carlo. But then we lose our service.

Hono. Leave that to me! for there is the trophy of my revenge.
I Will make 'em thank ye too --

Both. That would be fine in faith?

Hono. I Will do it -- but I hear footing.
That hedge will keep you secret

{Go behind the Hangings. Enter Vatinius. Vatin. This is the place; but no
Fumante come:
If 'twere but possible he were more fearful
Than my self, and stay away -- what honor,
I might win.

Hono. I Will spoil your growing hopes, hum, hum, hum.

Vatin. But oh vain hope! -- that was his voice.

Rosa. How the wretch trembles!

Vatin. My Executioner is come --
But no Honoria to reprieve me To him Fumante.

Hono. He Is come indeed!

Vatin. Would I were well at home! but there is no flinching.

Fuman. He Is yonder, and descries me: there is no retyring,
(Aside, Now should Honorio fail? I Am lost.

Vatin. I must set a face 'ont: -- Sir, you keep touch.

(Both draw. Fuman. I Am not behind the hour you prefixed.

Vatin. Nor would I mispend time, now you are come,
You cannot but imagine the cause of this our meeting.

Fuman. Not on your part: but I come to receave.
Strict satisfaction, for disgraces, which
Your forward tongue, in the hearing of my Mistress,
(The fair Rosania) most unworthily.
Have put upon me.

Vatin. He means to sight --
(Aside. Can you as well acquit your self, of the ignoble wrongs committed by
your self, unworthily, against me? as I of what you charge me with; this
meeting, rather will confirm our former friendship, then breed farther
difference.


Fuman. I Am glad it is come to this --

(Aside. Hono. I Will break that union.

Vatin. As I Am a Gentleman! --

Rosa. Oh fearful protestation!

Vatin. I ever honored you; wherefore could not detract.
From your desert: then but relinquish claim
Unto Rosania (for I have her promise)

Rosa. Oh shameless impudence!

Vatin. And l'le remain your servant.

Fuman. The first I cred it, but the latter honor forbids.

Vatin. Then let our swords decide it -- oh for Honoria!

(Aside. Fuman. Stay! -- a pox on my credulity! this is no Coward.
(Aside. I hate these idle quarrels touching women.

Vatin. I hope he will compound --

(Aside. Fuman. Not that I doubt the justness of my cause,
Or fear your naked steel: the world knows me.

Hono. Yes, for a fearful Coxcombe.

Fuman. But that I would not kill a friend for such a triffle.
Yet give I up no interest; but if
You Will be content with her own verdict? we will
Refer our selves to her, yet save our honors.

Vatin. It Is not unreasonable; agreed. --

Enter Car: and Ia: their swords drawn, and in each other hand a cudgel; they
disarme them, then shifft hands, and beat; and kick them Ja: to Fum: Car: to
Vatinius. Hono. On! spare 'um not --

Car: Jaca. Ye must not part so calmly.

Vatin. We are betrayed; the Guard.

Fuman. This is Honorio's falsehood.

Carlo. Will not you yield your sword then?

Vatin. Yes, yes most willingly: oh, oh,

Jaca. Ye must be fighting? -- ye shall have fighting.

Fuma^. Not we! oh -- I protest not we! -- oh

Vatin. Nay (good Sirs) it is sufficient!

Car: Jaca. Not yet -- not yet.

Fum: Vat. Oh, oh, oh -- mercy Gentlemen!

Jaca. My toes are wearied.

Carlo. So are my arms.

Vatin, I Am sure my back parts are --

(Aside. Jaca. We yet dare hardly trust ye in one room;
Ye must be severally imprisoned.

Fum: Vat. Imprisoned?

To them Hono. Carlo. Yes: know ye not, that it is against law to fight a duel?

Vatin. Oh my good lord, unless you now befriend us,
We must to prison.

Hono. Then ye have fought?

Vatin. Not we.

Fum. Yet have bin soundly beaten.

Hono. Trust me, I could come no sooner, but for a small
Matter I Will undertake to free ye from these Catchdolts.

Fum. We Will give any reasonable consideration.

Vatin. Yea, and thank 'em too; so we escape.

Hono. I'e motion 't to 'em: they are of my acquaintance.

They whisper, Rosa. Dianetta, let us descend! and laugh at 'em.

Jaca. My Lord you may command us.

Hono. I must acknowledge it a Courtesy.
I have prevailed; for too double pistolls, ye are free:
But you must take it for a favor too.

Vatin. Oh by all means.

Fuman. There Is, Gentlemen, for each ^o good quadruples,
With many thanks --

Enter Ladies. Ros: Dian. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,

Vatin. The Lady's -- oh for a charitable halter!

(Aside. Fuman. Now could I wish my self, any thing but my self

(Aside. Rosa. Nay, never hang the head! your insolence has
Well deserved it: and now my verdict:
I hate ye both, as do the Scoti a py'd-Protimyst;
And this is my election --

[Salutes Honoria. Vatin. Is it even so? then hang the head indeed!
Why we are both deceav'd.

Hono. What think you now of kissing her white hand?
To Fuman^e. You more then think she loves you.

Rosa. Ha, ha, ha ha,

Dian. No more my Lord; I pity the poor Gentlemen.

Vatin. She should be free, because pitiful. --
(Aside. I Will try her constitution.

Hono. I should have done my self, what these t^ll.
Men have performed for me; but I knew they
Would use ye more gently -- know ye your tormentors?

Discovers Car: Iac. Fuman. Carlo?

Vatin Iacamo?

Car: Ja. The very same:

Fum. Vatin. Oh our shame!

Hono. I see you are truly penitent; if now,
Ye but assent to what I shall propound,
We Will hide your equal shames in privacy.

Fum. Vatin. As you are noble?

Hono. Upon my honor.

Fum: Vat. Be It what it will we both consent.

Hono. Receave then into grace again your servants!
They are stout fellows, and what each has done,
Has bin but for his Patron.

Car: Iaca. We humbly thank your Lordship.

Fum. Vat. We pardon both; and beg the like of ye.

Hono. Ye have it; and hereafter be more careful
Of your honor! then y' are well.

Rosa. And pray remember that it still has bin
An approved Maxim, shame will follow sin.

Exeunt. Desinit Actus Tertius
Actus Quartus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Duke solus, in habit of a Friar. Duke. THis seeming-sanctity couzens the
world
As did the soft words that (with power) fell
From the smooth tongue of that false Traitor, Me.
I walk invisible to any's knowledge,
And (through Honorio's counsel) have discovered
Treasons, which my too charritable faith
Could never have received for truth; if not
My self confirmed the certain witness?
Ingratefully-presumptious-Man,
If thy sublime thoughts throw thee from that hight
Where my deceav'd love placed thee? may thy fall
Live a preventive-patt'rne with thy folly
For the age to come! thou art worth no man's pity.
Showt with in, sound drum and Trumpet. To him Hono. What mean these loud, and
sudden acclamations?

Hono. Martiano, and the heir of Sicillie,
With hostile troops, invaded have the town;
The castle's, by Ausonius, yielded up
To farther their de^igne: with them take part,
The inconstant Cittyzens, whose forward faith,
Ruled by their strong persuasions, much does doubt
The justness of Pausanio's banishment,
And have resolved remission of his doom:
Disorder throngs the streets; yet no bold-hand,
Mannaging the rude sword, dare disobey
Its brave Commanders noble charge, but all
Enjoy their own with quiet: the soatious Court,
With every narrow-cantone, only is
Examined for your person, by the Gennerall;
Who greeves for your escape: Hipolito.
(The cheifest Agent in this proud attempt)
Is of their bosom counsel, and (I fear)
Intends a farther mischief -- what is to be done?

Duke. My joys are yet above my griefs; and I
Bless gracious heaven (zealous of its own glory)
That destined thee the pious instrument
To guard me from their malice: it is apparent
The Gods take part with us, whose purer wills
Abhor the opposition of humane
Policy: wherefore, in this disguize,
I Will live obscured, until that Industry
Have satisfied my curiosity, in all particulars.

Hono. It cannot but be safe.

Duke What? Lucebella takes me for no other,
Then Padre Stephano, my reverend Confessor?

Hono. She, and your Princely sister, still remain
In that desired error.

Duke. It Is well: has she not yet seen her rebellious brother?

Hono. Not yet.

Duke. It Is fit that we be present at their meeting. --

Exeunt. Enter Sica. Mart: H^pol: Leon. Auso. Fum. Soldiers, Cittyzons. Drum
beats a March within. Sicanio. Silence the noise of that disturbingdrumme!
And not a soldier, upon pain of death,
Exceed our given Commission! we intend
No less then honor warrants. --

Exit Leontinus. Cittyzens. It Is noble as your self.

Sicanio. Having, by Martiano, understood
The real cause of our just undertaking;
It must appear impertinent, to trouble
Your Wise ears, with needless repetition:
Wherefore (assured of your full satisfaction)
Each may depart, unto his peaceful home,
And there, (without the least suspicious thought)
Possess what fate has given him.

Cittyzens. Long live Sicanio!

[Enter Leontin^.] Martiano. Grave Cittyzens, and loving Countrymen,
We seek not furtive spoil, or thirst for blood;
Nor shall the ill tutour'd soldier,'f^re your faces,
Force your dear wives; but each enjoy his spouse
As he was wont: the untouched virgin may
Yet sleep securely, and not fear a rape;
For not the meanest man, among these many,
But vallues honor above sinful gain;
Rest satisfied with this, and all retire
Unto your proper dwellings! but, withal,
Pray be retentive of those burd'nous wrongs
Your good old General (who has hugged danger,
To purchase your dear sa^etys) now is oppressed with
And if our mildness, with your justice meet,
The Wars are ended, and ye most ^^^creet.

Cittyzens. Martiano, shall have justice, Martiano shall have justice.

Exeunt-Cittyzens. Mart. To each my equal thanks.

Enter Ja; Luceb: Duke, Hono. Rosanio, Dianetto. Auso. See friend, the
Princess. and your Sister

Mart, kisses Julia's hand and Salutes Luceb. Sicanio. Should my discourteous
fate deny my heart
Admittance, yet my dazzled eyes have leave
Freely to wonder, though my profane thoughts
Cannot conceive the excellence dwells there.
Surely divinity has chose residence
With frail mortality, for all the virtues
Po^ts have stellifi'd, at once, shine there:
She approaches -- Martiano, have you the
Honor to call this beauteous Lady, Sister?

Mart. Royal Sir, I have.

Sicania. I swear you are happy! happy beyond expression!
I Am lost in midst of conquest --

(Aside. Iulia. A goodly Gentleman! --

(aside. Sicanio. First (faire^^ sweetness) let my rude Salute
Express the fervent zeal I had to serve you;
Lest you, with thanks anticipate, what was but duty.
(Kisses Luceb. The Phaenix boiles with Wormwood -- all Odours
Aromaticall breathe there.

(aside. Mart. Sir, the Princess.

Sicanio. Madam, if that my misplaced sallutations have
Deserved your hard construction? think upon
Your equal glories! and the thought thereof
Will reconcile the error to your favor.

Julia. Great Sir, it was but justice; therefore needs no Apology:
(aside. If that my jealous fears prove true? her eyes
Already have exhaled his melting heart,
And, left behind, my ruin.

Mart. Father, at more convenience,
We shall desire farther conference;
Till when, let the pure truth, I Have uttered win
A creditable room in your opinion.
For by my fixed hope of future bliss!
My thoughts were all innocuous.

Duke. Enough; and so were his. I kept the Key,
That opened, to my view, the treasury
Of his rich soul; have searched the intrinsik'st part thereof,
But never found a sin so damnable, lodged there:
You Will find he is abused.

(aside. Hip. This Friar may work much mischief,
If not timely prevented!

Luceb. Royal Sir,
Duke gives a sealed Parchment to Hippolito, he reads, then shows it. The high
summed debt, due to your noble goodness,
Greatly exceeds all language, or acquittance;
All I can pay your bounty, is true thanks,
Sent from an humble heart devoted to
Your Princely virtue, those I Will bring you dayly^
Nor shall I doubt of your fair acceptance,
Since the pleased gods expect no other offering
For the large-all-they lends us.

Sieanio. It Is the voice of some sweet tongued Cherubin
My sense is blessed with! -- Gracious Madam, deigne
Me but the glorious title of your servant
And the reward's past merit.

Luceb. I shall be proud to be your highness handmaid

Iulia. Oh, who would not!
(aside I feel the pangs of tyrant love already.

Sicanio. And (beauteous madam) though we came with power
To Julia. (Expecting opposition) threatening ruin;
Banish all thought of fear! for the sharp points
Of our yet peaceful swords, shall vulnerate
Each one his owners breast, before disturb
Your quiet; we brought with us, love linked with
Resolution; and were your brother here?
He were as freely safe from outward harm,
As where he is; though placed within the Altar.

Duke. He has a noble soul.

(aside. Iulia Your power is great indeed: but if you bring
Love to associate it? I find no cause
Why I should doubt or fear.
My jealousy imboldn'd me beyond civility --
But it has eased my heart.
(aside. It Is the Dukes character and Signet how came you by it?

Mart. Auso. Hono. Fum. Duke. Himself, it seems, did on set purpose leave it
Upon my study table, when he came
Last to confession.

Hip. Gentlemen, examine it no farther! but elect
Among ye one more sit! it is too great
An undertaking, for so weak a man
As my unable self: alas (my lords)
My humble thoughts, accompanied with quiet,
Do trembling-look at soverainty, nor would
They be intreig'd in the great affairs of state:
But in the private contentation they
Do now enjoy, would period their date

Fumante. Uds will, don't refuse it! would 'twere proffered me!

(Aside. H^p. Martiano, Ausonius, Honorio, none but's more fit
Then I.
The Dukes command must be obeyed.

Mart. Auso Hono. Fum. Hip. Will no persuasions take place?
Bear witness heaven, with what unwillingnesse
I do receive this enforced honor!

Duke. Finely dissembled -- ^

(Aside. All. Long live Hippolito --

(Flourish. Hip. My thanks to all: and since it is my fate
To undergo this glorious yoke, I shall
Endeavor by the purchase of your loves,
To make it seem light. What Is now amisse'ere long
Shall have redress.
Mean while, let our best entertainment speak
This royal strangers welcome.

Exeunt Omnes sed Dux. ^ Sicanio. Your nobleness endeares us.

Duke. As Misers in a phantasm, enjoy
A mass of goodly treasure, upon which
Their fond imaginations do feed, until
The sleepy God (disposed to mock their hopes)
Unlock their abus'd-senses; when awaked
And missing their suppos'd-possession, they
Do greeving-wish that their deluded fancies
N'ere had fabrick'd so brave a guilded-Nothing
So thy short dream of dignity expired
(Vain glorious man) thou wilt repent the susception;
When thou, too late, shall wish thy winged thoughts
Had flown at lower distance, and not dared
A fight so near the beams of Majesty.
This condescended power, cannot but prove
The temper of his mind; and if I find
His inclination close with my great doubt,
I must appear my self, and root him out --

Exit Duk. Enter Vatinius solus. Vat. A reasonable man, would think I had bin
beaten sufficiently, to make my rampant flesh lie couchant: I Will be sworn
there is scarce room left for a single sold, about my body, of its native hew,
but all is soffisticated by the abusive cudgel, and yet all will not do -- I
have an extreme itching to be mounting some Court Madam, and (above the rest)
Dianetta, whose late compassion promised very fairly, were it but effected;
were quit with my poetique rival, I have resolved to try the encounter, and
first, I Will prove her temper with rich presents; which graced by her reception,
access must follow -- however, it is but disgesting of a denial -- or (at
worst) another beating; which, when a man's once used to, seems nothing: and
see where luckely she comes oh for this winning language.

To him Dianetta. Lady if my request come not unseasonable,
I shall importune your seeming have to afford
Me some few minutes conference.

Dian. For present, pray excuse me my affairs are now important.

Vatin. I shall awaite your leisure,
Mean time, so please your goodness to enrich
This poor gemme, by your wearing; the donatour
Will hold himself much honored, and remain
The humblest of your Creatures.

Dian. It were discourtesie (kind Sir) to slight
So free a proffer; and although I hold
My self incapable of merit; yet
I Question not the worth of you the giver,
But shall retain it till convenience shall
Acquaint me with your further pleasure --

(Exit Dianetta. Vatin. She must be mine! though gone, I feel her coming

Exit Vatin. Enter Hipolito solus. Hipol. The abundant joys my almost sated
breast
Conceives for this unlooked for greatness, swells
My jocund heart to such a boundless height
That the stretched strings would crack, if 'twere not for
This private vent? Courteous stars I thank ye!
Nor will I easily part with your free gift,
No, no, it is of too great a price: what can
Be more contentive then supreamacie?
To have such numerous payres of servile eyes
Attend our nod! as many plyant knees,
Bow at our beck! officious feet to move
With swiftest pace to execute our will!
And the whole court, in competition, for
Our coveted regard! ha? is it not brave?
I faith it is! once more (kind stars) I thank ye!
And then to steer ^he helm of the great state,
What course we shall think fit, or throw down
Or raise, when, whom we please can there be bliss
On earth exceeds this? Liberal Fate,
Still I must thank thy bounty -- Now the way
To keep in this blessed state -- (for it is esteemed.
No less policy to preserve then purchase)
Must be the Dukes remove; which might be done
With safety, and facility, could I learn
Out his abode? which promises may win
From his late confessor (for there is hypocrisy
Even in sanctity) whom I must employ
In other weighty matters, which if fate
(Exit. Prosper for heaven, I scarce would change estate

Duke. However, her profession, hitherto,
Enter Duke and Iulia. Speaks her so much your friend, that I believe
When she shall know, by me,'it is in her power
To further this your love; her gratitude
(Consulting with her noblest thoughts) will counsel
Her brave soul, rather to dye Loves Martyr,
Then live esteemed ungrateful.

Julia. That were a cruel kindness -- Reverend Sir,
Be but memorative of what I Have told you!
And it is sufficient --

(Exit Iulia. Duke. Poor Iulia! we are allied by 'our hard fortunes
Well as blood; nor do the causes differ, you
Pursuing, with a furious love, my rival
And I yours^ yet neither's zeal respected.
There Is yet away to prevent all -- the Prince --

To him Sicanio and Martiano Mart. Will not your grace acquaint me with your
grief?
It Is not impossible, but I may ease you.

Sican. Thou mighst do much i^deed!

Mart. Why? do you doubt my faith?
Then I conjure you, by those many vows
So freely made to me of constant friendship, to disclose
Your troubled thoughts! left I justly suspicious
That my best deeds have found no credit with you;
Do, with this desperate point, rip up my breast
For you to find the error.

Sican. It shall not need; I know it full of worth;
But oh -- thy Sister -- thy Sister, Martiano --

Mart, What of her?

Sican. I love thy beauteous Sister; whose election
^ fear has promised future happyness
To some one more deserving.

Mart. Your equal breathes not.

Sican. Yes.

Mart. Who?

Sican. Hipolito: and now you know the very cause, assist
Me with your powerful intercession^
I cannot doubt success.

Mart. Sir, she is at her own disposal; nor am I
Versed in the soft way of amorous courtship,
A sword, and horse have ever bin my minnions:
Yet what the privilege of a brother, joined
With honest plainness, way persuade her to,
Be full ass^r'd; shall not be wanting^ So
I humbly take my leave

Exit Mart. Sican. If she consent? --

Duke. She doubly sins.

Sican. Against whom? and how?

Duke. Heaven and her friends.

S^can. Be charitable (holy father) and
Delay not your resolves!

Duke. Divinity not curiosity,
Made me partakers of your privacie
Whereby I h've heard your real tongue confirm
What I fore knew a truth, your ardent love
To the fair Lucebella -- but alas
My pious plainness (should I utter what
Religion prompts me to) could not but meet
(So fragil's wilful man) contempt and malice.
Wherefore the breath I Would thought to have employed
In satisfying your demand, I Will spend
In prayers to heaven, that you may shun the mischief
Unlawful love suggests you to, and place
Your purged affection on the glorious object
Fate has provided for you.

Sican. Oh leave me not unsatisfi'd! to doubt,
Will more afflict my troubled soul, than all
That you can utter: and (grave Sir) so much
Am I an enemy to those twined sins you mentioned,
That what e're falls from your lips
I shall believe oraculous: be free,
In your expression! whilst I give your words,
A willing, faithful hearing.

Duke. They will concern your souls eternal quiet;
For he that seeks to separate those hearts
Heaven has united, sins beyond all hope
Of sweet remission. Noble Sir, call back
Your fruitless, cause misplaced, affection!
Forth' absent Duke, and Lucebella have
Exchanged mutual vows, (which live recorded
Above the clouds) and fix your deserved love
On her, that mournes for you to the prejudice,
Of expetible health! who, prized below
Her worth, is still her rivalls equal -- it is --
Though I have no Commission (but what
Our holy order bound to further good,
Does warrant) to disclose this secret,
The incomparable Princess Julia --
But you seem troubled?

Sican. Where there is no power to help, responsive grief,
Shows friendly: -- But, reverend Man, your charity
Deludeth your too facile-faith, the Duke
Loved her ignobly, which provoak'd her brother
(Tender of her dear honor) to a rage
His fathers sufferings could not tempt him to;
And drew from her an everlasting hate:
Iv'e heard their tongues confirm it.

Duke. But that religion bounds my ready lips,
A killing curse would issue forth, and ceaze
Upon the cause of this foul scandal -- Sir,
The Duke made me familiar with his thoughts,
The thoughts most dear to him believe'^ he is abused;
I know it.

Sican. I nor condemn nor justify; yet shall
(Upon your affirmation) repute
The duke still truly noble: for the rest,
I shall with more deliberate thoughts consider,
What may be most expedient; affairs
Of so great consequence, ask not a sudden,
But well weighed resolve^ Father farewell! --

Exit Sicanio. Duke. Holy Angels guard you!
How is the goodness of a gracious Prince
Abused through easy-confidence? those men
Our favors most reflect on, are the first.
Revolt from their profession, and rebel
Against their second makers: faithless Age!
Direct me heaven in the best course, whereby,
I may repair my bleeding honor, and
Over my detractours get the upper hand --

Exit. Enter Rosania and Dianetta. Dian. I tell thee seriously his importunity
Did almost weary me; and, but to promise
Success to his desires, I Would no way left
To shake him off.

Rosan. In faith, it may impair your credit;
For he will brage ont'.

Dian. He shall have no such cause, as I intend to handle him: and see, he
keeps as constant to me as my shadow.


To them Vatin. Rosan. Well, I Will leave you --

Exit. Vatin. Lady, why do you seek to sterve my hungry hopes.
By cruel tardity? mine is no suite in law
(Though It has dependence in the Common Pleas)
Brooks not protraction; my desire has
A greedy-stomack; and the quick performance
Of your past promise, only can afford
Satiety: speak then some comfort (dearest)

Dian. Ah -- but my honor.

Vatin. An aerie word, quite out of fashion

Dian. But then ye men are so inconstant --

Vatin. Contract all hearts together, and you shall.
Find, in this one, the quintessence extracted,
Which I thus sacrifize unto your beauty --
kiss. Speak then, Lady; oh when? and where? the happy time? the blessed
place? when, Lady? oh when? and where?

Dian. This Evening; my lodging.

Vatin. Confirm it with a kiss! --

kiss. Dian. But you will be talking on it, to you Companions?

Vatin. Let me be guelded then! In such a case,
I would not trust my Confessor.

Dian. Well, at the hour convenient, I Will send you notice
By a trusty Messenger: till when, farewell!

Vatin Since the engagement of your noble word.
I can not doubt performance: Lady, your hoping servant.

Exeunt. Enter Iulia, and Lucebella. Luceb. Madame, should I deny what you have
urged!
My guilty tongue would speak a falsehood, that
My purer heart abhorrs: I must confess,
I love Sicanio; but not beyond
Those limets, which strict modesty allows
Severest Maids, or holy writ does warrant.

Iulia. They Are too too large.

Luceb. I apprehend your fears: Madame, be pleased
To entertain this serious truth with joy!
Although the Prince be full of merit, and
The man, to whose free goodness all our house,
So deeply stands engaged; though gratitude,
And the daily mediation of a brother,
With the authorized love to my own good,
Strive to persuade my yet unwilling heart
To meet his noble flame: the constant zeal
I Have vowed to your sweet friendship reprehends
My too forgetful thoughts, and challenges
A duty from me linked with detriment,
Which, thus, I pay your virtue: I Have resolved
(And to that purpose have returned him answer)
Rather to purchase, with my death, your peace;
Then live a Princess, to disturb your quiet.

Iulia. Thy unexampl'd goodness, Lucebella,
Strikes me with admiration: yet begets
A thought-distracting doubt that makes me poor
For all the wealth of thy so precious love.

Luceb. If you suspect my true sincerity!
I will confirm it with a righteous oath,

Iulia. Oh wrong not my belief? alas despair,
Of making thee amends, it is true, obliges me --
But the duke my brother must do that office for me.

Luceb. There you make me sad -- but -- and yet I should
Be glad to see him: do you think the duke is well?

Iulia. His Confessor has so assured me; who alone,
Knows of his residence: besides,
^a yes he will shortly come, and cl^are himself
Of the dishonor put upon him, touching thee.

Luceb. Pray heaven he may! however I forgive him

Exeunt. Enter Sicanio. Sicanio. There goes the fair occasion of my soul's
grief:
Poor Bankrupt Nature, woe that large expense,
Of thy rich store to prove more pitiful!
If not for mine, yet for thine own sake beg
That thy impoverished stock may be supplied
Again, from her, with plenty; lest after-births,
Produce deformity;
And Cytherea (thou whose tender heart
Has sadly sob'd as mine, when a like touched
By cold disdain) entreat thy tyrant son
To show to me such mercy, as thy self,
In the like necessity, expected! so
Shall thy sacred Altars smoke with incense,
Mirrhe mixed with Myrtle berries, and the choice
Of whitest Turtles: where as Mortals wounded,
And not regarded, grown to despair, neglect,
Your ceremonious-rites, pull down, and trample
On your holy Altars --

Exit. Enter Duke and Hipolito. Duke. Y^ had a foul soul indeed.
But son, Beware that your repentance be
More then formal; for it is no dallying with
Just heaven; whose searching eye discovers all
The hidden secrets of man's heart: you may deceave
The blinded world, and your dear soul, but oh
The irrecoverable loss is yours.
Therefore be sure y' are serious! fate's decree
Cannot be deluded by hypocrisy

Hipol. I cannot blame your diffidence, my life^
Has bin so sinful: but your doctrine of
Sure mercy, upon true contrition, has
Wrought from my soft'ned heart a pious grief
Will purge it from pollution-holy man, --
(Weeps. These are no feigned drops, but real tears --
I Have bin exceeding sinful, and they must
Fall faster yet.

Duke. My foolish pity, should I stay, would tempt.
My justice to forgive him --
Aside. Son, this sorrow does rejoice me; yea, and heaven.
Who Is pleased with your conversion: I must attend.
The Vespers, but my prayers shall still wait on you.
Son be constant --

Exit. Hipol. Else may I fail of mercy!
Away dissembled grief, I must forget you!
This Fryer's no other then his habit speaks him,
Religious. I Have sounded his deep thoughts,
And find his faith firm to his Master: heaven,
That I could say so of my self! -- but it is too late.
No matter -- and though it be death.
To him shall blabbe the secrets of confession,
I was too rash in my communication;
A smooth insinuating tale may cut,
My secure throat, when I least dream of danger:
Which to prevent, because, he is fit for heaven,
I Will find him out the nearest way -- the means,
Fumante. -- so the rigor of the law,
Sends him the other way; and I rest safe:
It Is a good plot! and a bad Age to trust
One's life, and honor in another's keeping;
And my hand in I Will thorough-stitch with the rest
My maine Projection prospers not: her heart,
Continew's told as glaciated snow
On the bleake Euxine Promounts: nor can I
Perceive a sign of change; my rivalls are
Too powerful -- I must forget her too -- but not revenge --
My love of late is grown ambitious,
And aims at the fair Princess -- ha? -- that done,
(And I despair not but it shall) I were,
Beyond the reach of malice, free from fear-

Exit. Enter Vatin and an old Crone. Vatin. A message unto me requiring hasty
answer?
My fair threescore- and twelve- what is it?

Crone. Fair an't shall like you, but not yet full threescore till come the
day of innocents, when I, and my late dead husband (peace be with his bones!)
were borne: he prized this face indeed and termed it fair, and often (full of
desire) with speaking touches, would bewray his fondness -- thus; then in my
bosom, and, nere was well but when a pidling with -- my double chin: a kind
poor fool it was! and then his lips (wearied in my due praise) would crave
refreshment on the red velvet pallet of my soft cheeks, which I (kind as
himself) must give him thus -- and thus -- which he received [kisses him. with
such voracity, that in the end it killed him.


Vatin. Another will kill me -- she has a breath loathsomely-strong as the
corrupted ^^ncke of a dead horse-fed-hound -- (Aside. but to the matter!


Crone. A lass extremes in any thing are hurtful: yet (as they say) though he
is not, my widdowhood has youthful friends; such as not think my, yet
passable face, and years contemptible -- A Fort, cause ancient, ^s not to be
forsook; whilst stored with munition -- I Am able yet for service.


Vatin. Pike-proofe I Will warrant thee:
I mean thy hide --

(Aside. Crone. Yea, and chaine-shot proof too -- and may
Content a reasonable man.

Vatin. I shall make trial of thee: but to the point.

Crone. Shall you? you will find^ me mettle to the back: and though my eyes be no
twinn'd-suns, as be young Dianetta's; you may see babies there, that (as they
say) may take you.


Vatin. This pals^'d tongue will never lin shakeing.

(Aside. Crone. And I dare wage the profit of my present
Employment, that when, you have tried us both,
Your self shall say I Have pleased the better.

Vatin. A bawd I think.
My able fair one do you belong to Dianetta?

Crone I am the private entry through which you safely may walk unto your
desires; indeed the very key that opens to success.


Vatin. I apprehend you, and will be your friend:
Heeres an earnest of it.

Crone. The first I do accept: nor will
I refuse.
Gives money. The last coming from you: -- well, it is,
The prettiest bashful babble, as e're man
Played with: she will show you sport in faith: although
At first (as Maidens should) she seemed unwilling;
Nor need I tell you how she dotes on you, this
Nigh^ will give you a full satisfaction.

Vatin. But how, and where?

Crone. Your way must be through me -- I Will be
Your Convoy.

Vatin. With all my heart: lead on?

Crone. But use, the youngling gently! or you may spoil her gate: which will
give vild indition to some about the Court, as wanton as your self, and then
you know her honor. --


Vatin. It shall not loose a grain: come let us go.

Crone. They say, the quickly hot, are quickly coold: --
But come -- you are even such another --

Vatin. Well, have a little patience, anon --

Crone. Well, I conceave -- but look you do.

Vatin I warrant you.

Exeunt. Desinit Actus Quartus
Actus Quintus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Duke and Luceb: having disclosed himself. Duke. THe dearest thought
within me will not dare.
TO attempt a farther satisfaction --
Now (my too credulous fair^) I hope you see,
What a Commanding power you have over me --
Had I bin sinful? then --

Luceb. Good Sir, no more.
This iteration but aggravates
My sorrow; heaven, for black iniquity,
Expects but true compunction: which pad,
It Is justice is appeased: then be not you
Less merciful, neglecting these my tears,
Shed for my misbeleefe! indeed I Am now
All confidence, if you dare credit me?

Duke. Before an Oracle!
Then spend not so profusely those rich drops!
The least of which is treasure to redeem
A captived king.

Luceb. Yet all too little to call home again a banished father.

Duke. Oh be more pitiful! and not torment
My penitent remembrance! you have read,
The inside of my soul, could you believe
The character? and know my new inten^^

Luceb. With the same strength of faith you have of me, I do.

Duke. Enough: I am confirmed.
Life of my joy, for a too long short season,
I must entreat your pardon; you know the occasion.

Luceb. You cannot be too quick in your dispatch.
Nor yet too careful of your person, for
The^ villain's made of mischief,

Duke. I Am much endebted to your careful love

Luceb. You Will not forget Sir, what I urged for my --

Duke. I guess your doubt: no,
I Will look upon thy brother, as a brother;
As part of thee, -- part of my better self;
He may have ground for his bold act; for s^^ce
Hipolito's found false in one, I must suspect his faith,
In all things -- your leave
kisses. I Am yet but language, therefore can but seem
Cleared of what charged with; but when next we meet
My accuser shall acquit me, and you see it --

(Exeunt. Enter Sicanio, and Leontinus. Leon. But Sir, the man that is rational
must know
Advisednesse to be a friend unto
A great design, and patience the maine help,
Either resolve to stay her father's answer,
Embrace the princes love (by far the fitter)
Or else hoist ^aile homeward.

Sican. Your advice comes now unseasonable ^
I Have eat Lotus, and cannot live but here;
Nor love, but her.

Leon. Yet wisely moderate these extremes!
You perceive distemper gives occasion
Of too much liberty to the neglectfull soldier,
Which breeds in the army inconvenience!
You came with resolution to serve
A brave deserving friend, then do not let
A thought for your own private end, detract
From your intended nobleness! but arm
Your royal self with commendable patience
until desired success crown your endeavors?
'T will ad unto your virtue.
Nor can it but be sudden, hourly
Pausanio is expected, whose arrive
Will make you happy: nor have you least cause
Thus to afflict your self, she never yet
Having returned denial.
But as a sweet example of obedience,
Judgment, and modesty humbly crave respit
Till her absent father (at whose dispose she is)
Came, and consented. Good my Lord be cheerful!
This unnecessary sadness makes us all droope.

Sican. Though It be against my humor ( Leontinus)
You shall sway me, I know you wise, and faithful.

Leon. I would be both -- but look, your friends --

To them Mart. Auso. Sican. Martiano, those unaccustomed frowns
Speak discontent -- the matter?

Auso. His father's slow pac'd-haste (my gracious Lord.)
Deceaving his too early expectation,
Makes him much doubt his welfare.

Sican. Come, come, be fearelesse^ Fate will be more just,
Having prepared him so great happiness,
Than't keep the enjoyment from him.

Mart. It Is my chief hope; and yet it troubles me.
For should the Duke (and it is no idle fear)
Obtain from Genoua, or Naples power,
And steal upon our weakn'd forces (of late
Grown careless) want of his supply would strike
A gash in our design, and shrewdly puzzel us

Sican. Not a whit: come be your self again!
We Are strong enough: yet see the idle Soldiers
(To Leon. Exercised daily to prevent emansions,
And keep our scouts abroad continually.
Martiano, away with all sad thoughts,
And let us enjoy our selves:

Mart. Your highness mirthfull inclination
Must make the saddest here rejoice

Auso. It Is manly and becomes him.

Sican. Oh -- that it were not forced!
(aside. We Are all the invited guest of Lord Hipolito,
Let Us thither and quaffe a lusty draught unto

Pausanio: what is it a match!

All. Most willingly.

(Exeunt. Enter Duke. Duke. Hear in this quiet grove, I did appoint
Honorio to meet me: till his approach,
Upon this flowery bank; I will repose my self.

To him Fum. Fum. I Have tract the Friar hither, and have sworn
To kill him; but were he not a churchman,
I should not undertake him -- and yet I Have heard
Of some that have bin dangerous -- and see how
Handsomely he is laid for my black purpose --
So lie's the harmless issue of the ewe
A prey for the voracious woolfe.
I could not take him better prepared then praying
But stay! he stirs.

Duke. If that my sense deceav'd me not, I heard
One speak? or 'twas the voice the wind gave to the leaves.
Honorio?

Fum. Di' you expect company? then I must be brief.
Runs at the Duke, who with a Pistol shoots him, his sword falls, the Duke
tak^s it up. You may tell tales in the other world, not here.

Duke. You are deceived: I Will be as brief as you

Fum. Oh -- I am slain.

Duke. Not yet I hope; but yet be sure you shall be!

Fum. You cannot be so cruel!

Duke. Can thou expect the contrary after so great
A Villainy!

Eum. Your pious form speaks you religious,
And that is shown in nothing more then mercy.

Duke. Then by that saving mercy you implore;
And the hope you have to obtain it; let your breath;
(Your now expiring-breath) aid your faint tongue
In the delivery of an honest truth
May merit my forgiveness, and please heaven;
Whither y' are going, if the devil do
Not tempt you the wrong way?

Fum. Oh --

To them Honorio. Hono. What hideous groan was that?

Fum. Honorio? then am I safe --

(aside. Duke. My Lord y' are opportunely come to be
A witness to the true confession of
This desperate sinner, whose sick soul o'recharg'd
With hellish mischief thought to vent it here.
He would have murdered me.

Honorio. Unheard of insolence!

Fum. Lessen your admiration! I Will answer the attempt.

Duke. Speak soulelesse villain; who set you on work!
Or if you have a soul, I Will kill that too.

Hono. Father, forbear!
Leave it to me, Sir, I know a better way --
aside. The thought of death will fright him:
I fear your wound is mortal.
See how his frighted blood flies from his face,
And leaves behind it palenesse! let us remove
Him to my neighboring lodgings, where he shall
Want nothing that may make for his recovery.
The air, so late, is hurtful: Father your hand^.
He bleeds a fresh, and fast: let us dispatch --
So -- So.

Fum. I do begin to saint: charitable Sir, forgive me!

Duke. I do, and shall with my best prayers invoke
The gods forgiveness for you

Hono. It shall be given out, y' have slain the Friar,
And mark the sequel --

Exeunt Enter Vatinus in a wast coat, drawers, and night Cappe, them, and his
face be smutted. Vatin. I was never so abused since I was swadl'd, have I lived
to the eye of the world thus Rosa and Diana behind the hangings. long
unspotted? and now (through my own folly) must appear thus besmeared? did
I'scape going to the grave my last rash undertaking, to be sent up in the air,
like a cased bladder; and let fall again that my posteriours rebounded? then
footed too, by half a dozen hard toe'd Rascals that had no more mercy then
the clowns hobnail'd Shun have of a foot ball, when they play a match? to be
tossed (like an unhappy Cat) in a foul menstruous blanket wool'd with fleas,
which the wise mother of the Maids, thirty years since, for her two fold
accommodation, placed in the garret to purify the gilded brimms of the close
stool pan, and keep smalecole in, to kindle the Ladies fire with: was that
your glorious coverlid to entertain me? curse on the courtesy; I have had but
a cold entertainment -- but an ill welcome.


Dian. I think you will not brag o^t.


Vatin. Then -- which is worse -- I fear they will turn me out of doors, thus --
as I am -- like one of Vulcans limping priests (for I am lamed) and not suffer
me to enjoy the private priveledges of this cool yard, so shame me to eternity
-- hum -- twould be but harsh dealing.


Dian. Yet short of your deserving


Vatin. But not to be avoided, were they resolved? I now begin to see my
error, and find that shame still follows sin; my unfeigned sorrow shall
implore her pardon, for my presumtuous insolence, which obtained, I have done
courting.

Think what we will of women, this I find
They may be truly virtuous, yet seem kind --

Enter Rosa. Dianetta. Rosania. They may, Vatinius: and I am glad of your
conversion.

Dianetta has o^^e heard your penitential lamentation, and is content not only
to forgive, but to forget what ever's past -- provided, you be serious, and not
fall again to your abusive trade against Ladies.


Vatin. I Have had too much of it Lady.
Let my now real grief, with your forgiveness
Gain your more charitable opinion.
For when I prove other than the admirer
Of your chaste self, and all your virtuous sex,
May my disgrace be published and I
Live and dye scorned.

Dian. Sir, I freely do forgive you,
Here take again your charmelesse Jewels and hereafter^
Be more careful of your own, and others honor!

Rosa. Nay, since you have wrought so great a cure they are
Well deserved.

Vatin. Pray keep 'em, as the sacrifice of my conversion!

Dian. Their worth my thanks, Sir,
In the next Room a Fire waits on you --

Exeunt Rosa. Dianetta. Vatin. I must remain your humble Convert.
And now I do believe there are some
Honest women

(Exit. Enter Julia, and Lucebella. Julia. Not go to the banquet, dearest
friend, the cause?

Luceb. There is a sadness has usurped my breast
That mirth can never remove: I am unfit
For company, nor would I see the Prince.

Iulia. I know the motive of this melancholy,
And now will give you speedy remedy;
If that the sad remembrance of your late
voluntary kindness, thus afflict you?
Take back again your killing courtesy!
Pursue with an unenvi'd freedom.
Your begun love! I did but try thy friendship;
Nor would I buy the greatest terrestrial comfort
At the dear rate of thy thoughts least disturbance.
No, Lucebella, live and love the Prince!
And may the powers divine perpetuate
Each others loves reciprocation,
Till arm in arm, ye soar up unto heaven,
And, there, fix glorious stars! If angry death,
(For that I robbed him of a greater purchase)
To cross your happiness, send you the sad news
Of my cold stay with him; bring, to my grave
One friendly sigh, and a religious drop,
And, on it, they will create aspiring perfumes, which
Will usher me the readiest way unto Elysium --
Thy hand -- and now farewell!

Luceb. Stay, thou sweet miracle of perfect friendship!
And may divinity whisper unto thy soul
What I shall speak is truth!
If penitence for the resignation of
Sicanio's love to you, or the least thought
Of him, does greeve me? may eternal shame
Blast all my better hopes!

Iulia. What infidel, but would believe thee?

Luceb. It will alike perturb your breast, when you
Shall hear the story, which I Am engaged to tacitize.
For a set season; but e're long (with safety) I may give you satisfaction
mean time I Will wait upon you to the Lord Hipolito's; and promise to be merry.


Iulia. Y' have made me sad too;
But we will endeavor to overcome it --

Exeunt. A banquet preparing with loud Music. Then enter Hipolito, and Honor:
whispering and Sican. Mart. Leont. and Ausonius. Hipolito. I Am sorry for the
untimely death of the good friar, and for the villains flight, that flew him,
whom my impartial justice should have made a terrible example for prevention
of like impiety.


Honorio. He worthily deserved it --

Exit Hono. Hipol. Sir, there is your seat.
Come Gentlemen (t'a void superfluous Ceremoney)
Each place himself!

Ausonius. It Is a commendable freedom, I hate this idle complement.

Enter Ladies. Hipol. But yone's the glory of the Banquet.
Lady's ye greatly honor me; and bring.
The best sweets with ye -- please ye sit? --
All Set. Were the duke here, the table were complete?

Sican. At nameing of the duke, how her glad blood
Sprange in her cheeks, and there imprinted, left.
Aside. Her hearts true meaning visible -- she loves him.

Hipol. Your Grace is -- sad ont'h sudden.
To Sicanio. Give me a boule of wine! and see it go round --
Ist't done as we commanded? --

To the Cup Bearer. Cup Bearer. It is my Lord; and tempered handsomely.

Hipol. Unto the Princes health, and hers whom most
His royal thoughts now honor.
Drink and flourish. -- Here Is that will expel sadness: -- fill to the Prince!

Brings another Boule flourish. Enter duke as himself, and Hono. Sican. Madame
to you --
To Iulia.
Sir I freely pledge you.

Duke. Hold, noble Sir, here can be naught but treason.

Cup Bearer. How knows he that --

Aside. Hipol. The duke -- what devil brought him hither?
My royal Master -- how am I blessed? --
I now was wishing for you, and good heaven.
Has heard my prayers, and sent you: oh let me kiss
That royal hand.

Duke. A way impostour! Honorio, do your office!

Take in the banque^ and put forth the bar. Hono. Hipolito, I do arrest you
for high treason.

Hipol. I obey; and do desire no other session^
Then this brave assembly.

Duke. It Is granted.

Hipol. Now -- who be my Accusers?

Duke. Padre Stephano; to whom you did confess
The wrongs your mischief plotted against Pausanio.

Hipol. His mouth was timely stopped he will blabb no more

Aside. Duke. And more -- by gifts, and promises you thought,
To tempt his loyalty to reveal the place
Of my abode, with full intent so murder me,
And to usurp the dukedom, then marry Lucebella:
Can you acquit your self?

Hipol. Yes, of all he can accuse me with.

Duke. Summon the friar to appear!

(Exit Hono. Hipol. I fear him not till domesday --

Aside. Duke. Sir, I Am now too full of thoughts
TO express your deserved better welcome, or
Apollogize to this my abused justice injured,
Er'e long shall I do both; in the interim
I do entreat your patience to hear
This accused man acquit himself: for me,
I dare not stay the trial, I once loved him,
And yet retain much softness --

Exit Duke. All. We all rejoice for your so safe return.

Ausonius. I ever told you what 't would come to.

Mart. Well, be not yet too confident!

Luceb. 'T was only that, by all our friendship! I heard
The friar was dead.

Iulia. I am satisfied.

Sicanio. My Lord, the hope I have of your integrity.
Forbids me sorrow, till I see just cause:
It is no scandal to be charged with treason,
But to be proved a Traitor.

Hipol. I not expect least favor, but refer
My cause to righteous heaven: if I be found
Guilty of what charged with; let justice
Spare no punishment, I Have merited
The lawe's extremest rigor

Sicanio. The friar is come,

Enter Duke, Hono. Fumante. Hipol. Death to my soul! is it possible? Fumante too?
Then I am lost.

Mart. It was reported you were slain, and by Fumante.

Duke. That rebel to religion so decreed it,
But heavens preventing hand put by the blow.
And we both live to witness against him.

Cup Bearer. And I.

Hipol. Still mischief upon mischief: how the devil --
Aside. When most we need him, faulters with us.

Cup ^Bearer. Nay't shall out, my conscience torments me.
This purse of gold hyer'd me to a treason.
Will strike your souls with terror, when ye heare't. All but the Princess,
and himself, (had not the Duke Inspired from heaven come in) I should have
sent, To death's cold tenements, with a draught of wine, commix'd with a
strange drug would not have wrought

In eight days after, that the blinded world,
Might have imputed your untimely ends,
TO excess of wine.

Mart. Horrid, and damnable!

Hipol. I do confess 'twas I that wronged Pausanio,
That would have slain the duke, betrayed your plot,
Poisoned the Prince, you, your sister, and the rest,
And all for Lucebella's scorn, nor do I greeve.
For ought but that I cannot have revenge upon
Those villains have betrayed me unto shame.

Mart. Insolent devil, wee'I have thee flayed alive

Hipol. I must not die alone^ the law condemns
The body of that father to the fire,
That shall divulge the secrets of confession;
And I glory in my revenge.

Sicanio. My heart bleeds for the good old man.

Duke. Sir, spare that needless sorrow!
For now I see the mischevous intents
Of that blood thirsty-sinner, know it is I
(Through the means of that good Lord) am your preserver.

Pulls off his disguize. Iulia. My royal Brother.

Hipol. Earth open me a living-grave may hide
Me, and my guilt! else my high swollen heart
Break op'e my breast, and find one!

Duke. Your expectation's frustrated: I am no friar.

Hipol. It Is vain to hope for mercy,

Duke. Pinnion him fast! and lock him up in darkness!
His execution we defer until
Pausanio be arrived, in hope that heaven
Will give him yet repentance

Hipol. Beyond my hopes --

Exit guarded. Duke. Fumante, as for your ignorant attempt against us,
We reconfirme our promised pardon: but,
For your perjured testimony against
The most abused of men the old General,
Condemn you the just summ^ of fifty thousand dukets.
To be paid Pausanio: Hipolito's estate
Shall make the satisfaction more complete;
And during life confine you to your living in the Country.

Fuman. Your gracious roy all Sir, as just --

(Exit. Duke. And for that you consented to this mischief,
We banish you the Court; and give^ your hier
To make a holy Challice -- for the Altar,
Exit Cup Bearer. Nor doubt we of your pardon since it lies
Within our power to make ye ( To Mar and Luc. fair amends.
For you (brave Sir) your great engagement to
To Sicanio. Pausanio, and the justice of his cause.
Pleads your excuse for breach of Covenant,
Y' are still a friend to Florence: nor repent
That I Am acquainted with your breast, we will
Continue friendly rivalls, only pass
Our Princely words to stand to what her father
Shall freely give consent to.

Sican. I agree -- and yet that Lady --
But love's deaf, well as blind.

Aside. Soldier. To arms (great Sir) not sarre off we descry.
Enter a soldier. Bright shining-troupes, bravely marching forward.

Duke. More discontent?

Mart. Soldier, there is a reward -- It is my father.
Be not dejected, Sir! oh sister now our joys are ripe
I Will forth, and meet him.

Sicanio. We will along -- with you.

Exeunt Sican. Mart. Aus: Leon. Soldier. Duke. Whilst we prepare to give him
royal welcome^
Oh Lucebell^, let not thy remembrance.
Look back at what is part! for then --

Lucebella. All Is buried in oblivion.

Duke. Confirm it with the seal of mercy^ a kind kiss!
[Kiss. The gods had their Nepenthe from these lips.
Sister I am familiar with your fears,
But know Sicanio's full of worth: forget 'em!

Iulia. Since you are safe, and my friend once more happy,
I cannot fear.

Luceb. Nor shall you have least cause: I know the worst
And am resolved to embrace it.

Duke. Thou art all virtue
(Exeunt. Beat a soft March within, then enter
Pausanio, Sebastiano-disguiz'd, and
Company of Soldiers, and pass over the Stage.

Enter Sicanio, Mart. Leon. Auso. and as they enter, Soldier; surprise them as
in an Ambuscado. Soldier. Y' are fairly caught.

Mart. What treachery is this?

Soldier. No treachery, but a tolerable trick
Allowed in war; ye must along with us.

Auso. Cowards, and villains.

Soldier. This rage will do no good
(Exeunt. March continues, Pansanio
And his company re-enter.

Pausanio. Sound a Parley!
Duke. Julia. Luceb. Rosa. Diana, above as on the Walls. Ho? from the Walls?

Duke. Whom does my glad eyes look upon --

Pausanio? Lucebe^. Father.

Pausanio. I am that wronged Pausanio, whose soft heart
(Joyful to see my persecutor) melts
It self to womannish profuseness.

Duke. We Will haste to thy embraces --

(They descend. Lucebella. Dear father make me happy in your blessing?

Pausa. Best comfort to my age, arise! and heaven
Look favorably on thee! thou retai^'st
(My Girl) thy wonted sweetness
In despite of grief.

Luceb. Next to good heaven,
The thanks belong unto the Princess.

Pausa. Oh let me kiss that bounteous hand! my heart
Was never proud^ but when it did you service

Duke. My nature's not to do thus, but in answer
Of such deserving drops, mine eyes rain tears --
Oh my Pausanio, be kind, and pardon
The error of my blinded justice; heaven
Can witness with me, that my will's untainted

Pausanio. I must believe it; I had a legal trial,
And by suborned witness, was condemned
To undeserved death; but then your mercy
Stepped between, and saved me: whereas (had you
Desired my end) I had unjustly died
And yet 'it had appeared justice -- I am still
Your loyal humble subject --

(kneels Duke. Rather the better half of my dear soul! rise!
But where is our loving kinsman? he is wronged too?

Pausa. I left him here; since, have not heard of him
Nor have I brought this power to increase
But to suppress rebellion --
Where is that enemy to virtue? I dare not
Call him, Son.

Luceb. The Prince, and he went both to meet you.

Enter Sicanio. Mart. Auso. Leon. as Prisoners. Soldier. Here Is our best
booty Sir,

Pausa. Free 'um!
In you (Royal young Man) 't was nobleness
TO attempt your injured friend's releasement;
For which my grateful soul shall daily pay
Your virtue tributary-thanks. In him
'Twas monstrous impiety: thy rebellious blood
Never had birth from these pure veins. I do
Disclaim all interest in thee; and beg
The sentence of the Law may pass on him.

Duke. Oh that were too unnatural: consider
It was his filial love to your wronged self
Provoke'd him to it.

Pausanio. The natural love of father never should
Make him forget the pious zeal he owes
His lawful Prince; obedience, loyalty
Are the sweet perfumes penetrate the sky:
Like it, no sacrifize such welcome finds
'Moung the celestial dwellers; nor than mutiny
And stiffe-neck'd disobedience, any crime
More strictly punished: what though injury
Plotted my bannishment? (patience virtue!)
He knew my spotless faith was purely free
From foul contaminating treachery,
And should with equal patience have smiled
On my sad sufferings, interested in
My harmless innocence succeeding time
(The aged sire of vennerable Truth)
Had then on the swift wings of lowed tongued fame,
Hurried his worth through the wide world; no mouth
Have mentioned his bare name, but with a kind
Of reverence, due to such a son, and subject
Whereas now (fallen from the virtue he professed
He lives (in spite of death) a cankered stain
To all posterity. Those numerous tongues,
That might, in emulation of his merit,
Have truly bin employed, will now as justly
Brand him with name of Traitor -- Bastard O my blond

(kneels. Mart. Sir.

Pausanio. Bends thy disloyal knee in hope of pardon?
Can such impiety meet with mild mercy, or in
Earth, or heaven? no, no the gods are just
And thou have lost thy hope of both.

Mart. Of neither, Sir:
The Duke is made of gentle pity, and
Upon my true contrition, has forgiven
The error of my supposed duty, for which grace
Prostrated thus -- I humbly kiss his feet! --
And for my foul fault in the eye of heaven,
My penitential tears will purge all guilt
And make me a pure sacrifize for their
Sweet mercy.

Duke. Martiano, rise! you have our favour^
Be worthy of it! your youth has had its swinge
But your now-better'd-judgement I hope will counsel
Your stout heart to execute, only, what is noble.

Martiano. My honest actions shall hereafter speak
My soul's intentions.

Pausa. Well, the gods forgive thee^ and now I turn
Petitioner, and must not be denied.

Duke. Command our Dukedom!

Pausanio. I only ask the life of my accuser; that he may have
A longer time to make his peace with heaven.

Duke. Go call him forth! --

(Exit Hono. Sicanio. Pausanio, you must resolve one doubt:
The Duke, and I are rivals in our love
To your fair daughter, yet are both engaged
To stand to your election.

Pausanio. Then I bestow her here: I Have heard the Duke
Loved her ignobly (though I know the contrary)
Gives her unto the Duke, And twill but take the scandal from her virtue --
To make her this amends. --

Duke. The which I do most willingly: and in my prayers --
I Will hourly bless the gods for this --
My so great happiness --

Pausanio. I hear the Princess loves you, who deserves
To Sicanio. A greater fortune then the earth affords;
Cherrish it, worthy Sir.

Duke. I see y' are full of thoughts: here -- I resign my right in Lucebella;
not that I am weary of my happiness, but choose, rather, to suffer nobly; then
have loved Chronicles report I used a stranger prince discourteously. Take her!


Iulia. Heaven put better thoughts -- in him.

Aside. Sicanio. I may receave with honor, now; what I before rofus'd. I
thankfully accept her -- but, as freely, do Return her -- and may peace, Wait
on your blessed Conjunction! -- here is my choice, If, Madam, you consent? --


To Iulia. Duke. Her blushes do confirm, what her toomodest
Tongue is loath to utter. --

kiss. All. The Gods shewre down their choysest
Blessings on ye!

Sica. Iulia. We thank ye.

Duke. Her dowery shall be answerable to her descent --

Enter Hip. Hono. Rosania. Since things go thus success full, Madam I hope
We also have your leave? here comes my choice.

Iulia. Ye have, and joy between ye ^

Hon. Rosa. We humbly thank your Grace.

Duke. Lady, we 're glad y' have chose so w sely.
Hipolito's late honors we -- confer on you!
To Honorio. You must be dear to us 't was he that brought
These obscured truths to light.

Pausanio. Honorio, you were ever an honest real friend.

Hono. And so will dye.

Hipolito. If a black soul, purged from its sinful filth
By penitential sorrow, more then hopes
For glorious Paradise? I Will not despair,
Of your forgiveness.

Pausa. The pardon I would ask heaven for my self
I wish to you, and heartily forgive you.

All. So we do all, and joy in your contrition,

Duke. Your honors are bestowed, but we will provide for you.

Hipol. He Is only truly happy who is good,
Not who is great: goodness, and greatness like known enemies, do rarely meet:
In the umble valley, better be a shrubb
With secure peace, then, on the aspiring top
Of a proud hill, a Cedar, still exposed
To certain danger. Beauty, honor, wealth,
My quondam friends, whilst I affected folly,
For ever I renounce ye: pious virtue,
(Who, whilst I knew ye, was a stranger to me)
Since has taught me, that y' are (at best) but air
Vannish'd, before enjoyed: the foul corruption,
My unstay'd youth sucked in at Court, prayers
And sad tears distilled from true repentance,
Shall wash a way: the remnant of my span
I Will spend religiously; my hourly votes,
For your prosperities, I Will daily, duly -- pay
To gracious heaven: this habit shall invest me
Puts on a Friars weed. One poor petition,
Though undeserved, vouch safe to grant, the last
I mean to beg: my newborn virtue give
life to, through your rememberance! former ills
Bury in kind oblivion! that my name
May live unblemmish'd, in despite of -- shame.

Exit. Duke. I doubt not but his fall
Has raisd his soul to heaven.

Sebastiano. Be sure ye be in readiness! --
To the soldiers. You Have almost made a fair conclusion,
Yet I have power to change the the Scene. --
Sebas. and soul diers fall on, and disarm them. Were I revengefull?

Duke. What means this progedie?

Sebastiano. Read in this face! --

(Discovers himself. Pausanio. So many months together yet not know
The friendly part'n^r in my sufferings?
Worthy Sir, pardon my ignorance!

Duke. Our noble kinsman?

Sebastiano. That late dispis'd-Sebastian -- but no more;
Hipolito's confession has cleared all doubts.
This act was only to express my loyalty:
Had I bin thirsty for your blood, or state,
To make me great, and Lucebella mine?
This minute might effect it -- but, thus low
kneeles. Humbl'd, I do confess my self your highness zealous
Subject.

Duke. Our happiness is now complete --
Let me engrafft thee on my soul! --
Rises, Salutes. The Ladies, But Cosen how joynd you with Pausanio,
Yet he unknown to you, until this instant!

Sebastiano. I heard of his abode at Naples, whether
(When I had news of his bold sonne's revolt)
I went to get you aid, and from the king
Obtayn'd it: Pausanio (desireous
To manifest his faith unto your Majesty.
In this intended service against his son)
Sought for Command: I (knowing his intents
Well as his valor after conference)
Gave him the Gennerall's place (although my beck
Commanded the whole army) yet kept my self
Secret in this disguise, till I should see
The final end, with which I Am now made happy.
And may your now rising joys never know Set!

Duke. Amen to that! once again,
My noble Cosen, forgive my rash belief!
Great ones, by this example, plain may see
There can no safety come of flattery.
Now haste we to the consummation of
Our Nuptial rites!
Those joys, culled out of danger, are most sweet,
Let us bless heaven they thus concent'rd-meet.

FINIS.

