engraving of man standing over skeleton in foreground, skeletons with scythes
chasing men in background Though I walk through ye Valley of ye shadow of Death
I will fear no Evil for thou art with me thy r^ and thy Staff they comfort me:
Psa: 23 O Death where is thy sting Thanks be to God which gives us the Victory
etc. (...) Cor 15.

Divine Consolations Against the FEAR OF DEATH: In a DIALOGUE between a
Minister and a Tempted Christian.

Written by John Gerhard the Author of the Meditations.

To which is added, The Christians Triumph over Death, with Divine
Contemplations, Ejaculations and Poems thereupon.

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the George over against the Stock's
Market, at the Lower end of Cornhill 1680.

The Authors Epistle Dedicatory to his brethren in the Ministry.
IF any, (my honored friends and reverend brethren in Christ,) will
accommodate Plato's definition of Philosophy (That it is the meditation of
death) unto the true divine doctrine of Christianity; in so doing, I think, he
will not go against truth, seeing in a manner the All of it consists in a
meditation of death. But by Death I understand, as well Christ's death as our
own. The death of Christ and his suffering is the sum of Christianity: 1 Cor.
2.2.
thence the Apostle judged, that among his Corinthians he would know nothing
save Christ crucified and dead. By Christ's death is made an expiation of our
sins, a destruction of Satan's power, a confirmation of the new covenant, and a
lessening of those terrors that are wont to accompany our death: The
meditation of the death of Christ therefore ought never to depart out of our
memory. But neither in any time of our life let us forget our own death: As
death awaits us every day, so let us on the other hand expect it every day.
Hieron. Epist. ad Paulin.
He that every day remembers he shall dye, easily slighteth all worldly things,
prepares himself for a happy death by a true and serious conversion, labors
after sincere godliness, patiently endures adversity, and heartily burns with
an ardent desire of eternal life. Teach us O Lord, Psalm. 90.12.
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, was Moses his
prayer: a great part therefore of Christian wisdom consists in a constant
meditation of death. We must long learn that, which that it be once done well,
concerns our eternal salvation. It is appointed for all men to dye: but to dye
godly, to dye in Christ, to dye happily, is not every ones lot: therefore the
mind is be prepared to that blessed immortality, and to be guarded with the
shield of the word and prayer. For if at any time, surely in that last time of
our life does our treacherous and subtle enemy lay wait for our salvation, and
with all his might endeavou^ to deprive us of the possession of it: wherefore
some of the ancients say that the infernal serpent is said especially to bite
the heel: for he knows very well that all is sure on our part, if he be
overcome by us in that last conflict: but on the contrary that it will be to
our everlasting disgrace and damage, if all the other parts of our life, as of
a Comedy, having been well acted, we behave our selves uncomely and cowardly in
this last Catastrophe. Hence are those various temptations, wherewith as with
battering Rams he assaults our heart in sickness and in the agony of death:
hence those fiery darts, which he casts at us with all his strength: hence that
horror and anxiety which we feel when we approach the gates of death. Blessed
is he that overcomes here, blessed is he that is faithful unto death, Rev. 2.3.
he shall he partaker of all those good things which are promised in the
Revelations to the stout Soldiers of Christ.

What is this life? it is death: death life does end,
Our life and death do both the same way tend.
But Christ of life's the Captain and the door,
Our death does conquered lie by his deaths power:
On him alone His hope ought to rely,
That would not of eternal deaths wound dye.
But this our hope most bitter storms do drive,
When in the confines of death we arrive.
This is the toil, these storms to overcome,
Lest that instead of life, death be our doom.
Wherefore seeing some while ago I have endeavored by an explication of the
History of the passion and death of Christ to instill into the minds of the
Godly the meditation of Christ's death; I thought it would be worth the while,
if to such persons I should also propound the meditation of our death: for
which end I writ these divine consolations to be opposed to the terrors of
death and to temptations in the agony of death for my own private use only; for
I carry about a sickly body, a brittle vessel, and besides, death not long ago
made a lamentable destruction in my own house, and there are many reasons for
which I fear my own life will not be long; therefore I would betimes prepare
and fence my mind for this last agony; and being encompassed with so many
domestic evils I bestowed some days on the pious meditation of this little
book: which meditations of mine seeing perhaps they may be useful to others
also, I was not unwilling to publish them. But this I would advise in the
beginning of this Treatise, that I writ not for secure, impenitent and hard
hearts, but for contrite, broken and bleeding consciences: Exhortations to true
godliness belong to another place; this discourse is wholly spent in
consolations to be opposed to death and temptations in death. Whosoever
therefore desires to receive this oil of consolation, let him bring the vessel
of a contrite heart: for what does comfort belong to him, that is not yet
contrite and made sad?

And I have dedicated this Manual unto you, most dear friends and reverend
brethren in Christ, to give a public testimony of that near friendship and
brotherhood we are linked together in. And you your selves also carry about you
a body subject to diseases, and there cannot but daily arise in your minds the
remembrance of death: I do not at all therefore doubt, although your faith
needs not these props, which for my own and others use I have collected in
this little book; but that notwithstanding, the reading of it will not be
unpleasant to you, epecially seeing it comes from a friendly and candid mind. I
pray our Lord Jesus will every where bless us and the labors of our ministry
by his grace and spirit.

John Gerhard.

An Index of the Temptations.
THE forerunners of death. page 1 Deaths Trident. page 3 The anguish of sin.
page 5 The remembrance of actual sins. page 8 A doubt concerning the
application of the benefits of Christ. page 12 The false persuasion of faith.
page 16 An insufficient sorrow. page 19 The weight of sorrow. page 22 Despair.
page 26 Blasphemy. page 29 The particularness of the promises. page 31 The
absolute decree of reprobation. page 34 The application of the merit of Christ.
page 40 The insubsistence of words. page 43 Falling from the covenant of
Baptism. page 48 The uncertain reception into the covenant of Baptism. page 52
The unworthy receiving of the Lords Supper. page 57 Weakness of faith. page 59
The not perceiving of faith. page 62 An inability to believe. page 65 The small
number of good works page 67 Want of merits. page 70 The accusation of the Law.
page 73 The accusing of conscience. page 76 Late repentance. page 78 Doubting
of the grace of God. page 81 Want of due preparation. page 86 Doubting of the
indwelling of the Spirit. page 89 Doubting of perseverance. page 94 Satan's
wiles and strength. page 98 The falling away of many. page 101 Doubting of
being written in the book of life. page 104 The fear of death. page 107 The
sting of death. page 111 The pains of death. page 117 Untimely death. page 119
Services farther owing to the Church. page 122 Short life brought upon ones
self. page 124 The love of this life. page 127 Separation from wife, children,
kindred. page 131 Stopping of the ears in death. page 134 The seeming
unprofitableness of Redemption. page 137 The horror of dust. page 139 The
incredibility of the resurrection. page 147 The flames of Purgatory. page 153
The rigor of the last judgment. page 156 A prayer in sickness. page 164
To these are added
The Christians Triumph over Death page 169 Divine Contemplations and
Soliloquies upon Death and Eternity page 198 Divine Poems upon death. page 217
Divine CONSOLATIONS Against the FEAR OF DEATH, And the TEMPTATIONS befalling
them that draw near thereto.
The forerunners of Death.
The Tempted. I Am oppressed with sickness, 2 Cor. 1.9.
the forerunner of Death; and have received the sentence of death in my self: I
see I must leave this life, than which nothing is more pleasant; this world,
than which nothing is more adorned; the house of this body, than which nothing
is more dear.


The Comforter.] Thou wast not created for this miserable and momentany, but
for a blessed and eternal life; Wisd. 2.23.
for God made our first Parent without corruption to immortality: Nor wast thou
redeemed by Christ for this fading and toilsom, but for that everlasting and
most happy life in the heavens; for it is a certain and undoubted saying, That
Jesus Christ came into the world, 1 Timothy 1.15.
to save sinners: Neither wast thou called of the holy Spirit by the word to
the kingdom of Christ that thou might live here a little while, but that thou
might pass from the kingdom of grace, to the kingdom of glory; from the
Church Militant, to that Triumphant; from a valley of tears, into a field of
joy: for if in this life only we believed in Christ and had hope, 1 Cor. 15.19.
we were of all men most miserable. Wherefore seeing thou must be brought
through the gate of death to that life, for which thou were created of the
Father, redeemed of the Son, and for which thou have been sanctified by the
Spirit, reject not, I pray thee, Luke 7.30.
the gracious counsel of God against thy self, but readily obey God that calls
upon thee.


Deaths Trident.
Tempted.] The thoughts of Death affright me; the dreadful shape of that enemy
disturbs my mind; it shows me its sting, 1 Cor. 15.55.
which is death; it threatens me with its cruel three-pointed weapon, while it
presents to my eyes and heart the Anger of God, the accusation of the Law, and
the cruelty of my sins, Romans 6.23.
in that death is the wages of sin, and by sin death has invaded me, Romans 5.18.
as it has done all the world.


Comforter.] But I advise thee, that being seriously and heartily sorry for the
sins thou have committed, thou look to him that died for thee on the altar of
the Cross, that thou might not be liable to eternal death: Turn thine eyes
from the outward show of death, and turn them to Christ who by his death has
destroyed him that had the power of death, Heb. 2.14.
that is, v. 15.
the Devil; And has delivered us who through fear of death, were all our
lifetime subject to bondage: He is death unto our death; Hos. 13.14.
he is a sting unto the hell we had deserved: Joh. 11.25.
He is the resurrection and the life; he that believes in him, though he were
dead, v. 26.
yet shall he live; And whosoever lives and believes in him, shall never die.
1. Cor. 15.22.
So that as in Adam (that is, because of sin derived from Adam upon us, and of
actual sins added thereto) we are all liable to death, and at length must die;
even so in Christ (the captain of life and conqueror of death) through faith
are we all made alive; Which that our Captain of life confirms with a solemn
and serious oath: Verily, verily I say unto you, Joh. 5.24.
He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed from death unto life.
And again: Joh. 8.51.
Verily, verily I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death. Therefore believe Christ, who is the truth; Joh. 14.6.
believe him promising, believe him swearing, Luke 21.33.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but the words of Christ shall not pass away.


The anguish of sin.
Tempted.] I begin to remember my sins; Psalm. 51.7.
for I was not only begot, conceived and born in sin, but I have increased this
sum of original and hereditary debt with manifold and most grievous [actual]
sins all my life long; how therefore can I hope God will be merciful to me whom
I have so often offended? how shall I conceive any comfort in death, seeing death
is the due reward to my sins, and a beginning of a second and eternal death to
them that are not reconciled to God?


Comforter.] Look unto Christ hanging on the altar of the Cross, and pouring
out the price of thy redemption, even his precious blood for thy sins. 1 John
1.8.
The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses thee from all sin: He is
the propitiation for thy sins, 1 John 2.2.
and for the sins of the whole world: For he came not into the world to be
ministered unto, Mat. 20.28.
but to minister, and to give his life a ransom and price for the sins of many.
And that thou might not at all doubt of this matter, therefore from heaven,
(which is the throne of truth) by an Angel, (which is the spirit of truth) was
brought that most sweet and comfortable name of Jesus, and given to this our
Mediator, before he was conceived; for what is Jesus but a Savior? Luke 1.31.
Mat. 1.21. Joh. 1.29.
For therefore was this name given to Christ, because he saves his people from
their sins. This is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is that Jesus Christ that came into the world to save sinners. Ephesians. 5.2.
This is the high Priest of the New Testament, who has given himself for our
sins an offering and a sacrifice unto God for a sweet smelling savor. Mat.
26.28. 1 Pet. 2.24. Isai. 53.5.
Christ it was who shed his own blood for the remission of sins; who bore our
sins in his own body on the tree; who was wounded for our transgressions, and
bruised for our iniquities; the Lord laid on him, (and caused to rush upon him
as an Army) the iniquities of us all. 2 Cor. 5.21.
God made him sin for us who knew no sin; that is, he imputed our sins to him,
he laid the punishment of our sins upon him, he made him a sacrifice for our
sins. Nor did Christ resist this counsel and decree of his heavenly father,
Psalm. 40.9.
but obeyed his will with the readiest mind that might be, Gal. 1.4.2.20.
and gave himself for our sins; he loved us, and gave himself for us. There is
a Baptism I will be baptized withal, says he, Luke 12.50.
and how am I straightened until it be accomplished! This was the Baptism of his
Cross, and the distress wherewith that our most bountiful Savior was wholly
overwhelmed, from no other motive than from his immense and unspeakable Love
toward us; this was it that so straightened and put him forward. How great soever
his outward pain was in his passion, yet his inward love toward us was still
greater and more ardent, by which he was prepared to suffer more for our sins,
if that price of our redemption which he paid had not seemed sufficient. But
there is no reason we should doubt of the sufficiency of the price; there is
the fullest redemption with him; Bern. Ser. 22. in Cant. col. 554.
for not a drop but a stream of blood flowed plentifully from five parts of his
body; he cried out, that all things were finished on the cross and by the
cross; and therefore he fully and perfectly Heb. 1.3.
by himself purged our sins; 10.14.
by one offering of himself he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified; Rev. 1.5.
he has washed us from our sins in his own blood. Believe therefore so clear,
so manifest, so express words of the holy Spirit; and firmly resolve, that by
Christ's death and passion there was made a sufficient satisfaction for thy
sins.


The remembrance of actual sins.
Tempted.] May be Christ only took upon him original sin, so that I my self
must either make satisfaction for my actual sins, or burn. Therefore though I
firmly believe, that Christ has washed away original guilt, yet I am troubled
and oppressed with those actual sins which through the whole course of my life
I have committed, in number very many, in weight most heavy, in desert
damnable. Adam is opposed to Christ; Romans 5.18.
therefore the benefit by Christ will not extend further, than the guilt which
is derived upon us from Adam. Another fault may be made up by another
satisfaction; but a man's own fault requires his own satisfaction.


Comforter.] No, 1 John 1.7.
but the blood of Christ cleanses thee from all manner of sins; not only from
that contracted from Adam, but also those which have been added thereto by thy
self. Romans 3.25.
God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood; we
may come thereto by true faith, and obtaining remission of our sins be
reconciled to God, as often as the weight of our sins oppresses us: Heb. 4.16.
We may come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find
grace to help in time of need. And what redemption, or what reconciliation
would this be, if Christ had only satisfied for one sort of sin, we being still
bound and engaged to make satisfaction for all the rest which are greater and
more numerous? Christ's redemption is not so maim, imperfect and by halves,
Heb. 10.12, 14.
but offering one sacrifice for sins, by that one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified; and he has obtained such remission of sins,
that no more offering for sin is necessary. v. 18. 1 John 2.1.
If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: 2.
He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world. Therefore if, when we have fallen into sin through the
infirmity of the flesh, we heartily repent, we have a refuge in Christ's
intercession, the foundation whereof consists in his merit and satisfaction;
for therefore is Christ's Intercession effectual for us, because he has made a
full and perfect satisfaction for our sins; thence and therefore the stroke of
divine justice and severe judgment due to our sins falls not on us, because
Christ hides our sins with the cloak of mercy obtained and merited by the price
of redemption paid by him. Aug. 4. de Trin. c. 13.
Let this therefore be held for certain, that Christ by his death, having
offered one true sacrifice for us, has purged, abolished and put out whatever
sins there were whereby Principalities and Powers did justly hold us to suffer
punishment. Therefore in him and by him we obtain the remission not only of
original sin, De merit. and remis. pecca t^ c. 13.
but of all the other we have added thereto. For Tit. 2.14.
he (which I pray remember) gave himself for us, that he might redeem as from
all iniquity. He is an infinite person who has satisfied, and how shall not
his suffering be also of infinite merit? What so deadly, that could not be
healed by the death of the Son of God, who is life it self? What so bloody and
defiled, that could not be cleansed with the precious blood of God?


A doubt concerning the application of the benefits of Christ.
Tempted.] But how can I be partaker of that most precious treasure? Christ
indeed died for all, but the fruit of Christ's death redoundeth not to all;
from whence therefore shall I be certain, that the benefits of Christ belong to
me also? Whence can it be manifest, that I am indeed and certainly partaker
actually of all those things that Christ by his passion and death has merited
for us?


Comforter.] God offers to thee the word of the Gospel, and in it all the
benefits of his son. Esaias 65.2.
He stretches forth his hand all the day long; he calls all, inviteth all;
therefore he also calls, invites and wooeth thee. What therefore God offers
thee with the hand of his mercy, that receive with the hand of a firm affiance.
Bern. Sermon. 31. in Cant. col. 597. Bern. Sermon. 3. in Annunc. col. 113.
As far as thou put forth thy foot into the good things of the Lord, so far
thou shall possess them. God puts not the oil of his mercy, save in the
vessel of trust. Thou shall possess so much of the good things of the Lord, as
thou gatherest in the vessel of trust. For faith lays hold of Christ, and in
Christ of a merciful God, of remission of sins, and life eternal. Of this hear
the words of eternal and immovable truth: Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son; that whosoever
believes in him may not perish, but have eternal life. v. 18.
He that believes on him, is not condemned but has eternal life; Joh. 1.12.
for to as many as received him, has he given power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name. This sonship comprehends all things,
which are necessary for us to eternal life: For if we are the sons of God, we
are also born of God. Tertul. in Apolog. c. 17.
For not a carnal generation, but a spiritual regeneration makes sons of God:
If we are the sons of God, God is full of pity to us; for does not a father
pity his children? Psalm. 103.13.
If we are the sons of God, then he has also given his Spirit to us; for so
the Apostle, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God;
Romans 8.14, 15.
For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, father. Gal. 4.6.
And again: Because ye are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, father. Romans 8.13.
Lastly, If we are the sons of God, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ: For what true son is there without an inheritance? All these so
precious, so plentiful, so various benefits befall us in Christ and by Christ,
who dwells in our hearts, Ephesians. 3.17.
and is born in us spiritually by faith, which therefore the Scripture does so
often declare and recommend to us. Verily, Joh. 5.24.
verily I say unto you, says Christ, he that hears my word and believes on
him that sent me, has eternal life, and comes not into condemnation, but is
passed from death to life. Joh. 11.25, 26.
He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever
lives and believes in me, Joh. 7.38, 39.
shall never die. He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water, (which our Savior spoke of the spirit, which they that
believe on him do receive.) Whosoever believes in me, Joh. 12.46.
abides not in darkness: namely in the darkness of ignorance, in the darkness
of sin, in the darkness of eternal death; but by the light of faith is brought
to the light of saving knowledge, to the light of true righteousness, to the
light of eternal life. Joh. 20.31.
Moreover the Apostle witnesses expressly, that whatsoever is written in the
Gospels of the words, deeds and sufferings of Christ, were therefore written,
that we might have life through his name. That God has given to us eternal
life, and this life is in his son. 1 John 5.11.
He that has the Son has life. 12.
Thence know we, that we have eternal life, 13.
because we believe on the name of the son of God.

Nor do the Apostles and Evangelists only, but all the Prophets also give
witness unto Christ, Act. 10.43.
that through his name, whosoever believes in him, receives remission of
sins. What therefore Paul and Silas once said to the keeper of the prison at
Philippi, Act. 16.31.
that say I to thee, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.


The false persuasion of Faith.
Tempted.] But I have observed many to entertain a vain persuasion of Faith,
and deceive themselves with a false boasting thereof, and what if I should be
of their number? Whence can I be sure, that my faith is true and saving, and
not an empty and dead image of it?


Comforter.] Examine and try thy self whether thou be in the faith: 2 Cor. 13.5.
prove thine own self: know thou not thy self, that Jesus Christ is in thee?
There are not wanting firm and infallible instructions, whereby true and saving
faith may be tried, known and distinguished from a vain boast of faith. And
first, this is the nature of true faith, Act. 15.9.
that it purifieth the heart, and desires that that may be cleansed from the
filth of sins. For seeing faith is solicitous and desirous of remission of
sins, he that truly believes will also perceive a grief for the sins he has
committed. The Gospel is preached to the poor, Mat. 11.6. Mat. 5.6.
namely to those that are poor in spirit; that hunger and thirst after
righteousness; Psa. 51.^7.
that bring and offer to God a cont^ite heart and a broken spirit. Look
therefore in the glass of the Law, and thou will see the deformity of thy sins.
Look unto the shining face of Moses, and it will appear, that because of the
works of darkness which thou have followed, thou can not endure that light.
Behold thy self, how grievously sickness has affrighted thee, which is the
just punishment of thy sins, the scourge of a revenging God, and the due reward
of a life spent in transgression. He that sins against his maker, Ecclus. 38.15.
falls into the hands of the Physician. We have therefore lost our health, Aug.
de verb. Apost. Sermon. 4. Bern. Sermon. 43. de modo been viv.
because we have offended our Creator. They that follow the flesh, are scourged
in the flesh. In that they complain, in which they have sinned. The sentence of
punishment is in that, in which was the cause of sin. In how many thoughts,
words and deeds have thou offended God? how especially feeble have thou been in
the fear and love of God? how remiss in prayers and other exercises of piety?
how barren of good works? How ost have thou followed the persuasion of Satan,
the seduction of the flesh, and the deceiving of the world? Those members which
thou have often yielded to be instruments of iniquity and unrighteousness, are
now by the just judgment of God afflicted with pain and weakness. Confess
this, and be sorry; for if there be a true and serious acknowledgement of sin
in thy heart, trouble of conscience and hatred of sin will immediately follow
it. God is in good earnest angry at thy sins; therefore from a hearty sense of
Gods anger bewail thy sin. God punishes sin severely; therefore by a just
grief punish that in thy self which thou observest thou have committed against
God. Acknowledge God's judgment to be upright, Psalm. 119.137.
and humble thy self under his mighty hand. And regard not only thy outward
sins, but acknowledge the fountain of all evils, the contagion of original sin:
That is hid indeed, but God sets it in the light of his countenance. Psalm. 90.9.
By it all the powers of thy soul and body are so tainted, that of thy self and
by thy self thou can begin nothing that is good, much less perfect it. By it
thou art liable to death, and all that troop of calamities, miseries and
diseases which precede death.


An insufficient sorrow.
Tempted.] I acknowledge and perceive, that I was not only born and conceived
in sins; but also that God has been offended by me by diverse, manifold and
great transgressions. I perceive this, and I am heartily sorry; but may be that
sorrow is not sufficient, as not being answerable to the faults, nor an
equivalent satisfaction for my transgressions.


Comforter.] True, the grief and trouble of conscience that arises from the
consciousness of sin, can never answer the grievousness and deformity of the
sins; seeing God is an infinite good, that is offended; sin an infinite evil,
that is committed; and the punishment of hell prepared for sinners is infinite,
how then by thy contrition can thou satisfy the infinite justice of God, and
expiate his infinite wrath? Christ has performed that, which of thy self and
by thy own strength thou could not; he has made an infinite and equivalent
satisfaction for thy sins. If thou could have satisfied by thy self, if thou
could have done away thy sins by thy own contrition and grief, what need had
there been for Christ to have come down from heaven, and to have labored so
long under the weight of the Cross? Isai. 43.24.
Thou have made him to serve with thy sins, and have wearied him with thine
iniquities. He has trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was
none with him. Look therefore that thou think not, that the grief of thy
contrition, either can be or ought to be so great, as that it should answer to
the greatness and deformity of thy sins: but therefore and for this end does
God require a true confession of sin, and a sincere contrition of heart, that
the free remission of sins, (which thou obtainest through Christ apprehended by
faith,) may take place. Christ preaches, but it is to the meek, that is, Isai.
61.1. Luke 4.18. Mat. 9.12.
the humbled in spirit; he heals, but it is the brokenhearted. For the whole
have no need of the physician, that is, those that think themselves to be well.
He preaches remission, but it is to the captives, that is, to those that are
sensible of the spiritual captivity of sin; for that man desires not to be
freed from bondage, that thinks himself free in every respect. He preaches
sight, Joh. 9.41.
but it is to the blind, that is, to those that lament the spiritual blindness
of their heart; for they that say they see, their sin remains. They that say
they are rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, know not that
they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. He preaches
forgiveness, but it is to the broken and contrite in heart. The Lord kills, 1 Samuel 2.6.
and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and brings up: He kills by
contrition, that he may make alive by consolation; he brings down to the
grave by the hammer of the Law, that he may bring up from the grave by the
comfort of the Gospel.


The weight of sorrow.
Tempted.] Troubles have compassed me about, my heart is broken and
overwhelmed, my sins come flocking before me, which grievously torment my
conscience, and strive to bring me down to hell: Psalm. 32.3.
there is no quietness in my bones from the terror of the Lord; my soul
refuses to be comforted: 77.2. v. 3.
I am troubled, and my spirit is overwhelmed. I see no place whither I can
flee, and seek a remedy of my sins.


Comforter.] If thou will flee, flee to Christ. He friendly inviteth all that
labor under the weight of sin, Mat. 11.27.
and are pressed with the yoke of that evil mistress, Iniquity. Hide thy self
in his wounds; until the tempest of God's anger be overpast. Romans 3.25.
Christ is the propitiatory, to which thou may flee by a true faith, and rest
under the shadow of his wings. Psalm. 42.1.
As the heart pants after the water brooks, so thy soul being even spent by
the heat of thy sins and the anger of God, thirsts after Christ, the fountain
of living water springing up to everlasting life. If thou come to him, he
will not refuse thee, nor thrust thee from him: for thus run the promises: Rev.
22.17.
Whosoever thirsts, let him come; and whosoever will, let him take of the
water of life freely. 21.16.
To him that thirsts will I give of the well of life freely. Mat. 11 28.
Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest:
In me and through me ye shall find rest to your souls. v. 29.
Him that comes unto me, Joh. 6.37.
I will not cast out. With a faithful heart embrace these words of Christ,
which are the words of eternal and immovable truth; let thy heart propound to
it self these his promises, Psalm. 27.8.
and seek the face of God. Put Christ as in the midst between thee a sinner,
and an angry God. Appeal from the throne of God's severe justice, to the throne
of mercy prepared for thee in and by Christ. The infernal hawk follows hard
after and persecutes thy soul; let it flee therefore like a fearful and
frighted dove to the elifts of the rock, Cant. 2.14.
which are the wounds of Christ. Moses accuses thee; therefore sigh, that
Christ may interceed for thee. Thy conscience is troubled, Bern. Sermon. 61. in
Cant.
but let it not be cast down from hope and trust, but remember the wounds of
Christ. Aug. in Medit.
Let the firmness of all thy trust be in the wounds of Christ which flow with
the streams of mercy, and want no holes whereby they may flow out. Idem. Sermon.
22. in Cant.
Let the Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ be thy last refuge, and the only
remedy of thy sins. It can help thee when thy wisdom fails, thy righteousness
is not sufficient, the merits of thy holiness are of no avail. And this is
another, and indeed an essential property of true faith, to look with the eye
of the heart on Christ hanging on the cross; from his wounds to hope for and
draw a remedy for a man's own wounds; to rest upon him with a sincere trust of
heart, and as it were to wrap ones self in his most holy merit. For this is the
voice of true faith:

Behold me thou, who on the cross did die,
And to my sins thy side a shelter give:
My heart pants after thee, my sins pass by:
By sin I dye, but by thy blood I live.
If therefore being pricked for thy sins thou hunger and thirst after
righteousness, Bern. Ser. 22. in Cant.
believe on him that justifies the ungodly; and being justified by faith alone
thou shall have peace with God. Confess thou art not worthy, Lib. 1. vit. Bern.
cap. 13.
nor can obtain the kingdom of heaven by thy own merits: but let this be thy
trust, that Christ thy Lord obtains it on a double account, both by being the
heir of the Father, and by the merit of his passion; he is content with the
first, the latter he bestows on thee, from whose gift challenge it for thy
self, and thou shall not be confounded.


The temptation of despair.
Tempted.] The Devil solicits me to despair.


Comforter.] I would have thee despair, namely of thy self and in thy self,
because thou art a sinner; but despair not in God whose grace abounds over
thy sin. Romans 5.21. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de poenit.
For no more is the malice of man to the clemency of God, than a spark of fire
is to the sea. The sea although it be great, yet it admits of measure; but the
mercy of God is unmeasurable. Neither despair of Christ and in Christ, 1 Timothy
1.15.
who came into the world to save sinners; whose blood avails more to reconcile
God, than the sins of all the world to offend him. Although thy sins be great
and diverse and often repeated, yet they are not greater nor more grievous than
thou may obtain pardon and forgiveness for; in that the goodness of God is
greater than the iniquity of all men. Sins as it were set with the sun; but the
grace of God rises with it. Sins are the works of the Devil and of man; To
have pity, to spare and to forgive are the works of God: By how much therefore
God is more powerful than the Devil and man, by so much is his mercy above our
malice. The Lord is merciful and gracious, Ps. 103.8.
slow to anger and plenteous in mercy. v. 9.
He does not always chide, neither does he keep his anger for ever. v. 10.
He deals not with us after our sins, nor rewards us according to our
iniquities. v. 11.
For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them
that fear him. v. 12.
As far as the East is from the West, so far removes he our transgressions.
Heaven is incomparably greater than the earth, which is but like a very little
point in comparison with heaven: but so is the mercy of the heavenly Father
incomparably greater than all sins. Bern. Sermon. 11. in Cant. col. 518.
Be far then from saying, Mine iniquity is greater than the pity of a merciful
God. Thou shall find God more bountiful than thou art faulty. Gerson. de remed.
contra pusillan.
So great is God's mercy, that if thou had all the sins of the world upon
thee, and were sorry that thou had proudly offended so good a God by thy
sins, and did firmly purpose for the future to refrain therefrom, God would
never condemn thee. Do thou so forget the satisfaction made by Christ, that
thou will prefer thy sins before the merit of Christ, that is, thy self before
God? Thou see the greatness of the disease, Aug. in Psalm. 55.
and see thou not the power of the physician? Thy sins are great, Christ is
far greater that satisfied for thy sins. Thy sins are diverse, but Christ also
suffered diverse things for thee. God is an infinite good whom thou have
offended by thy sins; but Christ is an infinite person who has reconciled thee
to God. Sigh therefore unto the heavenly Father, and pray in the name of the
Son thy Savior. If thou, O eternal God, Ansh. de redempt. genesis hum. fol. 96.
despisest me for mine iniquity, as I deserve; however for the dearness of thy
beloved Son, look upon me with pity. Observe in thy Son, what thou may atone
in thy servant. Behold the Sacrament of his flesh, and remit the guilt of my
flesh; remember what ^^y good Son has suffered, and forget what thy bad servant
has done.


The Temptation of Blasphemy.
Tempted.] I must needs confess, I am not only solicited to despair, but am
also sometimes tempted with the spirit of Blasphemy; for there arise such
thoughts in my heart, as are injurious against God himself my Creator, and my
Savior: I would choose to die a thousand times, to be freed from this
temptation.


Comforter.] These thoughts are not the actions of thine heart, but rather its
bitter passions; seeing thou art not delighted with them: but thy grief from
them is more bitter than death it self. They are the scourges of Satan whereby
he afflicts and torments thee; they will not be reckoned for sin unto thee by
the Lord. And though thou have the greatest impatience of spirit from the
infirmity of thy flesh, yet the Lord knows thy groans and thy sighs. The weight
of temptations did force hard words even from Job and Jeremy; which yet the
most bountiful God did fatherly forgive them. Thou see by them, how
altogether no strength unto good thou have from thy self; that thou may
cleave unto God alone with full trust of heart. This is the top and highest
degree of thy fight against Satan, see that thou despond not here; the greatest
champion will be with thee and will not leave thee destitute of his help. Wait
patiently and humbly till thou art freed of these fiery darts of Satan; Ephesians.
6.16.
in the mean time let the grace of God be sufficient for thee. 2 Cor. 12.9.
It is the flesh which so striveth against the spirit, and is so ready and
obedient to receive the darts of Satan; the sin that dwells in thy flesh shall
not be imputed unto thee, if through the spirit thou mortify the deeds of the
flesh, and consent not to those blasphemous thoughts. Those fiery darts of
Satan shall be quenched in the blood of Christ; turn toward him the shield of
faith, and as soon as thou perceivest any blasphemous thought to arise, betake
thy self to prayer, and so thou may kill it as it were in the bud.


The particularness of the premises.
Tempted.] I perceive some comfort of the Spirit in my heart; I observe some
trust in my mind, that keeps me from despair, when I behold the mercy of God
abounding over my sins, and the merit of Christ which is of infinite price and
value. But I doubt, whether the Evangelical promises of the mercy of God and
merit of Christ belong to me. For God is not only merciful, but he is also a
most just and severe punisher of sins; and alas! experience shows that all
are not partakers of the benefits of Christ.


Comforter.] But look thou give not way to those seducing thoughts of the
particularness of the Evangelical promises. God calls all to him, desires
all will come unto him; he offers the word of the Gospel, and in it the
benefits of Christ unto all; and that not feignedly, but sincerely; not
hypocritically, but with a mind to bestow. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. chapter 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he
should turn and live. Here thou have the solemn oath of Divine truth, thou
see their conversion is expected and desired by God that by their own fault
die in their sins; thou have that solemn protestation twice repeated. Mat.
11.28.
Come unto me all, says our Savior the Interpreter and Messenger of the
heavenly Father, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Thou hear that the way to Christ lies open to all that
labor under the yoke of sin; and that relief and rest of soul is promised to
them. 1 Timothy 2.4.
God will have all men to be saved, (says the Apostle, being taught it in the
third heaven) and to come to the knowledge of the Truth. He has concluded all
under unbelief, Romans 11.32.
that he may have mercy upon all. Thou hear, the salvation of all men is
desired by God, that his mercy lies open to all; none here is shut out, but he
that shuts himself out. Primas. in h. l.
There is one God of all; therefore he desires that all whom he has made may
be saved. There is one who has given himself a price of redemption for all;
therefore he wills that all partake of that price. God is not willing that any
should perish, (says Peter, 2 Pet. 3.9.
being taught by his own example) but that all would come to repentance. Thou
hear that the long-suffering and goodness of God inviteth all to repentance,
and that God wills not the death of one. Look that thou contradict not so
clear and so express truth, these words of the Holy Ghost writ as it were with
a Sunbeam: Let the comforts of the Scripture prevail with thee, above the
thoughts of thine own heart; for the Scripture is the word of the living God
that never deceives; but our heart is lying and does deceive.


The absolute decree of reprobation.
Tempted.] Outwardly indeed the promise is offered to all, but God from
eternity has made a certain absolute decree of the reprobation of particular
men, whom from an absolute hatred being rejected by him he has destined to
eternal torments: To these he offers his word indeed outwardly, but not with an
intent to bestow the good things offered in the word. And may be I am in the
number of those reprobated ones.


Comforter.] That absolute decree of reprobation is but the fancy of men who
are deceived, and do deceive. For if the Scripture do witness by words, Christ
by tears, and God by oath that he is not willing that any should perish, that
he desires not the death of a sinner; but on the contrary heartily desires
that all would come to repentance, would acknowledge the truth and be saved;
with what show of truth, I pray, can it be said that any by the absolute hatred
of God are excluded from salvation and the means thereof? Such as God has
declared himself outwardly in his word, such is his heart inwardly (if I may so
speak.) Such as he has shown himself to us in his son, such a mind also he
bears toward us; for Christ is the image of the Father, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3.
not only in respect of his essence, but also of his will. Indeed we ought not
so much as think, that he shows himself to us a bountiful and gracious God
outwardly, and in the mean time does nourish flames of hatred inwardly; this be
far from God who is truth it self, to whom all hypocrisy is extremely hateful,
who ought in no wise to be said to do that, which we see him forbid by precept,
and avenge by punishments. That any are saved, is the gift of God only; that
many perish, is the desert of themselves that do perish. For so says the
Scripture. O Israel thou destroyest thy self, Hos. 13.9.
but in me is thy help. The Scripture every where places the cause of man's
destruction in himself; and no where refers us to any absolute decree of God.
Fulg. lib. 1. ad Monim.
Because God by his prescience saw the sins of men, (especially unbelief, which
remaining all other sins remain) therefore he passed the sentence of damnation
and reprobation. And with what color can it be affirmed, that God does not in
the word of the Gospel offer the benefits of his Son to all in earnest, and
with a mind to communicate them, seeing Christ died for all, and satisfied for
the sins of all truly and really, not in show only and appearingly? The
universal terms here used do attest the universality of the satisfaction made
by Christ. God, Isa. 53.6.
says the Prophet, has laid on him the iniquities of us all; namely of all
those who as lost sheep had gone astray out of the path of an upright life:
even as all the sins of the people were by the Priest laid upon the goat that
was sent away into the wilderness. Lev. 16.21.
The Apostle repeateth twice in the same place, that one died for all: 2 Cor.
5.15. Ephesians. 1.9, 10. Col. 1.20.
It was the good pleasure of God to sum up, restore and gather together in one
all things in Christ; which are in heaven and which are in earth. It pleased
the Father by Christ to reconcile all things unto himself (having made peace
through the blood of his cross) by him, I say, whether they be things on earth,
or things in heaven. 1 Timothy 2.6.
Christ gave himself a ransom for all. Tit. 2.11.
The grace of God that brings salvation (whereby he gave his Son for us to
redeem us from iniquity) has appeared to all men. verse. 14.
Heb. 2.9.
Christ by the grace of God has tasted death for every man. The collective
term [World] used in such sayings proves the same universality of
satisfaction. God so loved the World, Joh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son; verse. 17.
whom he sent not into the world, to condemn it, but that the world through him
might be saved. Whence also he is most deservedly called Joh. 4.42. 1 John 4.14.
the Savior of the world. He is Joh 1.29.
the lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; Joh. 6.51.
who gave his flesh for the life of the world; 2 Cor. 5.19.
by whom the world is reconciled unto God; 1 John 2.2.
who is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world. The opposition of the first and second Adam that is of
Christ, delivered by the Apostle in express words, does prove the same
universality of satisfaction. Rom 5.15.
If through the offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and
the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.
verse. 18.
As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so
by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification
of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: verse. 19.
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Therefore where sin
has abounded, verse. 20.
there grace has much more abounded. Far be it from us then to say, that the
guilt derived on us from Adam extends farther, than the benefit of Jesus Christ
obtained for us. Away with saying that the disobedience of Adam is of greater
efficacy, than the obedience of Christ. Lastly, The universal extent of the
satisfaction made by Christ is attested by those Scriptures wherein he is said
to have died for those that perish. Romans 14.15.
Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. By the unseasonable abuse
of Christian liberty the weak brother perishes for whom Christ died; 1 Cor.
8.11, 12.
and therefore by sinning against such an one, men sin against Christ himself.
False teachers bringing upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1.
deny the Lord that bought them. These are Evangelick, Apostolic and divine
sayings, which to contradict is to deny Christ himself, and to deprive himself
of the fruit of Christ's merit. Orig. lib. 2. in Jobum.
Therefore believe steadfastly, that the only begotten son of God descending
from heaven, clothing himself in the last times with a terrestrial body from a
Virgin, has done away and cleansed the corruption, uncleanness and rottenness
of all the world by bearing the sins of all, by whose stripes all are healed.


Doubting about the application of Christ's merit.
Tempted.] Let the merit of Christ be and be called universal; yet I do not see
that the benefits of Christ are offered and applied to me in specie and
individually. Many things are offered to all, which yet do not belong to all.


Comforter.] Nay but the species is rightly gathered from the genus; we rightly
pass from an universal to particulars. Wherefore because God will have all to
be saved, thou may infer rightly and most firmly, that he will have thee also
to be saved. Whereas Christ is said to have dyed for all, thou may infer
rightly and most firmly, that he died on the cross for thee also, and is
willing to cleanse thee from all sins with his own blood. And what is offered
in the word of the Gospel to all in general, is offered, exhibited and applied
to thee in special in the word of Absolution. For when the Minister of the
Church does in God's name pronounce to thee the remission of thy sins, thou
may be sure that it is confirmed before God in heaven. For so has Christ
appointed it, Mat. 18.18.
Whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Whose sins ye remit,
Joh. 20.22.
they are remitted unto them. This is that wholesome ministry of reconciliation,
2 Cor. 5.18.
which God has given unto the Ministers of the Church; these are the salutary
keys, that he has committed to their trust; this is that wholesome office of
Ambassadors, verse. 20.
which they discharge in the name of Christ, God exhorting and as it were
beseeching us by them. What therefore is offered to thee in special, make no
doubt but it belongs unto thee in special. When in the serious trouble of thine
heart thou hear the voice of the Minister declaring remission of sins in the
name of Christ, think thou hear Christ himself: whatever he does in Christ's
name, that Christ does. It Is Christ that declares unto thee remission of sins;
the Minister only speaks for Christ. If any doubting arise in thy heart
concerning this, listen unto the words of Christ speaking unto his Apostles and
their successors: Luke 10.16. Mat. 10.20.
He that hears you, hears me. It is not you that speak, but the spirit of
my Father. Listen unto the words of the Baptist: Joh. 1.23.
I am the voice of one crying; It is another that preaches and cries by me;
the ministry is mine, but the force and benefit of the ministry depends on
another. Listen to the words of the Apostle: 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are ambassadors for Christ, that is, in Christ's name and stead, as though
God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God. He therefore that despises, 1 The. 4.8.
despises not man but God, who has given unto us his holy Spirit. Believe
therefore that even now Christ says unto thee as once to the sick of the
Palsy, and to the woman that was a sinner, Mat. 9.2. Luke 7.48.
Thy sins are forgiven thee. For there is no difference between that sentence,
and this which his Minister utters: for this is not spoken by man, and that
by Christ. When therefore thou hear the Minister declare to thee remission
of sins, do not imagine thou hear'st the voice of the Minister, but of Christ.


The insubsistence of words.
Tempted.] I confess there is great comfort offered me in the words of
absolution, yet my faith wavers still, and does not so firmly embrace the
promise of the Gospel as to shut out all temptation: for my flesh mutters, They
are but words which thou hear with thine ears, but thou see not yet the
good things promised with thine eyes.


Comforter.] They are words indeed, but they are the words of a God most true
and that lives for ever. They are words indeed, Joh. 6.69.
but the words of the spirit and life. They are words indeed, but such as are
more firm and durable than this heaven thou beholdest, or this earth thou
treadest on. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away, Lu. 21.33.
says the Truth. Isa. 40.8.
The word of the Lord our God abides for ever, says the Prophet. He that
trusts in this word, he that embraces it with a true faith, the same shall be
saved for ever. Nor has God given thee his word only, but has added thereto
his Sacraments also, which are as it were a visible word, Aug. tract. 80. in
Joh.
visible signs of invisible grace, and seals of the divine promises, ordained
to confirm and seed thy faith. By Baptism thou art received into the covenant
of divine grace, made the son and heir of God, washed from thy sins in the
blood of Christ, regenerated and renewed by the holy Ghost, and, in one word,
art truly made partaker of all heavenly good things. For Christ attributes to
Baptism, that it is the means of Regeneration. Joh. 3.5.
Unless a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Therefore he that is born again of the water of Baptism
and of the Spirit, is reckoned an heir of eternal life; because it is the means
of salvation: Mark 16.16.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. The Apostles ascribe unto
Baptism; that it is the laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.6.
and of renewing in the holy Ghost, Mark 1.4.
seeing we are baptized for the remission of sins. Acts 2.38.
Let every one of you be baptized in the name of Christ for the remission of
sins, says Peter, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Baptism saves us, says he in another place, which is not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience (or a covenant)
toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Be baptized, Acts 22.16.
and wash away thy sins, says Ananias. Gal. 3.27.
As many of ye as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: and by
faith ye are all the children of God: For Christ sanctifies his Church, Ephesians.
5.27.
cleansing it with the laver of water in the word. From all which thou may
strongly conclude, that Baptism is a ransom for captives, Basil. (...). tom. 1.
p. 446. Cyrill. Hieros. in praefat. Catech.
a remission of debts, a death of sin, a being born again, a bright garment of
the soul, an inviolable seal, a chariot to heaven, the Inn of the kingdom, the
gift of adoption; Nazia^z. orat. in S. Bapt. p. 615.
It is the brightness of souls, the change of life, the answer of the
conscience toward God, an help of our weakness; It is a putting away of the
flesh, a following of the Spirit, a communion of the word; It is an amendment
of the creature, a deluge to sin, a partaking of light, a dissolution of
darkness; It is a chariot unto God, anaccompanying of Christ, the prop of
faith, the perfection of the mind, the glory of the kingdom of heaven, a change
of life, a taking away of servitude, a loosing of bands, a changing of apparel.
Tertul. 4. adver. Marc. p. 231. Aug. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 18. Paulin. epist.
12. ad Sever.
It is the spring of true life and true righteousness, an abridged laver, the
Sacrament of life and eternal salvation.

The holy Ghost into this pool descends,
Whose waters by an heavenly spring are fed,
Which, influenced by the Deity, forth sends
An holy offspring from eternal seed.
For in the Baptism of Christ it was demonstrated by visible signs what the
divine grace works invisibly in our Baptism. Chemnit. in cap. 17. Harm.
The water of Baptism was sanctified by the touch of our Lords body: for
whatsoever Christ promerited and obtained in the body of his flesh, he
deposited as it were in his Baptism. He received Baptism with us sinners, to
testify that we by Baptism are made his members. As the eternal Father in the
Baptism of Christ said, This is my beloved son; so at this day he adopts for
sons all that believe and are baptized. As in the Baptism of Christ heaven was
opened, so to this day by the sacrament of Baptism the gate of the heavenly
paradise is opened to us. As the holy Ghost in Christ's Baptism descended upon
him in the form of a dove; so in our Baptism the holy Ghost is present, and
therein does effectually work our regeneration and renovation: so that thus in
Baptism concur the grace of the Father adopting, the merit of the Son
cleansing, and the efficacy of the holy Spirit regenerating. If therefore thou
art baptized, thou can not doubt of the grace of God, the remission of sins
and the promise of eternal life. Baptism is the laver of regeneration; where
there is regeneration, there is remission of sins, there is the grace of God,
there is perfect righteousness, there is renewing, there is the gift of the
holy Ghost, there is adoption, and there is the inheritance of eternal life.


Falling from the Covenant of Baptism.
Tempted.] I believe indeed that I was received into the covenant of grace by
the sacrament of Baptism, that I thereby obtained remission of sins, and was
writ in the book of life: but I have fallen from the grace of this covenant again
by my sins; by repeating my transgressions I have made void the aforegoing
remission, and have often deserved to be blotted out of the book of life.


Comforter.] No but the covenant of God is an everlasting covenant, to which
thou may always return by true and hearty repentance. For as God declares
concerning the sacrament of Circumcision, Genesis 17.13.
that it is an everlasting covenant: so let us not doubt but that in Baptism
which succeeded in the place of Circumcision, Col. 2.11.
God enters into and establishes an everlasting covenant with us. I will
betroth thee to me for ever, says he by the Prophet, Hos. 2.19.
yea I will betroth thee in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness, and in mercies: I will betroth thee to me in faithfulness. Isai. 54.10
The mountains shall depart and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee. Romans 3.3.
God forbid we should say the faith of God is made without effect by our
unbelief. If we give never so little belief to his words, or depart from him, 1 Timothy 2.13.
yet he abides faithful, always the same, true and constant, he cannot deny
himself. Therefore by the sins of thy natural infirmity thou fallest not from
the free covenant of God. By sins committed against thy conscience thou fallest
indeed from the grace of God and the covenant of grace; but thou may return
to the everlasting covenant of God by true repentance. The ship of Baptism
splits not, though we leap out of it into the sea of sins; therefore by
repentance, (which in this sense may be called secunda post naufragium tabula,
Hier. in c. 3. Isa. v. 9.
) we may return again to the same ship of Baptism, that we may in it be wasted
to the port of eternal salvation. Tertul. lib. de poenit. p. 479.
Therefore embrace repentance, as a shipwrackt person catches hold of a plank;
this will lift thee up when ready to be drowned in the waves of thy sins, and
will carry thee into the haven of Gods mercy. Peter had denied his Master, but
being converted he notwithstanding seeks the promise of salvation in Baptism. 1
Pet. 3.21.
The Galatians and the Corinthians had fallen foully, yet when they were renewed
again by repentance the Apostle offers them comfort drawn from Baptism;
declaring, that as many of them as had been baptized, Gal. 3.27.
had put on Christ; and clearly affirming, that they were washed, 1 Cor. 6.11,
12, 13.
and by one spirit were baptized into one body, namely mystical: whence it
clearly appears, that the efficacy of the Baptismal covenant is extended to the
future, and is not quite enervated and abolished by man's fall, but on God's
part remains continually a firm and established covenant. When Paul therefore
says, Aug. 1. de nup. and concup. c. 33.
that Christ cleanses the Church in the laver of water in the word, it is thus
to be understood, that in the same laver of regeneration and word of
sanctification all the sins of regenerate men are cleansed and healed, not only
those bypast, (all which are remitted in Baptism) but also those which are
contracted afterward by humane ignorance and frailty: Not that Baptism should
be repeated as often as men sin, but because by it once given, there is obtained
pardon unto the faithful of all the sins committed not only before, but also
after. Confess therefore and grieve for thy sins, but yet renounce not nor
forget the covenant of grace that was entered into with thee at thy Baptism;
but though thou fall a thousand times, yet return again. Return unto me, Jer.
3.12. Psalm. 27.
thou backsliding soul, says the Lord; and I will not turn away my face from
you, because I am merciful says the Lord, and keep not anger for ever. Let thy
heart present this word to God, and he will have mercy on thee, being mindful
of his promise, 2 Timothy 2.13.
for he cannot deny himself nor his word.


The uncertain reception into the covenant of Baptism.
Tempted.] But whence can I be sure, that I am again received by God into the
covenant of Baptism? I wish my heart could be persuaded by some certain seal! I
wish there were some sacrament, by partaking whereof the promise of grace might
be ratified to me!


Comforter.] Yea there is such an one, namely the holy sacrament of the Lords
supper, wherein thou receivest that body Christ gave to death for thee, and
drinkest of that blood which Christ poured forth for thy sins on the altar of
the Cross Wherefore seeing thou receivest in that holy supper the most holy
price of thy Redemption, namely the body and blood of Christ; thou may be
sure that thou truly partakest of all those things which Christ has merited on
the altar of the Cross by giving up his body and pouring out his blood; viz.
the grace of God, the remission of sins, righteousness, life and eternal
salvation. When thou drinkest that blood, by the pouring out whereof the
covenant of grace was established and confirmed, how can thou doubt whether
thou art truly received again into that covenant? What is more near to God,
than his only-begotten Son? as one that is in his bosom, Joh. 1.18.14.10.10.30.
that is in the Father and the Father in him, that is one with the Father.
Again, what is nearer to the son of God, than his flesh and blood or the humane
Nature assumed? as that which he has joined to himself in a personal and
indissoluble league. Therefore by eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood
thou art most closely joined to God: These being eaten and drunk do cause that
Christ abides in thee and thou in him. Hilar. S. de Trin. p. 141.
What is nearer to us than what we eat and drink? as that which is either
turned into the substance of our flesh, (as natural and elementary meats are)
or does as it were change and turn us into it self, as that spiritual meat of
the Lords body and blood, which we eat indeed, but we change not him into us,
but we are changed into him. Therefore by eating the quickening flesh of Christ,
thou receivest spiritual life from it; by drinking the precious blood of
Christ, thou come to the well of life. Christ assumed humane nature from us,
in it he condemned sin, he destroyed death, he repaired life and replenished it
also with fullness of grace and heavenly good things. That very nature assumed
from us and repaired in him, does he return thee again in the Lords supper,
sanctified and filled with heavenly treasures; that thou may be sure that
that truly belongs to thee which he has deposited therein as in a rich
storehouse: He implants as it were thy depraved nature in his most holy and
quickening flesh, that from him thou might draw the juice of life, and an
antidote to remedy that spiritual poison that lies hid in thy flesh. He is the
vine, Joh. 15.5.
we are the branches; he that abides in Him, and He in him, the same bears
much fruit. The impurity of thy nature is overshadowed as it were and covered
with that most holy body of Christ that thou receivest, and that most precious
blood that thou drinkest, that it appears not before the tribunal and in the
sight of God. They are taken by thee for an acceptable apology and earnest of
eternal life; Liturg. ^ter. Damas. 4. fid. Orthod. cap. 14.
for the confirmation and defense of the soul and the body; for the remission
of sins and for eternal life. Moreover in the holy supper there is given a
wholesome viaticum, in that therein are exhibited to thee the symbols of a
future resurrection, Can. Nicaen.
whereby is confirmed to thee a title of acquaintance and entertainment to be
expected in a heavenly country. Joh. 6.54.
He that eats my flesh, says Christ, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Therefore it cannot be, I say it
cannot be, that thy body should abide in the grave, Iren. lib. 4. c. 34.
when it has been nourished with the body and blood of our Lord: namely with
that meat that is the Ignat. ep. 11. ad Ephesians.
medicine of immortality, the antidote against death, and a powerful remedy
that we may live in God through Christ. By this meat thy weakness shall be
strengthened, that thou may arrive at the mountain of the Lord with Elias. 2
Kings 13.21.
The bones of Elisha being now dead did enliven him that was to be buried in
the same tomb; how much rather shall the flesh of Christ, now living and
quickening, being received by faith quicken thee to eternal life?


The unworthy receiving of the Lords supper.
Tempted.] I confess that in the true and salutary use of the Lord's supper the
godly are made partakers of these benefits; but that troubles me not a little
which the Apostle affirms, 1 Cor. 11.27.
That they that eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, become
guilty of the body and blood of Christ. I am afraid therefore lest I also be an
unworthy guest at that heavenly banquet.


Conforter.] By acknowledging and lamenting thine unworthiness thou may avoid
the imputation of an unworthy guest: for the Apostle calls those unworthy,
not who are weak in faith, (seeing this sacrament was instituted for the
strengthening of faith and comforting of the weak; 1 Cor. 11.28, 29.
but those who examine not themselves, nor discern the Lord's body; that is,
those who without true repentance and a lively faith, who without hatred of sin
and a firm purpose of amendment of life come to the holy supper as to a common
feast; who difference not this heavenly banquet from other common meats, that
they might acknowledge its true excellency, and duly prepare their hearts. Such
unworthy guests at this banquet sin no less by unworthy eating and drinking the
flesh and blood of Christ, than the Jews did in crucifying him. But far be it
from thy piety, far be it I say, that thou should be in their number. For
thou acknowledgest the filth of thy sin, thou lamentest the uncleanness of thy
nature, thou breathest after Christ the physician of thy soul, that he would
prepare himself a meet habitation in thy heart: Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11.
thou considerest the greatness of those things that are present and set forth
in the holy supper, and thou considerest the largeness of the divine gift: thou
hungrest and thirstest after righteousness, Matt. 5.6.
and therefore thou shall be filled: those sins shall not hurt, Luke 15.20.
which please not. Thou hastenest with tears to thy heavenly Father, thou
grievest for thy sins, and thou desire to satisfy the hunger of thy soul
with this heavenly food; verse. 22.
doubt not but that the most bountiful Father will kiss and receive thee with
joy, he will give thee the first robe of innocence, he will cloth thee with
the garments of salvation, he will put a ring on thy hand, he will seal thee
with his holy Spirit, verse. 23.
he will put shoes on thy feet, he will direct thee in the way of peace and
righteousness, he will fill thee with the flesh of that sacrifice that was
slain on the altar of the Cross and was offered for a sweet savor to him. Lay
aside therefore all fear of eating unworthily; he that is most unworthy in his
own eyes, is accepted with God; he that displeases himself, pleases God; he
that in himself is broken with true contrition of heart, is lifted up again by
the most bountiful hand of God.


Weakness of faith.
Tempted.] Faith is altogether requisite to the wholesome use of the Lord's
supper and the partaking of the promises of the Gospel, seeing to the partaking
of an alms there is not only required the hand of the giver, but there must
also be the hand of the receiver: But now my faith is weak, the ship of my
heart being tossed with various storms of temptations totters, and casts me
down from the firmness of faith.


Comforter.] Weak faith is yet faith; and faith does not therefore lay hold on
Christ, and in Christ the grace of God, forgiveness of sins and life eternal,
bebecause it is strong, but because it is faith: a strong faith embraces Christ
more strongly, yet nevertheless a weak faith also does not reject Christ, but
savingly lays hold on him. The faithful servant of God, Christ thy savior
breaks not the bruised reed, Isa. 42.2.
nor quenches the smoking flax; but receives him that is weak in faith most
bountifully. Romans 14.3.
The least spark of faith is the work of the Spirit; because of our selves, as
of our selves we cannot as much as think a good thought; 1 Cor. 3.5.
but to will and to do is from God: Phil. 2.13.
therefore God will not despise his own work which he has begun in thy heart
by his holy Spirit, but will perfect and confirm it. Isa. 66.13.
As a mother comfort her children, so does the Lord comfort us: Now a mother
treats an infant far more tenderly, and has a greater care of it, than of the
rest that are grown up: so God rejects not one weak in faith, but takes care
to heal and strengthen him as one languishing. If ye shall have faith as a
grain of mustard seed, and shall say to this mountain Remove from hence to such
a place, it shall remove, Mat. 16.20.
and nothing shall be impossible to you, says the Truth. If a miraculous faith
can do so much as to remove mountains, though it hardly equal a grain of
mustard seed; why cannot salvifick faith do the same; even remove mountains of
temptations and doubts, be it never so weak and feeble? God's strength is
perfected in our weakness; 2 Cor. 12.9
see therefore thou be not cast down in mind for the weakness of thy faith, but
rather look upon the strength of God; God can water what is dry, heal what is
wounded, bend what is stiff, foster what is cold, reduce what goes out of the
way. Only acknowledge the weakness of thy faith, and lean so much the more on
the divine word, for as the word is the seed of faith, so also the nourishment.
Pray with Christ's disciples, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase our faith: and with the father of the Lunatic, Mark 9.24
Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief.


The not perceiving of faith.
Tempted.] My faith is not only weak, but sometimes I perceive no faith at all
in my heart; nor do I call upon God with that fervency of spirit as can pierce
the clouds. I fear therefore lest my faith be quite perished and extinct; and
if faith be extinct, what hope or safety can there remain to me? I examine my
self, 2 Cor. 13.5.
and lo I perceive not faith in my heart, I shall therefore be of the number of
reprobates.


Comforter.] The spirit helps our infirmity, as it were by putting his hand
under us. For as we know not what we ought to pray for, nor how to pray as we
ought; but in the mean time the Spirit interceeds for us with unutterable
groans: so sometimes we perceive not what or how we believe, but the Spirit
cherishes and preserves faith in our heart. A spark may lie hid raked up under
the ashes, although it appear not outwardly: so faith sometimes dwells in the
inmost recesses of the heart, though it be not perceived of our selves.
Wherefore though thou perceivest no faith, gather not presently from thence
that all thy faith is perished and dead, seeing thou yet desire, longest and
art willing to believe: that desire, that longing, that willing proceeds from
faith. Moreover it is one thing not to perceive we believe, and another not to
be willing to believe; that is a sign of languishing, but this of obstinate
stubbornness. Christ does verily dwell in thy heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
although thou do not manifestly feel that indwelling of grace; even as the
holy Spirit, that inward comforter, has an holy dwelling in thy heart,
although he sometime withdraw from thee the sense of that comfort. As Abraham,
the father of the faithful, Romans 4.8.
against hope believed in hope; so thou ought to rely upon the word against
thy sense. As we ought to captivate every thought to the obedience of faith; 2
Cor. 10.5.
so do thou captivate thy not feeling of thy faith by faith; that is, receive
the word in thy heart, and firmly cleave to it. The seed lies hid under the
clods of the earth, when it does not as yet thrust forth so much as a blade: so
the seed of faith lies hid in the heart, although the fruit thereof do not as
yet fully and plainly appear. In sleep thou perceivest not faith; but who will
say that faith is then perished? so in this temptation a certain sleep as it
were has oppressed thy soul, so that thou perceivest not the motion of thy
faith; but far be it that thou should therefore suppose faith extinct.


An inability to believe.
Tempted.] I breath indeed after my savior, but I both feel and grieve that I
cannot believe. I could have wished indeed that I might have been made a
partaker of the benefits of Christ, but I perceive I cannot apprehend them by
faith.


Comforter.] Of thy self thou can not, Phil. 4.13.
but in that Christ who strengthens thee thou can do all things. God
wills and heartily wills thee to believe, for to that intent he offers
thee the word, that by it through the efficacy of the Holy Ghost he may
enkindle faith in thy heart; and resist not the working of the Holy Ghost, and
thou shall quickly see a plentiful ^^uit of the word. For if God ^^artily
wills thee to believe, he will also work in thee that belief, if thou do not
by an actual stubbornness resist his will. Thou say thou can not believe,
and yet thou art forced to confess, that thou breathest after Christ, and
desire his benefits; that very breathing, that desiring is the beginning of
faith. The holy Spirit will certainly perfect that work of faith which he has
begun in thee; only see that thou interrupt not his saving working. Thou
oughtst not to resolve first to have a sense and motion of faith enkindled in
thy heart, before thou will hear, meditate upon, and receive the word of the
Gospel. This is a perverse opinion, which see thou entertain not; this is a
perverse order, which see thou follow not. Thou must begin at hearing and
meditating on the word in the School of the holy Spirit, by that means thou
shall be brought to faith, and by faith to the sense of faith. Thou say thou
can not believe; thou ought therefore to hear, meditate on, and receive
into thy heart the word, Luke 11.13.
that thou may be able to believe. God gives his holy spirit to them that
ask him, and yet we cannot without grace ask the holy spirit: so God gives
faith to those that pant, and yet without the beginning of faith we cannot
pant. Faith begins in the heart with some struggling, it is increased, and
perfected also therein with some striving; and what we cannot do of our selves,
we can by his help who has said: Joh. 6.44.
None comes unto me except the Father draw him. Whosoever hears and learneth
of my father he comes to me. He that comes unto me I will not cast out. If
thou art not yet drawn, pray that thou may be drawn: hear and learn that thou
may come unto Christ.


The small number of good works
Tempted.] True and living faith always works by charity: Gal. 5.6.
and on the contrary that faith that has not works, is dead in it self. As the
body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. Jam.
2.17.26.
Now I see no great number of good works, that might give a clear testimony of
my faith. When I would do good, Romans 7.21.18.
evil is present with me: To will is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good I find not.


Comforter.] Thou do well indeed to judge of the light of faith by the beams
of good works: for as the works that are not done from faith, are not truly
good works; so the faith that is without works, is not true faith, but a vain
persuasion, and an empty picture. Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, says
our Savior. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Give all diligence, says Peter, to make your calling and election sure.
Therefore from works we must pass a judgment on faith; and this is a third
property of faith, that as it has contrition going before it, and instead of an
essential form, a true trust in Christ; so it has new obedience always
following of it. Therefore, as I said, thou do well to judge of the light of
faith by the beams of good works; but in the meanwhile take heed that thou
think not those only to be good works that by their outward show are great in
the eyes of men, and are free from any stain of sin cleaving to them. By good
works is understood chiefly the inward renewing of the heart; and the kindling
of those spiritual motions in the hearts of those that are born again, by the
holy Ghost. Therefore holy thoughts, a good purpose, a true fear of God, a
sincere love unto him, and ardent calling upon him, are truly good works,
although they are not perceived nor seen of men. Psalm. 45.14.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within; outward works bear witness of that
inward glory of renovation. Wherefore if thou have nothing else to offer to
God, offer a good will and a holy purpose to live godly. Offer to God thine
heart, and thou have offered all things. Yield thy self wholly to God's will,
cleave to it, resign thy will to it, 1 Cor. 6.17.
and thou shall be one spirit with him. If thou shall do this, outward works
will readily follow; because the spirit of God dwelling in thee, will drive
thee forwards to good works of all kinds: and where there is not an outward
power to work, there God will be pleased with a good will within. And thou have
no reason to hope to be free in this life from the stain of every infirmity;
our works please God, not in that they are every way perfect, but because they
proceed from a true faith in Christ, and are offered by his beloved children as
a thank-offering. Acknowledge therefore that testimony of good works that they
bear of faith, be not cast down, acknowledge their imperfection and the stain
of sin that cleaves to them, be not too much exalted.


Want of merits.
Tempted.] God is just, and his judgments are just; therefore he will give the
reward of eternal life to none, where there has not gone before the merit of
good works. What therefore is my hope, what my trust, seeing my works are
imperfect, vile, many ways defiled, and no way meritorious?


Comforter.] Nay but eternal life is not a due recompense of our deserts, but a
free gift of God in Christ and for Christ's sake. Romans 6.23. Bern. ser. in
Annunc. col. 106.
For the merits of men are not such, as that for them eternal life should
become a just debt, and God should do an injury to a man not to pardon him. For
to omit, that all merits are the gifts of God, and that so man rather becomes a
debtor to God for them, than God to man; what are all merits to so great glory?
All the saints confess that before God none is clear; Exodus 34.7
that Isai. 64.6.
all their righteousnesses are before God as a menstruous cloth; that none
Psalm. 130.3.
can stand at Gods judgment seat, if he will mark iniquity; that when Luke
17.10.
they have done all that God has commanded, they are but unprofitable
servants: what place can there therefore be here for merits? Bern. sermon. 22. in
Cant. col. 555. Gers. lib. 4. de consol. Theol. pros. 1.
What man from his either wisdom, righteousness, or holiness can presume upon a
sufficiency for salvation? what man in a boasting manner will make ostentation
of his righteousnesses to God, any more than a woman of a menstruous cloth to a
man? Neither our works nor our sufferings are worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed in us. Romans 8.18.


We cannot by our obedience merit a crumb of bread to feed upon, but we are
glad to beg it of God by daily prayers: how incomparably less can we obtain the
wages of eternal life by our merits? Aug. in Psalm. 31.
Therefore if thou will fall from grace, boast of thy merits. Idem de verb.
Apost. sermon. 15.
God gives altogether freely, he saves freely because he finds nothing for
which he should save, but much for which he should damn. Fulgent. 1. ad Monim.
p. 21.
From grace is given not only a good life to the justified, but also an eternal
life to the glorified: therefore death is called wages, but eternal life is
called grace; because that is paid, but this is bestowed. Bern. sermon. in not.
Mar. col. 213.
Let whosoever will therefore seek after merit, do thou study to find grace: let
thy merit be the mercy of God; thou art not altogether without merit, as long
as he wants not compassion. Sermon. 61. in Cant. Sermon. 67. in Cant.
There is no room for grace where merit has already taken place: grace wants
so much as thou ascribest to merit. Sermon. 68. in Cant.
It suffices to merit, to know that merit suffices not. Place all thy trust
in God only, embrace his mercy (...) the wounds of Christ seek thy merits, and
thou shall not be unw^^thy of merits.


The accusation of the Law.
Tempted.] I confess our works are not meritorious nor appease God; but we must
please him by faith. But how can they choose but displease him, when they are
not perfectly conformable to his Law? The Law is an eternal and immovable rule
of righteousness, condemning all that is not conformable to it self. Therefore
it brandisheth at me and my works the weapon of damnation, unless you show me
what shield I may defend my self withal.


Comforter.] Christ has redeemed thee from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for thee, because it is written, Gal. 3.13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. When the fullness of time was come,
Chap. 4.4.
God sent his son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were
under the law; verse. 5.
that we might receive the adoption of sons. Romans 16.
Christ is he end and fulfilling of the Law for righteousness to every one that
belie^. There is therefore no condemnion to be feared from the law (...) thee
and all such as are Christ's Chap. 8.1.
by faith, and walk not after the flesh. verse. 2.
The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made thee free from the law
of sin and of death. verse. 3.
For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God has
done, sending his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin has
condemned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, verse. 4.
that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Wherefore if by true
faith thou appliest the benefits of Christ to thy self, thou need not fear
the curse of the law. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.
The sting of death is sin; the strength of sin is the law: But thanks be to
God who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. He has
overcome our death by his death; he has satisfied for our sins by his
sufferings; and has most perfectly fulfilled the law for us by his most holy
obedience. And yet there is no abolishing of the law, but only a transferring.
Nor do the Law and Gospel destroy one another, Gal. 3.21.
seeing the Law is not against the promises of the Gospel, Romans 3.31
but is established by faith.

For what the law requires of us, that the Gospel declares to be performed by
Christ in our stead. What the Law commands, that Christ obtains. The Law
condemns sin, and us for sin: Christ yields satisfaction for sin, and bestows
his righteousness on us. The Law therefore is satisfied by Christ's obedience,
because it is perfect: on the other hand the fulfilling of the Law performed by
Christ redounds to us, Chytr. lib. 1. de vita and morte, p. 43.
because not due. Therefore as thou ought not to behold sin in thy body, but
in Christ raised again, the conqueror of death, and the giver of life and
eternal salvation; sin, not in thy conscience, but in Christ the lamb of God
that bears and takes away thy sins and the sins of all the world: as thou
ought to behold hell and temptations of eternal rejection not in thy self
and the innumerable multitude of the damned, but in Christ bearing on the cross
and overcoming for us the temptation of casting off: so thou ought to behold
the Law, not as it is writ in thy heart, but as it was fulfilled by Christ, and
fastened to the cross with him.


The accusing of Conscience.
Tempted.] My conscience bears witness to the accusation of the Law, it, as
an uncorrupted judge rises against me, and while none accuses me or brings
ought against me, is my accuser: Chrysostom. hom. 64. in Genesis Nazianz. orat. 26.
I cannot shun that home tribunal; in this great volume I see and am aghast at
all my sins writ with the pen of truth. Bern. de convers. ad Cler. c. 3. col.
414.
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this court of judgment,
wherein the criminal, the accuser, witness, judge, racker, whip, and
executioner are the same?


Comforter.] If thy heart condemns thee, Joh. 3.20.
yet God is greater than thy heart. If the remembrance of thy bypast sins
accuse and torment thee, yet Christ the Redeemer, who has satisfied for sins,
is more powerful; he acquitteth, freeth and saves thee. Col. 2.14.
For he has blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, he has taken it out of the way, fastening it to his
cross. That accusing handwriting of thy conscience is fastn'd also therewith
by the nails of Christ crucified; so that it is void and of no force before
God. Romans 5.1.
For being justified by faith thou have peace with God; peace of conscience,
quiet of heart and that blessed tranquillity of soul which Christ, the
conqueror of death, sin and Satan, brought with him from the grave, Bern. de
conv. c. 6. col. 415.
and bestowed on his disciples. Wherefore if thou feel the worm of conscience,
in this present life thou ought presently to stifle it, not to nourish it to
immortality; for conscience putrified breeds never dying worms. Stifle
therefore the worm of conscience by unfeigned repentance; beg of God, quiet of
heart and pardon of sin; and take heed of wounding thy conscience anew, for the
relapses of sin are very dangerous. In this life there is yet time for pardon,
time for grace, time for quieting conscience; In this life the book of
conscience may yet be mended out of the book of life: But at the last judgment
the books will be opened, Rev. 20.12.
and among them the book of conscience also, in which before all the world
shall be seen writ in fair letters all the sins of men that were not in this
world blotted out by true contrition, by faith and amendment of life. Before
that day of judgment come, and the time of grace be past, thou may have a
fair hope and sure trust that the blood of Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.14.
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, will purge
thy conscience from dead works to serve the living God.


Late repentance.
Tempted.] I am at last indeed sorry for having so wounded my conscience, I do
at last desire a remedy for my wounds; at last I have a desire to keep a good
conscience for the future: but I fear lest my repentance be too late; I am a
fraid, lest the divine grace being so often rejected by me, should also reject
and forsake me. Late repentance uses to deceive many; Aug. de vera and falsa
poenit. c. 17.
and that repentance that proceeds from a dying man, he ought to fear, lest
it dye also.


Comforter.] No but there is nothing too late, which is true and sincere. Cypr.
tract. 1. cont. Demetr.
While a man is in this life, there is no repentance too late: there are some
who being called come into the Lords vineyard at the eleventh hour of the day,
Mat. 20.9.
and obtain the reward of grace. No delay of time prejudiceth God's justice, or
piety. Fulgent. Epist. 7.
Repentance is never late with God, in whose sight as well past things as
future are always accounted for present. Behold the example of the thief on the
cross, who having confessed Christ with his mouth, on the tip of whose lips as
it were his soul was ready to depart, obtains pardon of sins and a free promise
of an heavenly paradise. Heb. 3.13.
Whilst it is called to day, so long God does earnestly will our conversion. As
long as the heavenly bridegroom delayeth his coming, Mat. 25.5.
so long the gate of grace and forgiveness is open. A man's whole life, even
the last hour of it, is granted for space to repent in. Isai. 65.2.
The Lord stretches forth his hand all the day. long; Joh. 6.37.
nor does he cast out any that comes unto him, at what time soever he come.
Have a care therefore that thy repentance be true and sincere, and thou needst
not fear it will be too late. If when death approaches thou therefore repent,
because thou art deprived of opportunities to sin; that is a false repentance:
for thus thou leavest not thy sins, but they leave thee. If thou therefore
repent, because thou see the punishment of thy sins near; that is also a
false repentance: for it proceeds from a love of thy self, not from a sincere
love of God. It proceeds not from the hatred of sin, but from the irksomness of
a most just punishment. Therefore that thou may truly and heartily repent,
grieve for thy sins so often committed; and therefore grieve, because thou have
so often and so grievously offended a most gracious God by them: In Christ seek
for pardon of thy sins; and firmly resolve to employ the remainder of thy life
wholly in the service of God: submit thy self to God, and be humbled in thy
heart before him: permit to his will what and how great punishments (a thousand
times deserved) he will inflict on thee, that it may appear thou repentest out
of an hatred to thy sin and not to thy punishment. Such a contrite and humbled
soul will be a most acceptable sacrifice to God, for so he says by the
Prophet: Psalm. 51.19. Isai. 66.2.
To whom will I look, but to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
that trembles at my word.


Doubting of the grace of God.
Tempted.] I feel in my heart indeed a deep contrition and sorrow for my sins,
nor do I altogether despair of the mercy of God: but in the mean time my heart
is shaken with the waves of doubts, nor am I yet certain of the free pardon of
my sins. I hope well indeed, but in the mean time I humbly doubt. The
consideration of God's mercy raises me up; but the thought of my unworthiness
presses me down again. I am turned to God, and therefore I hope well: I turn
but late, therefore in part I doubt still.


Comforter.] But I will put under thy staggering faith such strong props as
whereon thou may lean against all the storms of doubtings. For that doubting
is not an humble confession of our unworthiness, but a dangerous opposing the
faith we owe to God's promises: nor is there any reason strong enough why we
should doubt in late conversion and repentance; seeing the divine clemency does
offer a most certain promise of remission of sins to all that heartily repent.
Attend first therefore to the immovable truth of all God's promises. Whosoever
confessing and grieving for their sins seek for pardon of them in Christ, and
make a firm purpose of amendment of life; to them has God promised his grace,
forgiveness of sins and eternal life; Joh. 13.15.
Whosoever believes in the son, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.
verse. 18. 1 John 5.12. Mark. 16.16.
He that believes in him, is not condemned. He that has the son, has eternal
life. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. He that has promised
these things, is God, whose word is firmer than heaven and earth, who is truth
it self, 2 Timothy 2.11.
who is faithful and cannot deny himself or his word. What therefore God offers
with undoubted promises, thou must accept with an undoubted faith: and there is
no reason thou should object the infirmity of thy Nature, which cannot
embrace the promises with so great assurance of reliance; for this is a fault
of thy Nature which should be amended by the efficacy of the holy Spirit. As
thou believe not in Christ by thy natural strength, but by the working of the
holy Ghost; so by the grace of the same Spirit thou may be ascertained of the
mercy of the heavenly Father, against all inherent doubtings of corrupt nature.
1 John 5.10.
He that believes not God has made him a liar. As much as thou doubtest, so
much thou losest of thy faith: thou must therefore resist that doubting; which
is not to be set off with the specious name of humility, for humility ought to
rise from the consideration of our unworthiness, and yet in the mean time never
the less a firmness of trust ought to arise from the meditation of God's
promises. Therefore has God come forth from the secret throne of his Majesty,
and manifested his will in his word, that we might certainly know his will.
Wherefore God has not only delivered legal promises, which have annexed a
condition of perfect obedience, and are therefore made unprofitable to us; but
also Gospel promises which are free, that we might rely on them with firm trust
of heart. Therefore it is of faith by grace, says the Apostle, Romans 4.16.
that the promise might be sure. Men's promises are uncertain and doubtful,
because all men are liars; Psalm. 116.11.
but the promises of God are sure and unmovable, because God is truth it self.
As God is true in threatening, so also in promising. As out of Christ certain
damnation abides all unbelievers and impenitent persons: so in Christ certain
salvation is promised to all that turn to God and believe. Cypr. sermon. 4. de
mortal. page 209.
Do thou doubt whether those things shall be that God has promised, who is
true, whose saying is eternal and firm to them that believe? If a grave and
laudable man should promise something, thou would believe him, nor would
thou think thou should be deceived by him whom thou knew to stand to his
word and be firm in his actings. Now God speaks with thee, and do thou
unbelievingly fluctuate with a distrustful mind? Observe moreover the firmness
of Gods oath. As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner,
Ezech. 33.11.
but that he should turn and live. Verily, verily I say unto you, Joh. 5.25.
says Christ, hethat hears my saying, and believes in him that sent me,
has eternal life and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death to life. Joh. 8.51.
Verily, verily I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death. Aug. in Psalm. 88.
God has said this, he has promised this, if that be not enough, he has
sworn it. Therefore happy we for whose sake God swears; Tertul. l. de poenit.
but most wretched we if we believe not God when he swears! Acknowledge
therefore the admirable and never enough praised mercy of God, who willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability and immovableness
of his counsel, Heb. 6.17.
verse. 18.
confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutable things (seeing it is impossible
for God to lie) we might have a strong consolation who have fled for refuge to
lay hold on the hope set before us.


Want of due preparation.
Tempted.] All these things easily persuade me not to doubt of the firmness of
Gods promises in themselves: in the mean it is as yet uncertain whether they be
so firm and immovable to me, and whether I be in the number of them, to whom
God promises and offers so great things.


Comforter.] Yes because God pomiseth these things to all that truly repent and
fly to Christ by faith, 2 Cor. 4.13.
therefore he has also promised to thee, seeing thou also believe in Christ.
Attend therefore further to the inward sealing of the holy Spirit. For the
Spirit witnesses not only outward ly in the word, but also inwardly in thy
heart. Romans 8.16.
The Spirit himself bears witness with thy spirit that thou art the child, 1
Cor. 2.12.
yea and heir of God. Thou have received the Spirit which is of God, that thou
may know the things that are freely given thee of God. He that confirms and
strengthens thee with all the truly Godly in Christ, and he who has anointed
thee, is God: who has sealed thee, and given thee the earnest of the Spirit in
thy heart. Gal. 4.6.
Because thou art the son of God, therefore has God sent forth the spirit of
his son into thy heart, crying, Abba Father. Believing the word of truth and
the Gospel of salvation thou art sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians.
1.13.
which is the earnest of thine inheritance until the redemption of the
purchased possession: chap. 4.30.
whereby thou art sealed unto the day of redemption. As the Bridegroom, who
has promised his spouse marriage, gives her some token for a pledge of their
future marriage: so God has betrothed thee to him in faith, he has betrothed
thee in mercy; Hos. 2.19. Rev. 19.7.
but the marriage of the Lamb is not yet celebrated, therefore he gives thee
the earnest of his Spirit to assure thee of the fulfilling of the promises, and
a future introducing of thee to the heavenly nuptials. This is the spirit of
adoption, because he witnesses thou art adopted to be a son of God: this is
that seal whereby the promises of God are sealed in thy heart: this is the
earnest by which the word of truth is confirmed to thee. 1 John 4.13
By this thou know that thou dwell in God, and God in thee, because he
has given thee of his Spirit.


Doubting of the indwelling of the Spirit.
Tempted.] But whence can I be sure that my heart is the temple and dwelling of
the holy Ghost? The blots of sin stick to me, and I perceive that in my flesh
there dwells no good thing; how then will the holy Spirit, who is holiness
and purity it self, dwell in me?


Comforter.] We receive only the first fruits of the Spirit in this life; Romans
8.23.
we expect the full measure and complete tenths at length in eternal life:
there remains in this life a striving of the flesh and spirit; Romans 7.14.
we are yet in part carnal, and sold under sin; yet never the less by means of
regeneration and renovation begun, we are the temples of the holy Ghost.
Moreover, that the Spirit of God dwells in thee, thou may know by this,
that thou lamentest and abhorrest thy sins; Wisd. 1.4.
because the holy Spirit dwells not in a body enslaved to sins; because thou
believe in Christ, and love him, for he is the Spirit of faith; 2 Cor.
4.13. Zach. 13.9.
because with serious groanings thou call upon God and the most bountiful
Father, for he is the spirit of grace and of prayers, and cries in the hearts
of the faithful, Gal. 4.6.
Abba Father; because thou art led with a desire of all good, for they that are
the temples of the holy Spirit are led by him, Romans 8.14.
namely unto good; because thou often perceivest a foretast of eternal life in
thy heart, and the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Romans 14.17.
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Wherefore if thy soul
has felt at any time in the secret of its conscience the Spirit of the son
crying, Bern. in Cant. sermon. 8. col. 509.
Abba Father, let it presume it is loved with a fatherly affection, seeing it
feels it self moved with the same Spirit wherewith the Son is. In the Spirit of
the son it knows it self the daughter of the Father, and the Bride and sister
of the son. But though all these are sometimes weak and languid, yet be not
cast down, but beg increase of the Spirit, Luke 11.13. 2 Timothy 1.6.
for the Lord will give the Spirit to them that ask him. Stir up the gift of
the holy Spirit that is in thee, namely by praying, seeking, knocking,
meditating on the word, and resisting naughty desires. There is no perfection
here, but a continued way to perfection. Besides this inward sealing and
witnessing of the holy Spirit God has given thee the sacraments, which are the
seals of his promises, the conveyers of the benefits of Christ, and the means
to beget, feed and strengthen thy faith, that thou may be assured that the
benefits of Christ belong to thee in particular. By Baptism thou art received
into the covenant of Gods grace; in the holy supper thou art fed with the body
and blood of Christ; in private Absolution thou art pronounced free from the
chains of sins. Cypr. sermon. de mort. page 209.
Being confirmed with these seals, certainly and undoubtedly believe the word
of the Gospel. Why do thou doubt and waver? this is, not to eat thy Savior
at all; this is, to offend Christ the Master of believers with the sin of
unbelief; this is for one that is placed in the Church, not to have faith in
the house of faith.

Attend moreover unto the infallibleness of the audience promised thee. God
has promised even with his oath added, that he will hear our prayers, and give
unto us whatever we ask according to his will. Joh. 16.23.
Verily, verily I say unto you, says Christ, Whatsoever ye ask the Father in
my name he will give it you. Mat. 18.19.
If two of you agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it
shall be done unto them of my Father which is in heaven. 1 John 5.14.
This is the confidence that we have in God, if we ask any thing according to
his will we shall obtain it. He that has promised us hearing, has bid us ask
remission of sins; what place therefore can there be left to doubt of remission
of sins? How would Christ have bid us to add the word Amen unto our prayer, if
he would have us doubt of audience?

Attend therefore lastly unto the property of true faith, as by which we have
access into that grace wherein we stand, and boast of the hope of glory
promised by God, Heb. 4.16.
by which with confidence we come to the throne of grace, to obtain mercy and
find grace; by which through the power of God we are kept unto salvation; 1
Pet. 1.5.
by which we know that we are translated from death to life; 1 John 3.14.
by which we are most firmly persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, Romans 8.38.
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, verse.
39.
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature can separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Considering all these things let thy
weakness encourage it self, Aug. in Psalm. 148.
let it not despair, let it not chafe it self, let it not avert it self. Christ
has promised thee that thou shall be there where he is. What has God promised
thee, O mortal man? that thou shall live for ever. Believe thou not? believe,
believe, that is more which he has done already, than that which he has
promised: what has he done? he has died for thee: what has he promised? that
thou shall live with him. It is more incredible that he who was eternal should
dye, than that a mortal should live eternally. Now that thou art sure of that
which is more incredible, why do thou doubt of the other? God has promised
thee heaven, he has given thee his Son who is a greater gift than heaven and
earth.


Doubting of perseverance.
Tempted.] I no wise doubt but that an access unto God lies open unto me by
Christ the Mediator. I trust I am in the grace of God, in the mean time I am
made to doubt of perseverance. I know that perseverance alone is crowned; I
hear that only they that persevere to the end shall be saved. Mat. 10.22.24.46.
Aug. Sermon. 8. ad fratr. in Eremo.
It is virtue, not to have begun, but to have perfected; nor is the beginning
but the end required in Christians. Hieron. in Epist. ad Furiam.
Judas begun well, but ended ill; Paul begun ill, but ended well. Without
perseverance neither he that fights obtains the victory, Theol. mist.
Harph. c. 34
nor he that conquereth, the palm. I hear our Master of combats crying, Rev.
3.11.
Hold fast what thou have, lest another receive thy crown. I hear and fear: I
fear and doubt: I doubt and throw away trust of heart.


Comforter.] Consider three things wherein all thy hope consists, the dearness
of adoption, Bern. sermon. 3. de sep. frag. miser. col. 183.
the truth of the promise, the power of performance. Let thy foolish cogitation
murmur now as much as it will, saying, What art thou, and how great is that
glory, or with what merits do thou hope to obtain it? and do thou confidently
answer, I know whom I have believed, and I am sure he has adopted me in great
tenderness, that he is true in his promises, that he is powerful in his
performance. This is a threefold cord that is hardly broken, which being let
down unto thee out of our country into this prison, lay firm hold on it I pray
thee, that it may raise thee up, that it may draw thee to the view of the glory
of the great God. This is a most firm anchor of thy hope; these are those three
pillars whereby thou may bear against the waves and storms of doubtings,
namely the good will of God adopting, the certain faithfulness of the promiser,
and the immense power of fulfilling the promises. The good God has promised
good things, he has begun to work that which is good in thee; he that has
begun, Phil. 2.13.
will also perfect according to his good pleasure. The good God has promised
good things, he that has promised is faithful and true, he will not suffer
thee to be tempted above thy strength, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but with the temptation will give an issue that thou may be able to bear it.
2 Timothy 1.12.
The good God has promised good things, he that has promised is able to
fulfill his promises. Be thou confident therefore that he can keep his pledge
until the day of judgment. Joh. 10.28, 29.
None shall take Christ's sheep out of his hands. The heavenly Father, that
has given them to the Son, is greater than all, and none can take them out of
the Father's hands.

Christ the only high Priest of the new Testament has prayed for all that by
the word were to believe in him, that they may be with him, Joh. 17.20.
and may behold the glory that is given him by the heavenly Father. Wherefore
seeing thou also believe in Christ, thou have the witness of God in thy self,
1 John 5.10.
that Christ prayed for thee also: which prayer whether it was heard of the
heavenly Father, how can thou at length doubt? The son, Joh. 1.18.
that is in the bosom of the Father, shall not he be heard of the Father? The
son, Mat. 3.17.
in whom the Father is well pleased, shall he be rejected with his prayers?
Away! away! Rather in the days of his flesh offering up prayers and
supplications with strong cries and tears he was heard in that he feared. Heb.
5.7.
Christ therefore prayed for thee, he prayed and obtained that thou may live
with him hereafter and partake of heavenly glory.


Satan's wiles and strength.
Tempted.] I hope indeed that I shall be kept as a faithful sheep in the hand
of my shepherd: but yet I am afraid of the wiles of Satan, 1 Pet. 5.8.
who as a roaring lion goes about seeking whom he may devour: I am afraid of
his power, seeing he is a bold, strong, crafty, diligent and unwearied enemy,
one that wants no gins, and is most skilful in combat: how can I escape his
wiles, and avoid his power? He assaulteth and persecuteth me sometimes openly
and violently, sometimes secretly and treacherously, always maliciously and
cruelly.


Comforter.] None, Joh. 10.28.
says Christ, shall take my sheep out of my hand, therefore neither that
hellish wolf, be he never so treacherous and able to hurt. Joh. 14.29.
The Prince of the world came, and had nothing in Christ: therefore neither
shall he have anything in them that by faith are in Christ, Ephesians. 3.17.
and in whose hearts Christ dwells by faith. It is Christ that fights in
thee and for thee, believe, I say believe that the Devil shall not be stronger
than he. Christ was tempted of the Devil, Matt. 4.2.
and stoutly overcame him. The victory of the Lord is the triumph of the
servants. Heb. 2.14.
Christ by his death destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil: he spoiled Principalities and Powers, Col. 2.15.
he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in himself: With the sword
of the Cross as an heavenly David he overcame the infernal Goliath; this fight,
this victory of Christ brings salvation to all the Church, whereof this is
the Triumphal song, Rev. 12.10.
Now is come salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power
of his Christ, because the accuser of our brethren (...) cast down, which
accused them before our God day and night. verse. 11.
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony. Therefore in this victory of Christ let all the assurance of thy
trust and the glorying of thy hope be Resist the Devil in the power of Christ,
and he will flee from thee: Jam. 4.7.
As often as thou resistest, thou overcomest the Devil, Bern. in medit. devotis.
c. 14. col. 1201.
thou gladdest the Angels, and glorifiest God: for he exhorts thee to fight, he
helps thee to overcome, he beholds thee contending in the fight, he relieves
thee when thou failest, he crowns thee when thou overcomest: Greg. Nys. lib.
de beatit. p. 68.
He is the President and Moderator of the combatants, and the crown of the
triumphers. Ephesians. 6.10,
Be strong therefore in the Lord, and in the power of his might. 11,
Put on the armor of God, that thou may be able to stand against the wiles
of the Devil. 12,
For thou wrestlest not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickednesses in high places. 13,
Wherefore take the whole armor of God, that thou may, b^ able to withstand
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. 14,
Stand therefore, having thy loins girt about with truth, and having on the
breast plate of righteousness; And thy feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace. 15,
Above all things take the shield of faith, 16,
wherewith thou may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And
take the helmet of salvation, 17.
and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. In this armor appear
for single combat, and thou shall most certainly return a conqueror. Christ
fought and overcame for thee; the same shall fight and overcome in thee, and
shall set a crown of glory upon thee.


The apostasy of many.
Tempted.] But how many of Christ's soldiers could I reckon up, who being
circumvented by the wiles of the Devil, have returned from this battle not
conquerours but conquered! How many could I reckon that begun well, but have
afterward fallen from the grace of God, and the reward of eternal life!
Therefore I fear the hidden counsels of God, and considering his secret
judgments I tremble all over in soul and body.


Comforter.] Thou do well indeed, that thou workest out thy salvation with
fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
being conscious to the weakness of thy flesh, and knowing the power of Satan
that lies in wait for thee; and thoroughly considering the examples of those who
sliding into sin have fallen from grace: but look thou do not seek or place the
cause of this apostasy in any absolute decree of God reprobating. For God is
not moved of himself and by any absolute decree or hatred, again to forsake and
suffer to perish those that have been endued with a true faith; for the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance: Romans 11.29.
but whosoever being endued with true faith do afterward fall from the grace
of God and eternal salvation, they perish by their own fault, and not by the
necessity of any absolute reprobating decree, namely because by their free will
they turn themselves again from God. For these are always and nearly conjoined,
Faith, Christ, the grace of God, the holy Spirit, an endeavor after holiness,
eternal life. As long as any one of those that are born again abides in faith,
so long he abides in Christ; he that abides in Christ, abides also in the grace
of God; he that abides in the grace of God, the holy Spirit dwells in him;
and where the holy Spirit is, there also follow the fruits of the Spirit. But
they that cast away the endeavor of holiness, and begin to indulge sins
against their conscience; they shake off the holy Spirit, lose faith and make
themselves unworthy of eternal life. Therefore be thou in spirit so sure of the
gift of perseverance and the reward of eternal life, as yet not to bemade
carnally secure. The infallible promises of God free thee from doubting; the
exhortations and threatenings of God dissuade thee from carnal security. Aug. in
Psalm. 99. I them 2. d bon. persev. c. 13.
There is no where security in this life, but only in the hope of the promises
of God. In this life, which is full of temptation, he that seems to stand,
let him take heed lest he fall: for therefore those that will not persevere are
mixed with those that shall, by the wise will of God, that we may learn not to
soar too high, but to join with the lowly, and work out our salvation with fear
and trembling. Therefore with one eye of the heart behold the mercy of God; but
with the other the justice of God: from a faithful view of God's mercy let
there arise in thy heart a trust of perseverance; from the fear of God's
justice let there arise in it a shunning of carnal security. Let divine love
penetrate thy flesh, lest the love of sinful flesh deceive thee. Psa. 147.11.
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, and hope in his mercy. Let our
inner man hope and trust, the outward fear and tremble.


Doubting of being written in the book of life.
Tempted.] Those only persevere and receive the crown of perseverance, that are
writ in the book of life. But how can I know that I am writ in the book of life?


Comforter.] That book of life is Christ, whence it is called the book of life
of the Lamb. Rev. 13.8.21.27.
The writing into this book of life is nothing else than the election of
believers in Christ to life eternal. For as the faithful are said to be chosen
in Christ before the foundation of the world; Ephesians. 1.5.
Rev. 17.8.
so their names are said to be writ in the book of life from the foundation of
the world. Therefore we must pass judgment, as of election, so also of writing
into the book of life not a priori but a posteriori. Bern. sermon. 1. Septuag.
There are clear signs and tokens of salvation given, that it may not be
questioned but that he is of the number of the elect, in whom those signs
remain. For they that from eternity were elected unto life, those in time hear
the word of salvation, believe in Christ, put forth the fruits of the Spirit,
and persevere in faith. 1 John 5.10.
He therefore that believes on the son, has the witness of God in himself;
Romans 8.16.
for the holy Spirit in the heart of believers bears witness, that they are
the children of God, and writ in the book of life. Those whom God has
predestined from eternity, and whose names he has written in heaven, Luke
10.20 Romans 8.30.
he calls in time by his word, and justifies by true faith in Christ: That
faith shows it self by hearty calling upon God, by patience under the cross, by
endeavor after holiness. Therefore let the holy and wholesome thought of
election and the book of life begin at the wounds of Christ hanging on the
cross: He that believes in him, Romans 10.9.
and perseveres in faith is justified and writ in the book of the living. Wast
thou not received into the covenant of grace by Baptism, washed from thy sins in
the blood of Christ, regenerated and renewed by the holy Ghost? this is an
evident sign, that thou art writ in the book of life. Gal. 3.26, 27.
For we are all the children of God by faith, seeing as many as have been
baptized into Christ, Savanar. in Psalm. 31.
have put on Christ. Wherefore, falling into sin through the infirmity of the
flesh after Baptism, art thou not contrite? who put his hand under thee? who
received thee into favor again, who but the Lord? This is a great sign of
thine election; An elect person when he falls, shall not be broken. God did
not write the Tables of the Destinies, or the Decrees of Rhadamanthus, but the
book of life, when he elected us in Christ before the foundation of the world.
In Christ therefore by faith seek thy election to life, and thy writing into
the book of life: walk by faith, that thou may arrive at predestination. Ex
Aug ust Lomb. 1. sent. did. 41. D.
They that rashly and without the bounds of the word search the depths of God,
they are at length swallowed in the deep.


The fear of Deatd.
Tempted. It is good for me to cleave to Christ, I will notlet him go out of my
heart until he bless me. I have resolved to persevere in a true faith in
Christ, that I may come to reign with him. Yet I confess still I am not yet
free from all fear of death, nor do I feel that strength and assistance of the
Spirit as with the Apostle earnestly to desire to be dissolved.


Comforter.] Such is the infirmity of our flesh and disposition of corrupt
Nature, as that we are more desirous of this flitting life than of that to come
which is permanent: hence is that fear and terror of death, which that thou
may overcome by virtue of the Spirit, and may grow in the strength of the
inner man, consider those things which I shall propound to thee out of the
storehouse of heavenly truth. First, it is certain, that even the hairs of our
head are all numbered by God; Mat. 10.30. Job 14.5. Psalm. 139.
the number of our months is appointed by him, he has set us bounds which we
cannot pass. All our days were written in his book before there was one of
them. Therefore good reason thou should acquiesce in this fatherly will of
God; he gave thee life of his grace, he wonderfully brought thee forth of the
recesses of thy mothers womb, how long has he continued thy life! he has
preserved thee from a thousand dangers; that soul which he once gave, he now
asks again; he takes not away what is thine, but requires back what is his. And
what Action can lie against him, that calls for his loan? Moreover the soul
that he requires of thee, he translates into the joys of an heavenly paradise;
and hereafter he will restore it, adorned with greater glory and nobler
endowments, to the body again. That body, which is lodged in the grave, shall
hereafter be a more glorious, worthy and precious mansion for thy soul. It is
sown in corruption, 1 Cor. 15.42,
it is raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonor, it shall arise in
glory: 43,
It is sown in weakness, it shall be raised in power: It is sown a natural
body, 44.
it shall arise a spiritual body. Thy soul therefore created of God, delivered
by the son, inhabited by the holy Spirit do thou humbly and readily commend, as
a pledge, into the faithful hands of God, saying with David and Stephen, Psalm.
31.6. Acts 7.59. Luke 23.46.
yea with Christ thy head: Into thy hands I commend my spirit: thou have
redeemed me, O God of truth. Nay can thou not in the very agony of death most
certainly promise thy self the presence and help of God? For seeing thou
embracest Christ the Mediator by a true faith, being certainly persuaded that
by his death he has overcome thine, and by his resurrection has restored
righteousness and immortal life unto thee; therefore being justified by this
faith thou have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
and in the midst of death by the help of thine heavenly Father thou may
raise upthy self so as to say with Job, Job 13.15.
Although the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him. Ps. 91.15, 16.
I am with him in trouble, says the Lord, I will deliver him and honor him.
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. Romans 3.39.
Neither life nor death, nor any creature can separate or pull us from this
love of God, seeing it is in Christ Jesus who is our eternal King and Savior
for ever. The accusation of the Law, the deformity of sin, and the temptation
of eternal casting off makes the show of death terrible; seeing the sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law,: 1 Cor. 15.55.
but call to mind the consolation that was before opposed to these monsters,
and that outward show of death that is terrible to look upon will vanish, and
will be changed into a most pleasant sleep.


The sting of death.
Tempted.] By sin death entered into the world and is the due wages of sin; how
then should I not dread death?


Comforter.] Truly in and of it self death is the wages of sin, and the
revenging scourge of an angry God; but to those that believe in Christ it is
changed into a most sweet sleep. For although those that are born again and
believe in Christ, as yet carry about remainders of sin in their flesh, Romans
8.10.
whence also their body is dead, that is, obnoxious to death because of sin
dwelling therein; yet the Spirit is life because of righteousness; that is,
because by true faith in Christ they are justified from sins, and by the Spirit
resist the lusts of the flesh, therefore that sin as yet remaining in the flesh
is not imputed to them, but is covered with the shield of divine grace: Greg.
Nyss. in orat. de morte.
Therefore by death the true and spiritual life of the soul does not end in
them, but rather begins, whereto death is made to be as it were the midwife.
Thence flow those sweet appellations, whereby the holy Spirit, who is the
Spirit of truth, does describe the death of the godly. For those who in the
eyes of fools seem and are said by them to dye, those the holy Spirit says are
gathered or congregated unto their people, Genesis 25.8.35.29.49.33.
that is, into the company of the blessed and triumphant Church in heaven,
where they come to those that died before or rather went before. That which we
call death is a traveling; Tertul. lib. de patient. p. 12. Cypr. de mortal. p.
214. Chrysostom. hom. 45. in Genesis col. 375. Hilar. in Psalm. 140.
it is not an exit but a transit; not so much an emigration, as a
transmigration from worse to better; an ablation of the soul (and a certain
most happy translocation) not an abolition; for the soul is required again (and
translated into a place of rest) not killed. It is a transcension and ascension
to true life. Ambr. de bon. mort. c. 10. 2 Pet. 1.15 Joh. 5.24.
It is an Exodus, because by it the godly pass from the bondage of sin to true
liberty, even as the Israelites heretofore out of Egyptian bondage into the
land of promise. The godly are said by death to enter into peace, Isai. 57.2.
and to rest in their beds; namely because they come from that daily warfare
upon earth to a place of peace; from the troublous sea of this life unto the
haven; from the toilsom prison of this world to a place of rest. They are said
to be dissolved and to come to Christ, Phil. 1.23.
because they are brought out of the Inn as it were of this present life to an
heavenly country; and from a crew of wicked men to the blessed company of
Christ in heaven: by death they are loosed from their bodily bands: for as oxen
having labored all the day are let out of their yoaks at length toward
evening; and as prisoners are loosed from their chains; so the godly are by
death freed of the sad yoke of the labors and pains of this life, and from the
dark dungeon of sin, and by a sweet change are translated to a better life.
They are said to pass out of the land of their pilg^image by the dissolution of
their earthly tabernacle, Heb. 11.5. 2 Cor. 5.8.
and to be present with the Lord, namely because they come from the ruinous
cottage of the world to an heavenly palace, from an house of clay to a city not
made with hands eternal in the heavens, from the tabernacle of an earthly body
to the heavenly Jerusalem and the blessed company of Christ inhabiting it.
Cypr. sermon. de mortal. page 208.
It is his part to fear death that is unwilling to go to Christ; It is his part
to be unwilling to go to Christ, that believes not to begin to reign with
Christ. They are said to rest from their labors; Rev. 14. Ambr. de Bono mortis
c. 2.
for not the godly man but his misery dies. If this life be full of burden,
surely its end is ease: now ease is good and death is the end, therefore death
is good. 1 Cor. 15.38.
They are said to be sown in the ground or the field of the Lord by death and
buryal; in that the bodies of the godly like precious granes of wheat shall
spring up hereafter again to life.

That crop which from deceased Stigelius. bodies springs
Immortal glory to the body brings.
As under clods the withered granes do lie,
Which you would think were clearly cast away;
Yet in a while sprung up you may espy,
And unperceived, grow taller every day:
Even so our bodies that entombed were,
First raised, then in glory shall excel;
What death had swallowed up, shall trophies bear,
And in eternal light with God shall dwell.
The bones of the godly shall flourish and wax green, Isai. 66.14. 2 Samuel 7.12.
Isai. 26.20. Dan. 12.2. Mat. 9.24.
when the spring of everlasting life shall come. Lastly, they are said to fall
asleep. For as in sleep we rest from our labor, regain our wasted strength,
our soul in the mean time performing her operations: so by death being brought
from all the labors and dolours of this life to rest, we gather new strength
of mind and body the more readily and perfectly to perform those works for
which we were created in the beginning and redeemed by Christ, the soul in the
mean while living and rejoicing in heaven. As in our sleep we mind not what is
done about us, nor are troubled with the crowds of humane businesses: so those
that die in the Lord rest without all care and anxiety, and are no longer
subject to the evils of this life. As again we are awaked out of sleep: so
death will not be a perpetual sleep, but the time will come, in which we shall
hear the voice of Christ calling us out of the grave, and we shall again go
forth unto life. None so easily raises one lying in bed; Aug. sermon. 44. de
verb. dom.
as Christ the dead out of the grave. From all which things it plainly appears
how truly the blessed Apostle called the death of the godly gain; Phil. 1.21.
for it is gain to have escaped the increase of sin; it is gain to have passed
from worse, and to have arrived at better. Psalm. 116.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; and it is good
to them because of rest, better because of security, best because of
blessedness.


Pains of Death.
Tempted.] I fear not death but its pains, for I have often seen the eyes of
dying persons growing dim, their ears waxing deaf, their tongue faultering: I
have seen the sweat and anguish, the horror and nakedness of dying persons: I
have often heard the groans and complaints of the soul compelled to go out of
the tabernacle of the body.


Comforter.] Those that believe in Christ are preserved from those pains of
death, or at least their pains are mitigated. Christ has taken upon him what
was most bitter in death, namely the sense of God's wrath; Ex. 15.25.
Let us cast the tree of the cross into our death, on which Christ died for us,
and it shall become a pleasant sleep. Verily, Joh. 5.51.
verily I say unto you, says Christ, if any man keep my saying, he shall never
see death; that is, he shall not only not see everlasting death, but neither
that ghastly and horrible shape of temporal death. And if a very little taste
of bitterness be in the cup of death we are to drink, yet what and how little
is it in respect of that brook whereof Christ drank in the way of this life for
us? Psalm. 110.7.
how little is that little draught to be esteemed, in comparison of that cup
which our heavenly Father gave him to drink off in our stead? Matt. 26.42.
Asaying of Methodius.
Our death is like a medicinal purge of our soul and body; and seeing by it the
poison of sin is as it were purged out of our flesh, what wonder, if some Aloes
be mixed in this purge? Our death is the midwife to life eternal; what wonder if
the same happen to us as to an infant born into the world out of the narrowness
of its mothers womb, by whom the pains of the birth are in part endured? There
is no birth without all pain: That Fit will last but a moment, and lo the day
of our death will be the birthday of eternal life. Strait is that gate that
leads us unto life; what wonder, if we feel something of straitness in its
passage? Christ is our Captain and breaker up, Mic. 2.13.
he opens the way before us, we must cleave to him with a true faith, that we
may pass with him through the gate of death, and may come to the path of
eternal life that is known to him. Psalm. 16.11*
Sin yet dwells in our flesh; what wonder, if through the remainders of sin
it be made to feel some straits of death? Romans 5.1.
In the mean time our conscience has peace in Christ who is our true peace,
Ephesians. 2.14.
who rising from the dead brought the gift of peace to us. Death has nosting
left whereby it can wound our soul; it fasteneth its teeth in our heel, but its
poison is taken from it by Christ that it cannot infuse it into us when it
fastens its teeth.


Untimely death.
Tempted.] I seem to be called out of this life too soon: God snatcheth me away
in the midst of my days: Psalm. 55.23.
therefore I fear lest this be a sign of God's anger, seeing it is written:
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days.


Comforter.] There is nothing untimely, which God has timed. Long life indeed
is God's gift; but yet short life is not always a sign of God's anger, seeing
sometimes God commands even the godly and those that are beloved by him to pass
betimes out of the habitation of this world, that being freed from the dangers
of sinning they may be translated into a security of not sinning, and may not
be made to undergo public calamities that are often more sad than death it
self. God's people go and enter into their chambers, Isai. 26.20.
and shall shut the doors upon them: they shall hide themselves as it were for
a little moment, until the indignation be overpast. Isai. 57.1.
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart: the merciful men are
taken away, and none considers that the righteous is taken away from the evil
to come. He shall enter into peace, he shall rest in his bed, walking in his
uprighteness. Wisd. 4.7.
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For the
honorable age is not that which is of long time, (...)
neither that which is measured by the number of years. But wisdom is the gray
hair, (...)
and an undefiled life is the old age. He pleased God and was beloved of him,
10,
so that whereas he lived among sinners, he translated him. 11,
He was taken away lest wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit
beguile his mind. 12,
For wickedness by bewitching obscureth the things that are good, and the
unstedfastness of concupiscence perverteth the simple mind. Though he was soon
dead, 13,
yet fulfilled he much time. 14.
For his soul pleased God, therefore hasted he to take him away from
wickedness. Though we cut down those trees that do not bring forth, and let
those stand that do: yet God does otherwise. The godly dies most happily,
whether he die in a good old age, Sph. Philos. c. 36. p. 411.
or in the very flower of his youth. Quid (...) aliud nisi (...); quid (...)
nisi (...); quid (...) nisi (...); quid (...) nisi (...); that is, What is life
but violence? what is the body but a grave? what but a chain? what our birth
but a passing to the grave? Will thou take it ill to be freed betimes from
these evils and chains? The earlier the heavenly Emperor recalleth thee from
the station of this life, the sooner he puts thee in a place of rest, peace
and victory.


The services further owing to the Church.
Tempted.] I might in my place hereafter further profit the Church of God by my
labor in some kind, to this end therefore I could wish a space of longer life
were granted to me.


Comforter.] All this is to be committed to God's disposal, namely how long God
will have thee to live for the service of his Church. Therefore say with that
ancient Doctor of the Church and most deserving Bishop: Ambroses dying words
recorded by Posidon. in the life of Augusti^. c. 27.
I have not so lived as to be ashamed to live amongst you; nor yet am I afraid
to dye, because we have a good God. He that has furnished thee with the gifts
of teaching for the benefit of his Church, knows how to endow others also with
the same. Wherefore if with the Apostle thou be'st straightened so as thou know
not which of these two to choose, Phil. 1.23.
desiring to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best; or to abide in
the flesh which is more profitable for the Church: know that to die is gain to
thee, and to live is benefit to the Church. Romans 14.7, 8.
None of us lives to himself, neither does any die to himself. For whether we
live, we live unto the Lord, (namely that we may gain unto him more souls in
the Church:) or whether we die, we die unto the Lord, (that we may obey his
fatherly will calling us from our station:) whether we live therefore or die,
we are the Lord's, (that most gracious and powerful Lord's from whose love
neither life nor death Romans 8.3, 8 39.
can separate us.) Hitherto thou have obeyed the will of God in faithfully
bestowing thy services on the Church: obey him also in readily embracing his
will calling thee to the fellowship of the Church triumphant. Thou art duly
solicitous for the increase of the Church out of charity; but yet in the mean
time thou ought to commit the care of governing and preserving the Church
unto God out of faith. Nothing is more wholesome here, nothing better, nothing
more conformable to piety, than to resign ones self wholly to the divine will,
and by pious prayers to commit unto him a full power to dispose of our life or
death. Bern. in me dit devotis. c. 6. col. 1196.
We may undoubtingly hope for one of these two things, He will either give that
which we ask, or that which is better. Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.


Short life brought upon ones self.
Tempted.] I fear I my self have made my life shorter by my sins, how then can
I hope for the presence and help of God in death? Those that are guilty of
their own death obtain not a better life after death.


Comforter.] But that is to be understood of those that from impatience lay
violent hands on themselves, and force the soul to go out of the tabernacle of
the body against the will of God; far be such a purpose from thy piety. For
none ought to bring a voluntary death on himself to avoid some temporal
afflictions, Aug. 1. de civ. Dei, c. 26.
lest he fall into those that are everlasting; none may do this for other men's
sins, lest he come to have this most grievous one of his own who was not
polluted by those of others; none may do this for bypast sins, for which he
has the more need of life, that they may be healed by repentance; none may do
this out of a desire of a better life that is expected after death, because
those that are guilty of their own death obtain not a better life after death.
But if thy mind be troubled with those thoughts, that by the immoderate use of
meat and drink, or from any other disorder thou have made thy life shorter,
lament this with hearty groans, and place all thy confidence on the merit of
Christ, firmly purposing to amend thy life, and God will pardon thy iniquities,
who has promised forgiveness of sins to those that truly repent. Manasses, a
man of blood, had himself broken the thread of his life, and yet heartily
repenting he obtained the glory of eternal life. The thief on the cross
received things worthy of what he had done; Luke 23.41.
but heartily returning unto God, he entered with Christ into paradise. Genesis
3.15.
Nay our first parents had brought death on themselves and all their posterity;
yet nevertheless embracing that Evangelical promise of him that should break
the serpents head, they were cheered again with enlivening consolation.
Ambrose's saying to Theodosius the Emperor.
Wherefore if thou have followed them sinning, follow them also repenting with
tears. Gods hand is not yet shortened, nor has his mercy failed by the number
of years: the gate of pardon is not yet shut, seeing there is granted still
space of repentance.


The love of this life.
Tempted. I could have wished longer to have enjoyed this life and the benefits
of it. I could have wished longer to have possessed the blessings of God
granted me in this life.


Comforter.] See that by the inordinate love of this life thou bewray not thy
self not truly to love the chief good. Anselm. de mensur. crucis, lit. E.
All our heart is so owning to the love of God, that so much of it as is given
to another, is taken from God. He loves God less, that with him loves any thing
which he loves not for his sake. Thy heart is a vessel, but it is full of the
love of the world, therefore there is no room for the true love of God to
enter: turn out the inordinate love of the world, that the love of God may
enter in. Does the present life so delight thee, which is all of it a dangerous
and hard warfare? What else is it to live long, than to be afflicted long and
to sin long? Cypr. sermon. de mortal. page 215
If in thy dwelling the walls should totter for oldness, and the roof above
should shake, thy house now weary with its aged structure should threaten a
sudden downfall, would thou not pass out of it with all speed? If when thou
art sailing, a troubled and stormy tempest should foretell a future shipwreck
by the waves raised with the force of the winds, would thou not make swiftly
toward the haven? Behold, the world totters and slides, and witnesses its
ruin, not now by the age but the end of things; and do thou not give God
thanks, do thou not congratulate thy self, that being withdrawn by a timely
exit thou escapest the ruins, the shipwracks and the storms that are a coming?
Ambros. in cap. 8. ad Romans
As the sea stirred up by contrary winds insults, and causes a tempest to the
sailours: so the generation of the unfaithful being moved by a conspiracy
disturb the minds of the faithful, and the enemy acts with so great
perverseness, that one cannot tell what first to shun. For if the Powers cease
to be against us, he enrageth the spirits of private persons; if these be also
bridled, he raises a combustion by those of the same family: and if this be
quenched, by his art he causes discord amongst the brethren themselves; that
the house being beat upon at its four corners, it may fall on some side;
wherefore with one consent Christians must flee from hence. For they should
follow that holy man's example, who knowing that war is here waged against
perfidiousness, desired that he might depart in peace. This life appears a
precious nut outwardly; but if it be opened with the knife of truth, nothing
will be found within, but vanity and emptiness. If there be good in this life,
that is eminently yea incomparably better in the other. Aug. tract. ult. in Joh.
That is in faith, this in view. That in time of Pilgrimage, this in an
eternity of mansion: that in labor, this in rest: that in the way, this in the
country. That in the work of action, this in the wages of contemplation. That
declines from evil and does good; this has no evil from which to decline, and
has a great good to enjoy. That fights with theenemy, this reigns without
enemy. That is stout in adversity, this feels nothing of adversity. That
bridleth fleshly lusts, this is spent in heavenly delights. That is solicitous
with a care of overcoming, this is secure with the peace of victory. That is
helped in temptations, this is rejoiced in the helper himself without any
temptation. That succoureth the needy, this is there where it finds none needy.
This pardons other men's trespasses, that its trespasses may be pardoned; this
suffers nothing which it may forgive, nor does it any thing which it should
desire to be forgiven it. That is scourged with adversity, that it may not be
exalted in prosperity; this wants all evil with such a fullness of grace, that
without any temption it cleaves unto the chiefest good. That discerns good and
evil things, this sees only those things that are good. Choose that life
therefore which is to be preferred. Lay aside the inordinate desire of a
flitting life, that thou lose not the inheritance of a permanent one. So
possess the things of this world as that thou be not possessed by them: let
what thou have be under the dominion of thy mind; lest whilst thy mind is
overcome with the love of earthly things, it self be more possessed of its
enjoyments. Cypr. sermon. de mortal.
Why hastenest thou not to better things? Heavenly things succeed earthly,
great things little, and eternal things transitory.


Separation from wife, children, kindred.
Tempted.] I must leave my sweet children: I must leave my loyal wife: I must
leave my pleasant kindred: who shall provide for my wife and children? who
shall be their righter and patron?


Comforter.] God it is that calls himself a father of the fatherless and a
judge of widows: Pal. 68.6.
commit them to his protection and defense. It is God that is thy God, and who
will be the God of thy seed also. Genesis 17.7.
Thy children are not thine only, but God's also, yea rather God's than thine,
seeing he has bestowed more upon them: can thou doubt then of God's Fatherly
care of them? The Prophet of the Lord says, he had been young and now was old,
Psalm. 37.25
yet had he not seen the righteous forsaken nor his seed begging bread. The
generation of the upright shall be blessed. Ps. 112.2.
God has promised thy children heavenly treasures, he will not suffer them,
believe me, to perish with hunger. He has given them life, he will not deny
the sustenance of life: he has given a body; that which he has wonderfully
formed, he will also bountifully sustain. But take heed thou be not so
solicitous about the bodily welfare of thy wife and children, as in the mean
time to neglect the care of thy soul. Luke 14.26.
If any man come to me, says Christ, and hates not his father and mother and
wife and children and brothers and sisters, yea and his own life, he cannot be
my disciple: which he explains in another place, Mat. 10.37.
Whosoever loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he
that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. Behold, God
calls thee by death, see thou love not thy wife and children so, as therefore
to refuse with a ready heart to follow God calling of thee. Ambr. in cap. 12.
Lucae, p. 111.
The love of the heavenly Father is to be preferred before the love of
children: the love of Christ the bridegroom before that of thy wife: the
benefit ought not to be loved above the benefactor. What should I speak of
kindred? if thou lose them that are dear unto thee, Bern sermon. 26. in Cant.
col. 569. Aug. Epist. 6. ad vid.
hereafter thou shall receive them more dear. For we hope on a most true
promise, that from this life, (from whence being about to pass, we have not
lost those of our friends that have already passed, but sent them before) we
shall come to that life in which by how much they will be the better known to
us, so much the dearer and more amiable without fear of any dissension will
they be. If thy kindred are dear to thee, let Christ be more dear to thee, who
is thy brother. If it be pleasant to thee here to converse with thy kindred,
let it be more pleasant, Heb. 12.22, 23.
that thou go to mount Sion and the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels: To the Church of the
firstborn which are written in heaven, to God the judge of all, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect.


Stopping of the ears in death.
Tempted.] I am afraid lest my ears waxing deaf in the agony of death I be
deprived of all comfort of heart, and too much dismayed with the terrors of
Satan.


Comforter.] The inward consolation of the holy Spirit is more effectual than
all outward consolations. Romans 8.16.
The holy Spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of
God: the same Spirit raises our spirits when we begin to struggle with death,
Joh. 15.26.
and be straightened in heart, for he is the true and highest Comforter. When thy
eyes grow dim in death, the holy Spirit will give the illumination of heart:
when thy ears wax deaf in death, he will bestow on thee quickening comfort of
soul. Where humane consolation will end, there will divine begin. Behold the
examples of the Martyrs, how ready and prepared they were for the most
exquisite torments! Wheels did seem unto them Roses, flames of fire spiritual
bracelets, iron chains golden crowns, torments ornaments, two-edged swords
beams of heavenly light: who wrought this in their hearts, who comforted them
in their griefs, but the holy Spirit? His consolation is more effectual than
the accusation of the whole world, yea or of the Prince of the world. Think
thou that the holy Spirit does only cheer our hearts in the course of this
world, and is idle in the agony of death? think thou the dwelling of the
holy Spirit is destroyed, when the tabernacle of thy body is destroyed? Gal.
2.20. Ephesians. 3.2 Psalm. 45.9.
Christ lives in thee, and dwells in thy heart by faith, grace is poured
into his lips, the fragrancy of this grace will cheer thy heart, if thy hearing
be lost never so much: his speech will reach thy heart, be the doors of thine
ears shut never so much. Isai. 61.1. Luke 4.18.
The spirit of the Lord is upon him, the Lord has anointed him to preach glad
tidings unto the poor, he has sent him to bind up the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound. The Lord has given him the tongue of the learned, Isa. 50.4.
that he should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary. Cleave
to him with a firm trust of heart, commit thy self unto him by holy prayers, he
will comfort thee in season, he will raise thy heart with the word of the
Gospel, when the darts of death are fastened in it; he will bind up thy heart,
when it is wounded by death; he will preach liberty to thy heart, when thou art
led captive by death as a prey; he will preach opening to thy heart, when thou
art thrown into the prison of death.


The seeming unprofitableness of Redemption
Tempted.] If Christ has redeemed us from death, why must we dye yet? How was
death conquered by Christ, seeing it can show daily preys as the trophies of
its victory?


Comforter.] As Christ saved his people from their sins, Mat. 11.21.
not as if sin should no longer dwell in their flesh, seeing in this life they
remain sold under sin? but that it should not condemn for ever those that are
born again and believe: so he has redeemed us from death, not as if we should
no longer be liable to temporal death; for our body is dead (or subject to
death) because of sin: Romans 8.10.
but that we might be at liberty from the chains of eternal death. The death of
the soul is true death, Christ has redeemed us from this, enduring the pangs
of hell in his soul. The most sweet Jesus has also made our temporal death it
self sweet, so that it is only death in name, but indeed it is a sleep, yea the
end of death, and the beginning of true life. The truly godly because of those
daily calamities whereby they are oppressed in this life, 1 Cor. 15.31.
dye daily, therefore their death is the end of death: and by the gate of death
they pass to a quiet and eternal life, therefore death is the beginning of a
true life. Christ's death is the poison of our death: Hos. 13.14.
therefore although this poison has not yet altogether killed our death,
whence it as yet moves its self and fastens its dart in our heel; yet this
poison has reached the heart of death: therefore at last it shall dye by its
virtue. 1 Cor. 15.26
Death is the last enemy, which Christ will utterly destroy at the last day,
and a stronger coming on this strong man armed shall powerfully take from him
all his spoils. Luke 11.22.
Death is to be beheld with spiritual eyes, and its anger (as being now
captivated and overcome by Christ) shall appear to be vain without strength. It
lays in wait for the lives of the godly, and lo it brings them to true life.
It attempts to kill their soul and body with its darts, and lo, the soul being
unhurt with any wound of death, the body is only wounded, which it self also
shall hereafter be snatched out of the jaws of death. It endeavors to deliver
the godly to eternal death, and lo it delivers them to eternal life.


The horror of dust.
Tempted.] Be it what it will, I see I must be laid in the ground, and be
reduced to dust. A bed will be made for my body in the grave, therefore I have
said to corruption, Job 17.14.
Thou art my father, and to the worms, Ye are my mother and sister.


Comforter.] Mind not that whereinto thou art to be reduced, ashes and dust;
but mind that future resurrection out of ashes and dust which we expect. If
thou have said, with Job, to corruption, that it is thy father, say with the
same person, Job. 19.25.
that thy redeemer lives, who in the last day shall raise thee again from the
earth; he shall encompass thee with skin, that in thy flesh thou may see God.
The sayings of Scripture, the strength of arguments, the examples of those that
have been raised do all prove this blessed resurrection of our bodies. The
sayings of Scripture in the old and New Testament are numerous at hand, such as
are most weighty and clear. The blood of Abel cries unto the Lord, Genesis
4.10.25.8.35.29.49.33. Exodus 3.6.
in whose eyes he yet lives. The Patriarchs by death are gathered unto their
people, therefore by death they cease not to be the living people of the living
God. God is the God of Abraham, Mat. 22.31.
Isaac and Jacob: now God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: so
that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob live before God; they live, I say, in their
better part, and their bodies hereafter shall be recalled to life, nay are
already called, in that when Christ rose again, they Mat. 27.53.
rose together with him. I know, says Job, that my redeemer lives, Job 19.25.
and at the last day I shall be raised from the earth. Thy dead shall live,
says Isaias, my slain shall arise: Isai. 26.19.
Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust; Isai. 66.14.
for thy dew is as the dew of herbs. Your bones shall flourish like an herb.
Ezech. 37.5.
Thus says the Lord God unto these bones, Behold, I will cause breath to enter
into you, and ye shall live. I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up
flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall
live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Many of them, says Daniel, Dan.
12.4^.
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life,
some to everlasting shame and contempt. The great King of the world, 2 Mac. 7.9.
say the seven Maccabean Martyrs, will raise us up, which dye for his Laws, in
the resurrection of everlasting life. The hour comes, says the Truth, Joh.
5.28.29.
in which all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man,
And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. Joh. 6.39.
This is the Father's will which has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And
this is the will of my Father that sent me, 40.44.54.
that every one which sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Joh. 11.25, 26.
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me though he were
dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never
die. I have hope toward God, says S. Act. 24.15.
Paul, and expect that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the
just and unjust. 1 Cor. 15.53.
This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality: then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is
swallowed up in victory. 2 Cor. 4.14.
We know, that he that raised up the Lord Jesuss, Phil. 3.20, 21.
shall raise us up also by Jesus. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence
also we look for our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. 1 These. 4.14.
If we believe that Jesus died and rose again; even so them also which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him. Rev. 20.12 13.
John saw the dead small and great stand before God, and the books were opened.
And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up
the dead which were in them. These sayings of Scripture, writ as it were with
the sunbeam, are seconded by strong reasons. For so the Apostle concludes: If
Christ be risen, 1 Cor. 15.12. Tert. de carne, p. 33.
we shall al so rise again: teaching us that the resurrection of Christ is the
key of our graves and the example of our hope. 1 Cor. 15.20.
Christ was made the first fruits of them that sleep. Therefore as by God's
appointment the harvest followed the offering of the first fruits: Exodus 23.19.
Lev. 23.20.
so shall the harvest of the universal resurrection follow the first fruits of
our Lord's resurrection. Christ is our head: Aug. 20. de trinit. c. 17.
what went before in the head, shall follow in the members; and thence the
Apostle confidently affirms, Ephesians. 2.6.
that we are raised up together with Christ, and placed in the glory of the
heavenly paradise. Maxim. in Sermon. de res.
For the flesh, blood and portion of every one of us is in Christ-man. Where
therefore our portion reigns, there we believe to reign; where our blood
rules, we perceive our selves to rule; and where our flesh is glorified, we
know that we are glorious. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.
Moreover as by one man, namely the first Adam, came death; so by one man,
namely the second Adam, came the resurrection. As in Adam we dye, so in Christ
we rise again. Adam's fall was available to bring in death; shall not Christ's
resurrection be able to obtain our rising again unto life? Christ in his
glorious resurrection showed himself a conqueror of all his enemies, then
surely of death also, which at length he shall utterly abolish. Christ is the
eternal King; surely therefore he will raise from death the citizens of his
kingdom, that they may live for ever with him. Christ freed not our foul only
but our body also from the yoke of sin, and ordained it to an inheritance of
eternal life; therefore it shall be raised out of the dust, that it may go to
the possession of this life obtained for it by Christ. Theodor. in 1 Cor. 15.
tom. 2. p. 77.
From all which it clearly appears that Christ is as it were the surety and
pledge of our resurrection. 1 Cor. 3.16.
Moreover our bodies are the temples and tabernacles of the holy Ghost, he will
not let this his temple lie hid in dust and rubbish, but he will build it
again, and hereafter will make it far more illustrious than it was in this
life. Even as the latter temple of Jerusalem had greater glory than the former.
Hag. 2.4.
In Solomon's temple there were unfading palm trees: 1 K. 6.32.
so the bodies of the godly shall not be liable to eternal corruption, seeing
they are the dwellings of the eternal Spirit. Nay seeing our bodies are
sanctified by the body and blood of Christ, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
in the salutary use of the Lords supper, how can they abide in the grave? How
shall that flesh be said to come into corruption and not to partake of life,
which is fed by the body and blood of Christ? As that bread which is of the
earth, after consecration is no longer common bread, but the Eucharist,
consisting of two things, an earthly and an heavenly: so our bodies also
partaking of this Eucharist are not corruptible, having hope of a resurrection.
Christ's flesh is enlivening meat, Joh. 6.54.
whosoever therefore eats this flesh has eternal life, Lactant. lib. 4. instit.
c. 48.
and Christ will raise him up at the last day. Moreover seeing the soul in this
life works by the body and with the body whether good or bad, whilst it is in
the body; therefore divine justice requires, that those that are joined in the
work should be also joined in the wages; those which are joined i^ the fault,
should be joined also in the punishment: thence and therefore we shall all be
made to appear before the judgment sea^ of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his body whether they be good or
evil. Tert. in Apolog. c. 45. p. 337. Tert. de re. sur. p. 44. Lact. 6. div.
instit. c. 18.
The soul did not deserve without the body, in which it did all. Lastly besides
these strong arguments there are the examples of those that have been raised,
whom Christ by his own power, the Prophets and Apostles by a divine power have
recalled to life, for a testimony of the future resurrection, which as
Candidates of immortality and eternity they give to us who by faith and
confession are joined to them.


The incredibility of the resurrection.
Tempted.] The Article of the resurrection is very much against the nature of
our bodies and humane reason; whence the hope of the resurrection also is
sometimes not a little weakened with the storms of various cogitations in my
heart.


Comforter.] The foundation of our faith are the oracles of the holy Spirit,
not the dictates of our reason. We believe the resurrection of the dead, 2 Cor.
10.5.
to the obedience of this faith we ought to bring all reason into captivity.
Ephesians. 3.20.
God is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. Philo.
lib. de decal. p. 477.
If therefore thou find God does promise, thou shall find he will perform:
whatever God says, they are not words but works. Let us suppose that God can
do any thing which we confess we cannot tell how it can be done, and therein
the whole reason of the work is the power of him that says he will do it. Aug.
ep. 3. Bern. sermon. 4. de nativ. col. 43.
It will be easy for him, by whom his mother her self lost not incorruption of
flesh by bringing forth, to cause that this corruptible should put on
incorruption by rising again. Nay in Nature there are set forth diverse
resemblances of the resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.36, 37.
That which thou sowest is not quickened except it die first. And that which
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, 38.
it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. But God gives it a body as it
has peased him, and to every seed his own body. Aug. de verb. Apost. sermon. 34.
He therefore that quickens granes of seed dead and rotten, whereby thou
may live in this world; much more will he raise thy self that thou may live
with him for ever. Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 45. p. 738.
The light that daily at evening disappears, in the morning is renewed; and
darkness comes and goes by turns; the stars that vanish out of sight wax bright
again; the seasons of the year are ended, and return; fruits are consumed, and
grow again, at least the seeds do not rise with increase unless first corrupted
and dissolved; all things by perishing are preserved, all things are reformed
by death. Day dies into night, Id. lib. de resurrect. carn. page 54.
and is in a manner buried in darkness. The honor of the world has its
funeral, every substance is obscured. All things grow vile, are whisht and
stand amazed: there is every where a vacation, a rest of things. So light being
lost is lamented: And yet it revives again the same, whole and entire to all
the world, with its ornament, with its portion, with the Sun, killing its
death, the night; breaking open its grave, darkness: enjoying it self, till the
night also return again with its attendants. For the beams of the Stars also
are kindled again, which the morning had extinguished. The absence of the
Constellations is brought again, which a temporal distinction had withdrawn.
The Moon is renewed, which a monthly number had consumed. Winters and summers,
springs and autumns are hurled round, with their virtues, manners, fruits. For
earth has been taught by heaven, to cloth the trees after their nakedness, to
color the flowers afresh, to put forth grass again, to give the same seeds
that were spent: and not to give them till they are first spent. An admirable
way! to become a preserver from a destroyer: it takes away, that it may
restore: it loses, that it may keep: it corrupts, that it may keep entire: that
it may increase, it spends. In that it restores more plentiful and gay, than it
bereaved. Usury is spending, and injury is usury, and gain is loss: in one
word, every condition is a relapse. Whatever thou meetest with, once was;
whatever thou have lost, all is again. All things return to their station after
departure. They are therefore ended, that they may be. Nothing perishes but
for preservation. Therefore all this revoluble order of things is a witness to
the resurrection of the dead. For God taught by works before he taught by
letters: he preached by his power, before he preached by his word. He first
sent Nature to thee to beamistress to teach thee, and afterward Prophecy: that
being a disciple of Nature thou might the easilier believe Prophecy: that
thou might presently receive when thou heardest, what thou had already seen
every where: and that thou may not doubt that God will be a raiser up of the
flesh, who know him to be a restorer of all things. Are such types to be
esteemed in vain as are to be seen in the world? is God to be thought weaker
than Nature? Idem in Apolog. adv. gentes c. 45. p. 737.
Nay view thy self, in thy self discover a testimony of the resurrection.
Recollect what thou were before thou were, even nothing: for if thou had been
any thing, thou would have remembered. Thou therefore that were nothing,
before thou were: becoming the same nothing when thou shall cease to be, why
can thou not again be of nothing by the will of the same author, who would
have thee to be from nothing? What new thing shall happen unto thee? thou who
were not, wast made. When again thou shall not be, thou shall be made. Give a
reason if thou can which way thou wast made; and then ask which way thou
shall be made: and yet surely thou shall be made more easily because sometimes
thou have been; who were not difficultly made, when thou had never been. Idem
de resurrect. carnis, p. 54.
If God made all things of nothing, he can bring the flesh reduced into nothing
out of nothing. He that has made, is fit to make again: by how much it is more
to make than to remake; to have given a beginning than to have restored; by so
much believe it easier to restore flesh than to make it at first.


The flames of Purgatory.
Tempted.] I fear the avenging flames of the fire of purgatory after death; for
seeing I am beset with diverse infirmities of sins, I fear lest God therefore
enter into judgment with me, Psalm. 143.3.
and most justly adjudge me to the flames of Purgatory.


Comforter.] Those with whom God enters into judgment, that is, who by true
conversion in this life are not yet reconciled to God, he adjudgeth not to any
purgatory fire, to be tormented for a certain finite time, but to be burned in
an infernal and unquenchable fire for ever. But those who heartily acknowledge
their sins, and truly believe in Christ, have the Warrant of their Savior that
no place of grief or torments after death is to be feared by them: for thus he
says: Verily verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on
him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but is passed from death to life. Aug. lib. 3. hypogn.
The word of truth only owneth two sorts of men, to wit good and bad, penitent
and impenitent, believers and unbelievers: it only acknowledges two
receptacles after death, to wit of consolation and torment, of reward and
punishment, of heaven and hell: a third sort of men or places we know nothing
of, nor do we find any thing in the Scripture. Id. sermon. 8. de verb. Apost. Id.
21. deciv. Dei, c. 25.
There are two habitations, one in an eternal kingdom, the other in eternal
fire: therefore there is no middle place for any, where a man may not be in
punishment that is not placed in the Kingdom; Id. 1. de peccat. merit and
remis. c. 28.
any place that he can be in, except with the Devil, that is not with Christ.
He that believes, says Christ, and is baptized, Mark 16.16.
shall be saved: and he that believes not shall be damned. Joh. 3.18.
He that believes on the son shall not be condemned: but he that believes
not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. verse. 36.5.29.
He that believes in the son has everlasting life: but he that believes not
in the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. They that
have done well shall go forth unto the resurrection of life; but they that have
done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation. Mar. 25.46.
The blessed shall go into everlasting life, and the cursed into everlasting
torment. And that this immediate separation of the godly and ungodly shall not
only be made in the last day, but is made also presently after death, the
example of the rich glutton teaches us, Luke 16.23.
whose soul is thrust down to hell; and of holy Lazarus, whose soul is carried
by Angels into paradise: the example of the converted thief teaches us the
same, Luke 23.43.
to whom Christ promises that he shall enter into paradise on that very day
whereon he was to dye: the Spirit of truth confirms the same, pronouncing that
from henceforth blessed are the dead in the Lord. Rev. 14.13.
There is no other purgation or expiation of sins save in the blood of Christ
that washes us wholly from all sins: 1 John 1.7. Isai. 53.5
The chastisement of our peace was upon him, that he might be peace unto us:
Therefore he that believes in him, Romans 5.1. 1 John 3.14. Wisd. 4.1.
is justified and has peace with God: He is translated from death unto life:
and he need fear no torment after death.


The rigor of the last judgment.
Tempted.] I fear the rigor and terror of the last judgment. Above will be a
severe Judge; below, a gaping hell; within, a gnawing conscience; without, a
burning fire: on the right hand, accusing sins; on the left, affrighting
Devils; round about, good Angels to drive me to hell, and bad to draw me
thither. Satan will accuse me, my sins will accuse me, my conscience will
accuse me. Bern. in rythm.
I much dread the face of a severe Judge, from whom nothing will lie concealed,
by whom nothing will remain unrevenged. None shall be able to escape his power,
to deceive his wisdom, to bend his justice, to repeal his sentence.


Comforter.] If thou believe on the Son, Joh. 3.18.
thou shall not be condemned, namely with the severe and condemning rigor of
judgment. Joh. 5.24.
If thou hear Christ's word and believe it, thou shall not come into
condemnation: thy cause shall not be examined in that rigorous trial of
judgment, seeing Christ has delivered those that believe in him from the
wrath to come. 1 These. 1.10.
The day of judgment is to be dreaded indeed of bad men, Aug. in Psalm. 100.
because of punishment; but to be loved by good men, for a crown: to those it
will be a day of anger and revenge; to these it will be a day of grace and
large reward. Lift up your heads, Luke 21.28.
says the Son, and know that your redemption draws nigh. The Bride dreadeth
not the coming of her Bridegroom; now by faith thy soul is betroathed to
Christ: at the day of judgment he shall appear to that end, that he may
introduce it as his Bride to the heavenly marriage. Rev. 19.7.
What place therefore can there be here for fear or dread? That day shall be a
day of deliverance, because it shall thoroughly free us from the miserable
captivity of sin and death into the perfect service of Christ: it is a day of
deliverance, because it shall ease us of all burden of evils and weight of
calamities: it is a day of deliverance, because it shall wholly redeem us from
that daily lusting of the flesh and dangerous warfare. It is a day of
refreshing, Acts 3.20.
because it shall bring us thirsty and panting from the scorching heat of
calamities into a place of rest, to a fountain of living water. Let Christ our
Bridegroom therefore come: Let every soul that is a true spouse of Christ, that
is sealed by the Earnest of the spirit, that is drawn with a true love of
Christ, say, Come Lord Jesus. Rev. 22.20 Aug. in Psalm. 147.
If we truly love Christ, let us then also desire his coming: It is perverse to
fear his coming whom thou love: to pray, Thy kingdom come, and fear lest thou
be heard. But whence is thy fear? because the Judge shall come; what, is he
unjust? is he malevolent? is he envious? is he expecting to know thy cause of
another, that perhaps he whom thou have entrusted should either deceive thee by
collusion, or not be able to set forth the imperfect good of thine innocence
with eloquence enough? None of these. Who then shall come? why do thou not
rejoice? Who is to come to judge thee, but he that came to be judged for thee?
Fear not thine accuser, of whom thy Judge has said: The Prince of this world
is cast forth. Fear not an evil Advocate; for he is now thine Advocate who
shall be thy Judge. He will be both thy self and thy cause: the pleading of thy
cause, the testimony of thy conscience. Whosoever therefore thou be that
fear a future Judge, now correct thy conscience. There is no reason then
that thou should fear thy future Judge. He shall be thy Judge, that shall be
thine Advocate. He shall be thy Judge, that has given a promise to his Sains,
that by their testimony and example they shall judge the world. He shall be thy
Judge, in whom thou were elected unto life from eternity. He shall be thy
Judge, who is also thy King, how shall a King lose his people? He shall be thy
Judge, a true member of whom thou art by faith, how shall the head destroy his
members? Who shall accuse God's elect? Romans 8.33.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again, that sits at the right hand of God and
intercedeth for us: how shall he destroy them whom he has taken into his
patronage, for whom he came into the world that they might not be lost? Romans
2.16.
Christ shall judge according to the Gospel: Now they that believe have not
rejected it, but received it with a true faith. They have listened to the voice
of Christ inviting to conversion: Matt. 11.18.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest:
therefore they shall also hear the voice of him inviting to the possession of
the heavenly kingdom: Come ye blessed of my Father, Mat. 25.34.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. He
shall be the Judge, before whose face go grace and truth; grace has abolished
the sins of believers, truth has given them the promises of eternal life. Nor
is there reason thou should fear the horrible destruction of heaven and
earth. Luke 21.33. Isai. 40.8.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but the words of Christ shall not pass away.
The word of the Lord abides for ever: if by true faith thou cleave unto this
word, thou shall also abide for ever. Thou have lost nothing where thou have
possessed nothing with inordinate love: thy treasure is not the riches of this
world, but the delights of the heavenly kingdom. Let the world burn, it is
enough for thee that Christ thy treasure lives. Let the frame of heaven and
earth perish, flee, pass away; thou have the most faithful promises of a new
heaven and a new earth. Isai. 65.17. 2 Pet. 3.12.
Behold I create new heavens and a new earth, says the Lord, in which shall
dwell righteousness, so that none any longer remembers the former. Rev. 21.1.
Let the tabernacle of thy pilgrimage fall, the mansion of the heavenly
country abides ever. Nor is there any reason thou should fear the
accusation either of Satan or the Law or thy sins; thy sins are thrown into the
depth of the Sea, namely into the abyss of Gods mercy: God has thrown them
behind his back, Mic. 7.19. Isai. 38.17. Ezech. 18.24.
so that he will remember them no more hereafter: Satan (believe me) shall not
fetch thy sins up out of the sea, nor shall dare to bring them into the sight
of the Judge. Thy sins are Psalm. 32.1. Psalm. 51.1.
forgiven, covered, blotted out, they shall not be brought again into
judgment. The Devil will in vain accuse the godly, because the blotting out
the handwriting by the blood of Christ shall be turned to him. Col. 2.14.
His accusation for sin shall be to no purpose, because the forgiveness made
through Christ shall be alleged against him. Vain shall be the accusation of
the Law, because in this life there preceded reconciliation with God through
faith. Lastly, thou have no reason to fear Christ's sudden coming again to
judgment; for though the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night; 1
These. 5.2.
yet God has not appointed us to wrath, 9.
but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, Who died for us, 10.
that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. The judgment
day is not to be feared by them for whom the heavenly kingdom was prepared from
the beginning, Mat. 25.34. Ephesians. 1.4.
who were chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world. Commit therefore
into the faithful hands of God the precious pledge of thy soul, he will keep it
in death and in judgment, and he will introduce it being joined to the body
into the palace of heaven to everlasting glory.


A Prayer in Sickness.
HEar me, O God, thou giver and restorer of life, in whose hands life and
death, health and sickness are. Hear me, not according to the desire of my
will, but according to the good pleasure of thine own will. If thou will, thou
can heal me; say but one word, and I shall be whole. Thou art the length of
my days, in thy hands my lots are: but if now thou call me to the heavenly
country by the way of death, first mortify in me all inordinate love of this
life; give me strength of spirit that I may overcome the pangs of death; and in
the midst of the darkness of my dimm eyes, kindle and increase in me light of
heart: with thee is the well of true life, and in thy light shall I see light.
Thy death, O good Jesus, is the remedy of my death, and the merit of eternal
life. I embrace thy word with a faithful heart, therefore I am sure that thou
dwell in my heart by faith: I will not let thee go out of my heart until
thou bless me, and cheer me with thy enlivening consolation. Thou have said: He
that believes in me, shall never die; my heart presents this thy word before
thee, and with this faith I come to the throne of grace; thou will not cast out
nor reject him that comes unto thee. Let thy precious blood wash me from my
sins; let thy wounds hide me from the anger of God and the rigor of judgment;
I will die in thee, thou shall live in me; I will abide in thee, thou shall
abide in me; thou will not leave me in death and dust, but wilt raise me to the
resurrection of life. Thou have fought and overcome for me; fight now and
overcome in me; let thy strength be perfected in my weakness. My soul cleaves
to thee, I will not suffer my self to be plucked from thee. Let thy peace that
passes all understanding keep my heart and senses; into thy hands I commend my
spirit, thou have redeemed me thou God of truth. Take my poor soul, which thou
have created, redeemed, wash it from sins in thy blood, sealed with the earnest
of thy holy Spirit, and fed with thy body, and blood; thine it is, thou gave
it me, take what is thine, and remit the guilt of my sins, wherewith I have
stained it. Let not the fruit of thy passion perish in me, nor let thy precious
blood be unfruitful in me. O Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be
confounded. Amen.

FINIS.
THE Christians TRIUMPH Over DEATH: With some Divine Contemplations,
Soliloquies, and Poems thereupon.

LONDON, Printed by Margaret White, for Nath. Crouch, 1679.

THE Christians TRIUMPH Over DEATH: CONTEMPLATIONS On
1 Cor. 15.55. Oh Death, where is thy sting?
UPright Adam was made Immortal, but sinful Adam begot all his sons mortal,
even as he had made himself; Adam therefore is dead, and all the sons of Adam
do but live to die; the sentence of death past upon us all in him, and we are
born to see this sentence executed upon our selves: and as Adam himself dyed
the same day he sinned, that is, brought himself into a necessity of dying,
though as to the time of his death, he was reprieved for nine hundred and
thirty years after that day; So we in Adam came under the same necessity,
though it be some thousands of years after, before the sentence be executed
upon us. As a Malefactor is a dead man in Law at that instant when the sentence
is pronounced against him, though his execution be respited for some few days
after; So according to Gods law and decree, we are all dead in Adams doom,
though it please God to prolong these days of ours, wherein we must live to die
according to his irrevocable doom. A Malefactor is not executed sometimes one,
two, three, four, five or six days after judgment past: so likewise we were all
adjudged to die before we were born, but God (with whom a thousand years is but
as one day) has appointed the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, or sixth
thousand year of the world to be the day of our execution.

There is more necessity of our dying than of our being born. It is not so
necessary that he who is not, should be, as that he that now lives, should once
die; the former may be supposed, but the latter is fully expressed; It is
appointed for all men once to dye, Heb. 9.27. There is always a greater
necessity of the end than the means; death is the end of life, not only in the
execution of it, but in the intention, Morti nati sumus, we are born to dye,
and we dye from the time we are born; The day of our birth what is it, but the
beginning of the day of our death? and the day of our death but the end of our
birthday? our birthday precedes the day of our death, but the day of our
death is preferred before that of our birth by the wise Solomon, Eccl. 7.3. The
day of death is better than the day one is born.

And did we rightly consider this, our birthday is indeed a purishment, and the
day of our death in comparison thereof, a reward; for death only is the remedy
against the miseries of life, and to dye is but to rest from those labors, and
to be free from those sorrows whereunto we are born. What a plague and
punishment were the day of our birth into a sinful miserable world, did not the
day of our death give an end to all such evils both of sin, sorrows and pains?

Now since (as I have said) our birthday is but the beginning of our death,
and the day of our death but the end of our birthday; we seem to speak
improperly, to call the day of our departure only, the day of our death. On our
last day indeed we cease to live, but from our first day we begin to dye; our
last day is not the cause of our death, but the consummation of it, it does
rather finish than begin our death: it is not the last and utmost minute of our
life, which brings death upon us, it does rather manifest and declare that
death was always with us. As the Prophet speaking of persecution says, we are
killed all the day long, Psalm. 44.22. and the Apostle St. Paul concerning his
own sufferings, I dye daily, 1 Cor. 15.31.

So that though no violence or injury were offered to us, yet even through
natures frailty we dye daily, and by fatal Mortality are killed all the day
long; we dye daily from the time we first begin to live; the first day of our
life is our longest day, and every day afterward takes away one day from our
lives; and the longer we have lived, the less time we have to live: Quotidie
morimur, etc. says Seneca, we dye daily, and every day takes away part of our
life, and while we are yet growing up, our life decreases; the very day that we
now live, we do divide it with death. As by the time we spend in eating,
sleeping, working and playing, so by the moments which pass away in reading,
speaking, writing, our lives are shortened.

We dye daily, our times dye daily, our actions dye daily, our Persons dye
daily, our times dye daily; the time past is dead to the time present; the time
present is dying to the time to come, yester-day is dead to this day, and this
day is dying to the morrow; our actions dye daily; what is done and past is
dead to what we are now doing, and what we now do, is dying to what we shall do
hereafter: we hardly remember what we have, nor conceive what we have done, nor
delight in what we have done; so do our actions dye daily to our memories, our
understanding, our Affections. Our persons dye daily, our infancy dies to our
childhood, our childhood to our youth, our youth to our manhood, our manhood to
our old Age, and our old Age dies into our death.

A man is in a continual Consumption of himself, his days waste him as well as
he spends his days, one part or other of him languisheth, perishes or corrupts
every day, we dye by piecemeal not all at once, says Seneca. There is not one
day but wherein our spirits do in some measure waste, our blood cools, our
moisture dries, our stomach fails, our liver corrupts, our Lungs consume, our
bowels yearn, our hearts faint, or our head aches. Every day either some vein
stops, some sinew shrinks, some bone breaks, some skin is withered, some flesh
bruised, or at least some parts or member decayed. The eyes grow dimmer of
sight, the ears more dull of hearing, or the palate more unsavory of tasting
every day than other. Thus the several parts dye by little and little, and thus
at last the whole becomes dead. As the Candle consumes from the time it first
begins to burn, so does the Oil and marrow of man's life waste from the very
time he begins to live. Man is like a candle, that either consumes himself in
the Candlestick of this world, or else he is smothered under the Bushel of his
mothers Womb. An hourglass runs constantly from the very time it is turned up;
man is like this hour glass, he is but running sand, or moving dust; and as the
sand in the hourglass falls by degrees one sand after another till the whole
be run out, so a man drops away by little and little till the whole is
extinguished. A traveller goes forward many days toward his journeys end; man
is a Traveller, his life is the way he goes and death is the end of his
journey: and is it then a strange thing for us to dye, when our whole life is
but the way and path that leads to death? Do we think we shall never arrive to
that which we are continually going toward, says Seneca. There is no way on
earth to which there is not an end, the most intricate Labyrinth has a way out
of it at last. We are continually walking toward death, how can we then choose
but meet with it at last? we dye daily; how can it then be avoided but at last
we must come to be dead? Wretched man then that thou art, why do thou not
daily dispose and prepare thy self for death since thou die daily, says St.
Bernard. Imagine thy self to be dead, since thou must of necessity dye. Woe unto
us wretched creatures that all of us are so near death, and yet most of us put
this day so far from us. Death is ready to take us by the hand in the natural
execution of its office, before we are willing to take it to heart by our
Christian Meditation. We go toward the grave with our faces turned backward, so
that our feet are just ready to fall into the pit, before our eyes do once look
upon it. There are many who feel death, before they know what it is, and do
woefully hazard and experience it, before they could be persuaded either wisely
to consider or conceive thereof; for though we daily see death seizing upon
others, yet we can hardly be persuaded to believe our selves concerned: as a
learned Author says, men behold nothing more familiarly than death, and yet
they forget and neglect nothing more.

Death then is a mighty King, the great Conqueror of mankind, to whom all the
Glorys of this world must submit, and yet our blessed Apostle exultingly cries
out, Oh death where is thy sting? Let us then consider St. Paul's Appellation,
or his summons to death.

Oh death, what art thou? a Chimera, a fable, a bugbear, a dream, a shadow, a
nothing. Oh death thou art none of Gods creature; the Wise man says, God made
not death, neither has he pleasure in destruction, Wisd. 1.13. God is the God
of our life and being, and he delights not in our destruction; death was never
intended against us, but against our sin: we were therefore made mortal, that
our sins might not be immortal; we must dye once, that sin may not always live.

Oh death, what do thou? Thou dissolvest the rarest composition of heaven and
earth, thou dividest our spirits from our clay, thou do separate soul and
body; sharper art thou than any two-edged sword, and entrest to the dividing
asunder the soul and spirit, yea thou dividest between the marrow and the bone,
Thou make our dust return to the earth, and our Spirit to God that gave it.

Oh death, Thou make our spirit to vanish, our breath to stop, our blood to
cool, our color to change, our beauty to fade, and our strength to fail: thou
(as Solomon says, Eccles. 12.2.) make the keepers of the house (our hands)
to tremble, and the strong men (our feet to bow themselves; thou make the
grinders (our Teeth) to cease, and them that look out at the windows (our eyes)
to wax dim; thou shuttest the doors of our lips and stoppest our windpipes, the
Daughters of Music. Thou cuttest short the silver Cord of our Marrow, and
breakest the golden bowl of our brain pan, thou breakest the pitcher of our
veins at the fountain of our liver; at the cistorn of our heart there breakest
thou the wheel of our head.

Oh death, Thou art ordained for us all; It is appointed for all men once to
die; we must all walk in this way, all-tread this same path, we must all sleep
the same sleep our last sleep, and the dark night of death will at last
overtake us all; our fathers are dead (says the Father) our friends are dead,
and we our selves must die also. Some are gone before us, some do accompany us,
and some will come after us; as wave after wave dashes against the Rock, so
shall we all one after another dash against this hard and cold Rock of death.
And thus sooner or later we all must die at last. We are born with that
condition, that we must die: we do therefore put on the Garment of our body
that we may again put it off. Death is the Law of Nature, and to dye is but to
pay a Tribute due to Nature; it is as natural for us to live, and then to die,
as it is for us to wake and sleep.

Oh death, Thou will certainly come, yet it is most uncertain when; nothing is
more certain than death, but than the hour of death there is nothing more
uncertain, of that day and hour knows no man, Matt. 24.36. that is, of the
day of judgment, and the hour of death: Death comes as a thief in the night,
both certainly, suddenly, and violently, it takes one upon the house top,
another in the field, one working in the Vineyard, another grinding at the
Mill; one upon the house top of honors, another in the field of pleasures; one
laboring in the Vineyard of a Christian calling, another grinding at the Mill
of worldly cares and troubles, a man knows not his time, Eccl. 9.12. that is,
the time of his death. God will not discover to us the time when death shall
come upon us, because he would have us think it to be ever near us; he will not
let us know our last day, because he would have us imagine and expect every day
to be our last. This one hour the hour of death is hidden from us, that all the
hours of our life might be the better improved by us, says St. Augustine.

Oh Death, Thou art impartial, and indifferent to all, thou call equally and
as soon at the gate of the Palace, as at the door of the Cottage; thou make
the skull of the King and beggar alike, and between the dust of either thou
know no difference; thou have neither pity upon the poor, nor respect unto
the rich; thou neither scornest the foolish, nor do thou reverence the wise,
How dies the wise man (says Solomon) even as the fool, Eccl. 2.16. Thou do
long threaten the old man, and soon betrayest, and sruprizest the young; thou
never sparest any for their Age, Sex, degree, or wealth; we can by no power or
force resist thee, nor by any diligence avoid thee, no tears can move thee, no
money bribe thee, no art nor Eloquence can persuade thee.

Oh Death, Thou have manifold appearances, and come to us in several forms
and shapes; toward the old man thou approachest pale and lean, toward the young
bloody and boisterous, to the bad man thou appearest as black as Hell it self;
and terrible to every man. Thou come to us sometimes by the hands of men,
sometimes by the Teeth of beasts; sometimes by Fire, and sometimes by water,
sometimes by a cold blast of wind, sometimes by the slipping of a foot, and
sometimes by the falling of a tyle or stone; sometimes in our cloths, and
sometimes in our meat and drink: We dye several ways, and by diverse means; some
dye in War, and some in peace, some by sea, and some by land, some in the
field, and some in their beds, some by their own neglects and intemperance,
others by a sudden wound or a languishing disease: and thus by a Thousand ways
of dying, one death or other at last destroys us all.

Oh Death, How bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest
in his possessions! Oh Death how acceptable is thy judgment to the needy,
says the Wise man, Ecclus. 41.1, 2. Oh death, thou art indeed like a shadow,
thou fliest those that follow thee, and followest those that fly from thee,
thou hastnest toward us when we desire to avoid thee, and when we would embrace
thee, thou then delayest us. Death is the rich man's fear, and the poor man's
desire. Thou art often called upon in adversity, seldom or never thought on in
Prosperity. In prosperity we complain and cry with Hezekiah, Isai. 38. to have
further time added to our days, but in adversity we are apt every one to wish
with Elijah, It is enough now O Lord, take away my soul, for I am no better
than my Fathers, 1 Kings 19.4.

Oh Death, How dreadful a thing art thou to flesh and blood! how do we abhor to
think that the Grave should be our house, and that we should make our bed in
darkness, to say to corruption thou art my father, and to the worm thou art my
sister, and my mother. How hateful is it to inherit serpents and worms, to be
separated from our selves, and return to our dust! How terrible is death to us
not only from our own experience, but from the example of others! as often as
we see or hear that another is dead, we are concerned to think that we must dye
also; and when we are sick and think that death is coming upon our selves, how
are we troubled! not well knowing what we shall do, or whither we must go: we
are afraid to dye, even we, who have good hope of a better life after death; we
who look for an house not made with hands, are notwithstanding unwilling to
leave this house of clay; we who have the promise of a kingdom, are yet
unwilling to forsake our prison, we are afraid to be dissolved though we desire
to be with Christ; we dread the passage, though we rejoice to approach to our
home and habitation in the Heavens.

Notwithstanding what has been said, yet let us encourage our selves against
the fear of death, and by the example, and in the words of St. Paul, let us
ask, Oh Death where is thy sting?

For death truly considered is but a shadow, a mere bugbear, which children
only ought to fear; death is nothing, and we are afraid of we know not what;
death only separates between soul and body, why do we fear that it should thus
dissolve us, and not rather rejoice that it cannot destroy us? Let us not fear
what may separate us from our selves, but let us rather embrace what will
convey us to our Christ, and our God. Death is appointed for us all, why then
are we afraid of what we cannot possibly avoid? Our willingness to dye is the
only means to take away the terribleness thereof. Let us therefore offer our
lives to God freely which he will otherwise require from us as a due debt, says
Chrysostom. The coming of death is uncertain, and shall any thing that is
uncertain cause in us a certain fear? But rather since it is uncertain, at what
time or in what place death will overtake us, let us therefore at all times,
and in all places expect and look for it, says Seneca. Besides, death deals
equally and impartially to all, and this also should make us less afraid of it:
Who can reasonably complain (says Seneca) that he is in the same condition,
wherein all men else are? Who can expect that death should spare any, since it
is indispensible to all? when there is a general ruin threatened to the whole
world, who can think himself alone should escape? The equality of death is some
comfort against the cruelty thereof; there are several ways of dying, and why
should that make us afraid of death? it is no great matter which way we dye,
since we can be but dead at last; since we must dye, let us not much regard by
what means, but let us take care whither we must go after death, says St.
Austin.

To conclude, death is a thing that is indeed fearful to flesh and blood, and
yet all this should not make us afraid of death; for it is not death it self,
but the fear of it, that is so terrible; and this also proceeds more from our
ignorance than from the thing it self, did we but know death, we would not so
much fear it, says St. Chrysostom. The fear of death is the punishment of our
ignorance, and negligence which makes us apprehend things to be new and
strange, which really are not so. The only way therefore to free us from the
fear of death, is by daily meditation thereof to make it familiar to us, to
acquaint our selves with it before it comes, that we may the less dread its
appearance. Thus shall we find that by learning not to fear death, we shall at
last come like our blessed Apostle to triumph over it, and to say, O death
where is thy sting?

Death is not yet destroyed, for St. Paul says, the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 15.26. But yet it is disarmed already, Oh death
where is thy sting? This seems to be an (...), the Captains song of victory,
and the Soldiers song of deliverance; they look like the words of a mighty
conqueror bravely triumphing over a base and wretched enemy; and who is this
conqueror but Christ Jesus the Lord of Life? it was he who spoke the words in
the Prophet Hosea, 13.14. O death I will be thy death. And it is in the power
of Christ that the Apostle speaks thus, O death where is thy sting? Jesus
Christ did once subdue death for us, and said, O death I will be thy death, and
we may now triumph over death in the strength of Christ, and say with our
Apostle, O death where is thy sting?

Jesus Christ overcame death by dying; nay more, by death he destroyed not
death only, but him also who had power over death, the Devil, Heb. 7.14. Our
captain has conquered our enemy at his own weapon, he has caught this Mighty
Hunter in his own snare, he yielded only to death to take advantage against
death, yea therefore laid he down his life that death might no longer live:
therefore (says St. Chrysostom) we do not believe that Christ is dead in death,
but we believe that death is dead in Christ.

Death that greedy whale durst venture to devour Christ Jesus, our Jonas (who
was cast into the sea of the world, that the storms and Tempests of the Devil
and sin might cease) but yet he was preserved alive in the fishes belly, in the
belly of Hell, in the jaws of death, that he might preach repentance to the
Ninive of the Church. This great whale Death swallowed the bait of Christ's
humanity, but the hook of his Divinity entangled her, and made her vomit up her
bowels bait and all. Death designed to have swallowed Christ and left him in
darkness and obscurity, but death it self was swallowed up in victory. The
serpent death was bold to sting our Savior, but he made him lose his sting for
his labor, so that in his name we may now cheerfully ask, Oh Death where is
thy sting? The sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. Christ the Lamb of God has
taken away the sins of the world, John 1.29. In Christ Jesus therefore we may
joyfully say, Oh death where is thy sting?

Job asks this question concerning man, Man dies, and where is he? Job
14.10. but we may ask the same question of Death, man dies, and where is
death? yea we ask the same of the worst part of death, which is its sting, Oh
death where is thy sting?

Jacob bewailed the death of Joseph, saying Joseph is dead, Joseph is not, Genesis
42. and Rachel wept for her children, and would not be comforted because they
were not, Mat. 2. because death had seized upon them, they thought their
children to be quite gone.

But to speak properly, death does only convey us where we ought to be, but
death it self is indeed no where, O death where is thy sting? Death is utterly
destroyed by the Cross of Christ. When death first entered into the world it
was like the waters of Marah exceeding bitter, Exo. 15. but since the Tree of
the Cross of Christ, it is now made sweet and pleasant to us: we might once
have cried out with the children of the Prophets, Death is in the pot, death is
in the pot, 2 Kings 4. but since our blessed Savior has declared, This Cup is
the new Testament of my blood, we may now say with the blessed Saints of God,
This is the Cup of Salvation, Salvation is in the cup, death is now no more,
since the Lord of life destroyed death, his death has quickened our life, and
has sweetened and taken away the sting of death from us.

Our Apostle does not ask, Oh death what is thy sting? though the words which
follow seem to be an answer to such a question, the sting of death is sin: it
seems then that death is not the sting of sin, but sin is the sting of death,
for (says Anselm) we do indeed dye for sinning, but we do not sin for dying.

And as those words following answer to a Question which they ask not, so the
former words ask a question, to which those following answer not, Oh death
where is thy sting? Now not to tell you where it is, is as much as to say, it
is no where; death has now no sting, let us all rejoice and be glad, this
serpent may hiss at us, this wasp may buz about us, but it can now neither bite
not sting us: the sting of death is gone, and nothing remains but the name, nay
the name too is gone to them that are in Christ Jesus; the death of the godly
man is not to be called a death, but a sleep, a resting from their labors, a
delivery out of prison, a laying down their burden, a flying to their desired
home; death now has lost her sting, it is not now a punishment, but a happy
passage, not so much an end of this life, as an entrance into a better, not a
destruction but a dissolution, only a separation of the soul and body for a
short time, that so they might be joined together to enjoy heaven and happiness
with Christ our Lord, and life to all eternity.

Thus have we asked this one question of death, Oh death where is thy sting?
now let us ask another of our selves, why are we so desperately and
despairingly afraid of death, since we have heard and do certainly know that
death has lost her sting? Oh faithless and faint-hearted man! why do thou
tremble (O Christian) to encounter with thy last enemy, since its weapon is now
taken from it? why do thou shrink at the coldness of the serpent, when thou
know her poison and sting are quite taken away? Oh faithless and
faint-hearted soul, to be so afraid of a shadow! Alas why do we so dreadfully
fear death, since our souls are not lost but sent before; it is for those only
to tremble at death, that pass from one death to another, from the death of the
body on earth, to the death of the body and soul in hell for ever; it is for
those only to fear a temporal death so terribly, who are either ignorant or do
despair of eternal life, who go from their Prison in this world, to the place
of their execution world without end.

But as for those that are in Christ Jesus, they pass from a prison to a
Palace, from a dungeon to a Throne, from a crazy and miserable Tabernacle here,
to an eternal habitation in the heavens. It is for them (says Cyprian) to fear
to be dissolved who have no hope to be with Christ. A despairing fear of death,
is but a despair of eternal life after death; Men naturally choose rather to
suffer a great deal of pain and live, than to endure a small pain in dying,
which demonstrates, that it is something after death (and not death it self)
which we so much dread. Let those only desire to linger in the miseries of this
present life, who hope thereby to delay a while the torments and miseries of
the life to come.

But as for us Christians, we that are in Christ Jesus, why are we afraid to
arrive at our haven of rest? after so many dangers, storms and shipwracks which
we have suffered in this world, having fought a good fight and finished our
course, why do we doubt or delay to go and receive our Crown of glory? having
run our race, why seem we so unwilling to receive the prize? let us not fear
the threats of a Temporal death, but rather let us rejoice in the promises of
eternal life: For whether we live we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we
dye unto the Lord, therefore whether we live or dye we are the Lords. Let not
our lives be so wicked and profane, as that we should be therefore ashamed to
live, neither let us be so negligent and ignorant of death, as to be therefore
afraid to dye. But at the instant of our departure, let us every one say, (as
that dying Saint did which Hierom mentions) go forth my soul, go forth, what
do thou fear? Let every soul of us learn to say sincerely and cheerfully at
his last passage from his earthly Pilgrimage:

What though I dye, I know that my Redeemer lives; though my body be
dissolved, yet shall my Spirit be conjoined with Christ my Savior. Lie down
then O my body and return unto thy dust; mount aloft O my soul, and meet thy
Savior in the Air: my body shall be earth and worms meat for a short time, but
my soul I am assured shall be a companion with Saints and Angels for ever and
ever.

Amen.
Divine Contemplations and Soliloquies upon Death and Eternity.
I.
AS all the creatures O God were made by thy wisdom, so they may be useful for
our instruction to teach us to dye; my garments that wax old, may put me in
mind that I my self shall wax old like a Garment, and that as a Vesture I shall
be changed; Let me not therefore love the shadow and leave the substance; let
me not change heaven for earth, things temporal for things eternal; and since
my life is but as a day, let me so live by thy Divine assistance this day, as
if I were certain to dye to morrow; and since my life is but as a watch in the
night, my soul shall wait for thee O Lord before the morning watch, I will wait
for thee in zealous Affections, in unwearied patience, in undoubted confidence
and expectation of the joy that will come in the morning, wherein thou will
appear for my deliverance out of this transitory life, and with my lamp
prepared I will be in readiness to meet my Bridegroom at his coming.

II.
Whilst I behold the heavens, the works of thy hands O Lord; and the Sun and
Moon which thou have ordained, which shall all pass away as a tempest, I will
look for a new heaven and new earth wherein dwells righteousness, the heaven
of heavens, the City of the ever-living God, the celestial Jerusalem, the place
where thy honor dwells: therefore while I am on earth let me consider that I
am but earth: let me always remember that I am but dust, an house of clay, a
body of corruption, let me not be earthly-minded, and like those, whose God is
their belly, whose glory is their shame and whose end is destruction, who mind
earthly things. While I look upon the waterflouds, let me say, this is mine
infirmity, I am lighter than water that runs away apace. I beseech thee
therefore O my God who sit upon the floods of water, and art a King for
ever, to send the heavenly dew of thy grace upon me who am part of thine
inheritance, to refresh my wearied soul. Let every herb that I behold, cause me
to contemplate my own estate, that I shall one day be cut off like the green
herb; and shall wither away like the grass: let the Sun that shines over my
head lift up my heart to the Son of righteousness, to that light which lightens
the Gentiles, and the Glory of the people Israel. Let the Moon that rules by
night, make me call upon thee the father of light, to illuminate me while I sit
in darkness and in the shadow of death, in whom is no variableness, nor change
as there is in the Moon: finally let the beasts, the birds, the fishes, yea the
very flies and insects, which seem to be the very scorn of nature, let them all
by the shortness of their lives remind me of the brevity of my own; and since
it is thy blessed will, O dear Savior, let me be contented and rejoice therein
for ever.

III.
O Lord, the life of my life, and the God of the spirits of all flesh, make me
willing to dye since it is thy ordinance and appointment; for all things serve
thee, let me not forget thee, nor behave my self frowardly in thy Covenant;
make me willing to die, and to say with old Sin can, Lord now, let thy servant
depart in peace, and with St. Paul, I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ; and because my spirit is willing and my flesh weak, raise it and
quicken it with thy free spirit; by bringing to my remembrance thy promises and
comforts to me on every side: and since it is thy holy pleasure I should die
and not live, I am satisfied therewith, for thy law is within my heart,
therefore make no long tarrying O Lord my God.

IV.
How long O God shall I live to sin against thee? for as long as I live in this
earthly Tabernacle I can do nothing but sin; to will is present with me, but I
find no strength nor ability to perform; for I find a Law in my members
rebelling against the law of my mind, making me captive to the law of sin and
death, so that the good which I would do, I do not; but the evil which I would
not do, that do I. Deliver me therefore dear Lord from this body of death, that
I may enter the gates of life and go to the Angels and Saints, and be one of
them, and continue with them to all Eternity; my soul thirsts for God, even
for the living God, make have therefore O Christ and deliver me.

V.
Let my Conversation in this world, O Lord, be such, that I may neither be
ashamed to live, nor afraid to die. I know that to the natural man death is
very fearful and terrible, but let me be thine by thy grace, strengthen me in
my greatest weakness, be present with me with thy consolations even to the last
moment, and compass me about with songs of deliverance; and then though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death; I will fear no evil, for thou art
with me, thy left hand is under my head, and thy right hand does embrace me,
why should I be afraid in the evil day, or why should my soul be disquieted
within me? for death will then be to me advantage: let me therefore sigh and
groan, in being desirous to be delivered from this burden of the flesh, and to
be thereby made partaker of immortality, and of those unutterable joys and
pleasures, which thou O my blessed God and Savior do enjoy for ever: let my
faith O Lord scatter all my fears, and let my soul long for thy salvation;
deliver my soul out of Prison, and take me to thy everlasting mercy; put an end
to my sins, by the end of this life, that I may live with thee without end.

VI.
Set a watch O Lord before the doors of my heart, and so order my thoughts that
I may always set thee before me; and in the midst of life let me so remember
death, that when my days in this world are at an end, I may return unto thee my
rest: let not the flight and departure of this my Spirit from my body be on the
Sabbath day, that is, in the rest and tranquillity of my sins, nor in the
winter or frost of my hard heart, nor in the midnight of my security when I
least look for it; let not this dangerous thief of carelessness and security
break into my soul, nor hinder me from a serious and continual meditation of
death, and of the heavenly habitations. If I forget Jerusalem in my mirth, let
my right hand forget her cunning; those thoughts that are employed about my
death, are my best teachers; teach me therefore to die unto sin and to live
unto righteousness. Morning, evening and at midday let me wait for the coming
of my blessed Savior, who shall turn my night into day, my darkness into
light, my heaviness into joy, my labors into rest; when death shall be
swallowed up into victory, where the serpent shall sting no more, and where the
second death shall never hurt me.

VII.
Guide thou O Lord my God, the ship of my soul through the sea of this world,
by the direction of thy holy word, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust;
let me sail so safely, that by the winds and waves of temptations I may never
be driven either upon the Rocks of Presumption or Despair, but that I may
happily arrive at the haven of the promised land of thy heavenly Kingdom. While
I behold thee O Lord in thy justice, I am afraid, and am ready to despair; and
while I look upon thee in thine infinite mercies, I am subject to presume. Let
thy hand therefore so support me that I may be defended by thy fatherly
goodness as with a shield, that I may not be cut off by the course of thy
severe justice as with a sword. I must confess that in justice I have incurred
thy wrath and deserve condemnation, but through thy manifold mercies O Lord I
long and look for thy salvation. I am the workmanship of thy hands, destroy not
therefore that which thou have made, but bless it and bring it to a perfect
end; thou have redeemed me O Lord thou God of truth, and therefore I promise to
my self that I cannot be lost if I sincerely put my trust in thee; for then
thou have promised me salvation in thy word, and thou have bound this thy
promise with an Oath, and sealed it with the blood of thy Son, and that before
the best witnesses in heaven or earth, thy holy spirit bearing witness with my
spirit that I am a child of God. Now upon such considerations as these I fix
and ground my faith: and am persuaded that after this life ended I shall enjoy
life eternal: and in this confidence I commend my soul unto thee, and in the
belief thereof I do resolve to live and die.

VIII.
No man dreads death as he ought, but he that always expects his summons, and
therefore O my soul thou may truly judge thy self woefully secure, and a
wilful contemner of thy future good, if thou can go to thy bed and rest on
thy pillow in the apprehension of thy known sins without a particular
humiliation for them; for how often does a sudden and unexpected death arrest
men? we see and know in our daily experience that many lay themselves to sleep
in health and safety, yet are found dead in the morning. Thus suddenly are they
snatched from their quiet repose to their irrecoverable judgment, perhaps from
the bed to the flames. Such is the frail condition of our brittle lives, that
in the small particle of an hour we live and sicken and die; yet so gross is
our blindness, that from one day to another, nay from one year to another, we
triflingly put off the reformation of our lives, until our last hour creep on
us unlookt for, and draggs us to eternity.

IX.
How long (says St. Austin) O how long shall I delude my soul with to morrow's
repentance? Why should not this hour terminate my sinfulness? We are every
minute at the brink of death, and every hour that we pass through, might prove
for ought we know, the evening of our whole life, and the very close of our
mortality. Now if it should please God to take away our soul this night (as it
happens to many) what would then become of us? In what eternity should we be
found? whether amongst the damned or the blessed? Happy were it for us if we
were but as careful for the welfare of our souls, as we are curious for the
adorning our bodies: if our clothes or faces do contract any blot or soiling,
we presently endeavor to cleanse the same; but though our souls lie inthralled
in the pollutions of sin, this alas we feel not: it neither provokes us to
shame, nor moves us to sorrow. Therefore let us look into our hearts with a
more severe eye; let the shortness of our days stir us up to the amendment of
our sinful lives, and let the hour wherein we have sinned be the beginning of
our reformation. Our repentance must not only be sincere but timely also:
whilst we have the light let us walk as children of the light; let us no longer
cheat our souls in studying to invent evasions or pretenses for our sins, but
let us rather lay open our sores, and seek to the true Physician that can heal
them.

X.
All the creatures under the Sun do naturally design their own preservation,
and desire that happiness which is agreeable to their nature; only man is
negligent, and impiously careless of his own welfare. We see the Heart when he
is stricken and wounded looks speedily for a certain herb well known to him by
a kind of natural instinct, and when he has found it applies it to the wound.
The swallow when her young ones are blind knows how to procure them their
sight, by the use of her Celandine; but we alas are wounded, yet seek for no
Remedy; we go customarily to our Beds, to our Tables; to our good Company, but
who is he that observes his constant course of prayer, of repentance, of hearty
and sincere humiliation for his sins? We go forward still in our old way, and
jogg on in the same Rode; though our judgment hasten, Hell threaten, Death
stand at the door, yet we run forward still: But alas miserable souls that we
are, how can we embrace quiet rest, and uninterrupted sleeps with such wounded
Consciences! how can we be so secure, being so near our time!

XI.
The whole world promised for a reward cannot persuade us to endure one
momentany Torment in Fire; and yet in the accustomed course of our lives, we
dread not, we quake not at everlasting burnings. But O thou delicious and
dainty soul who cherishest thy self in the joy of thine heart, and the delight
of thine eyes, whose belly is thy God, and the world thy Paradise; Oh bethink
thy self betimes, before that gloomy day, that day of clouds and thick
darkness, that day of desolation and confusion approach, when all the
inhabitants of the Earth shall mourn and lament, and all faces (as the Prophet
Joel speaks) shall gather blackness, because the time of their judgment is
come. Alas! with what a doleful heart and weeping eyes and drooping
countenance, and trembling loins will thou at that last and great Assize, look
upon Christ Jesus when he shall most gloriously appear, with innumerable Angels
in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know him not? What a cold
damp will seize upon thy soul, when thou shall behold him, whom thou have all
thy life long neglected in his ordinances, despised in his members, rejected in
his love; when thou shall see the judgment seat, the books opened, thy sins
discovered; yea all the secret counsels of thy heart after a wonderful manner
manifested and laid open to the eye of the whole world, what horror and
perplexity of spirit will possess thee to view and behold but the very
solemnities and circumstances which accompany this judgment? when thou shall
see the heavens burn, the Elements melt, the earth tremble, the sea roar, the
Sun turn into darkness and the Moon into blood; and now what shall be thy
refuge? where shall be thy succor? Shall thou reign because thou clothest thy
self in Cedar? Shall thou be safe because with the Eagle thou have set thy nest
on high? Oh no, it is not now the greatness of thy State, nor the abundance of
thy wealth, nor the privilege of thy place, nor the eminency of thy wrath, or
wit or learning that can avail thee ought either to avoid thy doom or prorogue
thy Judgment.

XII.
All states and conditions of men are alike when they appear at the bar of
Christ; there the Prince must lay down his Crown and the Peer his Robes, and
the Judge his purple, and the Captain his Banner. All must promiscuously attend
to give in their accounts, and to receive according to what they have done
whether it be good or whether it be evil. Here on the earth men that are great
and glorious in the eye of the world, as long as they can hold their
habitations, have both countenance to defend and power to protect them from the
injuries of the times; but when the dismal face of that terrible day shall show
it self, then shall they find no eye to pity, nor arm to help, nor palace to
defend, nor Rocks to shelter, nor mountains to cover them from the presence of
him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Show me the most
insolent spirit, the most undaunted soul that now breaths under the Cope of
heaven, who now fears not any created Being, no not God himself, yet when he
shall hear that terrible sound, Arise ye dead and come to judgment, how will
his heart even melt and his bowels quiver within him, when he shall have his
severe Judge above him, and hell beneath him, and his worm within him, and fire
round about him. Oh then my soul dye unto thy sins and to thy pleasures here,
that thou may live to God hereafter.

XIII.
Death is the ending of our days not of our life; for when our day shall close
and our time shall be no more, then shall our death conduct us to a life which
will last to all eternity; for we dye not here to dye but to live for ever;
therefore the best guide of our life is the consideration of our death; and he
alone leads a life answerable to his Christian profession, who daily expects to
leave it. It is very strange that we should be so industriously careful to
avoid death, and so carelessly improvident of the life to come; whereas nothing
makes death bad but that estate which follows it: but the reason is, we are
spirtually blind and see not, nor know in this our day the things that belong
to our peace. We have naturally neither sight nor feeling of the joys to come.
But when God shall enlighten the darkness of our minds, and reveal his son in
us, when once the day dawneth, and the day star arises in our hearts, Oh then
our death will be our joy and the rejoicing of our hearts, then shall we
infinitely desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Let us therefore with
unwearied endeavors labor to bring Christ home to our hearts and to keep him
there. Let us dye to our sins and our lusts here; that so in the world to come
we may everlastingly live unto Christ and in him.

Divine Poems.
Man that is born of a Woman is of few days and full of Trouble, Job 14.1.
I.
OUr time's still flying, and we all make have
To live our last:
We come into the world to see it, and then
Go out again.
We are born crying, and we spend our breath
In sighs till death.
Our life is but a Toil, ere we can try
What course of life is best, it is time to dye.
II.
The Merchant wastes himself with fretting cares,
With hopes and fears:
And when his bags are filled, his last day comes,
He leaves his sums.
When he would joy in what his pains has got,
Straight he is not.
By all the care wherein his life is spent,
Perhaps he gets a costly Monument.
III.
The Scholar bends his curious thoughts to find
What is the mind?
He studies to know good, but seldom does
The good he knows.
Some, winding up their Wit to an high strain,
Have cracked their brain.
He that is most learned only comes to this,
To know at last how Ignorant he is.
IV.
The ranting Gallant wears out time and cloths
To learn new Oaths.
He scorns to take affronts, but thinks it brave
To be Hells slave.
The country Farmour's thinking night and day
Of Corn and Hay.
But Hawks and Hounds are for the better sort;
Who lose their time in seeking of their sport.
V.
In every Action whatsoever it is,
Something's amiss.
We never observe a mean, we run, and sweat,
Or cannot get heat.
Some bitterness still interrupts our joys,
Or too much cloys.
Our choicest Comforts are inlaid with fears,
And all our pleasures sprinkled over with tears.
VI.
Amidst this Trouble here is my hope, that I
Shall shortly dye.
Our time o'recast with sorrow soon decays,
Like winter days.
W' are Pilgrims here on earth, This is our way
No place of stay.
The way's unpleasant, come Death be my friend,
And bring me quickly to my Journies end.
Upon the death of Christ.
I.
THis day pressed with our sins the most high fell,
Lest he should feed on us, Christ satiates Death,
With his own blood quenching the Flames of Hell,
Enkindled by the fire of's Fathers wrath.
To make atonement for our sins, God dies,
Our Jesus is God, Priest and sacrifice.
II.
Lo how the hasty Jews cry Crucify!
Lo how they judge the Holy one to death!
Whose atribute, is Immortality.
Lo how they murder him who gave them breath!
The King of glory suffers shame, and he
That made the world is hanged upon a Tree.
III.
Lo how they nail unto the Cross his hands
Who spans the Heavens, how his feet they pierce
Who over hell and Death, Triumphant stands,
Whose boundless presence fills the Universe;
How every Varlet the Almighty scorns.
Lo he by whom Kings reign is crowned with Thorns.
IV.
And now the soldier with his cruel spear,
Dares pierce the side of the Blessed Prince of peace!
His torments are so great as man can bear,
The angry Godhead will not make them less.
When God himself withdrew, grief filled his heart,
Cursed sin for which God and Christ seemed to part.
V.
He bowed his head on which so heavy lay
The sins of Adam, and all Adams seed,
Which by his death he did revive this day,
To Heal our wounded souls, his Limbs did bleed.
Lord I believe, let me partaker be
Of thy Deaths power, that I may live to thee.
Upon the Resurrection of Christ.
I.
Our Lord is risen, and the powerful Grave
Holds him no longer; He has made his way
Even through the Gates of Death, that he might save
His heavenly flesh from turning into Clay.
The Grave knew not whom he had taken; when
He saw who 'twas, he let him out again.
II.
Upon this day the Suns Creator rose,
And the Eternal life came from the dead;
He that made ours did his blessed eye unclose,
And saw the place where his own Corpse were laid.
Death Conquered thus, he laid his grave-cloths by
As Trophies of his signal victory.
III.
I know not whether may more strange be thought,
For God to dye, or man to rise again.
Our holy Jesus made both true, he fought
The Lion Death even in the Grave, his den;
And thus he entered the strong bounds of Fate,
Not as led Captive, but to captivate.
IV.
The King of terrors now has lost his power,
And is become a servant unto all
Who will but imitate their Savior,
Who made a triumph of his Funeral.
And now he is up me thinks I hear him say
To all that dye in him, Rise come away.
Upon the Ascension of Christ.
I.
WHo on the water walked, now climbs the Air,
And without dying thus he goes to heaven,
Although his habitation now be there,
Yet we on earth are not of him bereaven.
He Is like those lights which in the skies appear,
Though there his Body be, his Rays are here.
II.
Now he is ascended up on high, Lo he
Gives us his hand, that we may get up too,
By him our strength we walk, our light we see,
He makes us able, shows us what to do.
To heaven he is gone for us there to provide,
Blessed man! whose God's his Harbinger and guide.
III.
Look up my Soul, and with blessed Stephen, see
Thy Jesus standing o'th right hand of God,
And then think earth too mean a place for thee,
Whom he redeemed with his most precious blood.
Sweet Jesus! Thouwast pleased to buy me, come
(I Am not the worlds but thine) then fetch me home.
If in this life only we have hope, we are of all men most miserable, 1 Cor.
15.29.
THE world presents thee Ophir gold, but stay!
Lose not thy Interest in God for Clay.
The world presents short pleasures to thine Eye,
Thy God presents blessed Immortality.
Be circumspect, the world's a crafty Cheat,
And sells its Vanities at too dear a Rate,
Thy Soul's more worth than all the world enjoys;
Exchange it not for Fooleries, and Toys,
Which to thy fancy may seem precious things,
Yet are but Adders Poison, Serpents stings,
Wounding the dying soul, that cannot die
Nor live less than to all Eternity.
Consider him who said, My soul take pleasure,
Go eat, and drink, thou have abundant Treasure,
Laid up for many years. That very night,
This wretched soul was stripped of all delight,
And hurried hence amidst its chiefest joy
By furious Ghosts Triumphing in their prey.
There are but few, that solid wisdom prize
And search Eternity with sacred Eyes
Of saving faith; Imploring not to miss
Grace here below, in Heaven Eternal Bliss.
Let thy Redeemer in thy heart be fixed,
So shall no sorrow with True joy be mixed,
Nor tempting vice thee from his precepts draw:
Omit no time, fulfill his Royal Law,
With son-like fear; and thou shall have no less
In The end, than everlasting Happiness.
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is Eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, Romans
8.1.
SAid I not, Lord, that I would sin no more?
Yet sin again has got me on the score.
Pray I not without ceasing to be free
From sinful thoughts? yet sin abides in me.
When I awake, sin seeks to gain my heart;
Contending for precedence by desert
Of Birthright from the womb, and would control
My holy thoughts, and close besiege my soul,
That matchless gift of thine; what shall I do?
Comply with sin, and be its Captive too,
Who arms the Creatures with enticing smiles,
And with deceitful arguments beguiles
Unstable Souls? no, I will shun its charms.
Thy strength, my God, to shield me from its harms.
I do implore; else I am lost, undone,
O let me find redemption in thy son,
The son of thy dear love, who is freely bent
To bath my soul, and make it innocent
With his pure crimson streams, whose mighty power
Trampled on Death and Hell, that dreadful hour.
The Graves restraint he vanquished at length
By his victorious and triumphant strength.
The Temple Veil he rent in open view,
And gave himself to Gentile and to Jew,
A sacrifice for sin; He is that Lamb
Foretold and Typified in Isaac's Ram.
The builders Scorn; yet the chief Cornerstone;
Ezekiels Shepherd, Daniels Holy One;
My Rock, my only confidence, my stay,
Forsake me not, but guide me in thy way.
I am the Jonah; I did cause the Rout
To beg a Murderer and cast thee out;
I stripped thee of thy clothes; and of thy skin,
And my transgressions tortured thee within;
My sins thy sharpest sufferings contrived,
My sinfulness thee of thy life deprived,
Drew down thy fathers wrath which none could bear
But only thee my Lord, my Life, my Fear;
Uphold me yet a little, to endure
Sins Buffetings, the victory is sure.
Faith tells me so; and patience bids me wait
And I shall gain a conquest to the height
Of my expected hope; I shall but die
And then shall go to immortality,
To live with perfect souls in perfect bliss,
Discharged of such a Nothingness as this.
Then wait my soul with patience for thy rest
Prepared from everlasting to invest
Thy nakedness with purest white array,
Free from the Moth, and power of times decay.
While with incessant pleasures thou art fed,
A Crown of glory shall begirt thy head;
Perpetual Halelujahs shall thou sing
Unto thy God, thy Savior, and thy King.
The souls Longing.
COme Lord, my head does burn, my heart is sick
While thou do ever, ever stay,
Thy long deferrings wound me to the quick,
My Spirit gaspeth night and day,
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
II.
How can thou stay considering the pace
Thy blood did make which thou did wast?
When I behold it trickling down thy face,
I never saw thing make such have.
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
III.
When man was lost, thy pity looked about
To see what help in the earth or sky,
But there was none; at least no help without,
The help did in thy bosom lie.
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
IV.
There lay thy Son, and must he leave that Nest,
That hive of sweetness, to remove
Thraldom from those who would not at a feast
Leave one poor Apple for thy Love?
O show thy self to me.
Or take me up to thee.
V.
He did, he came, O my redeemer dear,
After all this can thou be strange,
So many years baptized, and not appear,
As if thy love could fail or change?
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
VI.
Yet if thou stayest still, why must I stay?
My God, what is this world to me?
This world of woe? hence all ye clouds away,
Away, I must go up and see.
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
VII.
What is this weary world, this meat and drink
That chains us by the teeth so fast?
What is this Woman kind which I can wink
Into a blackness and distaste?
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
VIII.
With one small sigh, thou gav'st me to other day,
I blasted all the joys about me,
And frowning on them as they pined away,
Now come again said I, and flout me.
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
IX.
Nothing but drouth and dearth, but bush and brake
Which way so'ere I look I see,
Some may dream merrily, but when they wake
They dress themselves and come to thee.
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
X.
We talk of Harvests, there are no such things;
But when we leave our Corn and hay,
There is no fruitful year, but that which brings
The last and loved, though dreadful day.
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
XI.
Oh loose this frame, this knot of man unty,
That my free soul may use her wing,
Which now is pinioned with mortality,
As an entangled, hampred thing.
O show thy self to me
Or take me up to thee.
XII.
What have I left that I should stay and groan?
The most of me to Heaven is fled:
My thoughts and joys are all packt up and gone,
And for their old acquaintance plead.
O show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
XIII.
Come Dearest Lord, pass not this Holy season,
My flesh and bones, and joints do pray,
And even my verse, when by the rhyme and reason,
The word is Stay, says ever Come.
Oh show thy self to me,
Or take me up to thee.
Upon Death.
WHy should we not as well desire our Death
As sleep? No difference but a little breath.
It Is all but rest, it is all but a releasing
Our tired limbs, why then not alike pleasing?
Being burdened with the sorrows of the day,
We wish for night; which being come we lay
Our body down; yet when our very breath
Is Irksome to us we are afraid of death.
Our sleep is often accompanied with frights,
Distracting dreams, and dangers of the nights;
When in the sheets of Death, our Body's sure
From all such evils, and we sleep secure.
What matter Down, or earth? what boots, it whether?
Alas our body's sensible of neither.
Things that are senseless feel not pains nor ease.
Tell me, and why not worms as well as fleas?
In sleep we know not whether our closed eyes
Shall ever wake; From Death we are sure to rise;
I but it is long first; Oh is that our fears?
Dare we trust God for nights, and not for years?
Conclusion.
THe God of love my Shepherd is
And he that does me feed;
While he is mine and I am his,
What can I want or need?
II.
He leads me to the tender grass,
Where I both feed and rest:
Then to the streams that gently pass,
In both I have the best.
III.
Or if I stray he does convert
And bring my mind in frame,
And all this not for my desert
But for his holy Name.
IV.
Yea in deaths shady black abode
Well may I walk, not fear;
For thou art with me, and thy Rod
To guide, thy Staff to bear.
V.
Nay thou do make me fit and dine,
Even in my enemies sight:
My head with Oil, my Cup with wine
Runs over day and night.
IV.
Surely thy sweet and wondrous love
Shall measure all my days;
And as if never shall remove,
So neither shall my praise.
FINIS.

