UNIO DISSIDENTIUM Heir Apparent and Presumptive made one.
HORACE in his Ars Poetica says, Rem been provisam, etc. Fit Words necessarily
follow a Subject well Laid and Founded: So I on the contrary Presume, Vbi men's
male disposita est, where ill will has its design, agreeable Expressions are
never lacking, to Vent its Meaning and Malice.

Apparent (till 1^73.) has ever been, among us English Men, a fit Participle
(or Word Adjective) to Express one, between whom and the Succession to a
present Possessours Estate, no third Person Intervenes or Appears.

Such was and is, his R. Highness, [Suffering no Eclipse, in his Modest Fair
and Just Pretensions, till the time before recited, and then Natus est Haeres
Praesumendus (or Praesumptivus as French Latinists would Term it,) et denatus
est Apparens, inter Hominum Genus Novum: Presumtive comes into the World, and
Apparent dies among a new Sect, etc.

No Man can doubt this, to be an Artifice (we live in the days wherein they
abound) to Diminish among the Vulgar, the Opinion of the Validity of the
foresaid Pretentions: And it has gone so very far, that the Plow Man in the
Country, (as well as the Pitiful Vicar,) that Groans under the Detention of his
Tithes, and is to be Commiserated,) Argue it and Distinguish by it, and to say
the Truth, one Understands it as well as the other.

Nay the more refined Wits: (and Men of great Learning and Parts have the
Expression in Honor and Esteem. As Mr. Smith in his late Narrative. p. 13. (26
Bis. 27, etc.

Every Nation have Proper and Peculiar Idioms and Expressions, which by a long
use, are become their own, and are not so proper for other Countries and
Concernments.

These be the Diets of Germany, (the Parliaments of England, (the General
Estates of the Netherlands, (the Senate or Great Council of Venice, (and the
Cardinalate or Conclave of Rome^; (these two are Terms of Government and
Council.

But Secondly as to Expressions of meanet consequence and circumstances, (in
vulgar occasions and occurrences.

The Scots Term being a Sleep, Quiet: The Irish, Shall for Will: as, Such a man
shall die, meaning that he cannot hold out long, is past recovery or at least
in exceeding danger.

We English, understand by knocking on the Head, (no Bugbear expression if
genuinely considered: (nor of more danger than John Hopkins's fearful
Imprecation, Psalm. 74. Paragraph the last: (I say we understand by it down
right murdering and killng.

So the Latins have their e medio tollere, just of the very same stamp: (again
instead of demanding what hour it is, we ask what is a clock;) Significans pro
Significato.

Learned Seldom thought it no Solecism, to quote the old Ballade of the Tanner
of Tamworth, (recited by Mr. Ashmole in his Garter, p. 225. Why may not I quote
the merry Legend of the Friar and the Boy, to bring in a very common and usual
Angliscism, p. 1.

By the first Wife a Son he had,
Which was a Pretty worthy Lad,
A good unhappy Boy.
This Unhappy translated in the sense of Unfortunate, quite marrs the intended
sense; (which siignifies waggish and full of Roguish Tricks.

We say, the Wing of a Rabbet, (which notwithstanding is no flying Animal, but
a four footed Creature; So after the same manner, the Scots have the fore Leg
of a Capon.

The Dutch express I drink to you, uk brenght, (which is no other than I bring
to you, or make you the Offer of drinking.

They say Gen Schip ghebleven, is (a Ship is staid), meaning it is cast away
and lost.

The French say prendre sur, (gainer Sur, (take a Town upon, gain a victory
upon; where as we say take a Town from, gain or get a victory, over or against,
such a King or Prince: they say l' heure a sonnee, the Hour has struck, instead
of the Clock, (Significatum pro Significante)

To come to the point, then Presumptive Heir is a Galliscism, a French Term, an
Idiomatical Expression of that Nation, borrowed from the Latin word Praesumo,
(in its Derivative) And let us see what Hottoman says of it in the
Substantive, Presumptio apud juridicos dicitur, existimatio, quae ex
verissimilibus argumentis et conjecturis ducitur; a judgment, esteem or opinion
of things, which is drawn from credible and veritable arguments and
conjectures; (see Thomas, Thomasius in the word: The French use it to express a
next Heir, (as the two Brethren St Marthes all along in their Genealogick
History of France.

P. 719. Isabel de Bourbon fut accordee avec le Prince Olaus fills unique et
presomptif Heritier de Danemerc etc. She was affianced with Prince Olaus only
Son and presumptive Heir of Denmark.

P. 873. Tom. 2d. (Jean de Albret fille unique et presumptive Heritiere du Roy
de Navarre, only Daughter and Presumptive Heir to the King of Navarre.

P. 1052. Speaking of Jean Wife of K. Phillip the Tall; He calls her
Presumptive Heir of Artois.

P. 1331. twice) I will mention both Circumstances.

1st. The Agreement between Anne of Britain, and Charles the 8 of France
afterward her Husband, La Princess ne convoleroit en autres nopces; fors avec
le Roy futur (Si il plaift et luy fair ce peut) et autre Heretier prochain et
prefomptif de la couronne, she not to contract 2d. Marriage except with the
future King, (if it so pleased him and he could do it (and other next Heir and
Presumptive of the Crown.

2dly. The Prince of Orange is termed there, the next Kinsman and presumptive
Heir of the said Princess.

So again p. 1528. and 1537. (The first of which says Edw. K. of Portugal, was
the first who ordained Que le fills aisnee, presumptif Heritier de la Couronne,
etc. That the Eldest Son Presumptive Heir of the Crown, should carry the Title
of Prince of Portugal, being before only styled Infant,

The latter Page says, John of Portugal was joined in Marriage with Charlot de
Lusignan) Daughter of John the 2d. of the name, King of Cypress, (and of his
Queen Helene Paleologue, adds, she was presumptive Heiress of the Kingdoms of
Cypress and Jerusalem.

But finally the Bishop of Rhodes,) who so elegantly wrote the Life of H. 4. of
France, and is so well translated by Mr. Dancer, styles the said King no other
way than Presumptive Heir, (although already declared Successor by H. 3. and so
taken by all, (except those of the Ligue. who carried on a long war against
him, and whom at length he uttterly ruined.

Nam semper est praevalitura Veritas. Pray mark all these Expressions.

** 1st. Olaus, only Son and presumptive Heir. 2dly. only Daughter and
presumptive Heir, (in Jean De. Albret. 3dly. In the Case of Anne of Britain;
he does not say next or presumptive Heir, but it is a Conjunction Copulative,
and makes Next and Presumptive all one.
And so in the Prince of Orange, (next Kinsman and presumptive Heir; (if so,
what difference then from Apparent? (and the French they have no other Phrase
for it.

** But the next of all is so clear, that he says Eldest Son presumptive Heir
to (a Gramatical Apposition:) and no man did ever deny to an Eldest Son the
Title of Apparent.

It is clear then from these two Brethren eminent for their Learning and
Learned Descent: (see their own Dedication at the end of their work; (as also
from the Bishop of Rhodes That Heir Presumptive is nothing else than Apparent.

So you see (the Authors of this new Term) have made good that of the Poet.

Parturiunt montes, est natus ridiculus mus. I Will english it,

The Little Fly has raised a great deal of dust, But indeed Reason will tell
us, (without the Headache of Philosophical Argumentation) that that is nearest
the mark or object matter, where nothing at present intervenes.

Nothing more certain than against which at present not the least objection;
and nothing can be more apparent, than that which nothing appears at present to
obumbrate and obscure.

I compare then these interjected upstart Expressions of presumptive and
expectant Heir, to the Moons being in opposition under the Eccliptick Line,
which indeed darkens the Sun, but he afterward appears more glorious.

And indeed, as to the Term of Heir Expectant, it is worse than Presumptive, and
has some what more of malice in it; the word importing a looking for with
desire, (ex spe instare) to be instant after any thing, with impetuous Hope
(making his R. H. as it were, Imaginars Regis Mortem (a Trick to cause
Jealousies and Variances. (and learnt from Del Rio, and Contzen: (for it is not
to be doubted there be some Protestant Phanatical Politicians, as bad as any
Jesuit can be thought to be. Hudibras in his 3d. Book plainly describes them,
part 3d. p. 114

Among these there was a Politician
That had more Heads than Beasts in Vision.
I could wish the Prophesy of Hor. were accomplished, Ars Poetica p. 3.

Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula si volet usus.
Words out of use, in use shall come again;
And words in use, no more in use remain.
Let Heir Expectant and Presumptive be no more heard; Let Apparent be in Vogue.

Augustus Caesar adopts Tiberius. Joan the first of Naples, adopts Louis Duke
of Anjou: so also Joan the second, adopts the same Family: no Friend of
Caesar's, or of these Neopolitane Majesty's, but acknowledge the Adoptes for
Heirs Apparent.

Right of Adoption has great force in Sacred Writ, as Romans 8.23, Romans 9.4..
Gal. 4.5 Ephesians. 1.5. But on the Duke's Side, is successive Propinquity and
Proximity.

Atavis qui Regibus editus,
Augustissimo Carolo proximus
Se the Determination of the Holy Ghost ( Deuteronomy. 17.8.9.) Sans any objection.

Moses that great Prophet, Penman (nay Prince) who delivered to us that former
Law of Succession, says Genesis 1 16. That God made two great Lights, the greater
to rule the day, etc.

And our Savior himself (the Light of the world ( John 8.12. Tells us his
father,) who is the Father of Righteousness,) causes his Sun, (the greater of
the two Lights aforementioned, ( to arise on the evil and the good, and
sends Rain on the just and on the unjust, Mat. 5.45. which in the opinion of
all Divines admits, that all manner of men are to expect their Rights and Dues
in communicative and distributive Justice: and I believe that none of these new
Sect of Presumptivists would be willing to loose any the least Pretention,
though but to one hundred Pound per Annum! Let them do then as they would be
done by, laying aside all far-fetcht (equivocating) dubious, (malicious Phrases
and Expressions, contenting themselves with those of our own Nation, giving
Caesar's Relations their due) and so become just.

This new Order of Men, have erred not knowing the Scriptures. St. Peter's
advice is, (1.4.15.) not to be too busy. They have erred as not being
Philosophers; (not observing the Ethics) I mean the morality of Moderation.

Hor. Lib. 1st. concludes his second Epistle with.

Non tardum opperior nec praecedentibus insto.
I stay not for the slow; nor others would out-goe.
An admirable Lore and Document for moderation: It may be rendered Proverbially,
(soft fires make sweet Malt) a Commodity we in England cannot live without;
Let Us have a care of the making o'nt -- Solomon teaches us not to be righteous
over much, Eccl. 7.18. (as also to be wise for our selves it we pretend to
wisdom Pro. 9.12. ver.

It were heartily to be wished an Act of Pacification might pass, such as that
sub H. 3. called Dictum de Kenelworth, (so that no reflection might be made
upon forepassed Jealousies, to promote and foment new ones.

That the Duke might retire, near his only Royal Brother.

The present separation, is a matter of ill aspect and consequence; the sacred
Scripture declares against them which cause it, ( Prove. 6.4. and 19. ver. (The
Heathen Poet charms wisely against it. Ho. Lib. 1. Ep. 3d

Vbicunque l^coru^
Vivitis, indigni fraternum rumpere foedus.
Unworthy are you, where so e're you are,
Bonds of Fraternal Love to break that dare.
Moreover that the Kings wants might be supplied toward the payment of his
Debts; (a matter much importing his Reputation and Credit.)

Old Fabian tells us of wonderful monitions and warnings were given to H. 2d.
but especicially from one Sir William Chestreby, whose advice was Seavenfold.

The 6th Clause was, that he should take care his Subjects should be satisfied,
for any thing taken or received from them, for his use; and that he should pay
his Servants and Soldiers their wages; I shall make but short Paraphrase upon
it* only observe, that such as are averse to Aids and Subsidies, (the Ancient
Rights of our Kings) are such as are deficient in Loyalty and Charity. The
first as to their Sovereign. The second as to their Fellow Subjects.

That again, Preparation might be made for the Defense of the Nation, La
politic Francoise. p. 192. advises the Fr. King to place the Knights of
Mal^^a in the Isle of Rhee, (Isle de Dieu, and Belle Isle, to ruin our Trade.

Mr. Smith in his late Narrrtive, (p. 13.) tells us the said great Kings
Encouragements and Designs: and the Friendly Conference; (plainly tells us his
pretentions upon England; and that they are printed and exposed to public View
and Censure.

His Medals (lately uttered to the world) demonstrate the greatness of his
mind, and the Nebucadnezar* like Conceit he has of himself.

Neither does his Nativity (published both in Latin and English by two several
Astrologians) add any thing but Fuel to his Martial Mind apt for great
undertakings.

But I say, could he seize upon the South, and South-west parts of Ireland,
lying opposite to Britain* he would become Mr. of our Seas; and then farewell
Trade and Traffic, under the warm Sun.

Algenti miser as Aquiloni vertere prorus.
We must Turn our Prow's to the North.
Ireland has left Hope and Dependence upon Spain, (and have betaken themselves
to France,) in every Village of Connacht, and the South-west of that Kingdom,
are such as have been Trained up to French Military Discipline.

And whilst the Fewds of Papistical and Presbyterian, (or Antimonarchical
Plots, (for certainly there is a Party in England that aim at a Hollandsche
Government, (make a noise in the world, The French Plot, not a Religious one,
but Political one; such as Germany and the Netherlands have felt the effects
of. (silently gets growth, and they come and take away your Name and Nation.)

Inter nos Vnio fiat,
Nos inter regnet Pax, dominetur Amor.
I. G. B. M.



