Day-Fatality: OR, SOME OBSERVATIONS OF Days Lucky and Unlucky. Penned and
Published whilst His Present MAJESTY, The Most Serene KING, JAMES II. WAS DUKE
of YORK, Persecuted by the Excluding Party, and Retired into the Low Countries.
Presaging many Great Things, some whereof are wonderfully come to Pass; and
particularly made Good, in His Peaceable Inthronization, and His Speedy
Quashing Two notable Rebellions, (headed by Two Persons, Eminent for Military
Conduct* One in England, the Other in Scotland. And by WHOM Greater Things are
yet to be done.

Illi Pax Comes est. Comes aut Victoria laeta.
Peace is His Mate: Or, if War chance to come,
It Is His good Fate, His Foes to Overcome.
The Second Impression, with Large Additions.

To which is Added, Prince-Protecting-Providences, AND The SWANS WELCOME.

All Written by an Officer at Arms, Author of a Book, Entitled, Introductio ad
Latinam Blasoniam, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Alexander Milbourn, for the Author: And are to be Sold by
the Booksellers of London. 1686.

THE PREFACE.
IN the ensuing Treatise, ( Page 10.) I inform my Reader, how Lucky the
Fourteenth of October has been to the Princes of England: And observing out of
Wharton's Gesta Britannorum, and the Collections of Others, That His late Royal
Highness (our Present Magnanimous, Magnificent Sovereign) was also Born upon
that Augural Day; it made more than ordinary Impression upon me: So that I
never saw him, but, I thought, in his very Face there were extraordinary
Indices, and Tokens of Regality.

But when after his Recess into Holland, Those (whom I Prophetically
Characteris'd, Page 165. of my Introductio ad Latinam Blasoniam) exceedingly
Tryumphed, wishing he might never return; nay, that he durst not, nor would be
permitted so to do; using moreover opprobrious Terms: Indignation made me Print
my ensuing Sentiments. Which, though derided by Rome's Packet, and the People
of that Leven; yet (among the Better, and more Loyal Sort) found good
Acceptance: As will appear in the next Page, by a Letter sent me from an
Honorable and Learned Knight.

Things by me forethought, and publicly hinted, being come to pass, my
Day-Fatality began to be remembered: And One (whom I wish very well) desiring I
would give him Leave to Reprint That, and Two other of my small Pieces
together, I assented to his Request.

I will Conclude this Preface, with the following Metrical Demonstration of my
Loyal Well-Wishes:

Authoris Votivum pro Rege JACOBO Caermen
Aureus avulso Primo non deficit alter.
Aen. lib: 6 Constans Cord; piusque Anima; frugi; Generosus;
Qui facturus erit ditia Regna; Regit.
Huic esto in Terris. Foelix diuturna Corona;
Aeterna in Coelis, altera detur ei.
Oremus Tanto ne desit Mascula Regi
Proles. Eximij quae sit imago Patris.
Ejus posteritas sit in omne Volubilis aevum:
Sit Regum Series, stirps sine fine, sua.
Thus Translated, and the Quotation of Virgil brought in to accompany the rest:

One's gone, Another comes, (welcome to All!)
Resolved and Pious; Frugal; Liberal;
Whose Conduct make His Kingdoms flourish all.
Oh! May His Earthly Crown full long endure,
Before He of His Heavenly Crown be sure.
Let Us pray, So great a KING may live to see
A Son, who may his Father's Medal be.
Oh! May Great JAMES His Race for ever live,
And never fail a List of KINGS to give.
A Letter from Sir Winston Churchil, Knight; Father to the Right Honorable,
John Lord Churchil.
I Thank you for your kind Present, the Observation of the Fatality of Days. I
have made great Experience of the Truth of it; and have set down Friday, as my
own Lucky Day; the Day on which I was Born, Christ'ned, Married, and, I
believe, will be the Day of my Death: The Day whereon I have had sundry
Deliverances, (too long to relate) from Perils by Sea and Land, Perils by False
Brethren, Perils of Lawsuits, etc. I was Knighted (by chance, unexpected by my
self) on the same Day; and have several good Accidents happened to me, on that
Day: And am so superstitious in the Belief of its good Omen, That I choose to
begin any Considerable Action (that concerns me) on the same Day. I hope HE,
whom it most concerns, will live to own your Respect, and Good Wishes,
expressed in That Essay of yours: Which discovering a more than common
Affection to the DUKE, and being as valuable for the Singularity of the
Subject, as the Ingenuity of your Fancy, I sent into Flanders, as soon as I had
it; That They on the Other Side the Water may see, It Is not all sour Wine,
that runs from our English Press.

Day-Fatality: OR, SOME OBSERVATIONS OF Days Lucky and Unlucky. CONCLUDING With
some Remarks upon the Fourteenth of October, The Auspicious Birthday of His
Royal Highness, JAMES Duke of York
Atavis qui Regibus editus,
Augustissimo CAROLO Proximus.
NUMBER. XXVII. 8, 9. LUC. XIX. 42. In Hoc Die Tuo.
In This Thy Day.

THAT there be Good and Evil Days and Times, not only the Sacred Scriptures,
but Profane Authors mention; See 1 Samuel 25.8. Esther 8.17. and 9.19, 22.
Ecclus 14.14.

The Fourteenth Day of the First Month was a memorable and blessed Day amongst
the Children of Israel: See Exodus 12.18, 40, 41, 42, 51. and 13.4. Levit. 23.5.
Numb. 28.16. Four hundred and thirty Years being expired of their Dwelling in
Egypt, even in the self-same Day departed they thence.

A thing somewhat parallel to this, we read in the Roman Histories; That that
very Day four years that the Civil Wars were begun by Pompey the Father, Caesar
made an end of them with his Sons; Cneus Pompeius being then slain, and it
being also the last Battle Caesar was ever in. Heylyn in the Kingdom of
Corduba.]

Our Historians tells us, That Normandy was Conquered from Duke Robert by Henry
the First, that Day forty Years the Normans had won England: (A remarkable
Retaliation!) Anglia Nomandiae par retulit; England paid Normandy in its own
Coin. Burton's Historical Remarks.

The Calendar to Ovid's Fastorum says, Aprilis erat mensis Graecis
Auspicatissimus, a most Auspicious Month to the Graecians.

As to Evil Days and Times, see Amos 5.13. and 6.3. Eccles. 9.12. Psalm 37.19.
Obad. 12. Jer. 46.21. And Job hints it, in cursing his Birthday, Cap. 3. v. 1.
to 11. See Weaver, p. 458. The old Rhimes concerning the Scots:

Erly in a Morneuing,
In an Evil Tyming,
Went they from Duubarre.
Horace, lib. 2. Ode 13. cursing the Tree that had like to have fallen upon
him, says, Ille nefasto te posuit die; intimating, that it was planted in an
Unlucky Day.

The Romans counted Febr. 13th. an unlucky Day, and therefore then never
attempted any Business of Importance; for on that Day they were overthrown at
Allia by the Gauls; and the Fabii, attaquing the City of the Veii, were all
slain, save one. Heylyn speaking of St. Peter's Patrimony.] And see the
Calendar annexed to Ovid's Fastorum, as to the last Circumstance.

The Jews counted August Tenth, and Unfortunate Day; for on that Day the Temple
was destroyed by Titus the Son of Vespasian: On which Day also, the first
Temple was consumed with Fire by Nebuchadaezzar. Heylyn.] The Treasury of the
Times says, The Eighth of Loyon (August) the very same Day 679. Years, one
after another.

And not only among the Romans and Jews, but also among the Christians, a like
Custom of observing such Days is used, especially Childermas or Innocents-day.
Comines tells us, That Lewis XI. used not to debate any Matter, but accounted
it a sign of great Misfortune toward him, if any Man communed with him of his
affairs; and would be very angry with those about him, if they troubled him in
any matter whatsoever upon this Day.

But I will descend to more particular Instances of Lucky and Unlucky Days.

Upon the Sixth of April, Alexander the Great was born: Upon the same day he
Conquered Darius, won a great Victory at Sea, and died the same Day.

Neither was this Day less fortunate to his Father Philip; for on the same he
took Potidea; Parmenio his General gave a great Overthrow to the Illyrians: and
his Horse was Victor at the Olympic Games. Therefore his Prophets foretold to
him, Filium cujus natalis, etc. That a Son whose Birthday was accompanied with
Three Victories, should prove Invincible. Pezelius in Mellificio Historico.

Upon the Thirtieth of September, Pompey the Great was born: Upon that Day he
Tryumphed for his Asian Conquest; and on that Day he died.

The Nineteenth of August was the Day of Augustus his Adoption: On the same Day
he began his Consulship: He Conquered the Triumviri; and on the same Day he
died. Hitherto out of the Memoirs of K. Charles I. Heroes.

If Solemon counts the Day of ones Death better than the Day of ones Birth,
there can be no Objection, why that also may not be numbered amongst ones
Remarkable and Happy Days: And therefore I will insert here, That the Eleventh
of February was the Noted Day of Elizabeth, Wife to Henry VII. who was born and
died that Day. Weaver, p. 476. Brook in Hen. VII. Marriage. Stow in Anno 1466.
1503.

Bassianus Caracalla, the Emperor, was Born the Sixth of April, and Died the
same Day; as says the French Author of the Journal History.

Henry the Cardinal, King of Portugal, Died 1580. the last of January; upon
which Day he also was Born Sixty eight Years before. Histoire Genealogique de
la Maison de France.

So Saint Louis of Sicily, died upon the Nineteenth of August, the
Anniversary-Day of his Birth: A Man memorable for his Extraordinary Virtue and
Piety; for he forsook the Infallible Succession to his Father's Crown, and the
Marriage of the Fair Princess of Majorque, for a Cloister.

As also, that the Twenty third of November was the Observable Day of Francis
Duke of Lunenburgh; who was born on that Day, and died upon the same, 1549. as
says the French Author of the Journal History; who adds, upon particular
Remark, and observable Curiosity,

Ipsa Dies vitam contulit ipsa necem.
The same Day Life did give,
And made him cease to live.
Sir Kenelm Digby, that Renowned Knight, great Linguist, and Magazen of Arts,
was born and died on the Eleventh of June; and also fought fortunately at
Scanderoon the same Day. Hear his Epitaph, composed by Mr. Farrar, and recited
in the aforesaid Memoires:

Under this Stone the Matchless Digby lies,
Digby the Great, the Valiant, and the Wise:
This Ages Wonder, for his Noble Parts;
Skilled in Six Tongues, and learned in All the Arts.
Born on the Day he died, the Eleventh of June,
On which he bravely fought at Scanderoon.
It Is rare, that one and self-same Day should be
His Day of Birth, of Death, of Victory.
I had a Maternal Uncle, that died the Third of March last, 1678. which was the
Anniversary-day of his Birth: And (which is a Truth exceeding strange) many
Years ago he foretold, the Day of his Death to be that of his Birth; and he
also averred the same but about a Week before his Departure. This Third of
March is the Day of St. Eutropius, (of which hereafter.) And as to my Uncle, it
was significative; it turned well to him, according to that of Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the Dead, etc. and that of Ovid, Metam. lib. 3.

-- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo supremaque Funera debet.
-- None happy call,
Before their Death, and final Funeral.
The Sixth of January was five times auspicious to Charles Duke of Anjou. Ibid.
in the Life of the Earl of Sunderland.

The Twenty fourth of February was happy to Charles the Fifth four times.
Ibid.] Heylyn speaking of the Temple of Jerusalem, hints Three of these Four:
His Birth: His taking of Francis King of France, Prisoner: His receiving the
Imperial Crown at Bononia. And so does also the Journal History
beforementioned.

Of the Family of the Trevors, Six successive Principal Branches have been Born
the Sixth of July. Same Memoirs.

Sir Humphrey Davenport was born the Seventh of July; and on that Day
Anniversary, his Father and Mother died, within a quarter of an Hour one of
another. Same Memoirs.

Henry Earl of Northumberland, Convicted in Star Chamber to have favored the
Design of the Fifth of November, died on the Fifth of November, some Years
after: His Son, Algernoon, Earl of Northumberland, (Baptized the Thirteenth of
October, 1602.) died the same Day, 1668.

I have seen an Old Romish MSS. Prayer Book, (and showed the same to that
general Scholar, and great Astrologer, E. Ashmole, Esquire) at the Beginning
whereof was a Calendar, wherein were inserted the Unlucky Days of each Month,
set out in Verse. I will recite them just as they are, sometimes infringing the
Rule of Grammar, sometimes of Prosodia; a matter, of which the old Monkish
Rhimers were no ways scrupulous. It was as Ancient as Henry the Sixth, or
Edward the Fourth's Time.

January. Prima Dies mensis, and septima truncat ut ensis. February. Quarta
subit mortem, prosternit tertia fortem. March. Primus mandentem, disrumpit
quarta bibentem: April. Denus and undenus est mortis vulnere plenus. May.
Tertius occidit, and septimus ora Ex re and Iaedo.
relidit. June. Denus pallescit, quindenus foedra nescit. July. Ter-decimus
mactat, Julii denus labefactat. August. Prima necat fortem prosternit secunda
cohortem. September. Tertia Septembris, and denus fert mala membris. October.
Tertius and denus, est sicut mors alienus. November. Scorpius est quintus, and
tertius e nece cinctus. December. Septimus exanguis, virosus denus and anguis.

The Tenth Verse is intolerable, and might be mended thus:

Tertia cum dena fit sicut mors aliena. If any object, and say, Deni is only
the Plural; I excuse my self by that admirable Chronogram upon King Charles the
Martyr;

Ter deno, Jani, Lunae, Rex (Sole cadente)
Carolus exutus Solio, Sceptroque secure.
Neither will I have recourse for Refuge to that Old Tetrastich; Intrat
Avaloniam duodena Caterva virorum
Flos Arimathiae Joseph, etc.
because I have even now blamed the Liberty of the Ancient Rhymers.

He means by Mors aliena, some strange kind of Death; though Aliena signifies
Strange in quite another Sense, than here used.

I shall take particular Notice here of the Third of November, both because
it is my own Birthday, and also for that I have observed some remarkable
Accidents to have happened thereupon.

Constantius the Emperor, Son of Constantine the Great, little Inferior to his
Father, a worthy Warrior, and good Man, died the Third of November, ex Veteri
Calendario, penes me.

Thomas Mountacute, Earl of Salisbury, that great Man, and famous Commander sub
Henry IV. V. and VI. died this Day, by a Wound of Cannot-shot he received at
the Siege of Orleance. E MSS. quodam, and Glovero.

So also Cardinal Borrhomeo, famous for his Sanctity of Life, and therefore
Canonized, ( Heylyn, in his Praecognita, says, He made Milan memorable, by his
Residence there) died 1584. this Day, as Possevinus in his Life.

Sir John Perot, ( Stow corruptly calls him Parrat) a Man very remarkable in
his Time, Lord-Deputy of Ireland, Son to Henry the VIII. and extremely like
him, died in the Tower, the Third of November, 1592. (as Stow says.) Grief, and
the Fatality of this Day, killed him. See Nanton's Fragment a Regalia,
concerning this Man.

Stow, in his Annals, says, Anno 1099. November the Third, as well in Scotland
as England, the Sea broke in over the Banks of many Rivers, drowning diverse
Towns, and much People, with an innumerable Number of Oxen and Sheep; at which
time the Lands in Kent, sometimes belonging to Earl Godwin, were covered with
Sands, and drowned; and to this day are called, Godwin's Sands.

I had an Estate left me in Kent, of which between Thirty and Forty Acres was
Marsh-Land, very conveniently flanking its Up-land; and in those days this
Marsh-land was usually Let for Four Nobles an Acre. My Father died 1643.
Within a Year and an half after his Decease, such Charges and Water-Scots came
upon this Marsh-Land, by the Influence of the Sea, that it was never worth one
Farthing to me; but very often eat into the Rents of the Up-land. So that I
often think, this Day being my Birthday, has the same Evil Influence upon me,
that it had 580. Years since upon Earl Godwin, and others concerned in Low
Lands.

The Parliament so fatal to Romes Concerns here, in Henry the Eighth's Time,
begun the Third of November, (the Twenty Sixth of his Reign): In which the
Pope, with all his Authority, was clean banished the Realm; he no more to be
called otherwise, than Bishop of Rome: The King to be taken, and reputed as
Supreme Head of the Church of England; having full Authority to reform all
Errors, Heresies, and Abuses of the same: Also, the First Fruits, and Tenths of
all Spiritual Promotions and Dignities, were granted to the King. See Stow's
Annals, and Weaver, page 80.

Not long after which, followed the Visitation of Abbeys, Priories, and
Nunneries; and after that, their final Suppression: This Parliament being the
Door of Entrance thereto.

The Third of November, 1640. began that Parliament so direfully fatal to
England, in its Peace, its Wealth, its Religion, its Gentry, Nobility, nay, its
King: So verifying the former Verse of the Calendar;

Scorpius est quintus, and tertius e nece cinctus:
A killing Day to some or other.
The Third of September was a Remarkable Day to the English Attila, Oliver,
1650. He obtained a Memorable Victory at Dunbar; another at Worcester, 1651.
And that Day he died, 1658.

The first Two Occurrences wonderfully accord to the preceding Verse; Tertia
Septembris, and denus fert mala membris. being fatal to the Two Members of
Great Britain, Scotland and England. The Third, as happy to them both, as the
same Day, 1666. was dismal and unhappy to the City of London, and consequently
to the whole Kingdom; with its immediate preceding, and two succeeding Days,
viz. the Second, Fourth, and Fifth of September.

Pope Paul the Third, confirmed the latter Part of the Verse, when he advised
his Son, Peter Aloisa, to beware of that Day: He neglecting it, was Murdered,
and cruelly dismembered. Sleidan in his Commentaries; the Nineteenth Book.

I come now to the Days of the Week.

Tuesday, (Dies Martis) was a most Remarkable Day with Thomas Becket,
Archbishop of Canterbury, as Weaver 201. observes from Matt. Paris: Mars,
secundum Poetas, Deus Belli nuncupatur. Vita Sancti Thomae (secundum illud Job,
Vita hominis militia est super terram) tota fuit contra hostem bellicosa, etc.
Mars, according to the Poets, is called, The God of War. The Life of St. Thomas
(according to that of Job, The Life of Man is a Warfare upon Earth) was a
continual conflict against the Enemy. Upon the Tuesday, he suffered; upon
Tuesday, he was translated; upon Tuesday, the Peers of the Land sat against
him at Northampton; upon Tuesday, he was banished; upon Tuesday, the Lord
appeared to him at Pontiniac, saying, Thomas, Thomas, my Church shall be
glorified in thy blood; upon Tuesday, he returned from Exile; upon Tuesday, he
got the Palm or Reward of Martyrdom; and upon Tuesday, 1220. his Venerable Body
received the Glory and Renown of Translation, Fifty years after his Passion.
Thus my Authors.

One thing I make bold to gloss upon. His Translation is here mentioned twice.
Note, This is no Tautology of the Historian; but the latter Paragraph is a more
particular Recitation of the first, viz. Reference to the time when he was
Translated into the number of Saints and Martyrs: Quando in Divorum numerum
relatus, as Cambden phrases it in many places upon like Occasion.

Wednesday is said to have been the Fortunate Day of Sixtus Quintus, that Pope
of Renowned Merit, that did so great and excellent things in the time of his
Government. See The Just weight of the Scarlet Robe, page 101. his deserved
Praises.] On a Wednesday, he was born; on that day he was made Monk; on the
same, he was made General of his Order; on that also, was he successively
created Cardinal, elected Pope, and also Inaugurated. See Heylyn, speaking of
the Temple of Jerusalem.

Friday was observed to be very fortunate to the great and renowned Captain
Gonsalvo, he having on that day given the French many memorable Defeats.

Saturday was a Lucky Day to Hen. VII. Upon that Day he achieved the Victory
upon Ric. III. being August 22. 1485. On that Day he entered the City, being
Aug. 29. [Correct Stow, who mistakes the Day.] And he himself always
acknowledged, he had experienced it Fortunate. See Bacon in his Life.

Saturday also has been very successful to the Portugals (as Their Chronicles
report.) See Mr. Sandford (now Lancaster-Herald) his Translation of the History
of Their Kings; where he speaks of the Recovery of that Kingdom from the
Spaniards.

Thursday was a Fatal Day to Henry VIII. as Stow, 812.] and so also to his
Posterity. He died on Thursday, Jan. 28. King Edward VI. on Thursday, July 6.
Queen Mary, on Thursday, November 17. Queen Elizabeth, on Thursday, March 24.

Saturday, (or the Jewish Sabbath) was fatal to Jerusalem Temple; for on that
day 'twas taken by Pompey, Herod, and Titus, successively. Heylyn.

Hitherto by way of Prologue. And be pleased to take notice; As to the Days of
the Month, I have taken such care, that all are according to the Julian or Old
Account, used by us here in England.] Pope Gregory XIII. brought in his New
Style (used generally beyond Sea) Anno. 1585. in October, as asserts the
Journal History before recited.

Now for Epilogue, and Remarkable Reflection.

Turning over our Annals, I chanced upon a twofold Circumstance: I will not
say, that none else has observed the same; but I protest, (Ita me Deus amet,
ut verum loquor) I do not know of any that have; and therefore must justly
claim to be acquitted from the least suspicion of Plagiarism, or plowing with
others Heifers.

The first is, of William the Conqueror. The second, of Edward III. (I need not
say any thing of the Eminency of these two; every one knows what great things
they did.) And making reflection upon the Auspicious Birthday of His Royal
Highness, the Duke of York, I adventured upon the following Composure. [I
cannot be proud of my Poetry; but I cannot but be glad of my BON HEVR, d'avoir
(en lisant) tomb si fortuitement sur les evenements d'un si BON JOVR.]

Ad Illustrissimum and Celsissimum Principem, JACOBUM Ducem EBORACENSEM, de
Natali Suo Auspicatissimo, Octobris XIV. Anno MDCXXXIII.

-- Deus
Anne nefasto te posuit die?
Hor. li. 2. od. 13. -- The Fates, have they
Thy Birth designed on an unlucky Day?
OCtobris Decimo quarto Normannus Haraldum
Dux superavit, and hinc Regia Sceptra tulit.
Tertius Edwardus, capto pernice Caleto,
( Gallica quo Regna sunt reserata sibi)
Ire domum tentans, diris turbinibus actus
In pelago, Vitae Magua peric'la subit:
Octobris Decimo quarto, tamen appulit Oras
Nativas. (His quam prosperus ille dies?)
Natali laetare tuo, quam Maxim Princeps;
Fausta velut sunt haec, Omina semper habe.
I have, contrary to the use of the Poets, made by in Turbinibus long, because
the force of Pronounciation lies there; and as to that Matter, I have fully
discoursed in my Introductio ad Latinam Blasoniam, p. 144.

OCtobers Fourteenth gave the Norman Duke
That Victory, Stow in An. 1066.
whence he Englands Scepter took.
Third Edward, after he had Calais won,
(The Mean whereby he France did overrun)
Returning home, by raging Tempests tossed,
(And near his Life (so fortunes) to have lost)
Idem in An. 1347.
Arrived safe on Shore the self-same Date:
(This day to them afforded so fair Fate.)
Great Duke, rejoice in this Your Day of Birth;
And may such Omens still increase Your Mirth.
These Verses I presented in Anno 1677. to a most Honorable Peer of the Land,
and of great Place near His Royal Highness.

Since which time, old Fabian coming into my hands, from him I got knowledge,
that that advantageous Peace, mentioned by Stow, Anno 1360. (concluded between
the forementioned King Edward III. and the French King) was acted upon the
Fourteenth of October, with grand Solemnity.

The two former Circumstances must needs fall out Providentially: Whether this
last of Anno 1360. was designed by Edward III. or no, (as remembering his former
good hap) may be some question: I am of opinion, not. Where things are under a
Man's peculiar Concern, he may fix a time; but here was the French King
concerned, equally with the English, and many other Great Personages
intreressed: To have tied them up to his own Auspicious Conceit of the Day, had
been an unkind Oppression, and would have brought the Judgment of so Wise a
Prince into question: We may conclude then, 'twas merely Fortuitous. And
therefore to the former Observation concerning this famous Edward, give me
leave to add;

Insuper hoc ipsoque die (sibi commoda) Grandis
Rex cum Galligenis, foedera fecit idem.
An advantageous Peace, on Day self same,
This mighty Prince did with the Frenchmen frame.
Dover Castle, was in Ancient Time accounted the Key of England, (as testifies
Matthew. Paris) Therefore, when Lewis of France had set footing here, and took
some eminent Places, his Father swore, he had not a foots length in England, if
he had not that Castle in his possession. Kilburn's Survey of Kent, reports,
That the foresaid Lewis besieged it from 22. of July, to the 14. of October
following; about which time the Seige was raised, and England thereby relieved.

Sit si tuta Dubris manet Angliae tota salubris.

If Dover be sure,
All England's secure.
A memorable Peace (foretold by Nostredamus) much conducing to the saving of
Christian Blood, was made upon the Fourteenth of October, 1557. between Pope
Paul the IV. Henry the II. of France, and Phillip the II. of Spain. Nostredamus
says, These Great Princes were frappez du Ciel, moved from Heaven to make this
Peace. See Garencier's Comment on Nostredamus, page 76.

A Lucky Day this, not only to the Princes of England; but Auspicious to the
Welfare of Europe.

Upon the Third of March last (being the day of St. Eutropius) His Royal
Highness withdrew toward the Low Countries: Procopius tells us, Humana saepe
contingit a Deo mutari. Terence says, Vicissitudo omnium rerum est. Which two
Sayings, I can no way better English, than by that of Eccles. 9.11. Time and
Chance happens to all men: Nor no way better second, than with that of 1 Cor.
4.11. Incertis vagamur sedibus. This Accident therefore (our Life being but a
Pilgrimage, as Jacob termed it to Pharaoh) is nothing to a General Providence
in the main. Therefore from the Augury of His Fourteenth of October, and from
the good Omen comprehended in the Signification of Eutropius, which hints, That
all this shall end well, and turn to the best; and from Ecclus. 14.14, 15. I
accost His Royal Highness with a Non defraudabitur a die bono; He shall not
lose his Good Day.

Dixerunt Ibis, pariter dixere Redibis
Te non infausto Dii posuere die.
The Gods thy Exit have ordained, and also they
Thy blessed Return have firm'd, born on a Lucky Day.
I just now said, That the third of March was dedicated to Eutropius, which is
derived from (...) well, and (...) to turn: It is also dedicated to St.
Maximus, St. Marinus, St. Lucius; which three also have notable hints in
relation to His Royal Highness. First, No man can deny, but that He is Maximus
Princeps. Secondly, He is Maximus Marinus; for in the time of His Exile, He was
Admiral of Aragon, as I have been told many years since in Flanders; and I am
sure very many Commissions in those days past under His Name: And till 1673.
He was Lord High Admiral of England.

Lucius comes from Luci, which signifies in the Morning; and betokens a Child
born in the Morning, or at Sunrising, (which some affirm to be a good time for
Birth:) But I will for my present purpose deduce it a Luceo; and I must affirm,
Quod hic maximus Princeps gestis marinis maxim lucet, and alias lucebit; This
most Great Prince is extremely Illustrious in Sea Negotiations, and shall yet
be otherwise most Illustrious.

That his Highness has long since verified the first Paragraph of my Assertion,
take it not only on my Credit; but (besides what has been said before) hear
part of an Ode to His Sacred Majesty, on His Highness Victory over the Dutch,
June 3. 1665. composed by Sir Thomas Higgons, a most Worthy Person, whom his
Foreign Negotiations have made enough known.

This day Your Empire Fate secures,
And now One half of the whole World is Yours.
The Austrian Youth, who won the day,
When the pale Crescent to the Cross gave way,
Must to Your Glorious Brother yield,
Who with less Loss has got a greater Field, etc.
The Germans, High and Low, (amongst which last His Highness now resides) call
October, Wyn-maendt (Mensis Vindemialis) the Wine-month.

The Effects of Wine we read Judges 9.13. Psalm. 104.15. Eccles. 10.19. Zech.
10.7. Why then may we not term this Month Mensis Laetificans? That it may be so
to his Royal Highness, as well as it was to the most Great Queen His John 16.21.
Mother, are the hearty Prayers of BLEW-MANTLE.

Virg. lib. 1. -- Haec olim memenisse juvabit:
Vunanimes omnes, cum Te (Dux Celse) reducto,
Ib. l. 7. and 1. Certatim instaurent epulas, atque omine magno
Crateres laeti statuant and Vina coronent.
Remembrance of these things, delight shall Thee,
When (home returned) great Feastings thou shall see,
And Healthings round, shall stir up gladsom glee;
And this Rejoicing general shall be.
I have by me a Book Printed Anno 1641. containing the true Effigies of King
CHARLES the First, of Blessed Memory, his Queen, with their Royal Progeny, with
Verses annexed, wherein are notable Predictions of His Royal Highness, which I
will here recite:

This Prince, much like another Sun, darts forth
Most glorious Beams to's Dukedom, and the North;
And makes us see with Eyes of expectation,
He Will be a mighty Pillar to this Nation,
A Stay of State, a strong supporting Prop,
Whose Fame will scale the Height of Honors Top.
He hates dull Idleness, and loves to be
In Action, such as fits His High Degree:
He will be stirring in such Exercise
As well becomes His Years and Qualities.
Surely the Eternal Eye of Providence
Does watch, direct, and guide this Hopeful Prince,
For some Designs may be for Heavens glory,
And fill the Earth with JAMES His Noble Story.
This All True Britains do expect in Love:
No doubt, our Wishes are confirmed Above.
Thus that Book: And I add,

Quis meliora petat, consultus quod Tripos edat? Who Better things than these
can wish
From the Oracles Breath of Bliss?

Non Impressores audebant ( Prove. 6.19.
tempore duro.)
ADVERTISEMENT.
INtroductio ad Latinam Blasoniam; Or, An Easy Introduction to Latin Blason,
(being both Latin and English;) approved by the Testimonial of the Three Kings
at Arms, and Elias Ashmole, Esquire, Late Windsor-Herald. And Dedicated to the
Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Aylsbury. A Work befitting all Gentlemen,
Lovers of Armory, and the Latin Tongue. Sold by Robert Clavel, at the Peacock
in Paul's Churchyard; Benjamin Billingsley, at the Printing-Press in Cornhill;
and A. Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane.

(...)
