TO THE HONNORABLE THE COMMONS OF THE REALM OF ENGLAND, Assembled in
PARLIAMENT. EXPLANATION. Concerning certain expedients by which the State of
England may reap notable advantage.

BALTAZAR GERBIER KNIGHT.

M. DC. XLVI.

TO THE HONNORABLE The Commons of the Realm of ENGLAND assembled in PARLIAMENT.
EXPLANATION. Concerning certain expedients by which the State of England may
reap notable advantages.
HUMBLY SHOWS
THAT the State may get a present Stock of TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND POVNDS, and a
yearly constant revenevv of THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND POVNDS, and procure to the
people notable advantages and suerty in Estate, Vocation, Trafic and Credit; by
the speedy erecting of a PROTOCOLL Office, BENCHES OF LOAN, BENCHE OF PAYMENT,
and public SAIL OFFICES, etc. At the example of others, where they have been
erected with general applause.

THE first, (which is the Protocoll Office) was first thought on in the first
year of the reign of King Henry the IV. of France, first put in practice in
Picardie and Vermandois; where unconsionnable persons had accustomed
themselves to conceal Morgages, Transactions, Douaries, and other Acts; which
by all Purchassers were deceived in their Bargains, many good famillies and
peaceable persons put to great vexations, long and chargeable processes, which
did often prove the undoing of honorable and honest Famillies, VViddovvs and
Orphans besides other mischievous accidents.

The General States of the united Provinces did at that good example establish
the said Office in their Iuridictions, and did erect the same in the most sure,
regular, complete method, as the time than did permit; did since by the
continuance of able States men, reduce the same in the best and readiest form
as could be thought on; and so sure for all true Proprietaries and Purchassers,
as it proved an impossibility for any unconssionable persons to use any deceat
in their Morgages, Transactions, Douaries, Sail or Gifts, as they were wont
to do, by concealing (as aforesaid) their deeds, and by passing them in
several places, and by unknown persons; Nor was it since possible for
parties to be overtaken by any error, nor by shortness of time, for that the
truth of all proprietaries rights and Estates in possessions of Lands and
Houses was Known at an instant, without their cost; yet with their consent,
otherways not: for that no persons are permitted to view the Records, but
with a ticket subscribed by the Proprietary, which he gives to the party that
is minded to purchasse (or to put forth his money on a Morgage) only to view
the records, when he is fully agreed on Conditions with the said party.

THE Purchasser (as said) being himself the discoverer of the State of the
case, with ease and safety freeth himself of all disputes, quarrels, and
processes: Which discovery is with the least discredit possible to
proprietaries; when it was otherways by the recours had to common Roules;
besides that all Acts were but confusedly (as in a Cahos) put into the said
Common Roules, which is to serve only as for a Iournall.

The Records of this PROTOCOLL Office (which is a particular Record) are in
number answerable to the Parishes in the City and Town wherein the Office is
erected.

THE Records are great Books of the largest paper, consisting of 300 leafes and
no more, to shune confusion; every leaf bearing in chief the name of the
Proprietary of Lands and Houses, in such order as the Houses stand in the City
or Town.

THE leaf bearing the right vallidity, vvorth of the pocession, and any
Morgages thereon, Dovvaries, Gifts or any act soever.

THE Enroulment is immediately after the signing and sealing of deeds; and after
the entering of such acts in the Common Roules.

IF any Propietary, Heir, or Purchasser obmits the enroullements of his
Succession, Gift, Sail, Transport, Morgage (or any other) his right is void,
and forfaited to the State.

THIS public security is a bate to all Purchassers, and to all persons
desirous to put forth a stock of money, and to secure them against all frauds
and incombrances.

THE Records are kept in a secure place from fire, and others accidents.

THEIR Keepers are paid by yearly Stipends, proportionnable to the number of
Books in their managing.

THE Record Keepers are under the general Diteory of an eminent Officer of the
State.

AT the first erection of the said PROTOCOLL Office, H^vv t^ first sto^ money ^
crevvs t^ the Stat^ a Proto^ Office.
all men were bound to proceed to the enroulement of Acts, within the first
six vveeks thereof: Which braught in a present great Stock of money, proceeding
from the rights of Enroulments.

THE Keepers of the Records are accountable (of the rights received for the
Enroulments of Acts) to their general Director.

THE said rights for all Records of Deeds, Successions in Dessendent Assendent
or Colaterall Line, Gifts, Sail, Morgage, or any condition soever are paid by
both parties.

THE General Director is accountable to the State of the rights received for
the said enroullements.

THE rights are in Holland two and half per cent.

IT is humbly conceived that as the said Office of particular PROTOCOL or
Record, Rights Enroul^^ments.
would prove of as great benefit to the Subjects, of the State of England, as
it does to the Subjects of other States, that it would be of particular use to
the State for a porportionnable equallity in the Assessements of SVBSIDIES and
FIFTHIENS. Co^cerni^ Assessem^ of Subsi^ and Fift^


THAT the rights of Enroulments (though the State should put them but at one
per cent paid betvveen the two parties) would produce a vaste stock of money
to the State, How the revenev^ the State would b^ raised by Protoco^ Office.
and a perpetual constant revenevv; by reason of the often change of
Proprietaries, and enroullements of Acts; at least often change of
Proprietaries, of Houses, and the continual acts for Morgages.

Which present stock and yearly revenevv as it would accrevv from those that
are able, so with the more applause, Revene^ acrevvin^ from the^ that are a^
and the a^vantage^ they rec^ tehreby.
that as aforesaid Proprietaries and Purchassers are secured in their rights
and Purchasses; and are thereby freed of all such cost and incombrances as they
otherways are subject unto.

IT is likewise humbly conceived, that the State can augment that stock and
yearly revenevv to a large proportion by erecting throughout the Kingdom (for
the great benefit of the Subject) BENCHES OF LOAN, PVBLIC SAIL OFFICES, and A
BENCH OF PAYMENT: Which is demonstrated first, by BENCHES OF LOAN, as
follovveth, Viz.

THE erecting of BENCHES OF LOAN (...) time ^ Ben^^ of ^^nevve^e ^^blisht,
(...) the ^^nds ^^eof.
begun some two hundred years and above in the Kingdom of Naples, and
throughout all Itally; and at their example were established in other parts of
most trafic, to serve for relief of all Negosiants, Tradsmen and all needy
persons, of what quality and condition soever: And to free them (and all well
gouverned States) of the most pernicious practice of Jewish Benches of Loan,
afterward disguised by the name of Lombards, which prouved to be as Cancors
in any Common-vveal^h for that they did extort of the needy (by a redoublement
of Interest upon interest) first, three score and above in the hundred, for the
bare Loan; and over and above intolerable fees, for enroulment, and
releasement of goods; which in conclusion raised to such a hight, as that
Proprietaries did find themselves at last deprived of their maine stock:
besides that for the most part for want of timly releassement, they lost their
goods on pretense of forfaiture; and no such thing in practice (as in the
BENCHES OF LOAN) to restore to the Owners of the goods any surplus made of
the goods when sold.

IT being likewise found that those Ievvish-Lombards, did export all the
wealth they had gotten during the many years they had practiced their
unconssionnable and most pernicious Usury.

IT mouved good and wise Stats-men to forbid the practice of Lombards, and to
banish the Lombard-keepers for ever: Yet that the public might be supplied,
they settled in their place such BENCHES OF LOAN as could stand with
Conscience, and could be maintained by the undertakers: Allowed them to take
the ordinary use according to Statute, and for satisfying the Charges; as for
House Rent, Store-Roomes, Stipends of Officiers, and all necessaries belonging
to the said Benches.

THIS Establishement being found most Just and Fit, Bench ^ane ^yed by ^emi^
mem^ of the (...)
was recommended to the perpetual Survey, and Protection, of two eminent
persons of Church, and State, and has continued so ever since, without any
interruption, nor any fault found in the Administration.

Like Benches of LOAN have been established throughout all the Land of Liege,
and the Iuridictions of the Prince Elector of Collen, in Lorraine, Brabant,
Flandres, Arthois, Haynault, and throughout all the Iuridictions of the
general States of the United Provinces.

KING HENRY the IV of France, and his Son King Louys the XIII, (on
Remonstrances of horridde abuses committed in that Kingdom by Jewish Brokers
and Lombards) have often denounced their pleasure by Proclamations for the
utter abolishing of that pernicious practice, and instead of it to have BENCHES
OF LOAN established: Yet could not their Just and Pious intention take effect,
though their Edicts have been enacted in the Parliament of Paris, and the
Chamber of Edict: so powerful the Leagues and Combinations of Broakers has
hitherto prouved against that course; only the establishment of a BENCH OF
LOAN has overcome in favor of all Merchants of VVines, Bench o^ Loan b^ gun
in France.
and Fish, whereby the owners receive ready money from the said Benches of
Loan, and so are at an instant dispatched, and provided with money to further
their affairs. Which has been the maine scope in all States, by the erecting
of BENCHES OF LOAN, producing in all parts the readiest and the most easiest
relief to all needy persons. So the general strengtning, and increase of
trading, and a maine remeddy to prevent the sudden breaking of many good and
honnest Merchants; The sudden brea^^ing of M^^chants p^^^vented.
which has been found of forceable experience in the Iuridiction of the
general States of the United Provinces, where there is not a City nor Town,
but is provided with a BENCH OF LOAN; So are all Market-Tovvnes, and Sea
Ports of traffic, where all Merchants and Tradsmen are on a sudden relieved
with money on all such commodities as they are desirous to have ready money
upon, or such commodities as for a time will not well yield their price (when
by the not putting them off they would remain unprovided of such monyes as
they need to satisfy Creditors and Bills of exchange which are drawn on
them, and which otherways would constrain them to break, though, they
have their Storehouses and Shops well stored.) The Husbandman is likewise
by the said Benches enabled to keep his Plovvgh, The rele^^ of Husba^^^men.
and to pay his Landlord, when otherways for want of sail of a full
quantity of his grains (on fit and ordinary market days) he is often
constreined to sell his Cattle, and to let the plovving and mannuring of his
Land cease; which to prevent as well as other inconveniences incident to the
inhabitants of great Cities, Towns, and Seaports, the Magistrates have been so
careful off, Magistra^ of Tovv^ Administrators (...) Benches (...) Loan.
as that they have taken to their particullar task, the Administration of
diverse of the said Benches; as at Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Middelbourgh, Flishing,
and at other Seaports; and put the Benches of the other Towns, and
Market-Tovvns, to men confided by the State, to which the said men are
accountable, for they take all such Bench^s in farm.

And as the State cannot be defrauded of its rights (the Administration of the
said Benches being (as said) put in the hands of honest able men so the State
puts to profit in those BENCHES OF LOAN (kept by the Magistrate) all such Stock
of money, ^^vv the ^^te puts ^profit a (...) of ^uney.
as the State thinks fit to employ.

And thus, ^erall ^antages ^ Bench (...) Loan.
as the State of England can (on the true experience of the general good
which the said establishment of BENCHES OF LOAN does produce in other parts)
procure to the Subjects like advantages, and enable them the more to contribute
to the public occasions of the State,) strenckten trading in all parts of the
Realm, and invite all Forrainers to come to the Seaports with their
Merchandise (since by the ready course of a BENCHE OF LOAN, the said
Forrainers may be soon dispatch, and speedily provide themselves with such
commodities as the Port and Country does afford) so the said State (being
disposed to put a Stock to the erecting, establishing, and administering of
BENCHES OF LOAN in the main Cities, and Ports of the Kingdom,) will make an
incredible great gain, and in a most Just and Laudable course.

And it is thus understood, that the State will raise (without any presure of
the Subject) to a great and ample proportion that Stock, which will accrevv
from the rights of a PROTOCOLL OFFICE, which is the first expedient before
mentionned.

AND if the State should think fit to employ to the Keeping of BENCHES OF
LOAN part of the Stock, which will accrevv from a BENCHE OF PAYMENT, and
likvvise of that of the rights of PVBLICK SAILLE OFFICES: The State will find
(as it is humbly conceived) great facility therein, and that the making use of
a Stock, which the BENCHE OF PAYMENT will produce is grounded on Equity; and
without any presure at all to the Subject, Which is demonstrated, first
concerning a BENCHE OF PAYMENT, as follovveth, Viz.

^acerning ^ench of ^ment.
A BENCHE OF PAYMENT is Kept by the Magistrates of Towns (as so it is requisite
for the public security) at the example of the BENCHES OF PAYMENT in Itally
and in the Nederland Provinces under the State general; It Is the public Cash
of all Negotiants, who (to free themselves of the continual receite, and
payment of monyes, which takes so much of their time as proves too
prejudicial in their affairs) Keep in Banco (as they call it) a constant
stock, without any charge or cost to them, thereon to make their Assignations,
and to raise their Credit by a public fame, of the considerable stock by them
Kept therein.

Experience manifests, that in the said Bench (which is the receptacle of a
great Tresor,) remains continually a vaste ussesse stock of monny; of which
the Aministrators of the Bench do (without any difficulty) put to gain a
great part, and that they can do it without difficulty, experience has
manifested the same diverse times, that though they put forth great part of that
Stock which lays uslesse in the Cash-yet does the said Cash remain so well
provided, as that the Negotiants are readdily served, when they call for their
monny: This has often been made apparent, when Negotiants had been
misinformed by ill grounded brutes (raised by malicious and ignorant persons)
concerning the point of Trust, in the Administrators of the Bench, that they
resolved to put it to a Trial, by dravving at one time ^may thousands of pouns
out of the Bench.

For instance that in Iully 1645, Negotiants did dravv in one day out of the
Bench of Amsterdam, four hundred thousand pound sterlingh, and that they were
immediately after as prompt to redouble their stock in the said Bench, being
confirmed that they might repose on its infalibility; of which they had no
more cause to doubt than on the first day of its erection, which was at the
example of other like Benches, who never failled.

And so it is certain that a great gain is made by putting as said to
profitable use, part of that great stock which lies ussesse therein: which
will (as is humbly conceived) prouve so with a BENCHE OF PAYMENT in London,
in case the present time prouves not absolutely contrary to its erection; which
must have its fondation on a general disposition in all Negotiants to a
vigourous Trading, and to embrace all what may be advantageous unto them.

Which consideration (though in season) could not oblige the Proponant to
pass in silence the use which the State may make by the erecting of a BENCHE
OF PAYMENT, since it is likvvise fit to be annexed to the aforesaid
establishment, tending to the maine relief and advantage of the Subject, and
wherein the interest of the State is likewise concerned, as it is humbly
conceived to be interessed in the erecting of a PVBLICK SAILLE OFFICE, on the
grounds and Method follovving, Viz.

THE great abuses which have been in public outcries and sail of goods;
^ncerning ^aile ^ice.
in diverse places (sold by Officers in Combination with Brokers) who devide
the profits of goods sold at under rattes, when distress constrained the
Proprietaries to part from them at such price as those Officers and Brokers
would put on the said goods, provved such an intolerable grievance to the
need, (when their goods so sold, the monny made thereof, the charge deducted,
did but serve to satisfy their Creditors in part, and the Sergeants, when not
a bed left to the poor distressed to lay on.) That it mouved good States men
to think on a course to free the needy from the said grievance, and to remouve
from the Parish corners the pittyfull and lamentable spectacle of goods sold
by distress. The course they chouse was as follovving, Viz.

THEY made choice of trusty able men, to make Masters of public outcry
Offices, in every City and Town, and appointed fit Houses, to serve for the
public sail of mouvables: did order that the said Masters of sail Office
should afford to all buyars 3 months-time for the payment of such sommes of
monny for the mouvables baught at the said outcry; that the buyar might prouve
a more liberal Chapman; and that consequently the goods might be sold at the
best rate, to the benefit of the Owner. Ordered the said Master to advance to
the party, whole goods were sold, all such sommes as they had yielded in
their said sail; and that he should make it his work (for a set
consideration) to get his rembourssement, which has proved a great advantage
and relief to all needy persons, and furtherance for the clearing and settling
the Estates of all Mortuary houses, Heirs, and Executors.

The States General of the Nederland Provinces have on the said sail Office
the twentieth penny, and do allow to the Master of the Office the like
proportion, for which the needy are releeved, and become gainers, since
othervvays their goods would be sold for half their vallue; by reason of the
combination of Brokers, and that except the term of 3 months be allotted to
the buyars of goods they are not mouved to offer freely for them.

Out of this said Office the State (as aforesaid) will increase its revenevv,
and by employing likewise part of what it may render to the Stock for the
BENCHES OF LOAN; It will augment its revenevv to the proportion as aforesaid.

Considered first, what the PROTOCOLL Office will render throughout the
whole Kingdom, both in ready monny and yearly revenevv, though the State
should direct but one per cent, to be received for the rights of enroulements,
which should be but the half of the rights taken by the General States of
the United Provinces.

Secondly, what the use of monny put into the BENCHES OF LOAN throughout the
whole Kingdom would come unto, the use being no more than according unto
Statute, as before said.

Thirdly, what the twentieth penny of all PVBLICK SAILLE OFFICES throughout
the Kingdom would yield.

Fourthtly, what the Stock, which should be put to profit of that which
will lay uslesse in a BENCHE OF PAYMENT will produce.

Which (as it is humbly conceived) will not be said of the nature of
Taxations, less to prove pressures to the Subject, since (as before said) they
produce notable advantages, as first, Viz.

THE PROTOCOLL Office secures all Proprietaries, freeth them of charges, of
Processes, Disputes, Quarrels The benc^ of the Pr^^positions ^
and Incombrances.

The BENCH OF LOAN; releefes all needy persons (whereof the most poorest are
to a certain some to be assisted Gratis) strencktneth and increases Trade,
and extripated all intolerable Usury.

The BENCHE OF PAYMENT accommodates all negotiants.

The PVBLIC SAIL Office releefes and fits all needy persons that are
constrained to sell their goods.

On all which the State will receive (when pleased to command) all such
further satisfaction as may be requisite, besides the service, dutiful
attendance an application of those that are verst in the said Expedients.


