Misery's Virtues Whet-stone.

RELIQUIAE GETHINIANAE, OR, SOME REMAINS OF THE Most Ingenious and Excellent
LADY, The Lady GRACE GETHIN, Lately Deceased.

BEING A COLLECTION OF Choice DISCOURSES, Pleasant APOTHEGMES, and Witty
SENTENCES.

Written by Her for the most part, by way of Essay, and at Spare Hours.

Published by her nearest Relations to preserve her Memory, and Digested for
Method's sake under proper Heads.

Prove. xxxi. 31. Let Her own Works Praise her in the Gates.

Printed by D. Edwards, for the AUTHOR. 1699.

modern bookplate

To the much Honored, Sir GEORGE NORTON of Abbots-Leigh in the County of
Somerset, Baronet.
SIR,
THE known Loyalty of your Family, and that most Eminent and memorable Instance
of it, the Protecting the sacred Person of our late most Gracious Sovereign,
King Charles the Second, in his most happy Disguise in your House near Bristol,
when being hunted as a Partridge upon the Mountains, he took Shelter under the
Shadow of your Roof, and from thence escaped, by a miraculous Providence from
the many Snares that were laid for him, by his bloody Enemies; This alone will
eternalize your Name, and render you deservedly Famous to Postetrity, and will
also bear a large and a glorious part in the History of those Times, and of the
Restoration of that Illustrious Monarch.

But there is also another Monument to preserve the Name and Honor of your
Family, which at the Request and Desire of your most virtuous and Religious
Lady, is here presented to your view, and dedicated unto you.

It is indeed but an imperfect Collection, some scattered and inco-herent
Fragments, the Gleanings (as I may call them) and REMAINS of a most excllent
Person, your own Offspring and Issue; and therefore, you Sir, have the best
Right and Title to this Product of her overslowing Wit and Fancy, and at the
same time (which very rarely meets in one Person) most Profound and solid
Judgment; which may serve as some faint Idea to show us, of what an Inestimable
Treasure the World has been unhappily deprived by the Primature Death of this
admirable Young Lady your Daughter.

But as imperfect as it is, yet from this light Taste, this short and transient
view of what she did but a her spare Hours, as her (...) only; and by the by,
it is easy to see what transcendant Strength of Reason and Engagement she was
Mistress of, though at very young and tender years; what an excellent Example
and Pattern of Virtue the World might have been blessed withal, to help and
reform it in this degenerate and worst Ages; and what admirable maxims of
Prudence and Piety she would have been capable of giving for the Conduct of
Human Life: All which, coming from so fine an hand, would have been read and
admired (when most others would have been despised) by the most celebrated Wits
and Critics of the Age, and could not have chosen but have had a mighty
Instuence upon them. It will, I doubt not, be looked upon as an inestimable
Treasure by all her Friends; and as even the Filings of Gold are precious, and
carefully preserved, so will those GOLDEN REMAINS of this most Excellent Lady,
be carefully laid up and valued as they deserve, by all that knew her; and
especially Sir, by you her Father, and by her most affectionate and afsticted
Mother, as the best Relics of a Person so very deservedly dear to you Both;
and who can never die so long as this Monument of her Virtue, Wit, and
Ingenuity shall continue, which I prophecy, shall outlive the Marble
Monuments; which you her dear Parents, in Testimony of your most tender and
affectionate Remembrance of Her, have with great Cost and Care erected to her
Memory in Westminster-Abby, She being the last of your Surviving Issue.

That your Lady and your self, may in this your unspeakable Loss and
Affliction, be mutual Comfort to, and always happy in each other; That you may
be blessed together with long Prosperity here on Earth, and enjoy everlasting
Happiness and Felicity hereafter, is the hearty Desire and Prayer of

Sir, Your most faithful and humble Servant J. M.
April 4. 1699.
A POEM By the AUTHOR at a Eleven years Old.
POor, Dull Mortals, who only seek to know
The false Draught, called, Happiness below;
When this is only thus to let us see,
If this be termed happy, what must Heaven be?
For do we not account it a great grace,
When often we behold our Princes Face,
And when Commands their Pleasure is to lay,
We as an Honor, readily Obey;
Much more Ambitious then ought we to be
To serve a God, so Just, Great, Good as he,
Who as to Ransom his blessed Son has sent,
That he our Fatal ruin might prevent;
And lest his Just Commands might e're seem hard,
A Crown Immortal promised a Reward,
Rewarded by our Savior's Glorious Merits,
By Faith, Love, and Obedience, we Inherit.
A POEM In Praise of the AUTHOR.
I That hate Books (such as come daily out
By Public License to the Reading Rout)
A Due Religion yet observe to this,
And here assert if any thing's amiss,
It can be only the Compiler's Fault,
Who has ill dressed the Charming Author's Thought,
That was all Right, Her Beauteous Looks were joined
To a no less admired Excelling Mind,
But oh! This Glory of Frail nature's dead,
As I shall be that Write, and you that Read,
Once to be out of Fashion, I Will conclude
With something that may tend to Public Good,
I wish that Piety, for which in Heaven
The Fair is Placed, to the Lawn-Sleeves were given,
Her Justice to the Gnot of Men whose Care
From the Raised Millions is to take their Share.
W. C.

A Necessary PREMONITION TO THE READER.
THese few scattered Remains, of that Incomparable and most Excellent Lady, the
Lady Grace Gethin, Daughter of Sir George Norton of Abbots-Leigh in the County
of Somerset, Knight, and Wife of Sir Richard Gethin of Grott in the County of
Cork, in the Kingdom of Ireland, Barronet, having been fortunately found and
preserved, 'twas judged to be great pity that so rich a Treasure of Wit and
Ingenuity, should be laid aside and buried in Oblivion.

I know it is a vast Disadvantage, and therefore a great Injury, even to most
exact and celebrated Authors, to publish their private undigested Thoughts and
first Notions hastily set down, without Method or Order, and designed only as
Material or a Foundation for a future structure to be built thereon, which is
Generally the Case of posthumous Works, set forth without the Authors last
hand, who therefore seldom gain any Credit by them, but on the contrary, if
great allowances upon these accounts, be be not heartily made, do lose a great
part of that Esteem and Reputation, which formerly they had justly acquired.

That therefore this Monument, which is intended to perpetuate the Memory, and
illustrate the Fame of this Excellent Person, may neither in the whole be any
real prejudice thereto, nor in any of the parts thereof come short of that
great and just Expectation, which the World had of Her while she was alive, and
still has of every thing, that is the Genuine product and Issue of Her Pen. I
think my self in Justice obliged to give some account of what is here set
forth, and thereby exposed to public Censure.

As 1st, That it was written for the most part in have, were her first
Conceptions; and overflowing of her Luxuriant Fancy, noted with her Pencil at
spare Hours, or as she was Dressing, as her (...) only; and set down just as
they came into her Mind, as never designed for any others View but her own.

If any thing herein seems light or Trivial, or not so proper to come from a
Ladies Pen of such severe Virtue and Piety as she was, it is to be remembered,
that these were the Early Flights of Youthful Fancy (being scarce 20 when she
died) being writ some years before, and the first and free Productions of her
most private and unrestrained Thoughts, and which she was Religiously careful,
should come to no others view; But there is in them such strength of Wit, such
handsome Raillery, such Essay, and Natural Eloquence, that it was not thought
fit wholly to stifle and suppress them, and deprive the World of so Great a
Treasure. And there is the less-Concern in this Matter, because they are not
designed for every ones public View, a few Copies being only intended to be
Printed, enough to preserve her Memory, and for the private use of some persons
who were either personally acquainted with her, Admirers of her Wit and Virtue,
or particularly known to those that were; and so it is not doubted but they
will make candid Interpretation of all.

THE REMAINS OF THE Most Accomplished and Excellent Lady, The Lady GRACE GETHIN.
Digested under their Proper HEADS.
Of Friendship.
FRiendship without Tenderness, gives neither great Content nor Disquiet; some
have such an insensible Friendship, they can part with their Friends without
Melancholy, when absent they think not of them; they render Courtesies without
Pleasure and receive them without Acknowledgment; they neglect all petty Cares,
the misfortunes of those they Love touch 'em not; Generosity and Ostentation
has as much part in all they Act as Friendship; their Love is so lukewarm, that
the least Contest is ready to infringe their Friendship: They Love as if they
loved not, and their Friendship is very much interested, and built upon
Self-love. We see every day these ordinary Friends without Tenderness forsake
those to whom they have promised Love, as soon as Fortune frowns on 'em. There
are some that cannot bear the long sickness of Friends, and care little for
seeing 'em when they are no longer in a Condition to Direct them. But they are
not truly Friends that have not a tender Heart; for it is That only that makes
the sweetness of Friendship. Tenderness has yet something more particular, it
has I know not what Air of Gallantry that renders it yet more Diverting: It
Inspires Civility in those that are capable of it, and there is as much
Difference between an ordinary and a tender Friend, as between a tender Friend
and a Lover.

The better to define Tenderness, it is a certain Sensibility of Heart,
inseparable from noble Souls, virtuous Inclinations, and solid Minds; which
makes them, when they have Friendship, have it sincerely and ardently, and have
a lively Sense of the Griefs and Joys of those they Love. It Is this Tenderness
obliges them to love better to be with their unhappy Friend, than to be in any
place of the greatest Diversion; It makes them excuse their Faults and Defects;
It makes them do great Services with Joy, and not neglect the least Cares; It
renders particular Conversation more sweet than general; It appeases any
Disorder which may happen among Friends, it unites their Hearts, and all their
Desires: In a word, it comprehends all the sweetness of Friendship, it gives
the greatest Delight, and savours nothing of the irregularity of Love, but
resembles it in many things else. Those of a stupid common Friendship take care
only to keep the fairest Letters of their Friends; but those of a tender
Friendship keep with pleasure their least Notes; they harken to an obliging
word with Joy, and by an unexpressible Charm, those of a truly tender Heart
find no trouble to visit those for whom they have a Friendship, though they be
sick and Melancholy.

Friendship is the Allay of Sorrow, the ease of our Passion, the Discharge of
our Opression, the Sanctuary to our Calamities, the Councellor of our Doubts,
the Clarity of our Minds, the Remission of our Thoughts, and the Improvement of
whatever we meditate. Virtue, Learning and Abilities may be despised; only
Friendship is known to be so useful and profitable that none can despise it.

He that does a base thing in Zeal to his Friend, burns the Golden thread that
ties their Hearts together. The greatest Bond and Demonstration of Real
Friendship, is to choose to have his Friend advanced in Honor, in Reputation,
in the Opinion of Wit or Learning before himself. Certainly, Friendship is the
greatest Bond in the World, which is the Marriage of Souls: It has no other
Measures but its own, being it self as great as can be expressed. Beyond Death
it cannot go, to Death it may; Friendship being the greatest Bravery and
Ingenuity in the World; He is to be chosen to my Friend who is most Worthy and
most Excellent in himself; not he that can do most good to me. Choose to your
Friend him that is wise, good, secret, ingenious and honest; all which are the
very food of Friendship. He is only fit to be my Friend that can give me
Council, or defend my Cause, or guide me Right, or relieve my Needs, or can and
will, when I need it, do me Good, Comfort me in my Sorrows, be pleasant to me
in private, and useful in public; that makes my Joy double, and divides my
Grief between himself and me: Thus is Friendship the best thing in the World,
and were it not for Pleasure and Profit, there were no need of Friends.

Never accuse your Friend, nor believe him that does. He that is angry for
every slight Fault, breaks the Bonds of Friendship. He may be weak, and thou
may need pardon as well as he; for thou do not Contract with an Angel
when thou take a Friend into thy Bosom; to whom give Counsel wisely and
charitably in all that is prudent, useful and necessary; but leave him to his
Liberty without Anger if thy Council be rejected, for Advice is no Empire. Love
to be with him; Treat him Nobly; Do to himall that is worthy of Love; Bear with
his Infirmities; Give him Gifts and upbraid him not: Admonish your Friend
without Bitterness or Reproach, praise him with worthy purposes, just Causes,
and friendly Endearments; for he is not my Friend who will be my Judge whether
I will or no. Never be a Judge between two Friends in a matter where both set
their heart upon the Victory; For where Friends are the Parties, thou losest
one, which of 'em soever get the day. When my Friend is dead, I will mourn for
him, perform his will, and do for him as if he were alive.

Those that have a rational and tender Friendship will not only be secret in
what they are desired, but will also be silent in some things they are told,
though the Party do not desire it: But one ought in Generosity to have a kind of
Charitable discretion for those that are not wise enough in their own Concerns.

Friendship is never destroyed by Friendship; it is something that is stronger
than it self must force it out of the heart it is once possessed of; it is only
Love can do that; for when all is done one way make new Friends without injury
to the Old: There are Friendships on the account for Love; such as are in Love
will Endeavor to make Friendships, whether their Friends like 'em to not like
'em. A love mixed with Friendship is the most lasting and is the Mistress of all
the Qualifications requisite in a true and Generous Friend; and it is very
possible, in my Judgment, for Love to become Friendship, and Friendship Love;
though some will not allow a great Friendship and violent Love can subsist
together in one Heart. when One has Friendship for an agreeable Lover, it wants
but little of being Love.

Friendship and love do sometimes resemble, but when that happen, the the
Friendship is very tender, or the Love not very great; but I hold one may love
with such a tender Amity, as may be a Medium between Love and Common Friendship.

There are some Friends to whom one would commit things of Importance and not
Trifles; and there are some to whom one would tell Trifles but nothing of
Concern; and Love is a great Affair, and not to be enstrusted to every Friend.
One is never secure, if our Friend be not so Exact that he will never tell our
Secrets.

Pythagoras composed many Excellent Verses in praise of Heroic Friendship; he
Established a Community among his Disciples, for he Confidently Maintained
there ought to be no distinct Interest among Friends; if there be, it is only
Society, not Friendship.

Sublime Heroic Friendship is as difficult to find as Constant Love, and hard
to be cultivated: the slight Friendships of the world are more Convenient,
though not so Noble, Excellent and solid; but then it never gives us much
trouble, nor makes us partake of the Misfortunes of our Friends; we are not
much concerned at the Injuries they suffer, but take all the flowers of
Friendship, and leave the thorns to those sincere and Generous Friends, that
resent all their sorrows without Exception, Engage in all their Interests, and
maintain 'em courageously against all the World; who have no different
Fortunes, but equal concern in the Honor of each other; who cannot be poor
while one is Rich, nor in Health if their Friend be sick. It Is not Every body
is capable of this, and though they wish it, they cannot attain to it; therefore,
for fear of the like, I Am content to love according to the Mode.

I conclude this Subject with the Saying of the Spaniard.

-- Grudge not to lend,
Thy Heart, thy Hand, thy Fortune to thy Friend.
Of Love.
Some affirm Tenderness a Quality more necessary for Love than Friendship. it is
true that Affection produces by the help of Reason, and which is conducted and
governed by it, may produce the Effects of Tenderness; but Love which is
commonly inconsistent with Reason, or at least never Subject to it, it has
need of Tenderness to correct its Stupidity and Inconsiderateness. In Effect,
Love without Tenderness has none but impetuous Desires which cannot be
confined; Such Lovers consider only their own Satifaction without any regard to
the Honor of the Party beloved: Whereas true Tenderness takes more care of the
interest, credit and honor of the beloved Object, than of its own.

Almost all Lovers in general endeavor only to please themselves without any
Reservation, and have the Impudence in a rude, uncivil way to ask the greatest
favors as if they were due to them. These free Lovers which are Enemies of
Tenderness and laugh it to scorn, are commonly Insolent and full of Vanity,
easy to Anger, difficult to appease, Indiscreet when Favored insupportable
when ill heated; they fancy the greatest mark of Love they can give, is always
to wish to be made happy; they value not, or at least are not contented with
favorable Looks, obliging words, and all those little things which so
transport those that have tender souls; they are Lovers that read their
Mistresses Letters but once over, nor have they any joyful Emotion when they
recive 'Em; they know not how to rave, speak idly, nor sigh agreeably, and are
ignorant of a certain pleasing Melan choly which proceeds from the tenderness
of an Amorous Heart, and is often more agreeable than any other Delight: These
noisy Lovers make all the proof of Love consist in profuse Expenses, and are
insensible of all the Delicacy's and inward Delights of it. This sort of
Passion inspires a Brutal Jealousy, and contrary to that of a Lover, without a
generous tender Heart, they not only hate the Lover but their Mistress too, but
the other so respect their Mistresses that they often restrain their anger,
against their Rival fearing to displease them.

To love well, a Lover must have a natural Tenderness before he Loves, but this
rarely happens; with most, a Delicate Sensibility gives all the Punishments and
Pleasures of Love: That Love is most perfect that has least of Self-interest in
it, when Love is weaker than Reason, it is no perfect Love. It Is not to be
wondered if the Love of a man of higher Condition than the person loved
continue, to that Degree, that it obliges him to marry her, for Hope Enlivens
and Augments the Flame, so that he wants nothing whence he may derive a full
confidence of his Happyness if himself pleases; They are not the Lovers they
would appear to be who can forbear possessing what they love out of a
consideration of Interest. I am one that believes that Love which Grows with
out hopes, Subsists without it, and meets with nothing but invincible
Obstacles, is more Obliging than that which cannot but hope though it would not.
But I am of the Opinion that what Hope does in the hearts of these Lovers,
Glory effects in the other, and that there is a secret Satisfaction in Loving a
Person of great Quality that has Beauty, Wit and Virtue.

It were Madness to think one's self obliged to love any Body that loves us:
Merit and Services are little considered unless our Acceptance sets a Value
upon them, which is best, to have Merit without Love, or Love without Merit?
Fine Qualities are desirable, chiefly be cause they make us loved: Since there
fore their End is to please, he that happens to please without Merit, is more
happy than he that has it, yet cannot please those whom he wishes to please;
But one cannot help being filled with a troublesome Indignation to see Merit
Neglects.

It Is no great Difficulty to dissemble love; and when one finds a Lady that is
merry, of a easy Humor and gay Spirit, it is a Diversion to give her a
voluntary love which you may leave when you please, and which for the present
gives you some delight; while this lasts, one may accustom one self to speak to
Her more than to Another; I look on her; I praise her; I sigh artificially:
sing light airs, which she takes to her self; express my self in Amorous
Verses, Languishing Looks, and absolutely pretend to love her; If this pleases,
she is more free and Obliging than he; she hopes all things, and feels, I know
not what, which he calls love. In this slight imaginary love it is not like
others, where love fore-runs Hope, but in this, Hope precedes Love. It Is
Necessary she be not so very Complaisant and of too easy a Carriage; but,
choose one neither too severe nor too easy; who has no particular Gallant, yet
affects Gallantry; fair and young without Capriciousness: These Demy-Mistresses
you may love without despair; Leave when you please, and pass your time
pleasantly enough.

If one pleases to observe, one may make pleasant Discoveries: when one sees a
Man of Sense visit a simple Woman, one may imagine she has an agreeable
Kinswoman or Acquaintance; and on the other hand, if one sees a Woman of Wit
frequent the Company of a foolish Fellow, I conclude he is her Cully one way or
other; or if she seem to like one whom it is impossible she should like in
Justice or Interest, I conclude it is only a shadow, under which she may see him
whom she really Loves, but after all, Appearances are deceitful.

When one entertains a Passion, One is very apt to flatter ones self, tho'there
be a great disproportion between ones self and the Person one loves; so that if
he have not a real Hope, he has something that is like it that bears him up and
comforts him. I Will not be positive but there may be a Lover that can Hope
nothing; if so, nothing can be more obliging than this sort of Love; yet I am
fully persuaded no Woman can ever be obliged to a Lover for his Love; for it is
certain, when a Man happens to be in love, it is because he cannot avoid it; One
may Love without hope of being favored, though not without Hope of being loved.

One that Courts a melancholy Mistress must be very Cautious in the manner of
telling his Love; he must pay both great and small Services, be full of
Sweetness, Tenderness and Assiduity, and among all these, a little Ingredient
of Despair; and if one must endure so much, it is better not to be loved. If a
merry Mistress be angry, she is pacified with a Serenade; all Quarrels are but
trifles which are reconciled at the next Treat or Diversion; if they do not
love so zealously, neither do they expect so much Love, but give as much
liberty as they take; they require nothing but what is agreeable in it self;
they will walk with you, laugh with you, sing and dance with you; and to do all
this for the love of them, certainly is not very difficult; And is it not
better to serve these than those that are full of Morals and the Politics of
Law? And who exact solid Tears instead of Pleasures? A man, if he would
overcome such a One, must mix with his Love the Glory to have it fervent, and
must have an Amorous kind of Ambition, to redouble the Violence of that
Passion: for it is a pleasure after having been long a slave to a Mistress to be
at last a Conqueror, and to Vanquish that Heart that seems Invincible.

I know not which is worse, to be Wise to a Man that is continually changing
his Loves, or to an Husband that has but one Mistress whom he loves with a
constant Passion; and if you keep some measure of Civilty to her, he will at
least esteem you: But he of the roving Humor plays an hundred Frolicks that
divert the Town and perplex his Wife. She often meets with her Husbands
Mistress, and is at a loss how to carry her self toward her. It Is true, the
constant man is ready to sacrifice every moment his whole Family to his Love;
He hates any place where she is not, is prodigal in what concerns his Love,
covetous in other respects; Expects you should be blind to all he does, and
though you cannot but see, yet must not dare to complain; and though both he that
lends his Heart to whosoever pleases it, and he that gives it entirely to One,
do both of them require the exactest Devoir from their Wives; yet I know not if
it benot better to be Wife to an unconstant Husband (provided he be something
Discreet) than to a constant Fellow who is always perplexing her with his
inconstant Humor. For the Unconstant Lovers are commonly the best humored;
but let 'em be what they will, Women ought not to be unfaithful for Virtue's
sake and their own, nor to offend by Example. It is one of the best bonds of
Charity and Obedience in the Wife, if she think her Husband Wife; which she
will never do if she find him Jealous.

Ld Bacon:
Wives are young Men's Mistresses, Companions for middle-Age and old men's Nurses.

When I speak of Love, I do not mean those trifling Loves which do not deserve
the name they bear; when a man gives himself to Mirth and has no other design
but Diversion; I speak of an unusual Love, that is ardent and sincere, grounded
on Esteem and Virtue, and when once they have exchanged Hearts, their Desires
are the same, and likely so to continue. Ingratitude after this Dearness is the
most detestable Ingratitude, to one who gives all when they give their hearts.
If they love thus; there wants nothing but Occasion, and that depends on
Fortune.

If any persons of Wit be either merry or sad without Cause, it is a sign they
are in Love.

A little love is pleasant, too much is troublesome.

To know all the delights of love, one must know all the bitters of it; and he
that cannot make great Afflictions out of trivial Matters, shall never take
great delight in great Favors; but if one will be happy in love he must fancy
to himself great Pleasure from slight Favors; the very sight of the place
where his Mistress has been, must fill his heart with Joy, but such a joy as
must at once both grieve and rejoice him; forin Love, Contraries often meet.

Nothing is more difficult than to reconcile Fear and Love, and it is a great
Masterpiece to make ones self beloved by those that fear us. Those transitory
Loves which succeeded one another do not deserve the name of Love; some think
if they have a sincere constant passion for One, that they are not Inconstant
if now and then they make some transitory Gallantrys, provided that one be
chief Mistress, and they ready, when she pleases, to sacrifice them all to her.
But this is very Unjust; for they would have an Entire heart, and are Jealous
but of a kind Look to another, though they take the liberty to share themselves
to every Woman they like in the World. But we often see, those we confide in
most, deceive us most; and therefore we ought not to put on an entire cosidence
in any.

Ld Bacon
Nuptial Love makes Man kind: friendly Love perfecteth it; but wanton Love
corrupts it.

It is a true Rule, that love is ever rewarded either with its Reciprocal, or
with an inward and secret Contentment.

A man serves his Prince, but gives himself to his Mistress, and she her self
to her Lover. It Is only Love alone that nnites Hearts, though Friendship also
boasts to have that power: Two dear Friends may each have a Mistress that shall
somewhat divide them, at least render their Friendship less considerable; but
if Love unites two Persons that have tender Breasts and intelligent Minds, I
defy Friendship to divide 'em.

Of Gratitude.
IT IS a Question, if Benefits oftener produce Friendship, than Friendship it
self or great Deserts without Benefits: I think Benefits seldom produce
Friendship; for they are as apt to wear out of the mind as Grief, from which
every moment steals a part, so time weakens Gratitude as well as Affliction:
neither will Friendship without Desert produce a tender Friendship in Generous
Minds. We are not obliged to love Every one that loves us, and on that account
are ready to do us Good on all Occasions; for this officious Love often
proceeds from Vanity; and if we are always ready to acknowledge and return
their Civilties, it is enough. For Friendship and Gratitude are two things; we
ought to have Gratitude for all from whom we receive any Benefit, but it is not
in our power to love whom we please; Desert alone disposes to a Friendship, for
increates Esteem; Benefits ought to engage us to their Interests, and beget a
kind of Gratitude in our Minds, the Effects whereof resemble Friendship: such
as have only Love to recommend them, it is enough to have a Compassion and Pity
for them.

Ingratitude is the worst Vice, and most opposite to Nature and Equity. it is
hardly known among Brutes, for Benefits and Kindness has mollified Lions; Only
Men are capable of Ingratitude. This Vice is directly opposite to Justice; it
overthrows all laws of Society, which to reasonable People ought to be a
continual Armory of good Offices. The Laws of Humanity bid us do good to
whomsoever stands in need of it: Is it not most just that we acknowledge from
whom we receive a Benefit? But there are such ill Tempers in the World, that
when they have been very much obliged, they decline to own to whom they are
obliged, and at length cannot endure 'em; and some are of that odd humor, they
will not make the least return to those that have done all things for them, yet
render considerable to such as never did them the least Courtesy; they are of
the Humor of those who had rather make Presents, than pay Debts. But the best
is, all the World explains against this Vice, and there is no Ungrateful Person
but decry's Ingtatitude.

Common Benefits are to be communicated to all, but particular ones with
Choice: To be thankful for small Benefits, shows we value Men's Minds, not their
Trash.

It Is strange this Vice of Ingratitude, void of all pleasure, should be so
General; He that usurps the Good, of another, enriches himself by it; A
detracter has the pleasure of being easily believed; A vindicative Person has
the Content of being revenged of his Enemy; but an ungrateful Man has the
constant Displeasure of being stung with Shame and Remorse whenever he thinks
what has been done for him; but those who arrive at the highest pitch of
Ingratitude, never think of what has been done for them; but if he does not
think at all, there is still no Pleasure in not thinking of it. It Is a Question
which is the worst Ingratitude, that of a King or his People, Master or
Servant; and among Friends, that of Fathers or Children, Husbands or Wives, a
Lover or his Mistress? There are several Degrees of it, and I think one may be
positive there is no Equality under the Sun They may be divided into three
Orders, viz. in point of Duty, Friendship and Love, there are Laws which direct
Kings to Govern, and People to obey; but none to teach Gratitude in Love; the
Morality of Love is no where to be found but in Sonnets; Love being usually
nothing but a piece of Gallantry diverting the World with pleasant Songs and
Verses. This is a slighter Ingratitude much than in Friendship. The Ingratitude
of Friends causes Hatred, and divides Families; that of bad Kings causes a
thousand Injustices, that of Subjects sedition, Revolts and continual Wars;
that of Husbands and Wives, criminal Loves and tragical Deeds; therefore
Ingratitude in Duty is most Dangerous. An ungrateful Friend can never be a
truly worthy Man, but one that is Ungrateful in Duty, may; for Fortune
justifies many things. Ingratitude in Friendship is yet more detestable, for
Kings do not choose their Subjects. Nor People their Kings often; the same may
be applied to Fathers and Children; and even as to Husbands and Wives, Interest
makes more Marriages than Love or Choice: So that if there be a defect in their
Duty, though they are to blame, yet it is the less, because not loving at all,
they lessen the Obligation; and fancying their Duty less, no wonder if they
easily dispense with part of what they owe; and this is to be said for them,
That since they cannot love whom they please, they cannot be obliged in spite
of Inclination. But our Friends we choose, we are Voluntarily obliged to them;
We are not constrained to love 'em by any Laws, or any disordered Passion, but
by consequence Nature, Justice, Reason, Virtue and Honor, Exact of us a
correspondent Return of Good Offices, and though we want the power, we ought
never to forget it, but publish and own it with pleasure.

What confidence can there be put in a Man who is failing to his Friend? The
Ungrateful Man ruins his Reputation in the World, and insensibly mischiefs
Himself more than others. It Is possible he that is ungrateful to his Prince, may
be Grateful to his Friend, Mistress or Relation, but an Ungrateful Friend is
capable of any Ingratitude: For if one receive a Benefit from an Enemy, if he
be so noble and Generous as to confer it, one is obliged to acknowledge it as
much as to a Friend; and I know not if one is not obliged to Gratitude, though
one refuses the services they would do one.

Ingratitude is so common in the Minds of People, that from the King to a
Slave, every one has met with Ingratitude. If a Prince be Just and Good, the
People think he ought to be so, and therefore they are not obliged to him for
it. Kings, because above Masters, think they owe no reward to their Faithful
Subjects, and that Tyranny is a right of Sovereignty. It Is the same in
Republics; for they imagine those that obey can never do it blindly enough,
and never trouble themselves with acknowledgments. Masters believe their Slaves
born to do them service without Reward, and they on the other side think that
their least service ought not to be unrewarded by their Masters; If we oblige a
Friend, he thinks it an obligation of Friendship, and at best, but slightly
esteems it: A Father because he has given Life to his Child, thinks he ought to
be as much in Subjection as when he was an Infant, and gives him no thanks for
all his Endeavors to please him; The Children know their Birth is not the
greatest Obligation, but repine for the Life they gave, if they do not all for
them that they think they are able. Husbands whose Authority, is Established by
Force and Custom think their Wives happy in Obeying them, and give them no
thanks for all their Complacency; and Wives that have either Beauty or Virtue,
imagine their Husbands too happy in having married them; If Fair, they are
impertinent, if Wise, Insolent. And a Lover is always charging his Mistress
with Ingratitude, and though he should receive a thousand Favors, would yet make
a thousand Repinings; If at any time he has a less favorable Look than usual,
he murmurs, threatens to change his Love; and at length becomes ungrateful.

There would be much less Ingratitude in the World, were there less sloth, for
commonly the supine negligent Persons are the most ungrateful, who would
willingly be obliged to all the World without obliging any. There are some
Women who value no service that is done 'em, can forget a thousand considerable
good services, without ever thinking of a Return; but because they are Fair and
love their Beauty above all things, never forget one Flattery, but will Love
them best that deceive them most. But it is difficult to Examine all the
different Ingratitudes the World is full of, they are so Various.

'T would be a cruel thing to be obliged to make returns to all that pretend to
love one, or else be counted ungrateful, Impossibility sets bounds to all
things. We should not be truly Grateful if we were so with Injustice. We ought
not to injure one Friend to oblige another; And when it is said we ought to
acknowledge all Good Offices, it is meant so as we may with Reason.

Of Death-
THE very thoughts of Death disturbs ones Reason; and though a Man may have many
Eexcellent Qualities, yet he may have the Weakness of not Commanding his
Sentiments. This is certain, Nothing is worse for ones health than to be in
fear of Death. There are some so Wise as neither to hate nor fear it; But for
my part, I have an Aversion for it and with Reason; for it is a rash
inconsiderate thing, that always comes before it is looked for; always comes
unseasonably, disturbs all the pleasures of Life, parts Friends, and has
respect to nothing, ruins Beauty, laughs Youth, draws a dark Veil over all the
pleasures of Life, and is Inflexible. But this may be said for it, it Equals
all men, cures all Desires, ends all Misfortunes, satisfies Ambition,
determines love of Hatred, opens the gate to Good Fame, and extinguishes Envy;
and this dreadful Evil is but the Evil of a Moment, and what we cannot by any
means avoid: And it is That that makes it so terrible to me, for were it
uncertain, Hope might diminish some part of the Fear; but when I think I must
die, and that I may die every moment, and that too a thousand several ways, I Am
in such a Fright, as you cannot imagine. I see dangers where perhaps there
never was any. I Am peswaded it is happy to be somewhat dull of apprehension in
this Case, and yet the best way to cure the pensiveness of the Thoughts of
Death bring, is to think of it as little as possible. When against my will I
hear of the Death of any One, I sift a cause as far as I can from being
applicable to my self: For they who search so deep in the bottom of things are
never at quiet. Some are so inclined to fear that though they are neither on Sea,
River or Creek, but in good Health in their Chamber, yet are they so well
instructed with the fear of Dying, that they do not Measure it only by the
present dangers that wait on us. Some cannot Enjoy themselves in the
pleasantest place and Company in the World. If it Thunders; Fear all that may
happen; fear the Earth may chance to shake as well in England as in the Indies:
It Is true, all these Fears amount to Nothing; If the Earth must, it will shake,
whether we will or no; If a Thunderbolt must fall, it will, and as likely in
the place where you seek Refuge, as in any other; Then, is it not best to
submit to God? But some People cannot do it as they would, and though they are
not destitute of Reason, but perceive they are to blame, yet even at the same
time that their Reason Condemns them, their Imagination makes their Hearts feel
what it pleases. The best way to prevent our Fears when we come to die, is our
liveing Holy and Innocent Lives: so making it the business of our whole life
to prepare for Death. And truly to consider aright, One ought to think of Death
as an Occasion of being Frightened from Sin, and since I must infallibly see him
one day, it is best not to be so great a stranger to him.

Our Savior has perfumed and softened the Bed of our Grave by his own Dying
and being Buried: And how can it grieve us to tread in his steps to Glory?

To have Death easy, think of that Glorious Life that follows it; We can
endure Pain for Health, much more for Glory; How many Crowns and Scepters lie
piled up at the Gate of Death? Have we so often seen our selves die in our
Friends, and should we shrink at our own Change? Has our Maker and Redeemer
sent for us, and are we loath to go, who will put us in possession of a Glorious
Inheritance? 'Twas for Us Our Savior triumphed over Death: Is there any fear
of a foiled Adversary? He that lives Christianly, dies boldly; He that lives
miserably dies willingly; He that knows Death, and foresees Glory, dies
Cheerfully and Triumphantly.

Of Speech.
SOme persons will speak so much that one cannot interpose a Word, and others
are so silent that one is almost obliged to speak continually; So that I know
not which is worst and insupportable One who always speaks, or one who must
always be spoke to.

He that talks what he knows will also talk what he knows not; Some can talk of
nothing but what is past, others, of nothing but the present. It adds no small
Reverence to Men's Manners and Actions if they be not altogether open: No man
can be secret, except he give himself a little scope of Dissimulation, which is
the Skirt or Train of Secrecy.

Fluent and Luxurious Speech may become Youth well, but not Age.

Some think that to speak well, one should Choose only select Words, but it is
certainly best to speak easy and Natural, but we are to avoid an affected
Negligence; One ought not to affect hard words, but whosoever speaks, should
make himself Intelligible.

The Honorable part of Speech is to give the Occasion; again to moderate and
pass to something else, for then that leads the Dance; it is also Good in
Discourse and Conversation to vary and intermix Speech of the present Occasion
with Arguments; Tales with Reason; Asking of Questions with telling Opinions;
He that has a Satirical Vein, as he makes others afraid of his Wit, so he has
need to be afraid of others Memory.

There are those whose Thoughts come near the understanding of Matters, but
their Words do so intricate their Conceptions, that one cannot understand what
they would be at; and there are others that do not understand themselves, so
that they are not only to seek for their Words but their Apprehensions too. The
first are ambiguous in their Discourse, because they choose not fit Words to
express their Sentiments, the other, their Thoughts being confused, there are
no Words to fit 'em. Speech of a Man's self ought to be seldom and well chosen;
Speech that touches toward others should be spareingly used; for Discourse
ought to be a Field, without coming home to any particular Man.

It often happens that Men of good Sense speak little; but seldom that a great
Talker has a clear Judgment, yet it is seldom that those who are Masters of Wit
do ^most wholly decline speaking, but it is often that persons of much Wit are
too talkative; for Wit is a Fire that will discover it self, and though several
Extraordinary Men have affected to speak little, yet they have made themselves
known by their Writings or Actions Wit cannot, be concealed: There are great
Poets, great Princes, great Philosophers that have been very sparing of their
Speech, but their Works speak for 'em, and prove their silence proceeded not
from Stupidity. But it is not the same with those people whose Wit is at their
Tongues end, but their Actions are dumb. One may have Judgment, and speak much,
but those that speak too much have none. For though there seem little difference
between one that speaks very much and one that speaks too much; yet it is as
Liberality and Prodigality, the one a Virtue, the other a Vice. Yet some that
speak well may speak too much, and by an over-forwardness to show their Parts
and their Judgment, interrupt every one, and snatch all opportunities to speak:
But when a man loves to speak because Nature has given him an easy Expression,
a capacious Mind, a quick Fancy, a Memory stored with choice and Rational
Notions; when his Judgment is Master of his Wit and Fancy, and his Conversation
perfectly suited to the Genius of the World, such a one may speak much with
boldness, though I believe, he is also able to hold his peace, and will give
Liberty of Speech to those that desire it.

To speak well; it is requisite to have a great deal of Wit, and a sufficient,
and Excellent Judgment; Some who do not talk much, do listen with such
ingenious Attention, that it is plain they understand what Wit is, and have a
great deal themselves.

To speak first, sometimes prevents the trouble of answering to others
Impertinent Questions. Some speak what they ought not to think. It Is a great
Masterpiece to speak well of all things without affecting Knowledge, to have a
modest, prudent compliance in Discourse, as well as a real Goodness in all our
Actions. They that have these commendable Qualities, beget a Love of Virtue in
all that are Capable of it. It Is pleasant after long silence to relieve ones
self with speaking: and it is well when peoples Actions speak more than their
Words.

There are some Compliant People more troublesome than those that Dispute all
things; they Grant all one would have, say all one says, know no Opinion but
what you put into their Heads; never say No, Always say Yes, Contradict
themselves as much as you please, and by a base Unworthy Compliance destroy
conversation every moment. One knows not what to say to 'em, one can make no
Sport unless it be with 'em: Compliance is a good Quality, confined in its
Limits, and Guided by Judgment, otherwise it is as subject to Vice as Virtue.
Discretion in Speech is more than Eloquence, and to speak agreeably, than to
speak in good words or in good order: To use many Circumstances before one
comes to the Matter, is troublesome and wearysome, to use None is blunt.

It Is not every one has the privilege of Speaking displeasing Truths without
offense, it is but few can do this; and should they pretend to imitate, they
would be unsufferable. It Is different to jest with ones Friend, which may be
freely done without displeasing them. It Is not enough to speak plainly and
reasonably, but one must know well the Humor of those to whom one would speak
freely: several love to give, but not to take Jests: Sometimes one bitter word
makes the most pleasant Raillery bite, nay the Tone of the Voice, or but a
malicious Smile turns the most innocent Jest into a Satyr: Nothing requires
more Judgment than to railly inoffensively and to make this innocent War as it
ought, which makes Conversation pleasant when it ends without displeasure.
Nothing can be more disagreeable than not to be believed when one speaks Truth.
It Is well when peoples Actions speak more Morality than their Words.

Of Lying.
Ld Bacon:
A Man that Lies is an Hector toward God, and a Coward toward Men; for a Lie
faces God, and shrinks from Men. No pleasure is comparable to the standing upon
the advantage Ground of Truth; an Hill not to be commanded, and where the Air
is, always clear and serene. A Lie serves for Disimulation, for Perfidiousness,
and almost all Crimes. To Lie for nothing is foolish, and to Lie for Interest
is a great Fault. There is nothing so contrary to the Godhead as Lying, for
Truth is his inseparable Attribute.

The search of Truth is the Design of all Men, but especially of the Wise. Of
Lies some sorts are to be condemned, and some may be pardoned; a great or a
little Lie to any ones Prejudice ought to be avoided: For since Justice and
Generosity forbids Men to speak even Reflecting Truth, much more injurious
Lies. There are officious Lies to the benefit of our Friends, which may be
Excusable on some Occasions: If a Lie injures no body but does good to some
body, it may be thought inoffensive, however it is injurious to the Relator,
though to none else, because it renders him less innocent: If I would Lie in
behalf of another, certainly I would for my self.

There are Lying-looks as well as Lyeing-words; dissembling Smiles, deceiveing
Signs, and even a Lying-silence: There are Lying-Civilties, and
Lying-Courtesies; for people sometimes oblige those whom they hate; some
because they need them, and others out of Fear and Weakness: sometimes they
appear glad to see those they Extremely dislike: Thus does Dissimulation and
Lying confound each other.

Though all Complements are Lies, yet because they are known to be such, no
body depends on 'em; so there is no hurt in 'em, you return them in the same
manner you receive 'em, and without scruple conform to 'em, yet it is best to
make as few as one can.

As for a pleasant Relation, one may venture to add a little to History; for
Truth, for the most part, has somewhat too serious, and is not so diverting as
Fiction; and since it is no more believed than Complement, one is left to ones
Liberty.

There are no Lies innocent, but such as are Related for Lies: yet it ought to
appear profitable; for a mere Lie is Ridiculous. There is a sort of Lying
produced by Vanity, and these people are diverting enough; they are such as
commend themselves, each according to his Fancy. There are Hectors that tell
long Tales of dangerous Enterprises, where they never were, out of a Violent
desire that the World may have a better Opinion of 'em than they desire. There
are foolish Fellows that spend whole Nights in devising Adventures, and whole
Days in telling 'em; pretending to Fortunes they never had; Some mean Birth
pretending to be a Noble Family that came in with William the Conqueror; some
would seem sick, and think to hide Poverty with Lies; and some Liars are so
Extravagant, that after they have been puzzled by some person in Discourse,
without knowing what to say, make the handsomest Answer in the world at home,
as if they had spoke them on the place. Some are so foolish to report, that
Persons of Quality Visit them, and Write to 'em, who never thought on them.

The Sum of all is, That there are many Fools and Liars in the World; though they
that Lie to prejudice others are infinitely worse than those that so commend
themselves; but these are so Ridiculous, that I know not if I could not sooner
tell a Lie a little Malicious than to commend my self. But these have weak
Judgments, and deserve Pity. If Truth could be Established in the World,
Conversation would be quite changed, Lying would surest argue Weakness;
Dissimulation would be base and even Lying-Civilities not free from blame. To
lie for ones own Commendation is Ridiculous: Complements are lies so known,
they do no mischief; and Poets are the only Liars that deserve to be commended.
Though Lying be a great Fault, it is very difficult absolutely to renounce it,
or always to speak Truth. And if we well observe, they that Hate it most, do
sometimes use it. It has certain little Conveniences very Necessary; We always
add a little to a Story to make it more delightful. Who can commend a Woman
without speaking more Good of her than she deserves; or speak ill of an Enemy
without Aggravating his Faults; or a Lover complain without making his Misery
greater than it is? I beg your favor for pleasant Lies, and a Lie by way of
Excuse; or, to save the Life of a Person.

It Is a shrode Spanish Proverb. Tell a Lie and find a Truth: Certainly it is an
Heaven upon Earth to have a Man's Mind move in Charity, rest in Providence, and
turn upon the poles of Truth. There are some that are Liars, and don't know it;
since Speech is the great Thing that distinguishes Men from Beasts, how
Unworthy are they that falsify it? No Beasts have deceitful Cries, but that
Animal bred on the Banks of Nile; it is only Wicked Man that perverts the use of
his Voice.

Truth bears the supreme sway in Love and Friendship, and without it the World
would be all Confusion; Is there any thing more Odious than the Practices of
those great Persons, who with Looks and Words make one hope a thousand things
they never mean to perform? Is there any thing more Cruel than to discover that
your Friend has deceived you; or Mistress, who swears she loves none but you,
and yet loves diverse others, or to speak properly, loves none, for a divided
Love is no Love.

Sometimes one is apt to accuse another to excuse ones self.

True Lovers need not Lie unless in Poetry; but for the usual Impertinent
Lovers, they may speak what they please, for none will believe 'em but easy
Women, that deserve to be deceived: Let them feign Sighs and Tears, if they
can, Flatter and Lie, pretend Despair and a thousand Counterfeit Loves, they
are all but so many Lies.

Those who do not scruple little Infidelities, have strong Dispositions to
greater ones, therefore one ought to accustom ones self to be Exact, even in
the smallest things.

Of Idleness.
I Know not which is most Shameful, to be a sluggard for want of Wit or
Courage: Some are Idle only because they are Careless; for they have a great
deal of Wit, and on some occasions, show they have Courage, neither can one
perceive they have any bad Qualities; These are the most Guilty of all; for why
should they be so Unprofitable both to the World and to themselves, to have Wit
to no purpose, and such an Indifference, as to concern themselves with nothing;
to have neither Love nor Ambition, but be so Negligent, as to be Incapable of
any great Pleasure.

I Know not if it were at all better to addict ones self to what is not very
good, than to apply ones self to Nothing: it is certain, that those whose Minds
God has but sparingly Enrich't, are happy when they are assigned an Unactive
Life, and so they are hidden in their own Obscurities; This Deficiency produces
the same Effect in them, which Wisdom does in others, and restrains them from
appearing ill to the World.

There is none but Knows there are some that would not be spoken of, if they
were not in great Employments, and of whom one hears a thousand Discourses,
because they acquit themselves ill of what they rashly Undertake; Promote an
Hair-brained Man, or one of Weak Capacity to the Management of State Affairs,
or a faint-hearted Man to Command in an Army, and you will find it is pity there
are no more Idle than there be. Though Idleness be good for nothing, yet it
hurts none, it injures none but themselves; but such as manage Employments they
are Unfit for, make great disorders, and 'twere happy, if they did Nothing.
Therefore it is better to Censure impertinent Busy-Bodyes, than those
Lazy-Backs, who seek their Ease, and do better in indulging their Quiet, than
in being Active; but the worst Idleness is, when they will addict themselves to
Nothing, though they are Obliged by Necessity to take the Employment which
Fortune has given 'em: There are those that in great Employments do only
forecast how to acquit themselves of it, to Enjoy a Quiet, attended with
Pleasure; they are of the humor not to do the things they are obliged to, but
busy themselves in what they might Dispense with, and perhaps ought to Neglect.
When I observe a Grave Fellow, with a Senator-like Aspect, Ignorant of the Laws
of his Country; but pretending to play the Gallant wi^h a Lady, who laughs at
his awkward Courtship; on the other side, when I see a Man whose Age and
Conditon qualifies him for a Spark, put on Senatour's Gravity, dive into the
Doctrine of Pythagoras, speak no smaller word than that of Transmigration, or
Metempsychosis, I sigh and cry; why is not this man Idle? I am Possessed with
the pleasant'st Indignation in the world, for at the same time I contemn him, I
take Pleasure to abuse him: And so to see a Captain know nothing of the
Millitary Art, but to understand well that of Courting and Dancing, 'twere
better he were ever Idle.

Of the World.
WE all find fault with the World, when we our selves are part of it, and
sometime or other do like all the World, commit faults, and are to blame in
some things. One cannot say, such a Wise or Good Man is incapable of Failing;
All men are men, and subject to Defects: All the World may be prejudiced; all
the World is Crafty, Envious, Slanderous, False, and Weak, and the Greatest
Hero has at some time of this Life, found a low Vulgar Sentiment in his Heart,
which in Prudence he ought to nourish no further than it consists with his
Interest, or his Pleasure, or Honor engages him. In Equity we ought to love
Men as they love us, and we may Increase or Diminish it as we see Occasion.

It Is most certain that Weakness and Uncertainty reigns in the Minds of all
Men; and the wiser a Man is, the more he ought to excuse the Follies of the
People. The more a Man drinks of the World, the more it intoxicateth. They that
regulate their Sentiments by other Men, Oblige the others to follow Their's.

Of Secrecy.
SOme say it is more trouble than can be imagined to keep Secrecy in Trifles:
Serious Secrets that are of Moment, they that have some Sense of Honor, or a
little Prudence will not Reveal; but for a Jest, or any other little Deversion,
it is very difficult not to speak of 'em.

The best Composition and Temperature, is to have Openness in Fame and Opinon,
and Secrecy in Habit.

Of Prosperity and Adversity.
It Is an High Speech of Seneca; the Good things that belong to Prosperity are
to be wished, but the Good things that belong to Adversity are to be Admired.
It is true Greatness to have in one Person, the Frailty of a Man and the
Security of a God, which is an Higher Speech of Seneca, too high for an
Heathen. The Virtue of Prosperity is Temperance, and the Virtue of Adversity is
Fortitude, which in mortals is the most Heroic Virtue.

Ld Bacon
Prosperity is the Blessing of the Old Testament, Adversity of the New, which
carries the Great Benediction, and the clearer Revelation of God's Favors, and
if we listen to David's Harp, Braver is Affliction of Job illustrated than the
Felicity of Solomon. Ld Bacon
Virtue is like precious Odours, most fragrant when increased and Crushed.
Prosperity does best discover Vice; but Adversity does best discover Virtue.
Where the Evil is derived from a Man's own fault, there it strikes deadly.
Toward the bearing Evils, a Man can charge no body but himself; and he that
bears 'em with Courage makes 'em the less.

Nothing is Universally allowed to be a Good but Health. Some Persons think
they are to be pitied if they do not laugh from Morning till Night.

Of Children.
CHildren sweeten Labor, but they make the Misfortune more bitter. They
increase the Care of Life, but they mitigate the Remembrance of Death: Parents
do best in keeping up their Authority over their Children, but not in keeping
altogether their Purses from 'em. There are some that Count their Wife and
Children but as Bills of Charges; again there are some Rich, Foolish, Covetous
Men, that take a pride in having no Children, because they may be thought so
much the Richer. If one has lost diverse Children, it is more to him to lose the
last than all the rest.

It Is easy in Infancy to weed out Evil, and plant Good; but Parents are
commonly more concerned (in those tender years) to bestow Wit than Virtue; they
teach 'em the Art of Writing and Speaking well, but not of Doing well: but
believe it, the Manners are the Great concern of the Mind; and if they are so
unhappy as not to have the faculty of Discerning, they will be subject to strange
things.

Of Cowards.
NO People suffer more than Cowards; If they are necessitated to go to a Fight,
and desirous to pass for Men of some Courage, it is not to be imagined what they
suffer. Examples encourage 'em not, the Martial sound, and Roaring of Guns half
Kills 'em; they are ever prepared for a Retreat, fore-most in Flight, last in
Battle, they are racked between Fear and Shame, and though they should speak like
Courageous men, yet they see they are not believed, and they are often in
Danger of being kicked even by Cowards.

Of Bad Poets.
NOthing is more worthy of Pity than Bad Poets: though they admire all they
write, it often happens they perceive themselves to be their only Admirers; If
this does not reclaim 'em, then they are vexed to live in such an
unapprehensive Age, where Men can Judge of Nothing, but according to their own
particular Humor and Fancy; this Thought so incenses 'em, that they resolve
for despising their Poetry, to scourge 'em with it, and as angry Children,
think they are Revenged when they hit you with all their Might; so the Poor
Poet Fancies, he lashes his Enemies with his Satyrs; but when he finds himself
deceived, and that what he designed should fret 'em, on the contrary, does only
move their Laughter, he hates 'em for that Dullness and Unmannerliness which
himself is guilty of, continues doting on his Conceptions all his Life; dies
out of Charity with all the World, and so by consequence, is damned.

Of Indifferency.
THere is nothing so stupid as that soft Indisserency, which makes some people
be pleased with all things or nothing; which makes 'em entertain no great
desire of Glory, nor great fear of Infamy, neither love much, nor fear much:
They follow Customs blindfold, they are only sensible of the Afflictions of the
Body, the Mind being wholly Insensible; And if one may so Express it, they are
Guilty of a certain Sluggishness of Mind which renders 'em Unworthy of Life. In
like manner, I should be more prone to conceive hope of a Man, who in the
beginning of his Life should be hurried to evil Habit, than of one who fastens
upon Nothing; For to one that can Love or Hate immoderately, there needs no
more to show him a rational Object; but on him that is incapable of any violent
Attraction, who has only a General Indifference for all things, can never any
Good be done, and there is no Cure in Philosophy for it.

Indifference sometimes proceeds from Lowness of Spirit, incapable of making a
Judgment of things, for it is natural for a Man to desire that which he believes
to be Good; and if Indifferent People were able to Judge, they would certainly
fasten upon something. It Is certain this lukewarm Temper which sends forth
feeble Designs, sends forth feeble Lights, so that, not knowing any thing
certainly, they can fasten on nothing with Perseverance.

The Grave Indifferent Persons do neither Love nor Hate; they betake themselves
to Nothing, they unresolved in every thing; ask 'em if they will walk, they
know not; they are always in doubt, and endeavor to please or displease 'em,
they are little concerned. An inconstant Man is better than this, for he has
always something to do, and though he defire nothing Vehemently, and disclaims
Obstinacy, yet he is for the time, ever resolved in something. But if we
observe it, the Indifferent and the Inconstant are not very contrary to each
other: An Inconstant loves Indifferently all the Beauties of the Town, and it is
a cold Indifference in their Hearts that makes 'em thus Inconstant and to love
several: They Glory in their Weakness, and think they cannot be absolute Sparks
unless they be fickle; who Loving nothing much, yet spend their life as if they
were wholly taken up with Love.

Of Censoriousness.
THere are some so given to Envy, Mischief, and Censoriousness, that they are
ever on the Loading part, not so good as the Dogs that licked Lazarus's Sores,
but like Flies, still buzzing upon the thing that is raw; they easily believe
all the Good spoken of themselves, and all the Evil spoken of others.

Of Revenge.
REvenge is a kind of wild Justice, which the more Man's Nature runs to, the
more ought Law to weed it out. He that studies Revenge keeps his own Wounds
green, which otherwise would heal: If a Man merely out of ill nature does
wrong, it is like the Thorns and Briars which prick and scratch, because they
can do no other.

By taking Revenge a Man is but even with his Enemy, but with passing it over,
he is Superior.

Of Boldness.
BOldness is the Child of Ignorance and Baseness; nevertheless it fastens and
binds the Hand and Foot of those that are shallow of Judgment, and weak in
Courage. Boldness is an ill keeper of Promises, and to men of great Judgment,
bold Persons are a sport to behold: Nay Boldness is ever blind, not seeing
Dangers and ill conveniences; And therefore it is ill in Council, and good in
Execution.

Ld Bacon
Deformed persons are extremely Bold, being first in their own defects, exposed
to Scorn, and in process of time, that produces an Habit of Confidence, which
at last ends in Boldness and Impudence,

Of Youth and Age.
THE Inventions of Young Men are more lively than Old; Imaginations stream into
their Minds better. Heat and Veracity in Age is an Excellent Composition. For
Business, Young Men are fitter to invent than Judge, fitter for Execution than
for Council, fitter for new Frolicks than solid Business: The Errors of Young
Men are the ruin of Business, like an unruly Horse that will neither stop nor
turn. Men of Age on the contrary object too much, consult too long, adventure
too little, Repent too soon, seldom drive Business home to the full period.

Ld Bacon
Young Men may be Learners while Old Men are Actors: Authority follows Old Men,
favor and Popularity Youth.

Of Custom.
CUstom is every where Visible, so that we may well wonder to hear Men profess,
protest, engage, give great Words, and then do just as they have done before,
as if they were dead Images, and Engines moved only by the wheel of Custom:
Therefore we ought by all means Endeavor to obtain good Customs which may
regulate Company, raise Emulation and quicken Glory.

The greatest Multiplication of Virtues upon Human Nature rests upon Society,
well ordered and Discipline.

Of Charity.
THe desire of Power in excess, caused the Angels to fall, the desire of of
Knowledge in excess, caused Man to fall, but in Charity there is no excess;
neither can Angels or Men come in danger by it. If a Man be Gracious and
Courteous to strangers, he is a Citizen of the World; if he be compassionate
toward the Afflictons of others, it shows his heart to be like the Noble Tree,
that is wounded it self, when it gives the Balm; If he easily pardons and
remits Offenses, it shows his mind is raised above Injuries, so that he cannot
be shot against. Good Thoughts (however God may accept 'em) yet toward men
they are no better than good Dreams, except they be put in Act. Never defer
Charity till Death, he that does so, is rather liberal of other Men's substance
than his own.

Of Reading.
REading serves for Delight, for Ornament, and for Ability; it perfects nature,
and is perfected by experience; the Crafty contemn it, the Simple admire it,
and Wise Men use it. Some Books are to be tasted or swallowed, and some few to
be chewed and digested. Reading makes a full man, Conference a Ready man, and
Writing an exact Man; He that writes little, needs a great Memory, he that
confers little, a present Wit; and he that Reads little, needs much Cunning to
make him seem to know that which he does not. Ld Bacon
History makes Men Wise, Poetry witty, Mathematics subtle, Philosophy deep,
Morals grave, Logic and Rhetoric, able to Contend; nay, there is no
Impediment in the Wit but may be wrought out by fit Study, where every defect
of the Mind has its proper Receipt. Those that have excellent faculty of using
all they know, can never know too much.

Of Beauty.
THE best thing to illustrate Beauty is Virtue. The principal part of Beauty is
Defect and Gracious Motions. Also that is the best part of Beauty which a
Painter cannot express. Beauty is a Summer Fruit, easy to corrupt, and cannot
last; for the most part, it makes a Dissolute Youth, and Age a little out of
Countenance; but where it lights well, it makes Virtue shine and Vice blush.

Of Flattery.
AN Impudent Flatterer will praise him most, who is most Conscious of his own
Defects; That wherein he is most wanting, will he most entitle him to; that for
which he is most out of Countenance, will a Flatterer not excuse only, but
justify as Brave and Heroic. Ld Bacon
Some are praised maliciously to their Heart, to stir Envy and Jealousy toward
'em. Princes Love Flatterers, but are not over liberal in rewarding 'em. For
People of worth, it is not necessary to fetch praises from their Predecessors,
it is enough to speak of their own particular Merit. Nothing is less pleasing
than those sycophant Praises, that have been used to People who deserve Blame.
Not but that it is good to excuse the defects of others, but some do not deserve
it.

Of Riches.
RIches are the Baggage of Virtue; as the Baggage is to an Army, so Riches are
to Virtue, spared or left behind hinders the March. Of great Riches there is no
real Use, except it be in Distribution, the rest is but Conceit: It Is certain
great Riches have sold more men than they have bought (excepting Purgatory)
Seek such Riches as we may get Justly, Use soberly, distribute cheerfully, and
leave contentedly. When Riches come by the Devil, by Fraud and Oppression and
unjust means, they come upon speed, as Solomon says, such make haste to be
Rich, but they shall never be Innocent.

Of Honor and High Places.
Honor has three things in it, the Advantage-ground to do good, the Approach
to Kings and principal Persons, and the Raising of a Man's Fortune. Ld Bacon
The greatest Honor is that which happens rarely, even such as sacrifice
themselves to Death or Danger, for the good of their Country. Discreet
followers and Servants help much to Reputation. The lowest Virtues draw praise
from the Common People, the middle Virtues work in 'em Admiration, but of the
highest Virtues they have no sense at all. Fame is like a River, bears all
things light, and draws things weighty. To praise a Man's self cannot be decent
except in rare Cases, but to praise ones Office or Profession may be done with
a good Grace and with a kind of Magnanimity. Ld Bacon
Envy is the Canker of Honor. Great Persons had need to borrow other Men's
Opinions to think themselves Happy; They are the first to find their own Grief,
though the last to find their own Faults.

We may observe the Deep, Sober, and Politic Persons, in their posts of
Greatness, bemoan themselves to abate the edge of Envy. Men in great Fortunes
are strangers to themselves while they are in the bustle of Business, having no
time to tend their health either of Body or Mind. Men in great Places are
thrice Servants; Servants of their Sovereign or State; Servants of Flame,
Servants of Business. It is strange to see how men in great Places seek Poverty
and lose Liberty; seek Power over others, and lose the Power over their own
selves. Happy are they, who in great Employments retain the Virtues of their
private Condition; in their desires to do what they ought to themselves, are
just to other People

Of Pleasure.
ONE cannot live without Pleasure, and those who seem never to enjoy any, but
are naturally sober and Grave, find delight in their own Melancholy. The
Pleasure one finds in ones self, is the Melancholiest Pleasure, though perhaps
the most solid. Solidity is not required in Pleasures, it is enough if they be
pleasing and sprightly; if they dazzle our Reason and follow one another, if
they be full of Variety, and deceive, and amuse us agreeably. All men desire
Good, but know not what it is. Nothing is so great an Antidote to Sorrow as
Natural Mirth. It Is a Pleasure to some to divert themselves with other Men's
Follies.

Of Suspicion.
SUspicion Clouds the Mind, loves Friends, checks Business, that it cannot go
on Currently: It disposes Kings to Tyranny, Husbands to Jealousy, Wise Men to
Irresolution and Melancholy, which are defects not of the Heart but of the
Brain.

Of Excuses.
IT IS juster to Excuse the defects that are incident to that Age and Condition
men are of, than the contrary: One would sooner Excuse a Covetous old Man than
a young Miser; and though it be great folly to heap up Riches, when we no longer
need 'em; yet we see it is a defect commonly attends Old Age: Neither ought we
to wonder, that an Old Man loves to recount what he has seen in his Youth, and
to talk it over and over again, but how Impertinent do'es it look in a Young
Man to be telling long Tales? There are defects that belong to certain
Conditions: How is it possible for a Man in public business never to fail his
word? In some places men cannot do what they please, and though it appear as though
they did not well, yet we know not what Circumstances they are under, and
therefore should always make reasonable allowances, and not to be rash in our
Judgments and Censures.

Miscellanies.
Ld Bacon
IT IS good to commit the beginning of all great actions to Argus with his hundred
Eyes, and the end to Briareus Wit of Fools. and a Crooked Wisdom; like them
that pack the Cards, but know not how to play 'em.

They that too much reverence Old times are but the Scorn to the new. Hope is
one of the best Antidotes against the Poison of Discontent. Fortune is like the
Market, where many times, if you can stay a little, the price will fall.
Severity breeds Fear, but Roughness causes Hate. Reproof from Authority ought
to be Grave not taunting. A Man that is base and Inquisitive is commonly
Envious. Good things never appear in their full Beauty, till they turn their
backs and are going a way. Unmarried men are the best Friends, best Masters,
best Servants, but not always the best Subjects. Seneca says well, that Anger
is like Ruin which breaks that which it falls upon. A Man that has no Virtue
in himself envieth it in others. Ld Bacon
A Man's Nature runs either to Herbs or Weeds, therefore let him seasonably
Water the one and Destroy the other.

Curiosity were a Vice in me, who hate to have people prying into my Concerns,
Endeavoring to pump me, or importunate to know what I have no mind to tell;
therefore how unjust were it in me to tease others after this manner. There Is
nothing more difficult to find than a Woman Endued with all the Qualifications
requisite in a Person of Honor, and which accomplish an Excellent Woman: The
same Temper that gives a great and high Generosity is not always accompanied
with Modesty; that which gives Justice and Constancy in important affairs,
seldom consists with that sociable Complaisance and Mildness that belongs to
their Sex; that which makes them capable of Great matters, does not stoop to
certain trifles which in decency are almost necessary to Women. One rarely
meets with one that has all the Virtues of an Honorable Excellent Woman to
deserve all the Praises that can be given severally to both Sexes. To be exact
as one ought without constraint or Ceremony is a Commendable Quality. The Eyes
often discover either Wit, Wisdom, or Goodness, or what you, please. We often
believe what our Fathers believed before us, without searching into the Reason
of our belief. There are few sublime Wits, that pry into the original of
things, or endeavor to make a perfect discovery thereof. From our first use of
Reason, it is prepossessed with the sentiments of others, that cannot without
Violence clear it self from what entangles it; so that men are often deceived
in what they think themselves most secure, which has made some turn Scepticks,
and to doubt of almost every thing.

Till the days of Pythagoras, the most Learned believed, the Morning and
Evening to be two distinct Stars; and gave them several Names which they still
bear; Nevertheless this knowing Philosopher doscover'd they were the same.

Pythogoras commanded his Disciples to Honor the Gods, and never to ask any
particular thing of them importunately, both because no man knows exactly what
is fittest for him, and it is a more respectful temper to submit to the orders
of Heaven. Few have an Universal knowledge of things so as never to be
deceived, a sound Judgment and solid Morality; to have prudence to foresee the
most remote and least probable Events, and constancy to support the greatest
and most unexpected Misfortunes. Few are very sensible of the Misfortunes even
of those they love, or at most their Regret is seldom of long Continuance.
Compassionate Grief is transient, the soonest dispelled with the drawing of the
least pleasure, and with nothing sooner than Natural Mirth. There Is no Celerity
comparable to the Motion of Bullet in the Air, which flies so swift that it
out-runs the Eye.

FINIS.

