A SERMON OF MORTALITY: Preached at the Funerals of Mr. THOMAS MAN. AT
KINGSTON in SVRREY, FEB. xxi. 1649.

ISAIAH 40. VER. 6, 7, 8. A voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All
flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field.
The grass withers, the flower fades: because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it: Surely the people is grass.

The grass withers, the flower fades; but the word of our God shall stand
for ever.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD CONSTABLE, for the Author, 1650.

To his honored Friend Mr. ABRAHAM COLFE, Minister and Pastor of the Church of
CHRIST at Lewisham in Kent.
Honored Sir;
IN reverence to your Person, and in regard to your venerable Age, J have made
choice of you to be the Patron of this Funeral Sermon: I present to your Eyes,
what lately you heard with your Ears: It was Penned and Preached upon the
occasion of your much esteemed Brothers death, and at the solemnizing of his
Funerals: Your Christian VVisdome, according to the pregnancy of your Wit and
Apprehension, has approved hereof, and recommended it to the Press. I
intended it should have ended in the delivery of it; but yielding to your just
importunity, and the benefit of some private Friends, I have made it public:
Besides these are dying Times, and mine is but a Sermon of Death to the Living:
All that I desire is to mind us of our Mortality, to mind us of our Condition,
that we are here as Strangers and Pilgrims; that we have here no abiding nor
continuing City; that we dwell in houses of clay, whose foundations are in the
dust, which shortly must be broken in pieces. The Lord fit us for the day of
dissolution, and the hour of our departure: The Lord grant that our last hour
may be our best hour; that our work may be done before our day be done: That
when we shall come to die, we may have nothing else to do but to die: For the
hour of death will be the busy hour, then Satan will be busy, and Conscience
will be busy: These things the Lord of Heaven and Earth root in our hearts.
Sir, I desire the Almighty God to bless and prosper you; the Lord accomplish
unto you your honorable and charitable intentions; And so I rest,

Yours, in all Christian observancie truly devoted, R. G.

IN OBITVM Viri Amplissimi, and Integerrimi THOMAE MAN, Civis LONDINIENSIS. AD
Dn. ABRAHAMVM COLFIVM (...) Fratrem; Ecclesiae Lewishamensis in Cantijs
Ministrum and Pastorem Vigilantissimum. V. B. REIP. N.
PRINCIPIBUS nasci, claroque a sanguine Regum,
In fortuitis praedicant veteres Sophi.
At non Principibus diversus contigit ortus,
Quam qui tenenti sarculu^ obdura manu.
Sed repetunt etiam prima incunabula and illi,
Et sortiuntur funera cum plebe paria.
Nam neque fas Hominis prognatum semine quenquam,
Est quicquid Humanum, a se alienum credere.
Huic quoque natus HOMO cum sit, tam Nomine, quam Re,
Obire certum est omnia vitae munia.
Extremo moriens igitur neque deficit actu:
Sed and sup rema jura naturae subit.
Hoc voluit rerum series, supremus and ordo.
Et Universi lex, stabiles servans vices.
AT met as inter longinquas mortis, and ortus,
Quid deceat Hominem publico natum bono;
Id vero obnixa est sapientis quaerere cura
Et quo perennet maxim nomen modo.
Hoc docuit longo concessae tempore vitae,
Et mortuus quoque Noster hic adhuc docet:
Inprimis celebrare Deum, Christique benignis
Meritis reponere unicam fiduciam.
Dein Hominem natum sese meminisse, nec ultra,
Humana quam quod vis queat, contendere;
Et casus contra firmato incedere vultu:
Humanitusque far quaecunque accidant.
Seque parem magnis praestare doloribus, illos
Frangendo mentis strenuae patientia.
Spargere per populos varia (...) late,
Quamplurimis and benefacere mortalibus.
Posse voluptates, and luxum spernere mollem,
Virtutis uti rigidum decet satellitem.
Pectora cui tandem sunt has exculta per arts,
Laticesque very luminis vidit sacros;
Ille lubens, gratansque, potest occurrere fato.
Haud esse fortuita Noster haec docet.
Ita censuit GVLIEL. BVRTONVS; Et (...) scripsit, Regiovici ad Thamesim in
Regnis.

A SERMON OF Mortality.
JOB. 14. VER. 14. If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of my
appointed time will I wait, till my Change come.


IN this Chap. tanquam in Speculo, as in a Glass, you may behold, Statum
humanum, Man's State and Condition: His lamentable Ingression into the World,
his sad Progression in the World, and his miserable Egression out of the
World: The original of this disquiet and trouble is GODS Curse on the Woman;
Man that is borne of a Woman is of short days, and full of trouble, ver. 1. In
the following Verses he is likened to a Flower, for his fading; to a Shadow for
his declining; and his days to the days of a Hireling: Nay, he shows man's
bodily condition to be worse then a Tree; for a Tree cut down may grow again
in the same place, but a man cannot: Ver. 7.
for there is hope of a Tree if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and
that the tender branch thereof will not cease; Ver. 8.
though the Root wax old in the Earth, and the Stock thereof dye in the Ground,
Ver. 9.
yet through the sent of water it will bud, and bring forth Boughs like a Plant:
Ver. 10.
But Man dies and wastes away, is weakened or cut off; yea man gives up the
ghost, and where is he? In regard of bodily life, he is not; he lies down, and
rises not, till the Heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised
out of their Sleep.

This Verse, that I have chosen for the present Occasion, acquaints us with
these three things; 1. The Frailty of this life present. 2. The Certainty of
the life to come. 3. Our Care and Watchfulness to be performed in the one,
that we may enter into the other.


First, we have our frail Condition in these words, If a man die; Implying by
force of Logic this peremptory Proposition, Man must die.

Secondly; the Certainty of our Resurrection in these words, by way of
Question, Shall he live again? Where by a Question of Admiration, he puts it
out of all doubt and question, That man dying, shall surely rise, and live
again.

Thirdly, the Duty of waiting for this Dissolution and Restitution of the Body,
in these words, All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my Change
come.

The words afford us three Doctrines.

First, the End and Term of life is appointed, and die we must by ordinary
Prescription; and this is, Mors in olla, Death is our Lot.

Secondly, a Change shall come by Death, and there shall be a general
Resurrection; and this is Spes in Urna, Hope in the Grave.

Thirdly, we ought daily to Prepare for Death, and to live in continual
Expectation thereof; and this is, Viaticum in via, Provision in the way.

First, the Term of our life is appointed, and die we must, no avoiding hereof;
And that for these Reasons:

First, it is GODS Will and Decree, ver. 5. His days are determined, the
number of his months are with thee, thou have set his bounds that he cannot
pass: As he set bounds to the Sea, hither shall thou come, and no further, so
thus long shall thou live, and no longer. 39 Psalm. 5. Thou have made my days
(says David) as an hands breadth. If GOD has made them but an hands breadth,
who can make them longer? Pilate would not alter his Writing. 19 Joh. 22. Nor
GOD his Decree that is gone out. It was the first Doctrine preached to man
after his Fall. 3 Genesis 19. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. Not
by any necessity of his created Nature, but because he finned, GOD threatens
to make his End as base as his Beginning. Die then we must; Dance all in Deaths
Ring; sooner or later we shall be cut down by the Axe of Death, to be Fuel
for Burning, or Timber for Building; to become a cursed Brand in Satan's
Furnace, or a blessed Beam in CHRIST'S Palace: GOD has passed upon Adams
Posterite this sentence of Temporal Condemnation, Dust thou art, and to dust
thou shall return: All of us (without some extraordinary Dispensation, as that
of Enoch and Elias was) are liable to the same. 5 Genesis 24. 2 Kings 2.11.

Secondly, through the contagion of original Sin; Sin is the wicket that
let Death into the World. 5 Romans 12. As by one man Sin entered into the World,
and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all men, for all have sinned:
Sin has given Death much advantage and victory over humane nature, that the
kernel of a Raison, yea a hair in Milk has choked and killed a man, as it
did Anacreon, Val. Max. lib. 9. cap. 12.
and Fabius the Roman, and laid him lower then the beasts of the earth; for
they lie upon the ground, while he is laid under it.

Thirdly, from the Matter whereof the body of man consists: The original of
man's body is Dust, 2 Genesis 7. Homo ab humo: Not any durable matter, as Marble
and Rocks, against which the Winds blowing, and the Waves beating cannot
prevail, 7 Mat. 25. but like Dust before the Wind, 18 Psalm. 42. 4 Job. 19.
We dwell in houses of clay, whose foundations are in the dust; i. e. in
mortal bodies subject to corruption; which are crushed before the Moth; sooner
and with less labor then the Moth is crushed, which is killed only with a
little touch. 2 Corinthians. 5.1. The Apostle calls it an Earthly house or
Tabernacle; For we know that if our Earthly house of this Tabernacle be
dissolved, etc.

St. Paul who was a 18 Acts 3. St. Paul exercised a handy-craft and wrought
with Aquila, whose Trade was to make Tents of skins, then much in use in those
hot countries. view Anot. on the Acts
Tent-maker, elegantly compares our body to a Tent, and that in many regards.

First, a Tent or Tabernacle is easily raised up, and as easily taken down and
spoiled; so is our body by sickness or outward violence; come but one ill
night, one little touch of a Fever, some pain in the Side, or imperfection in
the Lungs, come the stone in the Bladder, Abijt illa universa Scaena, all the
Stage vanishes.

Secondly, a Tent is a moveable House or Habitation; so are our Bodies, which
are now like Tents pitched upon the Earth, but shall be hereafter transported
into Heaven.

Thirdly, a Tent is foul without, and soild with Wind and Weather; so the Body
and Outside of man is but vile, and contemptible, subject to blasts and
storms, exposed to all the violence of Nature.

Now that I may the better rivet the Truth into your Minds and Memories,
consider with me, that the walk of Death is Universal, not some men die, but
all; all that have breath must lose it and all that have life must leave it; as
the Woman of Tekoah told K. David, 2 Samuel 14. cap. We must all dye; you a
Sovereign, and I a Subject; you a Man, and I a Woman, We must needs die, and
be as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again, We
shall all be desperately lost; I have seen an end of all perfection, said Holy
David, 119 Psalm. 96. There is nothing so perfect on Earth but it has an end;
David had a sight of this; Happy are they which have David's Eyes: It concerns
us to look into this matter; And GOD requires us to listen to the Proclamation
of man's Mortality, that he makes by his Prophet, 40 Isaiah, 6. Quia per
nativitatem viret in carne, per juventutem candescit in flore, per mortem aret
in pulvere. Greg. in Ps. 5. Paenitent.
A Voice said cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all
the goodness, the gracefulness, the glory thereof is as the flawer of the
field. GOD would have the Prophet discover the Vanity of all humane
Excellency; to cry it in the Ears of the People; to make such a noise, that
might rouse a man that were slumbring, awake a man that were sleeping, move a
man that were musing; so careful is GOD that you should learn this Lesson:
For,

First, no Eminency of Office or Dignity can privilege thee; though thou
sit in the Chair of Earthly Dignity, Death will pull thee thence: 82 Psalm.
6. I said ye are Nuncupative, non Substantive
Gods [by Name, not by Nature] but ye shall dye like men. No Title of Honor
shall excuse you, die you must, and render an account, as well as other men.
We have seen this Truth verified in our days: He that made the Earth of
nothing, can mar the greatest in a moment: He brings Potentates to
nothing, and makes the Judges of the Earth as Vanity. 40 Isa. 23. He pours
contempt upon Princes, says Job, 12.21. And loses the Girdle of the Strong;
i. e. For their Wickedness and Tyranny, He causes their People and Subjects
to contemn them.

Secondly, no Strength or Stateliness of any Place or Palace can protect thee:
Xenoph. in Apolog. pro Socrat.
Socrates would live no longer, unless his Friends could tell him of a place
without the Territories of Athens where men never die: And it was a pretty
Answer of Hormisda the Persian Ambassador to Constantius the Emperor,
demanding of him how he liked the City of Rome, with the Amphitheatrum, the
Capitolium, and other such rich Monuments as were showed unto him: In truth I
think it the most glorious City in the World; Id tantum sibi placuisse quod
didicis set ibi quoque homines mori. Ammian. Marcell. lib. 16. Sigon. de Occid.
Imp. lib. 6.
But this only pleases me well, that I see men die at Rome, as elsewhere. So
it may be said of all other Eminent Places, and Renowned Cities, from which
Death cannot be excluded: Enter it will upon thee; either at thy Gates with
full force, or in at thy Windows with great fear: There is no possibility
avoid it, as the Prophet 9 Jer. 20,21.
Jeremiah from the LORD tells the Mourning. Women who were usually hired at
great 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
Funerals to Mourn, and to make exquisite Lamentation, Hear the Word of the
Lord, O ye Women, and let your ear receive the word of His mouth, and teach
your Daughters Wailing, and every one her Neighbor Lamentation: 21 ver. For
Death is come up into our Windows, and entered into our Palaces. Our strongest
places cannot keep it out.

Thirdly, nor the height of Honor or Estimation can privilege thee from the
fatal Dart of Death: The Rich man's Gold it cannot guard him; the Wise man's
Wit cannot ward him; the Knowledge of Learned men cannot keep it out, their
Skill cannot save them; nor the Arms and Trophies of Noblemen exempt them; nor
the Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas Regumque turres. Horat.
lib. 1. Od. 4.
Guard of Kings deliver them.

Visuntur magni parva sepulchra Iovis. Paulus Jovius, de vita Illustr.
Tamberlaine the Terror of the World dyed with three fits of an Ague: And
Saladine that that Mighty Pagan, which wanne the Holy Land from the Christians,
in the height of his Pride and Ruff, in the midst of all his Pomp and Glory,
in the top of his Honors was surprised by Death; and the Solemnity he had at
his Interment was only this, one carrying his Shirt or Shroud one a Spear or
Spade, crying, G. Parad. in Heroicis.
Hae sunt reliquiae Victoris Orientis.

This is all that Great and Mighty Saladine the Conqueror of the East carries
to his Grave. You see then die we must; thou can not withdraw thy self from
it; no place can privilege thee; no power protect thee; no strength defend
thee. GOD alone has an eternal Being, according to that expression of the
Apostle, 13 Heb. 8 JESUS CHRIST the same yesterday and to day, and for ever; an
Incomprehensible Being, an Independent Being. GOD alone can say, 3. Ex. 14.
I am that I am, and will be what I have been: Men may say nothing else, but I
am, and shall not be: I am to day a fresh and lusty creature, perhaps to morrow
smitten like Ionahs withered Gourd, or Palmarist, Jonah 3.7. To this agrees
the Plutarch.
Lacedaemonian Song consisting of three parts; The Quondam alij, nunc nos,
subito crescentque minores, Quoru^ nos stirpem sata videre negant.
Elder sang, We have been strong, and are not now; The Youth replied, We shall
be strong but are not yet; The Middle-age sang, We are now strong but shall not
be: All men must needs sing this note. Now I shall further demonstrate this
unto you: And first from things above us, secondly from things about us: First,
look above you, there you see the Sun that glorious creature over you daily
rising and setting; the Moon monthly waxing and wayning; the Stars shining,
and anon shutting: What does this but tell us, hold out unto us, that we who
now rise must set; who now wax must wayne; who now shine and glitter must
shortly shut and fall?

Secondly, look about you; Vtque notus frondes ad terram dejicit imam post
alias viridi prod^cunt ver^ice sylvae, sic g^s humanum rursus crescitque
caditque. Glauc. apud hom.
In your feilds and gardens, you see the Trees and Flowers now flourishing, anon
withered; Does it not teach us, that we who now flourish must perish? Look to
the Sea, now flowing and filling high banks, anon ebbing; Does it not teach us,
that our life which is now at full tide, must be at a low ebb; we must be
emptied by Death.

1. Consider the Apparel on your backs, the Gloves on your hands, the Shoes
on your feet, the Meat on your tables; All teach and instruct us, that these
bodies of ours which are kept alive by the death of other creatures, must at
last yield to Death.

Consider the several parts of your bodies.

1. Your Eyes every night dying in sleep, do show that we at last must sleep
in Death.

2. The Hair and Nails calling for poling and shaving, tell us that the whole
body must shortly be shaved by Death.

3. The Stomach still digesting our meat, and craving for more, shows the
unsatiablenesse of the Grave, which having eaten and digested our Friends,
gapes for us; and when it has devoured us, will hunger for them that must come
after us.

4. This very place shows we must die; the action that we are about, this
last function of Charity to our deceased Brother, that it will not be long ere
our Friends must meet here, or elsewhere to requite our kindness, by doing the
like for us: My Text tells us we shall die. All things in this life make way for
Death, that she may triumphantly pass through the field of this world, over
the carcasses of her slain.

Thus Death rules on Earth, as Eternity in Heaven; there all live, here all
die. The Dominion of Death is Universal: It Is a Clock that always strikes; a
Sword that always executes; a Snare which always entrapeth; a Sea whereinto
all Rivers run, wherein all Ships suffer wrack; a Pain which every one must
endure; a Tribute which every one must pay; sooner or later thou must taste of
Deaths cup; even in the furthest and fairest path of Nature thou art not far
from it; and the day will shortly come, when thou shall live in the morning,
and at night be dead. But I must look into my second Doctrine, namely, there
shall be a Resurrection, a Restitution of the body from the Grave. It Is neither
total, nor perpetual: It strikes upon the baser part; the body is dead
because of Sin. Romans 8.10. We shall live again, none may deny it: All the
people of GOD have a holy persuasion of this Truth; there is an impression in
them of their Immortality; this has been a nail of the Sanctuary to keep them
from desperate distractions, to set them forward to Perfection, to make them
undaunted in the terrors of Death: Job was hereof persuaded, Job. 19.24,25.
I shall llve again: He was undauntedly assured hereof; so assured that he
would have it written, and how? Not in loose Papers, but in a Book, O that my
words were written! And not only written, but engraven! and that with an
Iron-pen, in lead, or in stone, to endure, not for a time only, but for ever,
for the solace and comfort of all the distressed Saints of God: David in his
distress anchored in this Hold; 27 Ps. 13.
Verily I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living:
St. Paul was ravished with the assurance of life after death; his note ever
after was to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23
(...) I desire to be dissolved, or resolved into my first Principles, or to be
discharged or released out of the prison of my body, that I may presently be
with CHRIST my Savior in Heaven, in rest and in bliss. View Annot. in Philip.


Now a word or two of my third Doctrine, and I shall make Application. A Change
will come, and we must daily expect it. We are all desirous of Change; Adam
would be changed, 3 Genesis He had enough Wisdom, he would be as wise as his
Maker: And 2 Samuel 15.
Absalom would be changed, he would sit in his Fathers Throne, and of a
Subject become a Sovereign: Solomon would have change of Wives, 1 K. 11.3. 700
whom he solemnly married: The Israelites would change Samuel for Saul. 1 Samuel
5.8. And the food of Angels for the fleshpots of Egypt. 11 Numb. 4,5,6. Men
affect alterations, choppings and changes, but we seldom or never remember the
great Change of which the Apostle speaks, 3 Phil. 21. Who shall change our
vile bodies, or (...), Beza Annot.
the body of our vileness, that it may like unto His glorious body, or the
body of his glory. We never think of this Change. O the glorious estate that a
child of God shall be transchanged into! this corruptibilitie and mortality
shall be changed into incorruptibilitie and immortality: But I will fall
Application.
upon the Application of these Points; Application being the Life of Doctrines.
The use in gerall that we are to make of all this precedent Discourse, is to
prepare for Death and Dissolution. We read in Solomon's distribution of times,
that Eccl. 3.2.
there is a time to be borne, and a time to die; but of no time to live; as if
our Birth bordered upon our Death, and our Cradles stood in our Graves. That
Death therefore may not surprise you as it did that wicked Adversus omnia
pericula me munivi praeterquam adversus mortem, amp;c. 1. Seriously.
Caesar Borgia, think upon it, 1. Seriously. 2. Rightly. 3. Seasonably.

1. Seriously.
1. Do it Seriously; this do by laying it to heart: 7 Eccl. 2.
This is the end of all men, and the living will lay it unto heart: [to the
very heart of our heart] We must not lay it to our Eyes to gaze upon it; nor to
our ears to hear of it; nor to our tongues only to discourse and talk of
it, O such a one is dead, such a one is gone to his long home: but we must
apply it to our hearts; ruminate it in our minds, rivet it in our memories,
ponder it in our meditations, suffer it to make a deep impression in us: And
that for these reasons:

Qui considerat qualis erit in morte, semper: fit timidus in operatione. Lud.
Gra. Tit. Morb.
He that thinks seriously of his death, will be very circumspect in his deeds:
Men will not be such traders in Sin, such drinkers in of Inqiuity; Religion and
the Ways of GOD will not be so slighted; set before thine eyes the picture of
Death. A serious thought of thy Death, will help to drive evil thoughts out of
thy heart: Mortem cogitare est vitiis omnibus renunciare: 'Twi^l divorce thee
from the World; 'twill alienate thy affections from things earthly; this
pricketh in the right vein.

2. The thought of Death will make you lessc worldly; you will not be such
drudges to the world: Now thou art like a Mole over head and ears in earth,
anon comes Death like a Mole-catcher and takes thee up. The Luke 12,19,20.
Rich man had Goods for many years, but not many years for his Goods: Death will
turn thee empty into thy Grave, as Carriers turn their horses into a dirty
Stable with a gaulled back, and thee perhaps with a gaulled Conscience. Now
thou may state it, and stout it out, but shortly death will make thee stoop:
Now you may feed your unsanctified desires, but you shall have at length your
full deserts.

3. Think of thy death, and it will take thee off from all thy unjust
dealings: We should not have so many Oppressors; there would be less wrongs
in the world: A heavy Judgment hangs over men's heads because of oppression and
violence: Nay thy Conscience will one day rebuke thee; at thy death it will
trouble thee. In Barons Wars.
I have read of a Great man in this Land, by whom a poor Widow was
exceedingly wronged, and put from her house and home, and constrained to make
an old Oak her best harbor; But when he came to die, he was so affrighted,
that in horror of mind he often exclamed, O the Widow under the Oak! O the
Widow under the Oak! In the midst of your Ruling remember your Reckoning: He
that thinks upon his death seriously, will be afraid to get his goods
wrongfully.

4. To think of Death will greatly humble thee; nothing so powerfully treads
down Pride as this: Consider that thou art but a dead man, and thy body be it
never so strong or beautiful is but a lodging of Death; thou art but a rotten
creature; yea, vermis crastino moriturus, a worm that must dye to morrow: So
often therefore as corrupt Nature stirs up thy heart to Pride, because of the
flowers of beauty and strength that grow out of it, let this humble thee; thy
flowers, O man, cannot but wither, for the root from which they spring, namely
the body, is dead already.

2. Rightly.
Secondly, think of thy death Rightly: Send out the scouts of thy heart
aforehand; And that for these reasons: 1. To discover the Power of Death. 2.
The Peril of Death.


1. The Power of Death: Great is the Power of Death; it is unresistible; thou
art not able to encounter it: Art thou able to withstand the Messenger of the
Almighty? No: Death is an Iron-hammer that breaks us all to pieces, as so many
Potters vessels: Death comes upon the Wicked as Iehu came upon Iehoram. 2 K. 9.
v. 23, 24. He made with all speed to his Chariot, thinking to fly away, but in
vain; for the Arrow of Iehu overtooke him: So when men with all speed run to
their Chariots. i. e. to their refuges of vanities, the dart of Death surely
overtakes them.

2. To discover the Peril of Death: O there is a great dealt of peril and
danger in Death! Death will be very terrible to an unregenerate man: Art thou a
Sweater or a Drunkard? it is the Devils Sergeant to arrest thee, and carry thee
without bail to the prison of utter darkness. It is Satan's Cart to carry thee
presently to execution in Hell.

3. Sesonably.
3. We must: think upon it seasonably, timely, and in due season: Think on it
while we are young and strong: Remember thy death in the days of thy youth, in
the days of thy strength, before sickness and weakness seize upon thee: Lay
not the greatest burden on the weakest beast: Adjourne not the longest journey
to the shortest day: A whole life is but short enough to provide for Death. We
are a week providing for a Feast; a month preparing for a Wedding; three
months deliberation about a Bargain; And will we make no provision, no
preparation for this aforehand? We take time to make provision for the burial
of the dead; And shall we take no care to provide for Death it self? Many men
never think of Death, until Death come and take away their thinking. Think
upon it I beseech you in season, whoever thou art that hear me this day;
whether friend or foe, stranger or familiar, be not deceived; the great God of
Heaven and Earth, the great Determiner of time and days, has allotted thee
such a portion of time which thou shall not pass: Death Rev. 6.8.
mounted on his pale horse is posting toward thee: Here is not thy abode nor
rest, thou dwell a House of clay; in a Tent pitched up to day, and removed
to morrow: Thou art a Didapper peening up and down, in a moment depart thou
must and be gone, God knows how soon.

First then, this may reach us watchfulness, we know not the hour go; let us
watch every hour: We know not the hour wherein Death the Lords Handmaide with
the broom of sickness or sorrow will sweep us away, as the maid does the
spiders house.

2. It may teach us to provide for things Eternal, what ever becomes of
Temporals; for Death will strip us of all.

3. Labor to bid Death welcome: How shall I do this?

First, follow the precious Counsel of Christ; Mat. 6.20
Lay up Treasure for your selves in Heaven: Which are Works of Piety, and
Deeds of Charity; they will comfort you in Death, and accompany you to Heaven.

2. Look carnestly to things that are above; To GOD, to JESUS CHRIST who sits
at Gods right hand, carrying on the great work of Man's Redemption. So did Acts
7.55
Stephen, in that extraordinary vision he saw the admirable Glory of Christ in
Heaven.

3. Live after the Laws of the new Jerusalem; become a new creature; be borne
again; he that is borne but once, shall die twice; and he that is borne twice,
shall die but once.

4. Labor to get an assurance of the forgiveness of thy Sins: Labor to
find God reconciled unto thee: Labor to feel the power of CHRIST'S Death, and
the virtue of His Resurrection.

5. Live in all good Conscience: they that live in all good Conscience till
their dying day, shall depart in abundance of Comfort at their dying day: Get a
good Conscience, and keep a good Conscience, that when thou shall come to die,
though thou want the benefit of a comforting Minister, thy Conscience may
supply the place of a comforting Minister, and may be the same to thee as the
Angel was to CHRIST in His Agony; and minister such comfort unto thee, as may
make thee ready for joy to leap into the grave.

Lastly; be willing to die: fear it not, JESUS CHRIST was once among the dead;
thou must follow him through the horrors of the grave. Art thou a child of
God? Have thou given up thy Name to JESUS CHRIST? Though Death invade the
natural powers of thy body, and suppress them; though Death break in upon
this lodging of clay, and demolish it to the ground, yet be in no wise daunted;
thy death is but like the renting of Genesis 39.
Joseph's garment from him; the man of God fled, and left his garment in the
hand of his Mistrisse: So a child of God escapes out of the hands of Death
without danger; Vivendo decrescit transeundo nos terit.
he leaves his garment in the hands of Death i. e. his body, which like a
garment, the longer we wear it will be the worse for wearing: The dissolving
of the body to the man of God, is but the unfolding of the Net, and breaking
open the Prison, that the Soul which was prisoner may escape. Here is notable
comfort for the man of God; He has a life in him which no death can
extinguish; though the body descend into the grave, the Lord will take it out
again, He will not leave it in the grave, neither cast off the care thereof,
but shall watch over the dust thereof, though it taste of corruption it shall
not perish in corruption: The Holy Ghost who dwelt in the body, shall be unto it
as a Balm to preserve it to Immortality: This same flesh, and no other for it,
though it should be dissolved into innumerable pickles of dust, shall be raised
again, and quickened by the omnipotent power of the eternal Spirit of GOD.

Occasion
I now come to the Occasion: Something I shall say of this deceased Gentleman,
here arrested before our eyes for a debt of Nature. I shall not praise his
Birth, nor his Education, nor his Profession; but as Hierom Epitaph Mar.
Hierom said of Marcella, that godly Woman, Nihil in illa laudabo nisi quod
proprium; I will praise nothing in him but what was proper and peculiar to him.

Consider him as a Man, Husband, Christian;


And we shall find him a pattern worthy imitation.

1. Consider him as a man: As a man he had his Infirmities; For Lord what is
man? 8 Ps. An infirm frail creature; many and great infirmities we labor
under as we are men: We have strong Corruptions in us; as we are men we can do
no thing but Sin: Yet this I may safely deliver of him, that he kept himself
(or rather GOD by His Grace kept him) from those Sins against which Holy
David prayed, Ps. 19.13.
Lord keep thy servant from presumpteous sins: We are are naturally prone to
great sins; he was not a strong Sinner: O the strength of sin in our days!
Notwithstanding Admonitions, Judgments, Mercies, men go on still in sins:
No reformation, no amendment; we were sinners before the Wars, and we are
sinners still: He was none of these.

2. Consider him as a Husband: And there he observed the rule of the Apostle,
Col. 3.19.
Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter against them: He lived lovingly
with his Wife in the sacred Conjunction of their GOD six and thirty years
together. Children he had none that lived; but a cheerful respecter of them
whom Law and Love had made his own: No Lion in his house, no Tyrant among his
servants; freindly, affable, courteous toward his Neighbors; observing
another precept of the Apostle, Romans 12.16
equalling himself to them of low degree, whereby he gained love, and lost
nothing of his reputation.

3. Consider him as a Christian: And so he was; 1. Peaceable. 2. Humble. 3.
Charitable. 4. Devout.


Four most infallible evidences (as I take them) of a true Christian, and a
Sanctified heart. His Devotion toward GOD was not only public, but private:
He was careful to set up the duty of Prayer in his Family; for he had often
heard from my mouth, that Families as well as Kingdoms were cursed, that
called not upon the Name of the LORD. And truly, GOD will visit private
Families, as well as public States: GOD will lay His Axe to the root of an
unpraying Family, as to the root of an unpraying Kingdom. O set up the duty of
Prayer in your Families, that they may be GODS Families. Many men rise in the
morning like the wild Ass to their prey, to their trade, to their business,
and they lie down at night, as Dogs do in their kennels; they call not upon
the Name of the Lord. I never knew a praying Family, a Family of much Sin:
Prayer does break the power of Sin in a Family, and weakens the Kingdom of
Satan in the hearts of Gods people. I have been often called to pray with his
family; doubt not but GOD has in mercy accepted the services of his poor
servants. He had a weak and crazie body, but GOD gave him a religious mind in
so great weakness of body: He was born for the good of Many: Most liberally he
remembered the poor; both in his life time giving often privily many large gifts
to his poor Neighbors, when he saw them in want; and at his death bequeathing
ten pounds to the poor of lower Tooting in Surrey, where he dwelt; and fifty
pounds to the poor of Kingston upon Thames where he was borne (and both his
Father and Mother, and his elder Brother and Sister with himself now lie
buried) to be distributed among them the next year after his decease: Yea in
his life time, according to a former promise made to his loving Brother in Law,
Mr. Abraham Colfe, Minister and Pastor of the Church of CHRIST at Lewisham in
Kent near Greenwich; and as a farther testimony of his love to his loving Wife
Elizabeth sister to the said Mr. Abraham Colfe, he did from the 25th. of March
1642. now almost nine years past, give six pence every week weekly on every
Lord's Day in every year yearly to six poor people of Lewisham, being of
honest life and conversation, and chosen by the Minister Incumbent, and
Officers of the Church and Parish, to be distributed at the public Church,
they being in health, at the end of the Sermon before noon: And also at his
death has given by Will thirty pounds to purchase lands for the perpetuating
of the said gift to six poor people of Levisham in like manner successively for
ever. Also he bequeathed great Legacies, to the value of above two thousand
pounds, to his poor kindred, friends, and servants. As GOD gave him Riches, so
GOD gave him a rich heart. O this distribution of Wealth is the only thing!
This breaking of Loaves among the needy! This casting our Bread upon the face
of the waters! Eccles. 11.1. Men think laying up the way to be rich, but God
thinks laying out to be the way. The loins of the poor will bless you for
your Liberality. I see the faces of many rich men; I know not the frame of your
hearts; I know not the bias of them: This I know, that the clouds that are full
pour out rain to refresh the earth; so the rich that have abundance must
distribute it liberally. Now for his sickness: Dolor calcu^i misere expiravit.
terrible as his discase, of the stone in the bladder; wherein were found
twelve stones weighing above six ounces, which put him to strong Outcries;
Outcries for the Lords Mercy, Outcries for pardon; deep acknowledgements for
his great, and many sins, God had laid great pain and torment upon him. I
never heard him repine, nor charge GOD foolishly: 1 Job 22.
He was patient, and prayed for patience; Lord give me patience to suffer thy
good will and pleasure: He died praying even when death shook him by the hand;
his Prayer was, O FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, O Blessed Savior and Redeemer
have mercy upon me. Thus lived and dyed this worthy Gentleman: The Garment
which he wore of borrowed earth, he has left to be restored to the earth
again. I forbid not his Friends to lament him: We may lament the dead, but not
the estate of the dead: CHRIST sorrowed for his Friend Lazarus: But my counsel
is, let not the Temple of GOD be over-sad: And as the Apostle advises, 1 These.
4.13.
Sorrow not without hope for him that is asleep: He is but a sleep; his Grave
his Bed; he shall awake as sure as he lay down; yea more fresh and glorious in
the great Day of Resurrection.

FINIS.

