THE SCHEME OR DIAGRAMME Adjusted for Future use, in a larger Prodromus ere
long to be published; and whereof this is then to be a Part. At present Printed
for private Hands.
A CONCATENATION of the Series of the Heads of the Grounds of the Scripture
represented in this second Systeme by Scheme or Diagramme.
ANd first of that great and prime Hyperphysical (that is) supernatural and
spiritual Ground GOD, demonstrating Himself to us by His first Outgoings and
after Condescensions, necessarily to be thus in Concatenation considered.

1. God in Unity of Essence, One GOD; The Abyss Unfathomable.

2. That Essence subsistentiated, (i.) specificated in Subsistencies, in order
to Creation Emanant.

CREATOR, WORD, SPIRIT.

Three Subsistencies For Nature, Grace, Glory.

3. Those Subsistencies (so specificated) in their Actual Outgoings exerting
(i.) putting themselves forth by their singular Energies, the Energie^ of each
respectively.

4. Those Energies become in the Subject (the Creature) Operations: This in the
Creation simply considered, the first Creation, the Creation of the First and
Second Race of Intellectuals.

5. Those Energies for their Operations on the Creature in the second Creation
(that is, the Restoration of the second Race in their Nature laps't)
concentred in the Person of a Mediator: The prime specificate Subject of that
Work, Our Lord Jesus Christ; the Beginning of the Creation of God, The new
Creation.

And then the Essence in the Subsistencies works by their Energies concentred
in that Person of the Mediator, through Him and by Him transmitted unto
Individuals in lapse, The second specificate Subject of that second Work; that,
Persons pertakers of that decayed Nature from the old Adam, might by those
operations for Restoration, through and from Him be made and become New
Creatures.

Whence, The Essence is not the Subsistency: The Subsistency is not the
Energie: The Energie is not the Operation:


And yet, The Essence is virtually the Subsistency; The Subsistency is
virtually the Energie; The Energie is virtually the Operation:


Because, The Essence is the Abyss from whence the Subsistencies Emane; The
Subsistencies are the Fountains from which the Energies flow; The Energies are
the Causes (in the Subject) of all Operations.


In like manner, The Operation is not the Energie; The Energie is not the
Subsistency; The Subsistency is not the Essence:


And yet, The Operation is relatively the Energie; The Energie is relatively
the Subsistency; The Subsistency is relatively the Essence.


Because, The Operations (in the subject) are the Energies terminated; The
Energies are the Subsistencies limited; The Subsistencies are the Essence
specificated.


In result and sum (the work of the Creation simply considered pretermitted)

The Operation Prime, for the new Creation or Restoration, is the Influence of
the Essence, from the Subsistencies, by their Energies, concentred in the
Mediator, from him, by a second operation upon lapsed nature, terminated in
Particulars.

And thus the Lowest has (from that which is nearest to it self) of the
Highest and Sovereign Being; what could not otherwise, either be derived from
It, or, in that state of Lapse, be received by the Creature.

Because, as Essence, in its Infinity Essential, (i.) as Essence, did not work
ad extra (i.) outwardly to the Being of the Creature, but in the Subsistencies;
Nor did the Subsistencies work to the constitution or making up that Being in
the Creature, in the state of Integrity, but by their Energies: So, neither
could the Subsistencies condescend to nature in the state of Lapse for
Restoration; nor the Creature in that state, receive their Influence by their
Energies immediately; had They not by those their respective Working Powers,
sanctifying (in a Person prepared) the First Fruits of humane nature; as well
Treasured up those their efficacies from Themselves, as Fitted them (treasured
up) for the creatures Receiving them: The Principles, as thus in Him
predisposedly united, so their Glory for the creature (as it were) rebated in
the Person of a Mediator.

Secondly, The Concatenation of the Heads of the Grounds of the Scripture, as
they are a Narrative of the methods of that GOD in those his great Designs,
the Creating, and Restoring of mankind; and give us the Physical and Moral
Theological Grounds contained in them (i.) the Natural Heads and Result of
and from them; which we represent in the several Heads and Notes of the Inward
Circle and Outward Epicycle.
And first, as an Inlet to the whole, A Look before the Creation of the visible
and Animate World; and so of the Creation of (the First Race of Intellectuals)
Spirits, simple Essences; of which Some Adhered and stood These Confirmed, and
their number to be made up by a second Race. A Look before the Creation of the
visible and Animate World; and so of the Creation of (the First Race of
Intellectuals) Spirits, simple Essences; of which Some kept not their first
state. These Reprobated, for whom Tophet; whence the Devil and evil Angels.


II. The Creation of the visible Animate-world; and of the Second Race of
Intellectuals, Man, in the Protoplast, the First Adam; A Spiritual Essence
Imbodied (i.) consisting of Inner and Outward Man, to be made One with the
simple Essences (Spirits unbodied) those of the First Race that stood: Their
Innate Law, Covenant of Nature by Impresse upon Adhesion of the Inward Man; And
the Appendixes preparatory (Sacrament, the Tree of Life; Sabbath, the Rest;
Symboles of Grace and Glory) for consummation of the Person and Nature both in
the Inner and Outward Man, upon the condition of that Covenant performed.

III. The Inhibition, Probational of his Inward Adhesion (in that Covenant of
Nature) by his Outward Obedience unto this Negative Law, for the fixing of that
State of Nature in his Person, by the Annexing those Appendixes preparatory
upon the condition performed (i.) Adhering and Obeying: And the Threat annexed,
if otherwise, being an Antedated Sentence.

IV. The Breach and Violation of that Covenant by Disadhesion, and of the
Probational Inhibition likewise by Disobedience, commonly called the Fall:
whereupon the Appendixes (because only preparatory) become suspended; The
Threat before, now an Actual sentence, the Curse incurred; importing, upon
Nature forfeited, Aversion or turning away the Face of his Creator from him;
and the Word withdrawing his Principle of Grace: Both these as the Paena damni
or Privative Evil; And in demerit eternal Dereliction of his Intellectual
Nature in that state; and casting it off into the state of Tophet (prepared for
those of the First Race that kept not their first state) as the Paena sensus or
Positive Evil of Punishment; These relatively from the Covenant distinctly
terminated in that his Inward Man; And from the Inhibition, Support withdrawn,
as the Privative Evil; and Mortality seizing on him, as the Positive,
terminated in the Body or Outward Man; and from all these Glory in design from
the Spirit of necessary consequence come short of.

V. The Interpellation, a Rescuing from the Execution of the Sentence and Curse
upon that Breach; And the State of Nature (as so rescued from the Paenasensus
or Positive Evil) to be considered under the Paenadamni or Privative only: Yea
farther (upon the Creator's admitting that Interpellation) A Reprieve from the
Sentence, and so the Curse for the present sublevated both to the Inward and
Outward Man, by which a possibility for a following Covenant for Restoring of
Both.

VI. The Restoration of Nature in the Inward and Outward Man (under the
forfeiture to Justice suspended upon that Rescue and Reprieve) in Decree by the
Covenant of Grace Primitive in the first Transaction, as the New Creation in
the Second Adam by this the New Covenant (for Restoration and Revelation)
betwixt the Creator Ordaining, and the Eternal Word undertaking to be Incarnate
by his Eternal Spirit immediately united to the Intellectual Nature, and by it
to be united to the Body. Whereby (the principle of Grace withdrawn Restored to
our Nature in that the second Adam) He became a fit Mediator Sponsor (in the
Apostles phrase a Pledge) to perform the Condition of the first Adam by
Adhesion Inward, Obedience Outward. This not only Active to vanquishing, but
Passive also (for the satisfying the guilt of the first Adams nonperformance)
even to the suffering of Death; whence Raised and Glorified (as Reward upon the
work done, taking possession in our nature of the Glory come short of) He was
thereby made a fit Mediater Regenerator to restore the principle of Grace to
particulars, and so gave them title to the Glory in Him prepared for them. For
the efficacious Revealing and applying of which Grace to the Inward by the
Outward Man, Outward Means and Ordinances are hereunto Codecreed in him, as
Apostle by Unction from the Father to Reveal, as the work given him to do: And
so here, Nature sanctified, the Inner Man delivered from the Positive Evil, the
Execution of the Sentence, and the state of Tophet, by translating of the Guilt
and Curse upon the Satisfaction undertaken: From the Privative Evil, the
Creator now lifting up the light of his Countenance in his Decreed Ordinances
for the restoring of the Principle of Grace withdrawn, and Glory consecutive
thereupon: And though the Outward Man still continued under its incurred Curse,
Genesis 3.19. To dust thou shall return, yet that also here sanctified upon
Capitulation, that the Creator (to make it redeemable in us) would by a second
work prepare it for the Eternal Word to assume, and so to become voluntarily
and of himself Mediator to Redeem; and in it Anointed, Apostle to Reveal. All
from this (the beginning of time) by His cooperating Grace in Shadows and
Types in the several Administrations (and from this Compact) having efficacy
as Ordinances; though as to the Actuating them in the fulness of time
Personally in and from Himself (as in the Flesh) they were only in Decree.

VII. The Actual Restoration of Nature complete in the Covenant of Grace
Primitive in the second Transaction, mutually made good in the Person of the
Mediator, by the Creator's preparing, and so sanctifying the Humane nature or
Body as to the Outward Man: And the Word by the Intellectual nature, the Inner
Man (unto which from the first Transaction it was united) assuming it prepared
into union with his Divine Nature; so restoring the Principle of Grace in his
Person to Humane nature complete, both to the Inward and Outward Man: On whom
thus constituted (His Duty, Obedience Active and Passive, performed) the
Reward, Glory, is actually conferred: All according to that Restoration in
Decree.

VIII. The Restoration of Particulars in the Covenant Derivative, as the
Revelation and efficacious Application of the Covenant Primitive from Him, by
complication of Ordinances and Mystery, into which coming as into the Kingdom
of God, their Persons are by the Ordinances sanctified, and they renewed in
Knowledge from Him, as Apostle by unction of the Holy Ghost, Jo. 14.26.
teaching them all things: And then (upon the appropriate condition of Faith in
its Advances) they receive from Him, as Mediator, by Influx of that his
Renewing Nature, the Mystery, the Righteousness of the Kingdom, unto their
Regeneration in their Inward Man, upon and according unto that actual
Restoration in the Person of the Mediator.

IX. That Restoration of Particulars by Influx, upon the appropriate Condition
of Adhering and Vanquishing (in the Covenant Derivative Finished) consummate as
to the Inward Man in the Earnest from the Spirit sealing, The third
Subsistency; and the Cutward man by that his work on it, (the Inward,) sealed
to the Day of Redemption.

X. The State of Nature by dissolution separate in and after Death, relative
both to the Inward and Outward Man; the Inward (because by immediate impresse
Sealed) immediately in actual Bliss, a Bliss proportioned to this Separate
state: And the Outward Man (because once united to the Inward, and by that Seal
on it, sealed to its Redemption) resting in Hope.

XI. The state of Nature, both Inward and Outward; (according to that Seal and
Rest in Hope) by the Resurrection reunited and perfectly restored; Sealed unto
Translation.

XII. The State of Nature thus, as before, perfectly restored in the Persons
fully redeemed. Now declaredly Acquitted at the last Judgment, according unto
the different Administrations under which they were; whether General of the
Creature, or special in their several diversifications (that is)
Patriarchall, Mosaicall, Prophetical, Interlegall, Evangelicall: Prime, under
Christ and the Apostles; or Continued, in their Successors unto the End of the
World.

XIII. The Persons, thus by the Resurrection redeemed, after the Resurrection
sealed unto Translation, and according unto their Administrations at the Last
Judgment acquitted, Now finally Translated, as their consummate Glorification,
and made One Hierarchy with those of the first Race that Adhered and stood.

This the Accomplishing of that first Design, the End of the first Creation in
the state and Covenant of Nature violate and frustrated by the first Adam's
Dis-adhesion (explicated in his Dis-obedience) Now, and Thus repaired according
to This counsel of the will of God in a second Design, the end of their
second and New Creation in the state and Covenant of Grace, made good and
finished by the Second Adam, Christ Jesus, (God blessed for ever) upon his
Adhesion, Vanquishing, and Suffering (explicated by his Obedienc Active and
Passive) according unto the Interpellation and Covenant Primitive for the
Redemption and Restoration of Mankind.

Thirdly, The Consequentiall Heads of the Grounds of the Scripture, as they are
involved in the Primitive Fundamentals, and unto which they are relatively
consequentiall; which we have for distinction Chequered.
THus the Trinity Supreme, Creator and Word; operating by Creation unto the
constitution of the creature Intellectual, as Fountains Prime; and Spirit, the
Third Subsistency, distinct from either, which was (in Design) the
consummating Principle to the second Race upon perseverance: included in and
evidenced by that Head, the Creation of the visible world: And yet farther,
their distinct Personalities more fully appearing by the Interpellation and
Covenant of Grace Primitive in the first Transaction, we consequently state it
not till in this place, the close of the first Fundamentals, from which it has
its evidence, as included in them.

The Consideration of those of the first Race that stood is chequered also,
though but an Appendix to the sixth Head: And that it is properly unto it an
Appendix, is confirmed by the Holy Ghost, in that he says, Heb. 1.14. Are they
not all ministering Spirits, sent forth for them who shall be Heirs of
Salvation? that is, of those who are Claimers by this Covenant, which was
properly A Covenant of Salvation, the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the first
Transaction, which is the sixth Head.

The Consequentials involved in the Heads of Mediatorship.
THe Trinity of Condescensions for Redemption, The Creator, now complete and
actually Father by Generation, in overshadowing the Virgin and preparing a
Body: The Word, now Son, by Incarnation of his Eternal Spirit (personally
united to the Intellectual nature, and by it to that Body prepared) the New
Creature: The Spirit, now Consummator of Glory in full, actuated in the Person
of the Mediator, and by Him merited for particulars, as the Seal of Grace and
Earnest of Glory. All included in and resulting from the Covenant Primitive in
the second Transaction, and the Covenant Derivative Finished.

The Church Regenerate, the Ultimate End of this whole work of Condescentions
for Redemption, as the New Creation of God: This Consequentiall upon the
Covenant Derivative, and Covenant Derivative Finished.

The Consequentials involved in the Heads of Apostleship.
SCripture comprehended in the Emergent Revelations unto the Patriarchs, Moses,
the Prophets, Jesus Christ, and the Apostles; The subject matter of Those
Records; That Revelation by them to us, only Divine; And the Tradition of it
from them to us, only Authenticke.

The Trinity of Condescensions for Administrations in the Apostolate of Jesus
Christ: The Father, now Anointing, as Lord: The Son Anointed, as Servant: The
Holy Ghost, the Energie of the Father by Procession from Him in fulness on
the Son, and by and from Him in the several dispensations, the Principle of
special Administrations, for Revelation; included in the Covenant Derivative,
as the subject matter of his Apostleship, and implied in the principle of this
House of Administrations.

The Subadministrators, by whom that Apostleship of Jesus Christ was executed
in all Ages, to whom the word of Reconciliation was committed, and with whom it
was to remain and be continued unto the end of the world; both as to the prime
Ordinances, The Power of sending and Government; and secondary Ordinances, the
Administration of the Word and Sacrament, by those that are so sent.

The Church Congregate, the Ultimate End of this whole work of Condescensions
for Administrations, and so the Last in these consequentials; that He might
sanctify and cleanse it with washing of water by the Word (the Initiating
Sacrament to this Church) that He might (as Apostle) present it unto himself
(as Mediator) a Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; Ephesians.
5.26, 27.

The Influence of the Spiritual Theological Grounds (represented in the inner
Lines) their Juncture and Union with the Natural and Moral Theological
Heads, on which they terminate themselves.
HAving thus given in sum, the (...), or Narrative of the Things as they are,
as well Hyperphysicall, as Physical and Moral, with their relative
Consequentials, separate and apart: we farther desire, for the farther
comprobating of the Scheme, to suggest the (...), or manner how in Juncture
with themselves and each other, they so become one entire Body, as we have
represented them in It.

And first, in all humble confidence presuming upon that Demonstration (which,
by his Outgoings) the Infinite, Immortal, Incomprehensible Godhead has given
of it self; we do in conformity thereto suppose, and (by those Lines issuing
from the Essence, and terminated on the Subsistencies) express Their
Coessentiall Inbeings, their Coeternall and Coequall Emanations (i.) Flowings
forth from It.

The termination of those Lines upon the Figures 1, 2, 3. speaks not their
Priority or Posteriority in order of Nature (they being so Coequall and
Coeternall) but only shows their Order of Working, demonstratively evident
from their after-works in their subsistentiall Actings and energeticall
Operations, according to their distinct respective specifications, for Nature,
Grace, Glory: Because there must be Nature (i.) Being from the Creator, before
there can be Impresse upon that Being (i.) Grace from the Word: And there must
be Nature and Grace from both, before They can be anneal'd or fixed by the
Third, the Spirit, to make that Grace become Nature (i.) Glory Inchoate, in the
Earnest consummate here, or Glory in full (i.) absolutely consummate upon
Translation.

And secondly, with the same confidence (because upon the same grounds, of the
Subsistencies in Their Outgoings demonstrating themselves) we do determine of
their respective Energies (i.) their Working Powers or Spirits, One with
themselves, and therefore distinct from each other, as Themselves are.

And though One with themselves and distinct from each other; yet the same
Energie (from One and the same Subsistency diversifying it self for operations
toward and upon the Creature) becomes varied in Each and all those
Operations, according to the capacity of the Subject in its respective states
of Constitution and Restoration in its several Advances.

Nor is it without reason that we call them Energeticall Operations (not simply
Energies and Operations) because, as in and from the Subsistencies, they are
properly Energies; so in and upon the Creature, properly Energeticall
Operations: as we shall show you in their union with their Heads, with which
they must be read, as in the Order and manner of Reading we have directed.

All which Subsistentiall Actings, and Energeticall Operations, we represent by
the Lines drawn from the Subsistencies, terminating on their several Heads;
which we are now cursorily to run over.

Of which, the first Three, give us the Constitution of the first Race of
Intellectuals Consummate; that is, every of the Subsistencies having their
Energeticall Operations in the Creation of that Race by Constitution fixed: In
constitution we say, as deriving their Nature (which we in them call simply
Essence) from the Creator; their Grace (which in them we call Specification)
from the Word; their Glory (which we in them call Consummation in constitution)
from the Spirit: As giving us the real ground laid by the wisdom of God in
their forming, for his indispensible and Absolute Reprobation of them, if they
should Apostatize; in that All their Operations being, as we have said, fixed;
All must be equally incensed, and so there could be no Interpellator to stop
the Justice, much less Mediator to undertake for them: Heb. 2.16. He in no
wise lald hold on the Angels (i.) to deliver them, but took the seed of Abraham.

The next Three speak the Constitution of the Secohd Race, not consummate:
Their Nature, complex'd of Inner and outward Man (from the Creator) only
constituted, (i) fixed; Their Grace (from the Word) in Principle not fixed
(because to its fixing it prerequired a Condition on Man's part to be
performed) And Their Glory (from the Spirit) which should have fixed Grace and
consummated Nature, in Design only; which we have made the Line to say, in
that it comes not home, because the Energie it self could not be attained, but
upon perseverance: And this gives us the like real ground of the possibility
of restoring this Race, if they should Fall, because their Constitution was not
in their creation consummate.

The Inhibition has no Energeticall line terminating on it, because not
convoying any thing to his nature, but only as of Positive Precept, a Negative
Law, laying hold on him, as from the Lord and Sovereign of his Person.

Nor has the Fall any, It being his Defection from the God of Nature, by his
breach of the Covenant of Nature, and his Rebellion against the Sovereign of
his Person, by his transgression of the Law: yet the Consequen^s thereof, being
proportioned to his constitution by the Energies (to wit, his Nature forfeited
into the hands of the Creator, from whom it derived its constitution; his Grace
in Principle, the Energie, from the Word, withdrawn; because (the condition
unperformed) not fixed; And his Glory in design, from the Spirit, come short
of, because He persevered not) minister unto us the real ground, why the
Justice of the Creator only remains to be satisfied, and mankind, in the
Protoplast, delinquent to him alone.

But that the Justice of the Creator might be satisfied, order of of nature
requires, that It first be suspended: And that Suspension must as necessarily
precede the Restoration in Decree; as satisfaction made good must precede the
Actual Restoration.

And here we are cast upon disquisition, How Mankind in the first Adam shall
for the present be rescued from the Threat, now a sentence? And how the Justice
may be superseded, for the making way unto Redemption and Restoration to ensue?

And this we are necessitated unto, that we may make up the Chasme or Hiatus in
the Primitive and first Truths, betwixt the State of Nature, under the Guilt
upon breach of Covenant, and Transgression by the Fall, with the Sentence
thereupon; And the Redemption from that Justice of the Creator, and
Restoration of the Race by another Covenant, A Covenant of Grace.

For though, from the consticution of this second Race, we have discovered and
evidenced, that by the wisdom of God it was provided, that their Lapse, if it
should become actual, should not put them beyond the possibility of Restoring,
yet must that incurred Sentence, be reversed as to the delinquent, and that
Justice stopped; which we cannot refer either to the Sovereign Love of the
Creator, with some; or to His sovereign Beneplacit, or sovereigne Mercy with
others; because (Man being in real Guilt and under an actual sentence,) it
would cross those his other Attributes of Sovereign Holiness, Justice and
Truth, already fixed in the Covenant and Threat.

To salve therefore that crossing of Attributes, we have by disquisition found,
and do give another expedient, which we call The interpellation of the Eternal
Word (so the Line speaks it,) God of God (that is) God the Word (the second
Subsistencie) of God in Essence (not Christ, the Word Incarnate, which was the
Person of the Mediator) Interposing himself; And this putting himself in the
Gap, was His the Word's work solitarily; A Rescue upon his self worth.

And this, besides the salving of that Crossing of the Attributes, gives us in
consequence

First, A Plumbe-Line, by which we sound and fathom in the after Capitulation,
the depth of the wisdom of the Creator, in transmitting (not disanulling) the
Curse, in delivering (not absolving) the delinquent; and by that mortality
(introduced upon the Temptation and Fall) destroying the Enemy himself: and
discover the Bottom upon which the submission of God the Word, is also
grounded, for making satisfaction unto that Justice, because from It he rescued
mankind.

Secondly, It reaches unto us a Jacob's-staff, whereby we may take the true
height of the Divine Nature of Jesus Christ the Mediator, and demonstratively
conclude (from his satisfaction made) Him to be the same Eternal Word then
Incarnate, which now Interpellated and Capitulated.

This Head, thus discovered, will be Fruitful for the evidencing of many other
particulars, which have their first Root in it, which we do at present
pretermit, not willing to anticipate our selves in our larger complete
Prodromus, nor in our after larger work.

Upon the Covenant Primitive in the first Transaction, two Lines terminate from
the Creator and Word; These two Subsistencies being the only Parties
interessed in that Covenant, (whose respective works, the words on the Lines
speak) which does import, that the Third Subsistency, as to capitulation, is
not concerned; because his work was but in Design in the Constitution of the
first Adam, by the Covenant of Nature; and therefore but consecutive (upon the
work undertaken) in Decree, and not till executed, to be actually the
consummating Principle in and to the second Adam by this Covenant of Grace.

And this with the Interpellation, we are bold to affirm, the Beginning of the
Gospel, The New Creation, and to be intended by the Foundation of the World,
and by all the like Gospel expressions: This being the Foundation of the World
of Regeneration simply and properly so called, as in Gospel sense: Yea and the
Foundation of the very visible world, by the same Figure that the Holy Ghost
using has sanctified to my hand, when he affirms, Heb. 11.19. that Abraham
received his son Isaac from the (...) after a Figure.

For if the rescuing of Isaac from the sacrificing sword, and the providing a
Ram to be sacrificed in his stead, made that his Deliverance to be a
Resurrection: How much more shall this Interpellationall Rescue, and Compact
for preparing a Ransom unto Man, the Heir and Lord of the Creation, with the
whole Fabric (provided for him) forfeited by the Fall, be accounted both to
him and it, a New Creation?

Trinity Supreme, as a Consequentiall from the Primitive Fundamentals, we have
stated in the Systeme of Consequentials.

Note first, that, that Line to the Interpellation, and Those two to the
Covenant Primitive, are not Energeticall, but Personal Acts: For, as Personal
Consultation was necessary before they did exert their Energies to
Constitution; so, man having here destroyed himself, there is a like reason for
This their second Consultation, before they could exert their Energies to
Restoration.

Secondly, Nor is that which we draw from those of the first Race, which
adhered and stood; but only does denote by the words upon it, when they became
Ministering spirits, as a farther justification of our calling of them
Intellectuals there, and not Angels, till here.

Those Three, that fall upon the Covenant Primitive in the second Transaction,
are purely Energeticall; the Two first qualifying him for Duty of Mediator
Sponsor undertaken, which we therefore read downwards: The Third crowning him
with the Reward appropriate to the work of Mediator Regenerator upon the Duty
performed, which we therefore read upward.

Of the other Three, which fall upon the Covenant Derivative (the subject
Matter of his Apostleship) the Two first are to qualify Him for that his
Office Apostolical, and are therefore to be read downwards; the Third crowning
him with Reward, upon the same ground with the former, to be read likewise
upward.

The words Restoration executed, and Revelation executed, (which head the
points of each) refer you back to the second Note in the Epicycle, of their
being coactuated in their respective Principles (by which He was fitted for
each work) as That does to the Covenant in the first Transaction, when they
were codecreed.

That single Line, which from the Spirit, the Third Subsistency, falls on the
Covenant of Grace Derivative Finished, shows, that the Mediator having
meritoriously attained it in his Person, for our Nature, we in conformity
performing our respective Conditions, have in consequence at last from that
subsistency, an Impresse sealing us to Redemption, proportioned to this state,
which that Reverse Line speaks, pointing to the Redemption it self in the
Resurrection, The Redemption of our Bodies, Romans 8.23.

The next from the second Subsistency, the Word, terminated on the Church
Regenerate, does give us, by the Scripture on it, the true and real ground of
Communication of Properties, to be between the Eternal Word, and the Person of
the Mediator.

For though the Body was prepared by the Father, by the overshadowing of the
Holy Ghost, his Energie, Luke 1.35. yet it was still as from That, but the
Blood of man (though of the Son of God, Son of God and son of Man being
coincident) the seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. But when
assumed into union Hypostaticall, or Plastic, with the Word; His Blood (viz.)
the Mediator's, becomes so the Blood of God (viz. of God the Word) and this
People purchased by his own Blood, Acts 20.28.

The next Three give the varied Operations of the respective Energies, as the
Subject (under and by their foregoing operations respectively) is prepared for
This work, the Resurrection; and by these their present Operations, predisposed
for the Next, their future Glorification.

Thus:

1. Nature in the Primitive state, constituted by the Energie of the Creator;
becomes forfeited, by the Fall; reprieved, by the Interpellation; sanctified in
Decree, by the Compact in its first Transaction; then actually sanctified in
the Person of the Mediator, (as to the Outward man or Body) by the
overshaddowing of the Holy Ghost in the Covenant in its second Transaction;
and, from that alteration thus wrought in Him, Believers in Particular
sanctified; as they come under the Covenant Derivative then sealed to its
Redemption in and by the Covenant Derivative Finished; And so Nature Consummate
in the Earnest.

2. Grace in the Primitive state, the Energie of the Word in Principle, but not
fixed; by the Fall, withdrawn; the Interpellation makes way for its restoring
in Decree, by the Compact; as That in the Decree makes way for the Actual
restoring of it in the Person of the Mediator (by the Divine nature from the
Word assuming our nature into Plastic union in the second Transaction) by and
through whom it becomes actually conveyed, by Influx, unto particulars, as
they receive the mystery, in the Covenant Derivative; in the strength of which
they performing the conditions in conformity required (i.) adhering and
vanquishing, the Covenant Derivative is finished (i.) fixed in and on them; And
so Grace perfected in the Inward man.

3. Glory, the Energie of the Spirit, in the Primitive state in Design only;
by the Fall come short of; yet, by the Interpellation, in order to an Advance;
and consecutively restored in Decree, by the Compact in its first transaction,
as actually consequent (upon the work done) in the Mediator's assumption into
Glory in the second Transaction; And in consequent merited for us, and applied
unto us in the Covenant Derivative Finished, the Seal in the Earnest from the
Spirit; And so Glory Inchoate.

Note first, That the Fall (as the frustrating of the first Design) was the
Decay of all these in the Person of the first Adam; The Interpellation, as the
Occasional ground, and the following Covenant, as the Fundamental of the
Restoration of them; were Subsistentiall Acts betwixt themselves, and so
forensick to Our Natures: The actual restoring them (in the second
Transaction) in the Person of the Mediator, was by Energies and Energeticall
Operations, and so intrinsic to our nature, but terminated in his Person: The
subsequent Operations in their several Advances (as being Energeticall
likewise) are intrinsic to our natures in our own persons, as we increasing
with the encreasings of God, are made conformable to the Image of his Son.

Note Secondly, That in all these several Personal Acts and Energeticall
Operations (on this side the Fall) in their prequalifying Advances; The
Succeeding are not attainable (ordinarily) until the Acts and Operations
immediately foregoing, have had their Designed Works on or in relation to our
nature and Persons; because the foregoing only do predispose and render the
subject (in and on whom They are wrought) capable of the exalted operations
immediately following.

Thus the several foregoing Operations, gradually heightning and advancing our
Nature and Persons, until Nature and Grace be consummate in the Earnest, we do
by that Sealing rest in Hope; then raised, according to that Hope, in this The
First Resurrection; we have from the Creator by his Energie (in a varied
Operation) Nature, in the state of Integrity constituted, now Restored; Grace
from the Word in like manner, then in Principle, but not fixed; now in
Principle, and fixed; Glory from the Spirit, then likewise in Design only, now
secured: This being the sealing to the Day of Translation, intercepted by the
Fall.

Thirdly, In concurrence with this latter Note, this we must also farther
suggest and add; that as the Prequalifying Operation is of the Nature of
Disposition unto the after Advance; so by the after exalted Operation, the
former Prequalification becomes to be of the Nature of Habit.

And being thus brought to the Point where we first set forth, and from whence
we departed (the proper sense of the Apostles word (...), which has hitherto
been rendered, the Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21.) with this farther
advantage, that we are sealed to Translation; we have in our actual
Translation (in consequence of that Seal) Nature, by the Creator, then only
restored; now by a varied operation, Exalted: That Grace from the Word, then
only in principle and fixed, now Glorified: That Glory, from the Spirit, then
only secured, now consummate.

Then come in those Notes,

Of which the first, (The Subsistencies themselves now Comprehensible, because
Face to Face, etc.) occasioneth us upon review of that Attribute of
Incomprehensibility (the Boundary of created natures) to give you in scale,
when and upon what grounds in predication of God (thus diversely considered) in
Essence, Subsistencies, Energies and Operations, the Person of the Mediator
with his Energies and Operations,) it becomes moveable, when fixed (i.) when He
is Incomprehensible, when and how Comprehensible unto us, viz. GOD in Essence,
absolute simply and in Himself, Incomprehensible; The manner of the Inbeing and
Emanation of the Subsistencies so also.

But then, because the Essence, by the Emanation (as a nearer approach to the
creature) manifests it self subsistentiated; And the Subsistencies render
themselves comprehensible, mediately by their Energies, in their Operations
immediate; therefore when we shall have past all the Advances of the varied
Operations, and so become made fit by Glorification for the receiving of their
Energies immediately: Nature (which Adam forfeited) fully redeemed and exalted;
the Principle of Grace (from which He fell) by Restoration fixed and Glorified;
the Principle of Glory (of which He came short of) as of Auction, secured and
Attained; and so we Consummate: The Subsistencies themselves must necessarily
then become Comprehensible.

And from this ground, we have the sense of the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 13.12.
Face to Face, and Know as Known: which we have therefore made the close of this
Note. And that the Apostle's words (having found their proper ground) do
naturally speak their sense to be as we have given it, is most evident; because
Comprehensibility being formally an Attribute upon Communion betwixt God and
the Creature, Consequentiall upon his Being; and not (as the other Attributes
from God unto the Creature) Constitutive of his Being: It must therefore
necessarily follow, that (his Being once restored, and God taking us into
Immediate Communion of the Subsistencies, the End of the whole work) He then
turn his Face unto us, and we have Immediate vision (i.) Face to Face: The
Communication under Moses his Administrations, being but his back Parts of
Types to Ours; And Ours, The Gospel administrations, but mediate in the Face of
Jesus Christ, 2 Cor 4.6. (i.) by his Energies, as Mediator and Apostle; not
Face to Face of the Subsistencies by their Energies.

Though when we come thus Face to Face, and that the Subsistencies become thus
comprehensible; Incomprehensibility is even then and afterward fixed to the
Essence, as that Abyss unfathomable, that state of Godhead Incomprehensible;
according to the second Note; Essence, as They in it (in the Inbeing) It in
them (Subsistentiated and Emaned) now and for ever incomprehensible.

The Consideration of Our Lord Jesus Christ, as represented in this Scheme,
relative to his distinct Offices and Works of Mediatorship and Apostleship.
FRom these Inward Lines, and their junctures with themselves and the rest of
the Body, as the Spirit and Informing part of the whole; That which next
occurres, is the consideration of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom only we
can bless God, because through Him only God has been thus good unto us; in
whom all these Advances being first wrought, they through Him are (as we have
said) transmitted unto us.

Him therefore we represent,

I. Standing upon that direct Energeticall Line from the Word, the Divine
constitutive Principle, by which He assumed our Nature; so the words on the
Line speak, The Eternal Spirit by which He offered up Himself (i. His Humane
Nature) without spot, Heb. 9.14. for by the same, by which He offered up
Himself, He must assume it.

II. Placed betwixt the several Energeticall Lines, relatively qualifying Him
for each Office and Work, and conferring the respective appropriate Rewards on
Him as Mediator for Man to God, in the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the
second Transaction; and as Apostle from God to Man for promulgating the
Covenant Derivative.

III. Standing also upon his Administrations Patriarchall, Mosaicall,
Prophetical (in which Revelation in Shadow, Redemption in Type) Interlegall as
in John Baptist's Ministry, preparing his way beforehis Face: And Evangelicall,
in which Revelation, before in shadow, is now in Substance; Redemption, before
in Type, is now in Truth.

The Consideration of the Cross Lines, or Lines of Commensuration.
THe Cross Lines (of which in the third Note in the order and manner of
Reading) are Commensurations of the several states under those Heads, where
they terminate: we have only this to advert, that, as the words at either end
of them, separately considered, are the Gages of that state; so relatively
considered, they are the Grains of difference which balance them.

Thus first, though only Confirmation, was the state of the first Race, which
adhered and stood, yet Confirmation of the second Race could not have ballanc't
them without Translation.

Secondly, The Gage of the state of Nature in Integrity, being (as on the
Commensuration Line) Ingenerate and unto Glory but determinable, presupposing,
the first Design of God, and That frustrated by the Lapse; nevertheless then
(though supposing the Interpellation and Covenant for restoring of it) cannot
That State of Nature be commensurate, but by the state of Nature in and after
the Resurrection; and yet This state has its grains of difference, Regenerate
for Ingenerate, for Determinable Determinate.

Thirdly, The State of Nature in the Fall (because Death in the Root)
commensurate with the state of Nature in Death; with which it cannot be
ballanc't, until what Here was in Root by the Fall, has passed over all There
by Death; the Merit here, the wages there.

Fourthly and lastly, That the Gentiles (under the General Ordinances, and
their Instructing Paedagogie of the creature-Administrations, with the work of
the Law written in their hearts) if working Righteousness (according to the
purport of the words on the Commensurating Line) are (as to the Common Interest
of Eternal salvation) in equal balance with the Jew and Christian, saving
that these latter had their Prerogatives (as the Grains of difference) the
special Adminisirations; The One, the Adoption, the Glory, the Covenants; Romans
9.4, 5. The Other, 3^. the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof,
Matthew. 6. as special assistances, and more conducible means (though varied
unto Each respectively) unto that one Common End of All, Sal. vation.

The Import of those Words, THE INTELLECTUAL WORLD.
LAstly, that you see in Capitals these Words, THE INTELLECTUAL WORLD, taking
place between GOD in Essence, the Subsistencies and their Energies in their
first Operations (for constitution of the First and Second Race) as situate
above them; And separating Those Above (as the First part of the Scale) from
the Subsistentiall Actings, and the same Energies and their Operations varied,
for the Constitution of Jesus Christ Mediator and Apostle, upon and after
consultation to restore (the second Part of the Scale) together with those
Divine Principles in Jesus Christ constituted, and for execution of that second
Consultation to us ward by Him exerted; in whose Person, as the Restoration
was first wrought, so by Him was it to be perfected in us (the third Part of
the Scale) Both these latter gradually in situation, as in order of nature,
beneath Them.

We do assign unto Our Spirit, The Intellectual Nature, its peculiar Object
(purely spiritual, abstract from matter, and without the mediation of sense)
the Knowledge and Acknowledgement of God, as represented in this Scheme: For
want of which, we do but groape after God, not knowingly contemplate or adore
Him. For how can we ascend unto Him, but by the same scale He descends unto
us? And hence it follows, that That great Work and last End, Our
Regeneration, is less evidently quickening, and the Means thereto, the
Ordinances, are less efficacious.

And we must farther say congruous with this Analogy, that the not
understanding the first Part of the Scale, GOD in Essence, Subsistencies,
Energies, Operations to the constitution of the creature, has been the Prime
cause of the not understanding of the Second, viz. The Subsistentiall Actings
in the Interpellation and Covenant of the first Transaction, the Energies and
Operations in the Lines terminating on the Covenant in the second transaction,
as to his Mediatorship, and the Covenant Derivative as to his Apostolate: These
being but their Operations upon Condescension, which cannot have their Light
but from a consideration had of these their first Actings. And the confused or
Indistinct understanding of this Second, has been a like cause of not
understanding the Third, the Operations from the Mediator and Apostolate, by
his respective Energeticall Operations to us ward and on us, the subject matter
exhibited in the Covenant Derivative, and Covenant Derivative Finished; This
being but the Deriving unto us, what was Treasured up in Him.

And in as much as This Scale of the Intellectual in its Juncture with the
rest, is indeed the Spirit quickening the whole, we may affirm, that all Our
Errors, as well in Judgment and Faith, as in Practice and Manners, in the
other nature all Theological Heads and moral Theological Grounds (in the
Circle and Epicycle modelled) have arisen principally from the not aright
discerning of these.

And it would be no hard matter to evidence in particulars, where and how from
some Misprision or other (here in Root) of the Intellectual; each and every of
our misguided Actings in Morals, Oeconomicks, Politics, as well of sacred as
civil cognizance, have burgeoned and put forth.

The Review of the whole.
ANd now let the whole be viewed, From the Abyss of Essence to the Operations,
and the Person of Jesus Christ, with his Energies and Operations on us: From
the Look before the Creation, to the state of Glorification: From the Judgment
of the first Race, to the Judgment of the second Race; From the state of
nature in its Primitive constitution, to the state of nature in the first
Resurrection: From the state of nature in the Fall of the first Man, to the
state of nature in Death, the condition of all men: From the Covenant of
Restoration in Decree, to the same Covenant derived unto us, and Finished in
us: From the Trinity Supreme, to the Trinity of Condescensions: From the
Gentile in the Gener all Ordinances, to the Jew and Christian in all the
special Administrations. What should I mention particulars? Look on the
Generals, as the Circle in the Epicycle; and let the whole be considered in its
Symmetry and proportion, as it has wrought it self in the Scheme, A Systeme of
Truths purely natural, and according to the order of nature; without any
Artifice at all in the framing; we having only followed (not forced) Them,
whilst they in their natural Method (as things) formed and brought themselves
into Diagramme Mathematical; that the Inward subject matters might more
efficaciously (by demonstrating the Seriptures Design) inform the Reason, when
(fixed according to the order of nature in the outward Form and Figure) they
shall be transmitted unto it by the convinced Sense; that so, Sense, Reason,
and Revelation, may all conspire to the stating of each and every particular
Truth.

Thus see and consider,

Essence in the Subsistencies Emanant by their Energies constituting a First
Race; and upon the Apostasy of some of that Race creating a Second in a
Condition Inconsummate; Upon their Lapse, (the Lapse of the second Race, in the
Protoplast) the first and second Subsistencies (because They only had their
Principles actually in the constitution of the first Adam) in and by their
Subsistentiall Actings, laying their Design for the Restoration of this
second Race: This Decreed, Executed in the second Adam, revealed by Him, and
accomplished in the earnest, then in the Full in the creature: This creature,
thus restored by the Regeneration, and consummately Glorified (All by the
varied Operations of the Subsistencies by their Energies) show in Figure, the
Designs, the Degrees and Steps of this creatures Constitution, Restoration,
Advance, and Exaltation.

Next see and consider,

Tophet in its situation, A Work not decreed, but emergent upon Their Apostasy,
and extraneous to the Design of God in the Creation of that first Race; as The
Sentence from him, was aliene. They first become Devils and Evil Angels in
consequent of their Fall; Reserved in chains of darkness in consequent of
their Sentence, unto the Judgment of the great Day for the full of their
punishment, And then become Tempters in that state to the first man, and ever
afterward in Enmity with the seed: Thus in that Head and Labels.

And the Last Judgment in proportioned situation opposite, because an
Abdication of that first Race, and at once a Sentence and Abdication of those
of the second Race, workers of Iniquity, then finally Reprobated, imported by
the Labell, Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

Concerning which Last Judgment, I shall at present only suggest this one
thing; that It has and must keep the seventh place in the close of the Heads
of the Ordinances, as the First Resurrection is the seventh to those of the
Mediatorship; because It depends on those Ordinances which the whole Body of
the Head imports; Giving us farther also in the close, a Distinction of the
Kingdom of Apostolate, which he is to resign after this, and to lead us into
that merited Kingdom of the Father, prepared for us before the Foundation of
the World simply considered, expressed by that part of the Labell, Come ye
blessed of my Father, etc. Matthew. 25.34. when those who claim It by Covenant,
acquitted at the Last Judgment, are gathered into One with those of the first
Race confirmed.

Then see and consider,

The Head of the Fall, upon the same ground not decreed of God, and so the Root
of Death not made by God, He made not Death, says the Wise man, Wisd. 1.13.
but man; Adam giving himself by sin into the power of Satan; Death came in by
Sin, Romans 5.12. And hence we see how Satan came to have the Power of Death,
Heb. 1.14. (to wit) by Adam's admitting of the temptation, which was Death in
the Root: It was indeed a Breach, by which man was going forth to the state of
those in the Labell reserved in Chains, but by the Interpellation made up,
that all might be saved by the Covenant, as to the Inward man, if they perform
the Condition, though committed to Satan (by the Sentence, to Death thou shall
return,) for the destruction of the Flesh, the Outwardman.

And the Head of the state of Nature in Death, the Execution of that Sentence
(in opposite situation and like proportioned Figure) is a Going out of the Land
of the Living; but made up also by the first Resurrection; as That of the Fall
by the Interpellation.

And the state of Nature in the Fall, with this state of Nature in Death (being
the terminating puncts of the Epicycle) speaks, that the matter contained in
that Epicycle, viz. The Ordinances principled by the unction, (relating unto
the Reparation of that Darkness contracted in the Fall) are (though in their
several diversifications) to continue until now the State of Nature in Death,
as the Day of Grace vouchsafed by God to mortals in and by the Ordinances, the
lifting up the Light of his countenance upon us.

In like manner, as the Interpellation and Covenant in the Circle, did
primarily relate unto that Death into which we were sunk, but to be delivered
from (in the first Resurrection) by Him that by the Union of Natures brought
Immortality to light (which he published in the Gospel) and in whom, whilst Our
Life is hid, and we by the Spirit sealed, our flesh may in this, even the state
of Death, rest in Hope.

The Notes under the Diagram.
THe two Notes, the One concerning Decrees Eternal (as they speak) of
Election and Reprobation, the Other of Attributes, are next to be considered;
which because we foresee may raise some prejudice, being here as Notes in
bar, and in the foot of our Diagramme; which in other Systemes and Bodies of
Divinity have been presupposed for Truths, and laid as Praecognita and
Primo-creaita to be foreknown and first assented unto.

We are for the justifying of our method in these and other particulars
coincident with them ( viz. God in unity, Trinity, by Generation and
Procession, Decrees, Attributes and Scripture) by all others laid together as
Prolegomena and certain Premissa (as we have said) to be first believed,
necessitated to desire the Ingenuous and unprejudiced Reader to consider, that
this having been a work purely of disquisition, we could not without violence
to the nature of Primitive Truths (which we hold sacred) or distorting their
Order (which were piacular) represent them otherwise or in other order, than
they gave themselves.

Wherefore we first consider God in Unity, not as a Postulatum to be premised,
but as the first Truth: Trinity has its place as a Consequentiall inferred as
to us from their works ad extra, The Creation and Restoration, Generation
referred to the Person of the Mediator; Procession to the Apostolical
Principle and Work.

And for Decrees of Election and Reprobation (our first Note) in their notion
(of Eternal) waved; we give in supplement, the Compact betwixt the Creator and
Word, and the Decree thereupon in the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the first
Transaction; And because there limited to his Person, when He should be
Incarnate, and become a Mediator, and to our nature, but as He assumed it, we
refer the more explicit consideration of this Decree of Election and
Reprobation as it may concern, and lay hold on us in particulars, unto the
Covenant (with us) of Grace Derivative, and Covenant of Grace Derivative
Finished, on which They must necessarily depend.

For the Attributes (the second Note) that they should be treated of only,
where they emerge, is so congruous both with the Word and Thing, that we
suppose the speaking it only, is sufficient to evince it.

Yet our Diagramme therefore represents in view only and overtly, the
Attributes Essential, as the only and all that are appropriate to the
Essence, viz. Infinite (the genus to Eternity, Immensity, with such like,)
Immortal (i.) self-living; and (with reference to the Creature) All
Incomprehensible.

Then the Attributes Subsistentiall from their Inbeing, Coessentiall; and from
their Emanation (as Subsistencies Emanant and Emaned) Coequall and Coeternall:
which employed, that all the other Attributes ( viz. Goodness, Omnipotency,
Omnipresency, Wisdom, Justice, which we (according to the nature of the thing)
call Operating Attributes, that is in their Personal or Energeticall Actings
exerted, either in the Creation or Administration of the creature, must be
delitescent and covert unto us, until they disclose themselves in the
respective Heads, where they are exerted.

Nor could we be satisfied in our selves with the imposing of Scripture with
the rest of their Prolegomena; seeing we could not state it demonstratively,
until we had summed up the Emergent Revelations, of which it is a Sacred
Record; those Revelations from God making good by parts these Principles; and
that Body of Scripture from Men, divinely inspired and assisted, making good
unto us those Revelations.

But it will be sufficient at present to say, that these thus distributed
(according unto that order which they have in nature) is a sufficient warrant
for our thus disposing of them in Diagramme; which we shall more fully assert,
when (by the Continuance of that grace that is given us of God) we shall, on
these Foundations, raise the superstructure, and finish the Building in our
larger work.

The Use of all is,

First, As the general of the Design, by this Series of things (which are the
first Truths) to give in Diagramme, an Entire Sum or Body of Divinity Real,
that is, a Series of all Primitive Truths Theological, neither Defective, nor
Redundant, evidenced by their Concatenations.

And then this Diagramme by its exact Concatenations justifying it self, as
before;

We do secondly propose it (as the Fundamentals in Model) to be the ground of
demonstration unto all Dogmaticall and Practical Truths (according to the
Title) of which we shall show you a clearer use in our Essay Mathematical,
which is to be part of the Prodromus.

Nor can it be just cause of offense, either as restreining the liberty of
some, or as giving check to the magisteriall determinations of others; seeing
it is of universal consent, that All deduced Theoremes and consequentiall
inferences cannot otherwise be evidenced for truths in what science soever, but
by their proportion with their respective Fundamentals.

When we say Fundamentals in the Plural, we comprehend the first Angular or
cornerstone, Truth, the knowledge of God, and acknowledgement of Him, as He
has manifested himself, and of all the rest in a connected dependence with and
on it; Each and every one constituted in it self, and having its respective
Contignation with the precedent and consequent from the Look before the
Creation, unto the State of Glorification, neither in a Heap of Confusion, a
discretive Independencie of each other, or the Angular, nor in a dislocation of
Disorder.

And then we say and affirm, That these, thus considered and disposed, are so
the genuine and natural Fundamentals unto all Dogmaticall and Practical
Truths in matters Sacred and Divine, that what can be demonstrated by these
(and that only) ought to be believed and practiced; that is, our Grounds
sound, our Deductions certain, we may then, and then only securely rest in
them.

Nor let it seem strange, if we also say, that all our Confessions of Faith (as
by the Analogy) must necessarily be formed according to It: and all Our
Liturgies of Worship must in congruity be conformed unto It: of which we shall
(with submission) give you our Practical Essay, ere we close our larger work.

The Explanation of the Terms.
HAving now given by the order and manner of Reading (thus enlightened) the
Concatenation of the Heads or Primitive Truths Supernatural and Natural; and
the grounds immediate in their Contignations, which give in Systeme their
Juncture with each other; justified the Figure of the Diagramme; and showed the
use of the whole; we have brought the matters and things themselves so near to
the senses both Inward and Outward in all their several aspects, that the
words in which we represent them, will have the less difficulty.

And forasmuch as the method is wholly new, we presume that the Intelligent
Reader will not be offended at the liberty we have taken in Wording such
Principles, as have discovered themselves (not heretofore taken notice of) in
such terms (though new also) as may most properly express them; nor be too
severe toward us for varying the words, when we have been constreined thereto,
that we might bring them to the due proportion of Analogy, to rectify the
things themselves, from what they have been current in these latter Ages.

Yet for those, whose weaker apprehensions may require an Interpreter (because
in this also we desire to descend to the capacity of the meanest) we have
thought it our duty to give an explication of them, as familiar, as the matters
will possibly bear.

By GOD in Essence, we intend that state (The Abyss unfathomable) the
Infinite, Incomprehensible Godhead; wherein before his Outgoings manifested, we
can only say, that GOD is, or that there is a GOD, One GOD.

Subsistencies, The Outgoings of that Essence, by their Emanation discovering
themselves Three, This the true interpretation of the Greek word Hypostasis,
which the Latins endeavor to express by Persons, and which we also use
(though seldom) as being more familiar and better known to signify the same
thing.

Inbeing, The state of the Subsistencies in the Essence.

Emanation, The Outflowings from it.

Incomprehensible, Is of which we can frame no Idaea in our minds.

Ineffable, In consequence must be unwordable, for which there can be no
expression.

Emergeth, (i.) Puts up the head, appears or shows it self.

Energies, Are their Efficacies, or Working-Powers, called in Scripture, spirit.

Energeticall Operations, are the Effects of those Energies in the subject.

By the First Race of Intellectuals, we intend Spirits ^^bodied (i. simple
Created Essences) which we from their Office and Ministry not till afterward
call Angels.

By the Second Race of Intellectuals, we intend Mankind (i) Spirits Imbodied.

By Animate world, we intend a created Dead matter, quickened by a Form from
without it self, which in this was the Energie of the Creator, the Spirit of
God moving upon the waters, Genesis 1.2.

Innate Law of Impulse: By Innate we intend, that which was in their
constitution or making up; And because in that their constitution, the
Superior, the Intellectual nature, did qualify the inferior, the Animal, with
Rationality a Form besides its own; I do therefore call that from the Superior
to it a Law of Impulse, and the same in the Inferior, a Law of Instinct.

The Covenant of Nature properly so called (i.) of Impresse upon Adhesion,
whereby is intended, that whilst he should adhere and keep himself close unto
God, the Subsistencies would then continue their Impresse upon him, and
Concurse with him.

Appendixes Preparatory, Sacrament, Sabbath (i.) these were prepared, and but
prepared; until he Adhering and Vanquishing, not to be actually Appended or
exhibited.

Inhibition (i.) by that Negative Precept, enjoined not to eat. Probationall
(i.) by which God his Lord would know and make Proof whether he would Adhere
and Obey.

Threat, an Antedated Sentence (i.) that which was in Threat, was as certainly,
upon his Disobedience, to be his Sentence; as it was now a Threat.

Interpellation, Is expounded by the words following, Putting himself in the
Gappe, in English it is nearest to a Rescue, but here Legitimate from a Ground;
because the Interpellator the Word, was in a degree concerned in the
constitution of the Delinquent, and Himself coequall with the Incensed, the
Creator.

Superseding (i.) Dispensing with the present Execution of his own Justice; A
Law term in use amongst us.

So also is Reprieve, known unto most in criminal causes.

The Covenant of Grace Primitive in the First Transaction (i.) the Mutual
Agreement and Capitulation transacted betwixt the Creator Ordaining, and Word
undertaking, in reference to Redemption and Restoration.

The Trinity Supreme, is a consideration of the Subsistencies, as They emaned
and acted before their Condescentions, either in order unto or for the actual
Restoration.

The Covenant of Grace Primitive in the Second Transaction, their mutual
Performance (of what was mutually undertaken in the First Transaction) in the
Person of Jesus.

The Covenant of Grace Derivative; the Publication of that Grace wrought for us
in his Person, and the offer of terms of Reconciliation thereupon,

Influx (i.) A Spiritual Inflowing into us by operation from Him the Mediator,
opposed unto That which was by union of Natures, as Energie radically in
Himself.

Trinity of Condesceutions for Administrations and Redemption, are the
respective Energies of the Trinity Supreme, in their condescentions exerted or
put forth for the accomplishing of the second Design, both as to Redemption
and to Revelation.

The Explication of the Greek Words.
PEPIPOISIS, (i.) A Making by Gyre, Compass, or circumference; first in Christ
the new Creature; and then Particulars in the state of Lapse from Him as
Mediator by union of Natures, the Principle of this House.

PPIOYSIOS, A People pecullar, (i.) those whom God has dignified with special
Administrations; and so a People appropriated by sanctification of the Holy
Ghost, the Principle of this House.

APOKATASTASIS, An Astronomicall term, The Bringing of Nature about (by Grace)
to the same Point, whence it first set forth, and from whence it declined, and
fell.

ANAKEPH^LAIOSIS, The Gathering together again under One Head, the Word; Now
(by Incarnation) Mediator of this second Work, for compassing of the first
Designe^

FINIS.
My Desires to the Reader are,
FIrst, That those who desire the understanding of this Design, would as the
Alphabet or first Elements, get by Heart the Capital Heads; as, THE LOOK
Before the Creation, THE CREATION, THE INHIBITION, etc. punctually according to
the Direction in the order and manner of Reading.

Secondly, That, That being done, they would in like manner inform themselves
of the Subject Matters under every Head, and take notice of their concatenate
dependenctes.

Thirdly, That These things being done, they would then (and not before) having
the Scheme before them and in their eye, peruse these Sheets as the Key unto
It. Whereto if they bring their Heads as intent, and their Hearts as sincere,
as I have been (I take God to witness) in composing the whole. I shall not
doubt of that Union (so much talked of) in Truth and Peace; which, as it is the
Prayer, so it is the endeavor of him that is

An obedient Son of the Church truly Christian, Protesting against all Popish
Errors, or whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine:

Nicholas Gibbon.

Errata.
Page 14. line 10. for Resurrection, read Dead. page 24. line 24. for Figurea,
read Figure wih a Parenthesis. page 25. line 14. read Scripture as in a
Parenthesis; page 26. line 5. for Yet read That. Which is desired the Reader
would correct with his Pen before he peruse them.


