ELOGIVM HEROINUM: OR, THE PRAISE OF WORTHY WOMEN.

Written by C. G. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T.M. and A.C. and are sold by William Not, near the
Chequer Office, in Ivy-lane. 1651.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, AND HIGHBORN Princess, ELIZABETH OF
BOHEMIA.
Madam,
YOur illustrious Name is traced on the Frontis-piece of this Book, as that of
Minerva in the Temple of Virtue; To render the names of these Famous Vestals,
more recommendable by that of so great and illustrious a Princess as your
Highness is: whose mavelous wisdom, and profound knowledge in Arts, Sciences,
and Languages, is admired by all men; whose great Judgment, and Goodness, are
inexpressible symptoms of excelling Qualities.

Let therefore your memory, most Sacred and Famous Princess, be as eternal, as
your illustrious life happy and succesfull! May your future fortunes be
answerable to your virtues! that as you have the daily earnest prayers of all
good men, so you may have the success of their wishes; the which though many
who never yet saw you desire, yet all those who have had the honor to be
acquainted with you, know how worthily You deserve them: For that your virtues
have raised you to such a high degree of perfection, as that you render not
only those of your but even all Men unable to imitate Your Highness: They, as
well as my self, are therefore solely obliged to admire You: which is the only
intent of

Madame, Your Highnesses Most humble, most obedient, and most faithful
Servant, CHARLES GERBIER.

To the most Honorable, THE Countess Dowager OF CLAIRE, The Patroness of all
Virtue and Learning.
Madame,
PSaphon having assembled several Birds, taught them to pronounce these words;
Psaphon is a God! and afterward setting them at liberty, (by the rehearsal of
their lesson) they did spread their masters glory throughout all the Universe.

These ever to be admired Women (being revived) have learned your Honors name;
and as all the world did envy the glory of their fame, so will they now invite
all men to admire your perfections, they will say that few Nations or Ages have
yielded your equal, that to your knowing Judgment all learned men have
recourse, and that your matchless wisdom will be an example of admiration to
all posterity.

May all men blazon your eminent deserts! may your most virtuous mind enjoy
what it most desires or deserves! and may Heaven power down upon your Honor the
dews of thousand Celestial blessings together with all true happiness, are the
zealous wishes of him who is

Madam, Your HONORS most humble, devoted zealous servant, CHARLES GERBIER.

TO THE Virtuous Accomplished LADY Anne Hudson.
MADAME,
I Do not offer unto you any thing of my own, for that it is already yours, or
that you are worthy thereof, since your eyes have not so many charms, nor your
attractions so much power to captivate hearts, as the luster of your Virtues do
express unto all men the admirable perfections both of Nature and Grace which
are extant in your person.

Your modesty, the mildness of your discourse, and that gracious humility with
the which you entertain those who have the honor to be acquainted with you,
are precious jewels which do atchieve your renown.

Give me leave then (Madam) to end this my thrice humble dedication, with that
homage and with that bounden oblation which I owe to your all attracting
goodness, and let your favorable acceptance deign to receive it, since it is
presented with all the submissiv'st respects imaginable by him who puts all his
heart in his Pen (the better) to assure you, that amongst those who admire you,
none can be more then himself,

Madam, Your most humble and obedient servant, Charles Gerbier.

To his worthy Friend, Mr. CHARLES GERBIER, Upon this his ELOGIVM HEROINVM.
Were not this Treatise fully fraught
with its intrinsic worth,
It might (like Cloth that is finely wrought)
Be to the Press put forth
A luster to receive, whereby
Its sale might bettered be.
But as its value does rely
On its reality,
You have it thus undeck'd, without
An influence of Verse,
Or lofty Poems, which no doubt
The Author could rehearse:
But he intends not the least part
Of Rhetoric to strain;
His Theme is void of flattering Art,
He shuns Ambages vain.
For who'mongst mortals dare be bent
To Oppose it with a No?
And since the bruitest beasts assent
Who then would not do so?
With me let all men then confess
That which I do disclose;
The praise of Women's never the less,
Though it be writ in Prose.
B. S. Knight.

To his much valued Friend, THE AUTHOR.
The Grecian Beauties first Apelles saw,
Before he dared fair Venus Picture draw,
That he out of their many graces, one
Might make of all the only Paragon.
So thou out of the best, the best have writ;
Have culled the choicest, best therewith to fit
This work of thine, that it in worth and store
Might all surpass have written thee before,
Or after shall. How much these Angels owe
To this thy worthy pains, themselves best know.
E. B. Esquire

To his worthy friend Mr. Charles Gerbier, upon his Elogium Heroinum, or the
Praise of worthy Women.
I find my self by much to be too weak
To add a grace where every line will speak
Where female constancy, and beauty you
Have open laid to censure, and to view;
Which will in spite of envious time comprise
Your worthy Women in our memories;
And from respects engaged, I must make known
Thy lines are unaffected, free, thy own
Thy matter's rare, expressions genuine
Style most emphatical, and wit divine;
Then reap thy due, and let Apollos bay^s,
In spite of Autumn, grow to crown thy praises.
J. H.

To his loving Brother, ON HIS ELOGIVM HEROINVM, OR HIS Praise of worthy Women.
Scarce dare I these rude lines prefix
To this your worthy Women's praise,
Lest thereby I might chance t'eclipse
The glory of their splendent rays:
For by my style in it is ruff cast,
I may their excellencies blast.
Never did I taste of those sweet streams
Which charming Helicon does yield
Nor has Apollo with his beams
Me graced, so that into the field
OF the Muses I am loath t'appear
Lest infamy me thence may bear.
The very subject of your Book,
Does clearly unto us set forth
It Is excellence; nor need you look
That I attempt t'inlarge its worth;
This far surpasses my small skill
Nor can I reach it with my quill.,
And though I know it is a hard task
To please all pallates, yet submit
I must to censure, and unmask
My ignorance, rather then it
Be said that I just then withdrew
My hand, this tribute being due.
Express I cannot, what that Sex
(Which you so worthily do blaze)
Deserved has; nor need we vex
Our selves, that they have born the bays
Away from us, for they excel
All those who on this orb do dwell.
Their brave atchievments do outvye
What ere we undertook, and they
Themselves to all eternity
Have Trophies raised, so that we may
Sit down, and them admire;
Their eminencies it require.
Nay, ought we not
Turn pupils unto them, obey (shame) though to our
Their profound precepts, and disclaim
Those vices which us daily sway,
Even those (as't were) us captive hold
By fettred passions manifold
Awake therefore ye sons of men,
Rub up your drowsy souls, it is meet,
We should take heart of grace again;
Rowse up your selves, stand on your feet;
At least endeavor to regain
Our honors, by these females slain.
My Author does to you recount
The several faculties wherein
These worthy Women us surmount
As paterns, for us to begin
Our n^w profession by; the same
By which they gained eternal fame
Wherefore with him let us adore
Those deities, let us follow close
Their virtuous footsteps and implore
To be accounted even as those
Whopast their lives in great renown
And now entombed enjoy a Crown.
Geo. Gerbier Esquire.

The Printer's Apology, For not having inserted on the Frontispiece of this
Book, all the Verses which were sent unto him.
Courteous Reader,
WHen a sumptuous Scene is to be represented, or when a solemn Tilting is to be
performed, and that an Amphytheater is prepared; then from all parts such
multitudes of People resort thereunto, as that the main for which they came
together, is by them almost hidden.

Therefore that this Scene, this Race, and Amphytheater (whereunto most men of
this World, if not all, would willingly resort, first with their Eyes, then
with their Hands, and finally with all their Senses, striving and contesting
which of them all should soonest be admitted) might appear, and not be
smothered up by the press of so many, whose Pens may pretend as much right as
this Author, to show themselves; And lest he should suffer, that deserves so
well, in the setting forth of this glorious Scene, I have omitted the inserting
of several Verses; and do publish by that Trumpet of Fame, by that of Virtue,
by that of Constancy, and by that of Honor, (which these Women do possess) to
stand by, and to make use here only of your eyes: For Woman is the Mark, and
Woman is the Trophie. And then will this Work appear in its best luster.

The Preface TO THE READER.
AS the Breast Plate of Judgment which the High Priest wore, did bear these
words, Vrim and Thummim, which signify Light and Perfection:

So on the Frontispiece of this Book there appears so powerful a Charm, as
that all those cannot choose but be void of wit and reason, who have not the
curiosity to view that which it contains: for those things which it relates,
possess all the requisite perfections, to strike an admiration into the minds
of sensible Creatures.

It is that powerful Charm, which made Achilles to forsake a Battle;

It is that which Narcissus disdaining, pined away, for his own shadow;

It is that, the loss whereof Alexander did lamentwith tears;

It is that, by means whereof Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and all the rest of
the Philosophers have attained unto such a famous reputation.

It is that, without which all our humane life would have been but a manifest
death;

It is that, for which in former Ages men would rather lose their Seats, their
Authority, their Office, then falsely to suspect it, or rashly to accuse it;

It is that, the sight whereof struck Tyrasius King of Thebes blind.

It is that, which did not only subdue Alexander (who had subdu^d all the
Eastern Kingdoms, and who was Lord of all the World) but also Caesar and
Hanibal; and which constrained Euristes King of Athens, to seek unto Hercules
and Theseus to be aiding unto him to withstand its power.

It is that, at the beholding whereof the Lybian Lions lose their strength, and
the Basilisk his senses.

It is that, which has been admired by the great Philosophers; by Solomon
himself, the wisest of all men, who did acknowledge that it was more worth then
precious pearls.

It is that, the least part whereof ought to ravish us even with admiration.

And it is that, which was made in Paradise, which represents the lively Image
of the Creator; a Body framed by an admirable architecture; a Soul endowed with
understanding, reason, wit, judgment, will, memory, imagination, and opinion; a
Soul which in an instant flies from one Pole to the other, descends to the
Center, and ascends to the top of the world again. In a word, here you have it:
It is Woman, the miracle of the world, and the marvel of marvels, which here is
exposed unto your view, accompanied with Presidents of Virtue, and Statues of
Honor, and whatsoever else can be included in goodness: which if you will
deign to read it so, as to understand it well, and (which is best of all) to
follow their examples, then will your memories outlive Posterity.

As for the foregoing threefold Dedication of this Treatise, though it may
happily not much concern the Reader, yet nevertheless rather then that any
should wonder at it, I will give him a reason for it.

It is the first of all numbers; and in natural Philosophy, there are three
principles; three Theological virtues, and three Graces.

But that which chiefly moved me thereunto, was the pleasing of my self
thereby; since that is the spring from whence every virtue begins to flow, the
Sea unto which they run, and where all of them end their course. It Is the only
thing which (next unto the fear of God) I chiefly aim at.

Rhetoric, Logic, Philosophy, Music, all Arts and Sciences are referred unto
this principle, to wit, that they might be profiable and pleasing unto us.

Does not an Orator rejoice when he sees his Clyent delivered by his Plea?

Does not the Logician laugh when as he perceives that his enemy is driven to a
dilemma?

Does not the Philosopher inwardly smile when he has sifted out the secrets
of hidden causes?

Does not the Musicians heart leap for joy, when as he beholds that men are
ravished with his melody.

And therefore, since that all Virtues, all Arts, and all the actions of this
life do tend (next unto the fear of God) unto our particular pleasure, who can
condemn me for having pleased my self?

But as for the Treatise it self: I am taught by Sapho, that no Note of Music;
and by Crassus, that no Vein of Rhetoric contenteth all men's ears who listen
or apply their senses unto the sound of harmony; therefore if distasteful
Critics shall mis-interpret the innocence of my harmless meaning, I shall but
reply as did Ben-Johnson. Their praise or dispraise is to me alike,
The one does not stroke me, nor the other strike.
And. for those prating Sicophants, those Zoylusses, and Momusses of all ages,
those detractors and evil speakers, who esteem it it far better to be wicked,
then virtuous, and who by their virulent tongues, abusing this most worthy
Sex, have abused their own mothers, and consequently themselves; let them talk
and prate at their pleasure they shall never be able (although they had the
same authority which Plato heretofore had in Greece, or the eloquence of
Cicero) to persuade rational men, that those excellent perfections, and graces
which are extant in the souls and bodies of virtuous Women, ought not to be
regarded; those Bodies, I say, on which if all the Angels should have spent a
thousand years in altering or changing of its form, figure, or composition, nay
the least part thereof, they would be at last forced to confess, that they are
not able to diminish or add thereunto: yet the blind impiety of some, has
led them to that height of presumption, as to find fault with many parts of
this curious Fabric. But such will at length find, that though the Divine
Justice has leaden feet, it has iron hands; though it is slow in coming, yet
it strikes those home, who do not regard those wonderful works of God which
ought to transport us with an ineffable admiration.

As for those well-disposed sculs, who are endued with a natural good
disposition, who wrong not themselves by misdeeming of others; I wish unto them
as to my self, that they may build their everlasting Tabernacles on that hill
of Sion, whose Prince is verity, whose Laws are charity, and whose limits are
eternity, etc.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
Of the Wisdom and Learning of some Women. Page 13 Of Constant and Courageous
Women. Page 48 Of Fair Women. Page 72 Of the Love of Women. Page 82 Of chaste
Women and Virgins. Page 115 Of Women's abilities to Govern. Page 133 Of Pious
and Religious Women. Page 141
ELOGIUM HEROINUM: OR, The Praise of Worthy WOMEN.
PHydias (a most famous Carver) after he had made Minerva's Shield, he
engraved his own Pourtraicture so lively and deeply in the same, as that it
could never be taken out, without defacing of the whole work.

So GOD himself, who is an ineffable Power, and an infinite Virtue, an
Understanding which can only be comprehended by it self, whose Throne is
seated amidst the flaming fires, (a far more excellent Workman then Phydias)
after he had made the Universal World, and adorned the Heavens with Legions of
Seraphims, Cherubims, Thrones, Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Dominions,
Archangels and Angels; with the beauty of the Sun, the glory of the Moon, and
the splendour of the Stars, which are of an incomprehensible brightness and of
a wonderful greatness; having moreover ordained unto them several miraculous
motions, and admirable effects on the four Elements, the Fire, the Air, the
Water, and the Earth; the which being beautified with Mountains, Plains,
Rivers, Woods, Rocks, Plants, Flowers, and all sorts of Beasts, and in the
bowels thereof enclosed Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and of several other
Metals and Minerals, with a number of admirable precious Stones; and having
stored the Seas with all kind of Fishes, the Air with an infinite number of
Birds: He then created Man, of the dust of the earth; and afterward, in the
terrestrial Paradise, he made a Woman; not of Man's head, lest she should
presume to overtop him, nor of his foot, lest she should be vilisied by him,
but from a rib near unto his heart, that she might be ever dear and entire to
him, which shows the alternate love that ought to be betwixt them; And the
Almighty (by his inscrutable goodness) imprinted in them both his own Image
and similitude, so lively, that no power whatsoever is able to deface it.

This image and similitude of the Deity, is the Soul and the Understanding; the
which he would never have infused into them, unless he had first made their
Bodies of a substance fit to receive that impression, and worthy of so great an
ornament as the Understanding is, by means whereof we unfold all things, and
attain to the knowledge of the most difficult matters that the wit of man can
produce. It has a jurisdiction every where; and it keeps its eminency as well
in the highest powers, as in the lesser and inferior parts of the Universe; to
wit in the Heavens, Stars and Planets, by their motion, which it foresees and
prevents; in the Empires, Monarchies and Kingdoms, it commands Occonomie; it
establishes the Laws, and makes them to be obeyed: In the lowest and inferior
Regions, and amongst the common people, it keeps so good discipline, that all
things remain constantly firm in their perfection. And it is seated as well
in the woman, as in the man: for Nature has given unto the one as well as the
other a desire of knowledge; with an upright stature, that they might both lift
up their eyes to the contemplation of Nature, and bring their minds raised and
as it were inflamed with a divine love to such beautiful and glorious things,
in which the majesty of the eternal Godhead so apparently shines forth. And the
Woman is capable of as high improvements as the Man is; she has the same
prerogative of creation with man: For as he is endowed with a free, willing,
immortal soul, so is she also; and as Man was put into a state of dominion and
happiness, so likewise was Woman.

The soul knows no difference of sex; the Woman has the same desires and
appetites as Man; she is as well an heir unto the grace of life as he is; And
finally, whatsoever is estated upon Man, the Woman will also challenge, for
that there is no preferring of one sex before the other, but all are one in
Christ Jesus, as the Scripture clearly declares. Although the crazie and vain
wits of these times speak much to the disparagement of the whole Sex,
imitating the Philosopher Anaxagoras, who strove to maintain, that Snow was
black: but as all men of understanding, who have eyes to see, find it to be
white, so it clearly appears that he is an Impostor who endeavors to speak ill
of Women; since it is manifest, that the Virtues, the Disciplines, the Muses,
the Devisers and Patrons of all Arts, have been comprehended under the Feminine
sex, by the names of Virgins, and Women; that not only the Ethnicks and Moral
men, but even Christians and Divines, in all their books and writings which
they leave to posterity, still continue them under the same Gender.

That Sophia, which signifies Wisdom, is the mother of the three Theological
Virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity; which are represented as Women.

That the Seven Liberal Arts are expressed in Women's shapes.

That the Nine Muses are the Daughters of Jupiter.

That the Five Senses are expressed under the names of the five Daughters of
Apollo.

That Wisdom is called the Daughter of the Highest; as appears in the Book of
Wisdom.

And that the four parts of the World, and almost all whatsoever is good, is
deciphered by the names, and in the persons of Women.

All those who are inclined to virtue, will find, when they shall have perused
this small Treatise (which relates some Women who have been rarely
accomplished) that Women are capable of the highest improvements, unto which
Man may attain: For if some of the Sex (as it appears by the following
Heroical actions) have been so, it argues that the Sex is capable, and may
still be so.

But ere I proceed any further, I shall humbly crave from this most worthy Sex
one only boon: That it may not be offended at this my young Eagles flight,
toward such a source of perfect Rays, during the tenderness of my wings,
which affords me that pen whereby I endeavor to trace the description of their
most perfect lineaments and dimensions.

Of the Wisdom and Learning of some Women.
Wisdom is the guide of all other virtues; it gives goodness to good people,
pard'neth the wicked, makes the poor rich, and the rich honorable; it is that
wherein our sovereign good and the end of our life consists.

Learning, is the knowledge and understanding of Arts and Sciences; without it
Nature is blind.

Wisdom and Learning have made these following women famous to all posterity.

Nicaula Queen of Saba, did expose her self to a long and tedious journey from
the farthest part of Ethiopia unto Jerusalem, there to dispute with Solomon,
the wisest of all men; as it appears by the Scriptures, which therefore give
her an immortal praise.

Mirrhe Queen of the Lydians, was so little of body, as that she seemed to be a
Dwarf; but so far excelling in wisdom, as that she was called a Giant: she was
a wise and prudent woman, when she was married; and honest, being a widow.

Pythagoras (the light of his time, and the first that was called a
Philosopher) was a Scholar unto his own Sister Themistoclea, and he learned his
Philosophy from her: the greatness of her wisdom appears by a Letter which he
sent unto her from Rhodes, where he publicly read Philosophy, she being then
in Samothracia. The said Letter, translated out of Greek, was as follows:

Pythagoras your Brother and Disciple, ( to you Themistoclea my dear Sister)
wishes health and increase of wisdom.

I have read from the beginning to the very end, the Book which you have sent
unto me, of Fortune and Misfortune: By it I do really see, that you are not
less grave in writing, then gracious in teaching; the which does not often
befall us who are Men: for the Philosopher Aristippus was harsh in speaking,
and profound in writing; Amenides was succinct in writing, and eloquent in
speaking. But you (my dear sister) have so much applied your self to study and
to write, as that in Sentences you seem to have read all the Philosophers; and
by the antiquities which you express, it seems that you have seen all the time
past; by which you do make it appear, that being a woman you are more then a
woman, because the nature of women is only to employ themselves to the present,
and to forget that which is past.

I have been told that you do employ your self in writing the wars of our
Country: I do earnestly pray you, and by the immortal gods do conjure you to
flatter no body.

For as you cannot deny, (dear Sister) but that I am the eldest of your three
Brothers, so I cannot disavow that among all your Disciples I am the least: And
as being your Disciple, I ought to obey you; so likewise being your eldest
Brother, you ought to believe me.

Therefore I do advise you (dear Sister) to continue to do your utmost (as you
have hither to done) to be understood, and wise in your words, discreet and
grave in your life, and honest in your person; and above all, true in that
which you write: For if the body of man be worth little without the soul, the
mouth without truth is worth much less.

And this was the Letter which Pythagoras sent to his sister Themistoclea; by
which his profound humility, and her great eloquence appears.

Policrata daughter to the said Philosopher Pythagoras was not only wise, fair
and rich, but esteemed and honored for the integrity of her life, and more
admired for her Eloquence then Pythagoras himself.

Diotima did so excel in wisdom, that Socrates (who of all men was called the
wise, the just, the Prince of Philosophers, and the Father of Philosophy)
blushed not to imitate, and call her his Tutresse and Instructresse.

Arreta had attained to that perfection of knowledge in the Greek and Latin
tongues, as that the common report was, that the soul of Socrates was infused
into her; and when she was heard to speak, it seemed that she had writ the
doctrine of Socrates, rather then learned it: she her self instructed her son
in all the Liberal Arts, by whose industry he became a famous Professor; he was
called Aristippus: she also taught and instructed many, and wrote several
Volumes, some whereof were these following. The Praises of Socrates. The manner
how to educate Children. The Battails of Athens. The unhappines of Women. The
Husbandry of the Ancients. The Wonders of Mount Olympia. The Vanities of Youth,
and the Calamities of Age.
She read publicly the Natural and Moral Philosophy, in the Academies and
Schools of Athens, five and twenty years: she composed forty Books: she had an
hundred and ten Philosophers who were her disciples. She died being seventy
seven years old; and the Athenians, for an immortal praise to all posterity,
caused these following words to be engraven on her sepulcher.

Here lies Arreta, the famous Grecian, who was the light of all Greece: She had
Helen's Beauty, Thirma's Honesty, Aristippus Pen, Socrates Soul, and Homer's
Tongue. Leontium, a Grecian Damosel, did so excel in wisdom, and in
Philosophical contemplations, as that Cicero relates, in his book De natura
Deorum, that she durst write a worthy Book against that famous Philosopher
Theophrastus.

Alexander the Great refused the beautiful Daughter of Darius, (with Kingdoms
and infinite Treasures to boot) and made choice of Barsina, only for her great
wisdom, although she was poor, and had no possessions.

Dominica, the wife of the Emperor Valenticus, whenas the Goths had threatened
the utter subversion of Constantinople, she by her wisdom and discretion so
mediated with the Enemy, as that she procured the safety both of the People and
City.

Athenias the Daughter of a mean man, was for her wisdom and learning thought
worthy by a Christian Emperor to be his wife.

Priscilla instructed Apollo himself, that eloquent man.

Nicostrata, wife to King Evander, was so learned, that the Grecians reported,
that if her Writings of the Trojan wars had not by envy been flung into the
fire, the name of Homer (the Prince of Poets) would have been unknown. This
famous Woman is by some called Carmentis, because of the eloquence which was
found in her Verses; she helpd to make up the number of the Greek Alphabet, and
added to the Roman Letters; her Prophesies were preserved by the Romans at the
end of the Capitol, with as much respect and care as they do the Sacrament.

Hermodica wife to Midas King of Pbrygia, was not only celebrated for her rare
features and beauty, but for her great wisdom.

The Divine Plato had amongst his Disciples these two famous women, to wit
Laschenea, and Axiothia: the one had so profound a Memory, and the other so
extraordinary an Understanding, as that Plato being in his Chair, he often did
say (when either of these two chanced to be absent) that he would not begin to
read; and being by the Philosophers his disciples desired thereunto, he
answered, I will not read, because Laschenea the Understanding, which ought to
hear me, is not here; and for the absence of Axiothia he said, that the Memory
which ought to preserve him was not yet come. The wisdom of these two women is
the more to be admired, since Plato would not read but in their presence; for
he did esteem the memory of these two Women alone more then the Philosophy of
all the Philosophers besides.

Cornelia, wife unto Scipio Africanus, and mother to the Noble family of the
Graechi, was so excellent in knowledge, that she was more famous and honored by
the Sciences which she publicly read in Rome, then by the conquests which her
Children made in Africa. She was generally praised by the most learned men, for
her honesty, wisdom, and for her reading Philosophy publicly in Rome.

From her, as from a fountain, the eloquence of her children flowed. Therefore
Quintilius thus says of her: We are much bound to the mother Cornelia, for the
eloquence of the Gracchi, whose unparalled Learning in her exquisite Epistles
she has bequeathed to posterity. Cicero (the Father of Latin eloquence, whose
skill in joining Philosophy with the Art of Rhetoric was excellent) does more
highly exalt this famous Cornelia, whenas he says in his Rhetoric, That if
the name of a Woman had not diminished Cornelia, she did deserve to be the
chiefest of all the Philosophers, because he never saw such grave Sentences
proceed from any mortal creature, as were contained in her writings. A Statue
was erected on her sepulcher, on which these words were engraven: Here lies
the most learned Cornelia, mother of the G^acchi: she was both happy and
fortunate in her Disciples whom she instructed, though unhappy in her Children.

Aspasia, a Miletian Damsel, excelled in all Philosophical contemplations; and
so fluent a Rhetorician, as that Socrates himself imitated her, in his
Facultas Politica.

Amalasuntha, Queen of the Ostrogothes, the daughter of Theodoricus King of
those Ostrogothes in Italy, was not only learned in the Greek and Latin
tongues, but spoke all the barbarous languages that were used in the Eastern
Empires, exceeding well.

Eustochium, a Roman Matron, was excellently practiced in the Greek and Latin
Dialect, as also in the Hebrew character: she was in her time called the New
prodigy of the world: she with Reason overcame St. Hiero me, and made him
confess he was overcome by her, for that he could not answer the questions
which she had propounded.

Amesia, a modest Roman Lady, being falsely accused of a great crime, and ready
to incur the Pretorial sentence; she with a manly, yet modest courage, stepped
up amongst the People, and with a loud voice and a becoming gesture, and
facundious suavity, she pleaded her own cause, so eloquently, so effectually,
and so strongly, as that by the public suffrage she was freed and acquitted
from all aspersions whatsoever, and he who had accused her, was himself most
justly punished.

Hypparchia, the sister of Magocles, and wife to Crates Cynicus, with one
Sophisme did put Theodorus to silence.

Hortensia, the daughter of Quintus Hortensius, pleaded her self before the
Triumvirate (when a grievous Fine was imposed on the Romans, and when none of
the Orators or Lawyers durst) so boldly and eloquently, that she prevailed so
far, as that the greatest part of the Fine which was imposed on them, was
instantly remitted.

Sosipatra was a woman versed in many kinds of Disciplines; and so excelent in
all her studies, that she was said to have been educated by the Gods themselves.

Corinna Thebana had such an excellent knowledge in Poesy, that in several
Contentions she bore away the garland from Pindarus the Prince of the Lyrick
poets.

Sapho's Verses excelled Anacreon's, though he was one of the most famous Poets
in the world.

Telesilla was not only wise, chaste, fair, and courageous, but she had
attained to that perfection in poetry that she amongst all other women was held
in admiration.

Cornificia, sister to the great Poet Cornificius, was very learned in the
Greek and Latin tongues; and so expert in making of Verses, that she ex
tempore did excel those which her Brother made at leisure, though he was the
greatest Poet of his time in Rome.

Phanarite, Mother of Athenian Socrates, was the first that disputed of
Morality, and who taught the mystical phylosophie of the Stars and Planets, and
how it may be made familiar, and have correspondence with our humane and
terrestrial actions.

Hyppatia, a Woman of Alexandria, did so excel in Learning, as that she was
frequented by many worthy Scholars whilst she kept a public School: she wrote
several Volumes; she calculated her self an Ephemerides for many years; she
also writ a large volume of Astronomy.

L'Amia and Aglius were not inferior in Music to Arion or Orpheus.

Timarete, the Daughter of Micaon Irene, Anistarite, Lala Cizizena, Martia, and
many more, have attained to as high a perfection in Painting, as Apelles,
Zeucis, and Apollidorus themselves ever did.

What men were ever known to surpass the Muses or the Sybils in Learning?

The IX. Muses were these following:

Clio, Vterpe, Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsichore, Erato, Polyhimnia, Urania,
Calliope.

The XII. Sybils were these, Sybilla Persica, called Samberta. Sybilla Lybica.
Sybilla Delphica. Sybilla Cumaea, borne at Cimeria, at Campania in Italy.
Sybilla Samia. Sybilla Erithraea, borne at Babylon. Sybilla Cumana: she wrote
Nine books, for three of which Tarquinius superbus gave 300 pieces of gold, and
caused them to be religiously kept in the Capitol at Rome. Sybilla
Hellespontiaca, borne at Marmisea in the Territory of Troy. Sybilla Albunea,
surnamed Tiburtina, because she was borne at Tiber, 15 miles from Rome. Sybilla
Phrygia. Sybilla Epyrotiea. Sybilla Coliphonia Lampusia: she came out of
Greece, from Coliphonia a City of Ionia.


The Books which these Sybils wrote, contained manifest Prophesies of the
Kingdom of CHRIST, his Name, his Birth, and Death; The changes of Kingdoms;
Foretold Inundations, Earthquakes, and Wars; They also manifested that the
whole World would be burnt; and wished men to adore that God, while they lived
here, who would punish them so severely hereafter for their contempt.

These Books were by the Arch-Traytor Silico burnt; yet nevertheless some of
their Prophesies are yet extant, having been extracted out of other writings.

But as both the Ecclesiastical and Secular, Ancient, and Modern Histories
abound in examples, of diverse excellent and famous Ladies; So likewise these
latter times have not been barren in Learned women; who were not a jot inferior
to those of former Ages.

Constantia, wife of Alexander Sforza, was so laborious in the best Disciples,
that on the sudden, and without any premeditation, she was able to discourse
upon any argument, either Theological or Philosophical, and for her temporal
vain in verse, she was much admired; in which she was so elegantly ingenious,
that she attracted the ears of many judicious Scholars to be her daily
Auditors.

Olympia Fulvia Morata, a famous Italian woman, was the ornament and glory of
our latter times; she had an exquisite knowledge in the Greek and Latin
tongues, and she writ many learned and elaborated works.

Jane Gray, an incomparable Princess, whom no Nation nor Age can parallel, was
very learned in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues.

Christian de Pisa, a Gentlewoman of Italy, was endowed with such divine
graces, and she did so far excel in wisdom, that her works have made many
learned men ashamed.

The Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Portugal, do abound with many examples of
famous Ladies and Gentlewomen, which have excelled most men of this Age in
knowledge and humain Sciences.

Helisian of Crennes, a French Lady, did so excel in Learning, that she was
admired by the wisest men, and has bequeathed unto posterity several of her
excellent works.

Duema Ligua, a Spanish Lady (one of the Maids of honor unto Lady Mary, sister
unto the King of Portugal) was wonderfully verst in five sundry Languages, viz.
the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Chaldean, and Arabian.

Isabella Rosera, a Spanish Lady, did so excel in Learning, that she did not
only publicly read, but expounded the hard and difficult works of Lescost,
and unto her Auditory, the Cardinals, and the wisest men of Rome were
Assistants.

Dona Margarita de Noronha, a Lady of Portingal, was exceeding well verst in
several Languages, she writ with great eloquence many excellent Discourses,
and she had attained to a great perfection in Painting, and several other
Arts.

Queen Elizabeth of late memory, whose wonderful knowledge, and Learning, was
admired by all the Christian Princes that flourished in her time; she was so
well verst in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French languages,
that she needed no Interpreter, but gave her self answer to all such
Ambassadors in their own Language, of which those learned Orations in the
Latin tongue which she delivered by her own mouth in the two famous
Universities do bear a sufficient record in her behalf.

Margaret of Vallois, Queen of Navarre, was endowed with eminent knowledge and
Heroical virtues.

The Princess Elizabeth (eldest daughter to the Queen of Bohemia who is justly
styled the Queen of Hearts, and the best of Queens, whom all degrees honor,
and all Nations reverence) is a Saba for her Wisdom, an Harpalice for
Magnanimity, an Amalasuntha for her Temperance, a Cleopatra for her Bounty, and
a Zenobia for her learning and skill in Languages.

Anna Maria Schurmans, living at Vtrech in Holland, is endowed with such a
wonderful knowledge and learning, that she is admired by all men.

There have been likewise many Ladies and Gentlewomen of our Nation, whose
learning and knowledge may well be paralleled with the before-named.

Let me therefore trespass (Gentle and Courteous Reader) so much on thy
patience, as that I may upon so just, and good an occasion, insert in this
place some of their names.

With what Praises and Statues ought we to dignifie and celebrate the memory of
these following excellent Ladies.

The Countess of Pembrook, sister to the unmatchable Sir Philip Sidney.

The four Daughters of Sir Anthony Cook; The Lady Burleigh. The Lady Russel.
The Lady Bacon. Mrs Killegrew.
And those other Ladies which at present are endowed with learning and generous
education, whose abilities, as they are a proof to the present times, so will
they remain as examples to posterity. Wherefore if many women do not the like,
it may be inferred that it is not out of a defect of wit or judgment, but
because they will not apply their minds thereunto, or that they cannot by
reason of other diversions.

Let it therefore suffice that those who have been called to so great a
Function by so special an instinct have eminently excelled.

I shall not any longer insist on the wisdom and learning of this most worthy
Sex, but proceed to their Constancy and Courage.

Of Constant and Courageous Women.
Constancy is the ornament, the end, and confirmation of all virtues.

Courage, contemns all perils, despises calamities, and conquers death.

These following famous Women, being consident of the immortality of their
souls, encountered dangers, offered up their lives on all occasions, and
sacrificed themselves, as it were, on the altar of Glory: their life was unto
them but an apprentiship to die well; and their Sepulcher was (as it were)
their Cradle, imitating the Pelican that revives again out of her own blood.

If I should ( Courteous Reader) relate unto you the constant resolution of all
the women Martyrs; (amongst which there were those, who in the midst of the
flames, and tortures, cried out with a resolute voice, Tyrant, you lose your
time, here we are always at our ease; where are those pains, where are those
torments, with the which you did threaten us? our Constancy will make you
suffer more then we do by your cruelty; make us complain, make us yield, if
you can; encourage your Sergeants, your Executioners, for they are
faint-hearted, edge them to all cruel and bloody courses against us, etc.)
Whole volumes would not be able to contain their names; therefore I shall
only relate unto you some of them.

Felicula was by the command of Flaccus Comes, shut up in a Jakes, and when by
no persuasions nor threats, promises, or torments, she could be forced to
renounce the Christian faith, she was there stifled to death.

Apollinia, a Virgin of Alexandria, for speaking boldly in the defense of her
Faith, had her teeth plucked all out by the Tormentors, and afterward
threatening to burn her instantly, unless she would renounce her Christianity;
she seeming to pawse a little, as if she meant better to consider of the
matter, (when they least suspected) leapt suddenly into the fire, and was there
consumed to ashes.

Julia Cathaginensis, because she would not bow to Idols, and adore the false
heathen gods, was nailed unto a Cross, and so ended her life, partly with the
smoke which the Executioners made at the foot of the Gallows.

Flavia, Euphronia, Theodora, Sabina, Amonaria, and Dionisa, all Roman Virgins,
have been more ready to receive death for to maintain the glory and honor of
God, then the Tyrants could minister the torments to them.

Clara a Widow of threescore years of age, was in the year 1526. on the 9. of
December burnt in Bokemia, because she would not deny the faith of the Gospel.

Martha Porzizia in the next year after, suffered the pains of the fire with an
invincible constancy. Besides many others related in Fox his History of
Martyrs. O rare and wonderful Patience, O sufferance worthy of everlasting
remembrance! O constancy, the like whereof cannot be elsewhere found! their
Crowns are glory, and their prais^^ are not to be expressed by the pen or
tongue of man!

Let their names be as sacred to us on Earth, as their souls live eternally
enjoying a heavenly bliss!

As for their Courage:

Deborah, a Warlike woman, was a Prophetess, and judged Israel, by whose
Counsel and Courage, they were not only freed from the incursions of their
neighbor Nations, but many times returned from the field with rich spoils, and
glorious conquests.

Judith smote off Holiphernes's head, and brought it her self through the
enemies Camp into her own City.

Jael, with an invincible Courage, took a nail of her Tent, and with a hammer
struck it through Sisera's head, who was Captain of all the Canaanites.

Zenobia, Queen of the Palmerians, discomfited the Emperor Aurelian, and all
his host.

Candaces Queen of Ethiopia, during all her Wars, led her people in person to
the field, whereby she obtained so great a dignity and honor, that for many
years after her decease, the succeeding Queens of Ethiopia were called Candaces.

Tomyris, Queen of the Scythians, sent this challenge to Cyrus, that great
Emperor of Persia: Come, or I will come; Stay for me, or I will stay for
thee. This challenge could not well be answered, but by an undanted Enemy, who
with his sword in his hand, had replied, Here I am: her blood was all on fire,
and it seems that the very words did displease her more, then the blows
themselves, Come, or I will come; Stay, or I will stay. Cyrus being taken in
the Wars by her, she caused his head to be cut off, and in remembrance of his
cruelty, it was cast into a vessel full of blood, whereon she caused this
inscription to be sixed, Now Cyrus drink thy fill of that with the which thou
could never be satisfied.

Artimesia, Queen of Caria, was admired throughout all Greece, for her manly
Courage, and excellency of spirit: she not only in a Navall expedition
overcame came the invading Rhodians, but pursued them even unto their own
Coasts, and took possession of the Island, amidst whose ruins, she caused her
own glorious Statue to be erected.

Semyramis was a Queen renowned for her brave and magnanimous exploits and in
all her attempts supereminent; with her invincible courage she not only
conquered all Ethiopia, but invaded India, being the first that ever durst
attempt it, and saving her there was none, but Alexander, who imitating her
glorious footsteps, was the last. Berosus affirms, that no man was ever to be
compared with this Woman, such great things have been written of her; she was
the fourth that reigned in Assyria; all her subjects in admiration of her
heroic acts, wore the like garments as she did, which habit has been in use
amongst the Assyrians, Bactrians and Babilonians, even to this day. Vitruvius
relates, that one day as she attired her self in her royal Palace, the one
part of her hair being bound up, and the other half hanging loose upon her
shoulders, suddenly news was brought unto her that the Citizens of Babylon were
revolted, being in a high mutiny and uproar; she alone went into the City,
commanding all her followers to stay back, and thus by her sole presence and
persuasion she reconciled that innumerable number of people unto her obedience;
and attracted the hearts of that barbarous rude Nation unto her admiration and
love, even as the Adamant draws Iron; for the which her Statue was erected in
the City, represented half dressed, and half undrest, in memory of that noble and
magnanimous adventure of hers. She built the aforesaid mighty City of Babylon,
and the stately walls which have been reckoned amongst the seven wonders of the
world, they were fity feet thick, two hundred feet high, and threescore miles
in compass, adorned with many great Towers, and for the building of these walls
three hundred thousand men were for a long space hired from diverse Countries.

Plutarch, and others write, that she caused these words to be engraven upon
her Tomb, Quicunque Rex pecuniis indiget, aperto monumento, quod voluerit
accipiat; that is, what King soever has need of coin, by openning of this
Monument may take what he pleases. King Darius by chance reading these
pleasing words, and thinking some Magazine of treasure had been there enclosed,
caused the Tombstone to be removed, where he found upon the other side these
words engraven, Nisi Rex avarus esses, and pecuniae insatiabilis, mortuorum
monumenta non violasses; Had thou not been a covetous King, and unsatiable
of Coin, thou would not have violated the grave of the dead.

Thus the excellent Lady in her death, taunted the gripple avarice of the
living.

The Amazons, warlike women in Scythia, defended their own Country, and waged
War against their neighbors: but that the one might not seem more happy then
the other, they slew all the men of their Country, and when they had gotten
peace by force of Arms, they used the society of men, lest their whole Nation
should perish for want of procreation, and every female child's right breast (at
seven years of age) was seared and burnt away, lest it should them in shooting;
and hence they took the names of Amazons, which is as much as to say, Vnaemammae,
Creatures with one breast.

They subdued the greatest part of Europe, and many Cities in Asia; their Army
was divided into two parts, the one part whereof was commanded by the Queen M'
Arthesia, which maintained the Empire of Asia, and the other was commanded by
the Queen Lampedo, who governed at home.

These famous warlike women, built Ephesus, with many other Cities in Asia, and
they erected a Temple (in the Country called Ionia) to the honor of Diana, the
like whereof was not then in all the world; it was two hundred and twenty years
a making, there were in it a hundred and seven and twenty pillars of Marble,
which were seventy feet high; the length of the whole Temple was four hundred
fifty five feet, and the breadth two hundred and twenty; no Temple in the world
could be compared unto it in wealth.

But finally the perfidious Erostratus, who doing great feats in War, and
perceiving that he got no reward, nor renown thereby; for to leave a continual
remembrance of his infamous action, did consume this famous Temple with fire.

Queen Tyrgatao Meotis, did in many battles oppose two potent Kings, she
righted her own injuries in person, met with them, braved them, and beat them
in the field, and after many victorious defeats vassalled their insolent pride,
and subjected them to her own heroical mercy.

What praise, what admiration and honor may not this magnanimous Queen claim?

Valasca Queen of the Bohemians, having instructed all the women of her
Kingdom in military exercises, leavied an Army of her own sex, with the which
she encountered all the men of her Kingdom, and overthrew them, by which means,
the women attained unto the Sovereign principality, and for many years together
managed all public affairs, as well for offense, as defense, without the help
or counsel of men.

Hasbites was a famous warlike Virago, and led Armies into the field.

When as the Lacedaemonians had besieged the city of Messena in Sicily, and
being resolved to storm it, the women suddenly issued out against their
enemies, and put them to flight.

Lesbia, a Virgin, being besieged by the Turks, hazarded her self to discover
their Works and Mines: by whose only valor and encouragement in presenting
herself upon the walls to the violence of their arrows and engines, the City
was preserved.

The women of Bellovaca, being besieged by Charles the great Duke of Burgundy
most resolutely defended the walls, tumbling the Assailants down headlong from
their scaling-ladders; to the everlasting honor of their Sex, and reproach of
the Enemy.

Elphleda, sister to King Edward (before the Conquest) surnamed the fourth, was
present in the Battle which was fought against the Danes at Toten-Hall in
Staffordshire, and at the mighty overthrow at Wooddensfield, where two Kings
were slain, two Earls; and many thousands of the Danes. She not only tamed the
Welch-men, but chased the Danes.

This Epitaph has been left as a memorial over her Tomb.

Oh Elphlede! mighty both in strength and mind;
The dread of men, and Victress of thy kind.
Nature has done as much as nature can,
To make thee maid; but goodness makes thee man.
Yet pity thou should change ought save thy name,
Thou art so good a woman; and thy fame
In that grows greater, and more worthy, when
Thy feminine valor much outshineth men:
Great Caesar's acts thy noble deeds excel.
So sleep in peace; Virago-maid farewell.
Queen Margaret, Henry the sixth's wife; whose courage, resolution and
magnanimity deserves an immortal praise: she was personally in all those
Battails which were fought against the House of York; nor are the English
Chronicles sparing in commending her more then womanish spirit, to everlasting
memory.

In times past, the Romans honored (even for private and common services)
their ordinary Soldiers, some with Cirick Crowns or Garlands, others with
Lances headed with Gold, Golden Chains, Statues of Ivory; others, with
Triumphs, Praises, Acclamations, Gratulations, etc. If these things were
allowed to men only, with what Elogies, Enconomiums, Crowns, Garlands, Statues,
Sepulchers, and Monuments shall we then celebrate the memory (if it were
possible) beyond all posterity, of these ever to be admired Constant and
Courageous Women!

Of Fair Women.
BEauty is the Image of the Creator, and the Rhetoric of Heaven: it delights
the eye, contents the mind; and the more it is seen, the more it is admired.

That of Venus was so extraordinary, as that Apelles, who was the best of
Painters, could not with all his art (though he had set before him a hundred
choice and selected Beauties, all naked, and had taken from one a charming Eye,
another an amorous Lip, from a third a pleasing smile and a modest blush, from
a fourth a graceful Nose, a fifth a fair Hand, and from each of them that
special Lineament in which she most excelled) represent such an Angelical Face,
such charming Eyes, such amorous coral Lips, such snaring Tresses, such
captivating Hands, or such a pure Alabaster Skin as Venus had. How should I
then by my rude style dare to express that, which Apelles could not represent
with several Colors? I know I am unable to express the least part of that,
which represents the wonderful work of God: and though I were able, yet would
I make a scruple to trace out miracles with ink. Nor shall I enlarge on the
great influences, which the famous Beauties have had in former Ages over men.

Neither dare I presume to name those of these later times, who are admired and
adored by all men (save such as are wilfully blind) lest I should by the
alleging of their power run the same hazard as Antiochus did, who was seized
with a Fever, merely by the rehearsal of Stratonica's extraordinary Beauty;
such divine gemmes did sparkle about her. Or as Tyrasius King of Thebes, who
was struck blind by his only beholding of Diana, as she was bathing herself.

For my part, I am already not only amazed, but even transported (if not lost
with wonder) by the bare rehearsal of the forementioned famous women's heroic
acts.

And though I could aver how that their Beauty does ravish beholders, that
their complexion is clearer then the Sky; their Faces borders of Lillies,
interwoven with Roses; how that the luster of their Eyes surpasses the Diamond,
their Lips the Coral in redness; that their Tresses are like the colored
Hyacinths of Arcadia; their Necks as white as Snow, their Breast as pure as
Allabaster, their Arms as ruddy as the Rose, and that all their parts are most
rare, their whole bodies beautified with more then Terrene perfections; how
that they have more strength then the moistened Torpedoes, which do not only
charm the hand, but the heart also; and that not only the Lybian Lion loses
his strength in beholding their beauty, but the Basilisk his senses; and though
I should add thereunto, that they represent the lively Image of the Creator,
that they are the miracle of the world, and the marvel of marvels; after all
this, what say I more then each man knows and is by all men confessed?

Were not the very feet of Thetis as bright as silver, and the ankles of Hebe
clearer then Crystal?

Are they not admired and beloved even of unreasonable creatures? was not a
Virgin in Leucadia, so beloved of a Peacock, as that the enamoured Bird never
left her whilst she lived, and accompanied her in death; for seeing the young
Damsel dead, she never would receive food from any hand, but so pined away and
dyed also.

Does not Saxo Grammaticus in the tenth book of his Danish History report, how
that certain young maids of a Village in Switzerland, playing and sporting
together in the field upon a holy day, suddenly an huge Hee-bear rushed out of
the Forest, and shatched up the fairest amongst them, and hurried her away to
his Den, gently and without any harm; where he long gazed on her face, as if
with a kind of admiration he grew so enamoured with her on the sudden, that
instead of a Murderer, he became a Lover, imparting unto her all the prey he
got abroad, etc. Did not an Fagle (which was taken in a Neast, and carefully
brought up by a Virgn in the City of Sesto) being come to full growth take her
slight every day abroad, and all the Foul she could catch, brought it home and
laid it in the lap of her Mistres: at length this Virgin dying, and her body
being born unto the Funeral fire, the Eagle still attending, it was no sooner
exposed unto the flames, but the Bird likewise by voluntary flight, cast her
self amidst the kindled pyle, and gave her self as a most grateful sacrifice
unto her Mistress Hearse.

Was not the Queen Suabilda so excelling rare in all the Lineaments of her
body, as that being doomed unto a wretched and miserable death, and bound with
thongs of Leather, to be trod upon by the hoofs of wild horses, her beauty
struck such an impression even in those unreasonable creatures, that they could
not be forced with their rude feet to leave the least character of violence
upon limbs so fair and exquisitely shaped.

Therefore I shall not insist any longer on the specifying of women's Beauty,
since as it appears they are beloved and admired even by unreasonable
creatures: but proceed to their goodness.

The love of Women toward their Husbands; of Mothers toward their Children;
of dutiful Daughters toward their Parents; and of Sisters that have been kind
to their Brothers.
THe women of Wynedi in Germany, bear such an expressible love toward their
husbands, that they repair to their sepulchers, and holding their lives tedious
without them, they offer up their bodies wilingly either to the sword or to the
fire. The like is observed by the Women amongst the Geats, the Catheoreans, the
Herulians (a people which inhabit beyond the River of Danube) by those of
Thrace and the Indies.

The wife of Pandorus, begged of her Husband, that before he hazarded himself
to the extremity of of danger, he would first take away her fears, by taking
away her life with his sword: which he denied, and so gave the signal of
battle, in which he was vanquished and slain, his Wife surprised and committed
into the hands of one of the chief Captains, who pitying her tears and sorrow
(to which her beauty gave no common luster) made suit unto her to make her his
wife: she put him off with all possible delays; but after perceiving, that what
he could not compass with her good will, he would by force, she therefore
craved some few hours of deliberation, which he granted; and being retired, she
first writ in a Note these words: Let none report that the Wife of Pandorus
harbored so little love, as to outlive him. Which Note leaving upon the Table,
she took a sword hanging in the chamber, with which she slew herself.

Alceste, wife to Admetus King of Greece, gave herself up to a most willing
death, for to redeem the health and life of her husband.

Cleopatra Queen of Egypt suffered her breasts to be poisoned with Asps, that
she might die for the love of her Antony. Admirable was the love of her two
Handmaids, Neaera, and Charmione, who would by no persuasion survive their
Queen, but out of an unmatchable zeal to their Mistress, both fell down by
her, and breathed their last.

Phila, having heard that her Husband K. Demetrius had been defeated in a
battle, drank poison, and so dyed.

Camma was not only famous throughout all Galacia for her beauty, but for her
virtue; she did so love her husband, and was so constant unto him, that she
never went forth, nor would suffer any man to see her, whilst she was married.

Evadne at the solemnization of her husbands Funeral, burnt her self to mingle
her ashes with his.

The Queen Artimesia out of the great love she bore to her husband, and
inflamed with unspeakable desire and affection toward him, took his bones and
ashes, and drank the powder thereof, thinking no Sepulcher so worthy as her own
body; and for a perpetual remembrance of her husband Mausolus, King of Caria,
she caused a sumptuous Tomb of mavelous workmanship to be made of four
hundred and eleven foot in circuit, and forty foot high, environed about with
thirty six Pillars, wonderfully well carved, it was held to be one of the seven
wonders of the world.

Cecilia Barbadica Veneta, lived with so great a faithfulness toward her
husband Philippus Vedraminus, that she had never any other object of all her
passions then her husband, his happiness made her joyful, his fear her grief;
and on her face, and in her actions, appeared the good or bad fortune of her
husband; after his death, she could not by any counsel, comfort, or
persuasion, be won to taste the least food whatsoever, or give answer to any
word that was spoken to her, in which silence and consumption she (after some
few days of unspeakable sorrow) breathed out her last.

The Princess Panthea having been acquainted that her husband Abradratus had
been killed in Cyrus Camp, she resolved to go her self and find him out, and
having found him dead amongst a number of dead men, she washed her whole body
and face with his blood, and striking her heart with a dagger she died
embracing her husband.

The City of Wynbergen, a free place in Germany, being besieged by Caesar, who
grew so implacable, that he resolved to take bloody revenge on the men for
having defended their lives and honors so valiantly, and thereby almost
overthrown the greatest part of his Army: The Articles being drawn for the
surrender of the Town, it was only lawful for the Matrons, and Virgins (by
the Emperors Edicts) to carry out as much as each one could carry of what they
best liked. The Wives out of an unexpressible love carried on their backs their
Husbands, and the Virgins and Damsels, their Fathers or Brothers. This struck
such an impression in the heart of Caesar, that of a mortal enemy, he became
their friend.

Artia Matter seeing her husband Poetus condemned and willing that he should
expire by his own hand, rather then by that of the common Hangman, persuaded
him to a Roman resolution but finding him somewhat; daunted with the present
sight of death, she snatched up a sword with which she stabbed her her self, and
plucking it from her bosom presented it unto her husband, only with these few
and last words, Paete non dolet, Poetus! It has done me no harm! and so fell
down and dyed. Martial in the first book of his Epigrams says thus, in
speaking of this courageous Woman, Casta suo gladium cum traderet Aria Paeto,
Quem dedit visceribus traxerat illa suis,
Si qua fides, vulnus quod feci non dolet inquit,
Sed quodtu facies, hoc mihi Paete, dolet.
When Aria did to Paetus give that steel
Which she before from her own breast had taken;
Trust me (says she) no smart at all I feel,
My only wound's to think upon thy pain.
Portia a famous and excellent Roman Lady having heard that her most dear and
beloved husband was dead, her bowels burning with an unexpressable fire of love
for her husband, and finding no knife to kill her self withal, nor cord to
hang her self, nor Well to drown her self, she went to the fire, and with her
own hands she cast down her throat burning coals.

Triara wife to Lucius Vitellus seeing her husband in a dangerous battle, she
presented her self in the midst of the slaughter, killing on all sides till she
had hemmed her self in with dead bodies slain by her own hand, so bold and
magnanimous a spirit had the conjugall love to her husband impressed in her.

Admirable was the love of Julia toward her husband the great Pompea, who
seeing only the gown of her husband (which was brought home) bespotted with
blood, and conceiving thereby that some mischance had happened to her husband,
she fell into a swound, and afterward the trouble of her soul made such a
great emotion in her body that she dyed thereof.

Paula Romana, after her husbands death, was so far from being persuaded to a
second match, that she did never eat nor drink in company of any man.

Proba Valleria Falconia a Roman Matron (and wife to Adelphus Romanus the
Proconsul) inscribed her self on her husbands Tomb this Epitaph, To God, to
Prince, wife, kindred, friend, the poor,
Religious, loyal, true, kind, steadfast, dear,
In zeal, faith, love, blood, amity and store,
He that so lived, and so deceased, yes here.
Pompeia Paulina, the wife of Seneca, when she heard of the Tyrant Nero's
sentence of death (that Monster who ripped up his own mother to see the place
where he had lain) on her husband, she caused her own veins to be opened, being
resolved not to survive him whom she loved so dearly. This Epitaph might have
been inscribed on her Tomb: To these, whom death again did wed,
This Grave's the second marriage bed.
For though the hand of Fate could force
T'wixt soul and body a divorce,
It could not sever man and wife,
Because they both lived but one life;
Peace, good Reader do not weep,
Peace, the Lovers are asleep:
They (sweet Turtles) folded lie
In the last knot that love could tie.
Let them sleep, let them sleep on
Till this stormy night be gone;
And the eternal morrow dawn,
Then the Curtains will be drawn,
And they waken with that light,
Whose day shall never sleep in night.
Rathean Herpin carried her husband Christopher Thaeon (struck by an Apoplexy
in all his limbs and members) with an invincible constancy at several
journies the space of one thousand three hundred English miles to a Bath for
his recoverie. This was about the time that Marquis Spinola entered the
Palatinate; Sir Henry Wotton being the when English Ambassador in those parts.

Dr. Hackets wife was a religious woman, and a loyal and loving wife to her
husband, as this her Epitaph denotes. Drop mournful eyes your pearly trickling
tears,
Flow streams of sadness, drown the spangled spears,
Fall like the tumbling Cataracts of Nile,
Make deaf the world with cries, let not a smile
Appear, let not an eye be seen to sleep,
Nor slumber, only let them serve to weep
Her dear lamented death, who in her life,
Was a religious, loyal loving wife,
Of children tender, to an husband kind,
Th'undoubted symptoms of a virtuous mind;
Which makes her glorious, 'bove the highest pole,
Where Angels sing sweet requiems to her soul;
She lived a Nonesuch, did a Nonesuch dye,
Never nonesuch here her corpse interred lie.
In the time of the second Punick War, when the Romans were overthrown, many
that were reported to be assuredly dead, returning home unexpectedly to their
mothers, such infinite joy oppressed them at the very instant, that betwixt the
kisses and embraces they suddenly expired.

The wife of Aruntius the Roman slew her self, hearing that her son was
drowned.

The rumor of the great slaughter at the lake of Thrasimenes being published,
one woman beyond all hopes, meeting her son at the City gate, who was safely
returned from that general defeat, cast her self into his arms, where in that
ecstasy of joy she instantly expired.

Another, hearing that her son was slain in the battle, after much sorrow for
his death, sitting in her house, and spying her son coming toward her (safe
in health) she was overcome with a sudden joy, that not being able to rise and
give him a meeting, she dyed as she sat in her chair.

The Matrons of Carthage, when their sons were selected to be sent as
Hostages into Sicilia, with weeping and lamentations followed them unto the
Seaside, and kept them so fast hugged in their close embraces, as they
suffered them not to go aboard, until they were forcibly plucked from them
and sent unto the ships; yet then many of these lamenting mothers, oppressed with
extremity of sorrow, cast themselves headlong into the sea, and there were
drowned.

Agrippina, the mother of that cruel Domitius Nero, enquired of the Chaldeans
and Astrologers, whether by their calculations it were possible to find out
whether or no her son should be created Caesar. They returned her this answer;
that by their Art they found for certain that he should be Emperor, but
withal that he should be the death of his mother: to whom she answered,
Interficiat, modo imperet; I care not though he kill me, so he may attain to
the Empire.

Harpalice, the Daughter of Harpalicus, rescued her Father in battle, defeated
the enemy and put him to flight.

Hypsipile the daughter of Thoas, gave life unto her Father, when he was
utterly in despair of hope or comfort.

Erigone the daughter of Iearus, hearing of the death of her father, strangled
her self.

Agane, the Daughter of Cadmus, slew the King Lycotharsis in Illyria, and
repossest her Father of his before usurped Diadem.

What a stock of piety lived in the breast of Tyro, the daughter of Salmoneus,
may be easily conjectured, since she condescended to the loss of her only and
dearly-beloved children, for to save her Father.

Niconus (or as some will have it, Cimonus) being a straight prisoner, and
there adjudged to be starved to death, his daugbter Xantippe fed him through
the irongrates with the milk of her own breasts. What will not love invent, or
true zeal penetrate? What more unheard or unexpected thing could be
apprehended, then for a Father to be fed from the breasts of his Daughter? Who
would not imagine this to be against Nature? but that we see by proof, true
Natural piety transcends all bounds and limits.

Hyas, a young man, being devoured of a Lion, the Hyades (his sisters) deplored
his death with such infinite sorrow, that they wept themselves to death.

The Prince Intaphernes, being condemned to die, with all the male-issue of his
race, for having cut off the ears and nose of one of the Waiters, who rudely
put him back from entering into the Chamber of Darius the Emperor of Persia, and
the execution being hourly expected; the Wife of Intaphernes prevailed so far
with her tears (accompanied with such passionate words, as were able to
mollify flint, or soften marble) That Darius commanded one only, whomsoever
she would choose, to be ransomed for the continuance of the memory of their
name and family; after some meditation (contrary to the expectation of all men)
she demanded the life of her Brother: The King somewhat amazed at her choice,
sent for her and demanded the reason why she had preferred the life of a
Brother before the safety of such a Noble Husband, or such hopeful Childrens To
whom she answered: Beholdo King I am yet but young and in my best of years, and
I may live to have another Husband, and consequently more Children; but my
Father and Mother are both aged; and should I lose a Brother, I should for ever
be deprived of that sacred name! At which words the King, exceedingly moved to
see with what a fraternal zeal they were spoken, he not only released the
Brother, but likewise the eldest of her Sons. This history is more amply
related by Sabe^licus.

A another History does here represent it self to my remembrance, which I have
read in Marul. lib. 3. cap. 2. where he relates that two Virgins, the one
whereof seeing her Bedfellow lying upon her deathbed, fell upon her knees,
and devoutly besought the Almighty, that she might not survive her; but as they
had lived together as one soul divided into two bodies, in all sanctity and
sisterly love, so their chaste bodies might not be separated in death. God was
pleased to grant her the effect of her prayer; for both dyed in one day, and
they were both buried in one sepulcher, being fellows in one house, one bed,
and one grave, and now (questionless) joyful and joint-inheritors of one
everlasting Kingdom.

Their goodness does bereave of a voice to proceed any further: But as
Aristotle being not able to comprehend the ebb and flow of an Arm of the Sea,
threw himself into it; so do I drown my self in such a multitude of wonders,
not willing any longer to measure their loves by the inch of my knowledge. I am
transported in this great Labyrinth of wonders, and cannot at last but break
forth and say, that those Satyrists, who assume to themselves such an unbrideled
liberty to inveigh without all limitation against this most worthy Sex, are
horrid Monsters, whose Understanding is a pit of darkness, whose Reason is a
shop of malice, whose will is a Hell, where thousands of passions outragiously
infest them; their Tongue an instrument of cursing, lying and slandering, their
Face a painted hypocrisy, their Body a sponge full of envy; and to conclude,
they seem to have no Faith but infidelity, no Lord but their passions, no God
but their belly, who would (if they were able) in their gluttony exceed the
Prince Hugotio Fagiolanus, who at one dinner devoured the two rich Dukedomes of
Luca and Pysa; nay, Smindrides, who for the furniture of one Table, entertained
a thousand Cooks, a thousand Bird-catchers, and a thousand Fishermen. But as
they consume their time in pleasures (which slide away like waters occasioned
by a storm) so they will sind themselves destitute and ashamed: so many golden
harvests which time presented to them are passed away, and nothing is left but
sorrow for having done ill, and impotence to do well: what then remains but to
say with that miserable King, who gave away his Scepter for a glass of water:
Alas, must I for so short a pleasure lose so great a kingdom! And besides,
there is a place ordained for the wicked, the great lake of Gods wrath, an
eternal fire, a bottomless depth, where there is no evil but must be expected
to be found, nor any good that can be hoped for.

Happy therefore all those who do attain to that everlasting blessed Kingdom,
where there is no more poverty, no sickness, no grief, no calumny, no
persecution; where the blessed see God face to face in a body as impassible as
an Angel, as subtle as the beams of light, as swift as the wings of thunder,
as bright as the Sun; where they do enjoy a delicious torrent of unspeakable
content; Voices and Music, which time cannot ravish away, Odours which are
never dissipated, a Feast which is never consumed; a blessing, which though
Eternity bestows, yet shall not Eternity ever see an end thereof.

Of chaste Women and Virgins.
TArquine the Proud, having been invited by Collatine (husband to the chaste
Lucretia) to a supper, he was fairly welcomed by Lucretia, who apprehended no
deceit; having supt, he withdrew himself to his lodging, and when he thought
that all were fast asleep, he came with a naked dagger in his hand to the place
where Lucretia lay; having recourse to the instruments of hatred for his
assistance in love; and he who was wont by the sword to vent his angry
passions, knows not how to lay it aside in tendrest affections; he lays his
hand upon his breast, he threatens her, he speaks her fair; and seeing her
rather to embrace death, than him, ready rather to lose her life then honor,
he threatens to kill some servant close by her, to make her be believed a foul
adultress. See how this wicked one threatens to bereave her of her honor, that
he might bereave her of it.

Lucretia thus assaulted with the same weapons wherewith she defended her
chastity, yielded to Tarquins prevailing lust.

Tarquin departs triumphant, saddest Lucretia remains overwhelmed with grief,
she sends for her father and her husband, acquaints them with what is past,
adding thereunto these her last words:

And what could unfortunate Lucretia do? if she had dyed that she might have
lived chaste, you would have thought her slain for having been unchaste. O most
cruel law of Honor, which savest not the innocent! a law never descended from
Heaven, but come from the deepest abyss of Hell.

I, who would have mine honesty known to all, have more studied glory then
chastity; and whilst I sought after the name of chaste, I am with infamy become
unchaste: I thought death the worst of all evils, I thought it the cure of all
misfortunes; I feared nothing, since I feared not to dye, yet now I was
enforced to choose life, not to lose mine honor, and by living have lost it.

I am resolved to dye, if not for what has already befaln me, at least for
what may hereafter happen unto me. But what then? If I dye, I shall seem to
acknowledge to have done amiss, they will say my guilty conscience killed me.
If I live, you will believe I have done amiss, you will say I consented out of
too much desire of life. O, of all others most unfortunate Lucretia, whose
innocence neither life nor death can justify!

This soul ( O Collatine) whose delight was chastity, abhors now that body
which is polluted, and as being wholly thine, cannot endure that that part of
me should have any longer being, which can no more be only thine.

But what was it in me that encouraged that wicked one to so great a mischief?
perhaps my honesty, which he thought greater then that of others. Most sacred
honesty, Art thou then become an inciter to lust? and instead of defending,
offendest? Do thou instead of bridling desires, edge on to fury and violence?

His heart where cruelty is harbored, which can kill none but the innocent, is
likewise a receptacle of lust, which can covet none but the chaste; to have
what they desire, is not that the Tarquins do desire, they find no pleasure,
where they use no force, and like lightning, rend most where they find most
resistance.

And whether can unfortunate Lucretia go for revenge? to the Kings family, who
has injured me? mine own friends, whom I have injured? You gods of
hospitality, it is you I call upon; but to what purpose call I you, since you
have permitted it? Revenge me, you infernal powers! but why invoke I you, who
were his assistants?

I my self will revenge my self, and will by death take greater revenge on this
mine enemy, then by living.

I will dye, not to lessen my faults, but to aggravate his; not for that I have
sinned, but to show that she did not subject her self to sense, who voluntary
deprives her self of sense.

I will dye, that I may not live in so wretched times which make life a shame,
and to be born, a misfortune. My fall shall ease your thoughts, make my revenge
happy; and I, who will not live an example of dishonor to women, will dye an
example of fortitude to men.

This said, she plunged a knife into her heart, and fell down dead thereon.

Theoxena being environed at Sea by the Navy of Philip King of Macedon, seeing
her husband thrown overboard, leapt after him, not only to express her love
to her husband, but to preserve her self from the tyranny of the Conqueror.

Alexander the Great, wrote a letter to his mother in this manner, Alexander
the son of Jupiter Hamon, to his mother Olympia wishes health:

To whom with great modesty she thus replied:

Dear son, as you love me, instead of doing me honor, proclaim not my
dishonor, neither accuse me before Juno; besides, it is a great aspersion you
cast upon me, to make me a, Strumpet though to Jupiter himself. And thus this
famous Queen would not for any swelling title, or vain ostentation, lose the
honor to be called a loyal and chaste wife.

Cornelia the illustrious mother of the Gracchi, to preserve the honor of a
chaste widow, denied to marry the King Ptolomeus, although he offered to impart
to her a Diadem and a Scepter.

Dyrrachina being taken prisoner, covenanted with her cruel Victor, that if he
would but reprieve her honor for the present, she would reveal unto him a
secret by the which he should preserve his body from being wounded. The
Soldier having accepted of the condition, she told him that it was the virtue
of a certain herb, with whose juice if he did anoint any part of his body, it
should preserve it free from being wounded; and to show him the effects
thereof, she from a neighbors garden plucked up the weed that next came to
hand, with the sap or moisture thereof she anointed her own neck, and bidding
him to draw out his sword and make trial of her whether she kept not a
faithful Covenant with him, the Soldier giving credit to her words, in regard
of her constancy and courage, with one strong blow struck off her head. A most
resolute and noble Lady, to prefer death before the loss of her honor.

Annia Romana having buried her first husband in her youth, and being
continually persuaded by her friends to a second marriage, she answered, it was
a motion which she would by no means assent unto; for (said she) Should I
happen upon a good man, such a one as my first husband was, I would not then
live in that perpetual fear to lose him; but if otherwise, why should I hazard
to put my self upon a bad one, that am so late punished by the loss of so good
a one.

Democion the Athenian Virgin, hearing that Leosthenes, to whom she was
contracted, was slain in the wars, she killed her self; but before her death
she thus reasoned with her self: Although my body is untoucht, yet, should I
fall into the embraces of another, I should but deceive the second, since I am
still married to the former in my heart.

Alice Countess of Salisbury, being importuned continually by King Edward the
third, to yield unto his inordinate desires, and having sent for her, thinking
to compel her, and to use his royal Authority, she cast her self down at the
Kings feet, and with an ocean of tears, accompained with words able to mollify
Steel, or to soften Flints, she declared, That since her unhappy destiny had
brought her thither before his presence as the innocent lamb committed to the
sacrifice, she most humbly craved that his Majesty would be pleased to grant
unto her one request: whereat the King replied with a solemn oath, that he
would not refuse any thing unto her; she then took a knife which she had
conveyed under her Gown, saying, that the request which she had craved, and
the which his Majesty had been pleased with his royal Faith to grant her, was,
That she did most humbly beseech him, that he would rather then take away her
honor, with his sword end her most unhappy life, or else that he would be
pleased to give her leave to kill her self with that knife, which she had
purposely brought, that so her innocent blood might bear witness before God of
her undefiled chastity.

The King being astonished, and assured of the chastity and constancy of this
virtuous Lady took her to be his lawful wife.

Baldraca, though she was of mean parentage, and of an inferior fortune, could
neither by threats nor promises of worldly honors or promotion, be tempted to
prostitute her self to the Emperor Otho.

Isabella a Damsel of Ravenna threw her self headlong into the river Medoacus,
wherein she was drowned, to shun the violent lusts of some Venetian Soldiers.

Britonia a beautiful maid of Crete, to shun the importunities of King Minos,
cast her self likewise into a River, where, she was drowned.

Pithomena a Virgin of Alexandria (being a Citizens slave) was so fair, and so
virtuous, that her Master became in love with her; but when he saw he coald
neither with promises, nor threats gain her, he began to hate her more then
ever he had loved her; and though he had accused her to be a Christian (as
indeed she was) yet nevertheless she remained constant in her deliberation, and
resolved rather to suffer a cruel death (as she did) being put into boiling
pitch, then to lose her chastity.

With her therefore I close this relation of chaste Women and Virgins; and lest
I should omit any thing that might tend to the grace and honor of that Sex, I
shall allege somewhat of their abilities to govern.

Of Women's abilities to Govern.
CEres, Queen of Sicil, was the first that taught People to live according unto
the Laws; and therefore she was by the Ancients called a Goddess.

Mirrhe Queen of the Lydians, was by them reckoned amongst seven of their
Kings, by which they boast to have been governed.

Semyramis manfully governed her Kingdom for the space of 24 years, performing
many admirable things surpassing her Sex.

Teuca, a Warlike woman, Queen of the Illyrians, wife unto Argon, took upon her
self the sovereignty, and governed wisely; she opposed the violence of the
Romans, and obtained on them many noble victories.

Zenobia, Queen of the Palmirians, after the death of her husband Odenatus,
took upon her the Imperial Regencie, and made the Kingdom of Syria tributary
unto her.

Valasca, Queen of the Bohemians, governed her Kingdom, and managed all her
affairs herself, without the help or Council of any man.

Athalia Queen of the Hebrews, Saba of the Ethiopians, Amalasuntha of the
Goths, Hester of the Persians, Harpalice of the Amazons, do all of them deserve
an immortal praise for their well-governing.

Queen Mercea, wife to Guinthelinus king of Britain governed wisely, and
established many profitable Laws, which were much esteemed by the Britains,
and carefully observed; being called after her name, The Mercean laws, many
Ages ensuing.

It was a custom among the Celtans, a people of France (seated between the
Rivers Graumna and Sequana) to admit their Women to Council; and in the League
which they made with Anibal this Article was inserted:

If so be the Celtans have any matter of complaint against the Carthaginians,
the Carthaginian Commander in Spain shall judge of it: But if the Carthaginians
have any thing to object against the Celtans, it shall be brought before the
Celtan- Women.

Did not Hilkiah, Abikam, Achbor, Shapham and Asahiah (those prime Statesmen)
consult concerning State Affairs with Huldah?

Deborah was so able for the public management, that she judged Israel, and
the people of Israel came up constantly unto her for judgment.

Mary Countess of Flanders, wife to the Emperor Maximilian; and Louise,
Duchess of Savoy, mother to the French King Francis the first; by their
wisdom and prudence treated and concluded the peace at Cambray, a Town seated
amidst the seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands.

Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, was admired by her very enemies, namely Pope
Sixtus Quintus, though he plotted against her life, yet he was often heard to
say, that Elizabeth of England, and Henry the IV. of France, were able to
govern the whole world.

I need not insist any longer on Women's abilities to govern; since it clearly
appears that they have therein excelled most men: and therefore God never
appeared to them in his wrath armed with thunders as a revenger of crimes, but
with crowns in his hand, as a dealer of rewards: for this Sex has never been
infected with such Monsters as Vitellius, Nero, Heliogabalus, Caligula,
Domitian, Catiline, Silla, Achitophel, Herod, Marius, Nimrod, Sardanapalus
were, and a thousand such others, who as they lived most detestable and horrid
lives, so they expired with most deserved deaths; some by hunger and thirst,
others were eaten by horses, rats, and lice, others devoured by wolves and
dogs, others consumed by flames and tortures; some were driven naked through
the streets, saluted with Vrinals and Chamber-pots; others were tied into bags,
wherein a Cock, a Viper, and a Fox were put, and thus were they cast into a
river; some strangled, others poisoned themselves, and with such like horrid
and detestable ends they met with their final destructions.

But to divert you from these sad objects of Gods wrath, I will proceed to such
as are acceptable and pleasing, the reward whereof is everlasting happiness;
viz. Piety and Religion.

Of Pious and Religious Women.
MAry Magdalen, and Martha did preach the Gospel of Christ, and converted the
Country of Illyria, which now is called Sclavonia, unto the Christian belief.

The Sarahs were devout believers.

The Mary's were humble and mortified persons.

The Elizabeth's religiously observed all the commandents of God blameless.

The Priscilla's were heavenly, and rich in discourse.

The Bathsheba's, the Loises, and Funices were careful in the the instructing
of their children in the knowledge of God.

Catherina Alexandria (under the tyranny of Maxentius) was illuminated with
divine knowledge from above, she constantly maintained the faith of the Gospel,
notwithstanding all the Syllogistical and Sophistical Dilemma's of the cunning
Sophisters of those days, who were forced to yield, and to submit unto the
authority of a Virgins tongue.

Isota Navarula Veronensis, devoted her life to the contemplation of divine
mysteries, to which she added the honor of a perpetual chastity.

Rosuida born in Germany, composed many excellent works, exhorting those of her
sex to Chastity, Virtue, and the divine Worship; she writ the lives of holy
men, and composed a divine work of the pious and chaste life of the blessed
Virgin.

Fgilbert King of England by the means of his wife received the Christian Faith.

Hermegides King of the Goths, was drawn from Arius heresies unto the Christian
Faith by Nigegond his wife.

Cleotilda Queen of France, and wife unto King Clovis, made her husband
renounce the Paganism, and become a Christian.

Dorothy Leigh not long since deceased, was a pious and religious Gentlewoman,
she has left behind her as a legacy to her children, a book of her own
making, entitled, The mothers blessing: It is godly counsel, containing many
good exhortations and admonitions.

The holy Writ it self (in a most divine style) declares unto us mortals the
wonders of that Sex, in which God has been pleased to make them so far
excel, and to express how much he was pleased with the good return of his
merciful gifts from them, as that it moved the Savior of all the world to
publish the same, viz. O woman great is thy faith! and with this additional
reproach to his disciples, That they had not given him water for his feet, and
that they had not saluted him with a kiss, when as that woman had anointed his
feet, and washed them with her tears, had wiped them with her hairs, and had not
ceased to kiss them.

And was not our Savior himself moved to compassion by them? he who was
incapable of any passion, or weakness, yet he did weep, when he saw the tears
roll from Mary's eyes for Lazarus sake; he knew the value of that so great a
treasure which had been infused into that Sex, even since the first moment of
its creation in Paradise; and although the spirit of delusion did even there
work the fall of man by such an easy instrument, yet his divine providence
would preserve it to bruise that Serpents head withal, and to confound that
spirit of darkness, by making it appear, that they should neither forsake nor
deny him: and this he verified even at the Cross, where he was to overcome
death it self, when as he uttered these words, Woman behold thy Son! So
likewise said he unto his beloved Disciple, speaking of the blessed Virgin,
Behold thy mother.

The women were the first that returned to the Sepulcher, whither they went
before day. Their faith did excel that of men when as they went with ointments,
not taking care who should remove the stone from off the Sepulcher. So likewise
did they run unto Simon Peter, and to the other Disciples, to witness the
Lords Resurrection; neither did they as the Disciples return unto their own
homes, but remained at the Sepulcher weeping and inquiring after the Lord,
until that he had appeared unto them; and therefore he made them to be
companions of Angels, who comforted them.

O divine conversation! o heavenly meeting of an Angelical Chore! when as the
Angels asked, Woman why weepest thou? O what a transcendent love she expressed in
saying, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid him.

But with what a bliss was this conversation crowned, when as Christ Jesus
himself in person, would approve himself to be the chief in that heavenly
conference and enquiry, by his saying, Why weepest thou? whom seek thou? and
so might he well say indeed, since he himself was there to bid them weep no
more. Most blessed Sex! though they were forbidden to weep, yet may all men
continue the same for the backwardness of such as follow not the example of
these pious and religious women, but to the contrary do employ all their
faculties to perform only that which the Epitaph of Heliogabalus denotes, Ede,
bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas: imagining that the life of man was only
created but to eat, and drink, and sleep; and thus they are mere animals, nay
not so prudent and moderate, for they do carefully provide those things which
do belong to the defending of their lives, which moved one to say thus: Nor are
these creatures to be thought to be
Quite void of the intellectual faculty;
But that they can discern and understand
The language spoken in their native land,
And might discourse, if to so strange a wit,
Nature had lent them but due organs fit.


Lucan reports that the Elephants having washed themselves, they fall down and
adore, looking upwards toward heaven, after which they appear to be joyful.

The Storks, whereof there are many in Holland, do ere they give food to their
young ones look upwards toward heaven, as if they gave God thanks; and
wheresoever they build their nest, as a token of their gratitude, they cast
down one of their young ones to the owners of the house.

The Dove when she picks up her food, at every grain she lifts up her eye
toward heaven. And thus these harmless creatures appear to be not only as
so many teachers to the Rationals, of gratitude for the numberless mercies
which they have received from the Almighty for having made them so, when he
might have turned them into any other shape as the Potter does his clay; but as
so many judges against those who have made not only Men their gods, but
Brutes, Vegetables, and inanimated, viz.

The Phaenicians worshipped a Serpent.

The Trogloditae a Tortise.

The Thessalians a Stork.

Those of Delphos a Wolf.

The men of Samos a Sheep.

The Islanders of Tenedos a Cow with Calf.

The Romans a Goose.

In Alba a Dragon.

The Egyptians, Garlic and Onyons.

In some parts, a rude and unbeautified Stone. And of such kind of gods the
Pagans had no less then thirty thousand.

If the aforesaid Elephants, Storks and Doves could speak, no doubt but they
would (as Du-Bartas says of the ascending Larks Alleluja) tell men that they
do acknowledge but him who is the Creator of all the world, and thereby
confound: Alas, but too many of those Monsters who not so much as the Pagans
believe a Godhead; goddesses they will, but not such as these godly women, who
whilst they lived on earth, might on the Scriptures warrant have been said that
they were Gods, and the Temple of God; wherefore they enjoy Torrents of
unspeakable contentments in an everlasting Kingdom, where all the elected
souls of the Apostles, Martyrs, Prophets, Angels, Archangels, Thrones,
Dominions, Powers, Virtues, Cherubims and Seraphims perpetually sing hymns, and
Alleluja; for after they had been on earth as Angels in women shapes, they
could not fail to be their fect equals in Heaven, from whence if a message
should by them be sent unto some men of this age, what would it bear, but O ye
monsters that say there is no God, who tread the paths (it is true) whereof Job
speaks, where gold, silver, and moulten brass is to be found, the Onyx and the
Saphir, etc. but not those which these ever to be admired Women did, viz. the
unknown paths which no Foul knows, the Vultures eye has not seen, the Lions
whelp has not trodden, nor the fierce Lion passes by; whence Wisdom comes,
which is the fear of the Lord, and to depart from evil, which is understanding.
And that these Christian Women sought, and that they found, after they had left
behind them those manifold Examples of their Virtues, which brought them
thither, and for the which all Rationals ought to celebrate their praises with
Garlands, Crowns, Columns, Statues, and Monuments; and not to presume to bark
at this most worthy Sex: For who, if he be the production of a woman, can
deride the virtues of his own Mother? Let those Zoilusses and Momusses, let
them (I say) beware of incurring their just curse, for having not only obscured
as clouds the Sun that raised them, in stead of imitating the true
looking-glass, which returns the lively image so soon as the face is presented
unto it, without any disguisements at all: But for showing themselves not only
wilfully ignorant, and monstrous ungrateful, but void of all sense and shame.
And though these monsters do not acknowledge the unspeakable deserts of
virtuous Women, yet nevertheless Truth does manifest to all the world what
they are: and it may be justly said of them, as Socrates answered to
Hermogenes, who reproving him for that he did not think at all of defending
himself when he was accused, replied, that he had thought of that all his life
time, by striving to live well. And the example of Demetrius Phalerius, a
Prince of immortal renown teaches us how little account is to be made of the
dealings of envious men: when as word was brought unto him that the Athenians
moved with envy against him, had broken down the 300 Images which had been
erected in the streets of Ariopagus to his honor; He replied, The Athenians
may well throw down my Images; but they (nor all the men of the world) are not
able to abase my Virtues, for whose sake my Images were erected.

And there needs no other examples then these everto be admired Women, to
encourage virtue, and to discourage vice; to persuade both Sexes to that
eternal bliss, which is to be attained by treading the unknown paths; which is
not to be found in the land of the living, for that the living run that of the
Lion and the Lions whelp, and depart not from evil, their aim is at gold and at
the onix: And what is the end of all that path? You may remember it, if you
have read it: Were not all the riches of Craesus the Persians prey? Was not
Cyrus the Conqueror at last glad to crave for a cup of water? Did not the
Parthians, when they had overthrown Crassus, with all his wealth, pour molten
gold down his throat, to satisfy his greedy desire of money? And was not the
Treasure of Decebalus, though hidden in the bottom of the great River
Sargesia, fisht out by the Romans? Is not the Assyrian Empire reduced into
seven mountains? And of those great, and strong Cities: Niniveh, the walls
whereof had fifteen hundred towers; Babylon, which was threescore miles in
compass; the Pyramides at Amasia's Sepulcher, in the building whereof thirty
six thousand men were employed above fourscore years; the great and famous
Temple of Diana, which was scarce finished by the inhabitants of all Asia, in
two hundred years; and of all those great Emperors, Kings, and sumptuous
Buildings, what does there now remain but dust? Virtue which these matchless
Women sought only, remained, that never dies: therefore Seneca studied in his
youth time the Art been vivendi; and in his age, been moriendi.

And since Virtue was the mark at which these everto be admired women did aim,
the price which they so ran for to obtain; they attained to its possession so
absolutely, as that nothing was ever able to bereave them thereof.

The venomous speeches of those vile Detractors of this most worthy Sex, will
therefore prove but as the fools bolt shot upright, which in the fall endangers
their own heads. And it is no wonder (since Diamonds are cut and whilst despised
Peebles lie safe in the sand; and the Cedars crushed with tempest, whenas low
shrubs are scarce touched with the wind) that malice strives to make virtuous
Women suffer by supposed crimes. But as the Ruby, whatsoever Foil it has,
does yet show red; so they will flourish and triumph to all posterity, and
their fame remain glorious, as having approved themselves such Gemmes,
wherewith their Creator has been well pleased. The Elogium of whose Virtues I
cannot better close, then with these, Mr. Randal's Verses, in praise of this
most worthy Sex.

HE is a Paracide to his Mothers name,
And with an impious hand murders her same,
That wrongs the praise of women, that dare^ writ^
Libels on Saints, or with foul ink requite
The milk they lent us. Better Sex! comman^
To your defense my more religious hand,
At sword or pen. Yours was the nobler birth
For you of man were made; man but of earth*
The son of dust. And though your sin did bree^
His fall; again you raised him in your seed.
Adam in's sleep a gainful loss sustained,
That for one Rib a better self regained;
Who had he not your blessed creation seen,
An Anchorite in paradise had been.
Why in this work did the Creation rest,
But that the eternal Providence thought you best
Of all his six days labor? Beasts should do
Homage to man; but man should wait on you,
You are of comelier sight, of daintier touch;
A tender flesh, a color bright, and such
As Parians see in marble; Skin more fair,
More glorious head, and far more glorious hair;
Eyes full of grace, and quickness; purer Roses
Blush in your Cheeks; A milder white compose*
Your stately Fronts; your Breath more sweet then his,
Breathes spice, and Nectar drops at every kiss,
Your skins are smooth; bristles on theirs do grow
Like quils of Porcupines, rough wool does flow
Ore all their faces; you approach more near
The form of Angels, they like Beasts appear*

