GEORGIO MONCK Duci de Albemarle, Comiti de TORRINGTON, Baroni in POTHERIDGE,
etc. Exercituum in ANGLIA, sub Rege CAROLO Secundo, Generali; a Consiliis
Secretioribus; and Nobilissimi Ordinis Aureae Periscelidis Equiti.
EPITAPHIUM.
Luge and Mirare, Quisquis ades.
ECce jacet in Tumulo qui Sedere noluit in Throno.
fatis communibus moritur, qui communibus non vixit;
natura magnus, fortuna major, se ipso maximus.
Miles audacia Secundus nulli,
Dux prudentia,
Subditus fide.
Tyrannum,and Populis and Regibus formidabilem, Solus non timuit, sed terruit.
Defuncto Tyranno, and Superstite Tyrannide,
Venit, Vidit, Vicit,
non armorum strepitu, sed consiliorum alto Silentio;
(genus vincendi plane novum, quod nec voce nec armis!)
tria Regna obtinuit, vel uno die,
nec praeliatus, nec locutus.
Obtinuit tria, noluit vel Unum:
Sceptri enim factus Arbiter, maluit reddere quam habere;
pluris merito estimans restituere Regem quam esse.
Restituit quidem, restitutumque observantissime coluit,
CAROLO, non sibi, victor;
Et obedientia inclytus magis quam Imperio,
humilitate quam gloria;
Modestior Ipse post restitutam Majestatem, quam post laesam alii.
Fel^x qui triplici Regno Regem demeruit and hunc Regem,
CAROLUM Secundum,
praeter injurias oblitum nihil,
nihil memorem praeter officia;
nec triplici Regno, sed omni, dignum.
Restituto Rege simul omnia restauravit,
Pacem, Justitiam, Religionem.
Restauratisque omnibus, decennium adhuc vixit, conservaturus quae
restauraverat,
and conservando quam restaurando clarior;
Curarum nempe vitaeque prodigus ut semel restaurata semper conservaret.
Amicos habuit BONOS omnes,
Inimicum neminem, nisi aut Dei, aut Regis, aut Patriae.
Titulis, honoribus, divitiis, crevit supra modum, sed infra meritum;
fortunis mutatis nihil mutatus ipse,
semper minor sibi quo aliis major.
Pene inter nuptias filii haeredis obiit, lachrymas funeris temperaturus
nuptiarum gaudiis,
Domestico tamen solatio nihil placantur publici luctus;
Nec aliquod remedium doloris est, ubi calamitas dolorem superat,
Ubi amittitur quod nec reparatur in Haerede dignissimo:
Virtus enim Successorem non habet, quae Antecessorem non habuit;
HEROES toti nascuntur, and toti pereunt;
Similem non viderat Anglia, nec Orbis videbit,
Sepelitur cum Regibus, qui Rex non fuit, sed nec voluit esse.
Quidni cum Regibus jaceat, per quem stant Ipsi Reges,
Tumulumque accipiat qui Solium reddidit?
Superstes, etiam post haec marmora, futurus,
Nobilior and recentior dum antiquior;
Dignus plane qui celebretur mortuus, cum recusaverit vivus;
Imo qui coelum mercedem habeat, cui compensando terra non sufficit.
Hunc and Luge and Mirare.
George Monck Duke of ALBEMARLE, Earl of TORRINGTON, Baron of POTHERIDGE, etc.
Captain General, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Counsel; and,
One of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
LAment and Wonder, Reader, here lies one
Entombed, who did refuse t'ascend a Throne;
Who Dyed, by the common stroke of Fate,
As other Men, but lived not at that Rate;
By Nature Great, yet Greater by Success,
But above all, was in himself Greatest.
He was a Soldier second unto none
In Courage, and a General well known
In Prudence; and it is equally as true,
He was a Loyal, Faithful Subject too;
The Tyrant whom, both Kings and Nations feared,
He only feared him not, but boldly Dared.
The Tyrant being dead, this General came,
And saw th'succeeding Rage, then Overcame;
Not by the Noise of Arms, but by the Deep
Silence of Counsels, which he knew to keep;
Strange kind of Conquering this, and almost New,
In one Days space three Kingdoms to subdue,
(Without engaging of his Tongue, or Sword)
And yet of Either would not be the Lord;
Accompting it more Grandeur for to save
Three Scepters, and Restore them, than to have:
For being made an Vmpire, did decree
'Twas better to Restore, a King, than be:
And thus resolved, the King he did Restore,
Then Him, as Caesar, Humbly did Adore.
It was King CHARLES, for whose most worthy Sake
(And not his own) he did this Conquest make;
That all may know by reading of his Story,
Humility was his Aim, not Glory;
Since with more Modesty unto the King
He did submit, than those who injured him:
Most happy man, who did three Kingdoms gain,
That CHARLES the Second might solely in them Reign.
A Prince, whose Virtues are so Great, that He,
Deserves more Kingdoms Crowns, as well as three:
Forgetting nothing but past Injuries;
Mindful of nothing, but good Offices.
Even Him he did restore unto his Throne;
With Him, PEACE, JUSTICE, and RELIGION.
That done, Ten years survived, that he might see
What was restored, might conserved be;
And so become more famous to maintain
The Crowns Support, and Peace, than to obtain.
For which, his Cares and Life he valued not
To keep that always, which at once he got.
All good Men were his Friends, his Foes were they,
Who GOD, the KING, and COUNTRY disobey.
Titles, Honors, Wealth, he did inherit,
(High as they were) yet much beneath his Merit:
Though Fortune did advance him above others, he
Had in himself the more Humility.
At length, this brave Heroic General Died,
About the time his Son had taken a Bride;
That so the Joys in her might seem to dry
Those Tears, which ought to fall at's Obsequy:
And though those Joys were Great, yet could not boast
For to compensate what the Public lost
In him; nor is there any Remedy
Of Grief, if mastered by Calamity;
Which is so great, that nothing can repair,
Although he left a Son, his worthiest Heir:
For Virtue has no Parent, from whose Race,
It may derive to Successors its Grace.
HEROES are such by Birth, and such they Dye
Without Transmission to Posterity;
And such a one as this nor England saw,
Nor ever shall the World to keep't in awe.
He Vaulted is with Kings, although it is known
He was no King, because he would be none.
What though he lie by Kings, by whose stout Hand
And Policy, even Kings themselves do stand;
It is great Honor, but it is justly shown
To give a Tomb to him, who saved the Throne:
Yet, though these Marbles do consume, thy Fame
Shall even by Age renew, still be the same:
For he, who Living, did refuse to have
The World's Applause, best claims it in the Grave:
And he deserves Heavens favors to partake,
To whom the Earth could no Requital make;
-- Who can
But Mourn for, and Admire this Glorious Man!
In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for William Not, and James Collins. M.
D C. LXX.


