TO THE SVPREME AVTHORITY, THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND.

The Humble REMONSTRANCE OF Sir Balthazar Gerbier Knight.

Touching his sundry Proposals, wherein this Commonwealths Interest is
concerned: And particularly on the present necessity of laying a Claim unto
considerable Sums of money due by the States of Brabant and Flanders unto
this Commonwealth.

TO THE SVPREME AVTHORITY, THE PARLIAMENT Of the Commonwealth of England. The
Humble Remonstrance OF Sir BALTHAZAR GERBIER, Knight.
Shows,

And whereas the Parliament has of late directed a solemn Embassage to the
States-Generall of the United Provinces, possibly with an intent to proceed in
the like manner toward such other Kings and States as shall deserve their
Amity:

Your humble Remonstrant has long since prepared and penned several
particulars wherein the public service is concerned, and has kept them in
readiness against such a time as the State might be pleased to call for them
to be considered of, either publicly, or privately: For that some of them are
supposed to be of the nature of Arcana Reipublicae, the keeping of them secret
proving to be as their life: and therefore (as he humbly conceives) they ought
to be considered of in the like manner, and to be resolved on out of hand.

Such are several of his Proposals, which in the year 1623. were discovered by
a considerable Party unto those Persons who as then were the prime Ministers in
Authority; and the which, should they at present be considered of, would
happily not only be judged fit by the Parliaments great wisdom to be kept
secret, but to be undertaken out of hand, in consideration of the present
conjuncture of affairs, when as neighbour-Nations are hammering on Treaties,
and patching up their differences: Which being once allayed, the said parties
may in all likelihood proceed to such resolutions, and enter on such
Engagements, as that when they shall be once put in practice, would prove too
late for to be provided against.

Your humble Remonstrant has therefore, in conformity of his zeal and
fidelity, attended to give a clear account of all those particulars wherein
this State may be concerned, and with that reference to the public good as may
be justly expected. The which did lately beget a jealousy in him, on an
Information which has been given in, of the necessity there was to call him to
an Account; when as his voluntary and free Attendance could not imply any
necessity to such an Information; For that he has been far more ready to open
his Budget, then possibly the multiplicity of Affairs could afford a time to
view his Pack.

And whereas he humbly conceives, that Inferiors cannot too much express their
fidelity, zeal, and readiness unto Superiors: So lest it should be conceived,
that by his having but one Tongue to speak, he should want hands during the
time of his attendance, to put himself in a readiness to be accomptable to the
Parliament, remitting to their great wisdoms the sit opportunity of their
taking notice of his said Proposals* and to order therein according unto their
pleasure.

He therefore thought it requisite humbly to dilate himself in this manner on
his Proposals; and to demonstrate how that in the first place those particulars
which were presented in the year 1623. unto such persons who were then in
Authority, are of such a nature, as that in case they be made use of at
present, they may stand this Commonwealth in as great a stead, as the golden
Mines do unto the King of Spain.

Secondly, That there are certain Establishments extant in other Countries,
which if they were practiced here in England under the Parliaments protection,
would be very beneficial to the people, and produce a vast stock of ready
moneys for the States use: Some of the said Establishments being proffered to
be erected by such persons, as demand naught save this Commonwealths protection
and encouragement in those said Establishments; which will produce a present
vast stock of ready moneys, together with a constant considerable yearly
Revenue to boot for this Commonwealths use; and the gaining of the Peoples love.

Finally, That there is (as he humbly conceives) periculum in mora, in the not
present heeding of a claim to be laid on a Debt of Seven millions of pounds,
which are due unto this State by those of Brabant and Flanders. Wherefore your
humble Remonstrant (to make good his said zeal, as well by his pen, as by his
heart and tongue) presents the state thereof unto your Honors in the ensuing
lines Viz.

The Annals of Brabant and Flanders mention that. it happened on the 5. day of
March, how that the great Commander of Castile, Governor of the Netherlands,
being deceased, a Council of State was appointed to govern in those Provinces:
and the said Council was authorized by Letters Patents from King Philip the
second under his great Seal, in date, March 24. 1576. The said King of Spain,
(by his Letters of April 1576. invited Queen Elizabeth to continue a
correspondencie with those of his said Council of State in the said Provinces:
And by that Council of States appointment so authorized, acknowledged and
recommended, The Duke of Arscot was chosen and declared General for the King
of Spain in those Provinces. The said Dukes Commission being under that Kings
Broad-Seal, dated the 3. of October 1576.

The said States as then standing in need of a considerable stock of moneys,
sent to such Neighbors as they conceived to be in a capacity of furnishing
them: and as they sent to the Prince Elector of Cullen, to the Duke Casimir,
and others for a Loan of moneys, they likewise sent unto Queen Elizabeth.

Their Ambassadors were the Baron Sweueghen and the Marquess of Haure; and
the Queen was pleased to appoint the Lord Burley, and the Earl of Sussex and
others, to Treat with them concerning the Loan of money, for which they offered
their Bonds, and to second them by the Bonds of the States of Brabant and
Flanders, together with those of the Towns of Bruxels, Antwerpe, Gendt,
Bridges, Newport, and Dunkirck.

Those Ambassadors and States obliging their Persons, and the Magistrates of
the respective Towns themselves, and their Inhabitants for ever; until full
satisfaction should be made, not only of the said Loans capital sum, but
also of its Interest at Six and a quart. per Cent. per Annum. Whereupon, the
Queen was pleased to grant them a Loan on the above mentioned Conditions.

And whereas the respective original Bonds, of which your humble Remonstrant
has given notice to the Council of State, are in safe Custody, so they do
manifest the reality of the said Debt.

Which together with its Interest from the year 1578. until this present time
does amount unto seven Millions of pounds, lawful moneys of England, since
neither the Use money nor its Capital is yet paid.

The Loan of the moneys was allowed of by King Philip the Second, as it appears
by the eight Article of those States Treaty with their King at March in
Famines, on the 27 of February 1577. and the which was ratified and confirmed,
as appears by the nineteenth Article of the Surrender of Arthois in Haynault.

The said King also returned his thanks unto Queen Elizabeth, for that she had
assisted his Subjects.

Moreover those States specified the said Loan in their Accounts, which were by
them exhibited to their King, on the second of September 1584.

And the King of Spain past those Accounts in lue of their Taxations and
ordinary Contributions; so that the Debt thereby became those States, and those
respective Towns and members particular proper Debt.

And therefore it is to be demanded of them, and not at all from any Governor
in chief of those Provinces, much less from from the King of Spain himself.

Which the late Arch-Duchesse Isabella declared unto them, when late Mr.
Trumbal Agent, both in King James and in the late Kings time, had laid a Claim
to the said Debt, and had prosecuted the Debtors, when the said Arch-Duchesse
warned and advised them also to satisfy on the said particular, for that she
would not bear them out in the same.

So that both by Mr. Trumbal his pursuit, and the Arch-Duchesse her
declaration unto those Debtors, there would have ensued a good satisfaction on
that particular, had not the said Agent been recalled by reason of the
following rupture between England and Spain.

The said Agent Trumbal had likewise contracted with one Tymon an Advocate, to
prosecute the payment of the said Debt; Conditionally that the said Tymon
should have a certain part of whatsoever he should recover touching the said
Debt; and this in consideration of the said Advocates pains, disbursments, and
such Presents as he should be obliged to give unto such Persons as might be in
credit with those States, and with the Magistrates of the respective Towns.

The said Claim was again renewed in the year 1640. and was seconded by the
late Kings own Letters to the Infant Cardinal, and to the Chancellor of
Brabant, and by the said Kings Commissions, which he caused as then to be
dispatched on that particular; the Copies whereof are here inserted, viz.

The translation of the late Kings Letter to the Infant Cardinal, in date the
20. of June 1641.
Dear Cozen,
We would not let our Resident Sr. Balthazar Gerbier depart without our
Letter, for to confirm unto You the particular assurances of our Affection, as
also of the desires and good wishes which We shall always have for the
continuance and advancement of the good Correspondency which is betwixt these
Crowns. In regard whereof Our Resident will tell your Highness the
rescentments which we have witnessed against the Count of Egmond, for that he
undertook to cause such Books to be Printed in Our States, as did tend to the
prejudice of Yours; And how much we have disapproved this his proceeding.

We have also charged Our said Resident with a Commission from Us, for to
demand and procure the payment of considerable sums of moneys due unto this
Crown by the States and Town of Brabant and Flanders; Wherein we promise Our
Selves those necessary offices from your Justice and Power, as may be requisite
toward the procuring unto Us of the said satisfaction which is due; And that
Your Highness will order that the complaints of Our Subjects, which do still
continue, may once cease: On all which Our said Resident being fully
Instructed, we shall not make any addition hereunto, only desire You to give
him full Credence in what he shall say thereon; And thus We shall beseech God
to continue Dear Cozen in his holy Protection.

From Our Palace of Westminster 20. June 1641. Was Signed Your most
Affectionate Cozen, Charles R.

A Copy of the late Kings Letter to the Chancellor of Brabant.
Mr Chancellor, We have charged Sr. Balthazar Gerbier Our Resident, both with
Our Commission and Letters for to procure the payment of notable sums of money
due unto this Crown by the States and Towns of Brabant and Flanders, whereof We
would give you notice, to the end that if he should be constrained to make use
of the Courts of Justice, for to procure Us that satisfaction which is due unto
Us, he might rest assured of Your good Offices, according unto the dignity of
Your place in that Country; the which We do easily promise unto Our Selves
from You in so just a Cause; Wherefore remitting Our Selves there on unto Our
Resident; We shall remain,

Mr. Chancellor. Your friend C. R.
5. March 1640.
The Copy of the late Kings Commission for the Claim of the Debt.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our loyal and wellbeloved Sr. Balthazar Gerbier
Knight, Our Resident in the Court of Bruxels.
Whereas during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of happy memory (Queen of
England) several notable sums of moneys were lent unto the States General,
and to some of those Towns in the Low Countries, which are in Obedience unto
the King of Spain; which sums are due unto Us by Virtue of those Instrumens
and Obligations which on the same were respectively made and dispatched by the
said States and Towns for our use; And for that naught has as yet been
restored unto Us for the said Loan, either by themselves, or by others in their
behalf, notwithstanding the several endeavors which have been used heretofore,
as well in the behalf of Our late Father of happy memory, King James, as in Our
own behalf by Mr. Trumball Our Agent in the said Court of Bruxels.

We therefore have ordained and Authorized You, as by these Presents We do
Ordain and Authorize You, in Our behalf, and in Our Name, to ask and require
from the said States and Towns (as well in general as in particular) all such
sums, with their Interests, as appear to have been so lent unto them, by the
said Queen, and the which are due unto Us by the said States and Towns.

Commanding and Ordaining You moreover to use all such means, pursuits and
instances, which shall be needful for the recovery of the said sums and of
their Interest.

And these Our present Letters shall be a sufficient declaration and witness
(unto your self, as well as unto all others, whom it either does or may
concern) of the special power which we have and do give unto you, on this
particular.

Given at our Palace at Westminster, Signed by Our Self, and sealed with Our
Signet, the fifth day of March, 1640. stilo veteri, and the sixteenth year of
Our Reign.
This Commission, as likewise the Credentials are translated verbatim out of
the French tongue, in which the Originals are written; having been thought
necessary to be penned in that language, because that they might have been made
use of in case of necessity. For that it was agreed on between King Henry the
Seventh and the Duke of Burgundy, that their public Conferences should be in
the French tongue, in which their public Ministers were likewise to speak.

And the said Commissions were also dispatched at that time, for that a Person
in authority in those Provinces had made a proposition to procure satisfaction
from those States for the said Debt, they (as it seems) being sensible of its
Interest excessive increase; apprehending likewise, that as then the English
Nation might have transported the said Debt either to the Hollanders or to the
French, then in open war against them; And therefore showed so great a
willingness to come to a composition thereon.

Which being duly represented to the late King, the said Commission was
immediately dispatched; which was the rather effected, to save it from
prescription, as the said Debt requires to be claimed at every change of
Government.

But the late King being at that time highly incensed against your humble
Remonstrant, for that he had (in obedience to the Peers commands, then
assembled in Parliament) declared the names of such as betrayed this State,
especially the L. Cottington; He therefore caused Sir Henry Vane then Secretary
of State, to call in again the said Commission concerning that particular
(which Commission was under the great Seal) and likewise redemanded the
Authentic Copies of the Original Bonds and Instruments, which had been
translated here by a public Notary, and unto which the City of London's Seal
was affixed.

Insomuch that the said chief Commission, and the other authentic Copies
being redemanded, and your humble Remonstrants return to Bruxels being
impedited, the prosecution of the said Debt has ever since layen dormant.

That the said Commission, with the Credentials, and the said Authentic
Copies of the Bonds concerning the Flanders-Debt, were in this manner
redemanded and delivered, it does appear under the said Sir Henry Vanes hand,
as follows, Viz.

Sir, I have received a special command from His Majesty, to redemand of you
the Letters and Orders you received for your Return to Bruxels. Which I shall
entreat you to deliver unto this Bearer my Secretary, without any further
delay. And so I rest.

Whitehall, the 31. of July, 1641. Is signed, Your assured loving friend, H.
Vane.

The Copy of the Receipt, viz.
Received by the Order here above, from Sir Balthazar Gerbier, the Letters and
Papers therein mentioned, to wit, A Commission to solicit the payment of
Debts due by the States of Flanders: Four Letters of Credence; two to the
Infant-Cardinal, one to the President Rose, and another to the Chancellor
Boiscot; and Copies of the Bonds.

Witness my hand, this 3. of August 1641. Signed, Sidney Bear.

Hereby this particular Case is stated; The proceedings which have been
formerly held thereon are manifested, and the cause of its having remained
dormant ever since.

The which in case it be renewed before the Debitors may justly plead a
Prescription, and before they shall have any other cause to pretend any other
evasions: Then the said Debitors may be so wise as to desire and seek to come
to a Composition on the Total, before it amounts to a further Increase: when
as moreover they shall be induced to apprehend, that a Transportation of the
said Debt might be made unto the French their Enemies.

So likewise on the other side, may the French be called upon for the
satisfying of the said Debt, since they possess the Town of Dunkirk, which in
its own particular stands bound for the Debts liquidation.

Finally, Your humble Remonstrant conceives, That as this States remaining
silent as touching the said Claim, cannot stand this Commonwealth in stead in
any regard whatsoever, nor cause that Nation to esteem it any more for the
same: But to the contrary, if after the claiming of the said Debt, this
Commonwealth shall think it fit to grant those States a favorable Composition
thereon, a Forbearance, or an Acquittance of the Interest upon Interest; Then
those People must needs acknowledge the perpetual Obligation which they will
thereby owe for so considerable a Favor.

FINIS.

