An Invitation to Mr. John Garlick's House at the Sign of the George in
Love-Lane near Billingsgate, to the Eating of a Dish of Meat, called, a SPANISH
OLEO.
COME to the George you Epicurean Crew
That love good Eating, there is a Dish that is New;
No Friggecy, Randula, or Reguse,
No Gallick, Kickshaw, vulgarly ye use
At Gambles, Lambs, and Lockets for to eat;
No, it is an OLEO, a more Spermatick Meat,
Not fit for every Son of Truckle Bed,
Incipit, Dull, Illiterate Logerhead;
That knows no difference high or low
Between Cow Heel, and Pigs Pettito:
No, it is an OLEO for Doctors to advise,
Medicinally to be eaten by the Wise,
It is Composed of all Delicious things
That might create an Appetite in Kings.
'Twas brought from Spain a Rarity,
To be admired for its Variety;
And now in practice put, as I will tell,
By one that does in Cookery excel,
To Dress an OLEO in which is Natures Treasure,
To please the Sense with ecstasy of pleasure.
Of Heavens Bounty we collect the chief
Of every thing, to give Mankind relief.
The best part of the Ox, the Sheep, the Lamb, the Kid,
Nay Venison you will find in OLEO hid.
The Cock, the Hen, the Duck, sometimes the Phesant,
All sorts of Foul to make OLEO pleasant.
Of Foreign Dainties I could many reckon,
Polonia Sassage and Westphalia Bacon.
The Pulse of Peace, Mushromes, and Anchovis,
Not understood by every Fool and Novis.
Of numerous Plants that grow we pick and cull,
Of luscious Roots we fill the Caldron full.
From India we have Spice to cheer the Heart,
OLEO is made with cost and curious Art,
To diffuse and quicken each Benumbed Part.
Should I the Virtues write of this same OLEO,
It could not be contained but in Folio;
In Vigorous Youth it operates with wonder,
Each Hour with strong desires to lay asunder;
As you may guess in old Decrepit Age,
It warms the Blood with tickling Amorous Rage,
And by its subtle Magic does command
To make the Thing that has no Legs to stand;
It nourish the Concoctors, fills the Veins,
Inliv'n Nature, Coroborates the Reins;
And in nine Months by Chymick Art brings forth
Not only one, but two or three at Birth.
And therefore OLEO may in Truth be said
To be twin Broth, to delight the Lustful Maid.
There Is nothing better to make fit the Bride,
And make the Groom a Gallop for to Ride.
The Married Woman, that loves to have her Fill*
Entreats her Husband to eat of OLEO still;
The afflicted Widow that has but cold desire,
Let her eat OLEO 'twill set her Nerves on fire.
It dissipates the Serum of the Blood,
And for the Stomach it is very good.
If the Head be out of order it gives ease,
And Cures the Hungry Passion, a Disease
That Is many times the Original of Strife,
And makes difference between Man and Wife.
Is Colon angry? go to the George I pray,
I Will hold a Guinney you come pleased away.
It pacifies the Gut when it has bin
For want condemned to be a Chitterlin*
The Strength of OLEO keeps the World alive,
And for a Cordial the best Restorative.
Now for Accommodations you will find
The Master of the House to be very kind.
But to oblige him, this remember ever,
After you have eat, wash OLEO from the Liver.
He has most curious Mum, Beer and Ale,
Syder, Tobacco, Brandy to prevail
To please his Guest, the Stomach that require
A Glass of Wine shall have to his desire:
There Is nothing wanting, if you will a Shilling spend,
You may with OLEO treat your Self and Friend.
Women it Sportful make, and Men Warlick,
And no where to be had, but at the George with Garlic.
Olla Podrida.
OLLA del Nombre Latino Olla, es un vaso de Cosina en qu(...) se cueze
principalmente la carne y todas las demas cosas. Po(...) la figura Metonimia se
toma Olla por lo que esta dentro della: Proverbio: Pense que no tenia Marido, y
comime la olla: Sessenta oll(...) al mes es el Govierno de un Hidalgo provido,
por que la olla a(...) ala Comida como alla Cena, satisfaze ala gente con la
carne, y l(...) demas que se echa en ella y con una escudilla de sopas.

Olla podrida es la que es muy grande y contiene en si varias (...) sas como
Tocino Carnero, Vaca, Gallinas, Capones, Longanissa, pie(...) de puerco, Apos,
Cebollas, etc. Puedese desir podrida en quanto s(...) cueze muy despacio, que
casi lo questiene dentro viene a desazer(...) y por esta razon se dize podrida
como la fruta que se madura dema(...) siado, Pero aquelle podrido es lo que da
el gusto y punto.

Andreas Bacio Medico Romano en el libro que hizo de Nature(...) Vinorum dize
que olla podrida es lo mismo que poderida, convicn(...) assaber, poderosa
porsei tan grande, y porque da tanta sustancia, (...) Nutrimento al Cuerpo
humano.

Es la Ollasin Tocino, qual Sermo sin Augustino.

Richard Gibbs.

London, Printed by J. R. for the Author. 1683.


