Flagellum Mercurii Anti-Ducalis: OR, The Author of the Dis-ingenuous Touch of
the Times Brought to the Whipping-Post, to prevent his coming to the GALLOWS.
Mr. Care (not Carre, it seems)
I Think I had great Reason to take Notice of it, to be so abused in Print as I
was, by the Author of Rome's Packet, whom I had never irritated. But be the
Author who he will, you have abused me worse than he, dis-ingenuously to Expose
my Letter in Print, and not have given me a Civil Account of my
misinformation, which had made me your Debtor, and which you might have done
by any of those you call Small Intelligencers (of whom anon) any, I say, which
had lived nearest you (as for my self I Live out of Town, further than I
thought you were willing to come.

But, Sir, the Ass, you know, having put on the Lions Skin, was acknowledged
by his Ears; and your Style betrays your Guilt to every one, as Peter's Voice
discovered him to the Maid: I Will assure you I can bring the Person that assured
me you are the Author. But that you are a Pamphleteer, your Title bewrays you;
( A Touch of the Times) had you not had an infected Scabby Genius that way, you
could not have hit on it: And besides, the Gentleman that gave me first Notice
of it, uttered this, The Fellow, I warrant you, had an Angel for doing on it,
the Letter has been kind to him: I Will assure you, Sir, he was one of His
Majesty's Officers at Arms, and also other ways well Qualified.

Sir, the Second part of the Title hints to me, that your Wit was at that time
intercepted, for where is any interception of a Letter? when it is plainly
downright Directed, and he to whom 'twas sent, confesses he Received it
September 16. the same day 'twas left -- You blame me for good Husbandry, and
flout me for bringing the Letter my self: The Truth is, I sent it by a Friend
to the Queens Head Tavern, but they told him you had left the House, but Lived
in such a place: He was loath to go out of his way, so I went my self, and did
indeed deliver it at your Being, Situate in a little Ruelle (pas plus grande
que celle du lict) and no ways agreeable to the Greatness of your Mind and
Spirit, that will not brook or digest the Pope; nay, a Man so Excellently
Qualified, that through all England none so fit to Discover the Cheats and
Legerdemains of the Man of Sin; nay that for many Months has laid Siege to
his City, and no doubt in the end will Ruin his Government. Aesop's Fly is now
upon the Wheel with his Quantam vim pulveris excito.

Mr. Care, it is good to have a care of the Main Chance; and Frugality is a
Virtue approvable and laudable in a King (if you will believe Tully in his
Orations, Pro Rege Deiotaro) and improperly scoffed at by you, that have lately
left the Tavern, and sneak into an Alehouse.

But, Sir, if the Deniers will hold out, drink Wine still, to Refresh the
Pamphletick Facu^ty, the Poet tells you,

Nulla placere diu neque vivere Pamphleta possunt,
Quae Scribuntur aquae potoribus, etc.
Why talk I of Deniers holding out, when as the peccant Press (for the most
part) Entertained the Caitiff Pamphleteer with the Juice of the Grape at the
foresaid Tavern, Ominously Seated a little without Newgate, even in the very
way of Death, by which the Seditious Dolorously, but deservedly, passed to the
Trinacrian Tree.

Mr. Pettifogger, for Trades sake, be not Angry with Pamphleta, being Ignoramus
his Latin.

My Wizzardisme tells me not what three Caps a piece is, surely some Cerberus,
or Asinine (not Cabalistical) Triumvirate.

Sir, it cannot be, but you must needs be a Pamphleteer, and Mr. L'Estrange
(during his Reign, as you call it) I doubt me, would not permit your
Quisquiliae to pass abroad, and therefore you are Angry with him too: He
Reigned well and wisely, and had not his Reign been determined, your Letter,
beginning Most Illustrious, and pour Terrible prefixed to Reges ac ipsis ortos,
etc. had not bewrayed your Anti-monarchical, Anti-ducal, Fanatical Spirit, by
giving Scommatical Epithets.

Sir, because I say most-Just things of his most Royal H. (and quote others
that also do) and Affirm, he shall yet be other ways Most Illustrious, you give
that Title to me -- You cast Royal Bread to Dogs -- Remember Collingborne, (2
Richard III.) whose Distick was a good piece of allusive wit, in respect of
King Richard's Badge, which was the Porc-Sanglier, or Wild Boar (as R. Brook
and others Affirm) yet the Composer died under the Umbrage.

Of the Mortiferous Gallow-Tree,
Which you deserve far more than he.
Justa mente Cares, non Justa fune Carebis,
Objicere injuste qui scommata Regibus ansus.
Sir, Erra Pater is a Book I am too Old to Read now; you may call him Errans
Pater if you please: But give me leave to tell you, The Observer of
Childermas-day (that you speak of with so much scorn) though you think him not
so wise as your self, yet he was a King ( Reges Reverenter habe) and not the
veriest Benoict of his Age.

If you are not the Author of the Packet, you may (for ought I know) not be so
knowing as he: Therefore, not to trouble you with Platina's Latin, I refer you
to the Meditations of Camerarius in English (p. 246.) He tells you, Popes are
not Immortal, and can die brokenhearted, and instances John 24.

You have a very unkind Expression (Mr. Care) as I hinted before: You cannot
cordially brook the Popes Subjects as such -- Jove be Merciful to the poor
Souls of Campania di Roma, Patrimonio di Santo pedro; Vmbria, Ancona, and other
Provinces, over whom the Pope is Temporal Prince: why, alas, alack a day, Mr.
Care has left them to themselves, he disowns them quite; and no doubt has
thereby given his Holiness a deadly Creve-coeur. Haeret lateri laethalis
Arundo, he has pricked him to the Heart -- This Care is an Ominous Name: Care
will kill a Cat -- Cura facit Canos, etc.

Cura animum nunc huc nunc dividit illuc,
Et rapit in parts varias.
When the Pope hears of your Unkindness, He will be at his wits end; he will
not know which way in the World to turn himself, and all long of Care -- O
Curas hominum.

But I Omitted one thing (which should have come in before) you are pleased to
mention the breaking of an Act of Parliament; there was no need of that, nor
intended any such thing: I tell you, I offered it, Gratis, to Mr. B. Mr. S. and
Mr. F. (the Intelligencers, as you call them) and to others: They were to get
it Licensed, but they would not run the hazard, doubting the event, it being a
difficult time, such as we read of, Judges 9. a strange kind of Spirit Operated
in the mind of most Men with a vehemence against his R. H. rejoicing at his
Recess, wishing he might never Return; nay, I have heard very many affirm with
great Animosity, that he had taken his final leave, and that he neither would
be permitted, or durst return any more. Haec sic eructans ignobile mobile
Vulgus. Odi. And this Spirit, I hope, God has already, or will allay.

Regum Corda Deus at aquarum flumina vertit, Prove. 21. 1.

Profanum Vulgus nec minus ille Regit.
He that of Kings restrains the Potent Will,
Can the Tumultuous Raging Vulgar still.
Sir, you are a mere Catch-pole; pray don't snap at us in Deus used long, nor
at pro in profanus; for the force, strength, and weight of Pronunciation, in
the last, lies in fa, and the Prosodia excuses the first.

But again, what can any moderate Man (not Spirited as aforesaid) say against
the Fatality? At the beginning of it there is Collections out of many worthy
Authors (only from them) recited by me; and at the latter end there is a
composition of mine own, Talis Qualis, part of an Ode of Sir Thomas Higgins,
and the Remarkable Predicted Circumstances concerning the Duke, Printed with
his Effigies, Anno 1641. and some freaks or Ridiculous flim flams (as you call
them) about the 3d. of March.

Now, Sir, call them what you please, but know, the Author of the said Book of
Effigies says thus concerning His Majesty's Birth,

Felix is Happy, and on Felix day
This Prince was Born, the 29th. of May:
A Hopeful Branch of Happiness to come
To us and all disjointed Christendom, etc.
Sir, you had best be Angry and witty with him too, as a Day-observer; and
Blaspheme the King, as you have done the Duke (if being Author of the Packet)
which I tell you again you are averred to be, or at least one of the
Triumvirate.

Rameiro, the Second King of Arragon, caused Eleven of his Barons to be
Beheaded for unreverent Deriding of him; using a Sarcasme, which my French
Author thus Expresses. Cese fausse Renairdaille,
Ne scait de qui elle raille.


I Will English it thus: This false Fox was not aware,
That he touched Kings (like Mr. Care.)


These bold Barons knew, when 'twas too late, that they had Jested with the
Hatchet; Oh Chordae sit tibi Cura!

Mr. Care, Kings were Terrible in those days (and are still, what ere you think.

As to Inundation of Latin, I know none (nor no body ever Objected that but
your Impentinent self.) I confess, the Mensal Fatality takes up twelve Verses;
but those that have any Air of Curiosity and Antiquity (and are totally void of
Hypocritical Fanaticisme, Approve of them.) You love not Latin, no more than
you do the Popes Subjects viz. Those of the Provinces -- aforementioned (for
so your Expressions signify.) But give me leave to tell you, Mr. Chiquaneur a
maizon, (that like a good Husband, had always shit at home) that Latin is of
some Esteem abroad; and that the Golden Bull enjoined, That the Sons of the
German Electors should in their Youth Learn the Italian, Latin, and Sclavonian
Tongue.

Mr. L'Estrange (in a very good thing lately come out) plainly hints, Those
that Oppose the Duke, etc. Strike at the King; Non procul, es a tramitibus
mortis [a Crimine laesae Majestatis] ab Arbore Ominosa. Have a Care, Sir,
Prudens a nomine fias.

Sir, you are exceedingly troubled at my I faith; Consult Heulot's Dictionary,
Augmented by Higgins (a Surname Born to Wit and Learning) and you will find
(in the word Envy) Virgils -- Haud equidem Invideo, Englished; In Faith, I envy
not thy luck, etc. You are pleased to tell me, I Faith is not so Jantee in
writing, as by word of mouth: I confess you are an Egregious Master of the
English Tongue, but not so of the French: Though I never drank French Wine at
the Queens Head (a place heretofore dignified by your Access) yet I have drank
Wine in France, and never tasted this word before.

Sir, I meant nothing of Al-a-mode de Godfrey toward your Eminent Active self,
only I hinted something to you, what you might Incur by your bold and saucy
Temerity -- I would Advise you to go to the end of Coleman-street or
Billingsgate, and other places, and near the Stocks there, stand Hieroglyphic
Remarkable Columns, whereupon are Elegantly Carved the Punishments due to your
several Demerits: Methinks I see you Care-fully beholding the same, and
especially that of the Dismal Tripple Tree, and that I hear a Voice as of a
Pythonical Spirit, susurrously uttering, Son Care, have Regard to thy Latter
end, and Remember the Indulgence of the Scarlet Robe, that has once already
unbound you from the Post of Correction, sparing your Back, and only given your
scurrilous pen suspension.

Sir, you say, you will never Read any more of my Volumns: A Pox take you, why
did you put your self to so much unnecessary trouble about the last? Now, Sir,
I will promise you, and perform it, This is the last ten shillings I will
bestow upon you. Ben. Johnson says to his Detractor, -- Thou Blatant Beast,
In writing against me, thou think at least,
That I would write on thee; mean wretch, thy Name
Shall not work out unto it, such a Fame.


To which I add, If ere I beat the Busb after thee ( Care)
The Devil take both Hunts-man and the Hare.
And know I can find my self Beef and Mutton sance Pamphleting, and I tell you,
you are the Author of the Packet.

Lastly, Sir, you are pleased to Name Mr. Philip Foxcroft (alias) Foxall, to
gybe him too: I Will tell you what he is; he is an Honest Man, well Qualified, he
does nothing to deny, or be ashamed of: He was not Born in England, but speaks
as good English as you or I: His Native Tongue is French, and he is a very good
Latinist. Use my Name to him, when ever you are to Scribble French, and he will
Instruct you how to spell: You do suppose him to be my Godfather (here I am to
seek where the Sal is) he is not so; but I Will be yours (if you please) and I
Name my Adopted Son, Mercurius Ignoramus (in respect of his Calling, and
Memorial of that most Pleasant Comedy) or else Anti-monarchicus Anti-ducalis
Fanaticus, which he pleases; and this last, in respect of his Loving Friends,
to please whom, he endeavored in a quaint way (as he thought) to quip them of
St. Omers and the Popes Vassals (that laugh him to scorn.)

God-Son, if any thing I have written has stirred up Choler in you, it is your
own fault, for you dealt very ingentilely in Publishing my Letter, and my
Friends Names.

Saepe quod ingratum est nimium qui provocat audit. The Theater of fine Devices
(Translated out of French) Englishes this for me,

It is not good in Peace or War,
To Provoke thy Foe too far.

FINIS.

