Day-Fatality: Or, Some Observation of Days Lucky and Unlucky, CONCLUDING WITH
Some Remarques upon the Fourteenth of October, the Auspicious Birthday of His
Royal Highness, James Duke of York.
Atavis qui Regibus editus,
Augustissimo CAROLO proximus.
NUMBER. XXVII. 8, 9. LUC. XIX. 42. In Hoc Die Tuo. In This Thy Day.
THat there be Good and Evil Days and Times, not only the Sacred Scriptures,
but profane Authors mention: See 1 Samuel 25. 8. Esther 8. 17. and 9. 19, 22.
Ecclus 14. 14.

The Fourteenth day of the First Month was a memorable and blessed day amongst
the Children of Israel: See Exodus 12. 18, 40, 41, 42, 51. and 13. 4. Levit. 23.
5. Numb. 28. 16. Four hundred and thirty years being expired of their dwelling
in Egypt, even in the self-same day departed they thence.

A thing somewhat parallel to this, we read in the Roman Histories; That that
very day four years that the Civil Wars were begun by Pompey the Father, Caesar
made an end of them with his Sons; Cneus Pompeius being then slain, and it
being also the last Battle Caesar was ever in. Heylyn in the Kingdom of
Corduba.] The Calendar to Ovid's Fastorum says, Aprilis erat mensis Graecis
auspicatissimus, a most auspicious Month to the Graecians.

As to Evil Days and Times, see Amos 5. 13. and 6. 3. Eccles. 9. 12. Plalm 37.
19. Obad. 12. Jer. 46. 21. And Job hints it, in cursing his Birthday, cap. 3.
v. 1. to 11. See Weaver, p. 458.

Erly in a mornening,
In an Evil Tyming,
Went they from Dunbarre.
Horace, lib. 2. Ode 13. cursing the Tree that had like to have fallen upon
him, says, Ille nefasto te posuit die; intimating, that it was planted in an
unluckie day.

The Romans counted Febr. 13. an unlucky day, and therefore then never
attempted any Business of Importance; for on that day they were overthrown at
Allia by the Gauls; and the Fabii, attaquing the City of the Veii, were all
slain save one. Heylyn speaking of St. Peter's Patrimony.] And see the Calendar
annexed to Ovid's Fastorum, as to the last Circumstance.

The Jews counted August 10. an unfortunate day; for on That the Temple was
destroyed by Titus the Son of Vespasian; on which day also the first Temple was
consumed with Fire by Nebuchadnezzar. Heylyn.] The Treasury of the Times says,
the Eighth of Loyon ( August) the very same day 679 years one after another.

And not only among the Romans and Jews, but also among Christians, a like
Custom of observing such days is used, especially Childermas or Innocents day.
Comines tells us, That Lewis XI. used not to debate any Matter, but accounted
it a sign of great Misfortune toward him, if any man communed with him of his
Affairs; and would be very angry with those about him, if they troubled him in
any Matter whatsoever upon this day.

But I will descend to more particular Instances of Lucky and Unlucky Days.

Upon the Sixth of April, Alexander the Great was born: Upon the same day he
conquered Darius, won a great Victory at Sea, and died the same day.

Neither was this day less fortunate to his Father Philip; for on the same he
took Potidea; Parmenio his General gave a great Overthrow to the Illyrians; and
his Horse was Victor at the Olympic Games. Therefore his Prophets foretold to
him, Filium cujus natalis, etc. That a Son whose Birthday was accompanied with
Three Victories, should prove Invincible. Pezelius in Mellificio Historico.

Upon the Thirtieth of September, Pompey the Great was born: Upon that day he
he Triumphed for his Asian Conquest; and on that day died.

The Nineteenth of August was the day of Augustus his Adoption: On the same day
he began his Consulship: He conquered the Triumviri; and on the same day he
died. Hitherto out of the Memoirs of K. Charles I. Heroes.

If Solomon count the day of ones death better than the day of ones birth,
there can be no Objection why that also may not be numbered amongst ones
Remarkable and Happy days. And therefore I will insert here, That the Eleventh
of February was the Noted day of Elizabeth Wife to Henry VII. who was born and
died that day. Weaver, p. 476. Brook in H. 7. Marriage. Stow in Anno 1466. 1503.

As also that the Twenty third of November was the Observable day of Francis
Duke of Lunenburgh, who was born on that day, and died upon the same, 1549. as
says the French Author of the Journal History, who adds, upon particular
Remarque, and observable curiosity

Ipsa dies vitam contulit ipsa necem.
The same day Life did give,
And made him cease to live.
Sir Kenelm Digby, that Renowned Knight, great Linguist, and Magazen of Arts,
was born and died on the Eleventh of June; and also fought fortunately at
Scanderoon the same day. Hear his Epitaph, composed by Mr. Farrar, and recited
in the aforesaid Memoirs.

Under this Stone the Matchless Digby lies,
Digby the Great, the Valiant, and the Wise:
This Ages Wonder, for his Noble Parts;
Skilled in Six Tongues, and learned in All the Arts.
Born on the day he died, the Eleventh of June,
On which he bravely fought at Scanderoon.
It Is rare, that one and self-same day should be
His day of Birth, of Death, of Victory.
I had a Maternal Uncle, that died the Third of March last, 1678. which was the
Anniversary day of his Birth; and (which is a Truth exceeding strange) many
years ago he foretold the day of his Death to be that of his Birth; and he also
averred the same but about a week before his departure. This Third of March is
the day of St. Eutropius (of which hereafter); and as to my Uncle it was
significative, it turned well to him, according to that of Rev. 14. 13. Blessed
are the dead, etc. and that of Ovid, Metam. lib. 3.

-- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
-- None happy call,
Before their Death, and final Funeral.
The Sixth of January was five times auspicious to Charles Duke of Anjou. Ibid.
in the Life of the Earl of Sunderland.

The Twenty fourth of February was happy to Charles the Fifth four times.
Ibid.] Heylyn speaking of the Temple of Jerusalem, hints three of these four:
His Birth: His taking of Francis King of France Prisoner: His receiving the
Imperial Crown at Bononia. And so does also the Journal History
beforementioned.

Of the Family of the Trevours, Six successive principal Branches have been
born the Sixth of July. Same Memoirs.

Sir Humphrey Davenport was born the Seventh of July; and on that day
anniversary his Father and Mother died, within a quarter of an hour one of
another. Same Memoirs.

I have seen an old Romish MSS. Prayer Book (and showed the same to that
general Scholar, and great Astrologer E. Ashmole Esquire) at the beginning whereof
was a Calendar, wherein were inserted the Unlucky days of each Month, set out
in Verse. I will recite them just as they are, sometimes infringing the Rule of
Grammar, sometimes of Prosodia; a matter, of which the old Monkish Rhimers were
no ways scrupulous. It was as ancient as Henry the Sixth, or Edward the Fourths
time.

January. Prima dies mensis, and septima truncat ut ensis.
February. Quarta subit mortem, prosternit tertia fortem.
March. Primus mandentem, disrumpit quarta bibentem.
April. Denus and undenus est mortis vulnere plenus.
May. Tertius occidit, and septimus ora Ex re and laedo.
relidit.
June. Denus pallescit, quindenus foedera nescit.
July. Ter-decimus mactat, Julii denus labefactat.
August. Prima necat fortem prosternit secunda cohortem.
September. Tertia Septembris, and denus fert mala membris.
October. Tertius and denus, est sicut mors alienus.
November. Scorpius est quintus, and tertius e nece cinctus.
December. Septimus exanguis, virosus denus and anguis.
The tenth Verse is intolerable, and might be mended thus,

Tertia cum dena fit sicut mors aliena.
If any object and say, deni is only the Plural; I excuse my self by that
admirable Chronogram upon King Charles the Martyr,

Ter deno, Jani, Lunae, Rex (Sole cadente)
Carolus exutus Solio, Sceptroque secure.
Neither will I have recourse for refuge to that old Tetrastich, Intrat
Avaloniam duodena. Caterva virorum
Flos Arimathiae Joseph, etc.
because I have even now blamed the liberty of the ancient Rhymers.

He means by mors aliena, some strange kind of Death; though aliena signifies
strange in quite another sense than there used.

I shall take particular notice here of the Third of November, both because
it is my own Birthday, and also for that I have observed some remarkable
Accidents to have happened thereupon.

Constantius the Emperor, Son of Constantine the Great, little inferior to
his Father, a worthy Warrior, and good Man, died the Third of November, ex
Veteri Calendario, penes me.

Thomas Mountacute Earl of Salisbury, that great Man, and famous Commander sub
Hen. IV. V. and VI. died this day, by a Wound of Cannon-shot he received at the
Siege of Orleaunce. E MSS. quodam, and Glovero.

So also Cardinal Borrhomeo, famous for his Sanctity of Life, and therefore
Canonized, ( Heylyn, in his Praecognita, says, He made Milan memorable, by his
Residence there) died 1584. this day, as Possevinus in his Life.

Sir John Perot (Stow corruptly calls him Parrat) a Man very remarkable in his
Time, Lord Deputy of Ireland, Son to Hen. VIII. and extremely like him, died in
the Tower, the Third of November, 1592. (as Stow says) Grief, and the Fatality
of this Day, killed him. See Nanton's Fragment a Regalia, concerning this Man.

Stow in his Annals says, Anno 1099. November. 3. as well in Scotland as England,
the Sea broke in over the Banks of many Rivers, drowning diverse Towns, and much
People, with an innumerable number of Oxen and Sheep; at which time the Lands
in Kent sometimes belonging to Earl Godwin, were covered with Sands, and
drowned, and to this day are called Godwins Sands.

I had an Estate left me in Kent, of which between thirty and forty Acres was
Marsh-land, very conveniently flanking its Up-land; and in those days this
Marsh-land was usually let for Four Nobles an Acre. My Father died 1643. Within
a year and half after his decease, such Charges and Water-scots came upon this
Marsh-land, by the influence of the Sea, that it was never worth one Farthing
to me, but very often eat into the Rents of the Up-land: So that I often think,
this day being my Birthday, has the same evil influence upon me, that it had
580 years since upon Earl Godwin, and others concerned in low Lands.

The Parliament so fatal to Romes Concerns here, in Henry the Eighth's time,
begun the Third of November, (26 of his Reign); in which the Pope, with all his
Authority, was clean banished the Realm; he no more to be called otherwise than
Bishop of Rome; the King to be taken and reputed as Supreme Head of the Church
of England, having full Authority to reform all Errors, Heresies, and Abuses of
the same: Also the First Fruits and Tenths of all Spiritual Promotions and
Dignities were granted to the King. See Stows Annals, and Weaver, page 80.

Not long after which, followed the Visitation of Abbeys, Priories, and
Nunneries; and after that, their final Suppression: This Parliament being the
Door of entrance thereto.

The Third of November, 1640. began that Parliament so direfully fatal to
England, in its Peace, its Wealth, its Religion, its Gentry, Nobility, nay, its
King. So verifying the former Verse of the Calendar,

Scorpius est quintus, and tertius e nece cinctus.
A killing day to some or other.
The Third of September was a Remarkable day to the English Attila, Oliver.
1650. he obtained a memorable Victory at Dunbar; another at Worcester, 1651.
And that day he died, 1658.

The first two Occurrences wonderfully accord to the preceding Verse, Tertia
Septembris, and denus fert mala membris. being fatal to the two Members of
Great Britain, Scotland and England. The third, as happy to them both, as the
same day, 1666. was dismal and unhappy to the City of London, and consequently
to the whole Kingdom, with its immediate preceding and two succeeding days,
viz. the Second, Fourth, and Fifth of September.

I come now to Days of the Week.

Tuesday (Dies Martis) was a most remarkable day with Thomas Becket Archbishop
of Canterbury, as Weaver 201. observes from Matt. Paris: Mars, secundum Poetas,
Deus Belli nuncupatur. Vita Sancti Thomae (secundum illud Job, Vita hominis
militia est super terram) tota fuit contra hostem bellicosa, etc. Mars,
according to the Poets, is called The God of War. The Life of S. Thomas
(according to that of Job, The life of man is a warfare upon earth) was a
continual conflict against the enemy. Upon the Tuesday he suffered; upon
Tuesday he was translated; upon Tuesday the Peers of the Land sat against him
at Northampton; upon Tuesday he was banished; upon Tuesday the Lord appeared to
him at Pontiniac, saying, Thomas, Thomas, my Church shall be glorified in thy
blood; upon Tuesday he returned from Exile; upon Tuesday he got the Palm or
Reward of Martyrdom; and upon Tuesday, 1220. his Venerable Body received the
Glory and Renown of Translation, Fifty years after his Passion. Thus my Authors.

One thing I make bold to gloss upon. His Translation is here mentioned twice.
Note, This is no Tautology of the Historian; but the latter Paragraph is a more
particular Recitation of the first, viz. reference to the time when he was
translated into the number of Saints and Martyrs: Quando in Divorum numerum
relatus, as Cambden.

Wednesday is said to have been the fortunate day of Sixtus Quintus, that Pope
of renowned Merit, that did so great and excellent things in the time of his
Government. See The Just weight of the Scarlet Robe, page 101 his deserved
Praises.] On a Wednesday he was born; on that day he was made Monk; on the
same, he was made General of his Order; on that also, was he successively
created Cardinal, electected Pope, and also Inaugurated. See Heylyn, speaking
of the Temple of Jerusalem.

Friday was observed to be very fortunate to the great and renowned Captain
Gonsalvo, he having on that day given the French many memorable Defeats.

Saturday was a Lucky day to Hen. VII. Upon that day he achieved the Victory
upon Ric. III. being August 22. 1485. On that day he entered the City, being
Aug. 29. [Correct Stow, who mistakes the day.] And he himself always
acknowledged, he had experienced it Fortunate. See Bacon in his Life.

Thursday was a Fatal Day to Henry VIII. as Stow, 812.] and so also to his
Posterity. He died on Thursday Jan. 28. King Edw. VI. on Thursday July 6. Queen
Mary, on Thursday November 17. Queen Elizabeth, on Thursday March 24.

Saturday (or the Jewish Sabbath) was fatal to Jerusalem Temple; for on that
day 'twas taken by Pompey, Herod, and Titus, successively. Heylyn.

Hitherto by way of Prologue. And be pleased to take notice, As to the Days of
the Month, I have taken such care, that all are according to the Julian or Old
Account, used by us here in England. See Partridges Almanac, Pref. to the
Reader.] Pope Gregory XIII. brought in his New Style (used generally beyond
Sea) Anno 1585. in October, as asserts the Journal History before-recited.

Now for Epilogue, and Remarkable Reflection.

Turning over our Annals, I chanced upon a twofold Circumstance: I will not
say, that none else has observed the same; but I protest, ( Ita me Deus amet,
ut verum loquor) I do not know of any that have; and therefore must justly
claim to be acquitted from the least suspicion of Plagiarism, or plowing with
others Heifers.

The first is, of William the Conqueror. The second, of Edward III. (I need not
say any thing of the Eminency of these two; every one knows what great things
they did.) And making reflection upon the Auspicious Birthday of His Royal
Highness the Duke of York, I adventured upon the following Composure. [I cannot
be proud of my Poetry; but I cannot but be glad of my BON HEVR, d' avoir (en
lisant) tomb si fortuitement sur les evenements d' un si BON JOVR.

Ad Illustrissimum and Celsissimum Principem, JACOBUM Ducem EBORACENSEM, de
Natali Suo Auspicatissimo, Octobris XIV. Anno MDCXXXIII.
-- Deus
Anne nefasto te posuit die? Hor. li. 2. od. 13.

-- The Fates, have they
Thy Birth designed on an unlucky day?
OCtobris Decimo quarto Normannus Haraldum
Dux superavit, and hinc Regia Sceptra tulit.
Tertius Edwardus, capto pernice Caleto,
( Gallica quo Regna sunt reserata sibi)
Ire domum tentans, diris turbomibus actus
In pelago, Vitae Magna pericla subit:
Octobris Decimo quarto, tamen appulit Oras
Nativas. (His quam prosperus ille dies?)
Natali laetare tuo, quam Maxim Princeps;
Fausta velut sunt haec, Omina semper habe.
OCtobers Fourteenth gave the Norman Duke
That Victory, Stow in An. 1066.
whence he Englands Scepter took.
Third Edward, after he had Calais won,
(The Mean whereby he France did overrun)
Returning home, by raging Tempests tossed,
(And near his Life (so fortunes) to have lost)
Arrived safe on Shore the self-same Date. Idem in An. 1347.

(This day to them afforded so fair Fate.)
Great Duke, rejoice in this Your day of Birth;
And may such Omens still increase Your Mirth.
These Verses I presented in Anno 1677. to a most Honorable Peer of the Land,
and of great Place near His Royal Highness.

Since which time, old Fabian coming into my hands, from him I got knowledge,
that that advantageous Peace, mentioned by Stow, Anno 1360. (concluded between
the forementioned King Edward III. and the French King) was acted upon the
Fourteenth of October, with grand Solemnity.

The two former Circumstances must needs fall out Providentially: Whether this
last of Anno 1360. was designed by Edw. III. or no, (as remembering his former
good hap) may be some question: I am of opinion, not. Where things are under a
Man's peculiar Concern, he may fix a time; but here was the French King
concerned, equally with the English, and many other Great Personages
interessed: To have tied them up to his own Auspicious Conceit of the Day, had
been an unkind Oppression, and would have brought the Judgment of so Wise a
Prince into question: We may conclude then, 'twas merely fortuitous. And
therefore to the former Observation concerning this famous Edward, give me
leave to add,

Insuper hoc ipsoque die (sibi commoda) Grandis
Rex cum Galligenis, foedera fecit idem.
An advantageous Peace, on day self same,
This mighty Prince did with the Frenchmen frame.
A memorable Peace (foretold by Nostredamus) much conducing to the saving of
Christian Blood, was made upon the Fourteenth of October, 1557. between Pope
Paul IV. Henry II. of France, and Philip II. of Spain. Nostredamus says, These
Great Princes were frappez du Ciel, moved from Heaven to make this Peace. See
Garencieres Comment on Nostredamus, page 76.

A Lucky day this, not only to the Princes of England; but Auspicious to the
Welfare of Europe.

Upon the Third of March last (being the day of St. Eutropius) His Royal
Highness withdrew toward the Low Countries: Procopius tells us, Humana saepe
contingit a Deo mutari. Terence says, Vicissitudo omnium rerum est. Which two
Sayings I can no way better English, than by that of Eccles. 9. 11. Time and
chance happens to all men: Nor no way better second than with that of 1 Cor. 4.
11. Incertis vagamur sedibus. This Accident therefore (our life being but a
pilgrimage, as Jacob termed it to Pharaoh) is nothing to a General Providence
in the main. Therefore from the Augury of His Fourteenth of October, and from
the good Omen comprehended in the Signification of Eutropius, which hints, that
all this shall end well, and turn to the best; and from Ecclus 14. 14, 15. I
accost His Royal Highness with a Non defraudabitur a die bono; He shall not
lose his Good day.

Dixerunt Ibis, pariter dixere Redibis
Te non infausto Dii posuere die.
The Gods thy Exit have ordained, and also they
Thy blessed Return have firm'd, born on a Lucky day.
I just now said, That the Third of March was dedicated to Eutropius, which is
derived from (...) well, and (...) to turn: It is also dedicated to St.
Maximus, St. Marinus, St. Lucius; which three also have notable hints in
relation to His Royal Highness. First, No man can deny, but that He is Maximus
Princeps. Secondly, He is Maximus Marinus; for in the time of His Exile He was
Admiral of Aragon, as I have been told many years since in Flanders; and I am
sure very many Commissions in those days past under His Name: And till 1673. He
was Lord High Admiral of England.

Lucius comes from Luci, which signifies in the morning; and betokens a Child
born in the morning, or at Sunrising, (which some affirm to be a good time for
Birth): But I will for my present purpose deduce it a Luceo; and I must affirm,
Quod hic maximus Princeps gestis marinis maxim lucet, and alias lucebit; This
most Great Prince is extremely Illustrious in Sea Negotiations, and shall yet
be otherwise most Illustrious.

That his Highness has long since verified the first Paragraph of my Assertion,
take it not only on my Credit; but (besides what has been said before) hear
part of an Ode to His Sacred Majesty, on His Highness Victory over the Dutch,
June 3. 1665. composed by Sir T. H. a most Worthy Person, whom his Foreign
Negotiations have made enough known.

This day Your Empire Fate secures,
And now One half of the whole World is Yours.
The Austrian Youth, who won the day,
When the pale Crescent to the Cross gave way,
Must to Your Glorious Brother yield,
Who with less Loss has got a greater Field, etc.
The Germans, High and Low, (amongst which last His Highness now resides) call
October, Wyn-maendt ( Mensis Vindemialis) the Wine-month.

The Effects of Wine we read Judges 9. 13. Psalm. 104. 15. Eccles. 10. 19. Zach.
10. 7. Why then may we not term this Month Mensis Laetificans? That it may be
so to his Royal Highness, as well as it was to the most Great Queen His John
16. 21.
Mother, are the hearty Prayers of BLEW-MANTLE.

Virg lib. 1.
-- Haec olim memenisse juvabit:
Ib. l. 7. and 1.
Vunanimes omnes, cum Te (Dux Celse) reducto,
Certatim instaurent epulas, atque omine magno
Crateres laeti statuant and Vina coronent.
Remembrance of these things, delight shall Thee,
When (home returned) great Feastings thou shall see,
And Healthings round, shall stir up gladsom glee,
And this Rejoicing general shall be.
I have by me a Book printed Anno 1641. containing the true Effigies of King
CHARLES the First, of Blessed Memory, his Queen, with their Royal Progeny, with
Verses annexed, wherein are notable Predictions of His Royal Highness, which I
will here recite.

This Prince, much like another Sun, darts forth
Most glorious Beams to's Dukedom, and the North;
And makes us see with Eyes of expectation,
He Will be a mighty Pillar to this Nation,
A Stay of State, a strong supporting Prop,
Whose Fame will scale the Height of Honors Top.
He hates dull Idleness, and loves to be
In Action, such as fits His High Degree:
He will be stirring in such Exercise
As well becomes His Years and Qualities.
Surely the Eternal Eye of Providence
Does watch, direct, and guide this Hopeful Prince,
For some Designs may be for Heavens glory,
And fill the Earth with JAMES His Noble Story.
This All True Britans do expect in Love:
No doubt, our Wishes are confirmed Above.
Thus that Book: And I add,

Quis meliora petat, consultus quod Tripos edat?
Who Better things than these can wish
From the Oracles Breath of Bliss?
1678.
Martis Mense data haec, timidi committere praelo
Non Impressores audebant ( Prove. 6. 19.
tempore duro).
J. Gibbon.

FINIS.

