'ELEOTHPIAOS: BEING England's Triumphs IN AN HEARTY REMEMBRANCE OF THAT
Wonderful Providence Which has all along waited on the SACRED PERSON OF OUR
AUGUSTUS, HIS MAJESTY WILLIAM III.

Until He arrived safe in the Joyful Haven of PEACE.

A PINDARICK.

Imperium lateritium accepisti, marmoreum reddidisti. By T. G. Physician in
Essex.

LONDON, Printed for F. Blithe, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin near the
Oxford Arms in Warwick lane, 1696

Serenissimi Principis Gulielmi Tertii Symbolum Actionum, Victoriarum,
Heroicarumque effatum, in Carmina succedanca, Per Hiberniam, nec non Germaniam
Inferiorem, gestarum.
WIllielmus sic ora gerit; mera gloria secli!
Cui tot mentis opes invidet ipsa Themis.
Heroum palmare decus, quem praepete curru,
Sublimem coeli, fama per astra vehit.
Caetera miramur! vix ausi dicere quae sit
In regem pietas, religio inque Deum.
ELEOTHPIAOS: BEING ENGLAND's Triumphs, etc.
I.
BRave Albion, now take up thy Golden Lyre;
So shall the Sacred Nine thy Verse inspire
While on each Shore the Universe shall ring
The lasting Triumphs of Great Britain's King!
Behold a Ray from Heaven breaks in,
To usher the bright Chorus of that A Golden Age.
happy time,
Which Ages past, do so lament and say,
Time never before, or since, dawned such a (...) before Christ, (...) was ^ne
Golden Age, so much (...)
Day!
Till Britain's Great NASSAW ascends the Throne;
Such glitt'rring Suns never gilt her Horizon!
He who in noblest Dangers understood
To gain our Liberties through Blood,
Pursued the ^
Means, as proper to his Skill,
As soon th'exhausted Arteries could fill;
And with his Royal Hand has broached the Vein
That Mitigation gave to Europe's Pain:
And will a Series of health procure,
As Bleedings vast are stopped by clotted Gore:
So ancient Kings and Emperors have been
Enured to ways of Medicine,
Till they their Politics refined thereby,
With Lenitives and Cordials high
Their Subjects have maintained in truest Liberty.
II.
What should we have said? What would we not a' done
In some years past, to have quit the Nation
Of blackest Tempests drawing on,
Big with Designs and Desolation?
Had not the brave Augustus; him I mean,
That humane Deity we call Supreme,
Displayed His Conquering Banners over this Isle.
W'had felt a sad Exile
Of Liberty; and all that is just and good
Had then been sacrificed to Gods of Wood,
And Sense, and Reason to a croaking Brood.
When Egypt's Tyrant had Heaven's Ire provok^d.
And Frogs and Lice about his Palace croak'd
Sure nothing noisomer was then,
Or plagued his haughty Mind like that,
When upon force he begged a milder Fate
So very often of the Men,
Who sent their Plagues again,
And let that ru^^l'd Hector see,
It Was Heaven's Will to make the Nations free.
Such God-like Awe has England's Scepter swayed,
While Prodigies her Royal Standards prop;
In Myriads of happy Days we hope,
While Heaven's praised, and its Vicegerent's well obeyed.
III.
Eternal Trophies sing thy Lot,
And to the Star that damped the fatal The ^u^let that grazed upon His M^^esty
(...)the sacred Person -- (...) obtusam (...)
Shot
So as that winged Messenger of Death
Could no Impression ma^e;
But for thy sake,
Its deadly Breath
Did in the Plumes of Honor sheath,
Though prim'd with Devilish Ire,
Those Sulphurs changed to (...) duo tela pla^etea (...) operam, (...), facit
(...)
lambent ^^^
While the astonished Hosts stood still t'admire
The Care the Almighty over his Darling had
(Whose Cause he did defend)
The force of (...)
Art and Nature both sorbad,
To bring to pass his purposed end!
Why such Repining then? Why so unjust
To Him, on whom Heaven lays so great a Trust
Ye busy A grand Query among the learned Theologists where those ten Jewish
Tribe, (who for their grumbling, etc. were captived by Salmanasser King of
Ass^ria, and carried into the Regions of Media on the North, or North-East side
of the Caspian Sea) might remain: are, by the learned Enquiry of the present
Age, found out in the Cities of Tartaria, whose People are the Posterity of the
ten lost Tribes, according to Dr. Geo. Flet^^^^ his Tractate called (...)
Redux, published by the judicious and learned Samuel Lee, Ann. 1677.
Seekers in the World's wide round,
Here fix your Thoughts and Feet on England's Ground
Suffer your minds no more to be perplexed,
While here the long lost Tribes
Stand grumbling by your sides,
For all whose Benefits, as says the Text,
Ever with Murmurings Heaven stormed, as often Jehovah vext^
IV.
Behold an Hero girt with noble Ire,
Braving the Poniard, so the loudest Fire;
From place to place, posting his weighty Charge,
Regardless of his own, with Soul so large,
As ever filled a Monarch's Breast.
Europe's great Atlas, on whose Shoulders rest
The tottering Diadems of Sacred Power,
Which only England's Monarch can restore.
Without the Rhetoric of a Father's See the Nunclo's Oration to the French
King in the State of Europe, p. 295.
Trope,
(In Heaven's name) leads the forlorn Hope;
And in a Brave and Generous Disdain
Fires all his Dangers back again.
Each Element exults, and proudly boast
Our Gideon's Triumphs in the God of Host,
Who once the Darling Tribes through Crystal Walls
Had led, and Prophets three through Flames: he calls
Now a prodigious While our glorious Monarch was wading through the rugged
S^^eams at the B^^ne; and afterward passing so many furious and fiery Fatigues
at (...), and all on account of public Peace and Safety. It was impossible for
me to omit the Parallel in this Stanza; it having been begun and then finished
at those particular Season, when his Sacred Majesty was in^^^^^ntly moiling
those unparalleled Hazards of his Royal Person, in who^e (...) of whole (...)
was wrapped up.
Prince forthwith to save
Men's civil Rights, in chief, the Laws he gave;
All pure and incorrupt, now sullied over,
Scarce known by whom they were promulg'd before.
The swollen Boyne first fails and leads the way
To Namur's Walls; all have without delay,
The broad N^ssavean Banners to display.
V.
Hail to the Prince before whose gracious Throne.
Clusters of Scepters daily come,
And all their Royal Tributes pay,
Where true magnetic Graces ever live and stay,
As Suppliants to so divine a Ray!
Here they their Diamond Cusps immerse,
And wretched Tyranny disperse.
But Wisdom, Courage, Princely Constancy,
That once had fleshed those (...) and his Celestial Hosts, (...) and his, etc.
Heroes of the Sky
(And flung the aspiring Crew then headlong down,)
Now shine about fair Alb^on's stately Crown,
And may an other An Halo or Glory encompassing the Throne.
Galaxy inspire
With Virtues that have a communicative good in them; whose contrarie^ are most
apt to fully, and obscure the Regal D^^d^m; as these are to poli^h and en^ble
it with all the (...) and Graces of the divine Bounty.
Virtues fed by true Celestial Fire.
While our Augustus, whom we love to trust,
Still makes his martial Deeds the more august:
By how much in Him, something more is found,
Than withered Fame's loud Trumpets sound,
Or the Arcadian The Monosyllable ^^^(by the (...)) is taken often for a
Univerality -- but more (...) in the (...) their God (...), at whole Death the
whole frame of Di^b^^^^al Worship fell to the ground, along with that in^ernal
Polity which lay hid in the Paga^ Ora^les.
Pan had levelled to the ground^
VI.
I knew no better way great Acts to have told,
Than graving Thine upon the backs of old;
Till You most mighty Prince my Muse inspired,
And such a grateful Zeal had fired,
Whose See to this effect a famous Story of (...) to the Emperor Tilerius
Caesar, and handed down to us by the accurate Pea of the learned Mr. (...) his
Travels to (...), etc. lib. 1. p. 11. (...) alludes both to a liquid and (...)
Chemical Substance, which (...) for half a Minute of an hour (...) whatever, if
scroll'd (...) Paper, will represent the (...) very delightful (...)
Characters, (...) self have seen (...) ingenious Doctor (...) which he some
years (...) of the Royal Society, by the Name of the (...). Another ^^^^,
namely the (...) and by (...)
Pyramid in Shining Flame,
Blazons Thine Acts round Thy Victorious Name,
And gives surprising Glories to Thy Deeds,
That when Thy Successor Thy Positaeque ex ordine gemmae.
Labors reads,
As Letters sense; so this its own Clara reperoussu reddebant lumina Phoebo.
Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
Fame breeds'
You lent an Ear to Europe's Groan
When none beside its Cause dare own
A Sacred Stem You slipped from off Your Throne.
Gracious it proved, Luxuriant and Green,
And as the Prophets Goard, a goodly Screen
Unto the Nation's Laws, their Liberty,
Their Lives, their Children, Religion
All sheltered from Oppression!
And also gave so great Renown to Thee,
As fixed the Universal Monarchy
Unto the fertile Root, from whence it sprang,
As great Effects on Causes terminate and hang.
VII.
Listen no more unto the Tales of Fame
Of Caesar or of mighty Pompey's Name;
Or the great King of Macedon; those Scenes
Were to these Ends as nobler Means:
The Means of Peace, and fuller Glory,
Than Time ever placed in Greek or Roman Story.
But what if Hebrew Rabbis talk of sage
Moses and Joshua, famous in their Age:
Yet these the Shades, not Substance might presage,
And seemed with Verities to jest,
While they held earthy things in Quest;
The Heaven spir'd Zeal, that filled our Hero's Breast,
Bids him look high, since his Commission bears
What top-most The Cross that rests upon the top of the Imperial Crown
sits upon the Crown he wears,
Strengthens his Heart, and bids his Sword not spare
A traitorous Crew; but let 'em feel and see,
(So treacherous to Heaven and Thee)
That the All Conquering Banners thou do bear,
Shall Victims make, till they to Heaven rear
(In Concert with Thy Labors and just Throne)
Thy Great Allies, where Joy and Interest meet in One.
THE ANAGRAM Drawn from the ROYAL TITLES, Viz. William the Third, KING OF
England, Scotland, France and Ireland.
I, the Delight of Mankind,
I, can call redres of the Land tangled in War.
So some more Orient Gem, in Casket close immured,
Is no more safe from harm, than fatally secured;
As once the Illustrious Titles with thy mighty Name
Suffered Eclipse in the dark Shades of written Fame,
Till Royal Acts untangl'd their strict Anagram.
FINIS.

