THE Genteel Housekeepers PASTIME: Or, the Mode of Carving at the Table
Represented in a Pack OF PLAYING CARDS. By which, together with the
Instructions in this Book, any ordinary Capacity may easily learn how to Cut up
or Carve in Mode all the most usual Dishes of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and Baked
Meats; and how to make the several Services of the same at the Table; with the
several Sawces and Garnishes proper to each Dish of Meat. Set forth by several
of the best Masters in the Faculty of Carving, and Published for public Use.

LONDON, Printed for J. Moxon, and sold at his Shop at the Atlas in
Warwick Lane; and at the three Bells in Ludgate Street 1693.

OF CARVING In General.
CArving at the Table is an orderly and methodical Cutting and Dividing any
Dish of Meat, whether it be Flesh, Fish, Fowl, or Baked Meats, into so many
Services as each dish of Meat will conveniently admit of: and the doing this
neatly and cleanlily, is worthily accounted a great Imbellishment to Man or
Woman. Nor is the labor and pains taken about it, lost, or useless: for by
good Carving, a dish of Meat is improved so, as (according to its size) it may
decently appear at the Table to the last: when as the disorderly mangling a
Joint or Dish of good meat, is not only an unthrifty wasting of it, but
sometimes the cause of loathing, to a curious Observer, or a weak stomach. Upon
such considerations as these, has the wisdom of the Grandees of former Ages
of great antiquity elected Carvers at their Tables: And though we might plead
this by many testimonies, even from Moses time, who was instructed by God
Almighty himself what parts to make choice of for his own Offerings and
Services, what for the Levites, and what for the People; yet we shall only
instance in one Grandee of our own Nation, viz. George Nevil Chancellor of
England and Archbishop of York, who honored the Lord Willoughby with the Title
of Carver to his Table, at a great Feast made by him in the year 1468 so that
we see the Office of a Caver is not only ancient, necessary, and profitable,
but honorable too. And the Germans at this day have so much esteem of good
Carving, that it is as customary among them to provide Tutors to teach their
Children this faculty, as other genteel Accomplishments.

I may farther, in the praise of good Carving, say, that it is an Anatomical
Art, and teaches its Practitioners to know the Dissection of Parts, the
situation of Joints and Ligaments, and the true position of the (at least)
eminent Muscles. Nor does it shut out the most excellent Sciences of
Arithmetic and Geometry: for the skillful Carver knows how to proportion his
several dividends of Services according to the number of Guests at the Table,
and like a good Harauld can dispose the best of Delicacies to the most eminent
Persons.

These and some other considerations, have induced me to set forth this brief
Lecture of Carving, according to the Rules and Methods observed here in England
by the best Proficients in this Faculty, relating not only to our famous City
of London, but to his Majesty's Royal Court and Palace of White Hall: and I
hope no ingenious Person will blame me for this my Publication, there having
hitherto nothing of this nature been exposed in our Nation; nor for
demonstrating this Faculty on curious engraven Cuts, accommodated to Playing
Cards, since they are full as intelligible as if they were Printed in the Book,
and more easy to peruse when you read upon each Card: because you may hold the
Card in your hand all the while you are reading the Rules relating to it,
though it be for many leaves, without being troubled to turn backward or
forward to the Figure. Besides, these Cards do not only perform the office of
other Playing Cards, but the variety of Pictures of good Cheer on them, will
doubtless often prove the cause of adding Mirth and Jocularity to your sociable
and harmless Recreation.

The method I have used in the Disposing of these several Dishes of Meat, is
thus: All the Fowl is ranged amongst the suit of Diamonds; and on those Cards
are placed a Diamond at the left-hand-corner of the said Card on the top. All
the flesh of Beasts, among the suit of Hearts. All the Fish, among the suit of
Clubs. All the Baked Meats, amons the suit of Spades. And the number of each
suit is noted, on the right hand of the Diamond, Heart, Club, or Spade, with
Numerical Letters, as, I, II, III, IIII, V, etc. to X. And the Kings, Queens,
and Knaves are noted with the Pictures of a King with a Crown on his head, and
a Scepter in his hand: A Queen, with a Crown on her head: The Knave, a Man's
Head with a Feather in his Cap, and a Sword in his hand. The manner of playing
with them at any Game, is the same as with other Cards.

The Office of a Carver.
HE must be provided with good sharp Knives of several sizes; that he may choose
great Knives for great Dishes of meat, as for Venison, Sir-loins of Beef,
Gammons of Bacon, etc. And small Knives for smaller Dishes of Meat, as Capons,
Pullets, or smaller Fowls: He must also be provided of Forks of several sizes,
that he may suit himself with one sizable to the Dish of Meat he is to practice
upon. He is to keep himself neat and cleanly, and not to touch the Meat with
his Fingers, more than needs must, and then only with his Forefinger and
Thumb; or in some cases, with his two Forefingers and Thumb at the most; but to
use his Fork and Knife instead of his Fingers. His place is to stand on the
left hand of his Lord, with a clean Napkin on his left Shoulder; and to
exercise the faculty of Carving, with Comeliness and Dexterity, that he make
not the Guests stay too long for their Services, nor offend them with his
undecent managery.

First of Fowls, answering to the suit of Diamonds.
To cut up the Turkey.
A Turkey is brought to the Table lying on its Back. Thrust your Fork into the
Breast Bone (as at figure 1.) to hold it fast; and make your first cut at
figure 2. and cut between the Thigh and Breast (to figure 3.) next to your
Body, directing the edge of your Knife from the Rump upwards. Take your next
cut from figure 4. at the Rump, and cut through the whole Breast to figure 5.
and there cut through the jovnt of the Wing; but if you hit not the Joint by
drawing your Knife toward figure 5, remove your Fork to figure 6 in the Wing,
and turn the Turkey on its opposite side; and then cut through the joint from
figure 5 (as you may see in the Capon, which therefore is turned on its Breast)
downwards. You may according to the bigness of your Turkey, take one Service or
two more off the Breast, by making another cut through the whole length of the
Turkey, from the Rump up toward the Neck, parallel to the cut 4, 5. as at 12,
13. Thus have you one side cut up: the other side is cut up in the same manner.
Then stab your Knife at figure 7, and raise the Merry-thought, and with your
Fork part it from thence upwards to the Neck, by figure 5, 8. Then place your
Fork at figure 9 in the Thigh, and turn the Turkey with its Back toward you,
and cut on the backside downwards, from figure 3, to the joint toward figure
2; and then from figure 2 to the same joint toward figure 3, and so part the
first Thigh from the Carcass: but if it part not easily, thrust the point of
your Knife through the Carcass, as at figure 10, and twist your Fork toward
your body, and with that twist the Thigh from off the Carcass; which lay down
in the Dish. Then remove your Fork to figure 6 again in the Pinion because that
part is strongest, and will best secure the Turkey from tearing; and turn the
Back toward you, and the joint being divided, cut upon the Back opposite to
the former cut on the Breast, and so bring away the Wing with your Fork: which
done, place your Fork on the Breast where you please, and cut from the Vent at
figure 11 up toward the middle of the Backbone. Then place your Fork near the
Rump in the inside the Carcass, and turn the Breast downwards, and with your
Knife at the middle of the Back break it, by lifting up your hand that has the
Fork in it.

The two Side bones must be parted from the Rump, by cutting them, either as
they lie in the Dish, or by setting the Rump upwards, and cutting straight down
either side of it along the Backbone.

The two Binding-bones lie on each side the Neck. That part of them that lies
in the Back, is something like the bones of the Merrythought; the other part is
fixed to the Breast with a strong joint, which are to be parted by thrusting
your Knife under the Back bones from the Neck downwards: Then with your Finger
and Thumb of your left hand take hold of the joint, and placing your Knife on
that part of the Carcass near where the Merry-thought did lie, and with your
Thumb raise that bone upwards, which will disjoynt by force, though it be not
to be cut with the Knife. The Breast is not to be parted from the Back without
tearing, but by taking these Bones off.

Its Garnish, is either Oranges or Lemmons cut into thin slices, and so laid
round the Dish.

Its Sauce is sometimes boiled Onions, and sometimes Anchiovies, with the gravy
of the Turkey.

For Service, the Wing is generally first preferred. Secondly, The
Merrythought, and a Side-bone. Thirdly, The Leg. Fourthly, The Breast, and one
of the binding bones. Fifthly, the Back, and the other Binding bone, and the
Rump. To each Service add some of your Garnish.

See the King of Diamonds.

The Pullet.
THe Pullet is Carved, Sawc'd, and Garnished as the Capon.

See the Queen of Diamonds.

The Capon.
THe Capon is Carved like the Turkey; only you must not take a slice off the
Breast as you did off the breast of the Turkey, because the Wing will then be
too little for a convenient Service.

Its Sauce is Water and Pepper seasoned with a little Salt: Or at some great
Feasts, a little White Manchet soaked in strong Onion-broth, and boiled up in
Gravy with a little Lemmons. Nutmeg, and Butter, put into the (...).

Its Garnish is Oranges or Lemons (...) laid round the Sea the Knave of Diamonds.

The Chicken.
THe Chicken, if it be large, is Carved like the Capon; but if it be small, it
is only cut through from the Rump to the Neck.

Its Sauce is the same with the Pullet, if the Chicken be large; but if small,
Butter and Vinegar, with a little minced Parsley.

For great Feasts, they sometimes take an handful of Parsley and mince it
small, and wrap it up into a Ball with grated Nutmeg, and so put it into the
belly of the Chicken before it is spitted, and take it out when it is drawn;
and and putting some Butter into it, pour it all into the Dish.

See the Ten of Diamonds.

A Goose.
A Goose is Carved like the Turkey, only you may take a cut more off the
Breast: but you must take heed that you spoil not the Merrythought by it;
therefore cut no higher than to figure 7, and turn off there toward the
Pinion, as you may see in the Figure. The Merry thought of the Goose lies
nearer the Neck than any other Fowl, except Duck and Teal. To raise the
Merrrythought, place the edge of your Knife at figure 8, and slope the back of
your Knife toward the Neck; and having entered the Merry-thought, turn the
back of your Knife toward the Rump, and with the edge of the Knife raise up
the Mery-thought.

Its Sauce is Apples, either put into the Dish with the Goose, or else set by
it in Plates. Some put Butter and Sugar to the Apples, others Mustard. Some use
only Mustard for Sauce.

For Green Goose, the Sauce is Goosberries scalded, or green Grapes scalded,
sweetened with Sugar.

Its Garnish is Sugar or Salt strowed about the brims of the Dish.

See the Nine of Diamonds.

The Duck.
THe Duck is carved like the Goose, except the slices taken off the Breast.

Its Sauce is boiled Onions buttered.

Its Garnish is Salt strowed about the brims of the Dish.

See the Eight of Diamonds.

The Pheasant.
THe Pheasant is carved like the Capon or Pullet, and its Sauce the same.

See the Seven of Diamonds.

The Partridge.
THe Partridge is Carved as the Capon, and its Sauce the same.

See the Six of Diamonds.

The Teal.
THe Teal is Carved ike the Duck, and its Sauce the same,

See the Five of Diamonds.

The Pidgeon.
THe Pigeon is never Carved, but sometimes cut through the middle from the Rump
to the Neck.

Its Sauce is the same with the Chicken, only you must add a little minced Bacon
to your Parsley, with a little Mint before they are roasted.

See the Four of Diamonds.

The Plover.
THe Plover is Carved like a Capon, and its Sauce the same with the Duck.

See the Three of Diamonds.

The Snite.
THe Snite is Carved like the Capon, and its Sauce the same with the Duck.

See the Duck of Diamonds.

The Wood-cock.
THe Wood-cock is Carved like the Capon, and its Sauce the same.

See the Ace of Diamonds.

Secondly, Of the Flesh of Beasts, answering to the Suit of Hearts.
To Carve the Sir Loyn of Beef.
THe Loyn of Beef was, for the delicacy of its Flesh, and the stateliness of
its Appearance, Dignified by King James the First with the Title of Sir Loyn of
Beef. It is brought to the Table with its hollow side downwards. To Carve this,
draw a long Cut almost through the whole length, as from figure 1 to figure 2,
about the depth of two fingers; then from this Cut at figure 3, cut downwards a
hole in the Back to figure 4; which shall be one good Service. Into this hole
will run a great deal of Gravie, let out at the long Cut figure 1, 2. Your
second Service is beside the former hole, as from 4 to 5. The third from 5 to
6, and so forwards as many Services as is convenient. And to each Service you
must, from figure 7, cut a piece of Fat, and with a spoon take Gravie out of
the hole cut at 3, 4. But the most delicate and tender Bits are on the other
side of the Sir Loyn all along the Chine.

In private Families the Sir Loyn of Beef is commonly begun to be cut up in the
inside, that it may with the more Credit be the ofter brought to the Table; and
then you are to set the Sir Loyn on its Chine, and begin with the Flesh near
the Back bone, and so proceed to your several Services.

The Sauce is Vinegar and Pepper, or sometimes Vinegar alone.

See the King of Hearts.

Haunch of Venison.
HAunch of Venison is begun to be cut near the Buttock, as from 1 to 2, and
from 1 to 3, which is one good Service; from 1 to 4 is another Service, and so
on, on either side 2, 3, as many Services as it will admit of: But if the
Venison cut not fat enough in this place, you must turn the Haunch, and cut Fat
to add to every Service.

The Sauce is grated bread boiled and colored either with Claretwine, Cynamon,
or Sanders, and sweetened with white Sugar: Yet the most usual Sauce nowadays
is Anchovies, and the Gravie of the Venison, and a little Vinegar.

See the Queen of Hearts.

The Gammon of Bacon.
THe Gammon of Bacon has its Skin first taken off, and then laid in the Dish
with its outside upwards. You first cut out a round piece at figure 1 for the
first Service. For the second Service you are to cut round about the hole your
first Service was taken out of; and so for your third, fourth, or fifth
Service, or as many as you please.

Another way of Carving the Gammon of Bacon is, the Coat being stripped off, to
cut it as the Haunch of Venison; only they begin it a little nearer to the
Knuckle.

The Sauce is Mustard or Vinegar.

But if Westphalia Ham, the skin is left on, and then cut as before.

See the Knave of Hearts.

Shoulder of Mutton.
SHoulder of Mutton is brought to the Table with the outside upward. It is a
Dish of meat seldom used at public Tables, but in private Families; and is
then begun to be carved with a cut from 1, to 2, and from 3 to 2, for the first
Service: The second Service, from 4 to 2: The third, from 5 to 2; and so on, as
far as you can for the Blade-bone.

It is also sometimes begun to be carved on the inside; and then you slice the
flesh off in convenient Serviices till you come to the Blade-bone.

Its Sauce is either Anchiovies, or pickled Cucumbers, Capers, Water and Onion;
or several other sharp Sawces, according to the palates of the Guests. See the
Ten of Hearts.

Ribs of Beef.
RIbs of Beef are brought to the Table with the the hollow-side downwards. When
it is begun to be carved at Great Men's Tables, you make the first cut on the
outside the Ribs, as at 1, 2, for the first Service; and so proceed to cut your
several Services about the first, as you were directed in the Gammon of Bacon.
But in private Families it is begun on either of the brown sides near the Chine,
and so sliced out into convenient Services. But the most delicate bits are in
the under-side near the Chine.

Its Sauce is the same with the Sirloyn of Beef. See the Nine of Hearts.

Loyn of Veal.
THe Loyn of Veal is brought to the Table with the outside upwards; but is
carved with the other, viz. the hollow-side upwards. Your first cut, is a
circular cut about the Rump, as from 1 to 2, for the first Service. Your second
cut, is on the skirty side all along the Loyn from 3 to 4, which you lay by:
And make your other several Services straight through every joint of the Chine,
as you see them marked in the Figure.

Its Sauce is Butter and Vinegar beaten up thick, or Oranges. Its Garnish is
Oranges or Lemons sliced, and laid about the brims of the Dish.

See the Eight of Hearts.

Breast of Veal.
A Breast of Veal is brought to the Table with the outside upwards, and has
first its Brisket cut off, as from figure 1 to 2, and the Brisket divided into
several Services, as at 3, 4, 5, etc. Then the Ribs are cut down by two's at a
time through the Chine. To each Service add some of the Sweetbread as far as
it will go.

The Sauce and Garnish is the same with a Loyn of Veal.

See the Seven of Hearts.

Shoulder of Veal.
THe Shoulder of Veal is brought to the Table with its outside downwards; but
is turned to be carved. There are so many good bits in a Shoulder of Veal (two
and fifty the Proverb says) that the beginning to carve upon it is not so
methodically asserted, as on many other Joints; but that, according to the
variety of Palats and Fancies, it is variously begun. Yet the most usual, is to
begin about the thick fleshy part near the Knuckle, and there to cut in toward
the Blade bone; or else to cut slices off the flesh of the inside, to make
several Services of.

Its Sauce and Garnish is the same with the Loyn of Veal.

See the Six of Hearts.

Fore-quarter of Lamb.
THe Fore-quarter of Lamb is brought to the Table with the Ribs downwards. You
must first raise the Shoulder, by placing your Fork about the middle of the
Bladebone, and with your Knife begin to cut at figure 1, round the Shoulder to
figure 2; then removing your Fork to the Brisket, as at figure 6, with your
Forefinger and Thumb take hold of the Knuckle-end, and raise the Shoulder from
the ribs. Then strew a little Salt on the Ribs, and lay the Shoulder on again.
Then cut off the Brisket by a cut made from figure 3 to 4, and divide it into
convenient services. The Shoulder is cut into services as the Shoulder of
Mutton is, and the Ribs as the Ribs of the Breast of Veal. Only instead of
cutting two Ribs to a service, you must cut three or four, according to the
bigness and growth of the Lamb. Its Sauce is all sorts of Sallads, alterable
according to fancy and the season of the year.

Its Garnish, is Salt strewn round the brim of the Dish.

See the Five of Hearts.

The Boars-Head.
A Boars-head comes to the Table with its Snout standing upward, and a sprig of
Rosemary stuck in it.

The first Service is Carved out on the Cheek, as from 1 to 2: another service
from 3 to 4 toward the Neck. The several other services you may see marked
out, the Neck, Netherjaw and Snout; and therefore I refer you to the Figure.

Its Sauce and Garnish is the same with the Gammon of Bacon.

See the Four of Hearts.

The Pig.
THe Pig is brought to the Table with the back upwards. The first cut is to cut
the Head off behind the Ears, as from figure 1 to 2. The second cut is all
along through the Back from the Neck to the Tail, as from figure 3 to 4. The
two Sides are laid back to back with the Ribs downwards, and its two Ears,
being cut off, are laid on the two shoulders.

See the Three of Hearts.

The Coney.
THe Coney is most times brought to the Table with the Head off, and laid on
one side of it; except they be sucking Rabbets, which always are brought to the
Table with their Heads on, lying upon their Bellies in the Dish: and by the
Carver are turned with the Belly upwards, to cut off the Skirts on each side
the Belly, which Skirts are sometimes sent away on a Plate from the Table. Then
with your Knife raise the Kidneys, and turn them inwards toward the Backbone,
and make two cuts from the Neck downwards on either side the Backbone, through
the length of the Coney, to correspond with the cuts intended to be made
afterward on the Back. Then turn the Coney on its belly again, and placing
your Fork on the middle of the back, draw a sloping cut athwart it, as from
figure 1 to 2, and another sloping from figure 3 to 4; another cut all along
one side the Backbone, as from figure 3 to 5; and another cut along the other
side the Back bone, as from figure 1 to 6. Then place your Fork in one of the
Thighs, as at figure 7, and with your Knife cut through at the hinder joint,
and with your Fork draw that Thigh and Side piece from the Carcass. Then sever
the Thigh from the Side-piece, by making a cut on the inside the Thigh, as at
figure 8, and cut to the joint, and another cut on the outside the Thigh to
figure 9; and with your Fork and Knife separate the Thigh from the Side-piece,
and of each make a Service. Do the like by the other Thigh and Side piece. Then
place your Fork in one of the Pinions, and cut from 3 to 2, and draw the Wing
from the Carcass: do the like by the other Wing. Then place your Knife about
the middle of the Backbone on the back, and with your Fork placed under the
Rump, rear up the hinder-part of the Chine; and so breaking the Backbone,
separate it from the Carcass.

See the Two of Hearts.

The Calves-head boiled.
A Calves-head is brought to the Table with its Cheeks upwards. Your first Cut
is cut out of the fleshy part of the Cheek, as from figure 1 to 2. Your several
other Services are taken off the Jaw Bone and the Neck, as you may see them
marked in the Figure. It is commonly boiled with a piece of Bacon, and
therefore each Service has a piece of Bacon added. The Eyes and the
Sweet-tooth are the choicest bits.

Its Sauce is its Brains mixed with Sage and Vinegar; and sometimes instead of
Vinegar, Butter.

See the Ace of Hearts.

Thirdly, Of Fishes, answering to the Suit of Clubs.
Pickled- Herring.
A Pickled-Herring is dressed several ways; but the usual way is to chine it
through the Back, and take out all its inwards; then to strip the skin off from
the Gills to the Tail, and take out its bone, and so cut it athwart the back
and belly. Others mince very small and serve it with Oil and Vinegar; and
sometimes they put to the Oil and Vinegar minced Lemmons, Apples, Onions,
Cucumbers, etc.

The Dutch way of dressing it, is described in these following Verses.

Recipe.
A Pickled-Herring fat, white, heavy, large;
Cut off his Back, and then his Womb discharge;
Behead him next, and then his skin off draw.
Thus cleans'd Sup of him either roast or raw,
With Onion, and with Country Household bread,
And then dispose your self to rest in Bed.
This you shall find a precious Antidote,
Disposing for a liberal Draught your throat;
Repairing last nights rouse, moistning your Palate.
Drying your head and breast from Phlegm and Salate.
Discharge the Bladder, and the Colons seat,
Of Wind imprisoned by obdurate Meat.
This Medicine was put in ancient Rhyme,
By Poet Lawrence, in Duke Arnold's time.
See the King of Clubs.

To Carve the Salmon.
THe Salmon is slit down the Back with a Scallop cut out and in, and another on
either side, as you see in the Figure. Its Jolle is first cut off, and then
several Services cut from the two side-scallopt-lines toward the Belly and the
Back, as you may see in the Figure. The most convenient Services are marked
with the first figures, as 1 for the best Service, 2 for the next best Service,
etc. And this you must remember, that the Belly-pieces (as being the fattest)
are the most delicate, except it be the Jolle, which is most preferred,
according to an old English Verse:

The Jolle of a Salmon, the Tail of a Tench,
The Back of an Herring, etc.
It is served up with Sippets: And its Sauce is boiled Oysters, Shrimps,
Anchiovies, Lemmon, etc.

Its Garnish, thin roasted Manchet, thin scallopt Salmon, Barberries, etc.

See the Queen of Clubs.

The Pike.
THe Pike is brought to the Table as you see in the Figure. You must take its
Bone out, and carve it into Services, as you see in the numerical Figures.

Its Sauce is a little White Wind, Oyster-liquor, and Butter; into which scrape
a little Horseradish, and grate a little Nutmeg; then put in some Anchovies,
and beat up altogether with the Yolks of Eggs, and put them so into the Dish
with the Pike.

For its Garnish, stick it about with fried Bays, or Rosemary-leaves, and
garnish your Dish with sliced Lemons.

See the Knave of Clubs.

Cods-head.
A Cods head is carved as you see in the Figure.

Its Sauce is Anchovies, Oysters boiled, and Shrimps, with Cinnamon, and good
store of Butter.

Others make Sauce after this manner: They take the meat out of the shell of a
Crab or two, and put to it about a quart of Cockles taken out of their shells,
about a quarter of a pint of White Wind, an Onion or two, a bunch of
Sweet-herbs, a little whole Mace, and a grated Nutmeg. These they put into a
Pipkin, and put some Oyster-liquor to it, and set altogether on the Fire, and
let it boil till the Liquor be wasted. Then put good sweet Butter to it, as
much as will serve, and then serve up the Cods-head on Sippets.

Its Garnish is Lemons cut in thin slices, and Bay Leaves fried in Butter, and
so stuck round the Codshead.

See the Ten of Clubs.

The Lobster.
THe Lobster is brought whole to the Table, and has no carving in it; only its
claws are all broken off, and then the Tail-piece from the Body. The Tail-piece
is afterward opened on the back of it, and so laid in the Dish. The meat in
the belly is the most delicate of the whole body, and is mingled or tempered
with grated Bread and Vinegar.

Its Sauce is only Vinegar.

Its Garnish is either Fennel or other green Herbs.

See the Nine of Clubs.

The Mackrel,
THe Mackrel, if it be brought whole to the Table, easily divides it self into
convenient Services, it will split in the back and Belly, and both its Sides.
But it seldom does come whole to the Table, but is commonly brought to the
Table divided into quarters, and each quarter laid in the Dish with its Tailend
laid toward the Center of the Dish, and so quarter by quarter round the whole
Dish.

Its Sauce is Butter and Vinegar, with Mint and Parsley, Fennel and Sage boiled
well together and minced small, and laid in little parcels about the Dish.

For Service, add to each some of the Row, whether hard or soft.

Its Garnish is Salt and a few green Herbs round the Dish.

See the Seven of Clubs.

Side of Green Fish.
A Side of Green Fish is brought to the Table with the skinny-side upwards, and
is carved into Services by straight cuts made from 1 to 2, from 3 to 4, from 5
to 6, etc.

Its Sauce is hard Eggs minced small and beat up with Butter; and so poured all
over the Fish.

Its Garnish is the Yolks of hard Eggs cut into quarters, and so laid round the
brims of the Dish.

See the Ace of Clubs.

Fourthly. Of Baked Meats, answering to the suit of Spades.
Of Pasties and Pies in general.
ALl Pasties and Pies that are made of Flesh or Fowl, are generally full of
Liquor: And if they be not full when they are new baked, then there is commonly
some Cawdle to put to them afterward; as a Goose-pie, if it be judged not to
have Liquor enough in it, it is customary to melt a pound or a pound and an
half of Butter, and pour it in at the Crown of the Lid.

But if a Minced Pie or a Lumberpie be thought to be too dry, it is customary
to pour a Glass or two of French Wine with Sugar or Sack into them to moisten
them. And these are general Rules for all Pies or Pasties.

The Venison- Pasty.
THe Venison-Pasty, though it be here drawn with one end longer than the other,
and the sides sloping away, because the representation of the raised Crust may
the better appear, yet are they made square, with its two opposite sides equal
in length to each other. It is opened with a square Cut in the middle of the
Lid; and from that square Cut you are to cut several Cuts on each side toward
the sides, as you may see in the Figure. With your Knife and Fork you are to
take out your several Services of Venison, and to each Service give one of the
Cuts taken off the Lid.

See the King of Spades.

Red-Deer-Pie.
THe Red-Deer-Pie has its Lid cut round about near the side of the Pie. And as
you serve out any of the Meat, you give a piece of the Lid to it with some of
the Liquor if it be hot.

See the Queen of Spades.

The Minc'd-Pies.
THe Minced Pies are either eaten hot or cold. If they be eaten hot, you only
take off the Lid, and on a Trencher or Plate with a Spoon lay some of the
Minc'd-meat for a Service with a piece of the Lid.

But if they be eaten cold, you cut them straight down into convenient Services
through the Pie to the very bottom, as they are marked in the Figure.

See the Knave of Spades.

The Lamb-Pie.
THe Lamb-pie is as the Venison-Pasty.

See the Eight of Spades.

FINIS.

