A DESCRIPTION OF The Present State OF SAMOS, NICARIA, PATMOS, and Mount ATHOS.

By Joseph Georgirenes, Archbishop of SAMOS. Now living in London.

Translated by one that knew the Author in Constantinople.

Dum licet, and vultum servat fortuna benignum,
Romae laudetur Samos, and Chios, and Rhodos absens.
Hor. l. I. Epist. II. July 14. 1677.

Licensed,

W. Jane.



LONDON, Printed by W. G. and sold by Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

(...)
(...) (...) (...) (...).

TO THE MOST HIGH PRINCE Of Royal Birth, JAMES, DUKE of YORK, etc. JOSEPH
GEORGIRENES Of SAMOS, The least of Archbishops, offers his most Humble
Reverence.
Most High Born PRINCE,
THey that aspire to the Attainment of Wisdom, do not content themselves with
the Accurate Search of sublime objects, but also condescend to enquire into
lower matters. In like manner, the renowned Britains do not confine their
contemplations to their own homes, or to their neighbor Nations; but enlarge
their prospect unto the most remote Countries, and with a piercing Eye,
diligently pursue the exact discovery of their state and condition. To which
purpose, many persons of honor, and of curiosity, have importuned me to give
some description of the Coasts of Ionia, and the Aegaean Islands; and to
declare the present Condition of those great objects of Pity and Protection,
the Greeks, now under the cruel Tyranny of the Wicked and Barbarous Hagarens.
The desire I had to gratify their learned curiosity, whose Judgments I had
reason highly to esteem, prevailed with me to undertake a Description of some
Isles of the Archipebago, namely, Samos, Nicaria, Patmos, and Mount Athos, now
called The Holy Mount. But because this Work may seem to want that Elegance, or
depth of learning, requisite for a Book that must appear upon the Stage of
England, it stands in need of shelter and protection. Which put me upon the
bold necessity of flying to the Shadow of your Royal Highness's Patronage, to
escape the scorchings of Contempt, and with all humble Reverence, to shelter it
under the umbrage of your Royal Highness's propitious Name. And I most humbly
offer it, not as a thing of any merit; but as a manifestation of my devoir and
gratitude, for those great Obligations, which I, and in me all the Greek Nation
has received. I therefore most humbly beseech your Highness, that as you have
thought me worthy of your Bounty, so to continue the same favorable aspect, in
accepting this small demonstration of my Gratitude, and by your gracious
Patronage, to secure it from their censure, who are not so forward to imitate
our well intended pains, as to expose our defects. For which undeserved Favor,
we can make Retribution only in our daily Prayers to Almighty God for your
Highness's Health and Prosperity in this World, and Eternal Happiness in the
World to come.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THe habitable Earth, by Divine disposal, bestowed upon the Children of Men, is
but one great Island. And those Four eminent Parts of it which divide the whole
among them, not by equal portions, but by the casual intervention of Seas, are
not totally separated one from another; but make one perpetual Continent.
Africa is joined to Asia, by no very small neck of Land betwixt the
Mediterranean and the Red Sea: And is no more an Island properly so called,
than Peloponnesus. Europe and Asia are joined above the Lake of Maeotis with a
large space of ground betwixt the Hyperborean Ocean, and that Lake. And Asia is
joined to America, by the Streights of Anian in all probability. There has
nothing yet been discovered to the contrary, and the great Absurdities that
attend the peopling of it are no way soeasily solved. Besides this Main
Continent which is mounted above the Face of the Waters in one entire
continuation of parts, there are many lesser Islands, entirely surrounded by
the Sea, and divided from all other ground. And all these are but smaller
Sisters to that great product of Nature, the Main Continent, not differing from
it in kind, but in bulk and size. Whether they owe their birth to the general
Deluge, or date their antiquity from the day of the Creation, the Scripture is
silent, and so am I. The Opinion of several Islands being rent from the Main
Continent, by the violent Incursion of Seas, has been more forwardly embraced,
than convincingly proved, and owes more to Poetical Fancy, than to any solid
Foundations of Philosophy. However, certain it is, that many Islands are of
later Antiquity than either the Creation, or the Flood, as on the contrary,
many have either subsided, or been overwhelmed.

The same Earthquake does sometimes produce both effects; and the same time
brings Birth to one, and Burial to another. But these are the irregular
miscarriages of nature, laboring under a Convulsion Fit, and teach us what may
be, not what must be; what nature may sometimes suffer, not what she always
does. As for the whole Globe of Earth and Water, the admirable intermixture of
them both for use and beauty, does highly bespeak the Wisdom of the Maker, and
does no less merit our contemplation, than the Canopy of Heaven. And that the
rather, because the inferior World does more nearly approach our Senses, and
affords us clearer notice of their state and condition. Among all the associate
Collection of Islands, that by reason of their mutual vicinity, pass under one
common name, there are none more remarkable than those of the Aegean Sea, or
the Archipelago. These were so eminent in the days of the Prophets of the Old
Testament, that from them all the Western parts of the then known World that
was planted principally by the Sons of Japhet, went under the common name of
the Isles of the Gentiles, and the Islands of Chittim. The Phoenicians, the
first eminent Navigators since the Flood, and the first Planters of Learning
and Civility, as well as Colonies, along the shores of the Mediterranean and
Atlantic Seas, began their discoveries in these Islands: And there they have
left such visible Footsteps of their first Plantation, that the names they bear
to this day are most of them of Phoenician Extraction. The Colonies planted in
these Islands by the Phoenicians, gave beginning to all those Arts and Sciences
for which the Greeks were afterward so famous, and their Language been held in
such admiration to this day. The Aethiopick Islands are known all by Greek
names; but they are as far inferior to the Cyclades in renown, as they are in
number, having neither been the Scene of Actions recorded by such Immortal
pens, nor the native Soil of persons so eminent for Arts and Arms. The conceit
of Elysium, or such a future happiness as the Heathens dreamed of, was thought
fit by their Poets to be fixed upon some remote Islands; therefore called the
Blessed, or Fortunate Islands. The Hesperides and Canaries have been
Competitors for the Title, and our modern searchers into British Antiquity do
strain hard to make the Cassiterides, or the Scilly and Man, and Anglesey, put
in for a claim. But the Poets have been more accurate in maintaining the
Character of an earthly Paradise, and describing a felicity of state beyond
that of a Platonic, or Utopian Commonwealth, than in directing us by any rules
of Geography, where it is to be found. And as they have left it indifferent to
the Reader to fix the Local Situation of such Islands where they will, so they
have left it impossible to any Reader to find such a place in the whole World.
Indeed it is the high prerogative of great and lasting Wits to affix an esteem
and veneration upon those places they make the Stage of their Stories, be they
true or false. But in this point of credit, the Islands of the Archipelago do
far surpass any other in the World. And this is true, not only of the
licentious and extravagant Fables of their Romantic Mythologie; but also in
the graver and more creditable Records of sober History. They did heretofore in
a manner engross the Monopoly of all the Wit and Fancy both of Greece and Rome:
Insomuch, that it is hardly possible for a man well versed in the Greek and
Latin Tongues, to be a stranger to the ancient Geography of these Places: And
Pliny, who was in nothing less erroneous, than in this part of his natural
History of these Islands, does honor the Bay wherein they are situate, with
the Title of Sinus claritatis literarum. A large Encomium, and such as no other
aggregate body of Islands had equal right to. The Japan, Philippine, and
Molucco Islands in the Oriental Ocean, are far beyond these for number; but the
only thing they are sought for is some natural products peculiar to their Soil
and Climate, in which commendation, they do not exceed the late discoveries in
the American Ocean; but we find not that the World was ever beholding to the
one, or the other, for the Propagation of Learning or Civility. Nor is it only
famous for the early rise of Humane Learning and civil Culture, in the days of
Gentilism; but also for the early appearance of the more glorious Sunshine of
the Heavenly Doctrine of the Gospel. St. John the Divine, honored in the
Oracles of God, with the peculiar Title of the Disciple whom Jesus loved, was
once an Inhabitant of these Islands; where he founded the Christian Religion,
and writ that Divine and Mysterious Book, which was indeed to him Apocalypse,
but to all future ages Apocrypha. St. Paul, that great Apostle of the Gentiles,
did often cross this Sea, to plant the Doctrine of Salvation in all the
neighboring Shores of Europe and Asia. And in future ages, when the Divine
Providence raised up a Christian Emperor to protect his Church from
persecution, these Islands were the very center of once the most Orthodox and
learned Church in the World. To whom we owe not only the transmitting the Holy
Scriptures to our knowledge; but also the digesting the Doctrine of them into
Articles of Faith, the defense of Truth against all invasion of Error, the
faithful Records of most pure and primitive Tradition, the clear Exposition of
many obscure passages, which without their direction, might have been at this
day unintelligible, and the great advantage of many bearned and elaborate
Volumes of Orthodox Divinity, both Polemical and Practick. And of all those
many different Sects of Christianity in the East, they have to this day most
firmly retained the ancient Truths, and made the least Deviation into Error.
If that ignorance which those barbarous extinguishers of learning, the Turks,
keep them in, renders that afflicted Nation obnoxious to be imposed upon, and
incapable of knowing better, it deserves rather our pity, than our contempt and
scorn. It is rather a Miracle of Gods gracious Providence, that under such
tyrannous Masters, and such proud and contemptuous enemies of the common name
of Christianity, the light of Evangelical Truth is not only dimmed, but utterly
extinct, as it has happened in the Latin Church in Africa, once inferior to none
for purity of Doctrine, and piety and learning in their Professors. Yet this
cannot be denied them, but that they accord with us in many things wherein we
differ from the Romish Church. I may add this more, that in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, the Greek Church does not bear that conformity or similitude
with the Romish Church, as the great Champions for Popery would affix upon
them. And that will easily appear in these particulars. 1. They use not the
Elevation of the Host. 2. No carrying it in Procession. 3. The People stand
when they receive it. 4. They give it in both kinds to all. 5. The bread is of
a common sort before Consecration. It is besides, the business of this Preface,
to enlarge upon the present State of the Greek Church, which the reverend
Author has in some measure done in his account of Samos, and Mount Athos: And
that subject is more largely handled by a late learned Author Smith's remarks
upon the Turks.
in the Latin and English Tongues. All that I shall add is, that scarce any
part of Greece has less intermixture with the Turks than these Isles, where the
Greek Language and Religion is less entrenched upon. There are no less than
twenty Bishops in the Archipelago, some with the Title of Metropolite, as
Metelyn and Methymia; others with the Title of Archbishop, as Samos, and
Andros, and some with the bare Title of Bishop, as Sciathus. Yet neither of the
two first differ from the last in any thing, but in Title, or priority of
Place. Their jurisdiction is alike, it being ordinary here for a Metropolite,
and an Archbishop to be without a Suffragan. The reason is, because of the
great Revolutions, many of the old Bishoprics are lost, and the ancient frame
of Ecclesiastical Polity much altered. The Patriarch continues the Title of
Metropolite upon all the places that formerly were so, and the little of
Archbishop, upon those that depend immediately upon the Patriarch, without any
subjection to a Metropolite, although they have no Bishop under their
jurisdiction. The following Treatise gives an account of three Islands of the
Archipelago, and Mount Athos, the Great Academy for the Greek Clergy. In all
these places, he lived, and writes nothing, but what he saw, or what he
received from the constant Tradition of the places: So that as to matters of
fact, he may be better relied upon than those that write of places to which
they are great strangers. For the Truth of what is related, is the main
Postulatum of an History.

A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLE of SAMOS: AND Of its present State at this Day.
SAmos, is one of the greatest, and most remarkable Islands of the Archipelago,
situate near the Continent of Asia. It is well known that this was the Country
of Pythagoras, and once was Governed by Kings of her own, and has made stout
resistance against Athens, what time they both lived under a Democratical
Government. The ruins which yet are to be seen there are a Testimony of her
former greatness and wealth. But this Island has been subject to great changes
and revolutions, even to utter desertion of Inhabitants for many Years. Yet it
being my main intent to give an account of its present State, I shall wave the
former Transactions of Ancient times, whereof there is frequent mention amongst
Historians, and proceed to a survey of its condition in these Modern Times,
under the Turkish Empire; how it is now Governed; what Revenues it yields, with
a Geographical Description of the Country.

It is certain, that what time it pleased God for our sins to permit the Turks
to subdue Constantinople, and the Archipelago, the Island of Samos was totally
dispeopl'd. Afterward one Kilitch Aly Basha arrived here, and Landing with a
small Company to Hunt, was so taken with the place, that he was resolved to ask
leave of the Grand Signior, to re-people the Island: Which having done, he
transported several Families from all the Voisinage especially from Metelyne,
so that by degrees, it became full of Inhabitants, and now counts to the number
of 18 Towns and Villages, which I shall now describe according to their
Situation.

The Isle of Samos is 26, or 27 French Leagues in compass, and lies in length
East and West. At the West end it has the Isle of Nicaria, some twelve Miles
distant: The East end is so near the Continent of Asia, that in some places men
can Discourse one with another from the two Shores. This nearness of the East
end of Samos to the Continent of Asia, causes a narrow Frith about six Miles in
length, no where above 3 Miles in breadth, which by reason of little Islands in
it, is a great Nest of Pirates, whom no Ships that come into this Strait can
escape, but by putting to Shore on each side, where they are in equal danger of
being made a Prey. These Pirates for the most part are either from Malta,
Legorn, Savoy, or Sardinia.

At the entrance into this Straight, which the Turks call Dardbogazy, i. e. The
Mouth of the Straight, lies all along the Mountain for the space of a Mile, the
place where the Old City of Samos stood, remarkable Old Samos
yet for some remainders of the Walls and ruins of old Churches, and large
Stones, some 3, some 4, some 5 yards long, besides many Marbles and Pillars,
notwithstanding the many choice pieces carried away by the Venetians, when they
were Lords of the Archipelago. But the Greeks at this day dare not touch a
Stone, so much as to Build with, for fear of Imprisonment by the Turks, under
color of having found a Treasure in those old Ruins.

And being once Imprisoned upon such a pretense, they are sure to lie fast till
all they have be seized.

These Ruins are no less than six miles in compass. Upon the same Mountain in
the middle of a deep and large Grotto, stands a Church Dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, known there by the name of (...) Panagia Spiliani, St. Mary's of the Cave
Spiliani, from (...)
Panagia Spiliani, or The most Holy Virgin of the Grotto. All the Samians pay
great Devotion to this place, not only in honor of the Virgin Mary, but for
the belief of many Miracles there done. Here is also an artificial Channel, six
Miles long, drawn from a River of a perpetual stream, which besides the Mills
it drives, does water the Country in times of greatest drought. This water
arising near the Village of the Arnhauts (of whom we shall speak more
hereafter) becomes large enough by new supplies of other Currents, to deserve
the name of a River, and is that which the Ancients called Imbrasus.

At the bottom of the aforesaid Mountain, where Old Samos stood, toward
Scirus, lie the Ruins of an old Haven for Galleys; the Samians call it Tegani,
i. e. Basin, from its roundness. Near to which Port stands a little Church
Dedicated to St. Nicholas.
St. Nicholas, but now become a Refuge for the Mariners, who come privately to
fetch Water from a Well hard by, that has a most excellent Spring: Yet here is
always a strict Watch kept, one by Day, and two by Night, to carry Intelligence
to the next Aga, or the next Caddee, what Ships come in, whence they are, and
whither bound; And if the Aga, or Caddee, happen to hear of any Ships coming by
some other Messenger, before he that is to Watch, brings the News, he is sure
to receive 500 Bastinadoes upon the Soles of his Feet for his neglect.

Over Against the Old City, about * Megale Chora, or New Samos.
a Mile distant to the West, stands the New, now known by the name of (...),
Megale Chora, or the great Town, because it is bigger than the rest of the
Isle. Here the principal Men of the Isle have their residence, i. e. the
Archbishop, the Caddee, with three or four Turkish Families, the Aga, with ten
or a dozen other Turks to assist him in the Execution of his Charge.

The Caddees Office is to pronounce Law, and the Aga's to put it into
Execution, and to Levy all Taxes whatsoever. There are many who submit
themselves to the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop, especially the
Ecclesiastics. But if any Man rest unsatisfied with the Archbishops Judgment,
he many appeal to the Caddee. There are very few Turks in this Isle, besides
the forementioned. They had a Mosque, but the Venetians battered it down the
first time they came with their Fleet to subdue the Island to their obedience,
and to oblige them to contribution. But the Samians at first refused to pay
Contribution, or to appear before the General, but made their escape into the
Mountains, fearing the Venetians would soon be repulsed by the Turks, and they
be chastis'd for so quick a Revolt. But when the great Town was taken, and
plundered, and the Mosque in it quite battered down, the Aga and Caddee, gave
permission to the Islanders to pay a yearly tribute of 80000 Dollers or Crowns
to the Venetians. Yet after the Peace made, when the Turks were reestablished,
they would neither repair their battered Mosque, nor build a new one, for fear
of some such casualty. Out of a Superstition they have, not to build a Mosque,
but only where they are confident it shall never be profaned by Christian
violence.

Upon the coming of a new Caddee, or a new Aga, the Chief of the Villages
assemble at the great Town, or upon any public Affair which concerns the whole
Island, especially upon the coming of the Officer appointed to gather the
Poll-Money, called Haratch; Which is the only Revenue the Grand Signior
receives out of this Island, all other the Revenues of the place, are as they
call it, Vacouf amongst the Turks, are all such Lands as we in England call
Church Lands, especially Collegiate Churches, to which the Great Mosques in
Turkey bear a great resemblance; for they have always a Nursery of Men trained
up only to Sacred Employments; and a Governor, who is called Sheich, and under
him other principal Men, that are well maintained, and out of whose number a
Sheich is chosen upon any vacancy. These Colleges they call Medrasa, and they
are always close by the great Mosque.
to say, Consecrated to Religious use, and they belong wholly to the great
Mosque at Tophana, is the House of Guns, and it has its name from the use it is
put to, being the great Storehouse for the Grand Signior's Ordnance, and
Artillery, and the place of Residence for the Topgy-Basha, or Master of the
Ordnance to the Grand Signior.
Tophana, by Galata, over against the Grand Signiors Seraglio at Constantinople.

In other parts of the Empire, all Males that are not Turks, from 14 years and
upwards, do pay yearly three Dollers a Head, but in Samos only Married Men are
obliged. Yet if a Married Man dies leaving a Male Child, the Haratch shall be
demanded for the Child, though he be but a sucking Infant. Strangers that come,
pay this Haratch, Married or un-married. In like manner, the Samians that quit
their Country to exercise any Trade or Traffic elsewhere in the Empire, do pay
this Haratch, though un-married. When the Collector of this Poll-Money (whom
they call Haratchgy) comes, he first goes to the Caddee, and shows him the
Imperial Mandat. Whereupon the Caddee summons the chief Men of every Village,
whom they call Proesti, to come before him at the great Town, where having read
to them the Imperial Mandat, he charges them to take all possible care for the
speedy Levying of the Tribute, which they promising, are dismissed. Then the
Haratchgy goes to every Village, demanding of the Papas, or the Minister of the
place an exact Catalogue of the names of those that are obliged to pay, which
if the Papas fail to do, or omit any names that should have been put in, he is
sure to be laid down, and drub'd. There is no excuse for any person, and he
that cannot pay, is clapped into Chains, and led about as a Prisoner, till he has
either sold his Goods, or begged Money to defray the charge of this Poll-Money.

The Caddee is sent hither by one of the Caddileskers, whereof there are two,
the one for Europe, called the Romily Caddilesker, the other for Asia, called
the Anodal Caddilesker. These two are next to the Mufty for Dignity and Power,
and take place next to him. By one of these are all the Caddees sent to their
respective charges. The Perquisits of the Caddee of Samos arise from the Courts
of Judicature, where he is President: And upon the Death of any Person, he
takes an Inventory of all his Goods, which being prized, he takes three per
Cent, according to their value. But he meddles not with the Lands, being all
appropriated to the aforesaid Mosque of Tophana: But if any Man dye without
Issue Male, the Aga has power to seize his Lands, and to sell them to whom he
pleases. Neither Male nor Female can inherit the Lands of their Mother, but
they fall to the Aga, who has power to sell or dispose of them as he thinks
fit. If a Man leave his Lands uncultivated for seven Years, the Aga has power
to sell them, and to demand satisfaction for those dues that might have accru'd
to him, if the Lands had been cultivated those seven Years. We will return to
the remaining part of the Description of Megale Chore, and other remarkable
places of the Isle.

The whole Town, and all the Gardens about it, are supplied with Water from two
Plin. l. 5. c. 31. Fontes Eucarto, Leucothea.
Fountains, that of the two, whose Water is sweeter to the taste, is called
Platanos, the other Messaki. There are but six Churches, and those small ones.
Nor is it expedient in that Country, that any thing which concerns the
Christian Religion should make any outward appearance of Magnificence, or
costliness, least it should provoke the envy and avarice of their proud Masters
to Sacrilegious rapine. On the South side of the City lies a large plain, by a
word mixed with Greek and Latin, called Megalocampos.
Megalocampos, being the greatest Plain in the Isle; which by reason of
abundance of standing Water wherewith it perpetually stagnates, yields no
benefit, but great nuisance to the neighboring Inhabitants: Yet is it like to
continue still a Fenny Marsh, so long as the Tyrannous Government of the
Country gives so small Encouragement to the improvement of Lands. The Mariners
that sail by that Coast are the better for it, to whom it affords fresh Water
enough to furnish a whole Fleet, in four streams that issuing from this Fen,
disembogue themselves into the Sea, some six Miles distant from the Fen: Yet
the Coast is so open, that no Vessel can ride there but when the Wind is in the
North.

Beyond this plain a large space of fruitful Lands, watered with the
forementioned Imbrasus, belongs to Imbrasus.
a Monastry in Patmos, given by a Greek Architect, one of the first Planters,
who dying without Issue, left all he had to the said Monastry. Beyond these
Lands which belong to the Monastry of Patmos, upon the same River stands a
village of some 200 Houses, with one Church; It Is called Mily.
Mily, or the Mills, from that abundance of Water Mills, which Imbrasus drives
there. Here Lemmons and Oranges are so plentiful, that 500 may be bought for
one Doller. Westward of this Village lies Pagontas.
Pagontas, Situate on a Hill bedecked with Trees, the most healthful and
pleasant Village of the Island. It has no less than 300 Houses, and two
Churches,, and is enriched by the Manufacture of Silks. Some three Miles
distant from this Town, toward the Mountain, lies Spatharei.
Spatharei, a small Village consisting of about 50 Houses, and one Church, but
famous for making Pitch, which they sell at Megale Chore for three quarters of
a Doller, and sometimes a Doller the Kintal. Their way of making Pitch is thus.
They take Sapines, that is to say, that part of Firs, or other unctuous Trees
as is betwixt the Root and the Boughs, so far as it has no Knots; and shaving
away the extreme parts, they leave only that which is nearest to the middle,
and the Pith: That which remains they call Dadi, (from the old Greek word
(...), whence comes the Latin Taeda) These Dadi, or Torches, they cleave into
small pieces, and laying them on a Furnace, put fire to the upper part, till
they are all burnt, the Liquor in the mean time running from the Wood, and let
out from the bottom of the Furnace into a hole made in the Ground, where it
continues like Oil; Then they put Fire to it, and stir it about till it thicken,
and has a consistence; Then putting out the Fire, they cast Chalk upon it, and
draw it out with a Vessel, and lay it in little places cut out of the Ground,
where it receives both its form, and a firmer consistence for easy
Transportation.
Their way of making is like Pliny's description of it, l. 16. c. 11.

Over Against the Village of Spatharei, about a quarter of a Mile distant from
Shore lies a little Island a Mile in compass, called Samio Paulo, or little
Samos, formerly Narthecus.
Samio Paulo, or Little Samos; furnished with a safe Harbor against all Winds
toward great Samos. This Island abounds with a peculiar sort of Flower, which
from a Fragrance it has, like unto Musk, the People call Mouskoulia.
Muskoulia, others call them Coree. This Flower has that esteem in Turkey, that
they are sent for as far as to Constantinople, whither they are transplanted
with much care into their choicest Gardens. The Grand Signior wears it
ordinarily in his Turbant, and by his Example, makes it a Fashionable wear
among the Grandees of his Court. It has this quality, that time does not
decay, but augment the Fragrance of its Smell.

Three Miles distant from Spatharei, on the Hill side, stands the Village of
Pyrgos.
Pyrgos, consisting of about an 100 Houses, and 2 Churches: Here is the
Choicest Honey. Above this Village stands a small Village and Colony of the
Arnaouts Village.
Arnaouts, or Albanians; for so is that Nation at this day called by the Greeks
and Turks: And they have many Colonies in the Empire, being encouraged with
special privileges and immunities from the Grand Signior: yet they lose not
their Language (which in all likelihood is the old Illyrian) for it is not
understood by any of their Neighbor Nations; nor is it an Offspring of the
Slavonick. Their Religion is the same with the Greek.

Six Miles from Pyrgos, toward the South, lies ( d) Platanos, so (c) Platanos.
called, from abundance of Plain Trees there formerly. This Town has at least
300 Houses, and two Churches, and is remarkable for its good Air. Both the Men
and Women being generally longer Lived here, than any where else in the Island.
Their Waters hereabouts abound with Champinions, a great relief to the Poor,
when the word is given out for public permission to Fish. Which word with them
is Anoixe to libarintous.

Six Miles from hence, toward the West, lies a Village of some 200 Houses, and
two Churches, called Maratha-campos.
Maratha-campos, from the abundance of Gal. Fenouil. (...)
Fennel thereabouts, which the Greeks call Maratha. This Village looks toward
Patmos, from whence it is distant some Forty Miles

Three Miles from this Village lies a small Hermitage, by the Name of Saint
George's Hermitage.
St. George's Hermitage, where two or three Hermits of Patmos, commonly reside.
Not far from this Hermitage is a Grotto upon the top of a Mountain of most
difficult access, which the People, by Tradition do believe was Pythagoras's
retiring place; it has now a little Church, called (...), Or the Blessed
Virgin appearing; Because of a Tradition that the Blessed Virgin Mary has here
appeared, and done Miracles. The Bones of Dead Men that lie scattered
hereabouts, give occasion to believe, that those that remained when the Island
was deserted, made their escape hither; it being a Retreat of most difficult
access: And the inner Parts of this Mountain are not well discovered, in as much
as people are seen to appear, and observed to gather Chestnuts, none of the
Inhabitants of the Valley knowing any thing more of them.

This Mons. Cerce^ius. Plin. l. 5. c. 3^.
Mountain is called Kerkis, the highest of the whole Island, from whose top may
be seen the greatest part of the Isles of the Archipelago: It is covered with
Snow almost all the Year, and has a Lake on the very top, well stored with
Eels. Here is a Chapel Consecrated to the Prophet Elias's Chapel.
Elias, whither many resort for Devotion: Here is likewise a Grotto, with
another Chapel, which has no Tradition of its Name or Dedication; yet many go
thither to say their Prayers, and at Easter time it is much frequented. This
chapel, and Grotto stand directly over against the Isle of Nicaria, some 12
Miles from hence.

That which increases the Religious esteem of this latter Chapel, is, a
Tradition, That Light has often appeared in the Night time, which the People
conceive to be a Warning of some Holy Relics that lies here yet undiscovered,
and so neglected.

Upon the same Mountain, some six Miles distant, toward the North, stands
another Hermitage; besides which, in a spacious Grotto, stands a little Church,
Dedicated to the Virgin Mary. It has but one way of access, and that up a
steep Precipice so extremely dangerous, that it is called Panagia eis to
Cacoperaton.
(...), or St. Mary's, upon the bad passage. Five Miles from Maratha-campos,
toward the North, is the Village of Castany
Castanees, so called, from abundance of Chesnut-Trees about it. It has about
50 Houses, and one Church. Not far from hence is the Hermitage of the Holy
Trinity, where always two or three Hermits of the Monastry of Patmos do reside.

Two Miles from Castany, stands Leca.
Leca, a Village of 50 Houses, and one Church.

Not far from Leca is the Monastry of Saint George's Monastry.
St. George, an Hospital for the Monks of Mount Sina.
Monks of Mount Sina; it has always four or five Priests, who look after the
Revenues of the Hospital, which consists chiefly in Wine.

Higher upon the Hill-side, over against Leca, is a Covent of Monks of Elias;
Men abstracted from all secular employment, and they entertain all Passengers
with what they have upon free cost.

Six Miles from hence, toward Megalocampos, lies ( e) Carlovasy, (d) Carlovasy.
the greatest Town of this Island, next to Megale Chore. It is situate by the
Seaside, over against Sio, and the Castle of Siatsky, upon the Continent of
Asia. It has no less than 500 Houses, and 5 Churches. The Inhabitants are the
Richest of any in the Isle, by reason of their Traffic by Sea to Sio, Smyrna,
Chios.
and other places. Their principal Merchandise are Onions, and Muscat Wine. Yet
their Port is so exposed to the North Wind, and unsafe a Road for any Vessels,
that they are forced to load their Vessels a Shore, and so to thrust them off:
And at their return, without any delay they draw up their Vessels to Land.

Three Miles Eastward, from Carlovasi is the Town of Furni.
Furni, remarkable for those Earthen Jars, and Pitchers, and other Vessels,
which formerly were so much in esteem by the Greeks, and Romans, and were
peculiarly called Samian Vessels. The Town has at least 200 Houses, and two
Churches, and has its name from the Furnaces where these Vessels are made.
Besides this Town is a Fountain, whose stream is sufficient to make a Mill go;
at the Springhead is a Church, Consecrated to the Blessed Virgin, to which the
Inhabitants of the Town pay great Devotion. From hence begins a row of
Mountains, covered with Woods for the space of twenty Miles. It is furnished
with all manner of Wood, fit for Architecture, as well for Vessels at Sea, as
for Houses at Land, a great increase to the Aga's Revenue; But the Chestnuts
wherewith it abounds, are free for all Comers.

Upon the top of this Mountain is a Village called Vourliote.
Vourliote, a Colony of Vourla, a small Town by Smyrna. It has about an 100
Houses, and one Church. The greatest Employment of the Inhabitants, is to cut
Wood, and make Pitch.

Within half a Mile of this Town is a Monastry of a douzen Caloirs, by the name
of Panagia Touphronta*
Panagia Touphronta. The Grass about this Monastry in the Spring time is
Venomous to all strange Cattle; so that if an Horse brought from a strange
place be put into the Grounds, in a short time he shall swell and burst: But
the Horses bred up about the Monastry, and the next Village, find no such
inconvenience at all.

Ten Miles from this Monastry Eastward, stands Vathy.
Vathy, a Village of 400 Houses, and four Churches, enriched with a Port,
affording a safe Harbor in all Winds but the South. But four Miles toward the
North East lies another so well sheltred with three little Islands, (called
(...), or the Isles of Dirt,) that Vessels may ride safely in all Winds. These
Islands are 20 Miles from Scala nova, a remarkable Port, and much frequented
upon the Continent of Asia. The great Traffic of this Town is in Wine,
especially Muscat, which will hold good a whole Year, whereas that of Carlovasy
turns sower after six months age. It is likewise remarkable for Fishing.

Near to this stands Palaio-Castro.
Palaio-Castro, or the Old Castle; a Village of an 100 Houses and one Church:
Here also are good Wines, especially Muscat.

Four Miles from hence is the Port Vourcaria.
Vourcaria, near to which is a convenient place for making Salt. But the
Inhabitants fearing a great Imposition from the Turks, will not be at the pains
to make any, being content with what is brought them from Mylos, and Naxos,
from which two Islands all the Archipelago is supplied.

Two Miles from hence lies a great Plain, called (...).
(...), Ho pisos campos, wherein rises a Fountain, whose only stream causes two
Mills to go. This Plain is fruitful in Wheat, in Cotton, and the Grain of
Turkey, which the Greeks call (...), the Latins Irio, and the French peculiarly
Le bled de Turquie, or the Grain of Turkey. Here is a Church Dedicated to St.
John the Divine; the Church is called (...).
(...). The Inhabitants have an opinion of Miracles here done, and have a
Tradition, that St. John, as well as Acts 20. 15. (...).
St. Paul has been in Samos, which causes great resort to this place for
Devotion.

Four Miles hence, toward the North, stands Mytelene, a Village of some 200
Houses, and 2 Churches. It is a Colony of the Island Mytelene. This Village is
but a Mile from Megale Chore, the principal place of the Island wherewith we
begun, and so we have finished the Circuit of the whole Island, and the
Geographical Description of the Villages in it. It remains, that we speak of
some Monastrys yet untouched.

The Monastrys hitherto omitted, are but two, (...) and (...).

1. Two Miles from the great Village is Stauros, or the Monastry of the Cross,
wherein are 30 Caloirs. It is well endowed with Lands, and a Farm House for Lay
Friars to Till their Ground. Besides it has another Monastry depending upon
it, where the Friars chief Employment is to make Cloth, to do all other
necessary work for the Service and Maintenance of the great Covent.

2. Spete, and Spition, in vulgar Greek signifies an house, from Hospitium. The
first corruption of that Tongue came from the mixture of Latin words.
Panagia sta Pente Spitia, which in Vulgar Greek signifies the Blessed Virgin
of the five Houses. This maintains 60 Caloirs, and has a smaller Monastry at
Pagondas, subservient to it, in like manner as the former. This Monastry is not
subject to the Archbishop, but only to the Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Island is well stored with Sheep and Goats; But every Sheep is redeemed
with two Aspers, and every Goat with one, payable to the Vacouf or great Mosque
at Tophana in Galata. Yet were this Law literally put in execution, it were
well for the People; but the Agas take the boldness to levy more, as they think
fit. Nor can the People help themselves, the charge of Appeal being greater
than the Payment injuriously exacted. And such is the Corruption of the Turkish
Court, that the event of an Appeal would be as uncertain as the attempt unsafe.

Besides the Aga demands as his due, all the Butter he finds among the
Inhabitants, what day soever he pitches upon to number their Flocks, in order
to the gathering this Vacouf Money; which grievance arose by the inconsiderate
bounty of a rich Samian, who to ingratiate with the Aga, presented him with a
great quantity of Butter, since which time, the Aga has ever claimed it as his
due from all others.

The Aga is likewise presented by every man of stock with a Lamb and a Kid;
which by a Charter obtained from the Grand Signior, the Samians have power to
redeem with two Aspers and an half by the head, but the Aga exacts no less than
five or six.

And now it is no wonder if this oppression by the Turkish Officers keep the
Inhabitants poor, ignorant, and low spirited. Kilitch-Aly-Basha, at his first
coming to re-people the Island, brought none with him but men of low Fortunes,
and the Tyranny they live under does still keep them so. And the Malice of many
slothful, but servile people among them, does render it impossible for any
person well affected to the Public good, to effect any thing toward their
Liberty, or redress of Grievances. For there wants not among the Greeks
perpetual spies, that for their private ends, bring intelligence to the Aga's
Ministers of any motion made, or any word freely spoken toward the redress of
Grievances. The Aga's principal Engines are either those of his Family, (called
Musifarides) or such creatures as lie dispersed throughout the Island. Those of
his Family, are his Secretaries and Interpreters: The latter sort are always
Greeks; for a Turk counts it a great dishonor to learn any Christian Language.

His Creatures abroad are the (...)
Proesti, or Chief of the Villages, whom he always makes his Creatures, and
they for private ends are very forward to acquaint him any thing that may
please him. They are more zealous and forward to pay their Homage to a Turkish
Aga's House, than to serve Almighty God in his public Worship; and as if
Interest and Gain were their Godliness, they are more punctually careful to
devote their time to a servile attendance in the outmost Gate of the Aga, among
his Porters and meaner Servants, than in the solemn assembly of their fellow
Christians in the Church of God. In so much, that though they are Christians by
profession, yet on the most solemn days of public Devotion, their greatest
Religion is to wait at the Aga's House, to bid him good morrow, when he goes
out to attend his pleasure, to drink Coffee, and smoke Tobacco among his
Servants, and to speak nothing but what may flatter his Pride, or serve his
Avarice. There is no Village in the Island so small, that wants such pestilent
Spirits as these.

Samos is not inferior to any Island of the Archipelago for good Soil. They
are not beholden to other Countries for any thing but Iron and Salt; and this
latter they might have, did not the oppression of the Turks discourage their
Industry. They are well stored with Trees of all sorts, with Pitch, Cottons,
Corn, Oil, Honey, and Wine, of whose Lees they make abundance of Aqua vitae in
the Month of October, by them called Asynchoretos, (...): For when (...),
unforgiven.
they make their Aquavitae, all Passengers are invited to taste of it, which he
that refuses, is branded with the name of (...), in these words, (...); If you
will take none, you shall never obtain pardon.

All the People of the Country are Laborers, excepting the Musafarides, who
farm out their Lands, and make it their business to attend the Aga. Every
Master of a Family is obliged to attend the Aga at such time as he puts all his
Corn in a readiness to be measured. And then is one of the Musafarides sent,
who is to be entertained at the charge of the Master of the Family, but instead
of taking a Tenth of the Corn, which is strictly his due; he takes Money
according to his own valuation of the price of Corn.

All Wines, Aquavitae, and Oil, are Tith'd according to an ancient rate set
down in the Court Rolls.

Heretofore there was no Imposition taken upon Silks, because it was a
Manufacture exercised only by the hands of Women, 'till a certain Aga came,
that desired a little to make him a Girdle; and being presented with a good
handsome Basket full: The next year he demanded the like quantity every where
as his due.

The Habit of the Samians is like the Turks: A long Vest, like our Cassock,
down to the Heels with a Girdle about the Loins, and over it a loose Garment,
like a Batchelour of Arts Gown. The Women likewise imitate the Turkish Women in
their Apparel, girded about the Loins, a white Vail over their Heads. The young
Women let their hair hang down behind, in a long Look plaited, and tied at the
end with a Silver or Guilt Chain.

In former times, the greatest part of the Isles of the Archipelago were under
the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Rhodes; and this Isle had a Bishop that
was Suffragan to that Archbishop. But since the last re-peopling of the Isle,
it has been under the Patriarch of Constantinople, who bestowed it upon the
great Church of Constantinople, and sent a Vicar to collect all the
Ecclesiastical Revenues. And in this condition it continued for an hundred
years, 'till the People of the Isle did petition the Patriarch to let them have
an Archbishop, which accordingly he did, and appointed them the Bishop of
Nicaria for their Suffragan; but that Island being too poor to maintain a
Bishop at this day the Archbishop of Samos has now no Suffragan at all.

When a new Archbishop comes, he shows his Patent from the Grand Signior to
the Caddee; then summons all the Proesti of the Villages, to whom having read
his Patent, he has it Registered in the public Records of the Island. This
done, they all accompany him to the Cathedral Church, where after the Reading
of his Institutions, given by the Patriarch, he is placed in the Archiepiscopal
Throne, where every one comes to kiss his Hand, and he bestows upon them his
Benediction; and then makes them a Speech (if he find himself of sufficient
capacity to do it.) This is the way of his Investiture into the Archbishopric
of Samos and Nicaria.

At his first coming, the Papas, or Parish Priest of the Church of his
Residence presents him 15, or 20 Dollers; they of the other Churches according
to their Abilities. The first year of his coming, every Parish Priest pays him
4 Dollers, and the following years 2. Every Layman pays him 48 Aspers, and the
following years 24. The rest of his Revenues comes in by Ordinations and
Marriages. One part of the Island come to Megale Chore, where he Resides, for
Licenses to Marry, the other part to his Vicar General at Carlovasi. The
Samians pay one Doller for a License; all Strangers two: But he that comes
after first Marriage for a License for a second, or third, pays three or four.
Since Samos has been an Archbishopric, there has been hitherto but eight; 1.
Athanasius; 2. Anthimus; 3. Parthenius; 4. Cornelius; 5. Christophorus; 6.
Neophytus; 7. Joseph (who writ this History in vulgar Greek) and Philaretus
that now succeeds him. Of whom here is a short account.

Athanasius, a Native of the Isle, and a Married Priest, but his Wife dying
about the time of his promotion, took upon him the Habit of a Caloir, he was
Archbishop 20 years,

Anthimus, surnamed Judas, because at the Ceremony of the Patriarch's washing
the Feet of twelve Priests on Maunday Thursday* he being one, had the name of
Judas. The Patriarch of Constantinople, in imitation of our Savior, does every
year, on Maunday Thursday, Wash the Feet of twelve Men in Holy Orders, who are
at that time called the twelve Apostles; and every Priest has at that time the
name of some particular Apostle. After he had been Archbishop 15 years, upon a
Complaint made against him by the Islanders to the Capitan Basha, or Admiral of
the Turkish Fleet, he was clapped into prison, whence being released by a sum of
Money, he became afterward Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

Parthenius a Theban, was Translated from the Archbishopric of Patras to
Samos, where he presided 12 years, only under the Title of (...) or President;
but after he had passed 12 years under this meaner and unusual Title, he was
admitted to the full Rights and Dignity of an Archbishop.

Cornelius of Metelyne was deposed by the Patriarch of Constantinople, after he
had sat six years.

Christophorus a Samian, was clapped into the Galleys by the Venetian Admiral,
for not paying Contribution to the Venetians, at the appointed time; for
happening to be Archbishop in the beginning of that War between the Turks and
Venetians (so calamitous to all the Greek Isles) the Venetians then Masters at
Sea, forced all the Archipelago to contribution. He to secure his poor flock,
the Samians, from immediate Plunder, Rapine, Captivity, and other Insolences,
did engage for raising the demanded Contribution, which was an high sum for
that place, but was not able to make good his promise within the appointed
time; because of the Peoples poverty: Whereupon the Venetian Admiral, without
any respect to his Religion as a Christian, or to his place and quality as an
Archbishop, did most Barbarously put him into the Galleys, a punishment
commonly imposed upon Turkish Captives, or such Christians only as were gross
and notorious Malefactors, and judicially condemned for capital Crimes.

Neophytus of Siphanto sat 6 years, and deceased in the Island.

After him came Josph Georgirene, of the Island of Milos, who was Consecrated,
October 7. 1666. He sat here five years, till after the taking of Candie, the
Turks grew more populous, and consequently more abusive: So that wearied with
their injuries, he retired to the Holy Grotto of the Apocalypse, in the Isle of
Patmos.

After he had voluntarily retired from his Archbishopric, the Patriarch of
Constantinople did presently substitute in his place Philaretus of the Isle of
Siphanto.

And thus much concerning the Archbishop of Samos, his Investiture his
Jurisdiction, and his Revenue. Proceed we to the Clergy, that under him have
the Cure of Souls. And these not only in Samos, but throughout the whole extent
of the whole Greek Church, are always dignified and distinguished by the
peculiar title of (...), Papas which signifies a Father, because in spiritual
matters within the bounds of their Cure, they are Fathers, as well to Feed as
to Govern.

The Papas in the bounds of his (a) Of those whom the Greeks call Papas, or
Parochial Priests.
Parish is obliged to perform all those sacred Offices which the Greek Ritual
requires. They are not only allowed to Marry, but obliged to do it, before they
enter into the Order of Priesthood. And not only those Greek Priests that live
under the Patriarch of Constantinople, but also those Greeks that in Sicily,
Calabria, and in the Islands under the State of Venice do embrace the Romish
Religion, are by allowance of the Pope permitted to Marry. And such Men (though
Married) are commonly Ordained Priests at Rome it self, by some Greek Bishop of
the Romish Religion in the College of Greeks at Rome, and in that of Spain, and
in that called Madonna del Populo: Yet the Greek Church, for that esteem they
have of a Monastic Life, do never advance a Parish Priest to a Bishopric,
except his Wife be Dead, or Divorced from him, and he take upon him the Habit
and Profession of a Caloir.

A Married Man, that would take Orders, is required to declare, that he has
been but once Married, and that his Wife was neither a Widow, nor a Slave, nor
the Daughter of a Slave, or under the reproach of an Harlot: This done, he
comes to a Confessor, who among other Sins, does particularly put him upon the
Confession of those Sins that by the Canon would exclude him from entering into
Orders. And though his Confessor give him a good Testimony, yet a Week before
the Ordination, the Bishop does openly in the Church charge all the Assembly
under the Peril of Excommunication, if they know him guilty of any Crime that
may render him unworthy of Holy Orders, to reveal it before the next Sunday:
Which if any Man do, and make good his Accusation, he is denied Holy Orders; if
the Accuser be found to Impeach him falsely, he is Excommunicated for his false
Accusation, and the other Ordained. After the Candidate for Holy Orders has
thus made his way, the day before he enters into Priests Orders, he comes to
the Metropolite, who having tried whether he Read and Write without false
Pronuntiation, or mis-spelling; and being satisfied in that point, does
presently Ordain him Subdeacon and Deacon, and the next day Priest, if he be
of sufficient Age. The Age for a Reader is 18; For a Subdeacon, 20; For a
Deacon, 25. For a Priest, 30; Nevertheless it is left to the Discretion of the
Metropolite, to dispense with the Canon, as he shall see occasion, according to
the example of Anicetus, who Ordained St. Eleutherius a Priest at 18, and
Bishop of Illyrium at 20. If a Papas Marry a second time, he is deprived of his
Orders, and called ever after Apopapas. But nothing hinders the Widow of a
Priest to Marry again.

The Papas is obliged to Read Prayers, and Administer the Sacrament every
Sunday and Holyday. The day before a Sacrament, he is to sing the Vespers, and
after Supper, to rehearse a Prayer called the (...); if after that Prayer said,
he chance to Eat or Drink that Night, he is obliged to go to Church, and say
that Prayer again: Likewise that Night he is not allowed to lie with his Wife.

Every Parishioner is obliged to bring to Church a Loaf to the Weight of seven
or eight pounds, which is marked with these three words; (...): Jesus Christ
overcomes. Of this Bread the Priest distributes to every one a Morsel, and the
rest goes to himself.

If any man desire the Sacrament upon other days than Sundays or Holidays, he
sends to the Priest the day before, to prepare himself according to the Canon.
The next Morning the Priest sends to him to bring with him what is necessary
for Celebration, viz. a Loaf, marked as before, a Wax Taper of two Aspers, and
Incense of one Asper, (for they never Celebrate without a lighted Taper, and
Incense) and a Quart of Wine, and three Aspers in Money: What is left of the
Bread and Wine, goes to the Priest with three Aspers. He that leaves it to the
Priest to provide necessaries, brings with him 15 Aspers.

The Parish Priests, excepting those that are very ancient, or Widowers, never
confess any. That employment is left ordinarily to the Caloirs of the Order of
St. Basil, whereof there wants not some every where dispersed throughout the
whole Greek Church, to beg Alms for the Monks of Athos, from whence they are
sent. Yet neither they, nor any Parish Priest confess any without a particular
License from the Metropolite, who does enjoin them under a Mortal Sin, not to
exact any Money for Absolution. But if after Absolution, the Penitent offer any
thing, they receive it. If the Penitent desires any Prayers to be said for him
in some Monastry of Mount Athos, he gives Money in consideration of the Prayers
to be said for him.

If the Parish Priest have any Lands, he thinks it no shame to Till them
himself. But he resides constantly in the Parish, to be ready upon all
occasions for the Sick, to whom he says the Prayers appointed by the Church for
Sick people.

If a Woman be in Childbirth, he is sent for to say some Prayers appointed for
that occasion; nor can the company that come to assist the Woman in her Travail
leave the House, 'till the Priest come and perform the Sacred Ceremonies
appointed by the Church, for Women in Childbed; accounting it a great contempt
of God, and a thing ominous and of ill foreboding to the success of the person
in Labor, to neglect their solemn address to God in the prayers appointed by
public Authority for that Emergency.

A Woman Of their Women in Childbed.
after Childbirth stirs not abroad, neither to Church, nor to other Houses,
till 40 days be expired. Then she is brought to the Church Door, where the
Priest having said the Prayers appointed for that occasion, she is permitted to
go to Church, or to other Houses.

The Children ordinarily are not Paedobaptism.
Baptized till 40 days after Birth, sometimes, under pretense of the Parents or
Gossips absence, not till half a Year, a whole Year, or more. But this is
always in case the Child be healthy and strong; for upon the least suspicion
of the Child's being weak, or likely to dye, the Priest is sent for by the
Parents, and without any further Ceremony, the Child is Baptized in this manner.

N. N. The servant of God does Baptize thee, in the Name of the Father, Amen.
Of the Son, Amen. And of the Holy Ghost, from henceforth and for evermore, Amen.

In private Baptism they use only Water, Oil, and a Lamp burning before the
Picture of the Virgin Mary. For there is no House so poor, which has not the
Picture of the Blessed Virgin, or some other Saint, before which they pray,
Morning and Night, after they have lighted a Lamp.

In public Baptism, the Child is brought to the Church Porch, where after the
Priest has said ^n Exorcism, the Child is brought to the Font, and being
interrogated by the Priest, the Godfather makes answer, and rehearses the
Creed thrice. Then the Priest Consecrates the Water, which being hot he pours
into it Oil Olive, and Anoints the Child on several parts of the Body. The Child
is Anointed on the Forehead, Mouth, Ears, Breast, Hands, Knees, and Feet with
these words at every place; The Seal of the Gift of the Holy Spirit. Then the
Godfather claps a Cross to the Child's Breast: This done, the Priest takes the
Child stark naked, and baths him all over thrice in the Water, saying the same
words as you had in private Baptism. After the third Bathing, he pours some of
the Water upon the Child's Head: Then delivering the Child into the hands of
the Godfathers, he puts a Shirt on the Child, with these words; Jesus Christ
our merciful God, clothed with Light, give thee a bright Garment.

All the Greeks of the Island that ( b) Marry, first obtain a License of
Marriage.
the Archbishop, or his Grand Vicar: Then the Priest having examined if they
have any Legal prohibition of affinity, or otherwise; either at the Church, or
their own Houses, Marrys them in this manner. After the Reading of that part of
the Liturgy which concerns Marriage, and the parties enterchanging a Ring, the
Priest takes two Garlands made like Crowns, and signing them with the sign of
the Cross, he puts one on the Bridegrooms Head, with these words:

The Servant of God N. N. is Crowned to the Servant of God A. A. in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, henceforth and for ever.

The like is done to the Bride, and then the Epistle and Gospel appointed for
the Occasion is Read. Then he that gives them in Marriage, first Kisses the
Garlands, and all the Company, in Testimony of their wishing Joy to the Married
Parties.

On Maunday Thursday, which is an high day with the Greeks, Sacrament for the
Sick*
they Consecrate Bread, and pour upon it consecrated Wine, with these words:

The Union and Conformation of the Holy Body, and Precious Blood, Amen.

This Bread is laid up till the first Sunday after Easter, and then the Priest
in all his Formalities, lighting all the Lamps of the Altar, perfumes the Bread
with Incense, and cuts it into pieces as small as a Grain of Wheat. Then being
put up in a certain Vessel, it is laid up for all occasions of the Sick for
that year. When any is Sick, he takes one of these Grains of Bread, and putting
it into the Chalice, he carries it in his hand to the Sick Man's House: All
that meet him by the way, go back with him to the sick Man's House: But at
Constantinople, and other Cities where the Turks are numerous, the Priest
carries it secretly under his Arm, for fear of some affront.

The Priest is obliged to carry this Sacrament to those that have the Plague,
in which case, he puts the Grain of Bread into a Raison, and gives it him at
the end of a long Cane.

When any person Burial of the dead;
dies, a Lamp is lighted over the Corpse, and the House is perfumed with
Incense. Then the Corpse being stripped, they dip a Sponge or Lint in warm Water,
and draw it over the Face, Knees, and Feet, in form of a Cross: Then taking a
white Linen Cloth, they make a Hole in the middle, large enough for the Head
to come out, and sewing it up close at the Feet, they cloth him again with the
best Garments the Party Deceased had. When the Corpse are ready to go to Church,
the Priest goes before the Corpse with a Cross and a Taper in his hand, singing
certain Prayers. At the Church, the Office for the Dead being ended, the
Friends and Kindred of the Party Deceased, come and kiss the Corpse. The Corpse
being brought to the Grave, the Priest takes some of the Earth, and sprinkling
upon the Head, and the Feet, and the two Sides, in form of a Cross, saying
these words:

The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; Take O Earth, that which is
formed of thee by the hand of God, who has received that which was made
according to his likeness, and do thou take the Body which belongs to thee.

Then the Priest throws upon the Corpse some Water, or Oil, out of one of the
Church-Lamps, and a piece of flaming Incense, and so the Corpse are covered. In
Samos they give Bread and Wine at the Church, to those that accompany the Corpse
to Church.

Three days after Interment, the Friends of the Commemoration for the Dead.
Deceased have a solemn Office at the Church for the Dead. After the Office is
ended, they have a sort of small Junket, which they distribute, and Eat in the
Church, with Wine, or Strong Water, to wash it down. This sort of Junket they
call (...), Colyba, and they derive its first Institution from the time of
Julian the Apostate, who to spite the Christians, commanded all the Bakers to
raise their Paste with the Blood of Beasts that were Sacrificed to Idols. The
Christians, ignorant of the command, were about to buy the Bread, till St.
Thereon, that was a Martyr under Maximin, appearing to the Patriarch Eudoxius,
admonished him to forbid the Greeks to Eat any Bread of the Bakers making,
because it was mixed with the Blood of Beasts offered to Idols. The Patriarch
then asked the Saint what the People should Eat. He told them Colyba, and so
showed him the way how to make it. But now the Greeks use it at these Funeral
Commemorations, and on a Shrove-Sunday; and the Sunday before Pentecost.

Moreover they have another Commemoration for the Dead, nine days after
Burial, at the House where the Party died. Then again forty days; then at the
end of three Months; then of six Months; then of nine Months, and at last of
twelve Months. The first Year of the party Deceased being expired, the
Commemoration is only Annual.

Every Parish has an anniversary Feast, in Commemoration of that peculiar
Saint or Patron, to whose memory that Church is Dedicated, and by whose name it
is called. All they of the Parish, and others that have a particular devotion
for the Saint, carry with them a present of Bread, of a Wax-Taper and
Frankincense. The Bread goes to the Archbishops Vicar General; the Tapers and
Incense to the service of the Church.

And now we have finished the Description of Samos, and the story of its
present State and Condition, by which one place being one of the largest of the
Archipelago for Circumference, and one of the Fruitfullest for Soil, We may
guess at the condition of all the rest that are rich enough to maintain a
Turkish Governor. Besides it acquaints us in great part with the Religion of
the whole Greek Church, which throughout the whole extent of the Patriarch of
Constantinoples Jurisdiction, is very uniform, without any variation of Rites
or Ceremonies.

A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLE of Nicaria, olim Icarus.
THe Isle of Nicaria being under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Samos,
I thought it expedient to add this Relation of it, as a Supplement to that of
Samos.

Nicaria lies in length East and West; its prospect on the North is to Scio, on
the South to Paros and Naxos, on the East to Patmos, and the West to Mycone.
Three Miles distant from the Island, on the South Side toward Patmos, lie some
small Islands unhabited; but known by the name of Furny, and furnished with
good Harbors, capacious enough for all sorts of Vessels. Here the Corsairs of
Malta, and other Christians, used to lay in wait for Ships that trade from Scio
to Rhodes. It lies twelve Miles distant from Samos. The Sea about it was
formerly called the Icarian Sea, from Icarus, so Famous among the Ancient Poets.

Quid fuit ut tutas agitaret Daedalus alas,
Icarus immensas nomine signet aquas?
Tot premor adversis, ut si comprendere coner
Icariae numerum dicere coner aquae. Ov. l. 4. El. tr. 5.
Icarus Icariis nomina fecit aquis.
Transit and Icarium, lapsas ubi perdidit alas
Icarus, and vastae nomina fecit aquae. Ovid. l. 4. Fast.
It is upwards of fourscore Miles in compass, and yet has not one Port nor Road
for great Ships, but only two small Creeks for little Boats. The one called
(...) (...), Ton Hagion Phoca, from a Church here dedicated to St. Phocas: The
other is called Keramy, so extremely bad, that they that come a shore here are
forced to draw up their Boats after them. A Mile of Keramy is a little Island
called (...), Karavostasi, or the Rode for small Vessels, called Karavia. This
affords a good retreat for Vessels in Tempestuous Weather. And when it is fair,
they lade and unlade their Vessels with all possible speed, at the Shore of
Icarus, and so retire, for fear of a Storm.

All the Hor. od. 7. l. 3. Scopulis surdior cari.
Island is very Mountainous and full of Rocks, which causes but few Villages,
and those very small, none of them exceeding an 100 Houses. The Promontory
toward Samos is called Phanari, or the Lanthorn; because of a Watch Tower here
built, to give light to Mariners in the Night. The Tower is yet standing, and
the common People are so far mistaken in the common Fable, as to pretend that
Icarus and his Son were here kept Prisoners. But they are given to a Credulity
of new reports more inconvenient than that of old Fables, and that the belief
of Treasures hid in all old Ruins ever since the taking of Constantinople,
where so much was found long after it was burned. This conceit blown up by
various reports; and the Itch of talking on one side, and the great credulity
of ignorant People on the other, has increased into a vulgar Tradition, very
incommodious to the Greeks, and whereat the Turks take great advantage against
them, in case they meddle with any Ruins, either for Curiosity or Use. And
these Islanders have a common Tradition, that about this old Tower of Icarus
lies a great treasure, whereof part, though not all, they say, was carried away
some 40 years ago, by some Asiaticks, that came over by stealth, and in the
Night, dug up all the ground; And an old Man, whom I spoke with, that saw them
at work, but durst not come near till they had all gone aboard, and set Sail,
upon his approach, found the dead Carkase of a Man newly slain; whom they
suppose was sacrificed to the Genius of the place, or the Guardian Angel of the
Treasure. They add besides, that before this adventure of the Asiaticks, the
place was haunted with a Spirit, which always appeared in black, and destroyed
their Oxen, at least one in a year. But since that time, the place was no more
haunted, nor did the Laborers ever complain of the loss of an Ox.

About this Shore are the best Cockles of all the Archipelago. The principal
Villages are 1. Cachoria, of 100 Houses, and two or three Ches. 2. Steli,
famous for great abundance of Nut-Trees. 3. Musara, besides which is an
Hermitage, and a Church, wherein are kept the Relics of St. Theoctistes, who
was of Lesbos, and whom the People do think yet does Miracles at this day. Here
are in the Isle, the Ruins of a greater Town than any now is. The Church is yet
standing, and goes by the name of St. Hellens. The Beauty of its Fabric, is a
clear argument, it was built in the days of the Constantinopolitan Emperors;
and though it has no House near hand it, yet great resort is made hither for
Devotion; and from time to time there never wants a Papas to say the Prayers of
the Church in it.

There are besides these three already named, a great many little Villages
scattered up and down through the whole Island, which for the number of Houses,
are larger of extent than those in Samos; for here every House is environed
with its proper Garden, Orchard; but the Houses in Samos are commonly built
closer, and their Gardens, and Orchards at a greater distance.

The whole Island is for the most part Mountainous, and Rocky. The Valleys are
few, and little in compass; so that with great labor, and difficulty, they
force out of so barren a Soil, that little Corn they have; which is not
sufficient to feed the Inhabitants above one half the year; and lays a
necessity upon the Nicarians to traffic abroad for supplies elsewhere. But
principally they trade to Scio for Corn, whither they carry Wood from Samos,
and the neighboring parts of Natolia. They are very expert in making Boats,
and small Vessels, which are in such esteem, that they are bought up by all
their Neighbors. Besides their Traffic in Wood and small Vessels, they vend
good store of Sheep and Goats, wherewith their Mountains are well stored. And
yet their care to keep them is so small, that without either milking them, or
driving them into Coats, or Folds, or making any limits or bounds, they only
visit them twice a Year, to count the number of their Flocks, and to imprint
the Marks of the proper Owners. Some there are, and those of the Richest, that
are at the trouble of milking so many, as may supply their Family with Cheese.
They vend likewise good store of Swines Flesh. Wax, and Honey they have great
plenty of, but their Honey is in no great esteem, because of that bitterness of
taste which it receives from their Bees feeding upon Firr leaves, which Tree
that Island abounds with.

The most commendable thing of this Island is their Air and Water, both so
healthful, that the People are very long lived, it being an ordinary thing to
see persons in it of an 100 years of Age, which is a great wonder, considering
how hardily they live. There is not a Bed in the Island, the Ground is their
Tick, and the cold Stone their Pillow, and the Clothes they wear is all the
Coverlet they use. They provide no more Apparel than what they wear all at
once, when that is past wearing any longer, then think of a new Suit. Betwixt
their ordinary times of Eating, there is not a piece of Bread to be found in
the Isle. A little before Dinner, they take as much Corn as will serve that
Meal, grind it with a Hand-Mill, bake it upon a flat Stone; when it is Baked,
the Master of the Family divides it equally among the Family; but a Woman with
child has two shares. If any Stranger comes in, every one parts with a Piece of
his own share to accommodate the Stranger. Their Wine is always made with a
third part Water, and so very weak and small. When they drink it, so much as is
thought sufficient is put into one large Bowl, and so passes round. The
Nicarians are the only Islanders of all the Archipelago, that neither keep Wine
to sell, nor lay it up in Wooden Vessels, but in long Jars, covered all over in
the Ground. When they have a mind to Tap it, they make a Bung-hole in the top,
and draw it out with Canes. Their Houses are so plain, that all the Furniture
you can see is an Hand-Mill, besides this, there is nothing but bare Walls:
That little they have besides is all hid under Ground; not so much for fear of
the Corsairs (from whom their Poverty is a sure guard) as out of Custom. Nor
are they all so poor, as not to be able to buy Beds, but custom has brought
them into a contempt of Beds, as merely superfluous; insomuch, that when they
Travel into other Islands, they refuse the offer of a Bed. A Priest of Nicaria
coming into Samos, was courteously entertained by those of his Order, and at
Night was offered a Bed to lie in; he thanked them, but refused, nor could by
any importunity be prevailed upon, but told them the Earth was his Mother, from
whence he would not keep a distance; besides he was afraid of being Sick, if he
should lie in a Bed; and therefore if they had a kindness for him, they must
give him the liberty of sleeping after his own Country way.

When I went to visit them as Archbishop, and ignorant of the custom of the
Country, carried no Bed. At Night, where I first lodged, asking for a Chamber,
they told me they had no other than that where I first came; then asking for a
Bed, they told me it was not the Custom of the Country; then desiring to borrow
some Bed Clothes for Love or Money, all they brought me was one Smock made of
course Dimity.

They have no great communication one with another, any farther than the
public times of Sacred Solemnities, or Civil Business does cause them to come
together. At other times they keep strictly within the narrow Sphere of their
own affairs. Formal Visits, Treats, and Entertainments, are things unknown. If
any business do put them upon a Visit to their Neighbor, they come not close
to his Door, but stand off at a great distance, and call aloud to him; If he
make them answer, they discourse the Business they came about, standing off at
the same distance; except they be earnestly invited to come in. And this way of
discoursing at a distance they practice more in the Fields and Mountains; their
Voices being so strong, that it is ordinary to talk at a Miles distance;
sometimes at four or five, where the Valleys interposed between two hills, give
advantage to the Voice. Sometimes they can discourse at that distance, that the
carriage of the Sound through the Winding of the Valleys, shall require half a
Quarter of an Hours time; and yet they make distinct, and proper Answers, both
audible and intelligible, without the help of a Stentorophonical Trumpet.

Their Habit for the Men, is a Shirt, and over it a short Cassock, down to the
Knees, to which, in Winter they add only a short Vest, that reaches a little
below the middle. Stockings they never wear. There Shoes are only a piece of
thin Copper, bowed to the shape of their Feet, and every one is his own
Shoemaker. The Women have nothing but one Smock, but so large, that they wrap
it double, or treble down to the Girdle, but below the Girdle single. The
Priests, for greater reverence in the Church, ty two Towels about their Legs,
the one is their usual Bonnet, and the other their Girdle: so that they perform
sacred Offices unguirt, as well as uncovered.

Of all the Isles of the Archipelago, this only admits of no mixture with
strangers in Marriage, nor admits any stranger to settle with them: They being,
as they pretend, all descended of the Imperial Blood of the Porphyrogenneti,
must not stain their noble Blood with inferior Matches, or mixtures with
Choriats, or Peasants, for so they term all the other Islanders.

Porphyrogenneti, were those of the Blood Royal, in the Days of the Greek
Emperors, so called, from their wearing of Purple, which was a Badge of
Royalty, and allowed only to Princes of the Blood; and not from an house called
Porphyra, where the Empresses were wont to lie in. But Purple was throughout
the East, the known Badge of Royalty. Hence came that unsanctify'd Wit, and
learned Writer that ever opposed the Christian Religion with his Pen, to be
called Porphyrius: For his true name in the Language of Syria, his native
Country, was Malchus, or King; but the Greeks did paraphrase it Porphyrius, or
Purplerobed; that being a Color peculiar to Kings.

They have a great Happiness, by reason of their poverty, in not being molested
by the Turks, who think it not worth their while to come among them, nor if
they should, were they likely to enjoy any quiet, without keeping a stronger
Guard than the Revenues of the Isle would maintain. Once they slew a Caddee,
sent by the Grand Signior, and being summoned to Answer for their Crime, they
by common consent owned the Fact, but would name no particular Man. So that the
Turkish Officers looking upon their beggarly Clothes, thought there was neither
gain nor glory in punishing such Miscreants, and that in Justice, they must
punish all, or none, dismissed them untouched. From that time no Turk ever
troubled them: For they take all courses imaginable to seem poor; and
wheresoever they come abroad, they count it no shame to beg Alms: Yet they make
a shift every year to levy 300 Crowns for the Archbishop. They are governed by
a Proesti of their own choosing, who also levys their Haratch or Tribute to the
Grand Signior, and takes care to carry it to the Aga of Scio. As for their
Religion, it is the same with that of Samos; but their Priests are more
ignorant.

Thus you have an account of a small Island, the Poorest, and yet the Happiest
of the whole Aegaean Sea. The Soil is Barren, but the Air is Healthful; their
Wealth is but small; but their Liberty and Security is great. They are not
molested with the Tyrannous Insolence of a Turkish Officer, nor with the
frightful Incursions of barbarous and merciless Pirates. Their Diet and Apparel
is below the Rate of Beggars in other Countries, and their Lodging is a thing of
no more care, or cost, than that of the Beasts of the Field, yet their Bodies
are strong and hardy, and the People generally long lived. They live with as
little forecast, as if they expected not to survive a Day, being contented to
satisfy the present necessities of Nature. They do properly In diem vivere, or
as we say, From Hand to Mouth. They have but little, yet they never Want. Their
Ignorance is equal to their Poverty, and contributes much to their content. And
how well they esteem of their own condition, their contempt of their
Neighboring Islands, and scorning to mix with them in Alliance by Marriage, is
a manifest sign. Whence we may learn, that they approach the nearest to
Contentedness is this Life; whose desires are contracted into the narrowest
compass.

A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLE of PATMOS.
THe Isle of Patmos, now called Patino, is 36 Miles in compass, 40 Miles from
the Continent of Asia, toward Ephesus; as many Miles distant from Samos North
East of it; 30 from Nicaria, North; 60 from Paros, and Naxos, West; 60 from
Amurgos, South.

The Figure is neither round nor square, but irregular, by reason of unequal
Promontories and Bays. It is furnished with very commodious Havens, to which it
owes its being inhabited, though not so well as in former times, as appears by
the many and great Ruins in it.

This Island was eminent for those wonderful Revelations which the Blessed
Apostle, and Evangelist St. John had in it, during his banishment thither in
the time of the Persecution under Domitian. The substance of what is related in
that Life of St. John, that goes under the Name of Prochorus, is generally
believed in Patmos to this day. And though the Author might be of later years
than Prochorus, the Disciple of St. John, as the most judicious Historians of
later days do pronounce him to be: Yet that the whole contents of that Book
should be a mere Fable, and nothing but the Product of the Authors invention
and fancy, is very improbable. For though he might take great liberty in the
Manner and Circumstance of what he relates, yet the Matter and Substance were
built upon some foundations of real Truth, and such as many Books now not
extant, and the Streams of Tradition then nearer the Fountain, but now run dry,
might acquaint him with. That the Island, at St. John's first coming were all
Idolaters, had people possessed with Devils, and were misled with Magicians,
is more than probable. That St. John's casting a Devil out of young
Apollonides, had a great influence on the peoples Conversion, and raised him
the Enmity of a Magician, and all that he could draw after him, is a thing
reasonably credible. The Name of Cynops the Magitian, is known to all the
People to this day; yea, not without some very improbable circumstances of the
Story, that St. John should cause him to jump twice into the Sea, and the
second time to be turned into a Rock, which now bears his name. However it is
no small credit to a Place, otherwise very inconsiderable, that that great
Apostle, once the peculiarly beloved Disciple; who of all the Apostles, did
alone survive our Saviors judicial coming into his Kingdom of Power and
Vengeance upon the Jewish Nation: that he should be for no small time an
Inhabitant of this Island, and there Pen that Mysterious and Sublime Book,
which to him indeed was Apocalypse, but to all others Apocrypha, to him a
Revelation, but to us yet an hidden Mystery: like the former Prophecies of the
Old Testament, that were never rightly understood till actually fulfilled. The
Tradition of this Island is very positive, that he writ his Gospel here
likewise, and that upon the Request of the Islanders, who at his departure,
after seven years abode in the Island, did importune him to leave them in
writing what they ought to believe: Whereupon he staid eight days longer, to
dictate the Gospel to his Disciples that writ it.

They add more, that as he was beginning the Work, there happened a great Thunder
and Earthquake, whereupon, looking up to Heaven, he spoke those words; (...):
In the beginning was the Word. Besides, it is a most confirmed Tradition, that
the Cavern, which now goes by the name of the Holy Grotto, was made by the
Rupture of the Earth, in that Earthquake.

The Original of this Island, as it is at this day, is ascribed to St.
Christodoulus, in the Days of Alexius Comnenus.

It was Alexius Comnenus, the first of that name, in whose days began the Holy
War, who reigned the 20 last years of the tenth Century, and the 18 first of
the eleventh, and was contemporary with William the Conqueror, and Godfrey of
Bulloigne. This Christodoulus was Abbot of Latros, and had jurisdiction over
some 20 Monasteries in Asia, near a great Lake about a days Journey and half
from Ephesus. He being molested by the Turks, (whose power now mightily
increased in Asia) obtained leave of the Emperor to build a Monastry in
Patmos: Whither having transported his Wealth and Family, he built a Monastry
near the Port of Nestia, and named it Rouvali. But not liking the place, (and
as the Tradition goes, being warned by a Vision, and a Voice from Heaven,) he
quitted that Monastry, and built another in the highest part of the Island, and
fortified it with a strong Castle, environed with high and strong Walls: And
there he built a Church. The Inhabitants that lay scattered in the Isle,
desired leave to build Huts near the Monastry, for their better Shelter, and
defense, in case of any sudden Attaque by Pirates. In process of time, these
Huts were changed into fair Houses, and by Trade and Commerce, became a great
Town, to the number of 800 Houses, and there Inhabited by rich Merchants, that
traded into all parts. But the many Revolutions that have happened since, have
eclipsed the former Glory of the place: And their Ships of Merchandise are all
dwindl'd into small Fisher Boats, and the Inhabitants are all extremely poor.

About half a mile from this place stands the Holy Grotto, where St. John the
Evangelist is said to have writ the Apocalypse. Here is a small Monastry, under
the Jurisdiction of a Caloir. The Inhabitants of the neighboring Borough, pay
great Devotion to this place. They talk here of a Fig Tree, whose Figs have
naturally the Characters of the Word (...). Apocalypsis. Near the Grotto is a
stone Font, where St. John the Evangelist is said to have baptized.

The best Port of this Island, and of all the Archipelago, on the West side
toward Naxos, is called Scala, or the Wharf, because of a Wharf built of stone
for the convenient lading or un-lading of Ships. That which renders it free
from annoyance of Winds are certain little Islands that shelter it from the
East and North-east Winds. The Venetian Fleet were wont to winter here during
the War of Candy.

Besides this Port, stands an entire Village, called Phocas, without an
Inhabitant. Here is likewise among old Ruins, a Church yet standing, which they
say was built in St. John's days, and they show something like a Pulpit, where
they say St. John used to Preach. 2. Merike, whose neighboring Hills are well
stored with Vine-yards. 3. Leukes, fortified with a Castle for the Retreat of
the Laborers in the Vine-yards, and well supplied with fresh Fish, from a
neighboring Lake. 4. Myrsini, from the growth of Myrtles hereabouts. Here is a
Fountain of excellent Water, which the People call (...), Hagiasma, or
Holy-Well. 5. St. Nicholas, from a Church here dedicated to that Saint. 6. St.
George's from a Church here dedicated to that Saint: This is a convenient place
for Ships to take in fresh, Water at. Two Miles hence are the Ruins of an old
Town called (...), Platys Gialos, or the Broad shore; but now it is covered
with the shrub Arbutus, which the Greeks call Coumara, in old Greek (...): it
bears a Fruit like a Strawberry, but much bigger. 7. Turcolimnionos, or the
Turks Port, because it is frequented by the Corsairs. Betwixt this place and
Port Scala, a rich Merchant Nicholas Mathas did lately build a Tower at Livadi;
it being a convenient place for Vine-yards and Fishing. 8. Agrio Livadi, before
which lies St. Thecla's Isle with a little Church, dedicated to that Saint. 9.
Port Sapsila, before which lies a little Island, with a Church in it, dedicated
to St. Luke. 10. Port Gricou, next to Scala for commodiousness. The Island
Tragonesi, or Isle of Goats, defends it from all Winds. 11. Diacopti, famous
for Salt Pits, which belong to the Caloirs. Besides this Port, is a steep Rock
of a very great height, which they call Cynops, from the Magician in St. John's
days, whom the People report to have lodged in a great Cave in this Rock; which
Cave they yet believe to be haunted by Devils. For once letting down a Man
into it by a Cord for curiosity* to see what was in the Cave, they pulled him up
dead. 12. Meloi, a Mile from Port Scala. And so we have finished the Circuit of
the Island, in naming the Ports.

The Inland Villages are 1. Livadi. 2. Vagie, well beset with Vines and
Figtrees. 3. Megalocampos, rich in the same Fruits, and accommodated with a
Lake well stored with Fish. 4. Hagio Theophanes, from a Church there dedicated
to that Saint, and built by St. Christodoulos. 5. Sazousa, close by the Sea,
near to which are hot Springs of Water, that cure many Diseases. The Island is
well stored with Vines, Figg-Trees, Lemon and Orange Trees, and Corn sufficient
for the Inhabitants, if they could keep what they have free from the Robbery of
Pirates, as well Christian as Mohammedan, that often pillage the poor People, who
have no other remedy but patience, and sometimes the pleasure of seeing them
perish at Sea, that have been so injurious to a Shore. The Patmians complain
more of the Cruelty of the Christian Pirates, than of the Turks. And though the
Islanders have procured Charters and Patents from the Pope; the King of France;
from the State of Venice; from the Dukes of Tuscany; from the Grand Master of
Maltha, to secure them from the Injuries of Christian Corsairs; it is so far
from prevailing upon them to withhold their hands from rapine, that it does but
provoke them to more fierceness. Yet these Pirates sometimes are made the
visible objects of Divine Vengeance. About six years ago, the Marquess de
Fleury, that carried away not only the Grazing, but the Working Cattle* had got
no further than Paros, 'till his Ship sunk in the Port, and he was taken
Prisoner, and clapped into custody at Corfou, by the Venetians, Another that
pillaged the Monastry of Liptos, had no sooner put to Sea, but meeting with
some Saiks, to which he gave earnest Chase, he run himself a Ground, and there
perished he, and all his Company.

Let us now return to the State and Government of the Place. The whole Island
was given by ( a) Alexius Circiter annum Christi 1100.
Comnenus to Christodoulus, and his successors in the Monastry, and the
Islands near about, that were not inhabited. And what Culture they bestow on
the little Islands, or what Cattle they put to Grazing there, becomes all a
Prey to the Corsairs; so that the Revenues of this Monastry are now much
diminished, and the Monks become extremely poor. And his Son Calo Johannes,
gave also fourteen Villages in Candie: But the Turks left them but one small
Hospital in Candie, which yields them 200 Dollars a Year, whereas their
Revenues before were at least 13000. Besides the great Monastry, there is a
little Nunnery, containing 40 Nuns. This was built but an age ago. They
purchase their living by their labor, for they have no Revenues; only the
Abbot of the great Monastry is obliged to supply them with a Reverend Ancient
Monk, to do all Sacred Offices among them. Besides these, there are some small
Hermitages that maintain some few Monks. 1. The Hermitage of the Holy Grotto of
St. John the Divine. 2. The Hermitage of the Parasceve. 3. Of the Annuntiation
of the Blessed Virgin, lately built by a Bishop in this last Century. 4. The
Hermitage, called Asomati. Lastly, in a place called the Gardens, which furnish
the Monks Kitchen with all necessaries. They have certain Chapels consecrated
for the Laborers, at certain Hours, to hear Prayers, and so return to their
Work.

And this is the present Condition of the Isle of Patmos, once famous for the
Residence of that great Apostle St. John, and for the great and mysterious
Revelation he had in it. But now groaning under the Yoke of such Lords as are
common enemies to the Christian Faith, by whom they are both kept in great awe,
and slavish obedience, and yet ill protected against the violent Incursion of
Pirates and Robbers: so that Poverty is their best Protection against Rapine,
and Patience the only Remedy against the grievous Yoke of Tyrannical Oppression.

A DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT ATHOS.
MOunt Athos is a demy-Isle, or Chersonese, lying betwixt the Gulf of Strymon,
from a River of that name on the North, and the Gulf of Singus, from the Town
Singus, on the South. The Isthmus, or Neck of Land that parts them, is not much
above a Mile broad: It is called by the Greeks (...), and Athonas, by the
Franks, (or Western Christians) Monte Santo. It is 170 Miles in compass. Lemnos
stands directly East of it, some 40 Miles distant, and a little before Sunset
is overshadow'd by it. Thassos is 30 Miles distant to the North-east.
Thessalonica is four days Journey to the West, and Philippopoli as many to the
North. On the Land side there stands erected a great Wooden Cross, beyond which
all Women are forbidden to pass. Because the Caloirs, the only Inhabitants of
the place, are forbidden all communication with Women, as the principal Rule of
their Profession.

Not far from this Cross, without the Bounds, on the Waterside, stands a
Village called Alladiava. The Inhabitants live most upon Fishing, and bring
their Fish to sell to the Caloris. If perchance their Wives, or any Women of
their Family come along with the Men, they are left in the Boat, and not
suffer*d to step a Shore, for fear of Excommunication; for the highest Rule of
Discipline, and the most strictly observed, is that of not conversing with
Women. And for more caution, and better security of preserving this Rule
inviolable, they suffer no other Female Creature of what kind soever, nor any
Children, or young men, that are Beardless to come within the Mount.

In describing the place, we cannot pass from Town to Village, but only from
Monastrys to Hermitages.

1. The first, and most ancient, Sain Laura's Monastr.
St. Laura, built by Athanasius, who obtained special License of the Emperor
of Constantinople to retire hither, and found a College of Monks; so called,
from that Monastry of Laura of Bethlehem, where St. Saba lived, and his
Disciple John, once Bishop of Colonia in Armenia, and afterward Monk, after
the Discipline of St. Saba; whose Disciples, from a peculiar Rule of Silence,
which they did solemnly profess, and strictly practice, were called
Silentiarii. Of this Order was Anastasius the Emperor, before he was advanced
to the Imperial Dignity: Of whom Baronius relates, that in the Year of our
Lord, 491, he was from a Professor of silence, made a Sovereign Prince, Ex
Silentiario factus Imperator. The Monks of the place have a long Story, how
this Athanasius, wanting Money to go on with the great Church of the Monastry,
which he had begun, was met with by the Blessed Virgin, who took his staff from
him, and smote a Rock, 'till it sent out a Spring of Water, that runs at this
day; then thrusting his staff into the Ground, it became a Tree, and sent forth
Boughs and Leaves. Then she bid him take no care for necessaries, she would
provide, and did avow her self to be the Patroness of that Monastry, and of the
whole Mountain. This Monastry is about a Mile from the Sea, on the East side,
and has a convenient Channel, that brings up Vessels to their very Walls;
where they have a strong Magazin, and a Sentinel perpetually standing to give
notice of any Corsairs. It has likewise a very fair Church, and in their Hall,
where they eat in common, there is a large Marble Table, where 600 Monks sit
down together.

2. The Monastry of Caracale.
Caracale, the Name of its Founder, who did consecrate it to the Apostles St.
Peter and St. Paul. This is eight Miles from the former, toward the North. It
maintains 500 Monks. The Gate of the Monastry is adorned with an exceeding high
Tower. Here is likewise a Cistern cut out of a Rock 26 Fathoms deep. This also
being near the Sea, has upon the shore a Watch Tower, a Magazin, and a little
Port.

3. Philothe.
Philothe, from the Founders name. This maintains but 50 Monks, though well
stored with Orchards and Gardens, with its Watch Tower, and Magazin also by the
Sea side. Their Church is dedicated to the Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin.

4. Imberus.
Imberus, by the name of its Founder. This Monastry is in great repute for a
Picture of the Virgin Mary upon the Gate, which Picture, by the report of
Tradition, was found floating by the Shore. This Monastry has good Revenues in
Imbrus, and maintains 400 Monks.

5. Coutulmousi,
Coutulmousi maintains 300 Monks; it is commodiously surrounded with Gardens,
and has a fair Church dedicated to the Transfiguration of our Savior.

6. Porpat. Here is the general Assembly of all the Monastries in this
Mountain; hither every Monastry sends a Deputy under the name of Proesti, whose
business is to reside in the place, and to be ready to consult of all affairs
that concern the public Good. Here is every Saturday a public Market, and the
only Market within the whole circumference of the Mount. Here also dwells the
Aga, with two or three other Turks, who protects them from all injuries of
other Turks, especially of the Seamen from Barbary, whom they call Levents.
The Bostangy-Basha appoints this Officer from amongst the Bostangies. He is to
stay in his Office two years, and then another succeeds him. He is maintained
at the common charge of the Caloirs, who give him a yearly Pension. And
besides, upon every Church Festival, he is invited from Monastry to Monastry,
by course, and there, besides the Entertainment of him and his Retinue, he is
always presented with a Purse of Money, according to the abilities of the
Monastry.

7. Stauro-Nikita, or The Conquering Cross. This maintains but 30 Monks. Their
Church is dedicated to St. Nicholas, where they have in great estimation his
Picture upon a Board, that was found ready painted, as a Wreck, and devoutly
taken up by the Monks of this Covent.

8. Pantocratoras maintains 200 Monks; their Church is dedicated to the
Transfiguration of our Blessed Savior.

9. Vatopedi maintains 300, their Church is dedicated to the Blessed Virgin.

10. Tousimenou has but 80 Monks; the Church is dedicated to the Ascension. It
is the poorest of all the Monastry, not for want of Lands, but of Men to
cultivate them. For the soil about, is the best in all the Mount. It bears
Olives of a singular largeness, and wants no other sort of Fruit Trees. But the
number of the Monks in it amount but to 80, who being not able to make the best
advantage of so much good ground continue poor in a plentiful Soil.

In the middle of all the Mount stands 11. Chiliantary, a Monastry of the
Bulgarians, who speak here their own Language, and have their Prayers (though
the same with the Greek) in the Bulgarian Language. This is the largest
Monastry of the whole Island, and maintains 800 Monks. They have much Land
abroad, which they send their own Monks to cultivate.

12. Touzographou, or the Painters Convent, from the Founder, who was a
Painter. The Church is consecrated to St. George, it maintains 200 Monks, all
Bulgarians. There is a little Church not far from this Monastry, that stands
alone, and now is useless; but having a fair Picture of St. George in it, the
Monks thought fit to bring it into their own Church; but to no purpose, for so
often as they brought it, so often it takes its leave, and is found the next
day in the Church.

13. Xenophon, a Burgarian Monastry, has but 30 Caloirs.

14. Castamoniti has not above six, or seven Monks at most, yet it has a
Chapel dedicated to St. Steven.

15. Archangeli, which had before another name, but changed to this upon this
occasion. A young Caloir, that was tilling the Ground abroad, found a Treasure
in an old Urn, and brought the news of it to the Superior of the Convent; he
sent with the young Man two other Caloirs, who finding the Treasure, agreed
between themselves to kill the Boy, and share it betwixt them; and so they tied
a Stone about his neck, and cast him into the Sea, and hiding the Treasure,
came to the Superior, and told him the Boy had deceived them, and was run
away. Next morning the Sexton found the Boy and the Stone about his neck in the
Church, who discovered all, and told that the Angels Gabriel and Raphael
brought him thither. The two Caloirs thus convicted, were banished, and this
stone set up as a Monument to this day.

16. The Monastry of Russicon has a Church dedicated to Panteleimon, and
maintains 20 Caloirs.

17. Xeropotamou, dedicated to the Memory of 40 Martyrs that were drowned in
the Lake of Sebaste. This Monastry has 300 Monks, and being by the Sea side,
has a Magazin and a great Watchtower. Over against this Monastry, on the
Continent of Macedonia, stands a great Village of Hermits and religious
Persons, though without the bounds of the Caloirs.

18. Simo-Petra, so called, from the Founder and the Foundation. It is situate
on a Rock, and was founded by one Simon, an Hermit, who by his Prayers having
cured the Daughter of a Governor of Cassandria, did move him to bestow enough
for to build this Monastry, and 200 Monks. They show here an hand for a sacred
Relic of St. Mary Magdalen's body, but the Fingers of it are extraordinary
great.

19. Gregorios, near the Sea, and much infested with Pirates for want of
Fortification, and men to defend it, having but 60 Monks.

20. Dionisiou, consecrated to St. John Baptist, whose Forehead they pretend to
show here as a sacred Relic. Besides they show the Bones of one Nymphus, once
Patriarch of Constantinople, who being weary of public employment, retired
hither, unknown to any who he was; so they looking upon him as a poor Vagabond,
that wanted work, employed him as their Muleteer, to fetch in their wood; in
which employment he continued with great humility and faithfulness many years,
not offering to ride any of the Mules going or coming, and kept all the Church
Fasts strictly in the midst of all his drudgery. At his deathbed he discovered
to the Superior who he was, and that he chose that manner of Life to mortify
his proud Flesh. Whereupon, looking upon him as a Saint, they keep his Bones as
a sacred Relic.

21. Hagios Paulos, so named from the Founder, who was reputed a Saint. It
maintains 200 Monks, all Bulgarians.

Pass we now to the Hermitages, which are very small, but commonly so near one
another, as to make the appearance of a Village. There are two places where
they lie in great numbers. 1. Hagia Aena, or St. Ain, from a Church dedicated
to that Saint. These are the retiring places of such Hermits as live by
Manufacture, as particularly, the making of Crosses and Figures that represent
our Saviors Passion, and Seals and Marks proper for the consecrated Bread. The
Caloirs that are sent abroad to confess People, and to gather Alms for pious
Uses, buy up all these Manufactures to present unto people among whom they
come. These Hermits live more retired and melancholy, being not above two or
three, sometimes but one in an House. And they do imitate the Lives of those
ancient Monks in Egypt, about Thebais, that were imitators of St. Anthony, who
did himself, as did all his followers, live and maintain themselves by hand
labor and manufactures, though of a very mean sort, yet enough to earn them
Food and Raiment. This St. Anthony was the first Christian Monk of the World,
his Food was only Bread and Water; yet he lived 150 years: His fame was so
great, that Helen, the Mother of Constantine the Great, did by letters sent to
him, recommend Her self and her Son to his Prayers. He died in the Wilderness.
An. Dom. 361. 2. Kerasia, another plot of Ground, all strewn with such
Hermitages as are at St. Aine, and they live in the very same manner.

Besides these Hermitages that lie so near in voisinage, there are above 1000
more dispersed up and down the Island, which do all belong to some one of the
Monastries. If a Man desire to live in a Cell, he gives a certain Rate to that
Monastry to which it belongs, and so is empowr'd to enjoy that Cell, and the
Land belonging to it for his life: when he dies, it returns to the Monastry, and
the Monastry is Heir to all that he leaves behind him. There are Cells of all
rates, from 5 Dollers to 150. One thing is very remarkable, that Idleness is
utterly banished here, no man lives in the Isle, who is not some way employed.

As for the maintenance of these Monastries, though their Lands be sufficient
to seed them, and their Mountain furnish them with Wine enough to drink; yet as
the matter is ordered, they commonly want Money to pay their Haratch, or yearly
Tribute of 3 Dollers per Poll, and buy themselves Clothes and Furniture for
tilling their Land. So that every year they select some of their Caloirs to go
abroad, and beg the Charity of Christian People, toward the relief of the
respective Monastry. And these are always by two and two together. And the
Monastries agree beforehand to what particular places they will send their
respective Emissaries, who continue ordinarily two or three years in their
perambulation. At their coming home, the Money is delivered to the Skenaphylax,
or the Steward of the Monastry; for it is against the Rule of their Order, to
meddle with Money. He lays it out upon necessary occasions, and what is left,
is kept to defray the Charge of another Voyage. They have a Register of those
that bestow any thing, and they pray for them constantly in the Monastry.

When they are chosen to go abroad, the Chief of the Monastry names one of the
Caloirs: The Person named, in token of his obedience, does prostrate himself on
the Ground before the Superior of the Monastry, and rising, kisses the
Superiors hand. Then the Person first named, names those that shall go along
with him, who in like obedience, first prostrate themselves before the
Superior, and kiss his hand, then do the like to the Caloir first named by the
Convent, and own him for their Father and Superior, to whom they owe all
obedience during their mission. When they go abroad, they first apply
themselves to the Metropolite of the Diocese, and show him their Letters of
Obedience from their Superiors. Whereupon the Metropolite gives them Letters
of Permission to ask Charity, and confess Penitents throughout his Diocese.
Where they Confess any, they exact nothing of them by way of pecuniary Penance,
but only receive what in charity they freely bestow.

The beginning of Monks in Mount Athos, was from the time that the Mahometans
invaded Egypt and Syria, where the Monks in those places enjoying no security
of their lives, came into Gyeece, and desired of the Emperor a Place to live
in, according to their Monastic way. He appointed them Mount Athos, and
Athanasius soremention'd, was the first that founded a College here. They
professed at first the imitation of St. Anthony of Egypt, and St. Sabas; but
now the Rules of their Order are taken from St. Basil.

At their first coming to Mount Athos, they were a Colony of the Monks of the
Holy Land, who followed the Rules of St. Anthony of Egypt, and St. Sabas; but
chiefly the Rules of St. Sabas, who lived long after St. Anthony, when Monkery
began to alter its mode and fashion, and from a casual Retirement of some few
men to a rude and simple way of life in the Wilderness, to become subject to
Rules and Orders, to incorporate into Societies, to change their Caves into
Cloisters, and to remove from Deserts to good dwelling Houses, and places of
better convenience and accommodation. This St. Sabas, by his eminent and
singular strictness, did highly advance the Fame and Admiration of a Monastic
life. He was by birth a Cappadocian, of the Village of Mutalasca, in the
Diocese of Caesarea, and being left Heir to a good Estate, under the Care of
his Uncle Hermias, the perverseness of his Aunt made him quit that Uncles
House, and go to Scandos, to live with another Uncle, whose name was Gregory.
This breeding a Dissension between the two Uncles, he, to avoid all occasion of
discord, betook himself to the Monastry of Flavianae near Mutalasca; whence at
the eighteenth year of his Age, he went to Jerusalem, to visit those places
which our Blessed Saviors life and death has made so memorable. At that time
the Fame of Euthymius, then Abbot of Laura by Bethlehem, was very great in the
Holy Land. This enflamed young Sabas with great desire to be admitted into his
Monastry: Wherefore one day as Euthymius was going to receive the Sacrament, he
fell down at his feet, begging leave to be entered into his College: But
Euthymius gave him the Repulse, telling him it was not fitting that so young a
Man should be admitted into Laura; yet he would recommend him to a smaller
Monastry hard by, where St. Theoctistes was Abbot: Where having stayed ten
years, Euthymius admitted him into a Cave by his own Monastry for five years.
Then Euthymius selected him, and Domitian to vye asketick Severities in a
solitary Place for four years, which having performed to great admiration,
about the Fortieth year of his Age he retired to a Cave by the Brook of Siloe.
By that time he had lived here five years he had a College of Disciples, to the
number of 70, amongst whom was John the Silentiary, Bishop of Colonia in
Cappadocia, before he entered into his Monastic life, and afterward Abbot of
this College, which was called Nova Laura. There were afterward more
Monastries of this name in Palaestin. Laura Pyrgiorum by Jordan, built by one
Jacobus. Laura Malischae, built by Firminus, and Laura Marichae, by Severianus,
and Laura Elcerebae, by Julianus. But this Laura, built by St. Sabas, was the
most Famous, where in his lifetime the number of his Monks increased to 150.
He was eminent in the time of Anastasius, Justinus, and Justinianus, Emperors
of Constantinople, and died in the 94th year of his Age. His name is yet very
remarkable among the Eastern Christians, especially at Mount Athos, whose first
Monks were but a Colony of his Disciples, and whose ancientest College is
called Laura, from his Laura in Palaestine.

Their constant morning Prayer is three hours before day; their evening Prayer
at Sunset. On Sundays they go to Prayers five hours before day in the morning,
and before great Holy Days their Prayers continue all night. They have likewise
other set hours of Prayer for the daytime.

They that enter into this profession, are kept six months Probationers; during
which time they are put to all the Exercise they must undergo in their
Profession. After the six months are expired, the Novitiat chooses among the
Old Caloirs a Godfather to introduce him, and to instruct him in the Ceremony
of his Admission. This Godfather brings him to the Church door, where he is
stripped to his Shirt, and prostrates himself, then he makes a second
prostration in the middle of the Church, and a third at the Altar, and a fourth
to the Superior. Then upon his knees he answers to all the Interrogatories
made him by the Superior, which are commonly these.

Sup. My Brother, what motives have you to come to this Altar, and to this
Assembly?


Nov. A desire to live a Monastic life.


Sup. Do you come of your free choice, without any constraint?


Nov. Yes.


Sup. Will you for ever stay in the Monastry, and observe its rules?


Nov. Yes.


Sup. Will you keep Chastity, Temperance, and Godliness?


Nov. By the Grace of God.


Sup. Will you all your life be obedient to the Superior, and his fraternity
in Jesus Christ?


Nov. By the Help of God.


After these and some more Questions of like nature, some Prayers are said out
of the Euchologion, and the Superior showing him the Book of the Gospel, does
conjure him by it, if he come to that Profession of his own proper motion. He
answering in the Affirmative, the Superior gives him a pair of Scissers,
bidding him deliver them back into his hand: Which done, the Superior cuts off
a little of his hair in the form of a Cross, saying,

Our Brother N. N. has his head shaven, in the name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. The rest that stand by say three times Kyrie Eleeson. Then
his Monastic habit is put on in order.

1. his Cassock, whereat the Superior says,

Our Brother N. puts on the Garment of gladness, in the name of the Father,
etc. The Company say thrice Kyrie Eleeson.

2. His Girdle with these words.

Our Brother girds his reins with the strength of truth, to mortify his Body,
and to renew his Spirit, in the name of the Father, etc. Then follows the Kyrie
Eleeson thrice.

3. His Bonnet with these words.

Our Brother puts on the Helmet of Hope and Salvation, in the name of the
Father, etc.

4. His Mantle, with these words:

He puts on the Mantle as the earnest of Angelique apparel, and of
incorruptible Glory, in the name of the Father, etc.

5. His Sandals, with these words.

He puts on the Shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, in the name of
the Father, etc. with the Kyrie Eleeson thrice, as in all the rest. Then after
the rehearsal of an Epistle and Gospel, and some Prayers, they put a Cross into
his hand with these words:

Our Savior says, if any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me. Then a Candle lighted is put into his hands,
with these words.

Our Lord has said, Let your Light so shine before men, that they seeing your
good works, may glorify your Father who is in Heaven.

This done, the other Caloirs, every one salute him with a Kiss, and so the
Ceremony is ended.

The Rules are these,
1. To renounce the World, and all that is near, and dear to them in it, as a
Father and Mother, etc. according to that of our Savior. 2. To continue in the
Monastry in obedience to the Superior and his Brethren. 3. To suffer all
afflictions, and torments for the Love of God. 4. To have nothing of their own,
but all in common among their Brethren. 5. To keep themselves unspotted from
all carnality. 6. To be always ready to go to Prayers at the appointed Hours.
At Midnight; before Day; at Noon; at three a Clock after Noon; at Sunset; and
after Supper: And after all this, when they go to their Cells, where they lie,
to make 60 Prostrations, which they call Metanoia's, or Pennances, with a short
Prayer to every one for the Superior; for their Brethren; for the Benefactors
of the Monastry, and in general, for all Christians. 7. Not to eat or drink in
secret, but in common with their Brethren; and this is so observed, that in
case they are pinched with thirst betwixt Meals, they drink at the Window, or
Door of the Cell, that all may see them, and before they drink, they cry aloud,
(...), i. e. Give thanks. 8. Not to eat Flesh all their lives, which is so
strictly observed in Mount Athos, that in no sickness they are permitted to
break this rule; but the Monks that Travel, in case of sickness, may eat Flesh,
if the Physician advise them to it. But in Mount Athos they are allowed on
Sundays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, to eat Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and
Fish; the other days they eat none of these, nor drink any thing but Water
only; and those other days they have only a Dinner, at Night they eat a piece
of Bread, and drink a little water at the Church-door, and so to Prayers, and
thence to their Cells, where they remain in great silence. But the Sick, Aged,
and such as have newly come from a Journey, are allowed to eat in the common
Refectory. For the better Government of the Monastry, the Superior goes in
person to every man's Cell, accompanied with some of the elder Caloirs, and if
he find any man out of his Cell, or two or three together in another man's
Cell, this is a Crime, after three reproofs very punishable. The younger
Caloirs stand in great dread of this nocturnal Perambulation, and have that
saying of St. Paul's very much inculcated. Heb. 13. 17. The Burying of the Dead
is much like the way of Burying, described at Samos, with this difference, that
a Year after Interment, they take up the Scull, and wash it with Wine, and put
it in a Charnel, inscribing the name of the Deceased upon the Charnel. Thus
much of Mount Athos, wherein is a thing remarkable, beyond all example, that in
a space of ground, 160 Miles in compass, where no less than 6000 men constantly
live, there should not be seen a Woman.
FINIS.
The two Books following are lately Printed for Moses Pit at the Angel in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
THe six Voyages of John Baptist a Tavernier, Baron of Aubonne; through Turkey,
into Persia, and the East Indies, for the space of forty years. Giving an
account of the present State of those Countries, viz. of the Religion,
Government, Customs, and Commerce of every Country, and the Figures, Weight,
and Value of the Money current all over Asia. To which is added the Deseription
of the Seraglio. Added likewise a Description of the Countries which Border
upon the Euxine and Caspian Seas: By an English Traveller, never before
printed. Published by Dr. Daniel Cox. 1678. fol. price 20 s.

Remarks upon the Manners, Religion, and Government of the Turks. Together with
a Survey of the Seven Churches of Asia, as they now lie in their Ruins: And a
Brief Description of Constantinople. By Tho. Smith, B. D. and fellow of St.
Mary Magaalon College, Oxon. 1678. 8o price 3^.


