HEVREVX QVI EN DIEV SE CONFIE
portrait D. Balthazar' Gerberius, Eques Auratus* b. d. Ao. 1653



A Brief DISCOURSE Concerning the Three chief Principles OF Magnificent
Building.

VIZ. Solidity, Convenience, and Ornament.


By Sr Balthazar Gerbier D'ouvilly Knight.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Sacred Majesty:
MY place of Master of the Ceremonies (which the King your Royal Father of
blessed memory, confirmed unto me during my life, by the Great Seal of
England,) is to introduce Foreign Princes or their public Representatives to
your Sacred Presence. And in regard the Place of Surveyor General was also
intended to me (after late Inigo Jones) I do make bold to introduce the three
Capital Principles of good Building to your Sacred Majesty, who has seen
morestately Palaces and Buildings, than all your Ancestors, and may be a
Pattern to all future Posterity, by Building of your own Palace worthy your
Self, and placeing it as the Italians for their health, delight, and conviency
(as well as Solidity and Ornament,) La Matina alli Monti, la Sera alli Fonti,
according to which the main body of your Royal Palace may be set on the side of
Saints James's Park, and the Gardens along the River.

If the Book affoards any thing worthy your Sacred Majesty's further
satisfaction, I have obtained my end, and done the Duty intended by

Your Sacred Majesty's Most humble, most obedient, most Loyal Subject and most
zealous Servant Balthazar Gerbier D'ouvilly Knight.

TO THE LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Honors:
IT being lately reported that your Honors have deliberated to have the
Streets made clean, to enlarge some of them, and to Build a Sumptuous Gate at
Temple-Barr. I thought it my Duty to Present this small Discourse of the three
Principles of good Building, and withal a Printed Paper concerning the
Cleaning of the Streets, the Levelling the Valley at Fleet-Bridge, with
Fleet Street and Cheapside, add the making of a Sumptuous Gate at Temple-Barr,
whereof a Draught has been presented to his Sacred Majesty, and is ready also
to be produced to your Honors upon Command, with all the Devotion of

Your Honors Most humble and most obedient Servant B. Gerbier Douvilly Knight.

A Brief Discourse, concerning the three chief Principles of Magnificent
Building, viz. Solidity, Convenience, and Ornament.
WHereas Building is much minded in these times, I thought fit to publish some
Principles thereon, which may stand the lovers of it instead. Yet without
spending time and Paper to Note how a Point, Line, Angle, Demi-circle, Cube,
Plint, Baze, Pedestal, Colombe, Head, Architrave, Frize, Cornice, or
Frontispiece must be made; and what Dimensions all those several parts (a Point
excepted) must have, since all Master-Workmen ought to remember (as Scholars
their Grammar, and Arithmaticians their Table) how every Particle must have its
just proportion; and that the height of Windows and Doors must be double
their breadth; and also to be careful to maintain the due esteem of their Art,
since its Dimensions and Rules came directly from Heaven, when the great
Architect and Surveyor of Heaven and Earth, prescribed the Rules and particular
Orders for the Building of a floating-Pallace, (Noah's Ark) and the glorious
matchless Temple of Solomon, the perfect House of Prayer.

And therefore such Precedents may serve to convince those who say, That a
wiseman never ought to put his finger into Mortar, since there is a necessity
for Building, especially among Nations who do not, or cannot live in Caves and
hollow Trees, or as the Wild Indians, who have no other Roofs but of
Palmito-Leaves, nor Wainscot, but Bambouses, as they call the Poles to which
they tie a Woollen Hammac to lie in.

There are three Capital Points to be observed by men, who intend to Build
well: VIZ, Solidity. Convenience. Ornament.


Those who have Marshald the Orders of Colombs (to make good the first Point)
have Ranged the Toscan to be the Supporter of a Building, but such an Atlas
must stand on a firm Ground, not as ill Builders place Colombs (either of Brick
or Stone) like things Patcht or glewed against a Wall, and for the most part
against the second Story of a Building, (contrary to the very Gothish Custom,
who at least did begin their Buttrises from the Ground) as if their intent
were, that the weight of the Colombs should draw down the Wall, on the heads of
those that pass by.

Such Builders confound the first and essential point of Building, (to wit,
Solidity, with Ornament and Convenience)

They will make a show of some thing, but miss thereby (as ill Bow-men) the
Mark: They may perchance have heard of rare Buildings, nay, seen the Books of
the Italian Architects, have the Traditions of Vignola in their Pockets, and
have heard Lectures on the Art of Architecture, which have laid before them the
most necessary Rules, as also the Origin of the several Orders of Colombs, and
Discourses made thereon; that the Toscan is as the Hercules, so of the Jonic
and Corinthian; the first of the two to Resemble the Dressing of the Daughters
of Jonio, who had Twists of Hair on both sides of their Cheeks. The Corinthian
Heads to represent a Basket with Acante Leaves, and the Guttered Colombs, the
Pleats of Daughter and Women's Clothes.

That the Grecians (in remembrance of their Victories) did Range the Colombs in
their Buildings, to represent the number of Slaves which they had taken; the
Grains, Beads, Drops, Pendants, Garlands, Enterlaced-Knots, Fruitage, and an
infinite number of Ornaments, which are put on the Frize, to signify the
Spoils which the Victors had brought away from their Enemies; and to preserve
the Memory thereof, did place them on their Buildings, that they might also
serve for a true History.

But none of such Ornaments were ever impediments to the strength or
convenience of a Building, for they were so handsomely and well contrived, as
once the Duchess of Cheiveruse (a French Lady) said of the English Females,
that they had a singular grace to set their Ornaments right and handsomely.

The Barbarians and naked Tapoyers, Caripowis, Alibis, (and several
Charibdiens) do place Pendants in their Nostrils, which are proper for the
Ears; and these hinder not the use of the Lips, which ought to be observed by
all Builders.

And as for the inside of Fabrics, Builders should in the first place set the
Doors, Chimnies, and Windows, as may be most convenient for use.

Builders ought to be not only experimented in Housekeeping, but also good
Naturalists, to know (before they spend time and Materials) the required
Property to every part of a Building. A Door to be so set as it may not convey
the Wind toward the Chimney or Bedstead, though opened never so little.

The Windows to be so placed, as that the Fire made in the Chimney, may not
attract the Air and Moisture, and so prove the unwholesomest part of the Room
for those that are near the Fire; Which was the main reason why the great
Isabella Infanta of Spain (King Philip the Seconds Daughter, who Governed the
Provinces of Brabant, Flanders, Arthois, and Haynault, during her many years
Residence at Bruxells,) being prepossessed with a prejudice, never approached a
Fire to warm her self; till at last being through wet (going a Procession in a
great Rain, and by a Visit made by Mary of Medicis, Queen Mother to Lewis 13th,
just as she returned to her Palace) had no time to Shift her, she was
constrained to approach the Fire to dry her self, and few days after she fell
sick and dyed upon it: which Relation being very true, and happening in the
time that I resided for the King of blessed memory in that Court, I thought fit
to mention, to persuade all Noble (and curious Builders, to place their Doors,
Windows, and Chimnies in their proper places.

And though it be not my design in this small Discourse to Treat of Dimensions
(which are fit for a Primar to Apprentices,) Yet I cannot desist (by reason of
the West- Indian Herican-like-windes which happened February last, to persuade
all Builders to forbear the Buildlng any more those exorbitant Chimney-Shafts,
which when they fall, break both Roofs and Sealings of Rooms, and kill good
People in their Beds: since a Chimney some two Foot higher than the Ridges of
the Roof of a Building, (which is not overtopt by a Church or Steeple, or some
other eminency,) is as good a conveyance for the smoke, as any of a greater
height. Neither are those high Shafts of Chimnies real Ornaments to a Building,
much less to the Palace of a Sovereign: nor do the Germane Travelers of this
Age any more fill (as formerly) their Table-Books with the number of them, as
they were very careful to note the Names of their Hoatts, where the best Wine
was, and when they tasted that called Lagrima-Christi, they moaned and asked why
he did not weep in their Country. Its true, that the least addicted to
Bibbing, did put in their Stam-books the Dimentions of the Phanteon and of the
Amphitheaters; as also of Caprazola fiescati, and such Magnificent Structures
above Ground in Italy, and under Ground La Pessina Admirabile, La Grota de la
Sibila Cumana, Bagni de Cicerone, cente Camere, e le Sepulture de le nobili
Antichi. But they are now taught by Tutors to observe the Inside of Men, and
Buildings. And as the best Ornaments of a Face appears at first sight by the
Eyes, Mouth, and Nose; so does the best qualities of a perfect Building, by
Windows, and Doors well placed, as also by a large, magnificent, commodious,
and well-set Staircase.

Noble, manificent, and commodious Staircases, must in the first place
participate of a Noblemans manner of Pace and Attendance.

There is no man of sound Limbs (and that has a gallant Gate) but lifts his
Toes at least four Inches, when he goes an ordinary easy Pace; so that if two
steps (each four Inches high) be eighteen Inches broad, or deep, which makes
six and thirty Inches the two (the just measure of a man's two steps,) they may
be ascended from the first Floor, to the higher Story, as if a man walked on a
level ground.

2. Those Stairs ought to be so long, that the Attendants on each side the
Noble Person, Prince or Sovereign, may not be straightened for room.

Such were the Monarchlike Stairs of the Palace of Darius and Cyras the
Great, at Chelminor in Persia near Saras, the Metropolitan between Ormus and
Espahan. I do speak indeed of a Palace without comparison to any other, the
Walls of Circumvallation of that Palace, being four and twenty foot thick,
and the Stairs (as yet in esse) are forty foot long, in number an hundred and
eight, of Circular Form, and of so easy an Access, as that Travelers do
ascend them on Horseback.

King James of blessed memory could not have been so much in danger of an Onset
in a Pair of Stairs, large enough for a Noble Retinue to his Person, as he
was in a narrow Pair, which History mentions.

Neither had William Prince of Orange been so easily Shot at Delff in Holland,
descending a narrow Pair of Stairs.

3. A Noble Pair of Stairs should have a Cupelo, and no Windows on the
sides, which for the most part serve but for Rude and Unadvised Men to break.

In some Palaces and Noble-Mens Houses, Too many Stairs and back-Doores (as
the old English Proverb) makes Thieves and Whores. And the setting the Front of
a Building toward the North-West, and a Palace, like Cardinal Wolseyes
ill-placed one (now called Whitehall) on a low ground by the River side) makes
work for Physicians, Apothecaries, Surgeons, Coffin and Grave-makers.

But as for a Seat on MoorishGrounds (except the Builders observe the practice
of those of Venice (in Italy) and Amsterdam (in Holland) who bestow more Timber
of Oak in the Foundation of one, than in the Building of six Houses, in effect
it is to Build perpetually, leaving to their Posterity to prop and redress
their ill grounded Buildings; and they may well be rankt with the Duke of
Arscot, who built much in Brabant, and (in a merry humor) designed in his Will
ten Thousand Gilders per annum, to support and alter what he had Built amiss.

I must also advise Builders on high Grounds, to cause their Surveyors to
search for Springs, and shun them; which serve better to fill up Glasses to
allay the Vapors of Gascony Wines, than to make a Pond in a Sellar.

Builders ought also to be very curious and careful in the choice of the place
to Build a Seat on, for good Prospect, well Garnisht with Woods, and the Water
at hand, not too near, nor too far from a City or Town.

Item, I must wish all Princes and Noble Persons who are resolved to Build
Palaces and Seats answerable to their quality, to imitate those who in the
Heathen age were so careful in the ordering of the Structure of their Stone
Images, especially of their Saturn, Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, Neptune, (and all
their Fry of wanton Godesses) as to empannel a Jury of Philosophers,
Naturalists, Physiognomists and Anatomists, who were to direct the Sculptors
how to Represent those Images. And so I would wish Builders to proceed in the
contriving the Models of their intended Fabric, to wit, to consult (as those
of Amsterdam did in the making the Model of their Townhouse, diverse
experimented Architects, though they pitched for the Front on the worst of all.

Item, Before the Workmen, make use of Materials, and not to Build at Random,
as the Custom of too many ill Builders is; And when once the Model is
approved, never to alter, nor to pull down what has been well begun, nor to
hearken to the diversity of opinions, which have been, and are the causes of
many Deformities and Extravagancies in Buildings; and especially those who seem
to have had for Models Bird-Cages, to jump from one Room into the other by
Steps and Tressels, to cause Men and Women to stumble.

And the sides all of Glass (like Spectacles) the glass Windows of small Payns,
with great store of Lead, to draw the more Wind and Moisture from the open Air
within Doors. As also Windows with store of Iron Casements, which rust, and
never shut close, notwithstanding all the various devices of Smiths, to catch
Money out of the Builders Purses, contrary to the good custom in Italy, Spain,
France, Germany, and the Low Countries, which certainly for plurality of Voices
should be believed, and followed.

Those Nations cause their glass Windows to be fitted in wooden Casements
treble riveted, to keep out Wind and Rain; they are lined with wooden Shutters,
and have double boarded Shutters without, to resist all the violence of the
Weather and Thieves.

Let no man mistake these Windows* for wooden Casements, for such are usually
seen here in England in old wooden Houses, the Casements scarce above one Foot
and a half high, tottering things; for these are substantially, strongly, and
curiously made Casements; nor are the wooden Shutters such Pastboard-like
things, as are generally put on the outside of the Windows on the London and
Suburbs Houses, but double-Deal well-riveted Windows, with substantial Locks,
Bolts, and Hinges, and a double Iron Bar, with a Bolt fixed in the middle of
them both.

Nor do good Builders affect partitions of Lime and Hair in their Houses, nor
any of their Bricks to be daubed over with finishing Mortar.

The Romans are very curious in the tempering their Mortar, and in the laying
it as thin as possibly they can, to prevent the sinking and bending of their
Walls, which the laying of the Mortar too thick does cause; and experience
shows, that when some Walls are taken down in England, half of the substance
is Sand and Dust.

The Romans (as likewise the Grecians before them) did not make use of their
Lime at the same time it was slakt, but for six Months time suffered to
putrify, and so putrified composed a Seiment, which joined with Stone (or
Brick) made an inseparable union, and such strong work as I have seen
Iron-Tools break on the old Mortar of the Amphitheaters at Verona and Rome.

Their manner of preparing Lime is to lay it in Cisternes the one higher than
the other, that the Water (after it has been so stirred as that it is well
mixed and thoroughly liquid) may drayn from one Cistern to the other, and after
six Months time (the Lime having evacuated its putrefaction) remains purified,
and then they mix two parts of Lime with one part of Sand, and makes that
strong and pure Mortar, which if practiced in England would make a wondrous
strong Union, especially if the Claymakers did beat the Clay as it ought to be,
the English Clay being better than the Italian, nay the best in the world.

They are very careful in the making large and deep Foundations, and to let
the Walls raised on the Foundations rest and settle a good while before they
proceed to the second Story.

Some of our Carpenters have learned to lay Boards loose for a time, the
Italians and other Nations are not sparing therein, they nayl them as if for
good and all, but rip or take them up again, to fit them for the second time.

As I said before, no Building is begun before a mature Resolve on a complete
finished Model of the entire design: the Builder having made choice of his
Surveyor, and committed to him all the care and guidance of the work, never
changes on the various opinions of other men, for they are unlimited, because
every man's conceits are answerable to their profession, and particular occasion.

A Sovereign or any other Landlord, is then guided by natural Principles, as
well as by his own Resolve, taken on a long considered Model, because they
know (by experience) how sudden changes are able to cause monstrous effects.

They know that a well-experienced Surveyor must not be disturbed in his task,
and undertaking, but as the Silk Worm and the Soul of Man, the first in his
Husk, the second in the Womb, wherein both the one and the other (by the powers
of the great Architect and Director of all things) works out his own complete
Fabric, if not interrupted; but if interrupted by any outward accident, it
happens that those passions become the original causes of exorbitant Features
and Forms* An Item for all Builders to suffer a good Architect quietly to
pursue his task, if he understands it.

It has been observed among the French (a Nation as much addicted to changes
is any) that when the charge of an undertaking has been committed to many, it
caused but confusion, and therefore its a saying among them, Trop de Cuisineirs
gattent le pottage, Too many Cooks spoils the Broth.

I shall not spend time, and transgress on the Readers patience, concerning the
making of Clay, and burning of Bricks, only say, that it imports much the Clay
should be well wrought, before it be put in the Mould: experience has also
taught Brickmakers to have them of such a length, thickness and wideness, that
four of them (together with the Mortar thereunto belonging) may raise a Foot.

As for Freestone, Portland Stone works well, and makes a good union with
Bricks, yet cannot be compared with Marble, nor to the Bluish Stone of the
Quarries of Liege and Namur. But it is also certain, that this Climat makes
Marble it self to Moulder very much; as for example, the Cain and Abel in
York-House Garden, which did not Moulder when it stood in that of the Duke of
Larma at Valedolid in Spain, the coldness (together with the moistness of
this Clime) being of a contrary operation to the temper of the Air in Italy
and Spain. And therefore when Builders see their Copings, Water-table,
Cornishes, Railes, and Balisters to decay, they must have patience, since there
is no Material but is subject thereunto, and that Railes and Balisters (either
on the top of the Walls of a Frontispiece, or in Belconies) though never so
well Painted in Oil, and of the best seasoned Timber,) but must be renewed at
forty or fifty years end.

Builders ought to calculate the Charges of their designed Building, and
especially with what Sum of Money they are willing to part, and yet remember
to imitate some Philosophical Humorist, who resolves to venture on a pretty
thing called a Handsome Lady, without which their Fate seems to tell them they
cannot live, and therefore makes an account beforehand that all things will not
precisely answer his expectation. But on the contrary, the Lady instead of
being a good Houswife, (and an assistant) proves expensive, and an impediment.
And if it prove otherwise, he will be a great gayner by the bargain; for let
Builders put their design to Master-Workmen by the Great, or have it Wrought by
the Day, either the Workmen will overreach themselves, or the Builder will be
overreached.

Charity to the one, and respect to the other, moves me to keep the rest in my
Pen, yet shall never be backward to inform either of them in the ear what may
be the best for them to choose.

But I must freely advise all Builders in general, never to begin to Build on a
Ground before it be Purchased, as the late Duke of Buckingham did at
York-House, where there has been much daubing and breaking through old rotten
decayed Walls; first to make a Ladies Closet on the corner of a Wall where a
Butteryses stood, and which was taken away for the Closet, intended only at
first for a Closet of ease, and to serve until the Archbishop of York could be
persuaded to accept as good a Seat as that was, in liew of the same, which
could not be so soon compassed, as the Duke of Buckingham had occasion to make
use of Rooms, to entertain (according to the Dignity of a prime Minister of
State) foreign Princes and Ambassadors; so as on a sudden, all the Butterises
that upheld that rotten Wall were thrown down, the Seelings of Rooms supported
with Iron-bolts, Belconies clapped up in the old Wall, daubed over with finishing
Mortar, and all this (as a Toadestoole grows in a night) to serve until a
Model for a Solid Building (to stand even with the Street) were made, and to be
Built of such Stone as the Portico or Watergate at the River side is; and this
was done on a Moorish Ground, whereon no New Building could stand any time
without Proppings, which was contrary to the main Principle of good Building.

I must proceed and conclude with my humble respects concerning Palaces of
Sovereigne Princes, which must differ as much from other Buildings, as their
quality and condition from that of their Subjects.

And in the first place, as Solidity must be the first Principle in all good
Building; so much more ought it to be observed in that of Sovereigns, unto whom
the whole world has access.

And as there must be spacious Ground before their Palaces, their Inner-Court
ample, the Offices for their Retinue large and commodious, and so placed as
they may neither be an annoyance nor of ill aspect.

The first Stories ought rather to be vaulted than boarded, to prevent such an
accident as happened to Lewis 13th French King, (and his Queen at a Ball,) when
the Floor of the Room (with all the Company) fell down; the King and Queen
only remaining (by a special Providence) on the Hearth of the Chimney, setting
under the Cloth of State.

And as there is a necessary Magnificence to be expressed on the Front and inside
of Princely Buildings, answerable to their greatness; so is it absolutely
necessary, that the Architect be possessed with a Soul as great as the Player in
the French Play, called the Virionaries, where he persuades himself to be
Alexander, and governs his Motions accordingly. And the Lines and Strokes of
the Architect must be Alexander-like: his Figures and Statues Colosses, his
Pyramidis like those of Egypt, and the Vaults like that Rock wherein Alexander
and Darius wrestle for Mastery in a Valley in Persia, between Babylon and
Espahan, at a place called Carimonshahan, where formerly was a great City six
English Miles long; in which Groto, the Alexander-like mind of the Sculptor,
has Hewn within the Rock, (besides Alexander on Horseback, and a number of
Huntsmen and Ladies) the aforesaid Alexander and Darius wrestling to break a
Ring between them.

Such a like mind Prince Thomas of Savoy, (Son to the Great Emanuel of Savoy)
infused into his Architect, Sculptor, and Caster in Brass, who he employed in
the Designing and Building a Stable in Turin, within all of Marble, the Racks,
Manger, and the upright Posts all of Copper, Richly Wrought, Conveyances of
Water Pipes. The Manger fourteen Inches wide at the bottom, to contain a Pale
for Water on all occasions. The uppermost edge of the Manger three foot eight
Inches high from the Ground, to accustom the Neapolitan great Saddle-Horse to
raise their Neck. The Rack Poles three Inches asunder and upright, that as the
Frenchman says, (Lapetit vienten mangeant) the Horse may feed more cheerfully,
the Hay and Dust may not fall on their Heads, as it does out of a Rack which
stands shelving: the under part of the Manger ought to be made up to keep in
their Litters, and no Boxes made there for Dogs, as some not curious do, where
no Harnesses, Saddles, Coverings of Horses, or any other Implements or Tools,
are not to be seen about the Postern, since those things do but impede the
Access of a Cavallier to the Horses.

The disposing a Stable into a double Range, has been affected by some, who
would see all their Horses at once.

Others love only a single Range, with a broad Walk, and if they have a great
number of Horses, return at the end into another Range, if the Ground can
afford the same, so as a Wall makes the Partition between the Horses.

The Paving of such a Stable is very neat, being of white or yellow (twice
burnt) Flanders Bricks, in Dutch called Clinkart, far beyond Planking of
Stables, for diverse Reasons. The Paviors (after the Bricks are laid) throw
sharp Sand over them, and twice a day they are Watered with a Gardeners
Watering-Pot, and Swept with a Broom, which the Grooms are to continue
sometimes, because the Sand gets between the Joints, and makes the Paving very
close and firm. The Pavement at the Foot of the Manger, must be raised at the
least six Inches higher, than at the Gutter where the Posts are placed, which
ought to be five Foot and an half distant one from the other, which Ground so
Paved is of double use; first, that the higher a House stands toward the
Manger, the better sight it is, and especially when the Lights of the Stable
strikes on the Horse their backs, which is the better Light.

Secondly, That a Horse its usual standing place being so much shelving
accustomes the Horse (reposing more on his hinder Feet than on the foremost) to
be more light and nimble in his Gate and Pace.

Thirdly, That his Stall does not remain under him, and especially when its
standing has eight foot in length from the Manger to the Channel, which for
neatness ought to be above Ground, the eight Foot in length, being at full the
space which the Horse does possess when in the night time he lies stretched on
his Litter.

I must not omit by way of Queries, to Write somewhat concerning the Kitchen of
a Princely Palace, viz. whether there should not be as much curiosity, if not
more in the Kitchen than in the Stable; since the Meat prepared in a Kitchen,
ought to be Dressed with all Neatness, and preferred before a fine Lace about the
Master Cooks Towel: Neither are the Vessels of Silver but in reference to the
Neatness which ought to be observed in all Cookery. The French-Mans Glass is
wrenched as often as he Drinks, and why should not Cooks be more Curious and
Neat in their Kitchins, than Grooms in their Stables? And as a Stable can have
conveyances for the Horses Water, so may Kitchins for Slabbering, for Guts of
Fowls and Deer, Coals, Ashes, and* whatsoever else can cause Dirt and
Nastiness, and be freed from the annoyance of Smoke, which many ill-placed
Doors cause; nor ought the Kitchen or other Offices and Selleridge, (as in some
Palaces in France) to be so placed as they may prove prejudicial to the Court,
and if they are underneath a Palace they ought to be vaulted.

I must not forget that the Roof of a Palace should be covered either with Lead
or blew Slates.

The Pantheon at Rome was covered with Brass, which a Pope melted to cast
Canons, no such as only eat, drink and sing.

No curious eye can well endure those Barn-like Roofs of many Noble Persons
Palaces, covered with red Tiles, which break and rot away, and then the Roof
being mended and patcht, seems to be a Beggars Mantel, which I would not have
the Nobles and Courtiers to be. See the Roofs of Lester, Newport, Southampton,
and such like their Palaces, whether they do not look as Barns for Hay, and not
Pybald, by their patched Tiles?

As for the main bulk of Palaces, its true some have a greatness in plainness,
as that of Farners in Rome, whereof Michael Angelo made the Architrave, Frize
and Cornish.

And as for Bigness and Solidity, that of St Jeronimo, and Escuriall in Spain;
for Ornament, Munikch in Bavaria; the Louver at Paris for Vastness, Situation
and Ornament, by the imbossed Imagery on the Frontispiece, variety of Orders of
Colombs, with the delight of the annexed Tuilleries, wherein as especially in
that of the Palace of the Duke of Orleance, but above all in the Cardinals
their Vignas in Rome, is observed the form of a true Princely Garden,
consisting not only in much Air, great plots of Grass, low Borders, large
Gravell-Walks, but for close Walks, Fountains, Groves, and Statuaes, to make
good the Italian saying, Per variar natura e bella. And as for the imbossed
carved Imagery on the Frontispiece of a Palace, their Dimensions must be
according unto their distance from the Ground; which is a main point requisite
to be observed also in Scheames, wherein diverse undertakers commit very great
faults, not only by the not reducing whatsoever is represented to the true
Lines of Perspective, but also by omitting the giving such Proportions to
things, as may satisfy the sight of all the Spectators at their several
distances; for Excellency does not consist in vastness, nor in the quantity of
Objects, nor Shapes, nor Colors.

The Sphere in an Angle of a great Chamber in St Pedro e Vaticano in Rome
confirms this truth, and every judicious Eye will be satisfied therewith. Seas
must not only be seen to have a natural motion, but heard to make a noise of
breaking of their Waves on the shore, and against the Rocks. Clouds must not
only drive, but be transparent. Winds, Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Snow, and
Hail, must be so heard, seen, and felt, as that Spectators may think those
sights to be natural operations. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, no Past-board
devices, but so represented, as that they may dazzle the Eyes of Spectators, And
all the Motions of Scenes and Mutations as insensible, and no more to be
discovered, than that of the Hand of a Dial.

Neither can all great Rooms of Princely Palaces serve for this use, except
they be after the Moddell of such as the Italians have built, as there is a
good one at Florence in Italy, with conveyances for Smoke, and capacities for
Echoes, which Inigo Jones (the late Surveyor) experimentally found at
Whitehall, and by his built Banqueting House, so as having found his own
fault, he was constrained to Build a Wooden House overthwart the Court of
Whitehall.

The greatness of a Sovereign consists not in the quantity of Stone and Timber
heapt together, The Quarries possess more Stone, and the Woods more Timber than
a Banquet Room. Let any good eye judge, whether it be not true, that the
extreme height of a Room takes not away the greatness of the company that is in
the same, and that all Hangings of Tapistery make no show at all, unless they
reach to a proportionable height of a Room.

Since the greatness of a Nation consists not in a Husk, but in it self, and in
its Sovereign, nothing should be suffered to diminish the appearance of that
greatness within or without Doors. A Sovereign and his Retinue, in a too vast
Room in height, width and length, does appear like a company in a Valley near
high Mountains. Whenas a body standing on the brow of a Hill, and seen from
below, seems to be a kind of Colosse, which argues that there must be a great
discretion used in the making them fit and pleasing.

All which I do not Write to undervalue any Modern Works, nor any of the
Cavallier-like Operas, every good Talent being commendable. As I am confident
there are some that live, who will not deny that they have heard the King of
blessed Memory, graciously pleased to avouch he had seen in Anno 1628, (close
to the Gate of York-House, in a Room not above 35. Foot square,) as much as
could be represented (as to Sceans) in the great Banqueting Room of Whitehall;
and that diverse judicious persons will not deny, that the excellency of the
several Triumphall Arches Erected in the City of London, consists not in their
Bulk.

The Grecians and Romans (who have shown their Master-ship in them) did conform
them to the respective places.

Things can be too great, as well as too little, too massy, and too slender,
too gaudy, and too plain; and Colors placed together, which agree not one with
the other, as blew and green. God in his Rainbow having showed us the best way
of ordering Colors. Nor is it the quantity of Timber or Stone, that speaks
love in an Arch; but rather when it is composed of the hearts of Loyal
Subjects, which surpasses all that can be made.

May therefore the oldest and most tottering House in the Land, breath forth of
its Windows what may answer that true love, and in point of good Building,
wherewith this Discourse is begun, (next to the giving such a new Form to the
Streets of London and the Suburbs, as may in a manner equalize those in Holland
in neatness, if the Inhabitants will but take the right and only course
therein.) May his Sacred Majesty during his long prayed for and wished Reign,
see St. Paul's Church in that magnificency, as the Metropolitan of the Houses of
God, in the chief City of Albion justly requires. And his Royal Palace Built,
so as to answer the matchless greatness of him, who all tongues of Loyal
Subjects speaks to be Carolum, Magnum, Secundum Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regem, Ecclesiae, Legum, and Libertatis Populi
Restauratorem; Which shall ever be the dutiful Wishes of

Balthazar Gerbier Douvily Knight*

Printed by A. M. and are to be sold by Richard Lowns at the White Lion in St
Paul's Churchyard, Thomos Heath at the Globe within Ludgate, and Matthew
Collins at the three Blackbirds in Canon-street at St Nicholas-lanes end
Stationers. 1662.


