The First and Second PART OF COUNSEL and ADVICE TO ALL BUILDERS: FOR The
choice of their SURVEYORS, Clerks of their Works, Bricklayers, Masons,
Carpenters, and other Workmen therein concerned.

AS ALSO In respect of their Works, Materials, and Rates thereof.

Written by Sr. Balthazar Gerbier, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Mabb, for Tho. Heath at the Globe within Ludgate, 1664.

A Brief DISCOURSE Concerning the Three chief Principles OF Magnificent
Building.

Viz. Solidity, Convenience, and Ornament.

By Sr. Balthazar Gerbier, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Mabb, for Tho. Heath at the Globe within Ludgate, 1664.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
May it please yuor Sacred Majesty:
MY place of Master of the Ceremonies (which the King your Royal Father of
blessed memory, confirmed unto me during my life, by the Great Seal of
England,) is to introduce Foreign Princes or their public Representatives to
your Sacred Presence. And in regard the Place of Surveyor General was also
intended to me (after late Inigo Jones) I do make bold to introduce the three
Capital Principles of good Building to your Sacred Majesty, who has seen more
stately Palaces and Buildings, than all your Ancestors, and may be a Pattern to
all future Posterity, by Building of your own Palace worthy your Self, and
placeing it as the Italians for their health, delight, and conviency (as well
as Solidity and Ornament,) La Matina alli Monti, la Sera alli Fonti, according
to which the main body of your Royal Palace may be set on the side of Saint
James's Park, and the Gardens along the River.

If the Book affoards any thing worthy your Sacred Majesty's further
satisfaction, I have obtained my end, and done the Duty intended by

Your Sacred Majesty's Most humble, most obedient, most Loyal Subject and most
zealous Servant Balthazar Gerbier D'ouvilly Knight.

TO THE LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Honors:
IT being lately reported that your Honors have deliberated to have the
Streets made clean, to enlarge some of them, and to Build a Sumptuous Gate at
Temple-Barr; I thought it my Duty to Present this small Discourse of the three
Principals of good Building, and withal a Printed Paper concerning the
Cleaning of the Streets, the Levelling the Valley at Fleet-Bridge, with
Fleet Street and Cheapside, and the making of a Sumptuous Gate at Temple-Barr,
whereof a Draught has been presented to his Sacred Majesty, and is ready also
to be produced to your Honors upon Command, with all the Devotion of

Your Honors most humble and most obedient Servant B. Gerbier Douvilly Knight.

TO HIS Royal Highness the Duke of York.
THe forerunner of this Discourse was printed and dedicated to the King and to
the Parliament, the Chief Builders of a State; And though your Royal Highness
has not as yet thought good to Build, it may be that when your Surintendents
of Buildings shall (though they should not need any of those Annotations, nor
the rates of Materials, they will approve that Workmen may have this little
Book in their Pockets, that they may not be ignorant that their pay-masters
will look to have works performed according to a good Method, which (besides
the paying all duty and respects due to such an Eminent Royal Prince) is the
scope of,

Your Royal Highness Most humble, most Obedient, most Faithful and most
Zealous Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

To his Highness, Prince RUPERT, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of
Bavaria, and Duke of Cumberland, etc.
YOur Highness (like great Emperors of Germany, and other Princes does not
only affect all Arts and Science, but is so eminent therein, as to trace them
thoroughly with his Princely hands) and therefore needs no formal Crown thereon,
since they prove to be the Crown to all others, which argues the matchless
capacity of your Highness: who will not be displeased in the offer of this
little Discourse, on a gross matter, which notwithstanding if well made use
of, may serve to compose a Palace so charming, as to hinder furious Mars
himself to lay his destructive hands thereon; since those that bear the name of
Gotz were not permitted by great Gustavus Adolphus to touch Muniken, though it
was the habitation of the Duke of Bavaria, no friend to le-bon party, as it was
then called.

But that I may not by too many lines entrench, neither on your Highness
precious time nor patience; I shall end this duty, with my zealous wishes for
your Highnesses long Life and Prosperity, being

Your Highness Most humble, and most Dutiful Servants, B. Gerbier.

To the most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Arch Bishop of CANTERBURY his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan over all England.
HAving observed, that your Grace does Rebuild, what distracted times has
demolisht: I thought it fit to present this little Treatise to your Graces
view; it does proceed on the indisputable prescription, according unto which
Solomon's Temple was Built; and certainly, My Lord, it ought to pass for the
best; nor have the Heathens, Grecians and Romans, omitted the same in their
compleatest Structures, both for length, width and height, ordering each part
thereof, proper to its particular use, shunning all improperties; furthermore
it is certain, that many of them have affected to observe in the Dimentions of
their Edifices, the 60. Cubits in length, 20. in breadth, and 30. in height of
Solomon's Temple; their windows accordingly, allowing a convenient height unto
them, but most of their Magnificent Stair-cases with lights from above. May the
blessings thence continually attend your Grace that after his Building up of
Terester Seats, and the propagating of Temples in bodies of flesh, Your Grace
may appear as one of the Polilished corners of that Temple, whereof that of
Solomon's Building Was a Tipe; The wishes of,

Your Graces Zealous and most humble Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of CLARENDEN Lord High Chancellor of
England, etc.
I Have thought it my duty to offer to your Lordship (as I do to others) a
Counsel and Advice, how your builders may produce, according unto the nature of
men, and quality of materials to be had on the place, without seeking in other
parts (at needless expense) what with ease and satisfaction may be had at
home, if men can affect what is most proper, and be minded to take the best out
of that which Ancient and Modern men (skilful in building) have practiced,
according unto most infallible Rules; mine shall ever be to observe the
Worthies of the Age; and consequently to make good, that I am,

Your Lordships Zealous and most humble Servant B. Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable the Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of
England, etc.
SHould not an advice to all Builders be laid at your Lordships Threshold; It
were a matter to impose as a charge upon the Author of such a Treatise, though
he were blind, if he had but heard that your Lordship (as Trajan the Emperor)
leads the way not only to particular, but to Public Builders; May your
Lordship have therein as much satisfaction and divertisement, as any of the
great successeful Builders ever had; and may your Trustees therefore proceed
according to the best Method, since the well performing of a work, contributes
to the true content of the Builders, and makes him the sooner forget both his
Charge and Cares: May likewise your Lordship in all your other Affairs, both
Public and Domestic, have entire satisfaction, which are the zealous wishes
of,

Your Lordships Zealous and most humble Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable JOHN Lord ROBERTS. Baron of Truro, Lord Privy Seal.
THe Author of this Counselor shall not be a second Anacharte, for it meddles
not with matter of State; and though it were his approved profession, thanks be
to God, he lives in an Age as the Knights de la Banda, made by King Alphonso;
who were not only permitted, but obliged to speak truth.

Nor does it presume to offer to a Person so eminent (and as learned in the Law
as Iycurgus among the Lacedaemonians) a wax Light to the Sun; it neither speaks
in those learned Tongues, which your Lordship has in great Perfection; Its
Language being only the Phrase of Mechanics though some of them often presume
to quote the words in Ecclesiasticus, chap. 38. verse. 32. and 34. Without these
cannot a City be inhabited, etc. But they will maintain the State of the World,
and all their desire is the work of their craft. I will ever study the true
meaning of a French saying, viz la plus grande finesse est de w'en avoir point;
As in this offering I have no particular one, since its duty to consider your
Lordship as one of the Worthies, who does reflect on things as necessary to the
Public and to a Family, as neat and convenient clothes to a particular body;
and that I am confident your Lordship takes me to be a somebody, and

Your Lordships Zealous and most Humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

To the Duke of BUCKINGHAM His Grace.
THE saying, Vivat memoria Buckingamii, could not be made good by me if this
little Counsel and Advice, did not pay its respects to your Grace, whose
matchless Aspect is that Glass which a French Author called Le miroir qui ne
flat point, for what credence would Quintus Cursius his representing
Alexander have had, if he had mist his mark? and what would have been believed
of Ulysses without a true Homer? of Alcibiades without Xenophon; of Cirus
without Chilo; of Pyrrhus (King of the Fpirotes) without the Cronicles of
Hermicles; of the great Scipio Affricanus, without the decades of Titus Livius;
of Trajanus without Plutarch; of Nerva and Antoninus; Pius without Phocion the
Greek, of the great courage of Julius Caesar; and the Magnanimite of Pompey
without Lucan, and of the twelve Caesar's, without Suetonius? Your Aspect My
Lord, speaks indeed that which no memory can fall short of; And your Heroic
mind affecting that which is the Purest, speaks Buckingham in perfection; your
Grace can by a sublime quality separate Spiritual from Terrestrial, and without
venturing a stock to fetch Aurum Horisontalis from the East Indies, or with me
to the West, the most concocted and most pure from el Dorado, which if it had a
speaking quality, your Grace would hear its Hessian Alembick sing the Gold its
joy, for having approved it self the more pure by its often passing through a
Furnace: O that all well meaning creatures, and branded by black Calumniators
had like fortune, and were put to the examen of men, as Remon-Lue, to el
Dorado; I would go without being enrolled among Heresiastick Seekers, only in
that Number, who seek the Worthies to manifest unto them, how much I am theirs;
and consequently,

Your Graces Zealous and most humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

To the Duke of ALBEMARLE his Grace, General of his Majesty, Forces, and
Master of the Horse, etc.
ITs true My Lord, that to a person as Numa Pompilius, who honored the Church,
a Treatise concerning Divine matters were most proper. To one as Marcellus who
pitied those that were vanquished of compassion. To one as Caesar, (who forgave
his Enemies) of Clemency. To one as Octavian (beloved of the People) of true
Love. To one as Alexander (who gave to all) of Liberality. To one, as Hector
(Valiant in War) of Heroic feats. And what more proper to one as Hercules of
Thebes, Ulysses of Greece, Phyrrhus King of Epirots, excellent in the invention
of Warlike Works, Catulus, Titus, Marcus, Aurelius, Croesus King of Lydia, (a
just man) true, magnanimous, tender, courageous, a Mecenas to wise men, and the
great enemy of those that were Ignorant. But that malicious persons who cannot
endure any but themselves, should pass for persons endued with some useful
quality; I do make therefore bold to present, though a Treatise concerning
Mechanics to your Graces view, with the Humble Tender of the respects due to a
second Perseus, who next to the Almighties arm has delivered this Albion
Andromeda from a Monster, which deprived me also from a public employment,
during the space of seaventeen years.

Your Graces Zealous, and most Humble Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Marquess of Winchester.
YOur Henfield well seated Palace with a Wood at its back, like a Mantle about
a coat of Arms, which does defend it from the North west winds; argues, that
it is good to be there, as it proves a daily ease to Travelers, who by four
miles at once, shorten the tediousness of a too long journey; for I do
persuade my self, to hear many of them say, good cheer, its but four miles to
Henfield Seat, and thence but so much more to a good Town, to refresh and rest.

The present satisfaction of that seat, no doubt (My Lord) diminishes the
grief of the loss of Basing, and that Dolbier is no more (not a Prince of the
Air, save the carcass of his head on a Pole) drawing lines of circumvallation
above your Seats, but that there is now (in stead of destroying powers) a
blessed Prince, to whom may be justly applied, Post Nubila Phoebus, whose
quickening rays do now promise Peace and Plenty.

May there never more such dark clouds appear as might be able to cause storms
to fall, and lay to the ground such an ornament to a Land, as Basing was. Yet
if in any of your Lordships Seats works may be necessary, this little
forerunner of a more great one, may be as acceptable as it is most respectfully
tendered by me,

Your Lordships Zealous and most humble Servant. Balthazar Gerbier.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Marquess of Worcester, etc.
YOur known most Excellent parts in many wondrous opperations which a public
Genius can be capable of and which renders this Age more notorious, than that
wherein Pyrocles; who Invented the Art of the fire-lock, that of Prothee of
complete Armor, that of Phaenice of the Helmet, the Lacedaemonians, the Lance
and sword, the Combats at Sea and Land, by the Africans and Thessalonians, and
what can be said of Archimedes, and the High German Lord George Agricola, who
has left number of designs most completely Engraven; that demonstrates how
the great Element of water, can be easily drawn an excessive and almost
incredible height above its Center; so that Colonel Rushner and his assotiates
in Holland, their proposals concerning Waterworks, were not to be questioned;
all which to you my Lord, is so familiar, as that whatsoever Art can be treated
of, cannot be amiss to your Test.

Its therefore that this is offered to your hands, it being as a little
fragment of former exercises intended some years past, in a royal Academy, and
might have succeeded, had it not been attempted in a most destructive time,
when at one of the public lectures (which as all the other were gratis) a
world of People repaired to Bednal-Green, to destroy to the very foundation of
it; partly on pretense that it was a receptacle of Royalists; and partly that
the string of an Apollonian-like Harp, did not sound pleasing to their ears,
down with all Arts and Sciences, and let but Paris in France, Salamanca in
Spain and Padua in Italy have such a prerogative.

In fine, in case of like struggling against wind and stream, a good swimmer
(though a second fabulous Leander who sinks for Love) must give over; thus an
infinite number of eminent Verticosi have found to be true, and no doubt your
Lordship is of the number, that judges by experience, yet cannot be
discouraged; for Art and knowledge finds contentment in its self, it being a
constant good, to all those who do profess it; my profession (my Lord) shall be
as long as breath in me, to honor all those that follow what good is, and
consequently that with offer of this little present, I am

Your Lordships Zealous and most humble Servant B. Gerbier.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord Marquess OF DORCESTER, One of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
HEre is Presented to Your Lordships View, a Summary discourse wherein Men
affecting Building are concerned; it cannot be improper to his view, who
shows the effects of his liberal Heart, as a second Gelia, when he not only
did erect buildings for public use, gave privately, and openly, but kept
Officers at the gates of the City, to invite all in-commers to take refreshment
in his Palace, which did answer the truth of the saying, That as knowledge in
the hands of the Common is silver, in those of a noble person it is gold. And
that he does really possessits true (and no imaginary) powder of production,
That of Hermes Trisme gistos, that Aurum Potabile, which will serve to open
Heavens gate.

And who can tell, My Lord, but that Ovid had more then human thoughts by a
golden Shore, whereby a Divine bliss might make way to a pure soul?

To such a one My Lord, (who by a permitted comparison may be said to have
healing under his wings,) is offered the production of a person that means
well, when a Mecenas to all virtues (and so high born, as directly descended
from that Noble Stem of Shrewsbury) will favorably cast his eyes on an humble
sensitive,

Your Lordships Zealous and most humble Servant, Falthazar Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable The Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, etc.
COnsidering that the Lord Chamberlain by daily experience, finds what is most
needful in the Palace of a Sovereign, that a Person so endued, as your
Lordship can best judge thereof, that all men of parts endeavor the performing
of their task, the better under a good Commander, who also is of Noble
extraction, whose Mildness accompanies his Prudence, which does patiently
pass by some Errors that may be committed by men, who cannot challendge
infallibility in this world; I thought fit to pay this duty to your Lordship,
by presenting the Counsel and Advise to all Builders, to your hands; With the
Zealous professions of an old known Royal Sworn Servant, by two of your
Lordships Predecessors and,

Your Lordships most Humble Zealous Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable The Earl of Northumberland, One of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
DUring your Lordships being Admiral of the King of Blessed memory, his Royal
Fleet at Sea, I did not fail from my public Residency at Bruxels, to present
weekly to your Lordships view (as to all others of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council) what in duty bound, in reference to the Royal Service
and Respects to so great a Commander on the Ocean, wherein the Britain Kings
their Jurisdiction extends as far as the deviding of the Seas near Rochel.

From this deep Ocean my Vessel being withdrawn, I do with a fraught of words
concerning Materials, steer to Petworth: And if my little Treatise (though like
a Mouse gets no admittance up stairs, it may to that famous Stable built (as I
hear) as a magnificent one ought to be; No Horse in a double row, neither the
passage too broad, nor the Seeling too high, since otherwise that which is the
main pleasing object (the Horse) is as to seek.

Your Lordship will find in this Treatise, what kind of Stable Prince Thomas
of Savoy did Build; Its true where Marble is to be had at easy rate, but where
Coper is very dear; That I may not abuse that which is due to a person of his
Birth and condition, I shall only to the offer of this little Advice to
Builders; join the humble respects of,

Your Lordships Most humble, Zealous Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

To the Right Honorable The Earl of BEDFORD.
HEre is an offering not improper to the most noble successor of the Author of
the Piazza, whereby this great Metropolitan of Albion is beautified as the
firmament is by the Sun among the other Stars: Nor is your Lordships
Alexander-like receptacle, for all the generation of Bucefalls, a less
Ornament, though inferior to that of Prince Thomas of Savoy, which was built
of White Marble within, the Pillars Copper, Figures, the Manger and Rack of the
same Metal, to perpetuate his Name somewhat longer among Rationals, then Brick
could have done, yet Arthemisia had more reason to prefer before a glorious
Mosole her self, for a receptacle of sacred Ashes, which might remain longer in
the memory of men, and of that Sex which talks most. I shall My Lord,
endeavor to speak, not only in all the Languages which a true Master of
Ceremonies ought to have, but of that of the Heart, your Lordships praise, and
that I am,

Your Lordships most humble Zealous Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable the Earl of LEICESTER, etc.
It May be, that at the first sight of an Epistle, with Your Lordships name,
will be expected a Treatise concerning the most Sublime parts of the
Methaphisicks, in reference to your High Genius, or a Treatise of State Policy,
Embassages and Negotiations in the Courts of Foreign Princes, wherein your
Lordships carriage has justly deserved the respects of those, who in that time
were particularly acquainted therewith, as (My Lord) I was, being then honored
by the late King of blessed memory, with a Public employment; but (My Lord) it
being my scope only at this time, in the putting forth this small discourse,
to leave some advice to Builders, I must rather resolve to suffer in the
opinion of those Great Men, whose Capacity makes them write on matters
answerable to their Great Parts (and therewith to make Address to your
Lordships) then commit the paying this Duty to a Person who has enricht with a
Noble Building, one part of this Metropolitan, and thereby increased the number
of those who have endeavored to Build better, then those of past Ages; may
Your Lordship in this have all Satisfaction and Contentment according unto the
wishes of,

Your Lordships most humble Zealous Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable THE Earl of Denbigh.
YOur Lordship, who during the time of your extraordinary Embassage in Italy,
has not only seen the best Buildings, and knows how to order what is best
convenient, needs no advice, since your Lordships experiences in Building has
already proved it; yet my respects in the offering to your hands a little
Manual, for a Testimony, that during my travels, I did not attach my Eyes only
on the generality of Objects, but did exactly consider some particulars worthy
of note, (will not as I do humbly conceive) be rejected, as being contrary to
the disposition of Persons of your high Descent (that of Habsburgh) who have
not been abused in their Education though it happens but too much; Neither is
it natural to all those, which are born under one Constellation, to have like
Influences; since it happened that when Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany,
had his great genius elevated in Imperial thoughts, at the same moment he was
Crowned, and a Baker his Nurses Son, born in the very same moment as Charles
the Emperor was, who was observed only to be merry among his Friends, at the
same instant of the said Emperors Coronation.

Wherefore reflecting upon your Noble Birth, My Lord, my confidence to offer
such a little and Inconsiderable Piece of Work, cannot be looked upon as
unseasonable: My Mark being Respect, and the Effect my Duty; and so I do humbly
beseech you, my Lord, to let it pass, for though to so great an experience as
that of your Lordship, it should signify nothing New; It may nevertheless, by
your Lordships Favor, find a place where things are made good, and so may
prove as pleasing, as your Lordships Paradise-like-Garden at Neewnem, where an
Euphrates flows: And truly, my Lord, a Ground without such Waters, is as a fair
Ladies Chamber without a large and clear Looking-glass: With more I shall not
presume to abuse your Lordships Patience; since as the French say, Ilfaut se
lever de table avee bon apetit. Mine shall never long more, than receiving the
Honor of your Lordships Commands, as being, my Lord.

Your Lordships most humble Zealous Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the EARL of BRISTOL.
YOur Lordship who has seen both Spain, Italy and France; and therein observed
what is worthy, as a Person of that Great Judgment, as makes a true
distinction between things that are, and are not, will at the first view judge
of this Counsel and Advice to all Builders; who will not have just cause to
dislike the Offer, since the several Materials comprised therein, are of the
best Rate, as any can be; they are gratis, and accompanied with the Zealous
Respects to all, as to Your Lordship in particular, By

Your Lordships, most Humble, Zealous Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL of NEUPORT.
MY Zeal and Respect to the Nation in general, obliges me in the Address of
this Little Treatise to your Lordship, to mention some things of old, as true
as some were groundless; For as your Lordship in the Expedition for Rochell
had the Command of Horse, the French Mercury then had no just cause to write,
that there were five thousand English slain in that Expedition, since at the
return of the Army, four thousand five hundred men, of those five thousand
that went, were Mustered at Plymouth.

The Retreat was as good as the Attempt, by matchless Buckingham most
Caesar-like Glorious.

And Richelieu had no just cause to assume unto himself the glory of the
Conquest of Rochel since providence had only permitted it, for if the Town had
held out till the Sea over-turned the Ditch and the Estacade, neither had the
unresistable work, which I was commanded to build in three Ships, according to
the example of those of the Duke of Parma at the Seige of Antmerpe to blow up
Ditches, Estacades, and Chandeliers, been necessary, nor the hazarding the life
of men for the succor of that place.

In fine (My Lord) I should fail, (as I do humbly conceive) as much in memory
as in duty, if in the offering this my little work to your Lordships hands, I
should not speak in a language differing from that of workmen, as in reference
to Building, I might not omit this Address to your Lordship as to others,
since your Lordship has been exemplary to better Building on that part of
ground where your Palace is, then the old Norman gotish Lime and Hair-like
daubing custom, out of which it has been so hard to turn men, too constant
therein; but my profession not being changeable, I shall with more confidence
style my self,

Your Lordships Most humble Zealous Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of St. ALBANS, Lord Chamberlain to her
Gracious Majesty, the Queen mother, and of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
COUNCIL.
THis little Treatise mentions the best way for Building of Habitations, the
Choice of Surveyours, Clarks of the works, Master-Work-men, and Materials, as
likewise the Rates and Prizes of them, and of the Works, even the manner of the
East Indians burning of Lime, which could serve your Lordships Builders in St.
James-fields (if les Ardennes were near it) to burn more Lime in twenty four
hours time, then would be necessary for mortar to all that precinct.

As for the rest, your Lordship has seen abroad, the fairest Palaces, and most
complete habitations, the best contrived Ground-plats, and also most
Paradiselike Gardens, according unto the various fancies of their proprietors;
the one affecting Houses all of Glass, to have all men see them; Others their
Gardens most like an open field, or like Adam and Eve, when in their State of
Innocence; Others with Parters, and Imbroderiers for exercise to Gardiners pair
of sheers; other covered Walks, Labirinths, open basins for Fountains; others
with grots (as at Ruell, and Liancour in France,) with such shades as that
Nymphs may not be bereaved of a natural liberty; nor Acteon seen with his
curled brow; Infine, that Petrarca his saying, (per tanto variar Natura e
bella) might not become out of date, nor may be extinguished your memory.

Your Lordships most Humble, Zealous Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable, VISCOUNT STAFFORD, etc.
THe Advice-giver to Builders must less pass by the precinct of Tart-hall, then
of all those famous great Seats which the ever to be honored Lord High Marshal
of England, the Earl of Arundel, and Surrey, your Lordships Father did
possess, but of all such as the very aspects of number of Brick-buildings,
since the reformation of a Gotis relick building, has manifested to have been
the maine cause, that some of them Bearlike-whelps (by licking and smoothing)
have gotten some fashionable like shape, and times may work an increase of
comeliness on them, which that all help may contribute thereunto, this zealous
advice, does start forth as a little Postillion, to lead those that may in time
make up an excelling number, that shall be of more consideration, then such as
seem to take delight to loiter, as on the old road, about ill shaped things, I
shall in the interim endeavor to pay those respects unto your Lordship, as due,
and long since professed by

Your Lordships most humble, Zealous Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

To the Right HONORABLE Lord Brunckhord, Viscount Iyons in Ireland, President
of the Royal Society of Philosophers Meeting at Gresham College, and the rest
of that Honorable Society.
POssibly there are not wanting such who accustomed themselves to carp at all
things not directly of their humor, that will (upon sight of the Title of this
ensuing discourse) think it strange, that I should in an Epistle to you, treat
on the case of the perishing Buildings of mortals, though you already have been
entertained with observations made on the bills of mortality; as also the
Vegitation of Plants, when as indeed your Apollo's Oracle-like Arcenal, may
challenge the most sublime proffers of men of parts; And that if I would follow
the practice of men, who tell strange things, (having been in parts remote from
this Region) I should not begin with Clay, Sand and Chalk, whereof Bricks and
Lime are made, and is daily dug bear at home. I should rather have set forth
some account of Mariners, which during a year and upwards were my sole
Companions on the Ocean, or the cause of the Trade Wind, which serves us to
America, without shifting Sails; as also whether the starry apparition which
discovers it self, when North Pole is obscured, be that which Constantine the
Emperor see, whereby he made his Victorious conclusion; 2ly How my tear-man
found the Ebb and Flood all along the Coast of America, contrary to the several
observations and relations of a number of Seamen, who have maintained, that it
was impossible for a ship that was fallen on that Coast below the Port (whereto
it was bound) to get up again; except it tackt about one hundred of Leagues, to
recover a Trade wind for the reaching a higher Course; having found (as I say)
the contrary, after my Stearsman had lost time to sail five hundred Leagues
beyond the River of Amazons, not to fail to cast Anchor before that of Wiapoca,
Aperwack, Cawo, Wia, and finally in the Bay of Cajana; when as my Stears-man
found that notwithstanding the violent stream from that River of Amazon, he was
not hindered to get up again by reason of a constant ebb and flood.

Critics knowing also that (among such Eminent Philosophers (who like stars in
the Firmament, do with the approbation of the great Apollo of this Monarchy,
and his sacred influence, dive in matters most sublime) would fit more
seasonably from me an account of a day of rejoicing made by wild people (who
know no more of God, then that they are told of him to be a good man, who
drinks Tobacco, and that if they do well, they shall go to him with their wives
to drink with him, to the confusion of those who pay not their vows in
obedience, as is most due to Sovereigns; which was manifested, when one of
their Chiefs told me, that his sacred Ma esty was returning to His Throne, when
no living creature was come from Europe into that part of America to signify
that News, which was (as they said) revealed unto them by their Mackbouy; it
was when His Majesty was yet at Breda; whether then this truth does not
confirm, that Spirits not clogged with material bodies, know things most secret.

But leaving Critics to their unnecessary scruples, I have for the present
pitched on this discourse concerning Building, and thought fit not to forget to
Dedicate an Epistle to a Person of so great Honor, so great Knowledge, and
particularly in that without which, a great Philosopher of the first learned
Ages would not admit any into his Accademy, to wit Geometry; a Person that
understands all the Appurteinances to the Mechanics, who has a matchless
knowledge of the building of that whereof the Original was made, by the
direction of the Supreme Architect, to wit, the Arc.

And this being my dis-interessed scope, I shall remain confident that this
Advise to all Builders, may be useful either to your Lordship, or to some of
the Royal Society, or to any of those to whom they are bound to wish well, that
they may be persuaded to beware of ill Builders, who may well deserve to be
comprehended in the Bill of Mortality, since by their Exorbitances, happen many
irreparable accidents, viz. Chimnies which falling through the roofs of Houses,
kill good people in their beds; who contrive Rooms, Windows, and Doors, which
draws upon Inhabitants ill and infectious Air, from which I shall continue to
wish all men may be preserved, and profess to be,

Your Lordships, and the rest of the Honorable Society, Zealous and most
Humble Servant Balthazar Gerbier.

To The Right Honorable THE LORD WILLOUBY, OF PARAM.
SOme may think it strange that this Counsel and Advise concerning Building,
should also be presented to your Lordship, who minds at this present, the
Populating of such a part on the American Coast, where Houses are builded in
two hours time, because they have no second story, less third or fourth; the
Inhabitants whereof affecting no other livery then that of the first naked; and
who conceive that leaves of Trees do thatch their Domiciliums with less danger
to their naked parts, then if covered with Dutch Pan, or English-hard-burnt
Tiles.

But, My Lord, I confess (though I am seventy two years of Age) that if the
Charibden could give me an Advise of life, certain as the News, they told me
(four and a half degrees by North, the Equinoctial) of the Kings return, when
at that time, yet at Breda) and that I should live as many years as quarters of
the Charibden his Tooes and Fingers, which is all he can account by, I should
think my little Counsel and Advise concerning Building, might yet be put in
practice in those parts, where there is most rare Marble, and precious Stones,
where Magazins, and Storehouses, might be built to better use, then Casickes
made of American Bambouses, whereof I cannot forbear to speak to a person of so
much Honor, Knowledge, and Experience, as your Lordship is, who has heard
much of El Dorado, and if Men had minds as pleasing to God, as that they by his
blessing were led to that place (which is effectively in rerum natura) the
Great Cathedralls of St. Paul, and St. Peter, in this Metropolitan City might
be lined as Richly as the Temple of Solomon was. And, My Lord, because things
which Men do believe to be true, makes them more confident to speak them; I
think that the Discourse is neither unseasonable, nor the Counsel and Advise
concerning the best manner of Building, unpleasing unto your Lordship: It being
Written by him, who professes to be.

Your Lordships most Humble Zealous Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord CRAVEN Baron of Hamsted, Marshal.
I Shall not in this Epistle commit the faults of those Authors who crave great
Persons to Patronize their books, as if Quality, Credit, and Affection could
free a work from censure in the various Opinions of Men, are more then the
expressing the Name of Pelican or Phaenix in a sign, when the Painter has not
represented them to the life: Cooks cannot please all Pallats alike; nor
Orators, the ears of all Men. My scope in this Epistle is, to pay to your
Lordship a small acknowledgement of the debt due to a Noble Person, who affects
Building; and that all those whom your Lordship may think fit to employ
therein, may know what good Builders have observed, and that if they follow
those Rules, they will do their duty. The study of mine, and wishes for Your
Lordships satisfaction in all things shall be as constant as I am,

Your Lordships most humble Zealous and Obliged Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO The Right Honorable CHRISTOPHER Lord HATTON, One of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
THis Epistle shall say somewhat more particular concerning Building in
referrence to a Public good, then all the other, which are put to this
Treatise; Viz. That if your Lordship were pleased to reflect on the Proverb,
Foeneratur Domino qui miseretur Pauperis, Cap. 19. v. 4. Your Lordships
Building might be very fit to serve for a Bank of Loan in that part of the
Suburbs of this Great City; and your Lordship would do no more then other
Christian Eminent Persons in other Parts, who have bestowed both Houses, Lands,
and a stock of Money for such a Public use, whereby all necessitous persons
are rescued from a perishing condition; Trade Strengthened, Increased, and many
Bankrouts prevented.

In fine, your Lordship, will not take this Relation unkindly from a person who
means well, and who being past his Seventy two years of Age, is ere long
(according unto the frailty of Nature) to turn his back upon the World, and is
obliged ere that last moment, to leave all what possible may be to its Public
good, as I shall at all times attend your commands, in what may concern the
approving me to be,

Your Lordships most humble Zealous Servant B. Gerbier.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE DENZIL Lord HOLLIS, One of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
IF during your Lordships absence any of your Habitations require their
overseers, and Officers to be well and friendly advised; this little Discourse
concerning that matter, may be as useful to them, as it is zealously sent to
your Lordship, who has seen several good Ones, and whose Judgment (as good as
your Nature) makes a true distinction between those that are so, and are not;
which admirable quality in your Lordship, will favorably dain the acceptance
of this Epistle; though its but on the Subject of the well ordering of
materials for the Building of Habitations, when your Lordships great and
blessed Genius conjoyntly with the other true Zealous in the Council of a
Sacred Sovereign, does cooperate to the rebuilding of a peaceable flourishing
Government, wherein your Lordship, as all those of the same quality, may have
success answerable to the Zealous wishes of,

Your Lordships Zealous and most humble Servant. B. Gerbier.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Anthony Lord Ashley, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
THe Nation in reference to a lively Image of the Supreme sacred, by an
assembly of Representatives, takes notice of your Lordships great Genius in
representing Solomon's Temple-like Foundations of a State, to free it from the
fate of the Hebrews, Assyrians, Persians, Lacedaemonians, Medes, Greeks
Affricans, Romans, and even the Gots, who were sent packing by the Mores,
whereof but too many (as black in mind) are left; and therefore though a poor
small thing which treats but of Surveyors, Clarks of Works, Master Workmen,
Materials, and their Prizes, be not of a sublime, nor of State matter; yet
since from the least that lives, to the greatest Building is a main necessary,
either for one convenience or other; (My Lord) this apparent Demonstration of
Zeal, and Respect is humbly offered by,

Your Lordships most humble Zealous Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. John Robinson Knight. LORD MAYOR of the most Famous
City of LONDON.
AS what is alleged in the Epistle to the Reader of the Counsel and Advise to
Builders does infer, that the water of Thames, or of any Spring in the Country,
may serve to temper Mortar in England; so the observation of true Rules (waving
all quickchaws-like-devices) to Build as well as other Nations. It will not be
necessary to say thereon any more to the Chief of the Senate of this Great and
Famous City; nor will the Presentation of these printed leaves, require any
more Circumstances but my Zealous wishes, that next to the well Building of
Public Houses of Prayer (whereof all Nations have been careful, those of its
Inhabitants may be so well ordered, that other Nations may have just cause to
send their Surveyours and Workmen to take patterns, and pass their
Apprentiship in London or Westminster, where St. Paul may be rendered as Famous
as St. Peter at Rome; As King Henry the Seventh's Chapel in St. Peter at
Westminster, (who quarrels not on the point of Precedence) is Famous over all
Europe, and Esteemed by all good Builders; and that all may answer the same, is
the Zealous wishes of,

Honorable Lord Mayor, Your most Humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Henry Howard Esquire
YOu that know what good Building is, both by a Genius, which through a Golden
Channel sprung from the great Duke of Norfolk, was infused into your Spirit,
like by your particular applications to all things answerable thereunto, would
condemn this Messenger, if he should not deliver his Erant at your Palace,
where he calls neither on Porter nor Butler to draw him in as an Erasmus was at
the Lord Chancellor Moors, to drink in Hell, as he said, out of a Leather
Jack; He desires only to hear the words Ben Venuto, and its Author to pass for,

Honorable Sir, Your most humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO Mr. HARBERT ESQUIRE, Heir Apparent to the RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord POWIS.
Honorable Sir,
THe Ensuing Discourse is not presented to your view, as a shape seen on the
brow of a Hill, which faceth the Valley of Essen; It Is true, that cannot (as
this) fall; that cannot (by the carelessness of Grooms) be set on fire; and
therefore on that matter, to a Person of your Noble Birth and Retinue) one who
considers your merits, is obliged to recommend to such, who may be entrusted
with your Building; that Stables, and even Kitchens ought to be separated from
the main body of a Palace, the Stable without any question; in particular
Mansion-Houses, the Kitchens may be so well disposed, as that they may be at
hand, and yet not be an anoyance, which made the Great Henry the Fourth, the
French King say in a double sense to some of his Courtiers, who did accompany
his Royal Person to see a good Seat in the Country, and found fault with the
compactnesse of the Kitchen, Ventre St. Gris cest le bon menagement de la
Cuisine qui a fait la grande Mayson: Furthermore (Honored Sir) you will see in
a former Printed Discourse, concerning the three Chief Principles of
Magnificent Buildings, what you may perchance find seasonable; and whereon I
shall explain my self somewhat more at the end of the leaves, bearing the
Rates of Materials necessary to the Works, and conclude this with my humble
Respects to your self, as being,

Honorable Sir, Your most humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

To the Honorable Sir Kenelm Dighby, Knight, Chancellor to Her Gracious
Majesty, the QUEEN MOTHER.
THe Greatest Practisers of Music, who live at Lisbon, and in all the
Algarves, are reported to repair A las Orillas de la Mar, to sing as loud as
possibly they can, to hear whether it sounds well: To you whose deep judgment
could not suffer your Eyes to fix on slight objects as too many Travelers have
done, to you, whose fame, to my experimental knowledge, caused the greatest
Vertuosi to busy their admiration, as eminent as the true successor of
Thales, who found the North for Navigation, the Division of Years, the
Proportion of the Sun and Moon, that Souls are Immortal; who answered the
Question, what God is, viz. To be the eldest of all Antiquities; the World the
most beautiful Object, Place the biggest, Time most knowing, God, Virtue, and
Truth the strongest.

To you as to other Worthies of the Age, is offered this liule Counsel and
Advise concerning Building; for you have seen the various rarieties of
Frescati, Caprarola, Vigna Lodowizi, and all what is rare throughout all Italy
and other parts of Europe; and therefore as you can judge right of this matter,
so recommend the Advice given concerning the same to your friends, which may be
a benefit unto them; and this is all that is aimed at by me,

Honorable Sir, Your most Humble Servant B. Gerbier.

TO Sr. Edward Walker, Knight, Guarter, Principal King of Arms, and one of the
Clarks of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MEn that study naught but to carp at all, will perchance pretend, that I
should not Present a Discourse concerning Building to a King of Arms, but
rather a Treaty concerning the Antiquity and Origin of Herauldry: That the
Romans before Marius had in their Banners (to distinguish them in Romulus time,
from other Nations) no more then a bundle of Hay, to which succeeded a Hand,
and a bundle of leaves, with the Motto on their Banner. S. P. Q. R. Godefrey de
Bullon put on the Coat or Mantle which he did wear over his defensive Armor,
three white Eagles shot through with an Arrow, the Motto, Soit Dieu, soit le
hazard; and said, That he would wear no Crown of Gold, because the Savior of
the World had but one of Thorns.

But to return to the first Romans, that Constantine the great did Coat a
double-headed-Eagle, for having made a Seat at Constantinople, and kept also
that at Rome, that the Coat was afterward changed, because the Empire was
divided into two.

And as for the French, that they reckon their descent from Francion, second
Son to Hector, who did Coat a Lion, gul, field Or.

That the black Toades were taken up by Marcomir, second King of the Sicambres,
who had vanquished a Walon King whose Coat was three Toades, Sable field Or.

That Clovis (who became a Christian) did Coat number of Flourde-lis, because
(as the fable says) an Angel (by the hand of an Hermit of Journal) did give
them; Others, that he had obtained a Victory in a Field, wherein great quantity
of yellow Lilies did grow; and that finally Charles the Sixth, the fifty fourth
French King, did reduce them to three on the persuasion of his Herald, who had
told him, Qui plus a moins port.

But should Time and Paper be spent to relate what is so well, and particularly
known by you, it would savor of Vanity, and therefore I shall say no more, but
that if you, or your friends do affect Building, this Counsel and Advise may
perhaps be seasonable, neither will so discreet a person (by all men) highly
praised and beloved for his Integrity, and real good disposition to oblige all
men, misconster the respects of him who, professes to be,

Honored Sir, Your most humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO Sr. PETER KILLEGREW KNIGHT.
DUring your Journeys to Spain, objects of note could not escape your
particular Observations; as St. Jeronimo called the Escurial, which has almost
as many Courts, as some Palaces Rooms, and is a Body Solid like a Rock; Nor
will the Magnificent Seilings, and Carved Doors of the Palace at Sigovia have
mist your Annotations; So that this Treatise of Building, cannot likewise but
be acceptable to you, as directed to a Person who can with more convenience
acquaint his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, of what use it may prove to those
that will not spend time, money, nor materials in vain; which is also one of
the causes of producing it unto you,

Sir, By your most Affectionate Humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO Sr. THOMAS WINDEBANK KNIGHT. One of the Clarks of the SIGNET.
AMong such as know by experience what demolishing is, Counsel and Advise to
Re-build may be welcome; but I cannot pass the remembrance of a Fable that
several Nations having craved, it might for six weeks time rain good Noses: The
Grecians the readiest at hand had their choice, the Romans the next, but the
silly Black-Moores (living in remote parts) were the last, and therefore
constrained to gather such Noses as had been trod on.

Of those Blacks the Generation still are in esse, and there are certain
malicious spirits who make men black, though they be never so white, and though
their Noses are as straight as an Arrow, they will strive to persuade people
they were crooked.

But now an Apollo-like Prince, (who casts his most benign influence on men)
is accessible, its time (as the old saying) to make Hay; Re-build therefore as
fast as others, what a destroying Age has demolisht, and if in your Building,
you want instructions for your Clark; pray let him make use of this Manual
heartily Offered by,

Sir, Your Affectionate Humble Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO Sr. PHILIP WARWICK KNIGHT.
YOu have many Years past been known to possess a Genius capable of all good
Impressions, and therefore I thought it not beyond the purpose (but suitable to
the Acknowledgement of the particular Esteem, I am oblidged to make of Virtues
excelling in Men) to offer you this Little Treatise being sufficiently
convinced of your Judgment in all particulars, not doubting but you will
believe me to be,

Your most Humble and Affectionate Servant, B. Gerbier.

To Sr. JOHN BABER Knight.
one of his sacred Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary, Established by Letters
Pattents under the great Seal of England, and one of the Fellows of the
College of London.

I Look not for particular thanks for the Presenting this Manual to you as to
others; It Is but to express the rescents of my Obligation for your having made
good the saying of the Ecclesiastes concerning Persons of your Capacity; For
they shall also pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper, that which they give
for ease and remedy to prolong life, which you did in that person, whom it had
pleased the Almighty to suffer me to enjoy, during the space of 43 Years, and
to whom I ow this true Testimony; that during so many years time, she never
gave me any just cause of discontent; But to the contrary, to wish that you
might long before the increase of her indisposition, have been invited for the
lengthening of her days in this World; where truly I should not spend time
about Notes concerning Building, when the wishes of the great Apostle urges
men to think more on a desolution; were not preservation the first fundamental
Principle of man? And does not the Scripture command to mind it, as it does
very particularly point at the Physicians, who does know, what those various,
most admirable dimentions in the Microcosme do require: And that as it is a
good Air which coroborates the most subtle parts of that Master. Piece of the
great Architect of Heaven and Earth; A House to a whole Family ought to be so
contrived, as to enjoy that general necessary benefit. In which respect the
offer of this Discourse concerning Building may be said proper to you, and my
reason therein not to be gainsaid by malicious Critics, who are wont to feed
on flowers of the most sweet scent, and may to your Honey-Bee-like disposition,
this be so from,

Your humble Affectionate Obliged Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

TO Mr. POVY, Treasurer to his Royal Highness the Duke of York
YOu are known and reputed to be (as the Virtuosi say) a lover of Art; The
inside of your Habitation speaks it, and truly one good inside is to be
prefered before a hundred of such as signify but a show of something; the love
one has to Music argues a well composed Harmonius mind; so the love to Art
(consisting in perfect Rules, Dimensions and Forms) infers the party to be a
true Rational, who blusheth not at the Bees their Geometrical contrivances
even in the dark.

I do present you with one of the Examples for true Building; I hope you will
reflect on it as coming from,

Honored Sir, Your most Humble Affectionate Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO Mr. WILDS.
KNowing what Building is, and shown it at your own Charge, this Little
Treatise is then (as I do conceive) well addressed to you, without any tedious
repetitions in this Epistle; nor does the Treatise (by many Lines) entrench on
the time and patience of a Reader; It recommends to a good Clark of the Works,
to see the Workmen perform what they know ought to be done to Build well; and
this cannot be offensive to men that mean so, nor more then the respects of,

Honored Sir, Your most Humble, and Affectionate Servant, B. Gerbier.

To Master William Wine.
HEre is an Epistle to you, a lover of that which Marc Varro says; was the
second thing accepted by all the world, to wit, Letters which the Egyptians did
attribute unto them, though the Assyrians would have the glory thereof, by them
are taught to speak well, though they are mute; and what good seasonable speech
is, Papirus found in, the Senate of Rome; Grotius by Henry the great, at the
14th year of his Age. And you will no doubt (having begun betimes) continue to
proceed vigorously in all virtuous exercises, and make good (in the Royal
Society of Philosophers at Gresham College) that you are not of those who
content themselves with gilt out sides of books, but every day to remember the
great Artist in the drawing of a line, whereby he meant a continual exercise to
perfection, the scope of True Knowledge. I must therefore by this Epistle
(whereby I do send to you as to others, this little Manual) freely tell you,
that though never the hand of man could draw a perfect Line, (himself being
imperfect) yet must a lover of perfection strive to do his best, both in
straight lines in the Military Art (which you have studied) and the
ground-plats for an Habitation. But those Lines must be visible, no affected
ones, nor small as a hair, since Courtaines, Bastions, and Contrescarps, are to
be traced for old eyes, as well as for young adventurers. Nor are the lines for
the groundplats of Houses to serve for Castles in the air: And therefore good
Drauftsmen do express them strongly, what is to be built in Brick by a red
line, what with Stone white, what Partitions in Timber-colour, a mote-like
water, Gravel walks, (or others) accordingly, that the Workmen may have the
less cause to excuse; Which I thought fit to note, wishing you all increase of
Virtue, being,

Your Affectionate Servant, B. Gerbier.

TO THE Courteous Reader.
WHere as all Creatures from the Mole (that has no great sight) to the most
Argus like above ground, are continually a Building, and stand in need of
Mechanical more then of Phylosophical Rules: This little Manual does therefore
point at the Choice of Surveyors, the duty of Clarks of the Works,
Brick-layers, Masons, Carpenters, etc. who must be spoken unto in plain
intelligible terms, for that diverse Workmen ressemble those, whereof the
Ecclesiastes, faith, That when a Tale is told, then they will say, What is the
matter? This Manual does both now and then proffer a word or two to cherish the
Readers patience, for that bare names of Materials, of Forms, and several parts
of works will too soon tire Noble Persons; Nor is this present Age void of
number of Authors, who have written more on Architecture then any Clark of the
Works will have time to learn by Art: These summary Notes will serve for such
as are entrusted by Owners of Building, that they may the better perform their
task, and have more credit with the several Master Workmen, who do love to be
spoken unto in their own phrases; And Owners of Buildings their Trustees,
Stewards, and Pay-Masters being possessed with the Rates of Materials, will be
more at rest, than otherways if they should be to seek, to make perpetual
enquiries after them, and be vexed with ill grounded reports.

Furthermore, you may gather out of this Treatise, a Pozie pleasing to your
scent, and leave the gleanings, which are most proper to Mechanics concerned
therein, until a large work (with Copper Plates) shall have had time to be put
forth, wherein not only shall be represented in complete measure, the Forms of
all Moulding of Orders, Columns, Ornaments for Doors, and Windows, Court,
Houses, and Gardinggates, and with all some Fronts, and Dimensions of Houses
both in a City, and in the Country; Churches, Towns, Houses and Steeples, with
all necessary Appurtenances thereunto belonging; As also the charges a Builder
may be at, according unto the extent and height of a Building, either made of
Stone, Brick, or mixed.

You will have no just cause to infer, that when the best Building is mentioned
(according to the Grecian and Roman manner) that therefore English Labonrers
shall need go with their Buckets to fill them at the Tiber, less to the Scaene
at Paris, to temper their Mortar well, nor your Surveyors, nor Master-Workmen
to be vexed with things ala-node, if they will but observe Rules, Dimensions,
and Forms, which are not to be mended, less contradicted.

And as for the number of Epistles which are put to this Manual.

Anthoni peers (once Secretary of State to Philip the second King of Spain) was
a president for the putting of many Epistles to a Treaty, which he Dedicated
not only to Eminent Persons in Spain, but also in France and England; 'twas
his Peregrino, the main whereof represented a Demolisht Body: The scope of this
is contrary to that, being about Building; his was a personal interest, this a
Public: It Is therefore the more freely offered to a number of Persons, who
either themselves, or friends may have occasion to make use of it; It Is freely
offered as to the upper, so to the lower end of a Table, like a fresh gathered
Fruit; and none of those who are pleased to accept it, are craved to Patronize
it, it being held most unfit for any Author to crave, since no man is bound to
answer for faults committed by another.

A Brief Discourse, concerning the three chief Principles of Magnificent
Building, viz. Solidity, Convenience, and Ornament.
WHereas Building is much minded in these times, I thought fit to publish some
Principles thereon, which may stand the lovers of it instead. Yet without
spending time and Paper to Note how a Point, Line, Angle, Demi-circle, Cube,
Plint, Baze, Pedestal, Colombe, Head, Architrave, Frize, Cornice, or
Frontispiece must be made; and what Dimensions all those several parts (a Point
excepted) must have, since all Master-Workmen ought to remember) as Scholars
their Grammar, and Arithmatitions their Table) how every Particle must have its
just proportion; and that the height of Windows and Doors must be double
their breadth; and also to be careful to maintain the due esteem of their Art,
since its Dimensions and Rules came directly from Heaven, when the great
Architect and Surveyor of Heaven and Earth, prescribed the Rules and particular
Orders for the Building of a floating-Pallace, (Noah's Ark) and the glorious
matchless Temple of Solomon, the perfect House of Prayer.

And therefore such Precedents may serve to convince those who say, That a
wiseman never ought to put his finger into Mortar, since there is a necessity
for Building, especially among Nations who do not, or cannot live in Caves and
hollow Trees, or as the Wild Indians, who have no other Roofs but of
Palmito-Leaves, nor Wainscot, but Bambouses, as they call the Poles to which
they tie a Woollen Hammac to lie in.

There are three Capital Points to be observed by men, who intend to Build
well:

VIZ, Solidity. Convenience. Ornament.

Those who have Marshald the Orders of Colombs (to make good the first Point)
have Ranged the Toscan to be the Supporter of a Building, but such an Atlas
must stand on a firm Ground, not as ill Builders place Colombs (either of Brick
or Stone) like things Patcht or glewed against a Wall, and for the most part
against the second Story of a Building, (contrary to the very Gothish Custom,
who at least did begin their Buttrises from the Ground) as if their intent
were, that the weight of the Colombs should draw down the Wall, on the heads of
those that pass by.

Such Builders confound the first and essential point of Building, (to wit,
Solidity, with Ornament and Convenience.)

They will make a show of some thing, but miss thereby (as ill Bow-men) the
Mark: They may perchance have heard of rare Buildings, nay, seen the Books of
the Italian Architects, have the Traditions of Vignola in their Pockets, and
have heard Lectures on the Art of Architecture, which have laid before them the
most necessary Rules, as also the Origin of the several Orders of Colombs,
and Discourses made thereon; that the Toscan is as the Hercules, so of the
Jonic and Corinthian; the first of the two to Resemble the Dressing of the
Daughters of Jonio, who had Twists of Hair on both sides of their Cheeks. The
Corinthian Heads to represent a Basket with Acante Leaves, and the Guttered
Colombs, the Pleats of Daughter and Women's Clothes.

That the Grecians (in remembrance of their Victories) did Range the Colombs in
their Buildings, to represent the number of Slaves which they had taken; the
Grains, Beads, Drops, Pendants, Garlands, Enterlaced-Knots, Fruitage, and an
infinite number of Ornaments, which are put on the Frize, to signify the
Spoils which the Victors had brought away from their Enemies; and to preserve
the Memory thereof, did place them on their Buildings, that they might also
serve for a true History.

But none of such Ornaments were ever impediments to the strength or
convenience of a Building, for they were so handsomely and well contrived, as
once the Duchess of Cheiveruse (a French Lady) said of the English Females,
that they had a singular grace to set their Ornaments right and handsomely.

The Babarians and naked Tapoyers, Caripowis, Alibis, (and several Charibdiens)
do place Pendants in their Nostrils, which are proper for the Ears; and these
hinder not the use of the Lips, which ought to be observed by all Builders.

And as for the inside of Fabrics, Builders should in the first place set the
Doors, Chimnies, and Windows, as may be most convenient for use.

Builders ought to be not only experimented in Housekeeping, but also good
Naturalists, to know (before they spend time and Materials) the required
Property to every part of a Building. A Door to be so set as it may not convey
the Wind toward the Chimny or Bedstead, though opened never so little.

The Windows to be so placed, as that the Fire made in the Chimney, may not
attract the Air and Moisture, and so prove the unwholesomest part of the Room
for those that are near the Fire; Which was the main reason why the great
Isabella Infanta of Spain (King Philip the Seconds Daughter, who Governed the
Provinces of Brabant, Flanders, Arthois, and Haynault, during her many years
Residence at Bruxells, (being prepossessed with a prejudice, never approached a
Fire to warm her self; till at last being through wet (going a Procession in a
great Rain, and by a Visit made by Mary of Medicis, Queen Mother to Lewis 13th,
just as she returned to her Palace) had no time to Shift her, she was
constrained to approach the Fire to dry her self, and few days after she fell
sick and died upon it: which

Relation being very true, and happening in the time that I resided for the
King of blessed memory in that Court, I thought fit to mention, to preswade all
Noble and curious Builders, to place their Doors, Windows, and Chimnies in
their proper places.

An though it be not my defign in this small Discourse to Treat of Dimensions
(which are fit for a Primar to Apprentices,) Yet I cannot desist (by reason of
the West-Indian Herican-like-windes which happened February last, to preswade
all Builders to forbear the Building any more those exorbitant Chimney-Shafts,
which when they fall, break both Roofs and Sealings of Rooms, and kill good
People in their Beds: since a Chimney some two Foot higher than the Ridges of
the Roof of a Building, (which is not overtopt by a Church or Steeple, or some
other eminency,) is as good a conveyance for the smoke, as any of a greater
hight. Neither are those high Shafts of Chimnies real Ornaments to a Building,
much less to the Palace of a Sovereign: nor do the Germane Travelers of this
Age any more fill (as formerly) their Table-Books with the number of them, as
they were very careful to note the Names of their Hoafts, where the best Wine
was, and when they tasted that called Lagrima-Christi, they moaned and asked why
he did not weep in their Country. Its true, that the least addicted to
Bibbing, did put in their Stam-Books the Dimentions of the Pantheon and of the
Amphitheaters; as also of Caprarola, Frascati, and such Magnificent Structures
above Ground in Italy, and under Ground La Piscina Admirabile, La Grotta de la
Sibila Cumana, Bagni de Cicerone, cente Camere, ele Sepulture delli nobili
Antichi. But they are now tought by Tutors to observe the Inside of Men, and
Buildings. And as the best Ornaments of a Face appears at first sight by the
Eyes, Mouth, and Nose; so does the best qualities of a perfect Building, by
Windows, and Doors well placed, as also by a large, magnificent, commodious,
and well-set Staircase.

Noble, magnificent, and commodious Staircases, must in the first place
participate of a Noblemans manner of Pace and Attendance.

There is no man of sound Limbs (and that has a gallant Gate) but lifts his
Toes at least four Inches, when he goes an ordinary easy Pace; so that if two
steps (each four Inches high) be eighteen Inches broad, or deep, which makes
six and thirty Inches the two (the just measure of a man's two steps,) they may
be ascended from the first Floor, to the higher Story, as if a man walked on a
level ground.

2. Those Stairs ought to be so long, that the Attendants on each side the
Noble Person, Prince or Sovereign, may not be straightened for room.

Such were the Monarchlike Stairs of the Palace of Darius and Cyrus the
Great, at Chelminor in Persia near Saras, the Metropolitan between Ormus and
Espahan. I do speak indeed of a Palace without comparison to any other, the
Walls of Circumvallation of that Palace, being four and twenty foot thick, and
the Stairs (as yet in esse) are forty foot long, in number an hundred and
eight, of Circular Form, and of so easy an Access, as that Travelers do
ascend them on Horseback.

King James of blessed memory could not have been so much in danger of an Onset
in a Pair of Stairs, larger enough for a Noble Retinue to his Person, as he
was in a narrow Pair, which History mentions.

Neither had William Prince of Orange been so easily Shot at Delff in Holland,
descending a narrow Pair of Stairs.

4. A Noble Pair of Stairs should have a Cupelo, and no Windows on the
sides, which for the most part serve but for Rude and Unadvised Men to break.

In some Palaces and Noble Men's Houses, Too many Stairs and back-Doorss (as
the old English Proverb) makes Thieves and Whores. And the setting the Front of
a Building toward the North-West, and a Palace, like Cardinal Wolseyes
ill-placed one (now called Whitehall) on a low ground by the River side) makes
work for Physicians, Apothecaries, Surgeons, Coffen and Grave-makers.

But as for a Seat on Morish Grounds (except the Builders observe the practice
of those of Venice (in Italy) and Amsterdam (in Holland) who bestow more Timber
of Oak in the Foundation of one, than in the Building of six Houses,) in
effect it is to Build perpetually, leaving to their Posterity to prop and
redress their ill grounded Buildings; and they may well be rankt with the Duke
of Arscot, who built much in Brabant, and (in a merry humor) designed in his
Will ten Thousand Gilders per annum, to support and alter what he had Built
amiss.

I must also advise Builders on high Grounds, to cause their Surveyors to
search for Springs, and shun them; which serve better to fill up Glasses to
allay the Vapors of Gascony Wines, than to make a Pond in a Sellar.

Builders ought also to be very curious. and careful in the choice of the
place to build a Seat on, for good Prospect, well Garnisht with Woods, and the
Water at hand, not too near, nor too far from a City or Town.

Item, I must wish all Princes and Noble Persons who are resolved to Build
Palaces and Seats answerable to their quality, to imitate those who in the
Heathen age were so careful in the ordering of the Structure of their Stone
Images, especially of their Saturn, Jupitur, Apollo, Mars, Neptune, (and all
their Fry of wanton Godesses) as to empannel a Jury of Philosophers,
Naturalists, Physiognomists and Anatomists, who were to direct the Sculptors
how to Represent those Images. And so I would wish Builders to proceed in the
contriveing the Models of their intended Fabric, to wit, to consult (as those
of Amsterdam did in the making the Model of their Townhouse, diverse
experimented Architects, though they pitched for the Front on the worst of all.

Item., Before the Workmen, make use of Materials, and not to Build at Random,
as the Custom of too many ill Builders is; And when once the Model is
approved, never to alter, nor to pull down what has been well begun, nor to
hearken to the diversity of opinions, which have been, and are the causes of
many Deformities and Extravagancies in Buildings; and especially those who seem
to have had for Models Bird-Cages, to jump from one Room into the other by
Steps and Tressels, to cause Men and Women to stumble.

And the sides all of Glass (like Spectacles) the glass Windows of small
Payns, with great store of Lead, to draw the more Wind and Moisture from the
open Air within Doors. As also Windows with store of Iron Casements, which
rust, and never shut close, Notwithstanding all the various devices of Smiths,
to catch Money out of the Builders Purses, contrary to the good custom in
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, and the Low Countries, which certainly for
plurality of Voices should be believed, and followed.

Those Nations cause their glass Windows to be fitted in wooden Casements
treble riveted, to keep out Wind and Rain; they are lined with wooden
Shutters, and have double boarded Shutters without, to resist all the violence
of the Weather and Thieves.

Let no man mistake these Windows for wooden Casements, for such are usually
seen here in England in old wooden Houses, the Casements scarce above one Foot
and a half high, tottering things; for these are substantially, strongly, and
curiosly made Casements; nor are the wooden Shutters such Pastboard-like
things, as are generally put on the outside of the Windows on the London and
Suburbs Houses, but duble-Deal well-riveted Windows, with substantial Locks,
Bolts, and Hinges, and a double Iron Bar, with a Bolt fixed in the middle of
them both.

Nor do good builders affect partitions of Lime and Hair in their Houses, nor
any of their Bricks to be daubed over with finishing-Morter.

The Romans are very curious in the tempering their Mortar, and in the laying
it as thin as possibly they can, to prevent the sinking and bending of their
Walls, which the laying of their Mortar too thick does cause; and experience
shows, that when some Walls are taken down in England, half of the substance
is Sand and Dust.

The Romans (as likewise the Grecians before them) did not make use of their
Lime, at the same time it was slakt, but for six Months time suffered to
putrify, and so putrified composed a Seiment, which joined with Stone (or
Brick) made an inseparable union, and such strong work as I have seen
Iron-Tools break on the old Mortar of the Amphitheaters at Verona and Rome.

Their manner of preparing Lime is to lay it in Cesternes the one higher than
the other, that the Water (after it has been so stirred as that it is well
mixed and thoroughly liquid) may drayn from one Cistern to the other, and after
six Months time (the Lime having evacuated its putrefaction) remains purified,
and then they mix two parts of Lime with one part of Sand, and makes that
strong and pure Mortar, which if practiced in England would make a wondrous
strong Union, especially if the Clay-makers did beat the Clay as it ought to
be, the English Clay being better than the Italian, nay the best in the world.

They are very careful in the making large and deep Foundations, and to let
the Walls raised on the Foundations rest and settle a good while before they
proceed to the second Story.

Some of our Carpenters have learned to lay Boards loose for a time, the
Italians and other Nations are not sparing therein, they nayl them as if for
good and all, but rip or take them up again, to fit them for the second time.

As I said before, no Building is begun before a mature Resolve on a complete
finished Model of the entire design: the Builder having made choice of his
Surveyor, and committed to him all the care and guidance of the work, never
changes on the various opinions of other men, for they are unlimited, because
every man's conceits are answerable to their profession, and particular occasion.

A Sovereign or any other Landlord, is then guided by natural Principles, as
well as by his own Resolve, taken on a long considered Model, because they
know (by experience) how sudden changes are able to cause monstrous effects.

They know that a well experienced Surveyor must not be disturbed in his task,
and undertaking, but as the Silk Worm and the Soul of Man, the first in his
Husk, the second in the Womb, wherein both the one and the other (by the powers
of the great Architect and Director of all things) works out his own complete
Fabric, if not interrupted; but if interrupted by any outward accident, it
happens that those passions become the original causes of exorbitant Features
and Forms. An Item for all Builders to suffer a good Architect quietly to
pursue his task, if he understands it.

It has been observed among the French (a Nation as much addicted to changes
as any) that when the charge of an undertaking has been committed to many, it
caused but confusion, and therefore its a saying among them, Trop de Cuisineirs
gattent le pottage, Too many Cooks spoils the Broth.

I shall not spend time, and transgress on the Readers patience, concerning
the making of Clay, and burning of Bricks, only say, that it imports much the
Clay should be well wrought, before it be put in the Mould: experience has
also taught Brickmakers to have them of such a length, thickness and
wideness, that four of them (together with the Mortar thereunto belonging) may
raise a Foot.

As for Freestone, Portland Stone works well, and makes a good union with
Bricks, yet cannot be compared with Marble, nor to the Bluish Stone of the
Quarries of Liege and Namur, But it is also certain, that this Climate makes
Marble it self to Moulder very much: as for example, the Cain and Abel in
York-House Garden, which did not Moulder when it stood in that of the Duke of
Larma at Valedolid in Spain, the coldness (together with the moistness of
this Clime) being of a contrary operation to the temper of the Air in Italy
and Spain. And therefore when Builders see their Copings; Water-table,
Cornishes. Railes, and Balisters to decay, they must have patience, since there
is no Meterial but is subject thereunto, and that Rails and Balisters (either
on the top of the Walls of a Frontispiece, or in Belconies, though never so
well Painted in Oil, and of the best seasoned Timber,) but must be renewed at
forty or fifty years end.

Builders ought to calculate the Charges of their designed Building, and
especially with what Sum of Money they are willing to part, and yet remember
to imitate some Philosophical Humorist, who resolves to venture on a pretty
thing called a Handsome Lady, without which their Fate seems to tell them they
cannot live, and therefore makes an account beforehand that all things will not
precisely answer his expectation. But on the contrary, the Lady instead of
being a good Houswise, (and an assistant) proves expensive, and an impediment.
And if it prove otherwise, he will be a great gayner by the bargain; for let
Builders put their design to Master-Workmen by the Great, or have it Wrought by
the Day, either the Workmen will overreach themselves, or the Builder will be
overreached.

Charity to the one, and respect to the other, moves me to keep the rest in my
Pen, yet shall never be backward to inform either of them in the ear what may
be the best for them to choose.

But I must freely advise all Builders in general, never to begin to Build on a
Ground before it be Purchased, as the late Duke of Buckingham did at
York-House, where there has been much daubing and breaking through old rotten
decayed Walls; first to make a Ladies Closet on the corner of a Wall where a
Butteryses stood; and which was taken away for the Closet, intended only at
first for a Closet of case, and to serve until the Archbishop of York could be
persuaded to accept as good a Seat as that was, in lieu^ of the same, which
could not be so so^^ compassed, as the Duke of Buckingham had occasion to make
use of Rooms, to entertain (according to the Dignity of a prime Minister of
State) foreign Princes and Ambassadors; so as on a sudden, all the Butterises
that upheld that rotten Wall were thrown down, the Seeling of Rooms supported
with Iron-bolts, Belconses clapped up in the old Wall, daubed over with finishing
Mortar, and all this (as a Toadestoole growethin a night) to serve until a
Model for a Solid Building (to stand even with the Street) were made, and to be
Built or such Stone as the Portico or Water. Gate at the River side is, and
this was done on a Morish Ground, whereon no New Building could stand any time
without Proppings, which was contrary to the main. Principle of good Building.

I must proceed and conclude with my humble respects concerning Palaces of
Sovereign Princes, which must differ as much from other Buildings, as their
quality and condition from that of their Subjects.

And in the first place, as Solidity must be the first Principle in all good
Building; so much more ought it to be observed in that of Sovereigns, unto whom
the whole world has access.

And as there must be spacious Ground before their Palaces, their Inner-Court
ample, the Offices for their Retinue large and commodious, and so placed as
they may neither be an aunoyance nor of ill aspect.

The first Stories ought rather to be vaulted than boarded, to prevent such an
accident as happened to Lewis 13th French King, (and his Queen at a Ball,) when
the Floor of the Room (with all the Company) fell down; the King and Queen
only remaining (by a special Providence) on the Hearth of the Chimny, setting
under the Cloth of State.

And as there is a necessary Magnificence to be expressed on the Front and inside
of Princely Buildings, answerable to their greatness; so is it absolutely
necessary, that the Architect be possessed with a Soul as great as the Player in
the French Play, called the Virionaries, where he persuades himself to be
Alexander, and governs his Motions accordingly. And the Lines and Strokes of
the Architect must be Alexander-like: his Figures and Statues Colosses, his
Pyrimidis like those of Egypt, and the Vaults like that Rock wherein Alexander
and Darius wrestle for Mastery in a Valley in Persia, between Babylon and
Espahan, at a place called Carimonshahan, where formerly was a great City six
English Miles long; in which Groto, the Alexander-like mind of the Sculptor,
has Hewn within the Rock, (besides Alexander on Horseback, and a number of
Huntsmen and Ladies) the aforesaid Alexander and Darius wrestling to break a
Ring between them.

Such a like mind Prince Thomas of Savoy, (Son to the Great Emanuel of Savoy)
infused into his Architect, Sculptor, and Caster in Brass, who he employed in
the Designing and Building a Stable in Turin, within all of Marble, the Racks,
Manger, and the upright Posts all of Copper, Richly Wrought, Conveyances of
Water Pipes. The Manger fourteen Inches wide at the bottom, to contain a Pale
for Water on all occasions. The upper most edge of the Manger three foot eight
Inches high from the Ground, to accustom the Neapolitan great Saddle-Horse to
raise their Neck. The Rack Poles three Inches asunder and upright, that as the
Frenchman says, (L'appetit vient en mangeant) the Horse may feed more
cheerfully, the Hay and Dust may not fall on their Heads, as it does out of a
Rack which stands shelving: the under part of the Manger ought to be made up to
keep in their Litrers, and no Boxes made there for Dogs, as some not curious
do, where no Harnesses, Saddles, Coverings of Horses, or any other Implements
or Tools, are not to seen about the Postern, since those things do but impede
the Access of a Cavallier to the Horses.

The disposing a Stable into a double Range, has been affected by some, who
would see all their Horses at once.

Others love only a single Range, whith a broad Walk, and if they have a great
number of Horses, return at the end into another Range, if the Ground can
afford the same, so as a Wall makes the Partition between the Horses.

The Paving of such a Stable is very neat, being of white or yellow (twice
burnt) Flanders Bricks, in Dutch called Clinkart; far beyond Planking of
Stables, for diverse Reasons. The Paviors (after the Bricks are laid) throw
sharp Sand over them, and twice a day they are Watered with a Gardeners
Watering-Pot, and Swept with a Broom, which the Grooms are to continue
sometimes, because the Sand gets between the Joints, and makes the Paving very
close and firm. The Pavement at the Foot of the Manger, must be raised at the
least six Inches higher, than at the Gutter where the Posts are placed, which
ought to be five Foot and an half distant one from the other, which Ground so
Paved is of double use; first, that the higher a Horse stands toward the
Manger, the better sight it is, and especially when the Lights of the Stable
strikes on the Horse their backs, which is the better Light.

Secondly, That a Horse its usual standing place being so much shelving,
accustomes the Horse (reposing more on his hinder Feet than on the foremost) to
be more light and nimble in his Gate and Pace.

Thirdly, That his Stall does not remain under him, and especially when its
standing has eight foot in length from the Manger to the Channel, which for
neatness ought to be above Ground, the eight Foot in length, being at full the
space which the Horse does possess when in the night time he lies stretched on
his Litter.

I must not omit by way of Queries, to Write somewhat concerning the Kitchen of
a Princely Palace, viz. Whether there should not be as much curiosity, if not
more in the Kitchen than in the Stable; since the Meat prepared in a Kitchen,
ought to be Dressed with all Neatness, and preferred before a fine Lace about
the Master Cooks Towel: Neither are the Vessels of Silver but in reference to
the Neatness which ought to be observed in all Cookery. The French-Mans Glass
is wrenched as often as he Drinks, and why should not Cooks be more Curious and
Neat in their Kitchins, than Grooms in their Stables? And as a Stable can have
conveyances for the Horses Water, so may Kitchins for Slabbering, for Guts of
Fowls and Deer, Coals, Ashes, and whatsoever else can cause Dirt and Nastiness,
and be freed from the annoyance of Smoke, which ill-placed Doors may cause; nor
ought the Kitchen or other Offices and Selleridge, (as in some Palaces in
France) to be so placed as they may prove prejudicial to the Court, and if
they are underneath a Palace they ought to be vaulted.

I must not forget that the Roof of a Palace should be covered either with Lead
or blew Slates.

The Pantheon at Rome was covered with Brass, which a Pope melted to cast
Canons, no such as only eat, drink and sing.

No curious eye can well endure those Barn-like Roofs of many Noble Persons
Palaces, covered with red Tiles, which break and rot away, and then the Roof
being mended and patcht, seems to be a Beggars Mantell, which I would not have
the Nobles and Courtiers to be. See the Roofs of Lester, Newport, Southampton,
and such like their Palaces, whether they do not look as Barns for Hay, and not
Pybald, by their patched Tiles?

As for the main bulk of Palaces, its, true some have a greatness in
plainness, as that of Farners in Rome, whereof Michael Ang elo made the
Arcitrave, Frize and Cornish.

And as for Bigness and Solidty, that of St. Jeronimo, and Escuriall in Spain;
for Ornament, Munikch in Bavaria; the Louver at Paris for Vastness, Situation
and Ornament, by the imbossed Imagery on the Frontispiece, variety of Orders of
Colombs, with the delight of the annexed Tuilleries, wherein as especially in
that of the Palace of the Duke of Orleance, but above all in the Cardinals
their Vignas in Rome, is observed the form of a true Princely Garden,
consisting not only in much Air, great plots of Grass, low Borders, large
Gravell-Walks, but for close Walks, Fountains, Groves, and Statuaes, to make
good the Italian saying, Per variar natura e bella. And as for the imbossed
carved Imagery on the Frontispiece of a Palace, their Dimensions must be
according unto their distance from the Ground; which is the main point
requisite to be observed also in Scheames, wherein diverse undertakers commit
very great faults, not only by the not reducing whatsoever is represented to
the true Lines of Perspective, but also by omitting the giving such Proportions
to things, as may satisfy the sight of all the Spectators at their several
distances; for Excellency does not consist in vastness, nor in the quantity of
Objects, nor Shapes, nor Colors.

The Sphere in an Angle of a great Chamber in St Pedro eVaticano in Rome
confirms this truth, and every judicious Eye will be satisfied therewith. Seas
must not only be seen to have a natural motion, but heard to make a noise of
breaking of their Waves on the shore, and against the Rocks. Clouds must not
only drive, but be transparent, Winds, Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Snow, and
Hail, must be so heard, seen, and felt, as that Spectators may think those
sights to be natural operations. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, no Past-board
devices, but so represented, as that they may dazzle the Eyes of Spectators. And
all the Motions of Sceans and Mutations as insensible, and no more to be
discovered, than that of the Hand of a Dial.

Neither can all great Rooms of Princely Palaces serve for this use, except
they be after the Moddell of such as the Italians have built, as there is a
good one at Florence in Italy, with conveyances sor Smoke, and capacities for
Echoes, which Inigo Jones (the late Surveyor) experimentally found at
Whitehall, and by his built Banqueting House, so as having found his own
fault, he was constrained to Build a Wooden House overthwart the Court of
Whitehall.

The greatness of a Sovereign confists not in the quantity of Stone and Timber
heapt together, The Quarries possess more Stone, and the Woods more Timber than
a Banquet Room. Let anygood eye judge, whether it be not true, that the extreme
height of a Room takes not away the greatness of the company that is in the
same, and that all Hangings of Tapistery make no show at all, unless they reach
to a proportionable height of a Room.

Since the greatness of a Nation consists not in a Husk, but in it self, and in
its Sovereign, nothing should be suffered to diminish the appearance of that
greatness within or without Doors. A Sovereign and his Retinue, in a too vast
Room in height, width and length, does appear like a company in a Valley near
high Mountains. Whenas a body standing on the brow of a Hill, and seen from
below, seems to be a kind of Colosse, which argues that there must be a great
discretion used in the making them fit and pleasing.

All which I do not Write to undervalue any Modern Works, nor any of the
Cavallier-like Operas, every good Talent being commendable. As I am confident
there are some that live, who will not deny that they have heard the King of
blessed Memory, graciously pleased to avouch he had seen in Anno 1648, (close
to the Gate of York-House, in a Room not above 35. Foot square,) as much as
could be represented (as to Sceans) in the great Banqueting Room of Whitehall;
and that diverse judicious persons will not deny, that the excellency of the
several Triumphall Arches erected in the City of London, consists not in their
Bulk.

The Grecians and Romans (who have shown their Master-ship in them) did conform
them to the respective places.

Things can be too great, as well as too little, too massy, and too slender,
too gaudy, and too plain; and Colors placed together, which agree not one with
the other, as blew and green. God in his Rainbow having showed us the best way
of ordering Colors. Nor is it the quantity of Timber or Stone, that speaks
love in an Arch, but rather when it is composed of the hearts of Loyal
Subjects, which surpasses all that can be made.

May therefore the oldest and most tottering House in the Land, breath forth of
its Windows what may answer that true love, and in point of good Building;
wherewith this Discourse is begun, (next to the giving such a new Form to the
Streets of London and the Suburbs, as may in a manner equalize those in Holland
in neatness, if the Inhabitants will but take the right and only course
therein.) May his Sacred Majesty during his long prayed for and wished Reign,
see St. Paul's Church in that magnificency, as the Motropolitan of the Houses of
God, in the chief City of Albion justly requires. And his Royal Palace Built,
so as to answer the matchless greatness of him, who all tongues of Loyal
Subjects speaks to be Carolum, Magnum, Secundum Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regem, Ecclefiae Legum, and Libertatis Populi
Restauratorem; Which shall ever be the dutiful Wishes of

Balthazar Gerbier
Douvily Knight.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Sacred Majesty:
MY place of Master of the Ceremonies (which the King your Royal Father of
blessed memory, confirmed unto me during my life, by the Great Seal of England)
is to introduce Foreign Princes or their public Representatives to your Sacred
Presence. And in regard the Place of Surveyour General was also intended to me
(after late Inigo Jones) I do make bold to introduce the three Capital
Principles of good Building to your Sacred Majesty, who has seen more stately
Palaces and Buildings, than all your Ancestors, and may be a Pattern to all
future Posterity, by Building of your own Palace worthy your Self, and placing
it as the Italians for their health, delight, and conveniencie (as well as
Solidity and Ornament,) La Matini alli Monti, la Sera alli Fonti, according to
which the main body of your Royal Palace may be set on the side of St. James's
Park, and the Gardens along the River.

If the Book affords any thing worthy your Sacred Majesty's further
satisfaction, I have obtained my end, and done the Duty intended by,

Your Sacred Majesty's Most humble, most obedient, most Loyal Subject, and most
zealous Servant Balthazar Gerbier.

TO Her Most Excellent Gracious Majesty THE Queen Mother.
May it please your Majesty,
DID I not hope that the Offering up to your Majesty's gracious hands, this
Printed discourse (concerning Building) might be acceptable, it would doubtless
make me pass for insensible, how your Majesty (immediately descended from that
great Monarch, Henry the Phoenix of all his Royal Predecessors, and the
Virtuous Worthy of his Age, who in all things made Building worth a part of the
employment of his heroic Genius. Your Majesty imitating it, as having
inherited that same clemency wherein he did excel, as in Greatness all
Sovereigns that ever were, by graciously accepting the very least mite from any
of his zealous Subjects

Madam, This is a kind of Attome, in comparison of other Presentations;
neither do I presume to think that it should be reflected on otherwise, lest it
should seem to intrude it self as a Teacher to those expert Persons, who have
the honor to be employed in the Survey of your Majesty's Buildings; but rather
join these my reflections to their labor, for the due performing of their
undertaking, which is only the ends of him, who (with Heart and Soul) shall
ever pray the Almighty, to reserve for your Majesty in his endless glory, a
better Throne than all the world can afford; these are the devoted wishes of,

Your Majesty's Most Humble, most obedient, most Faithful and most zealous
Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS MANUAL.
1 ARepetition of the summary contents of a former printed Discourse,
concerning the three chief Principles of Magnificent Building, to wit;
Solidity, Convenience, and Ornament.

2 The choice of a Surveyor, how to try him, and what his duty is?

3 The choice of a good Clerk of the works, and what he is to do?

4 The duty of all Master Work men

5 The several proportions of the five Orders.

6 Particulars to be minded by all Builders.

7 Rates and Prizes of Materials, and of the several works belonging to
building.

8 That those who Build, or Build not, will (as those who marry, or marry not,)
have just cause to Repent.

Counsel and Advise TO ALL BUILDERS.
For the Choice of their Surveyours; Clarks of their Works, Brick-layers,
Masons, Carpenters, and other Workmen therein concerned.
A Little Manual which I formerly set forth (concerning the three Chief
Principles of magnificent Building, viz. Solidity, Convenience and Ornament)
does in the first place note the incongruities committed by many undertakers of
Buildings, who (both within and without doors) do confound the aforesaid
Principles: It Notes how the Grecians and Romans (the best Builders) have
proceeded on undisputable Rulers, not subject to fancies, for if men should be
inslaved by Weather-cock-like-spirits to make their Buildings according unto
things a la mode, especially of Hats, Bands, Dublets, and Breeches; how might
workmen laugh? And would not some (who cannot jear without making use of
Scripture) quote Ecclesiasticus; He that is hasty to give credit is
light-minded, chap. 19 v. 4. And he that teaches a Fool, as one that glueth a
pot-sheard together, chap. 21. v. 7.

Secondly, It Notes how several great and judicious Princes and Magistrates
have proceeded in their Edificies, what they have shunned, and what they have
curiously Observed; the particular care of Surveyours, their choice of
Materials, even to their preparing of their Lime and Clay: The care of their
Bricklayers in laying of a Foundation, and that they have been firm and
resolute in their undertakings to proceed on a well composed Model, since
Alterations in a well begun Building are very prejudicial.

Thirdly, It Notes the distinction between the well ordering of the Palace of a
Sovereign, and that of meaner Habitations; and it cites some remarkable
Sturctures, as that between Babylon and Espahan, at a place called
Carimonsharan; as also several remarkable ones in Europe; It omits not the
Description of Princely Stables, and the necessary Offices to their Palaces,
(as well as rooms of State, for great Feastival Shows, and ordinary use.) It
also points at several incongruities committed by Surveyours; and who minded
more to show that they were skilled in describing of Columes, Pilasters,
Cornishes and Frontispices, (though for the most part placed as the wild
Americans are wont to put their Pendants at their Nostrils) then to have
studied Convenience, and what most Necessary.

I shall now in the following lines treat more particularly on the matter by
way of Counsel and Advice to all Builders, etc.

Whosoever is disposed to Build, ought in the first place to make choice of a
skilful Surveyour, from whose Directions the several Master-work-men may
receive Instructions by way of Draughts, Models, Frames, etc. For the better
managing their intended work, since an ill built Palace leaves a perpetual
reflection of Ignorance on the Builder; whereas a compact Building, whether
City, Castle, or House, like a stock of Children continue the Name and Memory
of the Owner.

Surveyours.
An Exact Architect must have the Art of Drawing, and Prospective; ought to
know what appertains to each Inhabitants Convenience: Since there is a vast
difference between the House of Prayer, and a Princes Palace, and meaner
Habitations, nor is a Laboratorium for a Chemist fit either for Baking, or
Brewing.

Prospective.
Therefore he ought to know wherein is the use of Prospective, otherwise he
will never rightly describe the demensions of solid Bodies, which are to stand
high; his Circles will seem Ovals in Breadth, and his Ovals Circles, and all
his contrivances will be at random; as it is said of some men, who first act,
and afterward consider, excusing their mistake, which they thought it
otherwise.

What to reflect on.
The Surveyour must in the first place consider the ground whereon the Building
must be Erected, make a Distinction between a Plat in the City, and one in the
Country; and then govern himself as the ground will give him leave; reflecting
still on the Houses adjacent, and those which are opposite, if they be high to
raise as high, if not higher, to prevent the smoking of Chimnies.

The Seat.
Secondly, He must place the Front of a Building in the Country toward the
East, if the place gives leave; by which means he may shelter his double
Lodging Rooms from the North-west: He must cause all the back of his Stone work
(which stands within the Brick) to be cut with a Rabar three Inches broader
then the breadth of his James and Cornish; which will hinder the Rain (driven
by a fierce North-west wind (to pierce into A Nota Been to Builders.
the inside of the Wall, and through the meeting of the Brick-work and Stone;
whereunto the Mortar affords the passage of the Water. It may be some will carp
at this free Expression, pretending that Surveyours and Master Workmen (in this
refined Age, which abounds in Books, with the Portractures of the Out and
Inside of the best Buildings) are not to seek the first Points of their
Apprentiship: Whom I ask the reason, why modern and daily Buildings are so
exceedingly Defective? And whether it is not because many of them (if well
considered) have been but Apprentices lately, and too soon become Journey-Men;
And that Surveyours (who either affect more the Building to themselves a strong
Purse, or are blind in the faults which their Workmen commit) like careless
Postillions, hasten with the Packet-Maile to the Post Office, be it never so
ill girted, whereby it often falls in the midway.

The Count of Villemedi ana his witty expressions concerning a young Surveyour.
The Count of Villamediana, a rare Spanish Poet, having heard the Answer of a
Son of the King of Spaines Surveyour (to whom the Office of the Surveyour was
confirmed, by reason he had all the Drawings and Books of his deceased Father;
and to excuse his young Experience, said, to make use of them) replied to the
young Surveyor, Hazais come el Stomaco que coma herbas y caga Mierda.

How to try the capacity of a Surveyour.
The readiest way to try a Surveyor, is to put him to draw a ground Plot in the
Builders presence, to make him describe the fittest place for a Seat, the
ordering of Rooms for Summer and Winter; to Contrive well the Stair-cases,
Doors, Windows and Chimneys; that the Stairs may stand conveniently to the
Stories, Doors and Windows; so placed, as that they may not be inconvenient to
the Chimneys; the Bedstead place far from Doors and Windows, and of a fit
distance from Chimneys.

Distinction between the height of seilings of Rooms.
And as for height of Seilings, the Surveyour ought to make a Distinction
between the height of a House, or Town Hall; of a College and that of a
Church, the Hall of a private house, serving for the most part but for a
passage, the others for a Receptacle of a whole Body (consisting of number of
Persons) who for an hour or two jointly breath in one place, and the which may
be Offensive.

Natural Effects of Air.
Nature of Air being to ascend, and when it meets (with a sudden opposition it
spreads; Since the Nostrils (as the Pipes of Bellows) will attract to each
Persons Brains the scent which is composed of that Steam.

The Surveyours skill and discretion will also be discovered by the well
contriving of the respective seilings of common Rooms, and Closets for private
use; For as Rooms of State ought to be of an equal height, the seiling of a
Closet (ten foot square, less or more adjacent to a Bed chamber of State (which
may be thirty foot wide, forty in length, and sixteen or eighteen foot high)
would be preposterous, inconvenient, and like a Barbers Comb case, Staircase,
and Steeple-like to hang Bells in.

A good Surveyour shows his Art, both within the Building, as on its Front;
and in the fit mixture of Materials, Mortar, Brick and Stone, being Tympathick
stuff.

Necessity for mouldings.
As for the manner of the Outside of a Building, there is a necessity for
mouldings about Windows, and Door Frontispieces, or Cornishes, none about
Barns, Malt, Brew, or Glass-houses; whereof the outsides (especially a Barn)
has no opening of Windows, so as the Rain and Droppings of the Thatch falls
not in them, but only on the ground. But as for Cornishes and Frontispieces
over the Windows of a mere Habitation, being to it of the same use, as the
broad Brim of a good Hat is to a Traveller in a rainy day.

Ornaments.
The good Surveyor will order Ornaments to the Front of a Palace, according
unto its situation; shun too much carved Ornaments on that upright, whereas
the Southerly winds raise much dust; And though the Italian saying maintains,
Per tanto variar Natura e bella; Yet must the good Surveyor use moderation in
the ordering of Ornaments; shun in the first place, those Spectacle-like cant
Windows, which are of Glass on all sides; For it may be supposed Bay or cant
Windows Inconvenient.
that the Inhabitants of such Houses and Rooms with Cant Windows (exposed to
the Northwest) may well imitate a merry Italian Fisher, who (in a Winter windy,
rainy day) had been stripped to his skin, and having nothing left to cover him
save his bare Net wherein he was wrapped) sitting on the highway) put his finger
through one of the holes, asking to passengers what weather it was without
doors.

How Windows oughe to be placed
The expert Surveyor will repart the Windows to the front of a Palace, that
they may (besides the affording of sufficient light to the rooms) leave a solid
peers between them and to place some pleasing Ornament thereon, not
prejudicial to the Structure, nor too chargeable for the Builder; shunning
incongruities, as many (pretending knowledge in Ornaments) have committed, by
placing between Windows Pilasters, through whose bodies Lions are represented
to creep; as those Ridiculous Ornaments.
in Queen street, without any necessity, or ground for the placing Lions so
ill, which are commonly represented but as Supporters either of weight, or of
Arms in Heraldry.

The Order to be observed on the Front of Buildings.
He ought further to imitate the old Grecians and Romans, in placing the
rustic order next to the ground, as being most proper, both by reason it is
the most solid of all the other orders; and that no blemish appears in the
Rustic so soon as in a smood ashler.

Concerning the placing of Balconies
The reason also for contracting the Balconies within the upright of a Colmn
is, that weight is not prejudicial when it rests on its Center, no more then
the great weight of Bells in a Steeple, if hung plum with the upright.

Concerning the upper part of a Front without Rails and Barresters.
Moreover, He orders his top Cornish according unto the the weight which is
laid upon it; For if the Builder (to spare charges of Rails, Barresters and
Pedestals with Ornaments of Balls) will have the Building to have no other
finishing, he must lay a course of Stone on the Cornish, to keep the Walls dry,
and clap up a fillet of Lead: As good Carpenters do frame their Rails to
Barresters to meet on the Pedestals, under the neck of the Ball, so as the Rain
does not enter to rot them.

The use of Prospective.
A Surveyour (well versed in prospective) does order the Cornishes and
Ornaments according unto the height of the Stories: He ought to know what
Diminution, Altitude does cause; there is none perceived on the Latitude of an
Horizontal Line: Longitude represented by lines drawing to a Center from the
Latitude, causes also a Diminution in the Eye

The Grecians and Romans Surveyours, have ever been accustomed to make their
Cornishes and Ornaments about Windows, of the upper Stories to be bigger then
on those of the lower; which Michael Angelo did observe in the Arehitrave;
Freese and Cornish on the top of the Frontispiece of the Cardinal Raphael and
Albert Durer, their method in Dimentions
Farnese his palace in Rome.

Raphel d'Urbin and Albert Durer, drawing a Steeple on the first ground of a
board or cloth, whereon they did represent the figure of a man, standing (as
it were) in the upper gallery; made the figure of that man of the same height
of another which was to be set at the foot of such a Steeple; because there is
no diminution of form on a parpendicular Line, which is set close to the edge
of a cloth or board; A point at the foot, or at the top, is but a point, it
being only distance from separated lines (drawn to a Center) which causes a
Diminution as to the sight.

Therefore all Surveyours ought to cause the wooden Molds (on which Masons must
work, to be tried by lifting them as high as the Stone or wooden Figure is to
be placed; to see how it may please the Judicious Eye; which is the best Jury
and compass.

What form of Doors, prove a weakening to a Building.
Now concerning the well proportioned Doors and Windows; Every man reflecting
on Stature, ease and conveniencie needs not to call to his Neighbor for to
counsel him in this necessary proportion, since it must be granted, that if
Doors and Windows (in a solid Building of Stone or Brick) were as wide as they
are high; it must through necessity be a weakening to a Building.

The wideness of the Door, must be to serve for two to pass at once, that is to
say, the Doors of Chambers of a Palace, the height of the Door the double of
its width; all other Chamber doors of a convenient height for a man of complete
stature, to pass with a hat on his head: A gate for Coaches and Carts laden
likewise fit to the purpose.

Why Windows must be high.
Windows (because the light comes from above) must be higher then wide, the
middle Transoms of them above six foot (which is the common stature of a Man)
since otherwise the middle Transome would be opposite to a man's eye, hindersome
to the free discovering of the Country.

The leaning height of windows.
The leaning height of the Windows ought to be three foot and an half; since if
otherwise it will be incommodious, for being lower, it would require the
bending of the back, which old men (when they have spent money and time in
building) will not find so easy, as some wanton persons, who it may be will
affect low leanings, to make use either to sit on, and break the Glass-windows,
or to show themselves in Quirpo to passengers.

The height of windows.
The height of Windows and Doors, must be as much again as they are wide;
because they will otherwise offend the judicious eye of persons who reflect on
the former annotations, that shapes do alter by distances of place; as an Oval
seen from beneath, will seem to contract to a Circle; contrary to the sense of
some Children, in whose sight their Parents seem extreme tall, because they are
low themselves; But some Builders, (as Painters of a low stature) affect to
make Figures, door-ways, and Windows, according unto their own height.

Thresholds an old custom.
A good Surveyour shuns also the ordering of Doors with
Stumbling-Block-Thresholds, though our forefathers affected them, perchance to
perpetuate the ancient custom of Bridegrooms, when formerly at their return
from Church, did use to lift up their Brides and to knock their heads against
that of the door, for a remembrance, that they were not to pass the threshold
of their House without their leave.

The placing of Doors.
The doors ought to be all on a row, close to the Windows, to gain Room, that
when the doors are opened, they may serve for Skreens, and not to convey wind
to the Chimney.

The inconveniency of raised hearths to Chimneys.
The Hearth of a Chimney ought to lie level, without a border, raised hearths
being dangerous for the falling of coals on the boards, and likewise
troublesome.

The Chimney mantles ought to be all of Stone or Marble, but if (to spare
charges) the upper frame, sides and top be made of timber, it will be most
seeming to have them painted as Marble.

The use of spaces between the Chimneys.
And if the building cannot suffer the Chimney to be made even with the upright
of the wall, both sides may be made up to serve for hoards, if they are rooms
of State, but if of common use for Cabinets.

It is necessary to cover the top of Chimneyes to keep out rain and Snow; the
smoak-holes can be very conveniently made on the sides of the heads of them.

Rooms on moist ground to be paved.
Rooms on moist grounds, do well to be Paved with Marble, because the boarding
otherways is much subject to rot.

No Timber partitions to be suffered in the first Story.
A good Surveyour shuns the making of Timber partitions in the undermost Story.

He contrives free access to the double rooms, without making them through
passage whereunto the well placing of the Stairs contributes, either by
convenient passages about or under them; the composing of a fit and easy
Stairs being a Masterpiece, fit in respect of the place, convenient if the
steps be Deep and low Steps the best.
deep and Low in the rise, for a straight ascending or descending (without
bending of the sinews) gives most ease to the body which does rest better on
his bones, then on Sinews.

The good Surveyour does contrive the repartitions of his ground-plat, so as
most of the necessary Servants may be lodged in the first ground story; whereby
there will be less disturbance, less danger of fire, and all the Family at hand
on all occasions.

Finally, he ought from time to time to visit the Work, to see whether the
Building be performed according unto his direction and Moulds.

The second choice to be made, is, that of a fit Clark of the Works.
A Clark of the Works must be versed in the prizes of Materials, and the rates
of all things belonging to a building; to know where the best are to be had,
provide them to the Workmens hands, to prevent a retardment in their several
proceedings; that the Carpenter may not stay for the Brick-layers, nor the
Brick-layers, nor Masons for the Carpenters; he ought also to note in his book
the materials, and all necessaries as they are brought in, distribute them
orderly; and though Nails to some seem not very considerable, yet ought the
Clarke of the work to be discreet in the distributing of them to some
Carpenters, whose pockets partake much of the Austruches stomachs; his eyes
must wander about every Workmans hands, as on those of the Sawyers at their
Pit, that they waste no more then needs in Slabs; on the Laborers hands in
the digging of the Foundations, for the Bricklayers that all the loose Earth be
removed, and Springs observed.

That no Car-men turn or tumble down their Bricks, but the Laborers to take
them out of the Cart, and pile them to prevent damage.

To suffer no sammel Bricks to be made use of, not so much as in the choar of a
Foundation.

Concerning Brick-layers.
The Brick-layers to lay no Foundation except the ground be first Ram'd, though
it seem never so firm.

Observed in the foundation of Solomon's Temples.
No great and small stuff hudled together in the Foundation, but laid as even
as possibly can be, to ram it the better, and the more equal, and must be of
solid hard stuff, with no concavities, daubed over with store of Mortar, which
sinks unequally, and is the cause of the unequal settling of the Work.

No making of Scaffling in the morning.
Likewise to watch the Brick-layers hands, to use often their line, and
plum-rule, make small scaffling-holes, and never (if possible be) suffer them
to begin their Scafflings in the morning, but before their leaving off their
work; for if in the morning, most of them will make it a day of gathering of
Nuts and Fruit (if they are in the Country) and therein spend the best part of
their day; and one must not permit them to take the best boards and other stuff
for their Scafflings.

Concerning Mortar.
Item, See the Mortar well tempered, since if unequal in thickness; that
which is thin, will cause the work to settle more in one place then in the
other, and the joints to spue out the Mortar; especially of work made at the
latter end of the year, when no brick-work without doors ought to be laid, for
that it has not had sufficient time to dry thoroughly; and will therefore by the
setting of the work in the after-season, be so much the more retarded, and be
the worse to the Building, Hangings, or Wainscot set up against it.

Moreover, to see the Brick-layers take good solid Bricks to hue, since if any
thing sammel the work will molder away; and every night to lay bords on their
work to keep it from rain.

Concerning Masons.
It is to be noted, that the Mason must work no Stone with Sandy veins, or
that which (having been new taken out of the Quarry) has been exposed to Rain,
Snow or Frost.

As for the workmen, that must observe exactly their Surveyours Molds, and work
close and neat joints, use but little Mortar between them, not only because
much Mortar will be washed away, but that Cornishes will also appear as a rank
of open teeth, and they must not forget to shore the middle part of the head
of the Windows, as well as the sides, to prevent an unequal settling of the
work, and consequently cracks; both in the Heads, James, and Sils.

As for the Dimentions which the Masons are to observe in their work, in
reference to the orders. They must divide the Tuscan, Column, or Rustic, Base
and Capital (which is as much to say as feet and head) seven times its
thickness, the Architrave, Freeze and Cornish one fourth part of the Column
with Base and Capital.

If they make the said order without a Pedestall they must divide its whole
height into 17. parts and a half, which (in their vocation phrase) are called
Models, and are divided into 12. equal parts; If they are directed by their
Surveyour to make them with a Pedestal, then are they to divide the whole
height into 22. and one sixth part, for that the perfect shape of the said
Order requires a Pedestal, which must have a third part of the Column, with
Base and Capital.

Nota.
It seldom happens that a Pedestal is put to the Tuscan Order, because (as it
represents an Atlas) and that no man will take a Dwarff to reach to the first
Story of a Building) the said order requires, not to be set as a Candlestick on
a Cubbert, its as a Substantive, that can stand without an Adjective: Some
Venetian Ladies, must have their Shoppins to stand on, and were they as strong
as the Tuscan they would not need some of their Masaras to lean upon.

Dimention of all Pedestals.
But as for Pedestalls to the other following orders; a Builder shall do well
to see the Masons observe this general Rule; That the Pedestalls with their
Ornaments, must be one third part of the Column with its Basis and Capital
(feet and head as aforesaid) even as in the Ornaments above the Architrave,
Freese and Cornish, must make one fourth part of the same.

This must then be understood as follows, viz. The Mason must in the making
any of the Freese orders, divide the height of the Column with its Ornament
into nineteen parts, then take the height of the Column with its Basis and
Capital, and make the divisions of the Models according to its order.

Names of the several Forms or Moldings on the body of the Column.
Now the names of the several forms on the body of the Collumn are, viz.
theinging over of the Capital under the neck; Then follows the Freese, the
List, the Ovolo, the Cimatium, the list of the Cimatium, the Architrave, the
list of the Architrave, the Freese, Gul or Throat, the lists, the Crown, the
lists or Rule, the Round; and finally the Ovolo. And the Clarke of the Works
speaking in these terms, will be as well understood by the Masons as one at
Sea among Mariners; saying, Steer, or Larboard.

Concerning the Dorick Order.
Item, If the front of the Building is adorned with the other orders (as the
Dorick is) to follow the Tuscan, this proportion must be observed, viz. The
height of the whole Column with its Base and Capital, must consist in 20.
Models, that is to say, a Dorick Column without a Pedestall; the Model must be
divided in twelve parts, the foot with the nethermost band must be one Model,
the Column between the Foot and Head 14. Modells, the head one. The Architrave,
Freese and Cornish, is to be one fourth part with the Head and Foot, so as this
makes up the aforesaid Number, and such a complete Form, as is neither to be
controuled nor mended, and is that which the Grecians and Romans have found to
be a Dimension sunk down from above, as all those who have made it their
respectfull observations of the Dimensions the Creator has been pleased to
give to the Microcosme Man, they have found that there is a perfect
concordance, Perfect concordance among the dimensions of a man's body.
amongst them, a Body consisting of so many Modells of so many height of Heads;
A Head of so many distances between the one Eye and the other; nay even in the
gaping of a well-proportioned Mouth, except forced by a kind of Screw or Gagg,
which may break the Jaw-bones asunder.

Proportion of open gallaries with Columns.
If the undermost part of a Front (as many Palaces in Padua, and other Cities
in Italy) is left open as the Gallery in the Bedfort-Piatza; The Indisputable,
best and truest proportion to be observed therein is; if according to a Dorick
Order, the Height must be divided into twenty parts, one of those must be the
Model; the distance between the two Pilasters are three Models, the wideness
of the Arch, half the length of the Column, which is set out in the midst of
the Pilaster, one third part of a Model more then its half, which is to be
generally observed in all the other orders; This is for Galleries with Columns
without Pedestals; but Galleries, with these the Column must be divided into
twenty five, and one third part which makes a Model; the breadth of the
Pilaster must be five Models, and the distance between the Pilasters ten
Models, the half of the height of the Arch, which will make that perfect shape
as must satisfy all Judicious Eyes. Item, It must be remembered that the height
of the Pedestal of the Dorick must consist of five Models, and one third part:
And as for Ornaments (as Imbrodery or Lace on good Stuff) they are as various
as the occasions of the owners may require, or those things whereunto their
Genius does tend; if Warriors, Trophies; if men of Peace, Olivebranches; and
all what affrights not.

Division of the Ionick Order.
The Ionick Columns, their height must be of twenty two parts and a half; each
Model being one of the twenty, must be divided in eighteen, because it stands
so much higher, as distance (which then contracts the work) requires more
height; since otherwise the third story of Columns would shorten so much,
which is the fundamental reason that Prospective must be observed by a good
Builder, and not yielded to the particular fancies of some of them.

The Architrave of such a Column must consist in one, and one quarter Model of
the eighteen, the Freese of one and a half, the Cornish one and three quarters,
which being added together, makes four Models and an half, and the one quarter
of the Ionick Column, the Base and Capital comprised.

In the making Galleries of this order (which being most slender and more tall)
the breadth of the Pilasters must be three Models, the breadth of the Arch
eight and a half, since the height must be seventeen Models, which is twice the
breadth; but if these Columns are set on Pedestals, then must the whole height
of them be divided into twenty eight parts and an half, allowing six Modeles
for the height of the Pedestall with its Ornaments, and so it will fall out,
that as the breadth of the Arch shall be eleven Models, the height twenty two,
the breadth of the Pilasters four, and so a proportionable Body to the height
of the Story, and the weight it is to bear; which is one of the main
considerations of a good Builder; when to the contrary, Columns ill
proportioned and ill placed, prove often a weakening to a Building, and seem as
Organ pipes to stand in the Air for a Ill effect of two broad Cornishes.
show, as Cornishes too broad, happen the sooner to decay; but to this order
there ought to be one third part of a Model.

Which does not shrink.
To proceed on the form recommended to a good Clark of the works, to call upon
every Workman of the Masons to see them perform according unto such exact
patters made in good Wainscote; The next is the Corinthian, who if without
Divisions of the Corinthian order.
Pedestals, must be divided into twenty five Models, and those into eighteen
parts; the distance between the Columns four Models, and two third parts of a
Model; Because the Architrave about it may not bear too much, and that the
Models in the Cornishes may be just over the middle of the Column.

But if Arches or Galleries made of this Order; the distance between the
Pilasters must be nine Models, the height to the top of the Arch eighteen
Models, and the breadth of the Pilaster three Models: Galleries with Pedestals
must be divided in thirty two equal parts, and one of them a Model; the
distance between twelve and the height to the top twenty five, one more then
ordinary, because the height does diminish the proportion of its true height;
so the Pedestal seven Models, etc.

Composite Order.
The Composite Order must be made of the same proportions of the Corinthian;
all the difference between them is only in the members of the Head and Foot, as
all Surveyours and Master Workmen shall find this to be most true; After they
shall have compared all the best grounded Authors of the Greeks and Romans, and
that here is not an Iota differing from them; for it is a Rule as certain, as
that without the same, there cannot be a perfect building made, no more then a
man could without good Orthographie write true English; so as no man can have
just cause to say, there is a new Rule prescribed unto them, since it is the
same which will be found in all true Books concerning that matter; It is the
Rule of the Ancient Masters, whose Relics to be seen throughout most places
of Italy, makes many strangers that come there gape so wide, as that they need
no Gags. Let them but look on the Columns of the Temple of Peace and the
Pantheon in Rome, they shall see more men that gape after them then in other
parts: Pipers and Potters to sit in Tavernes, and they shall find in those
lovers of Art an Humility, as hinders them to crack, and boast never to utter,
Well enough for the time.

Most of the Italians, being of the humor of the old Carver, who had engraven
his own Name and Portraicture so deep in the shield of Pallas, as it could
never have been put out without defacing the figure; they work for a perpetual
fame; which a good Clerk of the works is to recommend unto the Workmen
committed to his charge.

Concerning the Carpenters.
That the Carpenters be good husbands in the managing of the Builder his
Timber, in the cutting of their Scantlings, their sparing to make double
Mortises, which do but weaken the Summers.

To lay no Gerders, which are needless and hindersome to the boarding of a
Room, no Summers to be laid, except the ends of them are either pitched or laid
in Loam, to preserve them from rotting, as is done by the heat of Lime whereof
Mortar is made; And therefore in Italy, France, Germany, and among the most
prudent and solid Builders, the free Masons put stone Cartoeses in the top of
the infide walls, which are bearers to the Summers, as such Cartoeses are seen
in diverse Churches, and some of them are carved in Ornamental Figures.

The manner of the Carpenter to lay his Timber.
Item, The Clerk of the Works must have a care to see the Carpenters to cock
the main Beams into the Lentals, to hold the wall the better, that they pin
down a Plank (three inches thick) all along the top of the Summer, to hold fast
the Brick work, after the Brick is raised to the height of the Summer, and that
the Joyces be framed a^ or three inches under the top of the Summers; that for
the boarding rooms smooth, the Carpenters lay Bridges overthwart the Joyces,
joined in the top of the Summers, that the Boarding be with breaking Joints,
which is the phrase of the Workmen and is the manner of flooring of rooms of
Note.

Height for Doors and Windows.
That door cases (well ankered into the wall) be made as high again as they
are wide, and so must well proportioned window cases be, both for giving better
light (which descends from above) and that the peers of Brick or Stone between
them, will fall to be a fit width to be a strengthening to the building.

Item, The Clarke of the works must be very careful not to suffer the
Carpenters to lay any Timber under the Chimnies; since by the laying of Timber
under them, many houses have been set on fire and burnt to the ground.

Scantlings for substantial Floors.
He must see the Carpenters to observe the Scantlings following, viz. (for
substantal Floors of rooms thirty foot wide) Summers for the first seeling
eighteen and fourteen Inches to be framed in such proportion as may serve to
make an Italian fret Seeling. The Lentals eight and ten Inches square, the
Joyses Scantling for Seilings of rooms thirty foot wide.
nine and three Inches; The Summers of the second Floor, fifteen and seventeen,
to be beams of the Roof for the principal Rafters to stand on, and the like for
the fret Seelings: The principal Rafters for the Roof to be at ten and eight at
the lower end, nine and seven at the top; The Pu^lains for the Roof nine and
eleven, single Rafters six and three Inches, and to be framed edge-wayes, which
Scantlings are fit for substantial Structures, but not usual in Lime and Hair
Birdcadgelike Buildings; Moreover he must not only (as a true Clerk) with his
Eyes follow the Workmens hands in the framing of their Work, and as before
said, that no waste be made of the Timber, nor of the least Slab, nor of Brick,
nor Brick-bats, nor Stone; he must not suffer Brick Carts to overturn the load
of Bricks brought to the Work, which is an insupportable abuse, but too often
committed in the Country, whereby a world of good Bricks are reduced to
morsels, Abuse committed with the overturning the loads of Bricks.
and this by mere lasiness of the Laborers, who (as better rationals in
London) ought to take the Bricks out of the Carts and pile them.

And as to a Building wherein diverse sorts of materials are used, the care of
the Clerk of the Works must be on all of them, as well as on the least (as I
said before in the distribution of Nails) as on materials of weight, as Sauder,
wherewith an unconscionable Plummer can ingross his Bill. The Clerk is to see
Sauder weighed and well managed, and in the attesting of Bills have a care not
to pass his eyes slightly over them, lest when a Plummer sets pounds of Candles
used about his Sauder, that trick prove as insupportable as that of one, who
having played away a round sum of his Masters Stock in a Journey to the
East Indies, set in his Bill to have paid a hundred pound for Mustard.

He must likewise have a clear insight on the Glass pains of the Glasier;
suffer no Green pains of Glass to be mixed with white.

He must with his Eyes follow the Measurer of the Work, his Rod, or Pole; so
the line where with the Joyners work is measured, that it be not let slide
through the Measurers fingers since the Joyners works has many goings in and
out; and a Ledger de Main may be prejudicial to the paymasters purse.

It were likewise better to agree with Painters, to have their work rated on
running measure, and on the straight, as the Carpenters work, who (being of an
honest Joseph's profession) are as deserving to be well paid as the Painters,
who do but spend the sweat of Wallnuts (to wit oil) the Carpenters that of
their brows.

Finally, the Clerk of the Works ought to be subject to the censure of the
Surveyor, on the point of all the materials which are brought in.

Concerning the use of Timber.
And as for Noblemen (or others) who have Timber of their own (and in whose
grounds good clay for bricks is to be had, their best course is, to fell Timber
(which they can spare, and intend to build with,) some years before it must be
put to the Carpenters tools.

Concerning Foundations.
Likewise to manage the uffal of the Timber. And as for the foundation of their
building, it ought to be raised at first leaning height; and then to let it
rest to settle, for if only brought level with the ground, it will prove but
as a receptacle of the wet that falls on it: and if but a foot high above
ground, it will be pusht down again, but being leaning high, it will be
preserved, and may be covered if the month of October draws on, when it is
fit Trovel men should be dismissed till the next Spring following.

The best Covering.
Item, To cause the foundation of the intended building to be generally laid,
without leaving any touchings, since walls new begun on them will settle more
unequal then those carried on in an entire range: As for coverings of
Buildings, Lead is best for Churches, for who would rob them but Goths and
Vandals.

Concerning blew Slates.
Blew Slates are most comely for a Noblemans Palace, they are not heavy as
Tiles, nor do not soon rot, nor gather an unpleasing moss; besides that when
some of the slates are broke, the Slater mends them with little charge; a rooff
colored with them is of an equal color, when as red tiled rooffs the least
breaking of them makes great chargeable work for the Tiler, who often removes
ten Tiles to lay two new ones in their place; and renders the Noble man's rooff,
as a Beggars Coat.

Concerning burning of Bricks.
As for burning of Bricks, if Noblemen care not to make a Bisme in their Parks
or grounds, they shall do well to cause the Clerk of the Works to look well to
the Workers of the Clay, for if it be not well wrought, the bricks will never
be good.

It is usual to pay five shillings per thousand, for the making and burning of
Bricks, the Clay digging therein comprehended; and all materials being provided
to the Brick-makers hand.

But as for those who can have Bricks from Brickills near at hand. And who love
to keep their Park and grounds even and handsome, they may take notice that in
the number of twenty Thousand of Bricks Between burning and buying of Bricks,
but six shillings and eight pence difference in twenty thousand.
bought or made, there is not above six shillings and eight pence difference;
Example, There goes four load of Sand, which (with the carriage) cost two
shillings six pence; in Straw to the making of twenty Thousand of Bricks above
five shillings; the Tools and bringing of water five shillings, the digging of
the Clay ten shillings, charges for hedging, forty shillings; the preparing of
the ground five shillings, besides the making of a Kill, which will consume for
the making of twenty Thousand of Bricks, fifteen load of Wood, at ten shillings
the load; of Bricks burnt in a Clam (being burnt with Sea coals) there are at
the least in twenty thousand, five thousand unfit for work; and though some
Brick-layers pretend that Sammel Bricks are good enough to fill the Choare of a
Wall, it is not so; Since most Sammel Bricks are no better then dust, and what
resistance dust can be when weight is laid upon it, any rational man can judge
by the several cracks in Walls, whereof the Choars are hollow; and therefore
the description of the foundations of the Temple, and the Palace of Solomon
bears, that The foundation of the Temple and Palace of Solomon.
it was made with smooth hard Stone.

Many Brick-makers are accustomed to dig the top spit (which is no better then
dung) and to throw it with the other clay, and is the cause that many Bricks
are brittle, so as in few An Item for those who do let out ground for buildings.
years houses made with them, the walls thereof moulder away like dirt.

To prevent the being overreacht with Bricks, they ought to be taken out of the
clam by account from the Brickmaker, who undertakes to make them in ones
ground, he is to keep to himself those that are not fit for use.

How to measure the Clay which has been dug.
The way for the Clerk of the Works to measure the quantity of Clay which has
been dug, is to measure the pit (out of which it has been taken) square,
which is six foot square, six foot in length, three foot in breadth, and three
foot in depth, which makes one thousand of Bricks.

Men dig clay for six pence the thousand.

Lime dug in ones ground is commonly burnt in a Kill, at four shillings per
load; Lime bought cost four shillings a quarter, six pence a Bushel, forty
shillings a load.

Inconveniency of putting Chalk in walls of Houses on Springish ground.
Those that mind the making use of Chalk in their walls, must be contented if
the ground has springs) with the green molding which breaks through the whited
walls within doors.

Walls about a Park or Court, may be filled with Chalk, which may be dug for
eighteen pence per load, bought for two shillings and six pence the load.

The number of Bricks in a square Rod.
He that desires to know how many thousands of Brick a Park wall, or that of
the building of a house will require, can make his account on the description
following, viz. A square Rod of a wall, two foot thick takes nine thousand of
Bricks, nine quarters of Lime to a Rod, nine load of Sand, at fourteen pence
per load.

Some good Country Bricklayers do work at twenty seven shillings the Rod, the
Bricks not being rubbed.

The rate of Bricklayers work.
Good London Bricklayers will work the Rod for forty shillings, rubbed Bricks,
the inside for thirty three shillings, arches comprised.

The fittest bigness of a good brick, is nine Inches and a half long, four and
a half, and a half quarter broad, two inches a quarter and a half thick, which
will raise a foot in the Mortar with four bricks.

As for Lime, the refining whereof (according unto the Grecian and Roman
manner, is mentioned in the former printed discourse of the three Principles of
Magnificent Building) the general custom in Europe, is to burn it in Kills,
which is a slow way. But if there were such a quantity of Wood as in the
Indies, there could be more lime burnt in twenty four hours, then otherwise in
a month: The burning of lime in China and The manner of burning Lime in China.
other parts of the Indies, being as follows, viz. They make a round pile of
great wood, leaving a cross hollow way through it from the bottom almost to the
top, which is raised to a height according to the Circle, there is
proportionably so much Stone heaved thereon as it will hold, the fire is put in
the Center, and in the middle of every cross way, and as it burns makes an
Overture at the top, and the stone burning by degrees falls still in the middle
of the pile, and of the Walks, which at last is covered with the Cinders of the
burnt wood, and proves a most strong well burnt Lime; Which if it were mixed
with Holland Bricks (called Clinkart, a yellow Brick as hard as Flint, bought
for twenty three shillings the thousand) would make walls as durable as if of
Marble, if not better.

The best paving in Stables.
Those Clinkarts are very fit for the paving of Stables, and walks in a Court,
for they lie very smooth and close.

As for choice of Master Workmen.
KIng Henry the Eight showed a good president (when the Sergeant Plummer
calling his Workmen to cast in his presence a Leaden Medal which was given him:
the King told him he would have no walking Master Workman.

Those therefore which are fit to be employed, are Working Masters, and not
those who walk from one Building to another; since Journey-men will no more
work well, then Soldiers fight without a fighting Captain; Feathers on a
Captains hat, nor Compasses in Master workmens pockets do not the deed, nor
will any Master Workman deny to have had as much more done, and well, by
bestirring their Hands and Tools in their Workmens presence then otherways.

This does not entrench on those who are undertakers of Buildings, but
insisteth only on the necessity of sufficient Master Workmen, actually
employed in every Work.

Master Workmen bound to a precise time.
The chosen Master Workmen must be bound to a prefixed time for the performance
of their undertaking to observe exactly the Model and Moulds held forth to them
by the chosen Surveyour, and to make good at their own cost what they do amiss.

Master Workmen to pay their own men.
They are to manage the paying of their own Workmen, on such a Contract as they
have made with the Proprietor of the Building; For the Master Workman must keep
his workmen under a certain regular proportion of pay, to hinder them from
spending their wages too fast, and to run to other works, as many (upon slight
occasions) do.

To shun reprehending of Master Workmen openly.
It is also very necessary to shun the reprehending a Master Workman of any
oversight before his men, but rather privately; since it would be to him as
prejudicial as a check to a Commander at the head of his Troop.

As for the Builder and Proprietor.
IT is best for the Builder to buy his own Materials, have his Work done by the
Rod or Square.

Have in reserve (to make good payment) such a stock of his own as he can well
spare; and against mistakes of Workmen a stock of Patience.

Be a constant observator of the three chief Principles of Building; viz.
Solidity, Convenience, and fit Ornament: Never suffer his Workmen to begin to
build before the Month of March, nor to continue longer in the building of
walls then until half September; remitting setting of walls until the next
Spring after.

Observe the several Annotations in the former printed Discourse, on the three
chief Principles of Building: concerning the well ordering both of Rooms of
State and ordinary use and Stairs, the form of Offices and Stables; as also the
contrivances and properties belonging to Gardens.

As for Prizes.
EXperience speaks that as times change, and occasions differ, prizes may
alter; Nor is that which is best cheap, always the best profit, but
Merchantable ware.

Rates of Bricks.
Bricks in some parts are delivered at the Work for 16s. 8d. the thousand.

Rate of Brick work.
Some will build a Rod 16^ Foot square, 1 Bricks, all Materials comprised for 5
pound.

For the old Tiling at thirteen shillings four pence a square.

New Tiling at one pound five shillings a square, finding all Materials.

The straight Arches, at one shilling per foot.

The Flints, at four pence per foot.

The Cornishes, one shilling per foot.

Slating with blew Slates the Workmen finding all, will cost seven pence per
foot, the workmanship only will cost three pence per foot.

Twelve thousand Slates will make one square.

Slates will cost sixteen pence per thousand, delivered at London.

Prizes of Timber.
Good Oaken Timber is bought in some parts of the Country for thirty three
shillings per load, consisting of fifty foot; in and about London. for forty
three shillings, forty four, forty five, forty seven, and fifty, at the
Merchants Yard.

White Fur, twenty five, twenty six, twenty seven, and sometimes twenty eight,
according as the seasons be.

Yellow Fur (called Dram) being very good, forty five shillings the load, the
names are these following; Esterrund, Westbeele, Longlound, Laurwat, Landifor,
Tonsberry, Holmstrand, Dram, Christina, Swinsound, Frederickstadt, Helleroane,
Moss, Drontom, Bergen, and Stavenger.

The prizes of these Deals are uncertain, for according to the goodness so they
are in price; for in all these places, there are both bad and good which
generally are sold from four pound per Cent. to six pound per Cent. if ordinary
length; long Deals which are about fourteen or fifteen foot long, are from
seven pound per Cent. to twelve pound per Cent.

An Estimate of Scantlings and Prizes.
OF Oaken Gerders fifteen inches one way, and eleven the other, two pound ten
shillings.

Oaken Gerders thirteen Inches one way, and eleven the other, two pound two
shillings.

Joyces seven Inches one way and three the other a square, two pound two
shillings.

Firr Gerders fourteen Inches one way and nine the other, one pound eighteen
shillings.

Firr Gerders twelve Inches one way and nine the other, Joyces six Inches one
way and three the other at a square, one pound sixteen shillings.

Oak Roofing raising pieces, eight inches one way, six the other; Purloyns nine
inches one way, and seven the other, one pound fifteen shillings.

Principal Rafters nine and six at one end, eight inches and five inches the
other, small Rafters it is worth sixteen pence, or eighteen pence the yard.

Rough-cast upon Lath being very well done, is worth eighteen pence the yard,
upon brick work it will be done very well for twelve pence or ten pence the
yard.

Rough-cast upon Lath-work, the owner finding all, is worth eight pence the
yard.

Upon Brick-work, or Stone, is worth six pence the yard.

To Lath and lay with Lime and Hair, the owner finding all the stuff, it will
be done for two pence a yard.

Plaistering upon Lath, ten pence a yard, some have done it for eight and nine
pence the yard.

Plaistering upon Brick-work at four pence a yard, and some for three pence a
yard.

White-washing and stopping, at three pence a yard.

Plaistering of Lime upon hart-lath is worth two pence the yard, some have done
it for six pence a yard, and two pence rendering with Coat of Lime and Hair on
it.

Greenwich plaistering, to be lathed and laid with Lime and Hair, and a Coat of
fine plaster, the Seilings and Partitionings at one shilling two pence a yard,
in Town, one shilling five pence.

A Cornish with two faces, all of it two foot deep, at two shillings six pence
a yard, running measure; a Cornish at the foot of an Arch, sealing done with
Lime and Hair, eleven inches deep, at one shilling nine pence the yard.

Architrave, Freese, and Cornish of three foot, three inches deep, done for
three shillings two pence a yard, running Measure.

Plaisterers work in Fret Seilings.
AFret Seiling as at Summerset-house, in the Privy Chamber, and in the Drawing
Chamber, done with square Ovalls round; with a Cornish round about the rooms,
the Fret having a double golose in the bottom, and a Cornish on the side, six
Inches deep, and all the members enriched according to the moulds therewith
measured flat in square yards without girting the work with a Line, is worth
six shillings the yard square.

Whiting and Stopping of fret seelings at two pence a yard, whiting and stoping
of old plain walls and seelings at one penny a yard, whitings of new walls at
three pence farthing a square.

The workmanship only in Lath and Lathing three pence the yard, rendering two
pence a yard.

A Friese made with folding two foot deep, at five shillings a foot running
measure.

Fret seelings the moulding, six Inches deep and full of work, with inrichments
in the moulding and fouldage in angles and squares, the workmanship only at
five shillings a yard, measured flat.

One Tun of Plaster of Paris will lay twenty nine yards of Lath work, three
quarters of an Inch thick, one Tun will lay as much again upon Brick-work.

Walls done in fair black for a Tennis Court, at one penny a yard, the workman
finding all.

Glassery.
THe best French Glass wrought with good lead, well simmoned, is worth sixteen
Pence a foot.

The best English glass wrought with an Arch well leaded, and simmoned at seven
pence a foot.

Ordinary Glass for quarries at five pence half penny a foot.

Painters Work.
FOr a fair Stone color in oil upon windows and doors. at twelve pence a
yard.

For a Timber color in oil, on doors and windows, at ten pence a yard.

Wainscot put into Wall-nut red color, in distemper at six pence a yard.

Painters work of ordinary lights of windows in oil, at six pence a yard.

To lay a fair white color in oil, on Cornish of Timber, and on Stairs, and
Rails and Barristers fourteen pence a yard.

The laying over a Wall white in oil, twelve pence a yard.

Painting of the fairest green that can be in distemper, and varnisht, is one
shilling a yard.

Frames seven Inches and a half broad gilded, the ground a Timber color cost
three pence farthing for one Inch broad, and a foot in length.

Other rich carved frames, painted and gilded, the gold fifteen inches broad,
the ground a fair white color cost five shillings a foot.

Painting in white and gold, upon flat moulding, and set off with shading, like
carving one inch board, and a foot long is worth four pence or five pence a
foot.

Painting the outside of ordinary windows, is at three pence a light, and some
at two pence a light.

Door case and doors at two shillings apieoe, the outside only.

Gilding, for Workmanship of the gold, at twenty shillings a hundred.

Nota, The Painters are to color over their windows thrice.

Smiths Work.
IRon Bars, Hinges, Bolts, Staples, great Hooks, are worth three half pence
the pound weight, Cross Garners four or five pence the pound weight.

Iron Casements about two foot high, three shillings six pence a piece, and
others according to their bigness.

Concerning the Plummer.
EVery foot of New Lead square, is worth thirteen or fourteen shillings the
yard, besides Souder at nine or ten pence the pound.

In exchange of old Lead for sheets new run, is allowed three shillings in
every hundred weight for waste.

Every square foot of Lead run thin, to serve for gutters; weighs commonly
six or seven pound, if old eight or nine.

Leaden gutters are at twenty shillings the hundred.

The Masons Work.
FOr the Base called Gross table, at the bottom of a building, seven pence per
foot.

For an Architrave of eight inches to a Window, eight pence per foot.

For a Friese to that Architrave six pence per foot.

For the Cornish (being about ten inches thick) one shilling two pence per foot.

For the Pilaster to the same Architrave, seven inches thick, six pence per
foot.

For scrowls to the said windows, six shillings a piece.

For scrowls and leaves of second Story windows, six shillings per window.

For the Capitol, to the stools of those windows, twelve pence per foot.

For the quines, six pence per foot Ashler measure.

For Belconies with Rail and Barrister to the abovesaid windows, four pound per
Belconie; being four foot high, and ten foot about.

For rail and barrister on the top of a building, nine shillings per yard.

For Architrave to doors, one shilling six pence per foot.

For cleansing and setting again old work, as window stuff, grostable,
watertable, cornish, quines, and Ashler, four pence per foot one with another.

For new cleansing an old front, and piecing the mouldings where it is broken,
four pence per foot.

Paving of Bortland stone, eight pence per foot.

White and black marble pavement a foot square, costs at London two shillings
six pence laid.

To be carried and laid in the Country, three shillings six pence.

The Namur stone gray and white, the same price.

The Rans five shillings mixed with white.

The Rans and Purple six shillings.

The Prizes in Holland.
White Marble pavement the foot, three shillings; the black, eighteen pence.

The black and white, or red and white Marble polished, five shillings.

Black glazed Holland Pan-tiles, six pound the thousand; sometimes five pound,
and four pound ten shillings.

Cashie rough pavement, at three pence half penny the yard workmanship, with
materials twelve pence, though the Paviors will exact sixteen pence.

Pavement with Pibble-stone, fifteen and eighteen pence the the yard, square.

Paving tiles six, Inches, eight, ten, and twelve, from six shillings to twenty
the hundred.

As for the paving of Courts, to prevent the over-growing of grass, and the
charge of too often weeding. It would not be amiss to lay Chalk or Lime under
the paving, and to do the fame in Gardens under Gravel Walks.

This is only a rate for the ordinary way of paving allowed by Act of
Parliament, for which price, but very slight work has been furnished; till
such time as Mr. Le Coeur (having undertaken the Commissioners paving works)
has contrived such a plenty in stone, which hitherto was so scarce that by
consequence he has since rendered the work more plausible at the very same
rate. But there is another way yet far more substantial, which the same
Undertakers, and Society have industriously invented, whereby they are not
only able to make a most substantial good pavement, but are likewise capable
by that same certain new invention, to maintain it durable for twenty one years
long, in reparation at a yearly small rate, but must of necessity cost them
much more then sixteen pence once, for all at the first paving.

If materials could be had at lower rates then the aforementioned, it would be
as well done to seek for such materials, as to look to the goodness of them. So
in the choice of Workmen for on those who can work best.

To complete these matters, I shall note what is most necessary First, That
what contributes more to the fatal ends of many good Mothers Son, is ill
Building Paper like walls, Cobweb like windows, doors made fast as with Pack
thread, purposely to tempt men who through extreme want are become weary of a
languishing life, and to whose fatal end, ill Builders are in a manner
accessory.

Let not the Hollanders, German, nor any other Northern Nation Vaunt of their
scarcity of theives (nor those of Delf in Holland; who when the Town Mason had
desired them to choose a day to visit the public Gallows which he had made,
said, that they would serve for them and their Posterity) but attribute the
same scarcity to that defense they are wont to make against Theives; but that
defense consists not in a superfluous care of putting locks and bolts upon
doors or wooden shutters to windows, not iron bars in them that will serve
turn, except those locks, bolts, shutting windows, and bars are made and set
on as they ought to be.

The Hollanders wooden shutters are double deal-borded wainscot-like-framed
within, with Battens, fluted without as the body of a Dorick Column; that the
rain beating on them, may the better run down and carry away the dust which may
be gathered on them, and that they may not rot so soon as they would, otherwise
if they were garnished without with battens; they paint them also in strong oil
color thrice over to resist the weather the better; the Carpenters do frame
them so exact to the witdth and height of the stone casement of the window, as
that scarce a knife could be thrust between them they are not hung with cross
garnets; because such are easily taken off, nor are the broad shoulders of an
iron hook the only thing that can hinder thieves to loosen such a window, nor
the iron bars; Thieves having a way to remove iron bars without breaking of
them, or making half so much noise as on a wooden bar.

The iron hinges ought to be framed between the two deal bords, whereof the
shutting window is made, and the head of the hinge is to be so well fitted in
the stone, as that no access can be had to it, the bolts within strait or
crooked, must have a shutter at its tail.

Now if a Builder will not be at the charge of such shutters without doors,
they must then have wooden or iron bars to secure those within.

Doors may be secured, not only by a wooden or iron bar, but by a strong
chain hung at the one end in an iron ring, at the other end in a like ring,
both united with a strong Padlock, then any Porter may open a gate or door six
Inches less or more to receive a Packet in the night when it so happens.

Nor do provident Builders rivet locks only at the one side, for that a thief
within doors in correspondence with one without makes that single riveting of
no use as to security; rivets to locks must be enterlaced with rivets between
the double board, nor should the keyhole of an outward door of a house be left
uncovered in the night, for if through the negligence of him that is the keeper
of the gate, neither bolts nor bars are remembered; Why? a pick-lock may soon
open such a door or gate; it is an easy contrivance to have a bolt with a
large head that shall cover the keyhole of a door or gate, to make fast from
without to the inside, and so secure the lock; and if the key of that bolt is
brought at night to the owner of the Palace, none can run out a gadding or
drinking.

And so much may suffice for the securing of doors and windows, only this
more. That there ought to be an Iron plate of the width of the door, and four
foot high, walled in within, so fastened on both sides as that no violence from
without can make a breach, since in diverse places Rogues have taken up the
causey or pavement before a door, and then with facility loosened the bricks
under the threshold to make a passage into the House.

But as for thieves who do untile houses, such may be keept out, if the seeling
be borded or made up with plates of tinn, or arched with brick as is practiced
in the Banks of Loan, which in other parts are erected for the relief of the
Necessitous.

Furthermore, In reference to the main of the contents of a former Printed
Discourse, concerning the three first Principles of Magnificent Building; As
the well choosing of a fit place for a Building, is a Capital piont, to set it
right, and the giving a fit extent to the Court, so the making to it a Porch
ought to be well considered, For as a Porch serves to a Hall to distribute
Alms to the Poor; a porch proves often cumbersome, being the receptacle of
foul creatures, who as soon gotten into a Court make it their randevouze; Nor
is a porch so convenient to the Palace of a Prince, whose person must be
attended by a great retenue, and no man to stand in his passage; But if a porch
be affected, let it then be a vaste Portuco, as that of Solomon's House was. and
that he Built for Pharaohs Daughter.

Now as for the placing a Gate or Door to enter into the Hall of a Palace; None
will deny but that Greatness and Convenience being conjoynt fits best. The
entrance into a Hall is not so proper in the middle as at the end, when the
ground plot is yet to choose and to be ordered; But if there be a constraint,
which is most prejudicious to a Building, the entrance must be set as much
toward the end as possible can be, to set the Chimney well, and the main
Staircase in so fit a place as that it may not be subject to a like fatal
accident as happened to William Prince of Orange at Delf, when he was shot by
one who stood behind a Column, opposite to the Stairs of that Prince his house.

The rise, width, and depth of steps, shall not need to be repeated, since they
have been described, and reasons alleged for their dimension, mentioned both
in the former printed, and in this discourse; nor shall repetitions be
necessary concerning the reason why the first Floor of a building should not
lie level with the ground; The first for health; the second for neatness, since
any floor level with the ground receives more dirt from abroad; the third for
greatness, which appears more by an assent; the fourth for the Vaulting of
Sellars or any other Offices; and the fifth, to have the floors more dry: Only
I shall insert this story of one in Authority, Who passing by a Town wherein
the people generally did not outlive the thirtieth year of their Age, caused
all the back of their Houses to be made the Front, and the windows which were
forward to be made up, to free them from that infectious Air that did shorten
their Lives, which had its effect accordingly; and it is therefore I do so much
insist on the point of placing a Building where good Air is, and that neither
chimnies nor doors may be so placed as to serve for the attracting of
infectious Air which kills more then the sword or the Seas overturnes ships.

To take my leave of all Builders, I must conclude with what follows,

First that when they shall be pleased, to take a Posey out of the former
Printed Discourse, and join it, to what may please them, out of this they will
find, that both hit the main mark, to wit, Solidity, Convenience, and
Ornament, altogether to be observed in true Building. That all what is
represented is for their profit and satisfaction, that the manner and phrase of
the first discourse, was to that end intermixed with recreative passages, yt the
Reader should not be tired with the Mechanics their phrase, and proper Names
of their several Trades, though some of them are wont to scoff at those whose
language is polisht; as if a person of Eminent Quality, (Born to the Highest
Concernment of a State) should have learned their words, and have spent therein
part of his precious time; And therefore I have now offered, to write, in such
workman-like terms, as may serve for a Clark of the works to speak unto them.

Secondly, That all owners of Buildings, shall do well to make choice of such a
person for their Clark as the Master workmen will endure, which they will not,
if he be a Master workman, whom they will not only suspect to have a design to
undermine and supplant them, but obey not, pretending to know more themselves;
Nor is it fit that there should be such a controuler over a Master Workman, as
a Workman: The same is to be observed with a Surveyor to prevent all quarrels
and contests: for as every Cook commends his own Sauce; more then one Cook to a
dish will spoil it; there cannot be two Suns in the Firmament, one General over
another; nay two Cocks among Hens.

In a word, an Owner must trust, or never make choice of Trustees; For if
otherwise, let him be certain that his purse will be incessantly abused.

Thirdly, Let all Owners be prepared to Repent, whether they build or not, for
it is likewise the fate of many that marry or marry not.

Let both the one and the other lay (as in a Scale) their several charges,
vexations, cares, labors, and pleasures, they will find this to be true, viz.
If they build they must be at great present disbursements, vexed with as many
oversights (as Printer-Setters will commit faults, as appears by the Errataes
at the end of Books) and to be over-reacht in Bargains concerning their
Materials, as also in work done by the Great, or Day.

If they build not, they are subject to the inconveniences of Houses built
according unto the fancies of the Owners, and when they shall cast up the sums
of money spent in the rent (besides many chargeable alterations) they shall
find that they might have built a better and more fit habitation for them and
their posterity; So will it be with men that marry or marry not.

The first will have had cause to exercise the Virtue of Patience, and if he be
a High German (especially a Swab) such as have wives, that believe their
husbands does not love them, except they be beaten, Why? They will be
practitioners in the mortification of their own flesh and bones; for let women
say what they will, they are bone and flesh of man, and not the head, though
some of them would wear the Bonnet and Breeches to boot; Well the Husband
(after all his pains and vexations) if he can turn all things to the best, will
have (as the Italian says) a sound gusto, he will have observed the French
saying, Lie tes doits, a l'herbe que tu cognois, and by a mixture of good blood
(sprung from a clear Spring) settle his name to posterity.

If he marry not, O how many dangerous encounters for him both in body and soul!

And how can such a one contest the Divine decree; That it is not good for man
to be alone?

Paradise would have been but a Wilderness without a Woman; nor can Trees speak
a word of comfort to a good man when stretched forth in his cold bed, tired of
the Labors of a dark Winters day; and let such a one, at the end of the year
cast up his Bill, he will find to have spent more in Presents of consideration
about another man's then his own; and if he be a Trades man, in Potting,
Gadding, Codlings, Pudding-pies, and Bare-baiting, (with ranting Creatures)
then if he had been married; therefore if men must Repent, let them have
somewhat that is called meum without offense for their Repentance.

Now if these two sorts of men, the one will resolve on the affirmative,
delight to spend money on choice Materials, as in particular to imitate
Solomon, in the procuring of precious Wood; they may take notice (if they
please) that store of precious Wood can be had for the boarding of Princely
Palaces, both for Color, Aromatic smell and durance; to make square framed
Pannels (more rich then those which are seen at Paris in the Cabinets of the
Palace called Orleans) which precious Woods are to be had in several parts in
the West Indies, some whereof are as red as the fairest Vermilion, some yellow
as Gold, hard as Marble; besides rare Madera, and other variously figured, as
the Right Honorable the Lord Willoughby of Param well knows, what extent of
Land about Surrenam is beset with speckled wood, and is not above six weeks
sail from England, where ships full of lading may be had, besides large Timber,
eighty foot high, At Abacoa.
straight, without a knot, and at no other cost but felling and lading, more
advantageous then to pay for Firr from Norway; besides a very gainful return of
Amber Greece, and vendible commodities in exchange of Iron Tools, Sissers,
Knives, old Linen, and trifles.

To conclude, May all Builders both of Palaces and of particular Habitations,
have good success and, possess them in peace and prosperity.

May also all Surveyors, Master Workmen, Journeymen and Laborers, behave
themselves so as they ought.

Take well this former Counsel and Advice, give no admittance to Pride, the
Enemy of all Learning; whereof a King was such a Lover, as that when near the
hour of his leaving the World, he saw one advance more then others to him
within the Curtain of his Bed, he asked, Whether he could learn him any thing
that was good.

FINIS.
THere is sold by Thomas Heath at the Globe within Ludgate, a Shorthand Book,
more easy and plain then has yet been extant, and all sorts of Almanacks and
Blank Bonds, Bills, Releases, Counter bonds, and Indentures, with Bills of
Lading, and Scriveners Labels, either pasted or unpasted, with Boards or in
Sheets; you may also have any sort of Texting done there at his shop, either on
Parchment or Dutch Paper, Recoveries or exemplifications; as also direction for
true attaing the Art of Short-Writing, very beneficial to Clerks, or Attorneys,
with several other Instructions in Sciences.


