A Touch of the Times, OR, TWO LETTERS Casually Intercepted.
The First, From the Author of a late Pamphlet Entitled, Day-Fatality: To the
supposed Author of the Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome.

The Second, The ANSWER thereunto.

REturning out of the Country, I was showed a Pamphlet of yours, Wherein you
made Reflection upon me as a Two Penny Scribler; with other Unhandsom Terms. I
am told you Write for a Living (Sedulitatem tuam lando) and yet your Books are
but Pence apiece, etc. to unbraid my Two Pence. I Wrote mine for no Reward or
Gain; and if you understand Latin, you may know when I did it, and guess upon
what Account: It being Compiled shortly after his Highness Recess, Upon a Duty
I owe to Him as being the KING (my Master's) only Brother. I proffered it to
several, to do Gratis, but none durst till the Press Open, and Parliaments
Dissolution.

I Will assure you, its Impression was upon my Contribution, without any design
of Profit.

You made a Damnable Reflection upon the Duke's Safe (therefore I say Happy)
Arrival, (taken Notice of by more than my self); and for which (no Doubt) you
must give Account to Greater Persons than the Gotham Author (who is no
Red-Letter Man) as you would have it.

And whom also you have injured in this Particular; In hitting him in the
Teeth, with the Second of September; when as he himself Acknowledges it A
Dismal and Unhappy Day, not only to the City of London, but consequently to the
whole Kingdom, [pag. 4. Paragraph the last.]

I shall then (and not before) prove an Impertinent Coxcomb, when such as you,
come to have the Rule of that Providence, that Attends his Royal Highness; and
will then apply to my self, your 1 Kings 22. and 22, 23. verses.

I have made Enquiry after you, and find you were Bred an Attorney; as such,
you cannot but have (at least) some little kind of Gammar-Learning: Read Then.
Reges ac ipsis ortos reverenter habeto
Ranaque desistat torvum irritare Leonem.
It was at the Printers Request, I set my Name: But I Faith Sir, I would you
were out of Harms Way as well as he is. (You know what I mean.)

Enquire for me (if you have any thing to say to me) at Mr. Bilingslies a
Stationer near the Exchange South Door, (I am not unknown to Mr. Stephens,
belonging to the Kings Printing House, and one of his Majesty's Poursivant
Messengers) or Mr. Philip Foxcroft belonging to the Printing House in Little
Britain. And my Name is

September. 15. 1679. JOHAN GIBBON.

The Answer.
Most Illustrious Unknown!
LAst Night I received a Paper which you did me the Honor to send, or,
(perhaps out of Good husbandry) bring me. What that meant I cannot thoroughly
comprehend. If you imagine me to be the Author of the Antipapal Packet, be
Convinced the small Intelligencers (possibly some of those your good Friends
you mention) may have deceived you: For, I am told the same is written by I
know not who, with Three Capps a piece, your small Wits of St. Omers it is like
will call 'um Legion, for, its confidently Aver'd, they are many. If you are
not a Papist I am glad of it, not for my own sake, but yours; but must needs
tell you, you are then one, of the most Unfortunate Protestants that have writ
Pamphlet since the Reign of Mr. L'Estrange Expired. -- You say you have
inquired after me -- -- Sedulitatem tuam Laudo, (to return you one of your own
scraps, for I mortally hate to be endepted to any Body, for Pedantry) but I
fear the pains in that, as well as in your printed Labors, proved to little
purpose. What a company of Raskals were these Printers that they would not
break an Act of Parliament to Oblige the World, (and the Bog-houses) with such
an Excellent Piece; and then at last, to make you pay Contribution too, (as you
say you did) toward Printing, really Sir, that was unkind; and a man were
better write for a living (as you are told, you know, or rather know not, who
does) than scrible to undo ones-self, which must Infallibly be your Fate, If
on such unconscionable Terms you publish any more such (...)ear. For since an
Inundation of Wit and Latin is as mischeivous, as that of the Sea, it is most
wise men's Opinion. That the Fee-simple of an Author will never turn to any more
Account to you, than the Land in the Marsh, did. Dear Sir, Consult Erra Pater
next bout. Did not you begin that, That Fatality-work on a Childermass-day? As
for your terrible Reges ac Ipsis, etc. I carried it, late as it was last Night,
to a Pedagogue for Construction, who tells me the English of it is, That it is
good sleeping in a whole Skin. Now I must profess, That though I Love and
Revere my King, as well, and would venture my Blood to serve him against Rome,
or Geneva, as freely as any little Fellow between Barwick and Dover Peer, yet I
cannot very Cordially brook any of the Popes Subjects (as such) be they what
they will; though in other respects, I honor them as much, and somewhat more
than any that shall go about with Freaks and ridiculous Flim flams to flatter
them. I like your humor rarely well for Swearing with your Pen, though I must,
to deal plainly (as you know Friends should do,) tell you, it is not altogether
so Jantes, as by word of mouth. For observe me, If I, that am but a bad Reader
(though my Grannum, and my Grammar (as you note right well) might teach me at
least some little kind of Learning) should not happen to Tone I Faith luckily
in pronunciation, Then would the Grace of that Expression be utterly lost. As
for the wishing me out of Harms-way, it is most Obligingly done, but I beseech
you do not you give your self the trouble of putting me out of the way, (the
Phrase is known) alamode de Godfrey, were I not assured under your hand that
you are none of the Bloody Letter, I should not like those Menacings. But to
obtain your favor, I do assure you, If you please to Write an Hundred and
Fifty more such Volumns as the Last, I will henceforward never so much as
directly or indirectly read one of them.

This is all at present, besides my love kindly remembered to you, and my
respects to Philip Foxcroft (who for ought I know may be your Godfather, for I
never heard of him before in my Life) so hoping that all our friends at home,
and going abroad are in good health: I rest

Septem. 17. 79. Your much obliged Servant, and my Name (lest you should have
forgot it) Is HEN. CARE.


