TO THE Right Honorable the Parliament, and the Council of State of England.
The most Humble Expression of Sir Balthazar Gerbier, concerning his Integrity
and zeal to this State and Nation; and the account he desires to give thereof:

WHEREAS the thoughts of men are only known to God, and men only to judge by
words and actions; As it imports to all States that men should not offend by
words or deeds; So it imports to know their intentions, especially in unsettled
times, that there wants no men who mind but mischief; who also make it their
work to traduce all such as run not their course; Which being a known Truth,
justly moves the said Sir Balthazar Gerbier, to declare, first, that it was a
true zeal toward this Nation, which moved him to come to it, in the year 1616
(from Zealand his Native Country, belonging to the States General) and to
apply himself during the best part of so many years since to the public
service; He never to his knowledge by Word or Action, said or did any thing,
that might or could contradict the truth of that zeal by him professed.

Secondly, That as soon as he perceived this Nation to be threatened with
disturbances, he (by the intercession of the Prince Elector Palatine, the then
King being at York) became an humble Suitor for leave to retire, and to return
beyond the Seas, resolving then to abandon all Court entertainments, and
employments, that could have argued in him a disposition, contradicting what he
had so long professed; and so preferred the keeping entire and spotless his
Integrity before all other worldly considerations in general, as in
particular, the recovery of all such sums of money as he has disburst
during his Residency abroad, for the service of the State, and at home in his
charge of Master of Ceremonies, for which he had gotten some Tallies struck
upon Bishops, which were stopped soon after that it was told at Court, he ceased
not to pay Assessements, and which was the cause also that Sir Clement
Cotterell being at Oxford, was instantly invested in his charge, though it was
settled upon the said Sir Balthazar Gerbier, during life, by Patent under the
then great Seal of England, first as adjoynt to his Predecessor Sir John
Finet, and since his decease in quality of Sole Master of Ceremonies.

Which could not be taken from him, except he had merited that which was most
unjustly and injuriously told to his face, (by the Instigation of the Lord
Cottington) that he had deserved to be hanged by his Legs, for having named
those who did betray this State. The Interest whereof, being the cause of what
he then did, was ever so dear unto him as it shall ever be preferred by him
beyond all that may concern his particular, as in that of his Office of Master
of Ceremonies, during life, he shall never complain against the State, that it
was, during his absence settled upon a Gentleman, who for his service in quality
of public Minister has well deserved; and who having all the necessary
qualities, is so fit for the execution thereof.

Thirdly, that during his seven years absence, he has not only continued to
contribute to the maintenance of the Army by due payments of Assessements, and
all kind of taxations, (though himself deprived of all Employments). But
publicly professed to wish the preservation of this State, against all
Foreign and Inland Enemies, with the same zeal and integrity of mind as he
has proceeded with, during his former twelve years constant Residency in the
Court of Bruxels, whence he did as diligently as possibly he could, advertize
the State of all the Trecheries intended and acted against the same, as he did
diverse times represent to the late King, that his Neighbors would never
consider his power, except it was seasoned with an harmonious concordance of
Parliaments, of which truth the said Sir Balthazar Gerbier, appeals to his
Journalls which the State does possess.

But his fidelity to the State proved to him his utter ruin, so great then
being the resentments of those who were offended; that in obedience to the
Parliament he named those who advertised the public ministers of State in
foreign Courts, especially those of Rome and Spain, of all the secrets of
this State, and who did cross and overthrow diverse of the most important
affairs wherein the honor and greatness of this Nation was concerned.
Fourthly

That his late re passing the seas hither with his family was on the same
grounds he first came to this State whence he departed without standing in need
of any quietus est, having that of his own conscience, the free score whereon
he was again moved to present himself, and to offer to give such a full account
of all his actions as should be thought fit, besides the explaining of all such
expedients contained in several of his papers, both written and Printed, and
as were sent first by himself to the right Honorable Master Speaker, since the
year 1646, and by M. Reni Augier this States resident at Paris (to whom the
said Sir Balthazar Gerbier shall always appeal, as to an infallible witness of
his zeal, affection and fidelity to this State) By which expedients (whenput in
practice) the revenue of the State may be augmented by two or three hundred
thousand pound per an. and this with notable advantage and applause of the
people, as may prove the present use of one of them, by him so long since
proposed, which having bin observed by the late Dr. Dorisla, has also by some
active person been presented to the Parliam. under the notion of an Office of
general Remembrances of matters of Record, which when settled, and practiced as
it ought to be, may render to the State more then forty thousand pound per
annum.

And finally the ground of the said Sir B. Gerbier his coming over to be for
the erecting of an Academy, on all such Principles and orders as are mentioned
in his Treatises heretofore presented to diverse Members of this Honorable Court
of Parliament, and of the Council of State, and in the following leaves.

For the performance whereof he in his own person (and in those of his own
family) undertakes, as also to prove his said design to tend to the glory of
God, the honor of the Nation, the improvement of all lovers of Virtue, and the
breeding of youth therein.

TO ALL FATHERS OF Noble Families, AND Lovers of VIRTUE.
SIR Balthazar Gerbier Knight, the Author of the Academy at Bednall Green
near London, wherein the honor of the Nation, the general satisfaction of
all Fathers of Families, and the improvement of all men that are Lovers of
Languages, Sciences, and all Noble Exercises is concerned, having, during his
being conversant with Foreign Nations, and his Residency among them, in
service of the State observed both the advantages which Fathers of Families,
and all Lovers of Virtue procure to themselves by public Academies, as also
the inconveniences whereunto many of those that travel, are subject; has also
fixed on this most Noble, and most necessary design (how great and laborious
soever it may prove to him and his) to apply all his time, his cares, labors,
faculties, and all possible industry, as well in his own person, as by those
that shall teach the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, German,
and Low Dutch, several sorts of Hands of excellent Writing both Ancient and
Modern Histories, jointly with the constitution and Government of the most
famous Empires and States of the World, besides the true experimental Natural
Philosophy, as also what is most necessary and most Noble, of the Mathematics,
to wit, Arithmetic; the true method of keeping Books of Account, by Debtor and
Creditor, as is practiced in Italy, and other parts of Europe.

Geometry, Geographie, Cosmographie, Perspective, and Architecture, as well for
building, as for magnificent shows, and secret motion of Scenes, and the like.
But above all, what is most excellent of practical, Mathematickes, whatsoever
belongs to Fortifications, Besiedging and defending of places, fireworks,
ordering of Battalioes, and marches of Armies, Music playing of all sorts of
Instruments, Dancing, Fencing, Riding the great horse, together with the new
manner of Fighting on horseback, and if there be any Lovers of virtue, who
have an inclination to Drawing, Painting, Limbning and Carving either for their
curiosity, or to attain to a greater excellency in several of the
forementioned Sciences (viz.) Architecture, Fortification, etc. they may have
them as exactly taught as any of the other Sciences, and by a short method,
which shall give them a full insight in the Theoricall part of the said
Sciences and exercises, at the self same time that they shall be taught in the
foreign Languages? whereunto shall serve several Treatises held forth by the
said Sir Balthazar Gerbier in the Languages aforesaid; he being fully
persuaded, that all such Fathers of Families as mind the improvement of their
Sons, will cheerfully and readily embrace what is now proferred unto them,
and prefer the placing of their Sons in the Academy, to their traveling
abroad, not only in troubled times, but at any other hereafter, for when all
is done, Parents do spend much for keeping of some of their Sons abroad,
when during the said chargable time, they for the most part become acquainted
only with Academists, and they return, leaving to those Forraigners the
honor of their education, when if they be taught before their traveling
abroad, they will then in a short time make themselves known among the best of
men, in the Court of Princes, and there lodge a glorious impression of the
abilities of the Nation, every whit as able of Body and Mind, as any other can
be.

They will also, Traveling in a more mature age, be the more secured against
those, who make it their practice to corrupt young men, and to infuse into them
destructive Principles, to their Country, and to their Religion, which is so
generally manifest, as no doubt both Germains, Polonians, Sweds, Danes and
Flemings will soon resolve to Travel toward these parts, and to this Academy,
which will also redound to a particular glory to the Nation, both for the
present and for the future, and make good that the present time fovoureth what
is so noble, and so generally useful and commendable,

All Lovers of Virtue, Are therefore invited to this Academy, where they shall
be received, well used, carefully and diligently instructed, without exception
of age, as it shall be in the pleasure of every Scholar in this Academy to
select the prosecution of any of the Languages, Sciences and Exercises in
particular according to his genius or affection, and accordingly lessen or
increase his charge.

The Master or Professors shall be engaged to read weekly the Wednesdays in the
afternoones Public Lectures on Languages, Sciences, and Exercises gratis,
both for strangers of civil conversation, as well as the Academists.

The Master and Constitutor being chiefly positive, only in the regulation,
for preventing idleness, and consequently vitiousnesse in life, or manners,
hopeing that beginning and and ending every day, with Prayers and Thanksgiving
intended, and filling the rest of the time with virtuous Exercise and Study,
God will so bless their Endeavors, as that he may be the more glorified, and
this Nation better served.

Orders to be Observed by the Scholars in this Academy.
THe Scholars are to be ready in Summer time, beginning from the twentieth day
of the Month of March, to the twentieth day of October following, at six of the
clock in the morning, and in Winter at 7.

They are then to meet at public Prayers at the second ringing of the Bell, at
eight to take their Breakfast.

Thence to repair until eleven of the clock to their Study and Exercises,
every one of them according to that which they do learn and practice.

From eleven to noone, they are to recreate according to their inclination,
except with Dice or Cards.

At the ringing of the Bell about Noon, they are to repair to the Washing
place for the washing of their hands, thence to the Dining room, ranging
themselves, after grace said, as they are entered into the Academy.

The Grace before and after dinner is to be said by the Reader, and in case of
some accident, by the learnedest Scholar.

The grace being said, are to eat decently, using civil languages one to
another.

They shall speak at Table such of the Languages as they learn, and also have
the liberty to speak their Mother tongue.

Having Dined, and Grace being said, they are to hear a Chapter read.

Being risen, they are to wash their hands again, and then apply themselves for
half an hour, to the Regent or to his Deputy, to be instructed in points of
good manners, or to be reformed of those faults as shall have been observed in
them, as also to be put on honorable and profitable Meditations.

They are to recreate until half an hour past two, and at the first ringing
of the Bell, are to repair to their Studies or Exercises, and to continue at
the same until five of the clock at night.

They shall then recreate themselves until seven of the clock.

At seven go to supper, and observe the same Orders prescribed for Dinner time.

They are to meet again for Evening Prayers at nine of the clock in the Summer,
and go to rest at ten precizely.

In Winter at nine, having been at Prayers immediately after eight of the clock.

They shall not swear, which if they do, they shall fast all day, or pay a
shilling for the poor.

They shall not speak any injurious word one to another under the same penalty,

They shall not without consent go forth on any pretense whatsoever, not only
during the days of their studies, but the Wednesdaies and the Saturdaies in
the afternoon.

They shall not admit any Visit during the times of their Studies, nor no
Maidens to come to them at any other time, except such as shall visit the
Academy in company of their Mother, and that are known to be their Sisters or
Cousins.

They shall not repair to any kind of Victualling Houses or Taverns, on
pretense of entertainments of such friends as they shall be visited by, but
present them with what is fit within doors, their Chambers, Orchards, or
Gardens, and without any offense or impediment to the Academy.

They shall keep themselves cleanly, and never appear otherwise to any Company,

They shall Civilly salute those by whom they shall be visited and return them
humble thanks for their visitation.

They shall not question one another concerning Birth, nor Means, nor
Profession.

They shall by a zealous emulation strive to become pious, and by fearing God,
make good their desire to attain unto wisdom.

Making it their only joy to improve in the profession of true christianity,
thereby to perfectionate all their Endeavors, Labors and Studies in a
Religious conclusion by an exact observation of the Sabbath, (and of their
improvement in the service of God) whereof they are to give a public due
account at the close of that day, in the presence of the Regent or his Deputy.

And whereas possibly by reason of the late years disturbances in this State,
and the great alterations, and variety of the dispositions of men, The Academy
in the receiving of Scholars cannot well except against any Lovers of Virtue
that are minded to improve themselves, Nor suffer any Scholar to bring in
question or quarrel about any former passages of the Times, as to reproach one
another, much less to meddle with any matter of State.

All Scholars or others belonging to the said Academie, are to observe and
keep this said Rule exactly, or else to depart, and loose the quarters pay by
them advanced according to contract and custom.

Balthazar Gerbier Knight.

FINIS.

