Fitz-Harris his FARWELL TO THE WORLD, OR A TRAITORS Just Reward*
Farewell great Villain, and unpittied Lie,
Instead of Tears drawn from a tender Eye;
Ten thousand Traitors like Fitz-Harris dye.
Unhuman Monster, to the World ingrate,
An Enemy to the King, the Church and State;
Had thou been starved, 't had been too kind a Fate.
His Crimes were horrid, infamous and base.
Deserves a total extinct of his Race;
Banish his Name unto some dismal place.
What Is worse than injuring Sacred Majesty,
For which he suffered on the fatal Tree;
May all men suffer, when Robbed of Loyalty.
England may then be glad, with Triumph sing,
When all her Foes are vanished with a string;
The Golden Age from Halcion-days will spring.
Those Wolves that Plot Protestant Lambs to Gull,
May Heaven obstruct the Engines of their Scull;
Give them of Tyburn, good Lord, their Belly full.
Giddy-headed Youths have been seduced of late,
Beyond their Wits, talk of the Affairs of State;
Obedience learn to avoid Fitz-Harris Fate.
Those public Libellers that with Zeal and heat,
With some unheard of Novelty daily Treat;
If they write falsely, tie them from their Meat.
Tell the Ambitious, their Fools and strive in vain,
To undermine a Crown, King Charles will Reign:
To be true and honest, is the safest Gain.
I hope to see Justice at Tyburn done,
If so, some hundreds may have Cause to run;
Give them what they deserve, their Thread is spun.
Bid proud petitioners, good Advice approve,
Make an Address and in one Body move;
With all humility to gain their Prince's Love.
I Would sooner lose a Limb, from the Monument fly,
Endure the worst of Torments till I dye;
Then willingly deserve my Kings displeasing Eye.
London, on thee all flourishing joys descend,
Heaven's bl^ss the Government, and Governors to the end;
Unanimous to agree, your Sovereign to defend.
The Man that burnt Diana's Temple down,
Did it on purpose a Villain to be Crowned;
Among Rogues (Damned Rogues) he got Renown.
How many thousands are there in the Nation,
Mere Knaves, but Saints, in private Congregation;
Loves Monarchy, with mental Reservation.
The Gods rebuke the Error of the Age,
Let moderation Tumultuous men assuage;
But hang all those against their King engage.
Let all dissenting Brothers Love the King,
To the Church Unite, it is a goodly thing;
With Brethren to agree, and with Te Deum fing.
Heaven's bless his Majesty, with Plenty, Joy and Peace.
To all that love the King Heavens give increase;
Confound his Foes to pray I nere will cease.
Non est Lex j^^^^or ulla Quam Necis Artifficis, Art perire sua.

Richard Gibbs,
Norwitch.
FINIS.

