

THE HISTORY OF THE Athenian Society. For the Resolving all Nice and Curious
QUESTIONS.

BY A GENTLEMAN, WHO GOT Secret Intelligence Of their Whole Proceedings.

To which are prefixed Several POEMS, WRITTEN BY Mr. Tate, Mr. Motteux, Mr.
Richardson, and others.

Foelix qui Potuit Rerum cog^oscere causas. Virg. Nam nihil ^gregius quam res,
est cernere apertas. Ab dubiis, -- Lucret. lib. 4.

(...). Isocrates.

LONDON: Printed for James Dowley, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster. Price 1 s.

The EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the Gentlemen of the ATHENIAN SOCIETY.
Gentlemen,
EVER since my First Thoughts of writing this History, I have frequently
considered whom I should select, as a fit Patron of my Endeavors this way; but
these Considerations still concluded, that you, who on the firm Foundation of
your own Excellence, have established your selves in the Esteem of the more
solid part of Mankind, without the Auxiliary Support of any great Man's
Assistance; that You who had no Richelieu to cherish your first Essays, or
guard your Rising Merit, were ablest to Patronize that, which chiefly aimed at
giving the World a Draught, in little, of what it owed to your Incomparable
Performances. If it were not, that most Writers have a sordid present Gain in
View, when they design a Dedication, I am confident, we should see few
Noblemens Names at the beginning of their Works, since it must be confessed,
'twould be more for the Advantage of their Reputation, to choose one another for
Patrons; a Writer being better qualified to defend that, which he has once
espoused, with his Pen, than any Great man, with his empty Name, or a long
Catalogue of Titles. At least I am sure, no man will think my Choice improper,
when he shall consider, how well able you are to protect my Failings with your
Invincible Pens, against all those, who shall hereafter attaque them. Nor will
the Defect of what I have writ, make me at all despair of your favorable
Reception, since every Action ought to receive its Value from the Intention,
not the awkward manner of Performance. My Will designed your Honor, though my Pen
has not come up to the Greatness of my Aim. I was no sooner convinced by what
you published, of the Possibility of carrying on so Noble an Undertaking, but I
resolved to attempt this History, which I hoped to perfect without the
knowledge of any of your Learned Society, being sensible that your abounding
Modesty would endeavor to stifle that, which might bear the least resemblance
of a Panegyri^, in the Eye of even the Envious; but by the want of Caution in
some concerned in the publishing it, I found, before the last sheet was
printed, one of your Society had Intelligence of it, whose Letter may convince
the World, that this Fear of mine was not without Just Ground. But I will not
pretend wholly to justify my self, for publishing this History without your
Leave, since a thing of this nature, indeed, merited better Helps than I had to
the compiling of it, and none were capable of affording them effectually but
your selves; yet it was an Error of the better side, a Trespass caused by a too
unconsidering Esteem, and Value for your Noble Undertaking, and no less
Performances, which have not only engaged me in this Affair, but always to be,
as I must here subscribe my self;

Gentlemen, Your Admirer, and Humble Servant, R. L.

To the Athenian Society.
THE Warmth your Beams produced you must excuse;
Your Commendation first inspired my Muse:
Your friendly Praise supports her feeble Wing;
You both invite, and teach her how to sing.
And, while by Art your charming Numbers move,
Her Wood-wild Notes instruct her to improve.
Censure, in this Attempt, can only say,
That I my Debt of Thanks too poorly pay;
That from your Bounty I my Tribute raise,
And but return the Product of your Praise.
Yet Mortals thus to Sacred Altars go
With Presents which the Gods did first bestow.
We treat them from the Stores which they dispense
Not to Requite, but show our grateful Sense.
To sing your Toils let abler Bards aspire,
While I at distance silently admire,
How much obliged your Country is to you,
If Wit, and Learning, here, those Charms renew,
That Art's Admirers once to Athens drew.
If thither Conquering Rome for Knowledge sought,
What Miracles have you for Britain wrought!
Who Athens home to us at your own Charge have brought!
Aspiring Lewis's self must yield to you,
In that sole Praise which he can call his Due:
Translated Learning France too dearly buys,
Which cheaply your Compendious Book supplies.
This Difference too your Preference secures,
His Aim was Glory, Public Good was Yours.
For while you move the various Orbs of Wit,
Concealed the great Intelligences sit.
N. Tate.

Atticae Societati.
DOcta cohors, Musis and Apolline nata secundis,
Per quam Cecroplis vita resurgit avis,
Cujus luce novum nostra decus additur Urbi,
Visit, and arctoas mitior aura plagas,
Eja age naturae penetralia pande lat^ntis,
Invitam excutiens, qua licet usque Deam.
Fortia languenti praebe medicamina mundo,
Phoebeumque tuo lumine read diem.
Lux divina Sophi Titanla lumina vincit,
Et penetrat terras, and super astra volat.
Quin pergis victuram in saecula promere chartam,
Quin Sophiae sequeris liberioris iter?
Ingens restat adhuc messis, novus ordo laborum:
Auxiliatrices sperat Apollo manus.
Barbariem, moresque feros manus Attica ademit,
Nec subigenda tibi monstra minora manent.
P. Motteux.

The same in English. To the Athenian Society.
SOns of the Muses, at whose welcome Birth
Auspicious Phoebus cheered the drooping Earth,
By whom once more old Learned Athens lives,
Our great Metropolis new Fame receives,
And a more gentle Air our Northern Climes revives,
Go on, descend to Natures deepest Cell,
The gloomy Night that veils the bashful Dame dispel.
Help a whole World which does your Aid implore,
And scattering Beams of Light our golden days restore.
Learning's diviner Rays the Sun's outvye,
And pierce the Globe, and range the loftiest Sky.
In never-dying Lines your task renew,
Through Learning's boundless Sea your course pursue,
Vast undiscovered Regions wait for you.
The mighty Work much Art, much Toil demands,
And even Apollo wants assisting Hands.
In dismal shades the ancient World did stray,
Till Athens Wisdom did its Light display;
Athens once more must change our Darkness into Day.
P. Motteux.

To the Athenian Society.
E'Re Science was, or Learning had a Name,
Dilated Memory recorded Fame:
'Twas long before Forgetfulness was born,
Or Wit could find out Ignorance to scorn:
When Men could back Six hundred years relate,
And still pursued their very distant Fate.
Deeds sooner far than Men did dye,
And long-protracted Life forgot Mortality;
Wide as the Heaven their Thoughts did roll
To Actions great as the extensive Soul.
Letters and Books the Helps We use
To keep expiring Sense alive,
Needless to Them, who could at once peruse,
In their unbounded Knowledge all was known;
Who had with Time their Race begun,
And still lived on as if they would Time it self survive.
Nature bestowed her youthful Store so well,
That none could want, and therefore none excel,
And so impartially adorned the Mind,
That equal Knowledge did inform Mankind.
Thus when our Fathers (touched with Guilt)
That huge stupendous Staircase built,
We mock indeed the fruitless Enterprise,
Succesless Actions never pass for Wise:
But was the Dreadful Pile in being, 'twould show
To what degree that untaught Age did know
Who Nature's Poize unequally divide,
And turned the Globe into a Piramide,
While Heaven seemed more to apprehend it, than deride.
Strange uncouth Dialects from Heaven succeed,
And Universal Clouds of Jargon spread:
Confusions here in horrid Squadrons join;
And here King Ignorance began his Reign;
Old Knowledge hither bore Imperial Sway,
But found a strange, a sensible Decay:
And though the Old Monarch seemed to keep the Throne,
The Tyrant Ignorance managed as his own.
Two Thousand years the Usurper had prevailed,
And on his Darling Sloth the Crown entailed;
While the old drooping Monarch saw his Fate,
But wanted Power to save his ruined State.
Two Sons he had, Youths of Angelic Birth,
That promised fair, to reinform the Earth,
Wisdom, and Learning, Twins of blooming Hope,
That sink his Fear, and all his Comfort prop.
Of all his numerous Progeny, these alone
Remain the Hopes of his declining Throne;
The rest opposing his approaching Fate,
Sunk in the Ruins of their Father's State.
But these the Darlings of the Parents Age,
He timely rescued from the Tyrant's Rage;
For these he cared; for these to Heaven he prayed,
To Latium one, and one to Greece conveyed.
Inspired by Instinct, with a mutual Rage,
Eternal Wars with Ignorance they wage;
From Athens one, and one from Rome, inspir^
The gladsome World with their own Genial Fire;
So Form did Chaos, light, the Dark expel,
As Athens Rome, and Rome the world excel:
The Usurping Troops, by their own Guilt subdued,
Fled from the approaching dawn, while none pursued.
The enlightened world new Altars gladly raise,
And form new Triumphs to the Victor's Praise.
Wisdom, and Learning, aged with Renown,
Enjoy unenvied an Eternal Crown;
Their Empire to the World's Extremes extend;
And Viceroys to remoter Kingdoms send,
Their faithful Agents through the world disperse,
And these we sing in our Immortal Verse;
These now we sing, and willing Trophies raise,
To their just Value, and their Master's Praise.
D. F.

To the Athenian Society.
WHen the Mysterious Nothing first was hurld
Into a Chaos, thence into a World,
By that great Fiat, (greater much by far
Than the strait Bounds of ancient Maxims were,
Which said, From Nothing Nothing can appear.)
Methinks in that great Work, that mighty Change,
I saw the Immaterial Beings range,
And crowd toward the Sight, as Mortals gaze
At some unknown prodigious Comets blaze;
But when they saw the sweet, the lovely Face,
And curious Harmony the Wonder grace,
Their Admiration lost it self in Praise.
Thus meaner We, whose low and humble Birth
Derives its Half at least from Native Earth,
When first the spreading Fame, the Rumor run,
That Athens had another World begun,
And cleared the gloomy shades of Ignorance,
And formed new sparkling Orbs --
This soon employed each Tongue; all Ears and Eyes
Were full of Athens, and the Enterprise.
But when the searching Age began to find
The greater Aim, the Good that was designed,
Changed into Act, and cultivate Mankind;
The deep Amazeme^t palled, and in its room
Deserved Encomium's crowd, and bring their Offerings home.
D. T.

To the Athenian Society.
SOON as our fettered Souls from Time are free,
All things in Heaven, just as they are we see:
No dark Conjecture, no obscure Suppose
Confounds the knowledge of each hidden Cause;
But easy Nature's beauteous Form appears
Disrobed of the thick Veil, which here she wears,
The Chain of Causes, and their Order shine,
And clearly show, they are framed by Hands Divine.
Ye Great Unknown, this You have aimed at Now:
And though coy Nature flies our searching View,
Whilst clouded Reason's cooped within this Cage,
Yet you have thus far blessed this happy Age;
Whatever the searching Study of the Wise
In things divine, and natural yet have found,
Whatever from your own Observations rise,
From your sublime Retreat you scatter all around.
The MANY, who dead in Ignorance lay,
Now Speak, and Think, revived by your bright Day.
Before, they had a mere Promethean Frame,
Till you informed their Souls with the Celestial Flame.
Go on -- Learning, and solid Truth advance,
They Are Noble Subjects, for such Noble Pens:
Let your Opposers Trifling Jests pursue,
They write for MINUTES, but for AGES You.
Charles Richardson.

THE HISTORY OF THE Athenian Society.
I AM sensible, that the more Judicious, and Learned may, with a great deal of
Reason, condemn me, as guilty of an unpardonable Rashness, in attempting a
Province, so extremely above my Abilities, as the writing the History of a
Society, whose Learning and Wit have justly made so considerable a figure in
the World; yet I must, with Vanity enough, own, that the Nobleness of the
Undertaking has born me up so far above any Apprehensions, that (like a
Soldier, who resolves on some brave Action) I cast off all thoughts of those
obstacles, which might frighten a cooler Considerer. And since it is confessed,
that to aim at Noble Ends is enough to merit Applause, I had rather undergo the
Severity of the Critics (who, I have reason to think, will not be so
favorable, as to forgive the Faults of the Performance for the Greatness of
the Design) than lose the Glory of having first offered at it. I will agree
with them, that it is to be wished, that the Great SPRAT would oblige the Age
with a Second-Best History of the Second-Best Institution, for the promotion of
Learning, and removing that Epidemic Ignorance; which exercises so incredible a
Tyranny over the more numerous part of Mankind: From such a Pen the World might
expect Satisfaction, and the Athenian Society Justice; the Charms of his Style
would engage all to read, and his Wit and variety of Learning give them
proportionable Idea's of those Excellencies, he would commend to them: And
indeed, none but He (whose Thoughts are so true and fine, and whose Language so
fully, and clearly expresses his Conceptions) or a whole SOCIETY learned as
themselves, can be thought capable of acquitting so illustrious a Cask with
that Strength, and Perfection it deserves.

This Consideration would not a little discourage me, if I had not This to
obviate the Difficulties it brings; That great part of this Book shall be drawn
from the incomparable Works of this SOCIETY, who are, indeed, their own
Historians, and most worthy to be so; for, their whole design is not only to
improve KNOWLEDGE in DIVINITY, and PHILOSOPHY in all their parts, as well as
Philology in all its Latitude, but also to commend this Improvement to the
Public, in the best method, that can be found out for Instruction; which is or
ought to be the End of every Writer, unless he aim rather at Amusement, than
Information.

If the World would be so favorable, as to admit of what I have said for an
Excuse, I hope the Gentlemen that compose this SOCIETY, will pardon my Boldness
in presuming to give an account of their Undertaking, who am not at all
concerned in it, and have not the Happiness of being acquainted with one Member
of it, since what I shall here advance proceeds from an esteem of their Design,
and the great Value I set upon their Performances, which are sufficient to
convince those (among which number I my self was at first) who were startled
with the seeming Impossibility of the Project, that notwithstanding it was so
difficult, yet they have fully come up to what they first pretended to.

The Design as well as Performance, seems so extraordinary, that when I ref^ect
on it, I often admire, that the general, nay, universal Advantage it brings,
should never have inspired any one to have thought of it before now; till I
consider, that the Good of Mankind was not the aim of the Grecian Philosophers,
so much as their own Personal Glory, and Pride, which they built on their own
Knowing more than the rest of the World, who had not the Leisure and Abilities
to spend their whole Life in Disquisitions, or Disputable Notions; and to
maintain this, 'twas necessary for them not to communicate Learning to any but
their immediate Hearers, who by word of Mouth were to deliver it to their
Successors in the Schools. This made all their Doctrins confined to their
Gymnasia, their Porches, and Gardens.

Some of them were so fearful of having their Sentiments known, that they
wrapped all their Notions up in Mysteries, as hard to be understood by any, but
their own Scholars, as those Chemical Tracts, we have now, which treat of the
great Hermetick Work: This was the cause of the different Representations of
the Philosophy of Pythagoras in particular; and I think it is not doubted by the
Learned, but that most (if not all) of those Absurdities, which are attributed
to him, proceed only from the uncertain Guesses of his Opposers, and Enemies,
who were never admitted into his School, or had a true knowledge of his
Opinions; though perhaps the Pythagoreans themselves did much contribute
(notwithstanding their great veneration for his Memory) by their Ignorance, to
the Ignominy of their Master, for they learned chiefly by Tradition, to which
we may reasonably suppose, that every Successor, in their School, (who was an
Arbitrary Dispenser of these Mysteries) added, at least by way of Comment,
which, in a Generation or two, incorporated with it, and all past for his.

If we pass from Greece to Rome, though Politeness and Learning diffused
themselves into a larger compass there, yet their principal Studies were
Oratory, and the Art of War, on which all the Preferments of that Commonwealth
turned; for, as for Philosophy, it was built upon the Greek bottom, and Cicero
was the first that brought the Roman Language acquainted with it: Both before
and after him, they that were that way inclined went to Athens, then the only
University (if I may call it so) of Europe, or had Masters from Greece, as
Plutarch, and his Nephew Sextus, and Apollonius, may witness, who were all
three Tutors to Emperors, and all three Grecians, besides many others which I
omit. The Vanity, and great Value these Philosophers, that were sent for to
instruct the Romans, set upon themselves, satisfies me, that I have no great
cause to wonder, that in Rome this Project was never thought of, since the
Learned, whose Province this must have been, would have lost that Esteem they
then possessed, by making what they knew common to as many as were capable and
willing to understand them; whereas their singularity in Knowledge gave them
Privilege to the highest Insolence: For, when the abovementioned Apollonius was
sent for by the Emperor Antoninus Pius, from Chalcedon to Rome, to read
Philosophy to his adopted Son Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (sirnam'd The
Philosopher) after his arrival at that City, never went to wait on the Emperor,
and being sent for by him, returned this Answer; that It was not fit, the
Master should attend the Scholar, but the Scholar the Master: This Pride of his
was so temperately born by that generous Prince, (in that more a Philosopher
than Apollonius) that he only smiled, and said to his Servants, Does he then
think it farther from his Lodging to my Palace, than from Chalcedon to Rome?

From hence is evident what Honor was paid them (by the highest Powers on
Earth) for the Opinion of their Knowledge, and also what Satisfaction, and
Pride they took in it: So that it is not strange, that they should persuade it
as necessary to their Followers, and by consequence deprive them of all
Thoughts of making Learning more common. But, that a Project of this nature
would have been very grateful to the Romans, I think, is manifest by the
general Inclination of their Youth to Learning, of whom such vast numbers
flocked to hear Carneades during his stay in that City, (when he was sent
Ambassador from the Athenians) that Marcus Cato made a Speech against him in
the Senate, (to whom his Embassy was already in some suspicion) and told them,
That considering the whole Youth of Rome were such Admirers of him, it were an
easy matter for him to persuade them to any thing. This discovers so great a
desire of Knowledge in them, that, I am confident, whoever should have set such
a Design on foot there, would have been exalted among their Gods, and had
divine and immortal Honor paid to his Memory.

It is less to be wondered, that the Churchmen, who at first took up the
Platonic Principles, to engage in the Controversial War, with the Heathens,
did not promote any thing like the Subject of my present Discourse, since they
were too much employed in Disputes, on the old Foundation, to think of any new
Progress in Learning; and after they had with success managed this Philosophy
of Plato, to the Downfall of Idolatry, their Tribe began to employ it against
oneanother, till their Contests, as well as Learning, found a Period in that
Inundation of Barbarity, which swallowed both them, and the Roman Empire up
together. After an Age of universal Ignorance, the Clergy again put themselves
upon Learning, at least assumed the Name of it; but it is not to be wondered,
that they, who, out of the illunderstood Work of Aristotle, composed an absurd
Body of Philosophy, kept up the unreasonable Humor of confining the Sciences
within such narrow Bounds, that many an Age scarce produced one Layman, that
knew any thing of Letters, because as it had gained the Philosophers
Veneration, so it would add to that which the bigoted World already paid to
their Character, for by this means the Clergy became undeniable Oracles in both
divine, and profane Knowledge.

The School-mens Heads were too much taken up with Subtilties, and Notions,
deduced from these Principles (they too being all of the Clergy) to devise any
means of making the rest of men wiser than before.

But that which gave me the greatest cause of wonder, was, that since the
benefit of Printing, Books, and consequently Learning, grew more general, and
with that an universal Inclination of most men to spread it still farther, that
nothing of this nature should by none of the Great men, and Virtuoso's of our
own, or foreign Nations be found out, before about a year since.

I am not ignorant that there is a Book called Sphinx Theologico-Philosophica,
that bears some resemblance to the Athenian Mercury, but then it differs so
much when you come to peruse it, that if it had not been to obviate some men's
unreasonable Fancies, I would not have named it; for, there the Author proposes
his Difficulties, and solves them himself, but with an endless number of vulgar
Errors, grounding all his Answers on ill Authorities, School* Divinity, and
those antiquated Systems of Philosophy, which were composed (as I said before)
out of the misunderstood Writings of Aristotle, who, if we may credit his
Letter to Alexander the Great, never intended, any one should reap much
Knowledge from them, except his own select Scholars; for, that great King being
fired, with generous Ambition of excelling all Mankind in Knowledge, as well as
Power, when he was informed that Aristotle had published his So called because
few only, and those Select, were admitted to hear that Philosophy: From (...),
Auscultatio, Hearing. Many learned Authors agree, that these Books were his
Physics and Metaphysics.
Acroamatick Books, sent him a I am not ignorant that some conclude that these
Letters are spurious, yet others are of a contrary opinion, and prove at large
the several Absurdities in those Acroamatick Books, which so great a man as
Aristotle could not be supposed to be guilty of.
Letter of Reprimand, in which were these words:

(...)
(...)

Alexander to Aristotle. Health.
YOU have not done well to publish your Acroamatick Books, for now I would
feign know in what we shall excel the rest of Men, if that Learning i^ which
you have educated us be made common to all: And indeed, I profess I had rather
excel in Knowledge than Power.


To this Letter of Alexander, Aristotle returns this Answer.

(...)
(...)

Aristotle to Alexander. Health.
YOU writ to me about my Acroamatick Books, which you judge should be kept as a
Secret, and not divulged: For your satisfaction therefore know, that they are
published, and yet they are not, for they can be understood, only by such who
have heard me deliver them.


From hence we may suppose what Exactness and Reason there was in Systems,
composed after this Model; and I assure the Reader, the Author of the
fore-nam'd Book falls yet lower, and dwindles into Old-wives Tales, and common
Sayings. In short, if any man of Sense shall happen to see that Book, they will
find, that it bears no likeness to the Athenian Mercury; but the form of
Question and Answer, the Authors of which Method, the Gentlemen of this
Society, are far from pretending to be, and it was made choice of, as the only
way of satisfying every ones Curiosity, and Doubts, when each proposed his own.
I never yet (upon enquiry) could understand that any thing like this was ever
advanced either before this time, or in any other Nation.

England has the Glory of giving Rise to two of the noblest Designs, that the
Wit of Man is capable of inventing, and they are, the Royal Society, for the
experimental improvement of Natural Knowledge, and the Athenian Society for
communicating not only that, but all other Sciences to all men, as well as to
both Sexes; and the last will, I question not, be imitated, as well as the
first, by other Nations.

This leads me into a consideration of the Advantages, this Undertaking has
afforded the World; which are so many, and so evident, that I may seem to the
Judicious to lose time in endeavoring to demonstrate, what every man of Sense
must acknowledge: Yet, to silence the Enemies of Reason as well as of the
Athenian Society, I shall instance in some few particulars, as first, the
promotion of Printing; for, as that Art contributed extremely to the spreading
and progress of Learning, so has this Project made grateful Returns already, to
the encouragement at least of the Masters of that Art, witness the Controversy
with the Anabaptists, the Quakers, and with Mr. Jones, on the Subject of Usury,
which though it be stretched into too great a Latitude, by the Practices of
some, yet is with no Reason in the World absolutely condemned by him; as this
Learned Society have already made evident to any discerning Judgment: Nor has
the little Endeavors at an Answer, by some nameless Scribler, moved me at all
to think otherwise, he having not answered any Proof the Society brought (nor
indeed do I believe he understood great part of them) but with a canting,
inconsistent, Ramble, hastens to the end of his mighty Vindication. I shall say
no more of this Controversy now, because it is not yet finished; and the other
I shall have occasion of speaking of in the Second Part of this Discourse.

But the Booksellers and Printers are not the only Gainers in this Affair, that
Branch of the Royal Revenue, the Post (I mean both the General and Penny-Post)
being not inconsiderably improved by it, they having in the first year received
some Thousands of Letters: So that it seems to me the Interest of the
Government to espouse the Quarrel of this Society, so far as to suppress any
Interloper, the Result of whose unjust Endeavors must be the Ruin of such an
increasing Advantage to Their Majesty's Interest. But I shall say more of this
in my last Part; and here shall leave the Benefit, that arises from the
Athenian Mercury, to the Purses of both the Public, and Private, to consider a
little of that which the Mind, the nobler part of Mankind, will reap from it,
that being its chief aim, and design, the others but accidental.

What an improvement this will be to Learning, I presume, none, that will give
themselves leisure to reflect, can be insensible of; for a diffusing Knowledge,
among all that Heaven has made capable, must certainly be the occasion of more
Discoveries, in Truth, and Nature, because the number of the Learned will be
increased; of the Learned, I say; for, I cannot see any reason why Languages
should be thought so necessary an Ingredient for the composing a Scholar, if it
were not for the opening the Secrets that are locked up in them; which Prison
this Noble Societies Undertaking will in time free 'em from; for, indeed it is
very hard, that those whose Pockets could not arrive to better Education, and
yet are blessed with abler Brains than many who spend their time in Books, should
be hindered from thoseadvantages they could so well make use of. The French
have removed in some measure this Obstacle, and made all Authors familiar to
every one, that can but read and understand their own Mother Tongue, by
translating all Books of any value into their own Language. It Is true, we have
imitated them a little in that way, but under a different Capacity; for here
there are a sort of little Ignorant Foreigners, who understand neither our
Tongue, nor that from whence they translate, employed by the Booksellers on
this difficult Task, because they murder a noble Author cheaper, than a Man of
Parts willdo him Justice, and like a Spaniard will live upon a Clove of
Garlic, and work hard for what will but suffice to buy 'em a great Coat to
keep 'em from the Cold: This is the cause, we have few good Translations.
Whereas the French are more accurate, because they who give themselves to
Undertakings of that kind among them, are such whose Business is Learning, and
who are otherways provided for, than to depend on the Generosity of a
Bookseller for their Bread. And whilst a business of that consequence is
carried on by such Hands, we have no reason to expect any greater Performances.

But had we the good Fortune to have all the Arts and Sciences, and all the
fine thoughts of all those great men that have writ, they would be so
voluminous that many a man of Sense would labor under, as great a difficulty,
as before, both for time to peruse and Money to purchase them: But this
difficulty is quite removed, by the Athenian Society, for One hour in a week is
all the time, that is required to peruse them, and Two pence weekly sufficient
to purchase those Papers, in which, every one may find the Marrow of what great
Authors have writ on any curious Subject, with the improvement of many
ingenious, and learned men upon it. Nor is the Reader confined to that silly
Magisterial Argument of some of the old Pythagoreans, an ipse dixit, but is
only desired to yield to the force of Reason it self, and what Authorities are
brought, will easily be seen to be supernumerary Proofs, unless about Matter of
Fact, and the verity of any Passage in History, as that of Josephus about our
Savior Jesus Christ, which can be decided by nothing but the Testimony of all
Ages up to the time when such Book was writ; which is a much more natural, and
rational way to come to the Truth, than by the conjectural Arguments of some
opinionated men of this present Age, who would needs prefer a mere Ghess to a
Cloud of Witnesses, a method quite contrary to all the Justice and Proceedings
in the World.

If the Reader will consider what I have said, I am confident he cannot but in
Justice acquit me of Flattery, when I shall say, that all the Endeavors of the
great men of all Nations, and Ages, from the beginning of Learning to this
time, have not contributed to the increase of Knowledge, so much as this
Institution of the Athenian Society. What the Ancients did, I have already, in
a few words discussed, and though I will not deny, that the Advance that has been
made, since the Restoration of Learning, is very extraordinary, yet it must be
granted that it falls short of this. It Is true, it was great to cast off
Authorities, and to have Recourse alone to Reason, and Experiment, the only
sure Foundation of all Learning, without which we spend our Years in painful
Study, to fill our Heads with false, and empty Notions, foreign enough from
Truth, which is the aim of all Study; for, without a pretty good assurance of
that, the Mind can never be satisfied. But though the Treasure of Knowledge
increased so vastly, yet the Possessors of this Treasure did not grow much more
numerous than of old; so that the Benefit of it reached only to such, as could
go to the expense of Studying at the chargeable places called Universities,
(few else being the better for this new Revolution in the Empire of Wisdom)
most of the rest of Mankind were an ignorant Generation, that bore the Form,
the Shape, the Image of Men, and had the use of their Tongue to make known
their Thoughts, but it was only to discover, how very little difference there
was betwixt them and their Brothers the Brutes. The Learned dealt with Mankind,
till now, as some bigoted Clergymen do, in giving the greatest part to
Ignorance here, as they do to the Devil hereafter. I confess those few, and
imperfect Translations we have, did a little refine the Conversation of a great
many, who had not the good Fortune to be skilled in Languages, but those Books
are (as I have hinted before) too large, too difficult, and too dear for
several, that are as willing, and as fit to learn, though they have not so good
a Purse to spare, either their Money, or their Time on them, from their
necessary Occasions of getting their Livelihood. But the Society have opened an
easier way, and set Learning in so fair a light, that won, with its Beauty,
every one must with eagerness embrace it, in a form so agreeable to all
Capacities; and those, who are so near a Kin to their Bodies, as not to care
for the Embellishments of the Mind, will have a clearer Mark set upon them, of
sordid Ignorance.

If these, and many more are the Advantages, that will accrue to the Public
from this Undertaking, I believe the Learned will receive no less, I mean those
who are not so full of themselves, that they cannot with Patience peruse the
Works of any one else; for, all the knotty points of Philosophy, Divinity,
Mathematics, etc. which have employed the curious part of the World thus long,
are formed into Quaeries by the Inquisitive, and answered with an abundance of
Reason, by the Society, who are not only men of Parts; but also blessed with a
Temper that is Industrious to the highest degree, and by consequence must give
a general Satisfaction in their Performances, to the best of Judges in every
Science.

But here methinks I see some plodding, grave, Gentleman, that has been at the
Expense of many a laborious Year, to gain the Mastery of Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, with a supercilious frown, condemning this Society, not for falling
short of their first Pretense, but because they keep up too close to it. For,
says he, What Honor will be due to Learned men, that have spent so many years
in the study of Languages, and the Criticisms of them, if the Kernel of that
Nut, they are so long a cracking, be given to every illiterate Fellow, that
understands not what is Latin for the Book he reads. This desire of Honor, and
Veneration, and to be esteemed something more than Men, has been the cause of
the small Progress of Learning in former Ages, as I have already shown, and
therefore ought to be cast away with the other Fopperies of those times, which
obstructed the Growth of Knowledge; and the Gentlemen of this Kidney may
satisfy themselves, that the number of Illiterate Fellows will be much less,
and yet the Skill in the Languages be in as much esteem, as it deserves, as
long, as the study of ancient Authors, especially the Poets (which can never be
delivered in any other Language with that Force, and Beauty they have in their
own) shall be valued by the Ingenious; Criticisms will still be pleasing,
though a thousand times repeated, and to be a Critic, 'twill be necessary to
understand the original of those Books, that teach them to be so: Etymologies
of Words, and Terms of Art will require some Skill in Languages, etc. Nay, this
Athenian Project will rather contribute to that; for, the nature of many men
(especially those that are very curious) is, to desire to see the Author
itself, from whence such admirable things are drawn, which will oblige them to
study Languages, to be able to understand them. So that that sort of Learning
is in no fear of being lost, since now, it may be, some Hundreds may be excited
to it, which otherwise had never thought on it.

But I cannot imagine, why a man may not be Master of as much Sense, though he
understand never a word of Latin, as if he were perfect in the darkest places
of Persius; nor if his Sense can be thus improved, can he come under the
Contempt of Illiterate? But to satisfy these Sparks, that are for the keeping
the World in Ignorance, let them not be so uneasy, for, I dare engage, there
will still be Fools, and Blockheads enough for them, that will not make use of
this Advantage.

Some of the Roman Pedants found the same fault with Cicero's Design in
translating the Philosophy of the Grecians into Latin, for fear it should make
Learning, or at least its Professors, too cheap. But, as that did not deterr
him from prosecuting his Undertaking, so this cannot be supposed to weigh at
all with the present Athenian Society, who have undertaken a Province of more
general Good, and carried it on with no less Force, and Wit.

Here I must not forget that Great, and Universal Good this Design affords to
any Troubles of Mind, in removing (to use the words of the first Mercury) those
Difficulties, and Dissatisfactions, that shame, or fear of appearing ridiculous
by asking Questions, may cause several persons to labor under, who now have
opportunities of being resolved in any Question without knowing their Informer;
and (I may add, without being known themselves. And that these People might be
wholly satisfied, the same Mercury says farther, thus -- And if at any time,
the Answer is not so satisfactory as they could wish, let them, as directed by
the Advertisement, mention in what particular, and they shall have a fuller
satisfaction in the next Paper.

To enlarge upon this would be superfluous, since every man, that is affected
with any such Trouble will find, how much Ease, Advice will afford him,
especially when he can have it without discovering himself to be grieved. It
must stop many a desperate Hand, which unnaturally else might attempt upon the
Breast, foolishly imagining, that an end of this Life would put a Period to
their Sorrows, when it only adds an infinite Increase to them. Methinks there
is something divinely mysterious in this, that I can consult so many able
Heads, on my private Distractions, and yet that they should still remain a
Secret. Nay, they who propose these Questions are not the only that receive the
Benefit of the Answer, since that may serve for many at the same time, under
the same Exigencies, and even Posterity that has not yet a Being, will be
indebted to it when in the like Cases, which will happen again. With good
reason therefore has the Designer of the Emblem of that Society placed an Angel
directing such unfortunate Desperado's to apply themselves to them; for if any
thing under a Divinity can avert their Misery, it must be the force of their
Reasons.

Having thus given a rough Draught of some of those Benefits which this
Undertaking has, and will produce to Mankind, it is fit that the World know its
Benefactor; and indeed Justice requires, that he who first designed, and
proposed it, should have that Reputation, that is due to him, and have his Name
known to Posterity, who will not have a little share in the Obligation. He
therefore who formed the first Idea of this great, this noble Project, was Mr.
Dunton the Bookseller, for whom all the Mercuries are printed; the Tenth of
March, 1690/1, he first brought the Embrio into form, and, as I am informed,
there were two occasions which gave Life to it, the first upon reading that of
the Acts 17. 21. For all the Athenians and Strangers that dwelt there gave
themselves to nothing else, but to tell, or hear some New: or rather new
things.] -- This has relation to the foregoing Verses, as I shall observe when
I come to speak of the Reasons why they call themselves Athenians. His frequent
reflection on this Text concurring, in time, with some great Injury he had
received, gave Birth to this happy thought. For, being sollicitous how he
should be instructed in that Evangelical Lesson of forgiving Injuries, as it
were by some Divine Instinct this Method came into his Head, by which both
himself and others might be satisfied in that, and any other Doubt, without
being troublesome to those, who would perhaps be not very well pleased with
resolving Quaeries, and Doubts, unless they saw some Advantage, beside the Good
of the Quaerist.

The Thought seems to be accidental (as we are apt to think all things for
which we can give no positive Reason) like the Birth of a great many other
great things; for, all the greatest Events have had Rise from some Accident,
without a premeditated Design. Were I a Pythagorean, I should imagine that it
was a reminiscence of something like what had happened some Thousands of years
ago in some far Country or other, which he had observed in the transmigration
of his Soul through all parts of the World; and that, as some things, or words
we observe, when we see, or hear any remarkable thing, will bring the whole to
ones Memory, so these concurring Circumstances had the same effect upon him;
but since we cannot find, that there ever has been any such Design set a foot
in any Nation, or Age, I must quit my Pythagoric Fancy, to come to a nearer
Ghess.

I have observed in History, that there are certain Accidit in pun^ quod non
speraturin anno.
Critical Minutes, in time when strange, and unforeseen things come to pass,
and that a Dream, a random Word, an unforeseen Action has begot mighty, and
surprising Revolutions, as well as great, and noble Arts. Thus Martianus, who
was afterward Emperor of Constantinople, traveling near Philipolis, finding a
man dead out of a Piety of those days, alighted from his Horse to bury him,
which whilst he was doing, some of that City coming by, took him for the
Murderer, and being brought to the Scaffold, by this strange Accident, was
delivered by the Confession of him, that was really guilty; and this gave Rise
to his low Condition. A more public Turn was that Philippicus, who telling his
Friend Tiberius (who by his means had gained the Empire of Constantinople) that
he dreamed an Eagle alighted at his Head, was banished immediately into a
barren Island, and from thence to the City Chersona, where living in great
Content, without any sollicitous Thoughts about his Banishment, (so far he was
from thinking of Empire) but Iustinian's coming against him to take his Life,
made him assume a sudden Resolution of taking the Name of Emperor; and the
successful Event showed it was more than an Accident, that put that Thought
into his Head. To mention all the Revolutions in History, which were begun by
such Accidents, would swell to a Volume, though very little to my purpose. What
was the original of the Noble Order of the Garter, but, the accidental falling
of the Countess of Salisburys Garter, from her Leg, in the King's presence?
There is nothing so divine as Music, (for, as Cowly says,

All that we know of the Blessed above,
Is, that they sing, and that they love.)
yet this was first thought on by the accidental Observation of the different
Sounds a Hammer made upon, an Anvil. Gu^ ^owder, so wonderful in its effect,
and power, and now of so universal use in Martial Affairs, was found out by an
Accident, which is so well known, that I need not mention it. The Art of Memory
owes its Birth to a fatal Accident; and it was necessary that the
Banqueting House of Scopa should fall down, and kill all the Guests, that
Simonides from thence might observe the Order, and Method of the Art of Memory.
So it was necessary that Mr. Dunton should have received an Injury, that the
World might be obliged with a Design of as great a value. All the study of that
great Master in the Mathematics Archimedes, could not resolve that Curiosity
which Hiero King of Syracusa proposed to him: Nor could he imagine how to find
how much Gold, the Goldsmith had stole, without destroying the Work, to know by
ocular demonstration, till going by chance into a full Bath, the Water ran over
the brim as his Body entered, this Accident brought the Solution into his Head,
full of which, he ran from thence, naked as he was, to put his Thought into
execution, crying out aloud all the way that he went, (...)
I have it, I have it.

To omit the Mariner's Compass, and a great many other noble Inventions, the
discovery of the new World it self was at first but a random Thought of
Columbus, from the observation of the setting Sun, with a quid si. Mr. Dunton
has done more than Columbus, for he has not only found out a way to discover
new Worlds, (for the Industry, and past-Performances of the Athenian Society
promise not a few new Discoveries in Nature) but also how to People the thinly
inhabited Kingdoms of Philosophy, with a more numerous Generation. I have heard
some of the Wou'd-be-Wits object against this Design, merely because invented
by a Bookseller; but that is so foolish a Flaw to find in it, that it
discovered their Ignorance, as well, as Partiality; for first, several noble
Inventions have had more unlikely Authors; to instance only in that of
Printing, designed by a Soldier, (though a certain Writer has dubbed him a
Knight from a Trooper, ( Eques being an equivocal word) than one that deals in
Wit and Learning, and may well be supposed to converse with many of those
Authors he sells. And next, the Learned know, that Scaliger was a Bookseller,
and Stephanus a Printer.

Having thus let the World know to whom it is obliged for this Advantageous
Project, it is but Justice that it give him that Encouragement, the usefulness
of his Design deserves, and not buoy up the Ungenerous, and Unjust Attempts of
any Interlopers, who wanting Wit to invent any thing of equal worth, meanly
Usurp upon the Right of another, and aim to live upon that Crop which was
manured by his Industry, and Charge. Every considering man, must needs think,
that it cost him not a little to establish it, and bring it to the knowledge of
the World, and therefore he ought, in Reason, to reap the Profit of it. If the
little Inventor of any small Mechanic Instrument, for the public use, have so
far a Propriety in it, as to deserve that Royal Security, a Patent, that none
shall enjoy the Advantage of his Industry for above Fourteen years, till his
Labor be in some measure rewarded: With much higher reason ought the Inventor,
or Designer of this Noble Institution, which contributes, as I have made
appear, to all manner of Knowledge, and the general Benefit of all Mankind,
since none are so Great, or so Inferior, but may make use of his Discovery.
'Twould be ungrateful therefore, as well as unjust, in every one, not to defend
him in the possession of that, which in Equity is his Due, by discountenancing
those who would invade his proper Right. But I shall say more of the
Interlopers in the last part of this Discourse.

Having passed through the Novelty, and Usefulness of the Design of the
Athenian Project, and given an account who invented it, and by what Accident it
was first thought of, not omitting the Charge the Undertaker has been at to
bring it to that establishment it is now in: I hope it will not be esteemed a
Digression, if I add a word or two in consideration, of the Difficulties, which
might justly have frightened the Authors from complying with the Importunity of
the Bookseller in the performance; for, it is evident from their Works, that
they foresaw 'em.

They must be men of more than ordinary Resolution, as well as Learning, as
their Performances show, else the great Pains that is required to go through
this Undertaking, would have hindered them from entering into this Society,
which, as themselves well observe, seems calculated for Objections; for, it is
no easy matter to give a good Answer to the curious Enquiries into Nature,
experimental Knowledge, and nice Reason being the only Guides; as well as the
only Satisfaction in those Affairs. Divinity brings far greater Difficulties
with it, since in Controversial Points (and there is no point of Theology, but
what has been controverted) variety of Opinions are endless, and Disputes may
be drawn out into Volumes; yet this could not dash their Resolutions of
contributing to the Public Satisfaction, what Reason, and the highest
Probabilities afforded, and a reasonable man can desire no more, since they
have often assured the World, that they pretend not to an Infallibility, and
shall be willing to acknowledge their Errors and, publish any Sentiment, that
any of the Ingenious, shall send to them upon any Subject, both in Natural
Experiments, and Reasons in opposition to their own. Nothing can be more candid
and ingenuous, than their Letter to Mr. Travesty, part of which I must
transcribe, to show the Reader that I speak not at random; it is thus --

Mr. Travesty,
IF at any time our Answers are not so satisfactory as we could wish, if you
will, as directed by our Advertisement, mention in what Particular, you shall
have a fuller Satisfaction in our next Mercury. If this will not suffice, we
farther assure you, whatever Questions you dislike, shall be all answered anew
by us ( Common Equity to our Quaerists obliging us to it) and in new Answers to
the said Questions, our Reader shall meet with all the Objections you send us,
the best of your Thoughts, and our own Improvements thereon.


For a farther Proof of this, let them that think this not enough, consult the
Preface to the Second Volume. This Promise they have complied with as often as
any Objector has thought fit to give them his Reasons for what he said.

But the Pains, and Industry that were required to return good Answer to every
Persons Quaery, was not the only Difficulties, since when they had done that to
the best Standard, and beyond the Exceptions of the Learned, they could not
expect (as indeed they expressed in their second Mercury) to please every Body,
that being an impossible Task: And, it is plain from their Introduction to their
first Mercury, that they did not think they should appear in Print, and that in
so nice a Design without Opposers. For, as the incomparable Cowly says, in his
Pindaric, on the Royal Society,

Whoever would deposed Truth advance
Into the Throne usurped from it,
Must feel at first the blows of Ignorance,
And the sharp points of envious Wit.
This as they foresaw, so they have met with in abundance, both from their
private Quae^ists, and public Enemies; though indeed most of the Efforts that
have appeared in Print, have shown more Gall, than Brains, and taken a great
deal of pains to convince the World how little they were guilty of Wit. For
this Reason they may almost forgive their avowed Opposers, because they punish
themselves in the very act of Injury against them, by the loss of their
Reputation both as to Sense, and Morals, though that they perhaps value not
very much. But there are a sort of very civil, dear, caressing Animals, that
with the air of a Friend are more troublesome than the most able Adversary. I
am afraid (says one) I shall be a Poet, direct me how to avoid that Fate of the
common Proverb, Poets are poor by Destiny. Nay, some of the Quaerists are so
full of their own dear selves, that they are restless, till they see their
impertinent Niceties satisfied in Print, and think the World is obliged to give
way to be entertained with their Follies. As for example; one witty Gentleman,
who had a mind to make Love in Mood and Form, desires to know in the next
Mercury, for (adds he most surprising, and wittily) Lovers are impatient, how
he may attain to an effectual form of Courtship. -- Another something angry
with the haughty port of Indignation, tells them, -- He (even he) wants to know
why those Questions he sent about six weeks since, are not yet answered. He
adds very gravely, I think my Questions deserve a Thought as well as any Bodies
else. There is nothing certainly more uneasy to a man of Sense, than to be
pestered with a Fool; nor for a man of Piety, than to be obliged to hear
Blasphemy, Atheism, and other Profaneness, but this Society being composed
both of men of Sense and Piety, (though I am sensible some of the Town Wits,
and Beaux, will think the last but a canting Commendation) have had abundant
cause to exercise their Patience. Horace had never half the Fatigue with the
Poetaster, as they must have had, with both Male, and Female Impertinencies.
One would know, whether any two men have the same number of Hairs; another is
troubled with a squeamish Conscience, and would know if it be lawful to eat
black Puddings; a third, a great Enquirer into Mysteries, and I believe very
studious of Cornelius Agrippa's occult Philosophy, would know what the King of
France, is doing at that time. 'Twere endless to run through the Follies they
have been troubled with; and I shall not meddle with the other, that fall under
Profaneness and Atheism, abundance of which they, in their Prefaces to the
first, and second Volumes, have let the World know they have received, which
but to repeat in the Quaerist's words, would be like selling of Poison in the
streets to every one that passes them.

Though I have not run through half the Difficulties which presented themselves
to the Noble Authors of the Athenian Mercury, upon a consideration of the
mighty Task they were going to undertake, yet no private Inconvenience could
deterr them from the Public Good.

Having done the first Projector of this Design, some Justice already, I think
my self obliged not to forget that Great young man, who first, like Valerius
Flaccus in his Argonauts.
Jason, dared so boldly to venture out into the Billows of the Critics, and
lead the way to the rest of the Hero's that were to go in search of the Golden
Fleece of Wisdom, and Learning. I am sorry I must not let the World know his
Name (for it was begun by one) who had so great, and generous a Zeal for the
general Benefit, that he would not let those Difficulties I have mentioned, or
any other Consideration outweigh it: No, he only kept the Nobleness of the End
in his view, fixing his Eye on the farther brink, that he might not see the
breadth of the Stream he was going to leap, or to express the noble Thought in
the best of our English Poets own words, Mr. Dryden I mean, in the Conquest of
Granada.

Almahide says to Almansor. Alm. Great Souls discern not when the Leap's too
wide,
Because they only view the farther side, etc

That which follows is also applicable to the same Great young man.

Alm. -- There Is a Necessity in Fate
Why still the brave, bold man is fortunate:
He keeps his Object ever full in sight,
And that Assurance holds him firm and right, etc.

It Is no small difficulty to determine which was the greatest Wonder, the
Boldness of the Undertaking, or the Ability he has shown in such unripe years
in the Performance. Hercules his destroying the Serpents in the Cradle, has
found Work for the Poets a great many Ages. But he has done more than all the
Herculean Labors, at an Age when the rest of Mankind are but ripening; for,
the mighty Sense he writes, will not let me doubt, but that he foresaw what
infinite Hydra's he was to engage with: But he has persued it to a Miracle,
showing the Scholar without the Pedant, the Philosopher without the stiff, and
obscure Expressions, and superfluous Repetitions of the School, but every thing
he writ in the first Mercury, had a pleasing genteel Air, and neat Turn through
every line, and discovered profound Reason could be lodged in a youthful Head,
and that it met there with a Softness, that did not obscure its great, and
severe Ideas. This his Boldness, Learning, and Ingenuity, ought to endear him
to every man, that pretends to value Excellence. And though I confess my self
the most unworthy of his Conversation, yet I must assume the Vanity to boast,
that no man can value his Acquaintance, and Friendship more, though I have not
yet the Honor to know him, having never had but once, and then only, a
transient sight of him.

I am sure, nothing but his Modesty, or the Envy of some impotent Aspirers to
the Names of Authors, will say, that what I have here advanced about him, has
any relish of Flattery; since I have the Judgment of more than one of the
greatest Scholars of the Age, to justify my Sentiments; but I will not
forestal what I believe they themselves may some time, or other communicate to
the World.

I shall conclude this First part of my History with the Reasons, why they
assumed the Title of Athenian, for even that has fallen under the merciless
Phangs of the Wou'dbe-Critics. If they had taken the Name of Lacedemonian,
indeed it would have looked something odd, and as if it were done in spite of
Learning, to borrow a Title from that place, which scarce ever afforded a
Philosopher, or any Man of Learning; but the Athenians were the most curious,
and inquisitive People of Antiquity, as that Verse I have before quoted out of
the Acts, demonstrates, which I shall add here to the two foregoing Verses of
the same Chapter, v. 19. And they took him, ( viz. St. Paul) and brought him
into Mars street, saying, May we not know what this NEW Doctrine, whereof thou
speak, is. Ver. 20, For thou bring certain STRANGE things to our Ears; we
would know, therefore, what these things mean. Ver. 21, For all the Athenians
and Strangers that dwelt there, gave themselves to nothing else, but either to
tell or to hear News, [or rather new things.] This, as it gave occasion to the
first rise of the Design, so it is enough to justify the Title that was chose
for it, because the Business, and end of it is to answer the Niceties, and
curious Enquiries into Arts and Sciences.

All that know any thing of History, or have read any of the old Authors, must
be sensible, that Athens was in that veneration with Antiquity, that it was the
only place of Study in those days, and from thence was all Europe civilized,
and taught Arts, and Sciences. Cicero, in the Introduction to his Offices,
which he writes to his Son, at that time hearing Philosophy there, that he had
the advantage of not only having Cratippus for his Master, but even in Athens
itself, as if the place added to the facility of his Learning, and he adds the
reason of it, because the Examples of so many wise men, that had flourished in
that City, could not but stir him up to Emulation; for, there Socrates, Plato,
Aristotle, and all the great Philosophers, learned, and taught; there were the
Schools of every Sect, and scarce any (I might say none) that were received
into the number of the Wise, and Learned, that were not beholden for their
Education to Athens: Thither Anacharsis came from Scythia, and was so taken
with the Laws, as well as Wisdom of the Athenians, that endeavoring to
introduce both into his own Country, he was killed by his Brother, and King:
There Demosthenes lived, and flourished in Oratory, and Sophooles, and
Euripides in Tragedy: There lived Eupolis, Curatinus, Aristophanes, (though the
last was born in Rhodes, yet he lived there, and excelled in their Dialect) and
Menander, all Comic Poets. Demosthenes was so great an Orator, that he excelled
not only all the Grecians, but put in for the Palm of Fame with Tully himself,
and if he carry it not from him, yet holds the Balance in equilibrio. The Value
the Government of Athens put upon the Learned in all Sciences, afforded
Encouragement to the Ingenious, to improve them. Both Comedy and Tragedy owe
their Birth to Athens; and indeed, the Dramatic was more in esteem there than
Epic Poetry, being the more immediately useful for Man's Life, Comedy
correcting the Vices of it, and Tragedy (by Examples more powerful than
Precepts) stirring the Minds of Youth up to Heroic Actions, and keeping Virtue
in esteem, by showing its Reward, and the Punishment of Vice: Though it is said
of Sophocles, and Euripides, that one represented the Accidents of Human Life,
without regard to that Poetic Justice, as they too often happen; the other, as
they ought to have been. The Esteem these Dramatic Poets were in, may appear by
two Instances, one of Eupolis, the other of Euripides: Eupolis having writ
Seventeen Comedies after the old Method, with a great deal of Liberty exposing
the Vices of the People, was slain in a Sea Fight betwixt the Athenians, and
Lacedaemonians. Athens resen^ed his Loss so much, that it made a Law, That no
Poet should after that venture himself in the War, such necessary Members of
the Commonwealth, that wise State thought them. When the Death of The worst of
Euripides was, that he hated Womenkind, so that he was commonly called (...).
Euripides was known at Athens, (who some say was killed by the Dogs of
Achelaus) there were several Embassy's dispatched to Macedon, to obtain leave
to convey his Body to his, and their own Country, but Achelaus, would not part
with the Treasure of his Bones, notwithstanding their repeated Importunities.
Nay, I may call the great Homer an Athenian, since Athens was not the least of
those Cities, that contended for his Birth, which are enumerated in a Greek
Distic to this Sense:

Seven Cities strive for mighty Homer's Birth, Athens, Smyrna, Rhodes,
Colophon, Salamin, Chios, and Argos. (...) Next to Poets, we must remember
Painters, and Statuaries, which flourished in Athens; of the latter Phidias was
the most excellent, but consult Pliny's Natural History, 36th Book, and there
you will find a full account of both. The World was not more obliged to Athens,
for Philosophy, Oratory, and Poetry (to omit Statuary, and Painting, just
mentioned) than for History, as Thucydides, and Zenophon may evince (to omit
Herodotus, who only retired into the Athenian Territories, from domestic
Tyranny, where the Muses always sound a secure Retreat; and though he was not
born an Athenian, would dye one.) Thucydides was the best of the Greek
Historians, being so impartial a Writer, that in the Peloponesian War, which he
was going to write, he paid for Intelligence of the Transactions on both sides,
that so he might perfectly find out the Truth, justly suspecting, that as both
Parties would palliate their own Losses, so if he knew the Affairs of each only
from themselves, he should never arrive at the Truth. And it is to be wished,
that none but a man of For such was Thucydides, deriving himself from
Meltiades, and Cimon, two of the Athenian Commanders, and they from Aeacus, and
so from Jove.
Quality, and Estate, would meddle with compiling of Histories, who are or
ought to be above the Partiality, and the weakness of being biased by
Affection, or Interest, it being more below the Honor of a great man, to
falsify the Truth to Posterity, than to be guilty of a Lie in Conversation.

Xenophon too was an Athenian; he took up the History of the Peloponesian War,
where Thucydides left off, and was the first Philosopher that writ an History:
And, it is the Opinion of Cicero, in his Book De Oratore, that Xenophon, in his
(...), consulted not so much the Truth of the Story, as his Design of forming
an Example of a Perfect Prince, and Commander, for he was a Soldier, as well as
Philosopher, and Historian. 'Twould be endless to mention but the Names of all
those that have flourished in every Science, and Art in this famous City. From
what I have here produced, will sufficiently appear, that since all the Arts,
and Learning of the old World owed their Beginning (nay, and perhaps Perfection
too, though afterward lost in the Inundation of Barbarity which from the North
overrun all Europe) to Athens, with just Reason did this Learned Society make
choice of that Appellation, whose Aim it is to advance all Knowledge, and
diffuse a general Learning through the many, and by that civilize more now, in
a few years, than Athens it self did of old during the Ages it flourished.

THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE Athenian Society.
IN the First part of this History I have given you an account of the Novelty,
Advantage, Inventor, and occasion of this Noble Undertaking. I have touched
upon the Difficulties that attend it; the Noble Daring of the first Author;
and, lastly, I have advanced some Reasons, why this Society assumed the Title
of Athenian. In That, I brought you to its beginning; in This, I shall (with
all the Brevity the Copiousness of the Subject will allow) proceed to its
Infancy and Growth, and from thence pass to the Manly Performances of the
Society, when established.

Though the whole design of this Institution may be gathered from what has been
said in the First Part, yet I think it necessary to premise an entire Prospect
of it here, since that will not a little contribute to the satisfaction of the
Reader, by avoiding Obscurity and Confusion, setting things in as clear a Light
as possible, and in that form, which the decency of Order requires.

That, which they first proposed to themselves, was not only to answer all
manner of nice, and curious Questions, in Divinity, Physic, Law, Philosophy,
History, Poetry, Mathematics, Trade, and all other Questions proposed by either
Sex, or in any Language; but also to give an account of the most considerable
Books, printed in England, or transmitted to them, from foreign parts; and to
accomplish this effectually, the Undertaker, resolving to spare no Charges to
gratify the Ingenious, settled a Correspondence beyond Sea: And though all this
were enough to expect from the extraordinary Parts, and Industry of any Society
of no greater extent, yet they resolving to spare no Labor, proceeded farther
by inserting the Conferences, and Transactions of several English Virtuoso's,
and whatever the Genius of our Nation would relish in the Acta Eruditorum
Lipsiae, the Paris Iournal des Scavans, the Giornali de Litterali, printed at
Rome, the Universal Historical Bibliotheque, and other learned and ingenious
Essays of other Nations. That so, as our Merchants supplied us with the
Manufactures, and Commodities of all Countries, we should not want that
Production, so much more valuable in its self, and in the esteem of every wise
man, their Wit and Learning, whatever the curious and brisk Genius of the
French, the Floridness of the Italian, and the Industry of the German, the
Gravity of the Spaniard, should from time to time gratify their several
Countries with, this Great SOCIETY have generously, and successfully imported
into England, and, by that means, made all Nations contribute to the Power and
Glory of our Empire of Wit, as the conquered World did of old, to the Grandeur,
and Wealth of Rome; this a far more noble Tribute, and a far more exalted
Glory, every man in Justice therefore ought to honor them with the august Name
of Patriots, above most that stand blustering Candidates for it.

Yet farther, to make their Endeavors the more satisfactory to all men, this
Society have all along invited every one, that has any Experiment, or curious
Instance, which they know to be Truth, and Matter of Fact, circumstantiated,
with time, and place, to send them to them. These Experiments, and Instances
they not only promised to insert in their Mercuries, but also endeavor to find
out a Demonstration for those, which the Senders could not. So great is their
admirable Zeal for the Good of the Public, and the Satisfaction of all curious
Enquirers into natural Speculations.

All these great Parts of this Mighty Design, could not possibly be brought
into the weekly Mercuries, which had not room to contain the hundredth part of
the Answers to those Quaeries, which they soon received; therefore for the
speedier satisfaction of Quaerists, and the publication of all these
Curiosities I have spoke of, they judged it absolutely necessary, at the
completing every eighteen Numbers, to print twelve more of Answers to
Quaeries, by that means, if possible, to obviate the Impatience of some of
those, who sent their Doubts, and Curiosities, to be resolved: These made up
one Volume, to which as a Supplement, that is to perfect their Design, is
added, (I mean to the four first) the Abstracts of all Books of value, both
domestic, and foreign, with curious, and diverting Dissertations upon several
nice Subjects. The fifth Supplement, to comply further with their Quaerists
Importunities for speedier Answers, is composed of the Resolution of Doubts, as
the single Mercuries are. What shall be the Subject of their future
Supplements, I shall have occasion to speak of in the third, and last part of
this History.

Though what I have mentioned already may seem the Labor of Ages, yet they
still went farther, and we find very early, their Resolution of gratifying the
World with a new System of Philosophy, a thing as much desired, as wanted, that
of Aristotle being so false, and that of Descartes so imperfect. I shall say no
more of this Work here, because I shall have occasion to speak of it again in
the third part.

But, that the World might be fully acquainted with this whole Design, they
have frequently published it, both in the Mercury, Volumes, and Supplements,
and any one that desires, may read it summed up all together in their Fifth
Supplement: So that none can plead Ignorance, that shall entrench upon their
Design, and Method, and none can be dissatisfied, that they have not a full
account of so many Advantages they may reap from the several Endeavors of this
SOCIETY. Here it will not be improper for me to give some account of the Method
they proposed to themselves for the prosecution of their Design, for that is
indeed a necessary part of it: That Order which Justice required they made
choice of; that is, that those Quaeries that came first should be first
answered, unless a greater Good interposed, as the answering any Popular
Quaery, that might be of service to the Government; for, the Public Good, is
granted by all men, I think, to be preferred to the Private: Or some curious
Accident, or remarkable Providence, that is Matter of Fact, and wants a
demonstration. Here too the general Advantage comes in, and then it is but fit
that Particulars of less consequence should expect a little, and give way.
Next, some extraordinary Scruple of Conscience, which wants a speedy Answer:
And for the satisfaction of such, I think, no reasonable man, but would
willingly admit his less-weighty Quaery should be superseded a while, since he
is sure after that to come in, in his turn.

Farther, that the Quaerists should not be disappointed in their expectations
of Answers, by their faults, they have laid down these excellent Rules.

I. To look over the Indexes of their Volumes, to see if their Quaeries are not
already answered to their satisfaction. II. That none send obscene Questions,
as not fit to be answered by any that pretend not to as great Debauchery as the
Senders of them. III. No Riddles, or Equivocations, etc. because ( as they very
well observe in the Preface to the Fourth Volume, whence I have taken this)
they are of no use to the Public. IV. Nothing, the Answer of which may be a
Scandal to the Government, or an Abuse to particular persons. V. Nothing, that
may be destructive to the Principles of Virtue, and sound Knowledge. VI. That
no Quaerist send above one, or two Questions, at the most, at one time, for
then they will be the sooner at liberty to send again, and perhaps something
more curious, than what they sent at first.
If every one would but observe these necessary Rules, they would not meet with
those Disappointments, they complain of; but if they will observe no Method, or
Reason, but their own Fancy, and Whim, it is juster to punish their Vanity with
Neglect, and Contempt, than for the sake of such unaccountable Gentlemen, to
break all Order, which is the Life of all Performances. Let them act but
regularly, and the Society desires they may be as Nice, and Curious as they
please.

Nor can I omit a Method proposed to the Society by some ingenious Well-wisher
to their Designs, for a farther satisfaction of the Quaerists, this being the
proper place to insert it. This Gentleman having considered the Fatigue of the
SOCIETY, in receiving so many Letters on one Question, sent them a Project for
their Ease, which they have published in the Preface to their Fourth Volume,
and there approved of it; it is thus. -- -- That every Quaerist set two Letters
to every Question he sends, and some number, consisting of three Figures, thus
-- -- A. B. 231, or A. C. 312, B. H. 132, H. I. 721, R. N. 472, etc. for it is
not likely that any two should light upon the same Letters, and Numbers too; so
that if they are publicly acknowledged in the Mercuries to be received, by
inserting the Letters, and Numbers, with those marks at the end of each, the
Quaerists would soon be satisfied, viz. those marked thus (*) will never be
answered, as coming under some of the abovementioned Exceptions: Those marked
thus (+) have been answered already, Vol. n. Those marked thus () will be
answered in their order.

Having thus given the Reader a View of the Design of the Athenian Society, and
the Method they proposed to themselves, and others, I shall now proceed in that
form I have set down in the beginning of this Second Part.

A Paper entitled the Athenian Gazette resolving, weekly, all the most nice,
and curious Questions, proposed by the Ingenious, dated Tuesday March the 17th,
1690, was the first Essay of this Noble Undertaking, that the World was
gratified with: Which, though it were the Performance of one only, as I have
said, yet gave the critical part of the Town as great a satisfaction in what it
contained, as it did admiration at the strangeness and seeming-impossibility of
the Attempt. This satisfaction was so general, that in the third Number, I find
Quaeries came in so fast, that public notice was given to send in no more,
till those were dispatched, that were sent already: An evident Argument, that
the number of those that sent had some Belief, that the Society were able to
comply with their desires, else it had been foolish to have been at the Expense
of writing, and sending. In the second number the Title is altered, from
Gazette, to Meroury, the reason of which they give in their Twelfth, in Answer
to this Question. -- What is the Reason of your changing the Name of your
Athenian Gazette, into that of the Athenian Mercury? Gaza (says the Author)
signifies a Treasury, and therefore we reserve it for the general Title of our
Volumes, designing to entitle them, the Athenian Gazette, or Casuistical
Mercury: And Mercurius signifying a Messenger, is the more proper Title for the
single Papers, which run about, to Coffeehouses, and elsewhere, to seek out
Athenians.

But as this Undertaking was too great for any one man to go through with (yet
if any one man could, the first Author did enough to convince us of his Ability
to do it) it was thought fit, both for Ease, Dispatch, and the fuller
Satisfaction of all men, to receive in several Members to the composing a just
number, for completing the Undertaking, by having men qualified with all sorts
of Learning, that so all sorts of Questions might receive just Answers. I
presume it will not be ungrateful to any Reader, if I here give him an account
of the Qualifications of the several Members (though there is scarce one of
them, but what might be called a Master in every Science) which make up this
Learned Society. I shall therefore set them down in that order the nature of
their Studies, in my Opinion, requires, without any regard to the particular
Merit of their Persons, to which I must (with a great deal of regret) confess
my self a Stranger, though I have had an imperfect account of some of them,
from those that did pretend to be acquainted with them.

A Divine. A Philosopher. A Physician: A Poet. A Mathematician. A Lawyer. A
Civilian. A Chyrurgion. An Italian. A Spaniard. A Frenchman. A Dutchman.
The last four are rather Servants, than Members of the Society, like the
Interpreters of Princes, to give a faithful account of such Quaeries that may
be sent in their several Languages, that the Society may come up to the just
Thoughts of the Quaerists, and also to give a perfect Translation of those
several pieces of Wit, and Learning, which, I have said, were brought from
beyond Sea, to be delivered to us in our Mother Tongue: From these the Society
can be fully satisfied in the Idioms, and nicest parts of each Language, which
few but the Natives (and of them only the Learned) understand. So careful they
are of giving their own Country the genuine Sense, as well as Marrow of all the
strangerAuthors they make free of our Tongue.

The other eight afford so ample and so just a Theme of Praise, that nothing
but my Ignorance of them, can hinder me from giving the World a more particular
knowledge of them: And this confines me much against my Will to the Divine, the
Physician, and Mathematician, though I shall have occasion, in the pursuit of
this Discourse, to touch upon the Performances of most, ifnot all of the rest.

As Divinity is the most sublime, and sacred of Studies, so I think my self
obliged to begin with the Divine, and I am satisfied that the rest of this
Learned Society, will subscribe to this just Preference, I give him, if not for
the veneration of his Character, yet for his own proper Merits; so great is the
Reverence of his Person, the Profoundness of his Knowledge, not only in the Holy
Scriptures, Councils, Fathers, and the rest, that compose that mighty Science
of Theology, but also in every other Art, that comes within the number of the
Liberal, the most barren Subject growing fertile, and divertive, to admiration,
by the Genial warmth of his WIT. How great, and apparent are his Zeal and
Abilities in the direction of Souls: How extraordinary, and how general is the
satisfaction he gives the Doubtful, and Troubled in Mind! how strong! how
invincible is the Reason, with which he confirms the wavering, and confutes the
Heresies, and Atheists of this Profligate Age! Then, what can farther
contribute to the Progress, of Piety, and Learning, than the Manly sweetness of
his Style, for whatever he writes is soft without Affectation, and Satiety, and
learned without Pedantry. Yet if all these Virtues were wanting, the
affability, and agreeableness of his Temper, and Conversation, the tender
Compassion he has for the Sufferings, of his Fellow Creatures (above the
consideration of which all his stupendous Learning, and Parts, are not able to
transport him) both in spiritual, and temporal Exigencies, were enough to draw
as great a Veneration from all, as is lawful to pay to Man. Finally, since
Actions are more valuable, than Words, his Deeds give a nobler, and truer
Character of him, than I can presume, with the inability, and weakness of my
Pen, to draw. All that I shall therefore add, is, that if it were possible that
any such thing could be, as an UNIVERSAL PRIEST, certainly his Duty would be to
take care of the spiritual Good of all Mankind; and then, I am very certain,
that None would be more worthy, and more justly qualified, than HE, who has
beforehand shown, in all his Writings and Actions, so universal a Concern, and
Zeal for all, that bear the glorious Image, of his MAKER. So truly apostolical
are his Inclinations, that all Pains, all Labor, all Watchings, and Prayers,
tho for the most inconsiderable of men, are far more delightful to him than
Glory, and Honors to the Ambitious, Wealth to the Miser, or Pleasure to the
Voluptuous, nay, than the Embraces of his Mistress to the faithful, and
long-sighing Lover: But all these fleeting Joys, which so dazzle, and invite
the World, are too little, too inconsiderable to give a just Idea of that of
His, which makes a near approach to those, it has not entered into the Heart of
Man to imagine. It were to be wished, that a great many of the Clergy would have
him in view, as a sure direction of their Behavior, since an imitation of his
practical Virtues, would soon remove the Odium, too great a number of them lie
under, and confute the profane Enemies of that SACRED BODY, by the most
prevalent of Arguments, EXAMPLE.

All these Excellencies were very well known to Mr. Dunton, so that he could
not imagine any one more fit to propose this Design first to, than him, who
being not a little sensible of the Benefit, the generality would reap by it,
gave him all the Encouragement in the World, that is, a promise of his
Assistance, when he had once set it on foot; for, 'twas fit first to see,
whether the Town would relish the Blessing with that Justice, and Applause it
deserved.

Though this Discourse be not designed as a Panegyric, but History, yet I cannot
prevail with my self to think this short account of some of the Members of this
SOCIETY any deviation, or digression; or if it were, yet I cannot (and I am
sure all, that love Learning, and Ingenuity will easily forgive, if not commend
it) pass over the Physician, though, I confess, it would be more prudent, and
pardonable, to say nothing than not enough of an illustrious Subject, but as,
Who was ever in Love, and Wise? is received as a just Excuse, for the Failings
of a Lover, so I hope, the more moderate, will grant me, that it is equally
hard to admire, and be silent, when the Object of ones admiration presents it
self.

It was said of a certain Great man, that if all the Libraries in the World
were lost, and not one Book remaining, that the general Knowledge He was Master
of, was capable of teaching Mankind, all the Arts, and Sciences in perfection,
the same I can with Truth, and Justice say of the Physician, who carries the
whole Circle of the Sciences in his Head; but that which is most admirable, and
rare in one of his Profession, KNOWLEDGE, and WIT, make him not profane;
Piety, and Religion illustrate all his actions. Never was any Question proposed
by ingenious Malice, or Curiosity, however new, and surprising, but with all
the readiness, and facility in the World, he gave not only fair, and amusing
Ideas of it, but full, and most evident Demonstrations. It is no satisfaction
at all to me to meet with Wit, and Learning, in a man of a little low Soul, and
ill Principle, because I cannot understand how he, that has a just notion of
things, should not make a better choice, for the regulation of his Mind; so I
am wonderfully ravished, with Delight, when I find the contrary, as here in
this Great, this Learned, this Good, and this Ingenious Man; for, he is so
generous ( a very uncommon Virtue) that he could never be prevailed with, to
admit of any other Consideration, for his Trouble, in this Affair, than the
Good of the Public, thinking it so much below him to mingle Interest with so
noble a Design, that I am confident it would be the only certain way to make
him forsake it, to press any Reward, besides what it contains in itself, for,
Virtue is its own Reward, in his Opinion: Yet he is far from condemning those,
whose Circumstances (too often the Fate of the Ingenious) will not allow them
to imitate him in this Generosity, since it is confessed very lawful for any
man, to live by his PEN, as well as any other way. Besides, many great Divines,
who, we may justly suppose, have the Good of many in their Eyes, do yet set no
small, or inconsiderable value on their Copies; though it must be granted, that
he excells them as much in this, as a free Agent does a mercinary one. I can
say no more of him, than that he is a worthy Companion of so great a man, as
the Divine, I have spoke of just before him.

All that I have to inform the World of the Mathematician, is, that he is the
Person that first put the design in execution, whom I mentioned in the First
Part; and I shall only add here, that his Learning is as universal, as his
Sense of things is fine, and curious. So that this Society seems to be composed
by something more than human Judgment, in selecting able men, since each of
them is sufficient to perform this mighty task alone.

By what has been said of these three Members, we may reasonably suppose, that
the rest are not ill matched. And, as in the search of the Secrets of Nature we
illustrate the more obscure, by the more evident, so here we may, by those I
have been able to get some account of, ghess at the Excellence of the rest, the
greatest part of which will not accept of any pecuniary Gratuity at all.

This Society being composed of such pious, and generous, as well as learned
men, I wonder what they could propose to themselves, who endeavored to tempt,
and persuade them to forsake the first Undertaker, on a poor mercenary
Consideration. Could they imagine, that such men would be guilty of so much
Baseness, as to forget that Obligation they had entered into (for, I am
informed, they obliged themselves never to engage in the like Design for any
one else) never to desert Mr. Dunton? Could they have so weak an Opinion of
that Worth they courted, as to press an Action upon it, which must necessarily
fully all its Glories, and make it of no value? But these men had nothing in
their Thoughts, but the supplanting their Neighbor, in his right, they would
else have foreseen the Answer, they without doubt received, That if it were an
Immorality, nay, Injustice for another, though never concerned with Mr. Dunton,
to interfere with his design, because it was entirely his own Project; how much
more ungenerous would it be for them, who have entered into a Friendship with
him to betray that Trust he had reposed in them, when he might (had it not been
for the Esteem, and Value he had for their Justice, and Parts) have engaged
those that perhaps would have proved more generous.

The vast Offers that have been made them, with no Success, shows, that Mr.
Dunton knew his men very well, he would never else have had the Courage,
through all Difficulties, and Oppositions, to have persu'd the Design, till in
spite of all Obstacles he established it; which if he had never done, there
had been no Motive for Interloping, few being willing to quit the Paths of
Just, and Right, where no Advantage invites. Nor is it to be wondered in our
Age, that, when he had raised his Project to a Staple Commodity, others have
endeavored to rob him of his Profit, when they were at no Charge to bring it
to perfection, who would not perhaps have regarded it, if it had been first
proposed to them. Thus, I am confident, few Booksellers in Town would have
given Ten pound for the Copy of The whole Duty of Man, before it had been
printed at all, yet now there is none, but would give an Hundred pound for it:
They whose Timerousness hinder them from venturing upon any thing themselves,
are always very eager to pursue, what another with success has undertaken. But
these interloping Gentlemen were extremely deceived, when they made their
Applications here, where they always found men that knew the Obligation, and
Value of their Word better than to forfeit it for that which they never
osteem'd, that is a little mean Lucre, and trifling Interest.

Having thus given the World an hasty Sketch, of the Qualifications of the
Members, I shall return to their Undertaking.

It would, I believe, be superfluous to dwell upon the Antiquity, and easy
Method of teaching by Question, and Answer, since Cicero, in his Tusculan
Questions, approves of it as the most useful, and ancient: And Plato practiced
it; nay, we find in the Tenth Chapter of the first Books of Kings, that the
Queen of Sheba, went to prove Solomon, with hard Questions. I shall therefore
say no more for the Proof of its Antiquity, since every one that considers it,
must soon observe how much it will contribute to the improvement of Knowledge,
when all the several Heads of the Nation, at least all those that love
Enquiries, are busied to find out the most difficult, and least-understood
things, for the Society to resolve, which could no other ways be effected, but
by Quaeries and Answers.

The Design being formed into these methods I have described, and the Society
now established, it was ^ecessary, that they should have a certain time, and
place of meeting together, for their mutual Conversation, but chiefly, for
consulting altogether, on every Answer before it was permitted to be published:
Smith's Coffee-house, for the convenience of its situation, in the middle way
of all their Abodes, was the first place agreed on for this, and Friday the
day; but, finding that House too public, by the great number that flocked
thither, on purpose to hear, and see the Athenians, that being appointed for
the reception of all the Quaeries, the Society thought fit, for the greater
Privacy, to remove to some other place, since their Modesty never aimed at
their own Personal Glory in their Performances, as is evident by their
concealment of their Names all along, with so much Regret to all those whose
admiration of what they had writ, would not let them think it sufficient to
converse only with their Papers.

There is such a desire of being known, in most Writers, that they all have
that beginning of the first Copy of Verses in Cowly in their Heads

What shall I do to be for ever known,
And make the Age to come my own?
that the Author of The whole Duty of Man, was almost the singular Example of
Contempt of Nominal Fame, till this Learned Society put in for his Rivals in
that noble Selfdenial; yet neither can, with all their Humility, avoid that
Reputation the World pays, even to themselves, since every one imitates the
Athenians of old, erecting within their Minds Trophies to the unknown Worthies,
as they did Altars, in their Temples to the unknown Deity. And Mr. Swift, in
his Ode to this Society (printed before the Fifth Supplement) concludes very
well;

-- How strange a Paradox is true!
That men who lived, and died without a Name
Are the chief Heroes in the sacred List of Fame.
But, though the World continue ignorant of the Names of these Gentlemen, yet it
is highly sensible of the Advantages it has already, and is still likely to
receive from their Performances, into which I shall now enquire.

There are no greater Enemies to Wisdom, and Learning, than vulgar Errors, and
Superstition (if they will admit of a distinction, and are not the same) as
long as the first remain, Men go upon a wrong Principle, rejecting all that may
seem to oppose that, which they have received, and settled within themselves,
as TRUTH, by so reverend, and awful an Authority, as Immemorial Tradition,
which they look upon, as the diligent Observations of their Ancestors, a Name
that has always been of too great a Veneration with most Ages, and by that has
proved the irresistible Patron of an abundance of Absurdities, especially in
Philosophy: And there is nothing more evident, than that no man can possibly
arrive to any true, and sound Knowledge, till such false Guides are removed,
which led him out of his way. I am confident, wherever the other prevails,
there is not much likelihood of any considerable Progress in Wisdom; for, it is
the Mist, or rather Night of the Mind, in which the Judgment wanders after the
deceitful glimmerings of an Ignis fatuus, or else fears, and shuns every Light
of Truth as such, knowing no medium betwixt these two Extremes. These Ills are
indeed inseparable Companions; for, vulgar Errors always beget Superstition,
and Superstition cannot subsist without vulgar Errors. One is the Tree, the
other the Fruit: Vulgar Errors are the Springs which feed the Stream of
Superstition, and till those are stifled, it is not to be expected, that will
cease to flow.

This Learned SOCIETY seems to have been very sensible of this, by the great
care they have taken, in confuting those erroneous Notions, which are commonly
received, as often as they presented themselves in any of the numerous Quaeries
that have been sent them: And they have very well observed, that there are a
great many omitted by the ingenious Dr. Brown, which are, in my opinion, as
necessary to be removed, as any he has observed. I shall mention a few
particulars, viz. That a Coal is to be found under a Plantane Root, at one time
of the year, more than another: That these later Ages are more ignorant than
their Predecessors, and that we find out no such useful Arts as our Forefathers
have done. This the Society have very concisely, and clearly removed, which
though I cannot omit, yet the Brevity I am confined to obliges me to contract:
The most invincible way^ of Argument, is by Delemma, which they have taken in
the decision of this point, viz. The invention of Useful Arts is either
infinite or finite; if the first, we must conclude (by Experience) that at
length growing too numerous, some would be lost, and supplanted by others,
which would not be, if the first were more useful: -- If finite, they can be
but once invented, and then our Ancestors have only the advantage of having
lived before us; for the improvements that we see daily made on former
Inventions, give us reason to believe, that if we had lived before them, we
should have done no less. They prove farther, that none of those Inventions the
World enjoys was found out by One, or at once. That the Myrmecides of Aelian,
and Pliny, with his Ivory Chariot, with Horses, and all in so small a compass
as to be covered by the Wings of a Fly, was outdone, in the Twentieth year of
Queen Elizabeth, by Marc Scaliot, in his Chain of Gold drawn by a Flea, and his
Lock and Key made of Steel, weighing but a Grain. And I must add, that the Ship
of Myrmecides was outdone by a Gentleman of Lions, who not only made one much
less, but also gave a Motion to it. And for a further Proof, they referr us to
the Transactions of the Royal Society.

It Is a vulgar and general Error, that to deceive the Deceiver is no Deceit;
which is very well removed in the Twentieth Number, and Tenth Question of the
Second Volume. It Is a no less common Opinion, That Men dream of things they
never thought of; which in the Seventeenth Number, of the Second Volume, and in
the third Quaery, they confute in this manner. They deny it to be possible,
unless in a Divine Dream, where both the Thing, and the Notion, should be
revealed together. They grant, that the Fancy has Power to join things
together, when they are before in the Mind, or to create Monsters, and Chymeras
out of real things, sleeping, as well as waking. For example I have the Notion
of my self, a Horse, a Road, Thieves, Water, Air, Fire, a House, Day, Night, or
whatever else you will name, treasured up in my Memory: These my Fancy may shuffle
together, and so represent such Accidents as I never thought of in the
Daytime. But they deny that there is any Imaginary Transaction that passes in
our Sleep, but we have all thought of the several parts, and things which go to
the composing of it, though perhaps not in the same order as there. For the
Reader's farther satisfaction, let him consult the place above quoted, and
there he will find full, and ingenious Arguments for a farther proof of this.

To run through all that they have observed in this nature, would make my Book
swell beyond its designed bulk. I shall therefore pass over those curious
Confutations of that Error, so commonly received, That a dead Corpse bleeds when
touched by the Murderer; which they have treated of, both in the Second, and
Sixth Volumes. I will not insist upon that Opinion, That Osiers are smooth one
year, and rough the next; and so Vicissim, in the Second Number of the Second
Volume, which they deny. I have not room to repeat all those witty, and
ingenious Arguments they produce to obviate that common Notion, That a man
cannot be twice in Love, Vol. 2, Number. 6, and Quaery 3. for the ingenious
discussion of which, as well as of many more, I must referr the Curious to
their Works, only I cannot omit mentioning two, or three out of many which have
a nearer relation to Superstition. It Is true, Dr. Brown has taken notice of
most of these (though not all) but yet the Advantage to the Public is no less,
than if they had been the original Remarks of the Society, since they
communicate them to the many, who are most concerned in them, the Learned being
generally now pretty free from those sordid Trifles.

Superstition is not only that supernumerary Formality, and ceremonious
Observations in Religious Worship, but ^lso that regard which too many have to
pure Accidents, as the certain Heralds of Destiny: And this proceeds from our
As Iuvenal has it, -- -- Et genus humanum damnat call go ^uturi.
Fear, and Darkness of a future state, the Ignorant, or Superstitious being
unsatisfied in all Conditions of human Life; in Prosperity they either fear a
Change, or hope an Increase, and this Fear, and Desire pushes them on to seek,
by some means, to know the Fortune, that is to attend them hereafter; and not
content with their present Happiness, wreck their Peace with foolish and
unnecessary Cares for to morrow. And those in Adversity, uneasy under their
Sufferings, with a great deal of willingness permit themselves to be flattered
by hope of better things, but impatient in bare Expectation without Certainty,
they fly to Superstition for it, which gives them generally an ambiguous, and
amusing Promise, and though it be as variable as the Oracles of old, they will
all, like Pyrrhus, and Croesus, interpret it to their own advantage, and indeed
flatter themselves, that it so evidently complements their coming Success, it
needs no Interpretation. That these vulgar Errors should carry away the Vulgar,
is not so much to be wondered, because they build their credulous Faith upon
Hearsays; but that the Ingenious, and Learned should be so far misled, who one
would think regulate their Opinions according to the Rule of Reason, is very
surprising. Thus I cannot but wonder to find Tycho Brahe, running back to his
House with no small consternation, and apprehension of an impending Evil, if
the first thing in a Morning, he met an old Woman, or if an Hare crossed the
Path he was going, or any such trifling Accident that day confined him to his
House, and perhaps it did him this Good, to pore upon his own new Systeme, with
admiration, or in those of Ptolomy, and Copernicus with Contempt, and Anger.

Among that vast number of those superstitious Follies, which England abounds
with several have been sent them, to omit, Whether Crickets, Batts, Owls,
Ratts, Ravens, etc. are ominous; and how they come to know the fatal Events
that, are to come? Because Dr. Brown has taken notice of them, I shall only
instance in orle, which that great man has not mentioned, and that is in the
fourth Quaery, the ninth Number of the second Volume; Whether there is any
Crisis of Time, wherein persons have extraordinary Accidents, as to Fortune,
and Misfortune? Which general Error when ^hey have at large confuted, they
conclud^ (...) well; -- That he that acts without (...), and believes things
for which he can give no account at all, deserves to be excluded the Society of
Rational Creatures.

But of all these Superstitions, which the Epidemic Desire of knowing our
future Condition (in this life, not the next) has produced, there is none more
pernicious, and of greater esteem, and authority, than judicial Astrology,
which because permitted ( to the Standal of Christianity) gathers the face of
Lawfulness, and C^rtainty with those, that are not sensible of the Tricks, and
Deceits that are made use of by those that practice this pretended Art, and
such as know not that it is as much against the Law of GOD, as that of Reason.

I am of opinion, that this Society has in nothing more contributed to the
substantial Service of the (...) Sex, than in undeceiving them in that (...),
since the Ladies are more generally carried away with the Belief in this
pretended Knowledge, than men (not that I think my Sex free from the Contagion,
or that it has reached all theirs) and have an implicit Faith in every
Astrologer, as the -- Quicquid Dixerit Astrologus credunt a forte relatum
Ammonis. Iuven. Sat. 6.
Romans had in the time of Iuvenal, thinking all as sacted, and infallible,
that he says, as the Scripture it self. Thus when they are sollicitous, on the
weighty affair of Marriage, or the Death of a Husband, or other Relation, or
the Constancy of a Gallant, they immediately repair to Oraculous Patridge,
Gadbury, and the rest. What a ridiculous bustle was here, not many years ago,
about Le Croy, the French woman that pretended to this Insight into Futurity?
And how many every day subsist, like the Kingdom of the Devil, by these LIES?
But, the Society have beyond answer confuted all the vain Pretenses of these
Impostors, in the First Volume, and Sixth Number, showing the Falsity of their
Foundations, by Reason, and their own Rules, and have beside added some Reasons
more familiar to those, that are not skilled in their Principles, by the most
obvious Inconsistences in Nature, which the meanest Capacities are capable of
judging of, and in the Fourteenth Number, Question the Fifth, produce several
undeniable Texts of Holy Scripture, to prove the unlawfulness of it. It Is with
a great deal of Reluctance that I omit the particulars of their Arguments,
because they are, in my Opinion, the strongest, and most curious I ever read on
this Subject; but Necessity obliges me to it, since it cannot be expected, that
I should give an Abridgment of every Question, that is well handled in all the
Six Volumes, that are already extant, because that would swell this History to
as great a bigness as all they have writ, since they have been so short, and
close to the point in every one, that it is impossible for me to be more
concise, and preserve the Force, and Beauty of their Arguments.

Having thus shown you how they have destroyed these Enemies, that most opposed
the Growth of Knowledge, and Progress of Wisdom, it is time that I lead you now
to a short view of some few of their farther Performances, in as many Sciences
as I am able to bring in, within the narrow compass, that remains of this
Second part; but considering the number of those admirable Solutions I find
both in Divinity, and Philosophy, I am at a stand how to proceed, for the
equality of their Worth, would engage me in every one; so that I must only
follow my own Fancy in the Choice, not the Merits of the Cause, which can be no
Rule where there is no difference.

To begin therefore with Divinity, out of many of as great Excellence I take
this, which I find the Subject of the Tenth Number, of the Second Volume, and
prosecuted in the Supplement to the Fifth.

The sum of the Quaery, and Proofs sent with it, is this:

Whether Sin might be ordained for 1. God's Honor, and by the (...) of his
Wisdom. Power. Justice. Holiness. Mercy. Love.
2. Man*s Happiness, (...) it he had never died, and* consequently never bee^
(...)


The Quaerist having taken the Affirmative, the Society, with more Piety as
well as Reason, take the Negative, the quite contrary following from the other,
to what the Quaerist would needs persuade: As, first, -- It destroys God's
Wisdom, true Wisdom consisting in choosing right, and just means, to attain a
good End; but Sin is a bad means, forbidden by himself to Man for the best of
Ends; and the Perfection of the Creature consists in imitation of his Maker: So
that the making God the Ordainer, and Cause of Sin, is to make Him guilty, and
Man innocent; which could never conduce to the manifestation of his Wisdom, but
the contrary. Again, it destroys his Justice, for Justice, in respect of
Punishment, always supposes a Subject capable of Rewards, and Punishments, and
farther supposes a Law, by which It must judge, and distribute them, none of
which can be if Sin be absolutely ordained, and unavoidable, and yet punished
with eternal Torments, since all agree that absolute Necessity excuses any
thing. -- -- Farther, Where is Mercy, if God save a very few only (as some
would have it) and punish all the rest of Mankind, for what they could not
avoid? Nay, what he has forced them to commit? Then -- Where Is his Holiness,
and Hate of Sin, if he himself ordains, and causes it?

As to to the second Branch of this Quaery -- Man's Happiness, etc. it is as
false as the other, if taken all together: That he had never died without Sin,
is granted; but it follows not, that if he had not died, he had not been
glorified, since like Enoch he might have been translated to Glory.

But to clear the first Branch of this Quaery a little farther; First, if God
ordained not Sin, how came it into the World? It Is answered, -- By Permission,
God being not obliged to hinder it, but indeed obliged not to hinder it, if he
would have, as he designed, Man a free Agent, Permission having no Influence on
a free Agent, it answers all those ends of the Quaerist's Ordination, viz,. the
manifestation of his Wisdom, Power, Justice, etc. in raising Man, after his
Fall, when penitent, and punishing him when finally impenitent. Besides, this
Position of the necessity of Sin, takes away all Sin, and consequently makes
the Supposition it self of God's ordaining Sin ridiculous, and impossible.
Again, -- -- If Sin were necessary, it is clear (from what has been said) there
could be no eternal Punishment; but it is evident from the Word of Go^* that
there is eternal Punishment, therefor etc.

(...) the Tenth Mercury, of the Second Volume, to which the Quaerist, sending
some Objections, not Answers, in the fifth Supplement, the same Member of this
Society has delivered, and confuted them, with that evident, and convincing
Demonstration, that nothing in Nature can be more fine. The whole Dispute is
too long to be here inserted, and too good to be cramped into an imperfect
Abridgement, for the Soul of the Argument spreads it self through every line,
and is all in all, and all in every part; so that would do the Author of that
incomparable piece, whom I honor, a great deal of Injustice, by giving so ill
a Representation of his Performance: And I am sensible I shall scarce merit
Pardon of him for what I have attempted in this kind above, therefore I must
desire the Reader not to make a Judgment of the force of this Authors Argument,
by what I have produced, since ^ only aimed to give such a View of them, as
might invite those that should chance to see this rough Draught, to consult the
Originial, where they will find them in their Life, and Perfection: And I am
pretty confident, that what I have inserted, contains so much of its primitive
Beauty, as to provoke an Ingenious C^oiosity to pursue the end I proposed. But
father to inflame his Desire, I shall give ^ome of those profound; and
invincible Reasons that Discourse I mentioned in the fifth Supplement contains.

Some men are of opinion, that there is no Science, worth studying, or at least
satisfactory, but the Mathematics, because they carry such a visible
demonstration along with them, in all their parts, that the Mind rests
satisfied in the Truth, and C^rtainty of the Operation it has employed itself
about. I will agree with them, that there is no greater, or more (...)
Inducements to read, or study, than Evidence, and high probability of arriving
at Truth, else we wander in the dark, and spend our time in the pursuit of
Shadows; and therefore I must recommend this Dispute to the perusal of every
one that loves to converse with Demonstration in Argument, since there is
nothing in the Mathematical Arts so self*evident, as this (out of many) -- If
Necessity excuses external Punishments (for that is the aim of the Proponents
A^guments) what did Christ dye for? what Justice did he satisfy? what Benefits
did he obtain? not the preserving us from eternal Death? for the Quaerist says,
there is no such thing, Necessity takes it away. Not saving us from temporal
Death, for that we all suffer. Not from other temporal Punishments; for he owns
the Good have them rather more than others. Is he a Savior, to save us from
nothing? It cannot be from our Sins, because they are necessitated; nor from the
Devil, because God has For that is the necessary consequence of the (...)
precedent (...); co^salt Number. 16, to ^4. of the Supplement (...) the Fifth
Volume, and this will be very clear.
delivered us up to him, that he may compel us to Sin, nor to bring us to
Heaven; since according to him all must go thither, nay, Judas, and all; nay,
there is no other place for them to go to, and therefore they cannot miss it. And
how, I would fain know, does this manifest God's Wisdom, in the death of his
SON, when at this rate it undeniably follows, that he died for nothing at all?
Tho this be enough to show, that what I have said is not without just cause,
yet I cannot but add another from the same Discourse, it containing so much of
Wit, as well as Solidity* and Reason.

-- If I conclude (says the Quaerist) Man's ways to be not of himself, whereby I
deny Freewill, I can then the more easily forgive, nay, love the worst of my
Enemies. -- -- But (replies the incomparable Author) he might as well talk of a
couple of Clocks, loving, and forgiving one another; they are all wound up, and
must necessarily strike on without any Choice of their own; they can neither
hate, nor (...) according to his Notion, but are determine^ ^or necessitated to
do either. -- -- Does not the Doctrine of Free Will (persists the Quaerist) set
men together by the Ears? Nay, P^rsecution it self has a share in it, by
persuading us* that Men's ways are in themselves, which makes it the more
difficult to pardon them? This is so ridiculous an Argument, especially for him
to advance, that holds the necessity of all our Actions, that the Author with a
great deal of Justice presses it close to him, in the most sensible part of men
of his Principle, I mean his temporal Interest.

-- Why there is no help for it -- (replies this Author) so the World will still
believe, and many a poor Pickpocket must suffer for it, whose Hand Fate shuffled
into his Neighbor's Purse, and Neck in the Noose, before he was aware of it;
nay, so necessarily, so irresistably, that it is the highes^ Folly in the World
for him to seek to avoid it. ^ever, would the Quaerist himself but live up to
this noble Principle, he would undoubtedly have all the Shop lifts in Town his
Customers, when at home, and all the Gentlemen of the Road his Attendants when
abroad; for he could not in Conscience prosecute them, and have them hanged for
robbing him, which they could no more avoid, than he being robbed. But, it
seems, he is yet to learn, that there is Charity even in Justice, and that the
Divine Being himself, as one of the Fathers says, is as merciful in building a
Hell, as in framing a Heaven.

Here I cannot omit the Millenium, Volume the Fourth, Number. 6. tho I can say no
more of it, but that it was done by the same Hand, and by consequence the
Spirit, and Life, which abounds in this I have touched upon, will be found in
that Question; and this I can assure the Reader, he will find no small Pleasure
in the perusal of it, there is such a clearness of Thought, and Expression, as
well as greatness of Learning, and Reason, for he proves it from many places of
Scripture, as well as the Testimony of the most ancient of the Fathers, that is
of the first, and second Century, as Papias, Justin Martyr, Polycarp, Clemens,
and afterward Iraeneus, Lactantius, Tertullian, Methodius, and still lower, St.
Cyprian, Nepos, Apollinarius. Not that the words of all these Fathers are
quoted in the Mercury, which would take up a whole Volume, as the Author
observes, but he affirms them to be of the same Opinion as Justin Martyr, and
Methodius whose words he inserts.

I would also recommend those that are curious in Controversial Divinity, to
peruse what another Member of this Society has performed against the
Anabaptists proving Infant Baptism, by the holy Scriptures, and primitive
practice of the Church, beyond the weak, and ridiculous Efforts of his
Adversaries to answer. For a confirmation of what I here avow, consult the
fourteenth Mercury of the fourth Volume, the eighteenth of the same Volume, and
the last twelve Numbers of the fifth Volume, where you*l find confirmed what I
have said, that this Society is composed of men of such general Learning, that
each could finish the mighty Task alone; for this Controversy was carried on
by the same who first began this Noble Design, and this I hope will prevent the
Enemies of this Society from charging me with Flattery, when I show such
weighty Grounds for what I say.

Though this be an Age that delights not much in Accounts of this nature,
relating to Religion, yet I must so far trespass upon the Wits, as to add a
word, or two, on their practical Divinity, for there is not a greater Vein of
Piety runs through all their Writings than in all their Actions* and their
Endeavors to render other men's actions of the like Perfection: And this will
appear from their Mercuries, which endeavored with Reason, and Argument to
second the Commands of the Government in the several admirable Papers which
treat of the present designed Reformation; as Numb. 2. of the 2d Volume; where
not only the reasonableness of bringing such a Reformation about is cleared,
but also Methods proposed for the better effecting it: Though I believe neither
they, nor indeed the Government, did ever imagine to bring it to that
Perfection, that it should affect all Degrees, Sects, and Principles, for that
is a moral Impossibili^y, yet they had reason to think it would have that Awe
upon most, that the Pious would not meet with such frequent, and open Objects
of Debauchery, and Profaneness, and that is as much Comfort to a Good man, as
to a man of Sense to have a Fool silenced by Authority, who else would be
continually prating. I know several have objected, that putting the Laws in
executing against Debauchery, would but increase the number of Hypocrites, but
I shall not fear to answer, that Hypocrisy itself is better than Scandal, that
being but a private and particular Ill, this general, that by borrowing the
Face, and outward form of Virtue (and by consequence) makes some Atonement for
its private Ills, by giving a (seeming at least) good Example; whereas Scandal,
familiarises Uice to every one, and makes all appearances of Uirtue ridiculous.

What can be more conducive to the general practice of Virtue than an able
Assistance to those Sinners, who have a desire to be converted, but are
withheld by the Tyranny of an habitual Sin, which perhaps, as it is the
greatest Obstacle to most of our pious Intentions, and the most difficult to
overcome, so it bears down the good Resolutions of most men. Any one that has
ever read St. Austin's Confessions, will easily perceive (if he be so happy to
be free from personal Experience) how a Habit cloggs the Soul, and pinions its
Wings, that it may not fly toward its Divine Creator, by the help of long
abdicated Virtue. Oh how often did it tugg, and pull back St. Austin, with a
thousand worldly Considerations! How did it lay open all its gilded Baits, and
struggle for a long time with the powerful Grace which God sent to his
assistance! But as there is no corporeal Disease (if we believe some learned
men) for which Nature has not provided a Cure, so much less is there any
spiritual Malady, for which God has not provided an abundant Remedy, which our
spiritual Physicians (at least those that value their Duty, and know the
Obligation of their Character) apply to us as our several Distempers require.
This the Athenian Society have done most admirably well in this difficult point
of Habits. First, in discovering what a Habit is; and next, that it may be
overcome, and lastly, the best Methods to do it: For the first two I referr the
Reader to the first Number of the third Volume, and shall here only hint upon
some of the Heads of the last; as -- An Habit always has its contrary, and may
be broke by the use of those Methods which constitute its Contrary, or by
removing the Occasions by which it is increased and continued. As for example;
A Fire is extinguished by Water, or by not supplying it with Fuel; for
Drunkenness, Whoring, or Uncleanness, etc. the Cure is by practicing the
constitutive parts of Temperance, and Chastity; or else by flying Occasions, in
these cases the Parthian Discipline is best, Overcome by flying; other Remedies
are prescribed in the same place, as communicating ones Failings to a Friend,
especially a Divine, whose Advice, and Prayers may not a little assist: And
here the prescriptions must be observed unfeignedly, and not used as some do
those of Doctors, flinging them away, tho they pretend to have taken them,
since in spiritual Sickness, without taking the Medicine, there can be no Cure.
As great a Step as can be made in this Affair, is to get a true-informed
Judgment, the Act of knowing things as they really are in their own Nature, and
the business is almost done to their Hands.

This I have insisted the more upon, because it is of general use, and
therefore, I hope, those who have a desire to take to the Paths of Virtue from
a Habit of Vice, will consult the Mercury I have quoted, which will not a
little contribute to their Ease and Satisfaction.

Next to Divinity I shall place Philosophy, as approaching next in Dignity.
Here their Performances have been no less extraordinary, as will appear from
the beginning of their Undertaking, where the most difficult, and sublime
things have met with a Resolution. In the very first Mercury we find no less
than the Eternity of the Soul decided, etc. in the second, the cause of the Sea
spouts given, and the cause of saline quality of the Sea, etc. In the third,
even the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea.

This is a Question which has given a great deal of Fatigue to the Learned of
all Ages, and some will have it, that Aristotle died with Grief, because he
could not find it out, others, that he flung himself into the Sea, saying, Si
non possum capere re, tu cap^es me.
If I cannot understand thee, thou shall contain me. The Opinions of it were as
numerous as the Philosophers that handled it; to omit the rest, Plato held,
that the Flux and Reflux proceeded from certain Gulphs in the bottom of the
Sea, which like Squirts sucked in the Water first, and then spouted it out
again. Apollinus Tyanaeus (who was extremely well skilled in Spirits, if we
believe Philostratus, in the Life of that Philosopher) will needs have it, that
certain Spirits, at the bottom of the vast Deep, are continually puffing, and
blowing, which gives motion to the Waves, and causes the ebbing, and flowing.
Others held, that there were some Fires under the Waves, which made it boil
like a Pot, and that when that Fire went out, the Sea ebbed. Some of equal
Absurdity, think the Sea to be (or rather contain) a great Animal, and that as
it turns, and moves from side to side, it causes the ebbing and flowing. There
have not been a few that have held the Moon to be the efficient cause of this
Motion: Others (among which number, if I mistake not, Galilaeus is Chief) are
of opinion, that the Sun, as it gives Motion to the other parts of the Dans
cuncta m^veri.
World, causes this Revolution of the Waters, though they be but a part of that
Globe we call the Earth, and therefore would not be supposed to have a
different, or at least a peculiar motion to themselves, from the same Cause,
supposing that the System of Copernicus is true of the diurnal Motion of the
Earth.

There is another Opinion built upon this Systeme, which is this; That the
diurnal Revolution of the Earth, upon its own Axis, is the only cause of the
Flux, and Reflux of the Sea; for as other Waters, that are conveyed in Pipes,
will rise to as great a height as the place from whence they first descend; so
these of the Sea, upon the descent (if we can term any part of that Motion so,
which has an equal reference to, and distance from the Center) of the Earth
flow down, as far as the Shore permits, but being there stopped, rebound up
again as much the other way; which is the ebb, and flowing. But this is no less
absurd than any of the rest I have inserted; for, first, if this were the
cause, there could be no such variety of Tides, as is well known, since the
Earth turns upon its own Axis, in an equal space of time, as well as with an
equal, even, and constant motion, without any rub: So that we are to seek in
the most difficult part of this wonderful motion still: For, How comes it to
pass, that the Tide flows some fathoms more in some places than in others, and
that constantly, and therefore not caused by any accidental Wind driving in
upon that Shore? But there remains, as great a difficulty as to the cause of
the seven times flowing of the Euripus in a day. Lastly, if there be such a
descent in the motion of the Earth, as to make the Waters fall down to the
brim, as I may call it, then by the same Rule, they would fall out when that
part of the Globe came, to be perpendicular downward; for, if there be a
descent, there must be a lowest part of that descent, and then what I have
urged would infallibly follow. 'Twould be endless to run through all the
Absurdities of this last, as well as those of the other opinions I have
related, which might well follow, when they never considered all the
Consequences of the Doctrine they advanced. The Society, in their third Mercury,
decides the Question with more Reason, and Certainty, in this manner. -- What
is the reason of the Suns motion, but the necessary Law of the Creation, or the
first-establish'd Order of Nature? For; had the Sun been fixed in any one part
of the Element, the opposite part of the Earth would have been burnt up, and
all the rest frozen, and consequently the whole Globe of Earth rendered
incapable of fructifying. And as the motion of the Sun was necessary in the
Order of Nature, for all those Beings that depend upon it, so it was equally
necessary that the Sea should have a particular Commission, or Order, from its
Creator (the only efficient Cause) for a Flux, and Reflux, else it would have
stagnated, and corrupted, and by consequence unfit for Procreation of Fishes,
and Navigation. For the Objections which are or can be raised against this,
consult the Mercury, and there you will find them answered to your full
satisfaction.

But if you require some more immediate cause of this Motion of the Waves, Vol.
5, Numb. 6, Quest. 2, referrs you to an ingenious Book, writ by a Member of the
Society, called, The Visions of Souls before they enter into the Body; and in
the 23d Dialogue of that Book you will find your Curiosity answered in a most
witty and surprising manner, I must needs say, the whole Book is an
extraordinary Piece of refined Notions, entertaining Wit, and great, and
well-digested Learning, and indeed, too much above the Capacities of most of
our English Readers, to sell well; for if it were but understood, I am
confident; nothing that this Age has produced would be more grateful to the
Curious: And if it were translated into French, that Nation would value it, and
be sensible, that the English had as noble, and speculative a Genius, as any of
them; but the Humor of most men, and some that pretend a little to sense, is
to give censure of a thing according to the Vogue, though they never saw it
themselves, though perhaps (as I am sure in this case it is true) that proceeded
from the Ignorant, (which being the more numerous, make up the Cry) or those at
least who did not understand it.

But what can be more fine than their Discourse upon Individuation! A point
confessed by the great Mr. Boil (as they observe) of the most nice, and
difficult nature. I shall transcribe it, because there can be no Abreviation so
well done, but it must be an Injury to its Excellence.

The Question is this: -- What is Individuation, or wherein consists the
Individuability of a thing?

-- -- -- It may n't be improper (pursues the Author, for I omit the Preface of
it, which is a kind of an Apology, because I think it needs none) to run
through the different Orders of visible Beings, and search them all for a
distincter Idea of it [ than the Schools afford.] To begin with those Species
of Body, which are not properly organized, and have neither Life, nor Sense, as
Stones, Metals, etc. in these Individuation seems to consist in nothing but
greater, or lesser: Take the less part of a Stone away, you may still call it
the same Stone: Like an equal part with the Remains, that Individuation ceases,
and they are two new Individuals: Divide a Stone, etc. as long as you please,
every part of it will be a Stone still, another individual Stone, as much as
any in the Mountains, or Quarry 'twas first cut out of, even though reduced to
the minutest Sand, or, if possible, a thousand times less. But when we take one
step farther, and proceed a degree higher, to the Vegetable Kingdom, the Case
is far otherwise, and indeed Nature seems to be still more distinct, and as it
were careful in its Individuation, the higher it rises, till at last it brings
us to that great Transcendental Individual, -- the only proper uncompounded
Essence, -- the One God blessed for ever. To return to Plants, -- their
Individuation consists in their singular form, contexture, and order of their
Parts, whereby they are disposed for those uses to which Nature has designed
them, and by which they receive and maintain their Beings. For example, a Tree,
from whence though you take the Branches, it grows, receives Nourishment from the
Earth, maintains itself, and is still a Tree; which the parts thereof are not,
when separated from the rest; for we cannot say every part of a Tree is a Tree,
as we can of a Stone, every part of a Stone is still a Stone. But now, -- if
this Tree be cloven in two, or more pieces, or felled by the Roots, this
Contexture, or orderly Respect of the Parts each to other, ceases; its Essence,
as a Tree is destroyed, its Individuation perishes, and it is no more a Tree,
but a Stump, or a piece, or pieces of Timber. Let Us proceed a degree higher to
merely sensible Creatures, who are not so immediately depending on Earth, the
common Mother, as Plants, nor rooted to it, and as it were a part of it, as
they are, but walk about, have, in respect of that, an Independent Existence,
and are a sort of Worlds by themselves: And here the Individuation consists in
such a particular Contexture of their Essential Parts, and their relation one
toward another, as enables them to exert, the Operations of the sensible, or
animal Life. Thus cut off the Legs, or any other parts of an Animal, it is the
same Animal still; but cut off its Head, or take away its Life, and it is no
longer that individual Animal, but a mere Carcass, and will by degrees resolve
into common matter again, or rather be transmigrated into some other form. To
ascend now to the highest Rank of visible Beings, the Rational; the
Individuation of Man appears to us, to consist in the Union of that thinking
Substance, which we call the Rational Soul, with any convenient Portion of
fitly-organiz'd Matter, we hope it is no Heresy to assert, that any Portion of
Matter duly qualified, and united to the Soul by such a Union, as we
experience, though we cannot well explain, is immediately individuated by it, and
together with that Soul, makes a Man: So that if it were possible for one Soul
to be clothed over and over, at different times, with all the Matter in the
Universe, it would in all those distinct shapes be the same Individual Man. Nor
can a man be supposed, in this case, to differ more from himself than he does
when he is an Infant, and just past an Embrio from himself, when of Adult, or
decrepit Age, he having in that line changed his Portion of Matter over, and
over; has been fat, and lean, sick, and well, lost by Bleeding, Excrement,
Perspiration, etc. gained again by Aliment, and perhaps not one Particle, or
but very few of the First Matter, which he took from his Parents, and brought
with him into the World, now remaining.

How noble, and how abstruse a Question is here handled with the greatest
Brevity and Perspicuity in the World! How knotty a Point rendered easy to any
tolerable Understanding, without losing one jott of its majesty or profoundness!

Here I should add that admirable desertation of the nature of Opium, Vol. 6,
Number. 4, Quest. 4. done by the Physician, and that of ^he famed Talismanical
Science, Number. 7, Vol 5, and of Specific Remedy, and also the Qestions about
several indifferent Matters; Hate of the Angels, Schism, Equivocal Generation
monsters, Transfusion of Blood, Muscular Motion in Lunatics, Mutation,
Circulation, and Abdication. And the first Question of the 9th Mercury of the
5th Volume, about Navigation, all incomparably and concisely done by the same
hand; but that I have already transgressed my Bounds, and I should injure these
excellent Performances by abreviating them, that of Navigation not being
capable of being made one single word shorter than it is in the Mercury.

Though it is impossible for me to run through all those Questions in Philosophy,
which this Learned, and Ingenious Society have handled with equal Excellence,
yet I cannot but recommend the several Discourses relating to the Soul of Man;
for, in their Volumes already published, they have discussed all that can any
way relate to it. The Quaeries I shall here insert, which, I question not, will
invite every curious Enquirer to consult the Answers, which are extraordinary.

1. Whether the Soul be eternal, or prae existent from the Creation, or
contemporary with its Embrio. See Vol. 1. Numb. 1. Quaery 2. V. 1, 1. N. 6, 12.
Q. 1, 3. this is very well answered.
2. Transmigration of Souls. -- V. 1. N. 7. Q. 6. 3. Is the Soul subject to
Passion? -- V. 1. N. 8. Q. 9. 4. What are the Souls of Brutes? -- V. 1. N. 9.
Q. 2. 5. Whether the Soul of Man knows all things to come, but is hindered by
the dullness of bodily Organs? -- V. 1. N. 26. Q. 10. 6. In what condition is
the Soul of an Infant, as to its natural Faculties? and what sort of Thoughts
of the things it sees, and hears, may it be supposed to have? -- V. 1. N. 2. Q.
13. 7. Whether Souls separated by Death from the Body, retain their
Inviduation, or are all turned into one common soul? -- Ibid. Q. 12. 8. In what
part of the Body is the Soul? -- V. 2. N. 1. Q. 13. and N. 7. Q. 2. and N. 29.
Q. 5. 9. What defect is there in the Souls of Persons born Naturals? -- V. 2.
N. 2. Q. 4. 10. What are we to think of the Definition of the Soul -- that it
is the Actus primus corporis organici, in potentia vitam habentis.
first Act of an Organical Body having Life in Power? -- V. 2. N. 2. Q. 7. 11.
Whether Women have any Souls? -- V. 2. N. 3. Q. 11. To which I join this; Is
the Soul of Woman inferior to the Soul of Man? If so, will that superiority
continue eternally? -- V. 5. N. 3. Q. 2. 12. Whether the immortal Soul was
breathed into Adam with the Animal, or, before, or after? -- V. 2. N. 5. Q. 17.
13. Upon a bare relation of any thing, an Idea of the thing related is at the
same time represented to the Imagination, but when he speak of God or the Soul,
we have none at all. -- The reason of this? -- V. 2. N. 7. Q. 9. 14. Whether
our Souls, going out of our Bodies, pass into any local circumscriptible place;
or, whether they assume certain Vehicles, or subtle Bodies, retaining the same
characterizing forms, which their terrestrial Bodies had? -- V. 2. N. 7. Q. 3.
15. Whether the separated Souls have any knowledge of Affairs in this World,
etc. Ibid. Q. 5. 16. Whether separated Souls know one another, since they have
not the Organs of Seeing, Hearing, Speech. Ibid. Q. 6. 17. Where do Souls go
immediately on their separation from the Body? Ibid. Q. 7. and 8. and V. 3. N.
25. Q. 7. and V. 4. N. 29. Q. 1. V. 2. N. 7. Q. 10. 18. Whether has a Man three
Souls, or no, viz. the Supreme, which they call the Mind; the Sensitive, which
they call an Image; and Rational, which lies, and knitts the other two
together? -- V. 2. N. 7. Q. 9. 19. What have the Philosophers (guided only by
natural Reason) conceived by the future state of the Soul? Ibid. Q. 11. 20. How
are we to understand the Union of the Soul, and Body, since the Soul is pure
immaterial Substance, and the Body a gross organized Substance? Ibid. Q. 12.
and Vol. 3. N. 15. Q. 11. 21. Whether the Soul of Man be a Traduction, or an
immediate Infusion; if the former, what tolerable Exceptions may we have of the
way and manner of a Bodies begetting a Spirit? If the latter, how comes it to
be defiled with original Sin? V. 2. N. 16. Q. 15. In relation to this, see also
Number. 22. of the same Volume, where several Objections about this are very well
answered. 22. Whether all Souls are equally happy in Heaven? V. 3. N. 8. Q. 5.
23. Whether the Soul of a Child that dies after it is quick in the Womb, be
happy, or miserable eternally? Ibid. Q. 6. 24. Whether the Souls of studious
and learned men, are more perfect in the World to come than the Souls of the
Ignorant, and Illiterate, etc. V. 3. N. 25. Q. 8. 25. Where Is the Soul of Man,
when in a Swoon? -- V. 3. N. 29. Q. 3. 26. Whether the Soul, after Death, be in
an active or unactive state, during its subsistence without the Body? -- V. 4.
N. 28. Q. 5. 27. Whether the Soul can be absent from the Body for a limited
time, without Death, provided the Body remain tenentable? -- Ibid. Q. 6. 28. Is
the cause of Death, or a separation of the Soul from the Body, in the Soul, or
in the Body? -- Ibid. Q. 7. 29. Whether the Soul does always actually think,
or no? -- V. 6. N. 6. Q. 2.
There are other Questions relating to the Soul, which I have not set down in
this place, the Brevity I am confined to not only denying me that, but also
room to make any mention of what other Philosophical Questions they have
answered. I must therefore desire the Reader to supply this defect in me, by
consulting their general Index, which will be published suddenly in an
alphabetical order, as they have given public notice; there they will not only
find what I have omitted, but also all other Questions relating to the
Mathematics, Physic, Law, Criticisms, Anatomy, and all the other Branches of
their Promise of answering all manner of Questions in every Science, and Art,
if of any Use, or Advantage, general, or particular; for, I shall only here
give a short Direction to two or three in each Science. For Mathematical
Questions therefore consult Vol. 1. N. 5. Q. 5. and N. 15. Q. 3, of the same
Volume, and Number. 4. Q. 7, of the Sixth Volume. For Physic see V. 1. N. 15. Q.
5. where is the original cause of the Gout. See farther, V. 5. N. 7. Q. 2. and
Q. 4, of the same Number. Anatomy in general is well improved, since Hypocrates
learnt it of Democritus in the Suburbs of Abdera, from the dissection of Brutes
gathering the Anatomy of Man, as the same Hypocrates testifies in his Letter to
Demagoras: And I am confident, that by the Answers this Society have given in
this Art, (which is a part of the Delphic Precept of Know thy self, which
thereforeis the reason, I suppose, E coelo descendit, (...) Juven.
Iuvenal says it must be kept in Heaven) will make any impartial Judge sensible
of their Ability in that as well as the rest of the Sciences, for your own
satisfaction, see Vol. 1. N. 23. Q. 6. and Vol. 2. N. 12. Q. 6, and several
other places, where the most curious thing in this Art are discussed. For Law,
see V. 1. N. 5. Q. 7. and V. 1. N. 18. Q. 12. and a great many other places.
For Criticisms, V. 1. N. 21. Q. 7, and 9. and other places in the Sixth Volume.

I am sure the Wits will think it high time for me to dismiss these grave, and
sublimer Subjects, and to come nearer their Province; for I am sensible that
Theology, and Philosophy require too much of Thought, and too much strength of
Judgment, to be Entertainment agreeable to their airy Genius, which relishes
nothing but a trifling Jest, a Quibble, or at most a pleasant Banter, as they
call it. These Gentlemen are so wholly possessed with the Spirit of G^iety, that
they think all things dull that are solid, though it is very hard, they will never
give us leave to be serious, under the severe Penalty of their Displeasure at
our Performances. But that they may have no cause to think I have quite forgot
them, if they will be so complaisant to meet me half way, and give for once a
step or two from their eternal Banter, to true Wat, I will now descend to
gratify these partial, and incompetent Judges of Wit, and Learning, and show
them, that the Athenian Society do sometimes unbend from their severer Studies,
to make a grateful mixture of the pleasant with profitable, that they might not
give the least cause to any to think their Endeavors any way imperfect: But
they make not a Business of a Delight, or think, that the Life of a man of
Sense, and Reason, should be taken up with no higher Contemplation, than the
continual view of the lighter Performances of Wit. This I must inform these
Gentlemen, that they will seldom find any of these easier Essays of this Society
without a just mixture of Learning, for that is so much a Part of them, that it
gives a lasting Beauty to their very Diversions. I shall instance in one
particular, which some (I am pretty sure without consideration) have been
pleased to exercise their unintelligible. Talent of Banter upon, I mean the
Answer to this Quaery; Whether Fleas have stings, or whether they suck or bite
when they draw Blood from the Body? This Quaery, we may see by the Author, was
sent by one of the fair Sex, and the Resolution is composed not only of true
Wit, all the Similes being ex re nata, not dragged from all the corners of the
Universe, to be crammed in by Head, and Shoulders, as those of some men are,
who have not gained a little Reputation by them, but also of a curious enquiry
into the form, and parts of that little, and domestic Animal, which though so
common, yet of so wonderful a composure. This I find the first Quaery of the
17th Number of the first Volume; which if any true Judge of Wit will consult, I
question not but he will with a great deal of readiness subscribe to what I
have said of it, and only blame me for the Modesty of my Expression. In the
very next Mercury you will meet with a no less entertaining Discourse on this
Quaery; Whether Beauty be real, or imaginary? The Quaery is nice, but the
Answer is incomparably fine. Farther, let the Reader peruse the third, the
thirteenth, the fifteenth, and sixteenth Numbers of the second Volume: The
Subject of the two last I cannot pass over in silence. (1.) Whether it be
lawful for a young Lady to pray for a Husband? (2.) A Lady desires to know when
she shall have a Husband. (3.) Is it better to live single, or marry? are the
three Quaeries proposed in the fifteenth Number, which are answered with that
Ingenuity, and Reason, (an Ingredient seldom found in the Gallymoferies our
Scriblers generally dress out for public view) that it cannot but bring the
extremest satisfaction to any one that pretends with any Justice to value
himself as a man of Wit, and Sense. The first Question of the sixteenth Number
I shall say no more of, but that the Reader may see, that as it is of the same
nature with the first in the former Number, so it appears to confess the same
Authors. See farther in this kind Number. 4. and the 13th of the third Vol. and
Number. 3. and 13th of the fourth Volume; and several places I have omitted in
each Volume.

In the fifth, and sixth Volumes I find the Society endeavoring a farther
diversion of the Witty, by several Essays in Poetry, in answer to Quaeries sent
them in Rhyme; this being indeed the necessary result of their first. Promises,
of answering all manner of Questions. In this, as well as in all their other
Performances, the Society propose to themselves the Service of Religion, and I
hope the Wits will not wholly condemn them for pretending to Poetry, and Piety
at once, since though Quarles has scandalized Devotion with wretched Verse, yet
Beaumont's Psyce, etc. that admirable Poem Spencer's Fary Queen, designed an
Encomium on all the noble train of Virtues; the Steps to the Temple, and other
Verses of Crashaw, who was commended by the incomparable Cowly; nay, the
Plagues of Egypt, the Paraphrase on Isaiah, and other Pindarics of Cowly
himself show, that Poetry is never so elevated, and fine, as when employed on
Subjects of that nature: Nay, Virtue is so far from not being the proper
Subject of Poetry, that nothing else, indeed, is: For, if we believe the best
of Poets, and Critics, and examine the Rules laid down by them for both
Dramatic, and Epic Poesy, we shall find, that the aim, and end of the first,
is to reward Virtue, and punish Vice; and the business of the latter is, not
only to draw its Characters truly virtuous, but to make them successful, as the
Piety of Aeneas (and most, if not all of his Trojan Companions) in Virgil, of
Godfrey of Bulloign, Tancred, and For the Character of Rinaldo is Virtuous,
notwithstanding his Amor with Armida, which was the effect of her Enchantments
more than his Inclinations; his Repentance of this failing, his Prayer on Mount
Olivet, before his attaquing the Enchanted Forest, and the rest of his Actions,
justify my placing him in this Number.
Rinaldo, etc. in Tasso, of David, Jonathan, etc. in Cowly, may satisfy: So
that I have reason to conclude, that the Poet, who pretends to write without
this Aim, is either ignorant in his Art, or guilty of perverting its sacred
Laws. All this being thus evident, the more equal Readers will, I question not,
be very well pleased, when they see this Society in their Poetical Mercuries,
in lofty Numbers presenting a formal Challenge to Uice; and as two Opposites
are best distinguished when set together, so here a Uice in one Column, and its
contrary Uirtue in another, must render the first as odious, as it really is,
and enhaunce, if not the Beauty, yet the Esteem of the latter. To perform this
with the more force, and majesty, the SOCIETY have, with a great deal of
Reason, made choice of Spencer's Stanza: This new Project for the promotion of
Religion is confined only to one Virtue, and one Vice at a time, that the other
half of the Paper may be free to answer such Quaeries that are sent them in
Verse, as shall any way merit to be taken notice of.

Before I dismiss this point, I think my self obliged to make some Remarks on
the Poetry this Society have already gratified the World withal, because some,
that with no little Ardour aspire to the name of Critics, have been pleased to
pass none of the most favorable Judgments upon it: I confess indeed these
Sparks are not so kind, as to give us any Reason for their Procedure in this
Affair, or to discover those Defects they have found out, supposing that their
Arbitrary Sentence is sufficient to prove a Guilt; perhaps that may be of great
value with those who blindly depend upon their Judgment, but we that are so
arogant to believe an ipse dixit no proof, must take the liberty to question
their Decission as very partial.

I wish these mighty Critics had given us some Standard for the Excellence of
Copies of Verses, or had ranged them under some of the known Heads, nay though
they had ran as far as the Division of In his Third Book De optimo statu
Civitatis.
Plato; for then I could with the more ease have made an examination of them,
and have obviated those Objections, they had made, but when Men speak at
random, without giving any reason for what they say, it is sufficient to be as
positive in our denial as they were in their affirmation, it is not, being as
convincing, as it is.

But to show the World that I am not afraid to bring the Poetry of the Society
to the Test, I shall, according to what Standard I shall think Just (since they
have given me none) examine it, with that impartiality which becomes not only
an Historian, but a Critic. Every one that has ever essayed any thing in Verse
cannot but be sensible of the difficulty of bringing every part to that decorum
which is necessary for the beauty, and perfection of that way of writing,
without which as Ut in vita, sic in oratione nihil est difficilius, quam quid
deceat videre: (...) appellant Graeci, nos decorum. -- Hujus ignoratione non
modo in vita, sed saepissime in Poemate, and Oratione peccatur.
Cicero observes, there are not a few faults break into Posie, as well as
Prose. What this necessary decorum is may be gathered partly from. -- Brevis
esse labor^ Obscurus fio; sectantem levia nervi Deficiunt, Animique professus
grandia turget. serpit hum i tutus nimium, timidusque procellae. Qui variare
cupit rem prodigaliter unam, Delphinum silvis appingit, fluctibus aprum.
Horace in his Art of Poetry, to avoid Obscurity, Trifling, Bombast, meaness
both of thought, and expression, and affected copiousness, which is a spining
out a Thought into various, and synonimous Expressions, and this last Claudian
is very much given to, notwithstanding the Character Scaliger, gives him.

If we cannot find the Society guilty of any of these faults I think (by so good
an Authority as Horace) we may conclude their Poetry cavill'd at without any
just reason. But I shall confine my self to one Copy of Verses which was writ
to the Author of the late Pastoral Poem, in the first Mercury of the fifth
Volume, for though the Poetry, they have as yet published be not very voluminous,
yet the examination of all would take up more room than I can spare, and out of
one or two Examples a Judgment may be made of the rest. In the forementioned
Poem I am sure there is nothing that falls under any of those Errors I have set
down; there is a Poetical genius shines all through them, the thought and
expression admirably matched like a Noble Soul in a beautiful Body, nay
something nearer a kin to each other, and nearer of a Nature: but before I say
more of them I Will transcribe 'em, which will not I am sure be ungrateful to the
Reader.

Yes -- by each Fountain, River, Stream, and Grove,
By all the pleasant Haunts the Muses Love,
By them themselves, and great Apollo too,
I Will swear I hardly love them more than you.
Say dear unknown, what is it that charms me so?
What secret Nectar through thy Lines does flow?
What Deathless Beauties, in thy Garden, grow?
Immortal Wit, in Natures easiest dress,
A Paradise raised in a Wilderness.
Though harsh thy Subject, Haggard, and unkind,
And rough, as bitter Blasts of Northern Wind,
Thy divine Spirit, corrects each ruder sound,
And breaths delicious Zephirs all a-round.
Thus can our Kindred Art, and Painters Care
Make even Storms, look beautiful and fair.
But whilst I praise, I must accuse thee too,
When thou had done so much, no more to do.
When to the brink of Boyne thy Hero came
There to break off the Chase of Him and Fame.
Where had been Albion now, had he thus stood,
But floating in another Sea of Blood?
To leave him when the Floods crept soft along
And Silver Boyne listened to hear thy Song,
To hear the Naids sing, what thou do write
As when she rose to see thy Hero fight:
See him, all over with Springing Laurels, spread
And all his Angel Guard around his Head.
This wields his flaming Sword -- the Rebels fly;
And That, the fatal Ball puts gently by.
Which Britains Mighty Genius shook to see
And trembled at the danger more than He.
This, sweetest Bard, had thou proceeding sung
How had the Woods, how had the Valleys rung!
And Pollio's learned Muse, who sits above
The Shepherd's admiration, and their Love,
Had deigned thee Smiles, as all the World Esteem,
Which dares not sure dislike what pleases him.
What can be more fine, and sweet than these Verses? What more Poeti^cal? What
more correct? and if at any other time their Poetical answers come not up to
these, there are several reasons for it. First, because several Queries are
sent in Verse, which would be more to the purpose in Prose, for there are
subjects not so proper for Verse. 2dly, Because they designed 'em otherwise, as
for example Burlesque, as the first Query of the 11th. Number of the 5th.
Volume, which in its kind is very witty, and pleasant; and the 6th. of the same
Mercury. But then there are the Answer to the 4th. Query, and the Epithalamium,
very fine; and Lastly, when the subject is not so Noble; as that of this, which
merited no less, than the Society has said of it. I cannot omit an Epigram I
find in the 5th. Number of the 7th. Volume, which is this,

Whatever Borrowed Lines our Works have shown,
This We dare swear, that thine are all thy own.
I find scarce one in Martial comparable to this, except, Pauper Cinna vult
videri, and est pauper. Martial too often playing upon words, which though more
tolerable in Latin, than English, yet I cannot bring my Palate to relish. The
Virtues of an Epigram, are, a dilucid Shortness, and an Acumen, which is the
Soul, Life and Spirit of an Epigram, without which it is flat, and insipid, nor
can I endure a long Introduction to that, which lies within the narrow compass
of a word, or two, the Wit of these being not sufficient to recompense the
tediousness of the other, nor could I 'till I saw this ever with patience admit
of any thing of that kind in English.

Upon the whole I think that Character which Julius Caesar Scaliger gives of
Claudian, is justly the due of the Poetical Member of this Society, viz. In
lib. 4. Poetices. Maximus poeta Claudianus, solo argumento Ignobiliore
oppress^s, addidit de ingenio quantum Deest materiae. F^lix in ^o Calor, cultus
non invisus, temperatum Iudicium, dictio candida, Numeri non affectati accute
dicta multa, sine ambitione. Though I do not understand with what Justice
Scaliger urges, the Ignobleness of his Subjects or Argument when all he has
writ, is upon the noblest, as Gods, Princes and Consuls.
That he is a great Poet, only has sometimes the disadvantage of being
oppressed with an unpoetical Subject, but even then supplies with his Wit the
defect of the Matter, he is Master of a happy daring, and a good Judgment, his
Ornaments agreeable, his Language clear, and expressive, his Numbers smooth but
not affected, his Thoughts fall naturally in, without force.

All I have to add in this point (because I have not room for a long Critical
discourse on Poetry) is that they have not only attained all the Beauties of
Verse, but have also had in their eye the very end, and aim of Poetry, which 1.
Aut prodesse volunt, 2. Aut delectare Poetae. 3. Aut Simul and Idoneae, and
jucunda dicere vitae.
Horace divides into three parts, Pleasure, Profit, and both together: But he
concludes the last to be the Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.
best, which comprizes both the pleasant, and the profitable. Some one of these
ends if not all, are observable in every Poetical Mercury I have yet seen. In
fine, I think; the opinion of one that was so much a Poet as to be Author of
those Latin Verses in the 13th. Numb. of the 6th. Vol. is a sufficient defense
of their Abilities in Poetry, since he, that could write so well must be a
competent judge.

I shall conclude this second Part of this History, with a defense of their
Complesance for the Fair Sex in Answering their Queries, which has been
extremely resented by the Wits; and other Emulators of the Society, who have
themselves in the 13th. Number of the 3d. Volume, obviated the main Objections
of these Sparks, that hate the Fair Sex, because they are their slaves I
believe, and it is pity they are not so generous to set their Names to their
Queries, that the Ladies might know their haters. In the Mercury I mentioned
there is this Query sent them. -- Whether it does not weaken the Credit of the
Athenian Mercury, that the Authors of it descend to such a pittyful Employment,
as to take notice of Feminine Impertinences? To which the Society answer, --
That they are troubled with ten, perhaps an hundred Masculine Impertinencies
for one Feminine. (They might have added this Query to the Number) Whereas on
the other side they have Letters from the Ladies, without the boasted
advantages of Learning, which are of so great concern, and carry so much
weight, that they dare not, without considerable Time, and Thought, attempt
their Answer. The Society proceeds farther in the same Mercury in this manner,
-- For meddling with Questions of Love, Courtship, and Marriage, we might say,
we designed thereby to mingle the Dulce, and the Utile. and a little farther,
-- But we scorn to excuse what needs it not, but rather ought to be Gloried in,
since though some things of this nature, may be pure Matters of Galantry, yet
there are very many Questions, which not only have an influence, on the
happiness of particular Men, and the peace of Families, but even the good, and
welfare of larger Societies, and the whole Commonwealth, which consists of
Families, and single Persons.

Though this is sufficient to justify their answering the Ladies Queries, to any
moderate, and considering opposer, yet lest the rest should imagine that I beg
the Question, and that I take that for granted, which they deny. I shall wave
the Word of this Society, that they have received several weighty Queries, etc.
from them, and prove by undeniable Examples both of the present, and the past
Ages, that the Women have as Nice a sense of things, and as good Judgments too,
as most Men. It Is true, that here in England, the Women are kept from all
Learning, as the profane Vulgar were of old, from the Mysteries of the Ancient
Religions; and therefore, are not generally so agreeable, in Conversation, to
Men of Parts, and Sense, because, a new Dress, Dance, Play, etc. is all they
can discourse of, though this is far from holding even here in England through
all, for there are a great many, who in spite of the Tyranny of Custom, will
steal some Minutes from the Needle, to improve their Minds, and this Society,
without doubt, will with their performances envite a great many more, to the
same, when they shall see the Beauties of Philosophy, in so sweet, and easy a
Dress, and then their Conversation would be far more agreeable to the wiser
part of the World, than the impertinent Chatt, too many (not by their own
faults) are now guilty of. This is evident to any man, that has ever been in
France, and conversed with the Women of the better quality there, whose
Apprehensions are more quick, and discourse upon any Subject, or in any
Science, I will not except the most profound parts of Philosophy, more a
propos, and ingenious, than the Men; their Wit, and Notions are indeed
extremely surprising. I am confident, by the acquaintance I have had the honor
to have with some of the Refined of that Sex here, that our English Women would
not be inferior to them in any qualification of the Mind, if they were but
blessed with as happy an Education: Nay, I am apt to think, they would as far
surpass the French Ladies in Knowledge, as in Beauty.

The entertaining Notions of Philosophy, are not the only Subjects of the
Ladies Studies in France, Madam de Maintenon will prove, that the weighty
movements of State Affairs are not above the direction of that Sex: And she
that writ the Memoirs of the Court of Spain shows, that they are capable of
making politic Observations on the nicest Occurrences. Madam Dacier is an
extraordinary Proof, that the most crabbed Studies are not looked into by them,
without the greatest success. Her Endeavors on Plautus, Terence, and Horace,
show, that Women are capable of being as nice, and critical Judges of Sense,
and Learning, as Men; nay, those Essays I have mentioned of this French Lady,
excel all that has been done in that kind, particularly all the Pedantic Labors
of those plodding Jesuits who have published Notes upon the Classic Authors,
for the use of the Dolphin. I am not ignorant, that some will urge, that she
was beholden to her Husband, for those upon Horace; yet these Gentlemen cannot
deny, that Plautus, and Terence were published when she was yet Madam la Fevre.

I cannot but mention the Lady Donna Oliva Sabuco, reckoned amongst the
greatest Scholars, she advancing in her Studies, etc. to the end Spain, and the
whole World might receive some Advantage thereby, she began a new and most
ingenious method of Physic; she wrote to the most august Philip II, to obtain
the establishing of her Followers as the Public Physicians, -- and in her
Treatise called The New Physic, she learnedly, Dialogue wise, censures the
Physic of the Ancients; and most famous Authors have since laid claim to many
things, boasting themselves the first Discoverers of them, whereof she had full
knowledge, and long before did publish them in her learned Books.

For a farther Proof of this point, I shall, in a few words, touch upon some of
the eminent Women of Antiquity: I will pass over the Politic Semiramis, the
valiant, and no less politic Thamyris Queen of Scythia, who not only engaged
Cyrus, but overcame him, by outwitting him, destroying him by his own
Stratagem. Nor will I instance Sempronia, mentioned by Salust, in his
Catiline's Conspiracy, as learned, and witty. Nor will I particularize the
fifteen eminent Women, that taught in the School of Pythagoras. All that will
be necessary here, will be a short enumeration of the Names of some of most
Ages, -- as Magalostrate, a Mistress worthy of Acman a Lyric Poet, that
flourished in the 27th Olympiade; the often celebrated Sappho, great in Lyric,
Elegy, and all manner of Poetry in the 42d' Olympiade, with her Friend Erinna,
and contemporary Demophila; Theano, the Wife of Pythagoras, both a
Philosophress, and Poetess, in the 56th Olympiade; Cleobulina, about the 70th
Olympiade; Corinna, Telestia Praxilla, betwixt the Battle of Marathon, and the
Peace of Antalcidas; Aspasia, between that Peace, and the taking of Athens by
Lysander; Cornificia, among the Romans, Sister to Cornificius the Poet, in the
second year of the 184th Olympiade; Athenais, afterward Eudoxia, in the Reign
of Theodosius the younger; and Pulcheria, Sister to the same Theodosius. Among
the modern Italians, Angela, Daughter to Anthony de Nugaroles; Modesta,
Lucretia, Marinella, who writ a Poem on the Nobility of Womankind; Olympia
Clara, Magdalena Acciaiolia, Valeria Miainia; Anna Maria Schurman, a Flemming.
To these I might add of our own Nation, in the time of Henry VIII, Sir Thomas
Moor's Daughter, who translated several of her Father's Latin Works, Mrs.
Elizabeth Carew, Mrs. Ann Asoue, Mrs. Elizabeth Weston: Nor must I forget Queen
Elizabeth her self, who was not only a politic but learned Princess; and nearer
our own times, Mrs. Katherina Philips, commended by the great Cowly; and of my
own knowledge, Mrs. Behn, who was not only an excellent Poetess, but discoursed
very refinedly on any Subject that came in her way. I could name another that
surpasses all these, if I feared not to offend her Modesty, by publishing her
name.

This is enough to satisfy the World, that the Society have advanced nothing
but Truth in that Affirmation before quoted, and therefore, that their
deference to the fair Sex merits not that Condemnation some of the moroser part
of the Town are pleased to give them. Nor is it at all derogatory to the
Reputation of a Philosopher, to meddle with Questions of Love, etc. since the
contemplative, and refined Plato, and Socrates (to omit other Philosophers)
have writ so many soft things on that Subject, that Maximus Tyrius, no small
Admirer of Plato, says, Me non admiratio tantum habet, sed etiam stupor, cum
Platonem, and Socratem lego, Homerum, civitatibus suis arcere, quod tam Levia,
and lascivia scriberet, etc. -- Et paulo post, -- Cum and Plato, and Socrates
Leviora long ipsi scripsere, etc.
That he is amazed, to find Plato, and Socrates banishing Homer out of their
Cities, for containing light, and amorous things, when they themselves have
writ far more light, and amorously.

Yet I find this not objected by any of the Opposers of these Philosophers, as
a Crime, or Defect, they being only here condemned by Tyrius, because they
forbid the reading of Homer, for what they thought fit to mingle in their own
Works.

This short View of their Performances makes it evident, what Advantage the
Public will reap from their Endeavors, and how much Knowledge will be in a
little time improved: For, as they very modestly express it, a diffusing that
Knowledge to many, which is already familiar to the Learned, is an improvement
of it. I will produce their own words, being a very moderate, and much too
civil Answer, which they give to a very conceited, and impertinent Quaerist.
The Quaery is this; -- Why you pretend to such strange things, and yet in
effect tell the World no more than what we all know already?

This Quaery, so worthy of Contempt, and Laughter, deserved no other Answer
than Silence; but after they had wittily rallied it, they give a serious Return
with a great deal of Ingenuity, and Modesty even to a Fault, degrading both
their Industry, and Abilities, in terming what they do as a Representation of
other men's Thoughts, and that all the improvement they make, is only the
communicating them to those that knew 'em not before. But I wrong them in not
transcribing their own words, which are these: -- It Is true in some sense, Nil
dictum, quod non dictum prius, the World is Learned, and we wish it were more
so; the finest things that can be said, are little else than old Sense, with a
new Turn; and if ye deny this, all the Orators in it must stand still, and
neither Divines, nor Lawyers, get any more than our Athenian Mercury: Yet still
what one man knows, another man does not, and a diffusing Knowledge is a sort of
improving of it, perhaps the best way. -- And a little after, in the same
Question, -- `Besides, we are pretty confident, there are very many Questions
here, some of moment, which were never before publicly decided, especially in
Morality, which is by far the most useful part of Knowledge: And 'twould be no
shame for us, should we own, our chief aim in this design, were to convey under
a pleasant Dress Notions of Virtue, and Honor into the Commonalty, and rather
make them better than wiser; though indeed in one we do both, and cannot doubt in
the mean while, but the curious, and ingenious Spirits will seldom take up our
Paper, but they will find something or other in it, that both may divert, and
please them: For the less candid Judges, they have done all they can against it
already, but avail nothing; the Paper still lives, and is still like to do so
in spite of all their ill nature, and finds that reception which we will say
the Design thereof deserves.

I have thought fit to conclude with this Quotation out of the Works of the
Society, because it is a Recapitulation of all that I have said, both as to
their Design and Performances, with a short modest Vindication of both, if not
a prophetical Assurance of its surpassing all the Oppositions it has or may
meet with.

The THIRD PART of the History of the Athenian Society.
HAving in the First Part run through the Rise and Advantages of this Society,
in the Second their Performances, that are already extant, with a much*greater
Brevity than the nobility, and copiousness of the Subject required: I shall
here anticipate their future Endeavors, or at least give the World a Prospect
of those beneficial Efforts it will soon be blessed with, from the matchless
Industry, and Learning of the Athenan Society, which when compared with what
has been already seen, will justly raise all men's Expectation of those yet
unthought of Discoveries, the successful Progress of their Labors, will in time
produce, when such great Attempts have been aimed at, and effected in so little
a time after their first Rise.

Their Care seems to have been to provide Means for the improvement of their
Knowledge (as I have observed in the First Part) who had not the Abilities of
Purse, to arive to learned Education, and to purchase all those voluminous
Books, which treat of those several Arts, and Sciences which are required to
the composing a Scholar: This though the Weekly Mercuries would in time effect,
yet more speedily to occurr to the Impatience of some, who perhaps may be
uneasy, in perusing so many things which tend to the satisfaction of others,
to find amongst them what themselves desire, the Society have taken care for
the compiling a Book entitled, The young Student's Library; containing the
Substance, and Pith of all that is valuable in most of the best Books printed in
England, and in the foreign Journals from the year 65, to this present time; to
which will be added an Introduction to the use of Books, in a new Essay upon
all sorts of Learning; written by the Athenian Society.

The Proposals sufficiently show, that this Work is to be a Translation from
the Universal Historical Bibliotheque, the Paris Iournal des scavan^, the Acta
Eruditorum Lypsiae, the Giornali de Litterali, and other foreign Iournals, to
which the Society will add what is most considerable in the Extracts made by
their own Countrymen, that so (to use their own words) by going backward, as
well as forward, we may render our account of Books complete. The Preface to
the Proposals of printing this Book, show abundantly the usefulness of it,
Extracts having received Encouragement from the Ingenious of all Nations, ever
since they have been set on foot, being necessary not only for them, that
cannot go to the price of the Books themselves, or have not time to peruse so
many large Volumes, but also for all the Learned, who in a little time may here
find the Desi^n of every Book, and some observation in the Performance, from
whence they may frame a Judgment what Book to buy, and what not, if they are
not fully satisfied with it in little; for, the chief Force, and Matter of most
Books lies in a little compass, the ornamental parts of Language generally
making up the bulk. But I shall give you a concise account of this Book from
Mr. De la Crose's Works of the Learned, who having been formerly an Antagonist
with the Society, on account of Extracts, may reasonably be supposed not to
flatter any of their Performances, especially in that kind: His words are these
in his Book for January, 1692.

It consists (says he of the young Student's Library) of Abstracts of Books in
several Faculties, as Divinity, Critics, History, Geography, Philosophy, Law,
Physic, etc. many of which are collected out of the Iournals des Scavans of
Paris, and the Universal Bibliotheque, and, as I hear, accurately translated;
but the most considerable, though not the biggest part, are two original pieces:
The first is written by a Divine, a Member of the Athenian Society, who has
spent several years in the study of the Hebrew Tongue, and shows a great deal
of Learning, and Piety, in maintaining the Antiquity of the PointVowels against
Lewis Capel, and his Followers: He pretends they are at least as ancient as
Ezra.

The second Original Piece is an Essay upon all sorts of Learning, as Divinity,
Physic, History, Poetry, Geometry, Architecture, Music, Civil Law, Canon Law,
Optics, Dyalling. Thus far Mons. De la Crose: And I have nothing to add of the
main Substance of the Book, but that there will be two English Abstracts added
by the Society, and that they will, as the Proposals inform me, supervise the
Translations; but of these things you will be farther informed in the Preface to
it, which is now almost finished: And I Will only add this Remark; That the
Abstract of the Works of the Learned wholly owes its Rise, and Progress to this
Society, all things of that nature having been entirely forgotten in England,
though of such great use; as appears' at large in the Preface to the First
Volume, and I suppose will be yet set in a clearer Light in that Monthly
Account of Books, which, I perceive by their late Advertisement, is now to be
printed only for their Bookseller Mr. Dunton, to begin this next May, and so
continue monthly.

I shall say no more of the main body of the Young Student's Library, (which
will contain the Substance of above an hundred Volumes, most in folio) but I
cannot pass over the original Piece of the Hebrew Points, it being a thing of
that vast consequence, that on it all the Christian Faith depends; for, if
there were no points, the Certainty of Scripture is quite out of doors: It
consists of thirteen sheets of Paper, and bears this Title;

(...): Or, A Discourse concerning the Antiquity, and Original of the Points,
Vowels, and Accents that are placed in the Hebrew Bible. The whole is divided
into two parts, the first part considers the Opinions of Elias Levita,
Ludovicus Capellus, Dr. Walton, and others, for the novelty of the Points;
showing the improbability of their Conceits, that the Masorites of Tiberias
pointed the Text, from the silence of the Jews about it, their Testimonies
against it, the unfitness of the Time, Place, and Persons of late assigned for
the invention of the Points, from the nature of the Masora, and of the
Masoretic Notes upon the Verses, Words, Letters, Vowels, and Accents of the Old
Testament; their Observations on all the kinds of the Keri, -u, Ketib; the
words written full, or defective; the Ittur Sopherim, the Tikkun Sopherim, and
the rest of the parts of the Masora, and from other Considerations. The second
part proves the Antiquity, Divine Original, and Authority of the present
Punctuation, by the Testimony of Jews, and Christians, the universal Consent of
all Nations that receive the Scriptures, their quiet possession of the Text, as
it is now pointed by Prescription, from Age to Age. The Vowels (an essential
part of Speech) often expressed by the Punctuation only. The Obscurity of the
Scripture without Points, which yet was commanded to be written very plainly.
The Old Testament evidencing it self to be the Word of God, in, and by the
Punctuation only, the Anomalies thereof manifesting its Antiquity. The Promise
of Christ, Mat. 5. 18. That nothing shall be lost out of the Law, and the
Prophets, whereof the Points are so great a part. The manifest Absurdity of the
contrary Opinion; and other Considerations; Together with Answers to several
Objections of Elias Levita, Ludovicus Capelius, Doctor Walton, and others
against their Antiquity; such are the Testimonies of some Jews about the
Points. The unpointed Copy of the Law so kept in the Synagogue. The silence of
the ancient Caballistical Writings of the Mishna, and Talmuds about them. The
LXX, and Chaldee Paraphrase reading otherways than our Punctuation directs.
The Samaritan Character (supposed to be the ancient Hebrew) never pointed. The
Novelty of their Names: The superfluity of their Numbers: The possibility of
preserving the Sound without the Shapes, and of reading the Bible without
Points (as well as the Rabbinical Commentaries, the Talmuds, and other Oriental
Languages, are read without them) by the help of the Matres lectionis, or
letters Evi, a, h, v, i, by the scope of the place, etc. The Silence of Ierom,
and the Fathers, about them. The Opinion of diverse modern Divines, both
Papists, and Protestant, against the Antiquity of the Shapes of the present
Punctuation. The Keri, u, Ketib, being about the Letters, and never about the
Points, and the like.

This bare Transcription of the Contents of this Original Piece (a sight of
some sheets of which my Bookseller, by his Interest, procured me) is sufficient
to show of what great use it will be not only to all Divines, but also to every
one that is curious in Enquiry into the original Text of Sacred Writ, a Study
as much above all others, as the Soul is above the Body. The consequence of
this Treatise is, as I have remarked no less than the Authority, and Certainty
of Christian Faith: For, as Antonius Rodolphus Cevallerius, speaking of the
Antiquity of the Points, thus pleads for them, saying, That They who are of the
contrary Opinion do not only make doubtful the Authority of the Scriptures, but
wholly pluck it up by the roots; for, without the Vowels, and Notes of
Distinction it has nothing firm, and certain. And this is sufficient to show
the necessity, and usefulness of this Undertaking, and how seasonable a
Treatise of this nature is, to obviate the Objections of the Atheists of this
Age, that we may give a loose to our Fancies in Belief, since there is nothing
of Certainty in the Bible it self: And if this Ground prevailed, it would
easily reduce us all to that part of Hobbism, of veering with every Wind that
blows, and changing our Religion as often as Fortune should our Princes to
different Persuasions. As for the Performance of this Divine, in this Piece,
the Contents show, that he has taken notice of all, that can be raised against
the Opinion he defends, and the many years he has given himself to the Study of
the Hebrew, and Original Tongues, as well as all the Rabbinical Learning, leave
no doubt, but that Performance is equal to the nobleness of the Subject: And
according to my small Judgment in that way, if I may be allowed to ghess at the
rest by what I have seen, he has done it with a great deal of Strength of
Judgment, Force, and Evidence of Argument, and Profoundness of Skill. 'Twas the
Saying of a great man, that he would easily tell the Progress any one would
make in any Science, if he knew but the Value he had for it, for earnest Desire
stirrs up indefatigable Industry, the Mind being never satisfied till* it has
obtained that to which it was born, by the high esteem, and value it has
conceived of it. And no man could have a greater Esteem for any Knowledge, than
this Divine had for this, as the chief, and obligatory Study of Men of his
Character, who were to give the true, and genuine sense of Scripture to the
Souls he directed under the pain of Woe, at the last Tribunal, which could
never be satisfactorily done by depending entirely upon the Word of other men,
without an ability of consulting the Key of those sacred Mysteries it self, I
mean the original Text: And it is to be wondered as well as complained of, that
so many of our Divines, through a Criminal Supinity, do too much neglect this
necessary Study, which our Divi^e has employed Several years in, so much was
his Care, and Zeal for the hono^ and vindication of the Christian Religion, (by
placing it on a firm Foundation) and the Good not only of those Souls under his
charge, but also all others who will make any improvement of his Labors, which,
by what has been said, may very well be concluded to be accurate, and
elaborate, and consequently abundantly satisfactory. And it were to be wished,
that the same Great man would oblige the World with those other pieces of
Rabbinical Learning, that he mentions in these sheets, having in these I now
speak of answered what has never been attempted in English.

Nor has any Prospect of any present, or future advantage to his Interest,
engaged him in this laborious Work, he having generously given the Copy to the
Undertaker, without the least Gratuity. And indeed his other Virtues, are as
well sorted to his Character, as these I have spoke of, for he has learnt that
divine Lesson our blessed Savior Inculcated to his Followers, saying, Learn of
me, for I am meek, and humble of heart, how charming, and excellent soever this
Lesson be, yet alas, it is followed by a very few, and Pride is never more
visible, than in those, whose province it is to press this admirable Doctrine of
Humility. Learning that should teach them to know themselves better, generally
transporting them to an insufferable Contempt of the rest of Mankind, but here
it has met with a happy Temper, an innate Modesty, and a sweet, agreeable
Affability to all Men, a Charity, not stinted to Factions, Parties, or
Religions, but universal like that of the first Instituter of our Holy
Religion, knowing very well that the perfection of a Christian life is a strict
Imitation of our Master, and Founder. How admirably has our Blessed Lord drawn
the corrupt Nature of too many of our Hotheaded Zealots, in that Parable of
the Good Samaritan, every one passed by the wounded stranger, the very Priests,
gave him not one eye of regard, as not worthy a look of the chosen, till the
Samaritan (a People rejected by the Jews as the most infamous, and wicked) came
and bound up his Wounds, and took that care of him, which humanity required. I
know too many that profess a great deal of Religion, and glory in the name of
piety, that will let a near Relation, if of an other persuasion, perish for
want of, what his supernumerary Servants enjoy, this is still more odious in
the Clergy who should gain Proselytes more by affability, and meekness,
necessary Ingredients to the Composition of their Character, and not by Fire,
and Brimstone, cruelty beyond the barbarity even of Cann^bals, for an
accidental misfortune of Education; Mildness may win them to give ear to the
Truth, but such an inhumanity (not to say unchristan hardness) makes all they
can say come with the prejudice of being delivered by one, that is not of
Christ, since he has given a clear contrary mark of his Disciples. This short
digression shows the Excellence of those Virtues this Reverend Divine has made
a part of himself, much more noble Qualifications than that extraordinary one
of his Learning. I am sorry that my Ignorance of his Personal Conversation,
should concur with my inability to deprive the Reader of a farther, though
imperfect, account of this Divine.

Before I pass from the Young Student's Library, I think, to make my account
the perfecter, it will not be impertinent if I insert here a view of that
Emblem, that is promised to be prefixed to it, of the Athenian Society, with an
explanation of it, a sight of which I procured at the Engravers, and both the
Society and Bookseller will, I hope pardon me for making it public before its
time, since it is here mentioned out of honor to their Design.

The Copper-Plate is of a Folio size, and is thus divided, above the Society in
an Oval is writ, The Athenian Society, this Oval is supported by two Angels,
from whence falls down a Curtain of Lawn over the Faces of the 12 Members of
the Society, who with Papers on the Table, and Pens in their Hands sit all
equally in a direct Line, every one dressed in the distinctive Habits of the
several Sciences, under which the Queries they have undertaken to Answer, do
fall, -- as -- the Divine, Physician, Mathematician, Philosopher, Lawyer, Poet,
etc. at the other side of the Table, the several Querists present themselves
with their Notes, for Resolutions of their Difficulties, in a corner, hard by
sits a Monkey (expressing the Quality of the Interlopers by his Apish Nature)
with the Claw of a Cat whom he holds fast in his Embraces, endeavoring to pull
some Nuts out of a Fire, with this label coming out of his Mouth vivitur ex
rapto, that is I live by Theft the Interlopers having endeavored to rob the
first Undertaker of his subsisting by that Project which he first set a foot,
and brought to perfection, and therefore merit that Character, of living on the
Spoils of their Neighbors. At the four Corners are four Cities, Ath^ns, (where
on a Pinnacle is placed an Owl Sacred to Minerva,) Rome, Oxford, Cambridge, in
the two first of which Learning once flourished, in the two last does now. On
the top of all the Emblem, is placed a Raven; for several reasons, first
because the Raven was the first Projector of the Design, and that therefore is
a proper place for him to discover the Approaches of the Cucko^'s* that come to
invade his Nest, and secondly, because it is the Nature of those Birds to have
always a Sentinel aloft to view all the Avenues, and Approaches of its Enemies,
though I never heard of an Owl riding on a Ravens back '^ill some Modern Authors
who resolved to invert Nature, as well as destroy all Religion discovered the
Secret and Never- till-then known Sympathy betwixt those two Birds, so much
that one would carry the other a Pick-a pack, a Pick-a-pack, but I must pass
from these Emulators, or rather Copiers of George-yard Wit to proceed in my
account.

Below the Emblem is placed the Explanation, marked with several Letters* which
refer to the same in the several parts of the Portraiture, to begin and observe
the order I find them in, ( A) directs to the 12 Members of the Society, with
these Verses.

Behind the Scenes, sit mighty we
Nor are we known, nor will we ^e
The World, and we exchanging thus
While we find chat for them, they Work for us.
B. C. D. etc. refers to the Querists in this Order
B.
To several Lady Querists.
Do You see that Lady in the Mask
We'll tell you what she* comes to Ask
Though an unconscionable Task
It Is how her Lover fast to bind,
False, as her self, false as the faithless Wind.
C.
To several Lady Querists.
That other brings her Favorite flea
With golden Fetters, Lock and Key
If t has a Sting our Thoughts does crave,
Or only a Tongue as other Females have?
D.
Referring to the Astronomers and Astrol^gers.
Thinking our Notions too jejune,
Some take their Aim at Madam Moon;
Some bring hard queries, which we crack,
And throw the gazing World the Kernels back.
E.
Referring to some Queries of that Nature sent by the Seameu.
Here Is Honest Tar, who would his Crown afford
Were he paid off, e're he returns abord
To know what he must ask in vain,
When we shall beat the French again?
F.
Referring to the Mathematical Queries.
Euclid, where ar't', though 'twas before despaired
Now may thou have thy Circle squared,
But Art is long; and thou must stay,
Nor Rome, was built nor Athens in a day.
G.
Referring to the Par^on's Queries.
We know, Sir, but too Well, your case
Some powerful Faction right or wrong embrace
Or starve, and die without a Place.
H.
In reference to the crowd of impertinent Querists.
Avoid you rout of Noisy fools
Once more, -- you are not in our Rules
Could we but please the Learned few,
Which send from far, we could dispense with you.
I.
This Stanza has reference to those that go to hang or kill themselves, who in
the Emblem are directed by an Angel to apply themselves to the Society.
Whither lost wretches, Whither would you run?
By guilt, or by unhappy Love, undone?
What need you perish, or despair?
If you would have aid, an Angel shows you where.
K.
Refers to Mr. Smith the Coffee-man, who so far contributes to this Affair, as
receiving all the Queries and conveighing them to the Society.
This Query's quickly understood
He only Asks do you think his Coffee good?
Yet would crowd in, though just by the door,
Or vowed he would take our Letters in no more.
L.
Referring to what I said before of the Monkeys making use of the Cats Foot to
pull the Nuts out of the Fire.
These dainty Nuts I must not loose
Nor burn my Paws -- b'your leave dear puss,
If those that put them there enquire
'Twas you not I that robbed the fire
How sweet is Interlopers Hire!
M.
Relating to Natural and Artificial Rarltles of England, etc. of which
immediately.
All England's Rarieties, are gathered here,
From unknown Earth, Fire, Water, Air;
Thousands agree in such a glorious strife
Or else a moments Work would last a Life.
N.
This refers to the Raven on the top of all, an account of which I have given
above.
With Beak, and Talons, I infest
Those Cuckoes that invade my Nest,
And if Minerva yet supply
My Ancient gift in Prophecy
All Scab'd, and Old, they in some hollow Tree shall die.

I am ignorant who designed this Emblem, as well as who composed the Verses I
have here quoted, which tho'they come not up to those of this Society, yet
naturally enough express what they are designed for, perhaps much better than
if they had been in loftier Numbers, Emblematists, seldom thinking it proper to
regard the Ma^osty of Style, and Thought, when their aim is only a bare
narratory Explication. This any one that has conversed with that kind of
Writing will grant; and that Book of Emblems, made upon the Emperors, confirms
my Position. So that the Poet (as every Writer ought) considered here the
nature of the thing he writ, and adapted his Thought, Numbers, and Language to
the Subject.

Having thus given you an account of the young Students Library, I shall
proceed to the other things of as great, if not greater consequence, as a new
Systeme of experimental Philosophy, upon the four Elements, though this will be
some while before it see the World, both because time will be taken for the
immediate Experiments, and also because this new Project of the artificial, and
natural Rarities of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Foreign
Plantations thereunto belonging, will employ them on a more general, and
entertaining Subject; so that they cannot have leisure, till they have, with
the great assistance they are like to have from the Ingenious, rid their hands
pretty well of it. The Reason they deferred the Natural History so long, was,
because several ingenious Gentlemen, well skilled in those affairs (to use
their own expression) generously offered them their assistance, upon which
account that their undertaking might be the more serviceable to the Public
(which they have always chiefly in their eye) they waited those supplies from
other hands, which they were promised; for there are several new Assistants,
joined themselves to this Society, for the speedier, and better carrying on of
this new Project, if I can call that New which depended upon the former, for
the World is obliged to the first Atheniun Project, for this Undertaking, since
the first rise of it, was from a Query sent (the Natural result of the
Societies design to answer all sorts of Questions) on that subject, so that it
seems, indeed, to be but a New branch that is sprung from the first design,
which may in the same manner, give birth, in time, to a great many other,
admirable Improvements in all sorts of Knowledge.

This Project will not be a bare Collection of what the best Authors of our
Nation have writ, of Rarieties Natural, Artificial and Civil, but also of what
ever Observations the curious Gentlemen of all England shall make, and
communicate to this Society, as, besides their own diligent enquiries into all
things that fall under those heads, first in the Regions of the Air -- All
sorts of strange, Appearances, and their several Forms, Qualities, and
Circumstances, Noises, and their several Kinds, Tomp^sts, Thunder, and
Lightning: Strange Winds, their different Natures, and Qualities, with their
several dependances of weather, etc. Rains, Hail, Mists, Dews, Frosts, Heats
extraordinary in any particular, as to form quantity, color, or effects,
Subterraneal-Steams, or Exhalations that issue out of the Earth, as to their
Quality, and Manner, and Effects, etc.

Next, as to fresh Waters, their several Springs, as to quality, medicinal or
other, hot or cold, extraordinary in color, or any peculiar property, as oily
or petrifying, what Fish does each afford most, etc. as also Salt waters, their
different nature, places of difference, and degrees of saltness, their depths,
etc. as to Currents, Edies, Concourses of Tides, Species of Fishes, etc. where
and how.

Next, as to the Earths, -- what sorts of Ochres, Chalks, Marles, Clays, etc.
their Qualities and Use; Tru^s, Coal dugg, etc. remarkable figures of Hills,
etc* Minerals, their quality, and where prepared, in like manner all sorts of
Metals, etc.

Farther concerning Plants and Trees that are unusual and extraordinary, in
Growth, Fruit, Leaves, or time of Blossoming -- Gardening, and all the curious
Observations that can be made as to the Insects, Diseases, Cures, proper to
each Vegetable, or common to more, or all. Next, as to Husbandry, what unsual
Grains, Grafts, etc. are sow'n in each Country, Improvements on all sorts of
Land, and other Curiosities in Husbandry; new Inventions as to Plowing,
preservation of Corn, peculiar, ways of opening, and draining Marshes, Boggs,
Fens, etc*

Farther concerning Animals, Observations, on Insects in their several Species,
who has observed their Origin, Perfection, Corruption, Diseases, and Cures, the
like of all sorts of Birds, Reptiles, and Fishes, and Beasts; unusual qualities
of each, as to Generations and Bigness, etc. strange accidents befalling Men,
or Women, prodigious, or numerous Births? similitude of Persons extraordinary,
any thing remarkable for excess or defect in all, and every of their Parts, and
Circumstances, and all the singular Occurrances that make either Man, or Woman,
or Families more than commonly remark able.

Farther, as to what Arts, are either improved or invented, and where,
extraordinary buildings of all sorts, Persons sk^lful, and in what chiefly, etc.

Lastly, concerning Antiquities, Seats of Kings, Priories, Abbeys, etc.
Castles, Fortifications, Banks of Land, Barrows, Monuments of Stone, and any
thing remarkable of any or every of them. Of Councils, Parliaments, and Terms
held, and where. Old Episcopal Sees, Battles fought, Armor, old Money, Urns,
Lamps, Lachymatories, Pavements, Bracelets, Rings, etc. found, and in whose
possession, immemorial Customs, and all other Curiosities, which may be
serviceable to the public, or to private Persons.

In the Third Number of the Seventh Volume you will find all these Queries here
inserted, which are by the Society proposed to all the Ingenious, Gentlemen of
each Nation concerned, whose Contributary help they desire, and will without
doubt obtain of all such, who have the least desire to bestow any of their time
for the Honor, and Glory of their Country. Nature has been extremely fruitful
of Wonders in these Kingdoms, that compose the British Monarchy, and it is pity
Gentlemen of Estates should be carried away with a desire of seeing the
Novelties of other Countries, before they have any tolerable insight into their
own, where they were born* Certainly every Patriot will not think his time ill
spent, which is employed for the discovery, and knowledge of our selves, or at
least our Country of which each is but part. This Generous desire, has inspired
several Learned Gentlemen to offer their service already, as I have observed
above, though I am ignorant of all of them, except ohe, of whom by accident I
gained this account. He was the first that offered his Endeavors for the
carrying on of this design, with which he was so extremely pleased at the first
notice, that was given of it to the World, and indeed England, I believe
affords not a Gentleman better qualified for this Undertaking, being first,
accomplished with variety of Learning, having great skill in Experimental
Philosophy, and scarce his Equal in Chemistry, a Science which is Mother of
strange and wonderful Discoveries, to all these acquired Excellences Nature has
added a strong, and admirable Judgment, a nice, and curious Fancy, and an
extremely happy Memory, with a Temper that is agreeable, and generous, and
fortune (or rather Heaven, for when I see Merit blessed with a Competency, I
conclude it the effect of a wiser Dispo^r than partial Chance) has crowned all
(for so it is in spite of Philosophy) with a handsome Estate, all which
concurring he seems to me, The Phoenix Boil revived.

This, Reader, is all the account I am capable, as yet of giving thee as to
their present, and future performances, which as they have gained them no
little Fame, and Rep^tation, so has that fame contracted Enemies, and
ungenerous Opposers, (Virtue when exposed to the Eyes of the World seldom being
without Enemie^) whose aim has been (at least of the (...) part of them) to
deprive the Public of those many advantages, I have made it appear, it
receives from this Undertaking, and the Performances of the present Members of
the Athenian Society. by using what means they can to discourage the gain of
the Bookseller, that so he may let fall so beneficial a Project; though they
could never yet Effect it. The first Opposers they met with were the
Anabaptists, who, I have showed were silenced by the Society; th en the demure
Quaker put in for his share, though to as little purpose, and among the Opposers
I must not forget, though one of the most inconsiderable, was the Vindicator of
Mr. Jones, on the subject of Usury. But all these were upon particular
Controversies, and made Enemies by their being disobliged because the Society
would not Complement them so far, as to subscribe to their Opinions. But on the
first of February I find, in the Advertisement of the Athenian Mercury that
some body else set up a Paper interfereing with their Design; but it seems that
the Author of that Paper became soon sensible of the Injustice of his
undertaking, and therefore was not ashamed in a public manner to acknowledge
his Error, for I find in the fifth Mercury of the sixth Volume, a Letter from
him to the Gentlemen of the Athenian Society, which I shall transcribe.

To the Gentlemen of the Athenian Society.
BEing at length convinced that the Design I was lately engaged i^, did not
reach up to that Morality, I aim at, I thought my self obliged to desire you to
insert this short Letter in your Mercury, to satisfy the World of the
Injustice, as well as fruitless endeavor of such an undertaking. If a breach
of the Golden Rule, may be termed Injustice, this must be so, since I believe
no Man, that is the first Designer of any thing, which by his Industry alone
has turned to account, will say, he would be content, to have another make use
of his Project, and run away with the profit of his Labors. But I am persuaded,
the Endeavors of any to interfere with you, would prove in a small time of as
little advantage, as the Attempt deserves. For the Town, will not give it self
the trouble of perusing both, when it may meet with all in one. But if the
Love, which the World generally has for contention, should give a Temporary
encouragement, yet the clashing, and Answers, and Replies from one to an other,
would divert both from the business, and end of these Mercuries, when they
shall be filled up, with Reflections, Errors, Mistakes, and Recriminations, the
Answers to Queries will find but small room, and the impatient Querists be
forced to wait much longer for a Solution of his Niceties, which must end in
the destruction of both Undertakers. In the small time I have been engaged in
this affair, I have had a sufficient Experience of the uneasiness of the Wits,
and Would be Wits, that will be at the expense of sending in their Queries. One
peremptorily demands an answer in a time prefixed: Another will not be content
barely to demand a speedy reply to a Catalogue of Queries of half a Sheet of
Paper, but threatens upon neglect, some mighty effort of Indignation: And in a
little time whoever shall go upon this design, will find his hands so full of
Business, that he must incur the dissatisfaction of his Querists, for one day
brings in more Work, than a Month can dispose of, unless instead of half a
sheet of Paper, he would publish weekly two Twelve penny Books, for 25 and 30
Queries in a day were much within the Number I in that little time received. To
conclude, since from the beginning of Learning to this day no body started this
design but your selves for the weekly diversion of the Curious, I hope you may
for the future, enjoy the benefit of it, for I am satisfied the profit of any
other will never compensate his trouble,

Yours to Command, etc.


This Letter well observes the immorality of such an attempt, since it is
evident that tho, the Law take not hold of it yet it is of equal guilt to the
Robbing of a Man's House or shop of his Goods, with which he drives his Trade,
for a Project of this nature is a Commodity in which Booksellers deal, and though
it evades the Penalty that is laid on those of that Trade, that shall print
another Man's Copy, yet it has nothing to justify it self but Impunity, like
several other Mischiefs, which the Law has not yet provided against, this will
appear a little plainer, by a comparison. Our Laws have provided a greater
punishment for those that counterfeit our English Coin, than for such, who do
the same to any Foreign Money, yet certainly no man, that will pretend to
thought, will thence conclude, that, therefore, the Cheat, is less in one, than
the other, since the Injustice that is done to our Neighbor is the same, which
certainly must constitute the guilt of the Crime. The Gentleman that sent this
Letter was (I find) afterward in a very impertinent, and foolish Pamplet
redicul'd for it, where the Authors (for one would scarce imagine. a leash of
Blockheads should club for such a trif^e), says against what is advanced in
this Letter, that London is as capable of maintaining two Papers of this
nature, as two Windmills; supply them both with Queries it will I grant, but I
am sure those that did attempt it found by experience it never paid for the
Work it set 'em about, though they were careful of being at as little charge of
Print as they could Title, Margent, Advertisements, and Algebraical Cannons
transcribed verbatim from. Authors I could produce, and not understood by one
in ten thousand, and perhaps not by the Transcriber himself, leaving very
little room for any matter of Ingenuity or Diversion, and even that was taken
up with solitary Queries, Profaneness, and Blasphemy. But I will not
anticipate what I suppose the Athenian Society themselves will expose to the
World in its proper Colors. Indeed their whole design seemed to be to laugh,
and ridicule Solidity, and Seriousness out of the World, that so they might
make an opener, and more easy inlet to Atheism, and that this was their Aim is
more than probable from that blasphemous expression of Serenading their Maker
at the expense of Sternhold, and Hopkins, and affirming that there were many
feigned Relations in Job, and their turning God's Judgment on Sodom into
ridicule, and a Jest -- all which, would I confess almost prevail with a Man to
believe that those reports were true, which were then given of them, viz. That
some among them did not believe in JESUS CHRIST, and that the same Lacedemonian
should say he would undertake to show as many absurdities number, for number,
in the N. Testament as in Mahomet's Aicoran. But whether these were Calumnies
or no, I am sure (if I may judge of their design by what they did publish) they
seemed bent to confound the Minds of the Vulgar, and incline them to
Debauchery, and Atheism rather than to fix them in any thing solid, and
virtuous: In short as the Athenians said of their design, That the World was
already very Learned, yet they desired to make it more so. So those Interlopers
might have said, of their performances, That the World was very wicked already,
but their desire, and endeavors should contribute to render it entirely so.
What could their dispute about the testimony of Josephus mean, but to bring the
very being of Christ into doubt? or at least that the Primitive Christians
promoted the Kingdom of Heaven by that same way the Devil does his, viz. by
Lies. But what mighty Arguments did these Anti-Christians bring, for a Proof of
their Assertion? nothing but bare Conjecture, to persuade that at least it was
not likely that Josephus, a Jew, should speak so favorably of Christ. Why not?
it is true he says almost as much of Christ as we Christians (perhaps more than
they do) believe, but what if I should say it is likely Josephus did believe
all that he writ? I am sure I have his words on my side (his words I say, for
all these SPARKS have said cannot convince me of the contrary) but is it so
strange a thing in our days, that a Man should for, interest, act contrary to
that his opinion is? there were no Preferments among the Christians but racks,
tortures, etc. they could set up no Statue's to the Honor of his Memory, which
the Romans did. He was a Jewish Priest, and one that came over to Titus, unable
to bear the Extremeties of the Siege of Jerusalem. But suppose none of these
Considerations (...) any weight may we not as well suppose Josephus to have
said those things of our Blessed Savior, though he continued in a contrary
opinion as to other things (how hard it was for the Converted Jews to quit
their Mos^ical Institutions is evident from the Scripture even after they had
received Christ as very God, and very Man, and the true Missias) as well, as
many other moderate Men, who have justified those of an other persuasion in
some Particulars. Thus, though it was the opinion of a great many fiery Zealots,
that the Heathens adored the Devil, yet Dr. Stillingfleet, the present Bishop
of Worcester, from their own Authors concludes with a great deal of reason (as
you will grant if you peruse a Book, entitled, The History of the Oracles)
that they directed their devotion to the great God of Heaven, and Earth, as the
ultimate end of their Worship, and who that has read Cicero, Seneca, etc. but
must believe the same? yet I hope these Gentlemen will not conclude from thence
that these Words were forged into the Doctor's Book, by some friends of the
Heathens?

So the ATHENIAN SOCIETY, though they are no Papists, are such friends to truth,
as to deny there was ever such a Person as Pope Joan, and indeed Bellarmine is
not to be answered on that point.

Thus much for the Equity of such an undertaking, and the Persons concerned in
it as well as their profane and trifling performances, for they not only left
Divinity to the Athenians, (as they first professed) but Philosophy, and indeed
every thing that was solid, or ingenious; now let us see what encouragement
they met with. Just as much as the above quoted Letter prophesied, not enough
to pay for Paper, much less for Print; and Copy: This I am positive in, because
I made an enquiry of the MERCURY WOMEN about it; nor could it be other ways
expected, since the Athenians took the ready way to suppress it by giving their
Readers all the little Metal, that was to be gained out of their Oar, purged
of its more bulky dross, with remarks on their Errors, and their own
improvements on their Thoughts: For a farther satisfaction to the Reader, I
shall insert their Promise (which they all along performed to a tittle) made to
all their Querists; in the 14th. Number of the 6th. Volume, (though they often
repeated it before, and after in other Mercuries.)

Finding that publishing our Mercuries four times a Week, would quite clog our
Undertaking, and render it useless, we shall for the future only publish them
on Tuesdays, and Saturdays as formerly, and that we may render our undertaking
perfect, we promise our Querists, that in case any Person should interfere:
with us in our design of answering Questions, they shall constantly find in our
Saturdays Mercury, Answers to all his Questions whatever, that so our Querists
may not be put to double Charges ( by buying the same Questions twice answered)
nor the Coffee-houses burdened with too many Papers. In another Advertisement
they tell the World that it shall find in their Papers all the Antagonist's
best Thoughts remarks on his Errors, and their own Improvements upon all he
advances.

Performing these things with all the Justice, and Impartiality in the World;
and constantly without omitting any thing worth taking notice of, it is no
wonder that so few were found void so much of Sense as to buy their trifles,
(the more pardonable indeed for being so very short) when they might have a
view of all that was valuable in them in the Athenian Mercury and that too with
great Additions. So may they thrive, who interfere with an others design!

I must not here among the other Oppositions they have met with, forget the
Endeavors of their Enemies to cast an Imputation of Fanaticism, on the Members
of this SOCIETY. But it is so evident from what they have writ that they are of
the Church of England, that blind Malice it self cannot deny it. I shall
trespass so much on ^he patience of the Reader for once to prove that the Sun
shines at noon day, or that there is such a thing as Motion, or at least that
this Religion of this Society is of the Church of England, as by Law
establishd, though out of many I will choose but two places, the first' -- Volume
3d. Number 28. and Quest. 4. The Query is this -- What Community in your
opinion comes nearest to the Doctrine of our Blessed Savior, the Apostles, and
Primitive Fathers? -- The Answer is -- Undoubtedly it is our Opinion, that the
Communion we our selves are of, and hope to live, and die in, namely that of
the Church of England is the best in the World, and nearest to the Doctrine, of
our Savior, his Apostles, and Primitive Fathers, and unless we thought so we
should be very ill Men to continue in it -- I desire the Reader would consult
this place I have quoted, where he will find evident beyond evasion, the
distinctive Medium betwixt Popery, and other Protestant opinions, particularly
as to the Liturgy and Episcopacy, etc. at large set down, which were too long
for me to transcribe here. Number 25. of the same Volume, Quest. 4. is a
farther Confirmation of this. The Query is, I desire your Opinion, what Book
you would advise me to for my private Devotions, as being a single Person. --
Pray, Reader mind well the Answer. -- Answ. What so many great, and good Men
have been concerned in the Composing of, viz. The LITURGY of the Church of
ENGLAND -- if the Labors of one Man, then Dr. Taylor's Composures, The Whole
Duty of Man.

This I am sure is enough to convince any reasonable Man of what Church the
Members of this Society are. 'Twas no impollitic part (how dishonest soever it
were) of their opposers to cast an Odium upon them in the Affairs of Religion,
since too many are carried away with a VIOLENT PREJUDICE against any thing,
that shall be offered, by one of an other persuasion, thinking to supply all
their other defects, by a blind and unreasonable Zeal.

But as the Oppositions this Noble design met with were many, as appears from
what I have said, so were the Encouragements too, from all parts of England,
Some parts beyond Sea, and from great, and learned Men, as is evident from the
Gentleman I lately mentioned, who has joined himself to them on the account of
the Natural Rarities, and that worthy Divine mentioned in the beginning of this
last part, so skilful in Rabinical Learning nor is that less which the
Approbation of the ingenious Gentlemen of Received Wit and Reputation, have
given them in the Verses prefixed to this History; nor must I omit the Judgment
of a very ingenious Gentleman, which he sent in a Letter to the ATHENIAN
SOCIETY, (which being now in the Press, I got a sight of) It begins thus --

Gentlemen,
I happ^n'd to read that sheet of your ATHENIAN MERCURY in which you resolved a
Query concerning some Actions of ^RUT ES, that resemble Reason, your Discourse
there was so very acute and solid that it envited me to peruse diverse others,
which without flattery, gave me that esteem for you, that I resolved to lend my
best assistance, to render your Endeavors beneficial to the World, which I
ought to suppose is the Mark you Aim at. I look on your Undertaking, as one of
the most laudable Projects, our Age has invented, and if prudently managed, the
most conducing to improve Knowledge in the generality of Mankind according to
their several Capacities -- after this he proceeds to some very good advice,
for which I refer you to the 12. Numbers, which, complete the 6th. Volume;
besides (...) general and increasing Applause of all the Nation, all (...)
together has made them surmount all the (...) impotent Endeavors of their past
and present (...) and fixed them beyond the power of those (...) ^OODING ENVT
shall produce hereafter.


Having thus run through all the points I proposed to my self upon my
resolution of Writing of this History, with a much greater brevity, I confess,
than what the well handling a Subject of this extent (...), I shall here
conclude, with a short View of what I have done.

In the first part, I have represented the NOVELTY, occasion, and manner of its
Invention; the Advantages it afforded the World, as the making that familiar to
many which was before confined within too narrow a compass, and recommending
the beauty of Knowledge to them, who were frightened from it by the Mercenary
Schools; whereas its easy Charms in the Athenian Dress, will excite many to
the study of Wisdom; they, at least, whose necessary Business will not permit a
more tedious Disquisition, may gather good notions of things by a mere cursory
reading of the weekly Mercuries, which will be no small improvement of
Civility, and Conversation. Farther, I showed, that it was unreasonable, that
they to whom Nature had given a noble Genius should be denied, when grown up,
the improvement of it (without the tedious Discipline of the School) because
their Parents had neglected, or their Circumstances hindered it when young;
that they who naturally slight Learning, will do so still, since this Design is
to improve, not alter Nature; that it were an Injustice, that they who value it
should be deprived of it, because confined to Languages: Nor is it reasonable
that a Pedant should esteem himself above others, for one without the other. I
shall only add here to these Considerations, that whereas this was begun in War
( though Peace is generally the Mother of new Arts, and Sciences) so it has
several Advantages proper to the Temper, and Exigencies of such a hurrying, and
martial time, when Arms, and Stratagems take up too much of our hours, to
permit us to spend many in the Enquiries into Truth, and all sorts of Learning,
by the perusal of voluminous Tracts.

Nor did I forget the Difficulties which presented themselves to the Members of
the Society, to hinder their engaging in this Affair; first, as to answering
all Quaeries well, and to the satisfaction of those that pretend to follow
Reason for their Rule, all Sciences being so very d^iputable; as also from the
Envy, and Malice of others; and lastly, from the different Humors of the
Quaerists. Nor could I pass over the due Praise of the First that set it on
foot.

In the second part I endeavored, according to the best of my Knowledge, to
represent the Progress, Methods, and Performances of the SOCIETY when
established, which if I should have run into the Vastness that the Subject
required, I must have swelled my Book into a Volume as big as all they had
writ; but designing this as the Quaerist's Companion, or Pocketbook, I was
forced not only to omit the abundance of difficult Texts of Scripture they have
explained, and other matters of Divinity, but a no less uumber of Philosophical
Questions, and only inserted References to those that are Medicinal,
Chirurgical, and Mathematical, etc. thinking that sufficient to direct any one
in all his Quaeries to the Society. Nor was it possible in so voluminous a
Miscellany to give every Member his due Performance, especially since I confess
my Ignorance as to that particular; however, the Talents of each were so
universal, that if Sickness or absence of a Member happened, it was easily
supplied by the Abilities of the rest. I shall only add, that they jointly
assist one another in all things that require Consultation; and, that they have
advanced several things that are wholly NEW, and explained those Difficulties in
a little time, which one would judge the business of Ages. In this same part I
have a little insisted upon an imperfect Defense of their Poetry, though any
one that believes, that a Member of this Society was concerned in the search
after Wit, will think my Labor ill spent in persuading the World of what it
must grant, that they have not a little; but I directed my Discourse to those
who were so abounding in themselves, that they denied it. I have also (as I
think every man of Honor ought) undertaken their Defense for answering the
Ladies Quaeries.

In the third part, I have in few words given a Prospect of what the World is
suddenly to expect from the Learned Pens of our Athenians, and likewise what it
has reason to hope hereafter. Nor did I forget the Oppositions this Undertaking
has met with, with a too-favourable account (when I could have done much more)
of both the Principles of its Opposers, and the Injustice of their Endeavors:
In all which, if I can merit Pardon from that Ingenious Society, and the more
judicious part of the World, I shall think I have attained to no small piece of
Happiness, and Success.

LAUS DEO.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Conclusion of this History, I have received these two following
Letters, the first of which shows, that my Design is (much against my will)
discovered to a Member of the Athenian Society, and also what I have said in
his just Praise; which notwithstanding his modest Letter, I shall never
retract, but must only add one thing which I had forgot, and that is, That his
Knowledge in SACRED WRIT does not a little adorn his other Accomplishments, as
may be seen in the management of that Controversy against the Anabaptists,
which I have spoken more fully of in the preceding part of this History. I have
adventured to transcribe his Letter verbatim for the Press, rather choosing to
add to my rudeness in acting without his License for it, than in not doing him
that Justice which he deserves. It Is as follows.

SIR,
I Am informed, that you have begun to write the History of the Athenian
Society, and that you have taken a particular notice of me as the first
Undertaker, and under the name of a Mathematician, the last of which I do
hereby disown; as for your other Encomiums, and Performances, which (I Am told)
you have attributed to me, I can deny nothing of 'em but the M^rit, and could
wish you would spared your Character till I had better deserved it; for I have
neither that Fondness nor Vanity for any thing I Have done, to prefer a noise
about it to its own silent merit, if it had any. Pray pardon me, if I desire
you would alter your Character of me, or transferr it to the rest of my
Brethren of the Athenian Society, who better deserve it: Or if it be too late,
by reason of some sheets already printed, that you would a little soften it, or
make the best Excuse you can in those that are to come; for I look upon the
Applause and Scandal of the Age to be Synonimous words amongst such as are
really wise, and the reverse of 'em much more eligible to

Sir, your humble Servant, R. S.


By this Letter indeed will appear the great modesty of this Gentleman; nor is
that of the rest of his Brethren less: But though Modesty be an excellent Virtue,
yet sometimes its Dictates are not to be obeyed; as here, when out of a
Self-denial, and humble Opinion of himself, it would oblige me not to give this
Gentleman what is his due, and rob the World of Great Examples, with which it
is so ill furnished.

The other Letter is from the Gentleman, who gave me an insight into the
Affairs of this Society, which I Will add, because it gives a farther light into
the Subject of my History; only I must omit the beginning of it, being a Praise
of my Performance, which I am absolutely sure I do not at all deserve.

SIR,
-- -- and since you have made that use of the Information you got of me, I
wish you had communicated your Design sooner, that I might have given you some
other Hints, as necessary as any you have had, concerning the more secret
Transactions of the Athenian Society, as to the order they observe in their
Conversation when they meet, though of different years, that makes no confusion,
though upon such different, and difficult Subjects, a Moderator being always
chose by majority of Votes, to determine any point in Controversy; and it is
unanimously agreed, that whenever any Member is absent on any occasion, he
shall transmit his Papers, for the Approbation, and concurrence of the whole
Society, unless in some particular cases: And if any more select Notion, or
refined Thought, is reposited in the Mind of any one of them, it is freely
imparted to the whole by Word, or Writing, and by them improved sit for the
public view; they never choosing easy Questions, but always something that may
be curious, and diverting; if they affected the contrary, they might satisfy
abundance of their impertinent Quaerists, though some of those that carry an
easy Fac^, are very difficult to resolve; as that about the Chequer, Tyburn,
Septuagesima, etc. They never put in any ridiculous Questions themselves, or
abuse their Quaerists, or their Objectors, but are as willing to learn as to
inform others, it being the standing Law of the Society, not to undervalue
other ingenious Persons. They allow there are extraordinary men in all
Sciences, excelling any in this Society; but there has not been any Bookseller
yet so happy as to find so many to answer this great End. By Time, and Exercise
they themselves own, they have been informed by their Quaerists. When Authors
are silent upon any point, or come not up to the Question, the Law is, That no
Member shall publish the Solution till he has imparted his Reasons to the
Society for their Approbations. I hear they are resolved to correct some
Answers as soon as they have leisure; and they have excluded one Member, for
making a frequent breach of this Rule, because their design is to leave nothing
imperfect, as near as they can.

Yours to command, C. B.


Having received this Letter, I thought necessary to insert it, since the
Contents of it were wanting to make this HISTORY complete.

FINIS.

