A SERMON ON THE Sin of Stealing Custom, AND THE Duty of Paying Tribute: From
the 13. Romans 7. v.

Preached at St. Peter's Exon: By JOHN GILBERT, M. A. one of the Canons
Residentiary of that Church; and Vicar of St. Andrew's Plymouth.

(...).

Chrysostom. Hom. 13. Romans Majores nostri ideo copiis omnibus abundabunt, quia
Deo Decimas dabant and Caesari Censum reddebant.

Apud August. Tom. 10. Hom. 48. EXON: Printed by Sam. Darker, and Sam. Farley,
for Charles Yeo, Bookseller, 1699.

ROMANS 13 Chap. 7 Ver. Render to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom
to whom Custom.
AMONG many other Things, with which the Enemies of Christianity aspersed those
who professed that pure and holy Religion; this was one, that they were of
implacable and turbulent Spirits, and Enemies to the Civil Government: For they
not complying with the Heathenish Customs of Swearing by the Emperor's Genius,
Sacrificing for their Safety, and Worshipping of them as Deities, were
represented as Enemies to Caesar; and their Religion and Principles as
destructive of Government. Therefore, the Apostles, that they might wipe off
this Aspersion, and that the Powers then in being, might not have any jealousy
of Christianity, as an Enemy to their Authority and Power, took frequent
occasions to enforce the Duty of Subjection to it, and of being Conscientious
in the Payment of those Tributes and Customs, which were required for the
Support of it, as we find in the Text.

Render to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom.

In discoursing on which words,

1. I shall show what is meant by Tribute and Custom.

2. I shall consider the Nature of the Command, which enjoins the Payment of
these Things.

3. I shall show the Opinion of some Eminent Divines, concerning the Obligation
of this Precept.

Lastly, I shall conclude with a brief Application.

1. To show what is meant by Tribute and Custom.

And hereby I understand the Legal Taxes Non modo Portoria and indictiones, sed
alios quoque reditus. Calv.
which are appointed for the Support of the Government, under which we live,
and enjoy Protection and Safety.

But some are more Critical in the Explication Vectigalia pro mercibus dantur,
Tributa pro solo and capite. Grot.
of the words, and they tell us, That Custom, denotes the Tax laid upon Trade;
and Tribute, that which is laid on the Persons or Estates of Men. To the like
purpose, (...) dicitur Tributum quod in capita civium imponitur: ^ quicquid
alio Nomine solvitur: Beza: Strigel. Aret. Gerhard.
Beza, and others, explain these words, That Tribute is a Polrate, Custom what
is payable upon any other account.

And having showed what is meant by Tribute and Custom. I come in the

2d. Place; to consider the Nature of the Est injustum quod Naturae Societatis
repugnat. Gro^
Command, which injoins the Payment of these Things.

And here it will appear, that this is one of the Moral Laws, and of universal
Obligation. Because

1. It has its foundation in the Nature of Things, being a most necessary
Means Prima justitia est in Deum: Secunda in Patriam: Amb. Lib. 1. de off.
for the common Safety. The great Principle, or Law of Nature, is the Welfare
and Happiness of Mankind, and whatever is necessary to this, we are obliged to
it by the Law of Nature.

Now there is nothing more necessary to the Happiness of Mankind than
Government. But Government cannot subsist, and Vectig. and Tribut. veluti
firmamento Respub. Nititur. Bodi. de Repub. li. 6. p. 1028.
the common Peace cannot be preserved, without a Power and Force to defend us
against the Enemies of it. And this Power cannot be maintained without Tributes
and Customs; and hence it is evident, the Payment Nec quies Gentium sine armis,
nec arma sine stipendiis, nec stipendia sine Tributis haberi possunt. Tacit.
of them becomes due by the Law of Nature. And the very Heathens were not so
blinded with Avarice as we are; and by the Light of Nature they were convinced
of the Necessity of this Duty, and the Obligations we are under for the
Practice of it. Cicero Subsidium Belli and Nervus reipub. Orat pro Manl.
Tributis Magistratibus denegatis, extremam Reip. perniciem impendere. Live. Lib.
7. p. 78.
styles Tribute the Support of War, and the Sinews of the Commonwealth. And
Menenius Agrippa in Levy declares, inevitable Ruin must needs follow the
denying of Tribute for the Support of Government. But

2. The Apostle, in the Verse before the Text, says, That Governors are God's
Ministers, attending continually on that very Thing. That is, they spend their
Time and Magistratus Gravissimas curas and Labores pro subditorum incolumitate
sustinet, aequum est ut qualicunque mercedis Loco Tributa persolvantur. Ger. de
Magist. Pol. p. 921.
their Strength for the Good of the Commonwealth: they undergo great Care and
Trouble; are exposed to great Hazards and Dangers, that we may enjoy the
Comforts of this Life, and sit quiet under our Vines and our Fig Trees. And for
this cause, says the Apostle, pay you Tribute also; and in the Text, Render,
therefore, Tribute to whom Tribute is due. So that the Apostle Tributum non
gratuitum sed Redhostimentum Patrei nii and Defension^s. Freher. Dissert.
inferring this Duty from the consideration of the Industry and Diligence, the
Care and Trouble, which Governors undergo in the discharge of their Office, it
is an Act of Commutative Justice; and upon this account, as well as that before
mentioned, it is a part of the Law of Nature, and by which all Men are obliged.
And of this Nature

3. It will appear to be, because it is, a proof of our Subjection to the
Government, Suum quod Magistratui jubemur dare, sunt Obedientia in Licitis and
Honestis, Reverentia and Timor pro ipso and Tributa. and Vectigalia chemnit.
Loc. Theo. pars 3. p. 231.
under which we live. It is by the Apostle conjoined with the Precepts for
Subjection, mentioned in the former Verses, and the denying of this Tribute
disowns the Authority, by which it is injoined. So that if Subjection to
Government be a moral Duty, this must needs be so too.

And having showed, that the Duty in the Text is a Branch of the Law of Nature,
I proceed in the

3d. Place, to show what the Opinion of the most eminent Divines, both Ancient
and Modern, has been concerning the Obligation of this Precept, whether it
bind the Conscience for paying those Tributes and Customs, which are imposed by
Law or not.

Justin Martyr, who lived so nigh the Apostles, (...), etc. Orat. Ad. Ant.
that he was styled one of their Disciples, in his Apology to the Emperor
Antoninus, does not only mention the peaceable Subjection of the Christians to
the Emperor, their constant prayers for his Health, and the Prosperity of the
Government; but also their conscientious paying of the Tribute, for the Support
of the Empire, and this as obliged to it by the command of Christ, To render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

Not long after this, another Apology was written for the Christians by
Tertullian: Vectigalia gratias Christianis agunt ex fide de pendentibus
Debitum, qua, alieno fraudando abstinemus. Tert. Apol. Sect. 42. p. 72.
and he says, they paid the Tribute, with the same Fidelity, with which they
abstained from all Frauds, thereby declaring it was as much against their
consciences to be guilty of public as private Frauds.

And St. Ambrose, (or whoever was the Author of those Commentaries on the
Epistle Bell. etc. ascribe them to Hill. Diac. Tom. 5. p. 232.
to the Romans, which go under his Name) speaking of the reason why St. Paul
commands the paying of Tribute before Honor, says, Quia Major Causa aut major
necessitas, Because there is greater Reason or greater Necessity for it. The
legal Revenue is the Strength and Sinews of the Government; and the
withholding of this, weakens it, and exposes it to contempt: It tends to make
a Prince a Beggar. This is, therefore, of greater moment, than giving to Kings
bended Knees, or pompous Titles; these, without the other, are little better
than Mockery or Scorn; little better than the Soldiers honoring of Christ,
when they bended the Knee, and said, Hail King of the Jews.

But I proceed to consider the Opinion of some Modern Divines, who lived since
the Reformation, and who have greater Authority with some than more ancient
Writers; and therefore, I shall give you some account of them, both Foreign and
of our Church and Nation. Vectigalia and Tributa persolvant, etc. non quia
Cogimur, sed quia Deo gratum est obsequium. Calv. Romans 13. 7. v.


Calvin speaks plainly for it in his Commentary on the Text, he joins this with
other Duties to be performed to our Governors, not by compulsion, but as an
acceptable Service to God.

Peter Martyr, who came into England, and was highly instrumental in our
Reformation, speaking of the paying Tributes legally imposed, admires, Quo Jure
and ratione, Loc. com. p. 307.
by what Law, or upon what account, any can think themselves exempted from it.

Aretius, in his Common Places, has a p. 877.
large Tract on this Subject; and he proves, by many Arguments, that Men ought
to pay the Tributes and Customs by lawful Authority imposed on them, and this
not propter Iram, for fear of the Penalty of the Law, sed ut conscientiae
satisfaciamus coram Deo, that we may keep a good conscience toward God.

The same may be found in the Works of Episcopius, who fully answers the
Objections that can be made to exempt the consciences of Men from the
Obligation of this Episc. quaest. 28. p. 26, 27.
Precept.

I might have given you large Citations from Grotius, Gerhard, Philip of
Limburg, but I am confined to narrow Limits, and must hasten to give an account
of the Judgment of some learned Divines, of our own Church and Nation.

The learned Bishop Tailor, in his Discourse of Laws Penal and Tributary, is
plain in this case. Tribute, says he, is due by the Duct. Dubit. Lib. 3. p.
125.
Laws of Religion, where it is due by the Laws of the Nation. And, therefore,
those Persons are very regardless of their Eternal Interest, who thinks it
lawful Prize whatever they can take from the Custom-House, etc.

Let no Man think that, because some Subjects Farm the Customs, and that the
Portion which is concealed, does not lessen the Incomes of the Prince,
therefore it may be Lawful to hide from them all they can. For the Farmer has
what he gets in the right of the Prince, and in his own right he has nothing
from the Subject, but from his Supreme who is therefore bound to defend that
Right, and complain of that Wrong. And the Husbandmen in the Gospel, who
denied to pay the Stewards of the King the Fruits of the Vineyard, which in
their King's Right were demanded of them, were cast into utter Darkness.

And Mr. Baxter proposes this case, when Christi Direct. part 4. p. 164.
an Estate is entrusted with a Friend, to secure it from paying great Taxes or
Tribute to the King, whether a Man may keep such a Trust? and he answers, He
may not, the Taxes being Just and Legal for the maintenance of the Magistrate,
or the preservation of the Commonwealth.

Now that the Non-payment of the Tribute and Customs, appointed by the Law, is
an Offense, some will not deny; but they think it hard that such Offenses
should be ranked with Robberies and Thefts. But, though this Practice may be no
Theft, in a Law sense, that having not declared it Felony; yet, in a Scripture
sense, it is no better: and for this, I could produce many Divines of great
Note, who have ranked this among the Sins forbidden by the Eighth Commandment.

Mr. Dod, in the Exposition of that Command, has these Words:

For things pertaining to the Commonwealth, that is another kind of public
Robbery; when Men that have the disposing and ordering of things, that pertain
to the Commonweal, and are to be used for the common Good, will take them to
themselves, and make a private Gain of them: this is a foul Fault, and a high
Degree of Theft, so much the more heinous, because it is the more general, and
greater wrong by how much it touches more.

And Dr. Towerson, in his Explication of In res singulorum majus est dominium
regis ad bonum commune quam dominorum singularium: Grot. de Ju. Bell. and Pa.
Lib. 1. c. 1. Sect. 6.
the Eighth Commandment, says:

In as much as the Public is capable of a Property, as well as private Persons,
in as much as it is not only capable of a Property, but cannot subsist without
it; hence it comes to pass, there may be a theft of public Goods, as well as
private; and consequently that, as well as the other, to be concluded within
the Force of the Prohibition.

And from hence it will follow, says that Learned and Pious Doctor:

That denying just Tributes, are Entrenchments upon the Goods of the Public,
and consequently proper Thefts.

And he afterward affirms, That As the Mischief which arises from public
Thefts, is much greater than that of private ones, consequently they are much
more criminal.

Chemnitius, amongst the Sins forbidden by Peculatus, Furtum quod committitur
in Repub. vel subtrahendo vel non persolvendo res communitatis. Loci. Theol.
pars 2. p. 81.
this Command, reckons the Offense which the Romans called Peculatus, and which
he defines to be a Robbing of the Commonwealth, by withholding, or not paying
what is due to it.

To these, I shall only add the Judgment of two Reverend Prelates, both once
well known and esteemed in this City, Bishop Hall, I mean, and Bishop Hopkins.

The first, in his Irrefragable Propositions, Bishop Hall's Remains, page 348
affirms:

That no Prejudice of another Man's Right can be so dangerous and sinful, as
that Prejudice which is done to the Right of Public and Sovereign Authority.

And the other, in his Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, declares:

That he, who detaineth any thing, page 75
which the Sentence of the Law adjudgeth to another, is guilty of Theft and
Robbery.

And thus I have laid before you the Opinion of some eminent Writers, among
many others that might be mentioned.

These Authorities, I hope, will be sufficient, especially since there is not
any Protestant Author of the contrary Opinion. And Vide Amadaeum Guimenium, p.
70
though a few of the Romish Casuists may be of another Judgment, this I think
will give little Reputation to the Cause, and as little ease to a Protestant
Conscience; For Vid. Decret. Inno 2do. Mart. 1679. and Prop. 36, 37.
these are the Men who have affirmed it is Lawful to Steal in Necessity; that
Servants may Steal from their Masters, when they think their Wages is not
sufficient for their Labor, and have published other Opinions, so impious,
that they were condemned as Pernicious and Scandalous by Pope Innocent the
Eleventh, and his Cardinals.

Now this matter, as most wherein the Consciences of Men are concerned, may be
considered with respect to many particular Cases: As what Men may be obliged
to, when the Tributes imposed are excessive, and carry no proportion to the end
for which they are given; as also, when we are certain they will be misapplied,
not to the Advantage and Preservation, but the Ruin of those that pay them.

But I omit the consideration of these, and the like cases, in which we are not
concerned, that I may answer some Popular Objections that are made in Defense
of the Non-payment of what the Law requires of us.

And one is grounded upon an obscure place of Scripture, and the Precept of the
Text being plain, that ought not to be objected, but understood agreeably to
it: However, I will briefly consider it. And the place is in the 17. cap. of
St. Matthew. from the 24. v. to the end.

They that came to receive the Tribute Money, V. 24,
came to Peter, and said, Does your Master pay Tribute?

He says, Yes. And when they came into V. 25,
the House, Jesus prevented him, saying, What think thou, Simon? Of whom do
the Kings of the Earth take Custom or Tribute, of their own Children, or of
Strangers?

Peter says unto him, Of Strangers. Jesus V. 26,
says unto him, then are the Children free.

Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, V. 27.
go to the Sea, and cast an Hook, and take up the Fish that first comes up,
and when thou have opened his Mouth, thou shall find a piece of Money, that
take, and give unto them for thee and me.

Now there is a great Controversy among learned Men, What is meant by this
Tribute, whether it was the half Shekel that was paid to the Temple, or some
other Tribute exacted by the Roman Emperor: Whatsoever it were, it matters not
much to the purpose, for which it was objected. Christ only mentions a
Privilege he might claim for Si censum Dei filius solvit quis tu tantus es, qui
non putes esse solvendum. Ambr. Redite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, id est,
Nummum Tributum, etc. quomodo ipse reddidit Tributa pro se and Petro. Hier. in
Loc.
himself and his Domestics, as he was the Son of God. And I never heard of any
that objected this Scripture, as exempting Men from paying just and legal
Tributes, but the Pope and his Clergy, and the German Anabaptists. And several
of the Fathers, were so far from thinking this place would justify the
withholding of Tribute, that they enforce the Payment of it from this very
Passage.

And there is as little weight in another Popular Objection, as in this, That
the Laws injoyning Tribute are Penal, and the Suffering of the Penalty, when
inflicted, satisfies the Law. For Penalties are annexed to secure Lex poenalis
eo fine lata est ut metu poenae Subditi cogantur ad officium. Dr. Sand.
Praelect. 18. p. 313.
Obedience to Laws, and cannot justify us in the Breach of them. And therefore,
when Lucius Neratius gave every one he met a Box on the Ear, and withal, paid
to every one Twenty Five Asses, which was the Penalty imposed by the Law of the
Twelve Tables; Homo imprebus atque immani v^^ord a Aul. Gel. Noct. At. p. 608.
He was, notwithstanding this, judged to be a most vile and wicked Person. And
this being a Duty, by the express Command of the Law of God, as well as that of
Nature, it is absurd to imagine, the Obligation to it can be taken off by
Suffering the Penalty annexed by a Humane Law.

I come now to the APPLICATION, the

Last Thing Promised.

1. To those who have Transgressed this Command in the Text, by injuring the
King, in withholding what by Law and Right belongs unto him.

2. To those who have not been guilty of these public Frauds, but have
conscientiously rendered to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as well as to
God, the things that are Gods. And

Last. To those who are concerned in receiving these Tributes in the Text, or
are in any Place or Office, by which they are entrusted with any part of the
Public Revenue.

1. To those who have transgressed this Command in the Text, injuring their
King and their Country, by withholding what is given by Law for their Security
and Support.

Bishop Latimer, a famous Prelate and Martyr of our Church, in his Sermon, on
those words, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, affirms, the King
has as good p. 206.
right to what is given by Parliament, as to any Inheritance; styles those
Thieves who withold it; and denounces the Damnation of Hell against them.
And this Doctrine had such influence upon his Auditors, that several Hundred
Pounds were brought to him for Restitution of Wrongs, of this Nature, done p.
113.
to the King, and which he faithfully paid to the Exchequer.

And though I have small hopes, this weak Discourse should have the same
Success, yet I must do my Duty, and leave the Success to God, and your own
Consciences.

If the Public be capable of a Property, if the King have as true a Right to
what is given by Law, as a Private Man, to what he enjoys by Inheritance or
Purchase, then have we the same obligation, to make Restitution for public as
private Frauds.

Let, therefore, the Necessity of Restitution, be applied, to engage to the one
as well as the other. If in this we are defective, Non agitur Paenitentia sed
Fingitur, we do not practice Repentance, but dissemble and counterfeit it: all
is but as the Sackcloth of Ahab, and the disfigured Face of a Pharisee. When we
have done wrong to any one, we do not truly repent, unless we undo it as much
as possibly we can, and set the injured Person in the same condition we found
him. Our Savior says, We must bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance; Fructum
Congruum, Fruit which is Congruous, or agreeable to Repentance, and amendment
of Life. Now when a Man has wronged another by Oppression or Fraud, if he have
unfeigned sorrow for this, a hatred and abhorrence of his past Injustice, is it
Congruous, is it Agreeable to this, to keep what is unjustly gotten? To declaim
against the Temptation, and yet keep the Bait by which it prevailed; to confess
wherein we have Injured the King, and not (to use the Prophet's Words) give
again what we have Robbed, are not these Matters Incongruous? Are they not
contrary, and plainly incousistant one with another? We should, therefore,
consider, that, unless we testify the truth of our Repentance, by making
Restitution for Injuries of all kinds, we cannot expect that God will be
reconciled to us: When God is reconciled, the Curse is removed, and all that he
has is sanctified to him. Such a one, as Moses expresses it, is blessed in
the City, and blessed in the Field, the Deuteronomy. 28. 3.
Fruit of his Ground, and the Increase of his Kine, the Flocks, and the Sheep,
the Basket, and the Store, all is Blessed. But it is not thus, when ill gotten
Goods are not restored, when our Basket is filled by Fraud, and our Store is
the Fruit of Robbery. A Curse, and not a Blessing, always cleaves to ill gotten
Wealth, and makes that of Solomon infallibly true; That better is a little with
Righteousness, Pro. 16. 8.
than great Revenues without right. For there is a Woe denounced against him,
who increases that which is not his own. So that if Hab. 2. 6.
we keep that, to which we have no just Title, Trade with it, and Gain by it,
there is a Curse goes with the Principal and Interest too: It enters (as
another Prophet says) Zech. 5. 4.
into the House, remains in the midst of it, and consumes it, with the Timber
thereof, and the Stones thereof. A Curse cleaves to ill gotten Goods, it is
most surely entailed to the Estate, and descends with it from Generation to
Generation, and is not to be cut off but by Restitution.

And till we restore these Earthly Things to which we have no Right and Title,
we can have no right to the invaluable Riches of the other Life, as well as the
Blessings of this.

This is plain from what we read of Zacheus, the Publican, who (as was usual
with Men of that Employment) had been guilty of great Injustice, and against
the Emperor, in all likelihood, as well as private Persons. And when our
Savior went to his House, he spoke not one word of comfort to him, till he
declared the sincerity of his Repentance to him, by a full and ample
restitution: Behold, half of my Goods I give to the St. Luke 19. cap. 8. 9. v*
Poor; and if I have taken any thing from any Man by false Accusation, I
restore him fourfold. Then, and not till then, Christ says, This Day is
Salvation come to thine House.

Now let us not think, that those only who are guilty of private Frauds, are
under these great and weighty Obligations to Restitution.

Can we think, that God will punish those who wrong the meanest Man, and not be
avenged on those who do the same to his Vicegerents? Their Royal Dignity
highly aggravates the Violence that is done to their Persons; and so it does
the Injustice that is done to their Property. And therefore, in the Parable,
with the Killing of the Heir, our Savior joins the Seizing his Inheritance, as
next to it in guilt. St. Mat. 21. 38.


2. As to those who have not been guilty of these Public Frauds, but have
conscientiously Rendered to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as well as to
God, the things that are God's: Let such consider their happy Condition, and be
ever careful to keep their Consciences void of Offense, both toward God, and
toward Man.

Restitution is one of the most difficult Duties of Religion, and Men are very
hardly persuaded to perform it sincerely and fully; and therefore, happy are
they who are not by any unjust Practices under any obligation to it.

When, therefore, you have opportunity to enrich your selves by public as well
as private Frauds, consider if you use the Opportunity, and do the Wrong, all
must be restored, or you are undone for ever.

And when the Approaches of Death and Eternity shall awaken your Consciences,
with what Horror will you reflect upon your former Injustice and Dishonesty?
How will those words of St. Peter terrify 2 Ep. 2. 9.
an Unjust Man, That he reserveth such to the Day of Judgment to be punished.
And it will not be an easy matter so to make Restitution for Injuries, as to
quiet our Consciences, there being difficult Cases, by which the mind of Man
may be perplexed and disturbed. But Just and Honest Dealing, the excellent Rule
to Render to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, as well as to God, the things
that are God's, is a plain, an open, and safe way to Heaven. And it is the
highest Madness to put our selves in that Condition, in which our way to Heaven
will be full of Difficulty, Perplexity, and Trouble.

Consider how it was with Judas, when he had received the Wages of
Unrighteousness, he had no quietness in his mind, and in Horror he restored it
to those from whom he received it. And the like remorse and anguish of mind,
will seize upon us, if we heap up Wealth, by the like or any other unjust or
evil Practices. Of this Solomon has given us fair Warning: Bread of Deceit is
sweet to a Man, Pro. 10. 17.
but afterward his mouth shall be filled with Gravel. The meaning is, Men
please themselves at first with the successful Arts of Fraud and Injustice: But
when their Consciences shall be awakened, Remorse and Horror will seize upon
them, and all their Pleasure will be turned into Sorrow and Trouble. In this
case, Men are like those in a Surfeit, nothing will give ease, but the
Vomitting up the Load that lies upon them. And what a vain Thing is it for a
Man to lay those Loads on his Conscience, under which he can have no ease till
he Disgorge, by discharging himself of the ill gotten Gain, which if kept, will
be but a Moth to consume what is honestly gotten; and for which we must also
account before the Tribunal of Christ in another World.

Last. What has been said concerning the Obligation that lies upon us, for the
paying of just and legal Tributes, for the Support of the Government, and the
Public Peace, should also be considered by all those who are concerned in the
receiving of these Tributes, and who are in any Place or Office, by which they
are entrusted, with any part of the Public Revenue. When these Men are not
content with their competent Stipends, and Enrich themselves by misapplying the
public Treasure entrusted with them; this is a greater Offense than that before
mentioned. It is not only high Injustice, and, in a Scripture sense, Robbery,
but Treachery; and, if by Oath they are obliged to be faithful, it is Perjury
too. Yet such there have been in all Ages; and this made Cato complain, A. Gel.
p. 352.
Fures privatorum furtorum in Nervo atque in Compedibus aetatem agunt, Fures
Publici in Auro atque in Purpura. Those who Rob private Men, live in Chains and
Fetters, but those who Rob the Public, brave it in Gold and Purple.

These are the great Pests of a Commonwealth, Dent tales Reges, tales Judices,
tales debitorum redditores, and exactores ipsius Fisci, quales praecepit esse
doctrina christiana. August. ep. 5. ad Marel.
more mischievous than those who Rob by Day or Night. The Roman State was
raised to its Height and Glory, under such Men as Fabricius and Scipio, who
studied to Enrich their Country, and were contented to be Poor themselves. And
the want of this Public Spirit to keep Men from Preying on the Revenue of the
Kingdom, is a more fearful Praesage of Ruin, than any Monstrous Births or
Blazing Stars.

From these Pests GOD of his Mercy preserve us, and send us always such as
Moses sat over Israel.
FINIS.

