FONS SANITATIS: Or the HEALING SPRING AT WILLOWBRIDGE IN Staffordshire. Found
out by the Right Honorable the Lady JANE GERARD Baroness of BROMLEY.

Published for the Common Good, By SAMVEL GILBERT, Chaplain to Her Honor, and
Rector of Quatt.

The WELL having been of Happy Consequence to all its Neighboring Diseased
Persons, and many Strangers, to whom Its Infant Fame has (but yet) lisped its
Virtues.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1676.

The Epistle to the READER.
Reader.
IF the Noise of these Waters have not sounded in your Ears, the following
Catalogue of some few of the many Cures done by it, are withal truth and
integrity made public, many amazing effects of it being lost through the
neglect of enquiring the Persons, Names and Places, where they Live: And though
this Excellent Water be but in its infancy, being but lately discovered; yet
it is found a Physician, not inferior to many that have taken their degree: And
as good a Surgeon and Occulist, as those tha^ have served an Apprentiship:
As also a Farrier, which my love to that Species of Creatures makes me insert,
for Curing several Maladies in Horses.

To show how universally Restorative these Waters are to Debilitated Limbs, it
has been often experimented, that they not only extend the contraction, but
contract and comfort the relaxation of feeble Nerves and Sinews, even to
admiration. And in an Incredible short time; which is performed by Drinking and
Bathing, although it be a Cold-Water, against which some may object; yet
methinks it is no^ unreasonable to answer; That tha^ temper improves this virtue
in it, b^lcent'ring the natural heat, which makes it return to the extreme
part^ with greater vigor, and so to procure an equal circulation of the Bood,
And it is believed they will hardly fail, where repletion is no^ wanting.

It Heals all Foul Scabs, and Ulcers, Scald-heads, the King's Evil, Scales
Bones; and heals by Extracting, and Cleansing the humors that cause the
Malady. And is an incomparable Remedy for Swellings in any part; and gives
immediate Ease to Aches and Pains, and Palsies. And by Drinking and Bathing,
Cures Scorbutic and Dropecal Distempers, the Stone, the Colic and the
Rickets; yet of flowing not mercenary administrations.

I have heard it is a Maxim: That no Mineral lies single, but certainly this
may pretend to come from a singular composition of them, by its Sanative
opperations: So excelling all I have heard of. And it is hoped, and believed,
there is no cause to fear it should loose its Virtue, it being not a lean
barren Spring, as most other Medicinal Waters, but a Stream so plentiful as it
is enough to turn a Mill.

But although I shall not pretend to Determine whether it be armed to encounter
and subdue Diseases, by running thorough Iron and Steel, or what other
Mineralls: For I assure you it is no Philosopher Writes to you; yet able to give
you this truest and best reason for their virtues, viz. Because the great
Preserver has given to the gift of Healing, to whom be Eternal Praise.

It Is farther added for the Inforformation of the Reader.
Reader.
THe Fame that is spread abroad of this Well, by those that have had the
fortune to use it, is not unknown to many, nor the Malice neither of some
Persons to all Mankind but themselves; no marvail then if exercised against the
reputation of this Water that is so much for their benefit: I wish such have
not occasion to make use of it, as some of the like stamp have done, that have
cried it down in public, and for the Curing of their own Distempers make use
of it in private; with such success as to perform what all their
Choicest-Medicaments have failed in. Like many Physicians, forbidding that to
others, which they use themselves.

It being indeed the Interest of the less Generous minded, both Physicians and
Surgeons, to beat down the fame of Cures done by this Water, to inhanse their
own Advantage, though to the utter ruin of many Diseased Persons.

But we need not spend the Readers, nor our own time in vindicating this Well
from the aspertion of such, or indeed of any: It is sufficiently able by the
daily effects of its Virtues produce, to wash off all spatlings, and raise its
own fame above all the noted Springs we have yet heard of: Of which you will be
farther satisfied by perusing the annexed and true account that we could take
of some Cures performed by it, that indeed would be beyond belief, were there
not good authority for them.

Nor would thus much as has been said; did not the glory of God lie buried in
our silence, which of all things we ought to be most concerned for: Shall so
great a mercy as this Healing Well be slighted? and his goodness not extolled?
Shall we be Cured by it, and he not Praised; the way purely not by concealing
his mercies in the wondrous effects of it, much less by celipsing them. As his
mercies shine openly and run freely, so let our acknowledgement too, and not be
clouded by derogating either from the Author, or means, by which he conveyes so
great a health to us.

Something Concerning Water in General. Of the Original, and the Reasons of the
several Virtues of Springs: With an account of the Healing Spring, in
Willowbridge-Park in Staffordshire.
AN exact Philosophical and Physical Treatise of Water in General, or in
particulars; Sea, River, Rain, or Spring Water, was never the Intention of the
Writer: which though not wholly out of his road, yet out of his compass of time
to perform, wanting all sorts of suitable Conveniences. But such light touches
that from his own reason fell in his way to this Spring, ftands in yours to the
account of some Cures it has performed, giving encouragement to some Pen more
ingenuously Industrious to give better satisfaction, of the admirable Virtues
of this Well.

Hypocrates (that great Master of reason, and Prince of Physicians, (as some
term him, not unworthily) affirms that Water and Fire are the two Principles of
life; giving (as well he may) water the pre-eminence, understanding thereby our
Radical Moisture, which is of such absolute necessity, that neither sensative
or vegitive creatures subsistence can be propt without it: For by its
deprivation, the one presently grows Hectical, the other Withers and decays.

And is fitly placed before Fire, Air, or Earth, for it extinguishes the
first, changes the second into its self, and devoureth the last. The most
mundane beings running the race of nature without Fire, but none without Water.
As we are abundantly beholding to that Element in our composition and
subsistence (having chiefest regard to the grandest power, God Almighty in the
formation and upholding of all things.) So for the rectifying of the motions of
the internal Machins of our Microcosmus's, and the repairing those breaches in
the walls thereof that our irregularities have made. Witness the advantage we
have by Water in general, but more by many particular Springs, whose use is
excellent for particular Distempers: but mostly for this Spring, the occasion
of what is hear made public, since God has been pleased so to bless it, and
us with having the advantage of it, as to enforce it with such virtues, as to
be a Catholicon (if rightly used) for most (if not all) Diseases in Man, or
Beast.

This Spring was first taken notice of, and several experiments tried with it,
by the most Ingenious and true vertuosa, that Right Honorable Lady Jane
Gerard, Baroness of Bromley, of Sandon in Staffordshire, whose Charitable care
and charge, in damming it out from the common Water, into which it delivered it
self, (a large Pool through which the River Terne runs, taking its beginning
about half a mile above it,) causing it to be divided into two large Baths; the
one for Men, the other for Horses. In both which the Spring rises with great
force in several places. And building a fair apiece Stone Conduit at the
head of the Springs to preserve water pure and clear for Drinking: Intending
also to build a Row of Rooms for the convenience of poor people to lodge in;
and an Undressing Room for persons of Higher Ranks that shall have occasion for
Bathing there, declaring the Nobleness of her Spirit, in such her concern for
the Public benifit of all Diseased persons, without the least glance on
self-interest: But the satisfaction of being useful to others.

This well is distant a quarter of a mile from Willowbridge Lodge (the finest
seated, and best compacted house of that nature) in the parish of Ashely, two
miles and a half off that famous house of Bromley in Staffordshire (both
possessed by that Honorable Lady before mentioned, the Inheritance of her
incomparable Son: The Right Honorable Digby Lord Gerard, Baron of Gerards
Bromley, Lord of Dutton of most noble parts as well as large fortunes.) Three
miles from Drayton in Shrop-Shire, five miles from Newcastle underline, six
miles from Eccleshall, seven miles from Namtwich, nine miles from Newport,
nine miles from Stone, eleven miles from Stafford, all Market Towns of Note;
and is Eastwardly from the Lodge, in a valley surrounded by several rises of
ground. The River Terne on the North, and Willowbridge Park on the South, on
the same side lies Ashley-Heath about a mile distant, which has been reputed
by the ablest Artist's in King James' time (the Learned Cambden) to be the
highest ground in England, and from whence it is supposed this Spring comes
flowing through at its breakings out, or off the face of a large Bed of good
and hard Building Stone.

Before we come to the wondrous effects of this Spring, 'twill be satisfactory
to some less knowing, to be informed of the original of all Springs; for whose
satisfaction I declare in short, (without mentioning the many oppinions about
it; and their Authors Discourses Pro, and Con, merely to show their mastery of
misterious words.)

That all Springs undoubtedly come from the Sea, through Meandring veins and
porositous passages of the Earth, forced through them even to or over the tops
of Mountains, and to their breakings out in so many places by that great weight
of water that lies behind them, pressing them forward; and are clarified from
the Sea Saltness in their passage: Good Lord Bacon.
authority affirming, that pits dug near the Sea, the water that soaks into
them, by that means becomes fresh.

Now the nature of the Spring, is suitable to the Qualities of that Earth, or
Minerals through which by its many turnings and windings in its passage through
the bowels of the Earth it runs; carrying with it either faculty, or substance,
or both.

Some Springs (as this we treat of) out of the subteraneal substances attract
faculties to each other, as those substances they pass through. Which solves
the Question of the Curious enquirer, why the same Spring should Cure diverse
Diseases, and they contrary, or having but small kin to each other; as (...)
any simples compounded together of natures repugnant to each other, having had
their due fermentation, working so upon one another, as to become incorporated,
with a concatenation of their virtues; may occasion the same Question, yet
produce in its effects a rare Medicine for most Diseases. and as it is most
powerful against those for which there was a greater quantity of suitable
Simples in the composition. So is each Spring of the greater force and quicker
dispatch in the Curing those Distempers, for which those Minerals it last and
most run through his, proper.

The virtues this Spring last participated, is conceived to be Sulphur and
Nitre by its Coldness, and driving out an internal Malady to the extreme parts
of the body, and its Balsamic virtue in healing it, and all sorts of Soa^s
whatever, that it with its virtues can reach either Internal, or External.

The Taste of this Water is extremely pleasant to most, near to that of new
milk mixed with common Spring water. But can give no pleusible reason of the
contrary and bitter relish it has left on the Pallets of some few, that have
given mean account thereof.

This Water is free from any manner of Tincture, but of a Crystal clearness,
some whereof standing but a little time in a clear Glass, which I often for
satisfaction tried, left a thick Oily foeces all over the Glass. A quantity of
it being exhaled over the fire, there has remained a substance of the
thickness and color of Honey; but we were debilirated for making Chimical
experiments of it for want of suitable Utensils: would but an Artist bestow
some pains upon it, 'twould certainly require his pains, and he thereby find
out the reasons of, and confirm those that (are not eye witnesses) may doubt
its virtues.

What this Water performs, you are informed in the Epistle to Reader, by a
Right Honorable, and though Female, yet a Pen of more than a Masculine strain
and vivacity, proceeding from so ready a Phaucis at all times, that the
richness thereof flows as much faster than she can write (though an incredible
swift hand) as this Spring outdoes the belief of many. Therefore the dull
account I might have given, would have seemed like flatest Water after the
briskest Wine.

However before we come to the Alphabetical account of the few of those many
Cures it has done since Spring was a twelvemonth: Those persons that desire to
make trial of this Water, that are not able to see a Physician for better
advice, are desired to follow these brief and easy rules

First, Rightly to consider the nature of their Distemper, and which way the
water must work to Cure them, and to take something that may prepare their
Bodies for it, to facilitate its operation; though few that methodically use
the water, and have time so to do, will stand in need thereof.

Secondly, that they Drink two or three days before they Bath, and that in the
morning, not overcharging their Stomachs at the first, but increasing* their
draughts every morning, and using if they can, some moderate exercise (as
walking) betwixt every three or four Glasses, and when they once find the water
to pass freely, by urine, or Stool, they may Drink the more freely. Then
whether they have any outward Distemper, or not, to Bath the whole body; the
time most proper, in the Morning? and after their drinking the water, not to
Dine till they find it clearly passed, which you may know by their Urines, if
it be any thing coulored when you make it, for till then it will be clear, and
if chiefly to work that way, to take heed of provoking sweating, which is a
great hindrance of the waters passage by Urine. An (...) of ability, to drink
their two or three first Glasses mixed with White Wind.

Thirdly, for their Dyer, to be moderate, and avoid all sort of Salt Meats, and
if they drink this water in the Evening, which may be done, (but not so proper
as in the Morning) to eat little or no Supper, if any, that which is of light
Digestion.

Fourthly, that they be not too hasty in leaving this water, but rather for a
settled Cure to stay two or three days longer than needs, that go on too soon;
and for encouragement read this ensuing and Just account as could be taken, of
some of the cures done by this Spring. Many having made use of it, that kept
their Distempers as close as they did the benefit they received by it; some
stealing the advantage of Bathing in it, when night had spread its sable mantle
over the surface of our hemisphaere (thinking the Stars were no Intelligencers)
thereby to hinder their Distempers well as Cures coming to appear in open day.
Like the ungrateful Lepers, ten Cured, but one found returning Praise.

Mercies so ill returned may surely make,
The Author of them a less Compass take,
About their Center; or it should him please,
His overflowing Springs of Mercies cease.
That you no more his favors should abuse,
Since Thanks that easy Tribute you refuse.
Aches.
1. A Tailor in Kemberton, near Shifnall in Shrop-shire, was so diseased in his
Shoulders and Arms with extreme pain, that he could not work at his Trade, nor
put on, or off his Clothes without help: coming to this Well, with one with him
to help him to Dress and Undress; the first night with Bathing in the water was
able to do it himself: And stayed no longer, receiving in that small time a
perfect Cure; being now as able to work as ever:

Attested by Mrs. Frances Wildie in Church-Eaton, Staffordshire.
2. Elizabeth Oakely of Shrewsbury, pained in her Shoulders, Arms, Legs,
indeed all over; so that she had small use of her Limbs Coming to the Well on
Tuesday last, the 4th. of July 1676. and there by Drinking and Bathing the
remainder of the week: On the Monday following went away perfectly Cured of all
her pains.

3. Mary Wood of Ridgley, in the County of Stafford, about nineteen years of
Age; having pains as the former, but with a large addition of a Scaby Scurfe
all over her body, was in a weeks time Cured of all her pains; her face and
body free from her Scurse, the skin remaining smooth and soft.

4. John Hancher of Knighton in Shrop-shire, middle Aged, for many years
tormented with pain in his Head, with Drinking this water, and Bathing his Head
therewith sometimes, was perfectly Cured.

5. Richard Scot of Pype-Yate in Shrop-shire, Aged about 50. years, Diseased
with extreme pain in his Stomach for three years space, having made use of
several Physicians, but found no help, till coming to this Well; where by
Drinking and Bathing he was perfectly Cured:

Attested by Mr. Thomas Cleyton OF Only in Staffordshire.
6. Mrs. Jane Reynolds of Mucklestone, of 60. years of Age in Staffordshire,
having an extreme pain in her Shoulder, running down her Arm to her Fingers;
with only Bathing it night and morning for three days in this water quite took
away the pain.

Taken from her own mouth by Samuel Gilbert.
7. Abraham Launder of the Parish of Muckleston, was troubled for twenty years
with a pain and weakness in one of his Wrists that he could not bare the weight
of a pound therewith; washing in this water three or four times, strengthened
his Wrist and took away the pain, so that he was never troubled since.

8. Margery Russel of Offeley in Staffordshire, Cured of Aches of her Bones
and Contractions of Sinnews.

If Aches you have from Cold or Country Caus^
Nere seek for distant waters Yorkshire Spaw^
Nor throw away your Money on each Quak,
That loudly of his Skill, on Stage does Crack.
Nor on some Pettycoat Doctresses,
One Medicine makes for all Diseases.
That speak most honey healing words to please yo^
Who of your Money not you pain will ease you.
Use then this Water, keep your Coin;
Your told for no ones prophet but your own.
Bitings.
9. Arthur Dickson of Kendal in Westmo^land, Aged 69. years, having been bit^^
with a Dog in the Calf of his Leg, so that si^ holes reached the Bone, and in a
small ti^^ wid'ned to that breadth, so that there mig^^ be two fingers buried
in each of them: H^ving before that Accident had (but more increased since) a
great pain in that Leg an^ Knee. In three weeks time at this well was r^leased,
of his pain, and his Sores Cured:

Taken from his own mouth, by Samuel Gilbert July 13. 1676.
Bloody Flux.
10. The Wife of Edward Hope of Mare i^ Staffordshire, Diseased with the
Bloody Flu^ four years: By this Water perfectly Cured;

Witnessed by, Francis Daniel.
Bruises.
11. Richard Scot of Pype-Yate in Shrop-shire, about 50. years of Age, being
croping a Tree, received a blow on the Calf of his Leg, that so bruised it,
that it became a Sore, that no Surgeon was able to Cure, though he made use
of the best he could get; and lying long under their hands. But a short time
Drinking and Bathing in this water, his Leg was perfectly restored to the
soundness of the other, and as well able to make use of it as ever.

Witnessed by Mr. Thomas Cleyton, of Only.
12. A Servant man of Abraham Launders of Pool-hall, near Oar in Shrop-shire,
that followed his VVaggon, the Wheel thereof bearing above twenty hundred
weight going over his Foot, so crushed it, that he lay under the Chirurgions
hands seven weeks with no other hopes of saving his Leg, but by cutting off his
Foot: Till Bathing in this water three weeks; was perfectly Cured, and again
able to follow the VVaggon as formerly.

Attested by his Master and Thomas Tildesly of Bromley
What greater crush can there be given,
To man, than loose his hopes of Heaven?
And pressed down to deeps below;
Where Torments are in hotest glow.
What greater comfort after this,
Than be assured of lasting bliss.
Though the old Serpent bruised each heel,
On his own head the pain will feel.
Lets trample there, with mind and body too,
No surer way our health for to renew.
The Serpents bruises take from off the soul,
This Water makes the bodies bruises whole*
Though we here than be crush't to greatest pain;
This Water Comforts, Heals, gives ease again.
With praise to God, Curtail the Serpents tread,
Least we trip but on's heel, he on our head.
Burns.
13. Samuel Jackson of Middle-wich in Cheshire, having very sorely burnt the
bottom of his foot, accidentally treading with his bare foot on a red hot
Heater of a Smoothing Iron, which burnt near the thickness of it into his Foot:
but no Salve being able to heal it for three months time, but rather making it
worse. But coming to this Well, and Bathing in the water about ten days; it is
so healed by it, that some persons it has been shown to, are scarce able to
discover, where it was burnt.

Taken from his own mouth and by the sight of Samuel Gilbert.
14. A Daughter of John Clarks of Aston in Staffordshire* five years of Age;
the fire catchgin in her Aporn and Clothes, most lamentably burnt her Belly
and one of her Thighs, which could not by any means be healed for a year and
halfs time, till Bathed about a dozen times with water fetched from this Well.

This Attested by her Father to Samuel Gilbert.
If outward burning here do painful feel,
And proving Soars as difficult to heal,
What are the dangerous flames pent up within,
Still fed with the vast fuel of our sin?
Which if not quenched here, will ever burn,
And we as they, and never to ashes turn:
Seek Cure for both, for their are Springs will do it,
Unto the first, apply this water to it.
For the next, I hope already understood,
Bath in the never failing Spring Christ's Blood.
Colic.
51. Edward Bate of Bloor in Drayton Parish under Hales, John North of Ashley,
William Gardener of Mare, John Twyford of Aston by Stone; all in the County of
Stafford, by this water Cured of the VVinde Colic.

16. Edward Snep of Mucklestone, Robert Cross of Winnington; both in the County
of Stafford, Cured by this water of the Stone Colic,

witnessed by Mr. Thomas Tildesly.
Thus has this water these Diseases Cured,
Let those that make not use often be inured.
Wilfully to such their distempring pain,
Whose virtues they will not try, but will disdain.
That power that turned water into wine,
Makes this more worth than richest juice from Vine.
For to this waters turned each Medicine.
Consumptions.
17. Sarah Plimly of the Parish of Drayton in Shrop-shire; having been (as
judged) in a Consumption for twenty years and more, by Drinking this water, and
Bathing, was perfectly Cured: Attested by Rohet Plimly her Father, living in
the Parish and County aforesaid.

18. Mr. William Plimly of Norton in Shrop-shire about forty years of Age;
being so far entered into a Consumption, that his Stomach digested nothing that
it received, accompanied with a tormenting Stich on his left side, occasioned
at Sea; the Vessel in which he was being run on the Sands, he continued long
wet by being forced to wade to save his life. For his Distemper he could
receive no benefit from many Doctors of Physic that he applied himself to; who
all gave him over as irrecoverable. But coming to this Well last Spring,
Drinking thereof, and Bathing only the pained side, it removed the Stich to the
other side; which he Bathing and continuing the Drinking of it, it occasioned
much Vomiting, sometime gently purging by Stool, but most by Urine, each night
taking a Bottle home with him, which he used as before mentioned, so many days
as but to fill up three weeks: It cleared him of his Stich, regained his
Stomach, and restored him to as good a state for health as ever. Attested by
himself and Robert Plimly in Drayton Parish in Staffordshire.

Great wheedler of poor men to death;
Mistaking quite thy whispering breath.
That such deluding thoughts do give,
'Twixt hope and fear thinks still to live.
Till of a sudden, hopeless they,
Remove into their beds of clay.
If you from this consumption cheat,
Would live, and be in health repleat.
Consume those vices that control,
The health of Body and of Soul*
Let the Graces hand you to this Spring;
For health, praise to the Author bring.
Fail not of that unless most basely rude,
There Is no Disease like to Ingratitude.
19. Mrs. Joan Maudley of Ashburn in the County of Darby: Being Lame of one of
her Legs, that she could not without help get in or out of her Bed, by reason
of her great pain and contraction of Sinews: being brought to this Well the.
4th. of July 1676. and but by Bathing till the 11th. of the same month, could
go so well as to have scarce a discernable halting. vide. the Contractions
Cured in the Leprosies, in the third of Lameness.

Relaxation of Sinews.
20. A Boy whose name we cannot learn; his Legs hanging as if held together by
threads, by reason of the weakness and laxed Ligaments and Sinews not being able
to use them: In a short time were strengthened sufficiently to support his body,
by Drinking and Bathing at this Well.

Attested by Mr. and Mrs. Wildie.
Dropsies.
21. Margaret Tingle of Bloor in Staffordshire, having her Legs much swelled
with the Dropsy, by Drinking of the water but once, and three or four times
Bathing, quite Cured.

Attested by Francis Daniel of Bromley.
22. Lawrence Key of the Parish of Stoak upon Trent a ground Collier, being
extremely Hydropical, the humor so fell down into his Legs as to swell them to
a great bulk: But putting them into this water the first time, he took them
out; there came from all parts of them little Worms, about the bigness of Pins
heads, very numerous; after them issued little drops of water: But by often
Bathing brought down the swelling, stopped those little issues, and perfectly
Cured him. Taken from his own mouth.

23. Mary Vicars of Knightly, Cured of a Dropsy.

Attested by Samuel Rhodes.
24. John Plimly of Madely in Staffordshire, of middle Age, cruelly Diseased
with the Dropsy, his Belly swelled bigger than a woman with child at her full
time, and his Legs to the bigness of a reasonable man's middle and of a strange
color; brought to this Well in March last on a Tuesday, and by the Friday
following, with Drinking and Bathing tok down the swelling, both of his Belly
and Legs; and in nine days time Cured him that he was able to follow his work
after his usual manner. Attested by Mrs. Jean Reynald's of Muckleston in
Staffordshire, whose Workman he was, and still is.

Was ever man delivered so from fear,
Of Children many, as there is days in the year!
His Belly should contain, being grown so big;
'Twas past his power to see, or feel a Leg.
His Belly like unto the great world seeming,
Of strange productions ready to be teeming.
His upper parts with arm on Kembo set,
Looked like the top of great Dutch jugge; but yet
His moving Legs and Feet Antipodes,
Altered my thoughts, that it was none of these.
But that it was Copernicus's world,
In which Perepaticks late were hurled.
Who suitable unto their lives, might have,
When past the streights of death, a walking grave.
Yet by this Water to the view of men,
Was changed into a little world again.
'Twas little less then miracle each thought,
A man to Bed of a great Belly brought.
The quick dispatch of Cure, sure done to show,
What likeless means can with Gods blessing do.
King's Evil.
29. Mary Ratcliffe of Vttoxiter in Staffordshire, of middle Age; having had
the King's Evil for twenty years, in her Face, Shoulders, Arms and Legs; Drank
of the water, and Bathed in it but for nine days time, in April last, was
Cured of that Disease in all the parts before mentioned: But the Issues made in
hopes to help her long before, (and nature having some recourse that way) the
water too hastily healed up for want of her regular Drinking of it; occasioned
some Breakings out, which the water afterward rectified by three or four days
Drinking, and once or twice Bathing.

Attested by Mr. Charles Cotton.
26. Mr. Richard Nevill, of Richards-Court near Stafford a Lawyer, having a
considerable swelling under his Chin, and by the date of it thought it the
King's Evil, coming by the Well as he was to journey about twenty Miles
farther, dipped his Pocket Hancherchief in it, and applied it as he rode to the
grieved place, which occasioned him so much ease, that he repeated it when he
came back, taking one Quart of it home with him, the use of it perfectly Cured
him:

Affirmed by himself to Mr. Thomas Tilsdesley.
27. A Daughter of Goodman Brooks in Oorelane in Shrop-shire, Aged about
sixteen, Disiased with the King's Evil, having a swelling on her Breast of long
continuance: Bathing in it but three times dispersed the Humor, and so
perfectly Cured her, that she has had no symptoms thereof since. The first
Cure that was publicly noticed. Attested by William Shaw a neighbor to the
Well.

28. Two Daughters of Mr. Brassingtons of Karsey in Staffordshire; one had the
King's Evil in her Foot, so that she could not wear any Shoe, but go with it
lapt about with Clothes, and scarceable to go then: with Drinking and Bathing
nine days was Cured. The other being suspected to have the same Distemper in
her Knees, having some swellings there, stayed the same time, and both made
dance by their Father at their going away, with as much agility as if never
distempered.

Attested by Charles Cotton. April 1676.
29. Anne the Daughter of William Brucks, of Oore in the Parish of Muckleston
in the County of Salop, Aged about fifteen; Diseased with the King's Evil,
especially in her Breast which was swelled as big as two Breasts, yet Cured at
three times Bathing. Taken from her own mouth by Mr. Andrew Dorrington of
Stillinghurst in Shrop-shire.

30. Jone Grimes of Aston by Stone, being to the apprehension of others as well
as her self, blinded by the Kings Evil: This water has recovered her sight and
Cured her of the King's Evil.

Attested by Mr. Thomas Tildesly of Bromly.
31. Elizabeth Cliffe of Maxfield in Cheshire, having been blind with the
King's Evil near two years. In six weeks time Cured of the Evil; and is now able
to see to follow her Trade of Button making as formerly.

Attested by Walter Wilson.
32. William Rowland of Bakewell in Darby-shire, Cured of the like Distemper.

33. John Knowles of Bridgworth in Shrop-shire, Cured of the like Distemper.

Attested by William Shaw.
Amongst our Physicians there are none,
The Curing this Disease will own.
They as often tried, as often failed,
But never any yet assailed.
To Conquer it with water here,
But with few wounds got the victory clear.
Though lamely they the on set made,
Looked pale and wan as if afraid.
Yet marched away with nimble paces,
And flying colors in their faces.
Thus English Mastiffe's fighting hold,
No force, can their closed teeth unfold.
Till in their mouths one water threw,
The Combatents they straight with drew.
So man with this Disease being joined.
Their flesh away in battle pined.
This water thrown, within, without;
Looses their hold, drives the evel out.
French Pox.
43. A Gentle Woman on the edge of Cheshire, whose name I forbear to mention,
had the French Pox given her by her Husband; which so seas'd her secret parts
that she could scarce go, and on her Throat and Pallat of her mouth that she
could not well be understood what she spoke, bringing her body to a very low
ebb of health, very pale and lean: but having been at this well Bathing and
Drinking for three weeks, has so recovered her health as to have a rudy
Complexion, plumpness and strength of body, with great amendment of Speech.
This if occasion offered, will be verified by Mr. Andrew Dorrington of
Sillinghurst in Shropshire.

Farewell Cornelius Tub be gone,
Here Is cleanlier Cure for every one,
Thou makes men look like parboiled flesh,
But this does make you clear and fresh.
No Pills of Turpentine you need,
All medicines this does far exceed.
Yet you will find repentant tears,
The soul of all diseases clears,
Then wash with both, since best for each,
Experience may discretion teach.
For he that knows the fire will burn,
Does reason Topsie turvie turn.
That has been scorched by its flame,
Will venture't play an after game
Head Scald.
35. Two Children of Morgan Shanbrooks in Shelton and over St. Chads, Salop,
Cured of very grievous Scald-heads, by Drinking and Washing their Heads
therewith.

Attested by Mr. Tho. Tildesly.
36. Thomas Ward of Ehelmarton in Blackewell Parish in Darby-shire, and his
Brother Edward Ward.

37. Henry Elisson and Elen his Sister of Stockholms in Cheshire, in Kunckorne
Parish, all in near abouts three weeks time, by Drinking and Bathing perfectly
Cured of very Sore Scald-heads. Attested by Samuel Gilbert, etc.

38. Many more of this nature, which cannot here be set down, through neglect
in taking their names at their going away from the Well.

Lameness.
39. Grace Hollenshead of Worsworth in the County of Darby, Cured in few days
of a Lameness of her Limbs, and Weakness of Body Attested by Mr. Andrew
Dorrington of Stillinghurst in Shropshire.*

40. A Stranger, whose name could not be known, brought to the Well in a Cart,
so Lame that he had no use of his lower parts, the water so recovered him, that
he left his Cart behind him, and went away from the Well on foot perfectly
Cured to the eye of all persons then there Attested by. Mr. and Mrs. Widlie
than of Willowbridge.

Mary Phillips of Prees Parish in Shropshire Lamed of both her Legs, her Arms
and Hands, and such a contraction of her Sinews in her hands, that they were
kept clutched by it, having the use of neither Arms, Hands, nor Legs, not able
to help her self: In a weeks time Drinking and Bathing, she could not only go,
but run; and in a fortnights time Cured both Legs, Arms and Hands, of which
she has now the perfect use.

Come make a halt then at this Spring,
Your Lameness you may thither bring.
But if you use the water right,
You Will find, ease profit and delight.
Better than strong drink will this water,
Make you to dance and cut a caper.
Enabled then to show your honor,
Make a whole leg unto the Donor.
What miracles does from it flow,
Makes Blind to see, the Lame to go.
A medicine sure this Age will please,
When drinking Cures the disease.
Off with your Glass, nay twenty more,
It Is for your health, never give it over*
The greatest Tiplers here make known,
Though to others health they drink their own.
Drink freely than, there is none that grutges,
'Twil make you fling away your Crutches.
Leprosy.
42. Joseph Gennings of Crannage in Cheshire, Aged twenty years, Diseased seven
of them with a Leprous breaking out all over his Body, from top to toe, not
able to go, or scarce stir, the Sinews of his Fingers Tucked up that he had
small use of any of them. Drinking and Bathing at this Well a weeks time was
able to go half a mile, or more to his lodging, too and fro from the Well; and
all his Scabs sheld off, except some few upon his Feet. Eye witnessed by Samuel
Gilbert, etc. About nine days after the same person went thence perfectly
clear of his Leprosy, his Fingers extended, and his Body in health.

43. Edmund Hulme of Licksrith in Staffordshire, Diseased after the same
manner as the former, but that he had the use of his Limbs; in three days
time, Drinking and Bathing, so freed him from Scabs, and killed the Distemper,
that he would not be persuaded to stay three or four days longer, but went
away the fourth day after his coming thither, taken from his own mouth, and eye
witness by Samuel Gilbert.

Lepers Armed Cap a-pee in Scales*
Whose dreadful fight with horror quales.
This water penetrats, and in
Piece meles brings off to the naked skin.
Make them as sound as the ever were.
With child-like-softness, smooth and clear.
Fits of the Mother.
44. Mrs. Dorothy Cotton of Apen in Staffordshire, being much troubled with
the above named Distemper, was Cured by Drinking four Glasses of this water at
the Well, and taking one or two quart Bottles home with her for that use, and
was never troubled since in that kind.

Attested by her neighbor Mrs. Wildie.
Palsy.
45. Richard Edwards a Blacksmith in Mere-lane-end in Staffordshire, brought
to Willowbridge in March last, so Diseased by the Palsy all over his Body,
that he was not able to go thence to the Well without being Lead and supported
by two men, under three hours time; having been there about three weeks,
Drinking and Bathing, his Palsy was so abated, as to walk it in as short a
time as most in health, without support, or resting. Attested by Mr. Charles
Cotton, and Mr. and Mrs. Wildie, then living at Willowbridge.

Rickets.
46. A Child of William Lingard's three years old, troubled with the Rickets
that it could never go a step, having been Bathed in, and Drank of this Water
but three days, the fourth day could use its Legs, and go three or four yards
without holding; in the sight of Samuel Gilbert and many others at the Well.

47. A Son of Gorings, or Golling of Callow-hill in Staffordshire, Esquire that
would by no means hear talk of any more than ordinary virtue this Well had,
especially of doing his Son any good, that was much weakened with the Rickets,
and a great faultring of Speech: was extraordinarily amended in both by some
bottles privately sent for of this water, by his mother, with which he was
Bathed and of which he Drank: Which his Father marvailing at, altered his
opinion of this Well, and fears not to be perfect now publicly by this Water,
what was so happily, tho against his consent, and privately begun.

We have had many informations of this Disease being Cured in many Children,
but till we are assured of the truth, we forbear to mention them.

Scurvy.
48. Mrs. Prudence Crompton of Miswich in the County of Stafford, a Gentlewoman
of good Quality (being as willing to declare, as others, to conceal the mercies
of God in this Wells Curing their Distempers) affirms, that she had the Scurvy
in that height that it occasioned her a sore Leg with four great holes in it,
of dangerous consequence. That her Stomach had almost wholly lost its,
digestive faculty, and that for thirty five years she Drank nothing but warm
Drink, yet the Drinking of this very Cold water no way offended, but rather
proved as a Cordial to her weak Stomach, recalling its lost digestion, and by
Drinking and Bathing about a weeks time with this water, cleared her of her
Scurvy, and Cured her Leg.

49. Edward Whitfoot of Cundever in Shropshire, near Shrewsbury, being sorely
handled with the Scurvy, which occasioned Scabs and Ulcers for 7 years all over
his body; Drinking of, and Bathing in the water of this Spring somewhat about a
fortnights time, the latter end of June, and beginning of July, perfectly Cured
him.

50. Thomas Howel, Husbandman Aged 70. living in Drayton near Shifnal in
Shropshire, having had a stoppage in his Stomach, pain in his belly for half a
years time, his blood being putrified, which appeared by the Scurvy he was
Deseased with, and breakings out. Coming to this Well, and Drinking and
Bathing, stirred him not till the third day, and then it purged him; the 4th.
day also, the 6th. again, after which it bound him for 3. days, and in that
time drove out all his Distemper to the extreme parts of his body in a violent
manner, working by Urine all the while, but continually Drinking and Bathing
five weeks in the whole, till this present day July the 7th. 76. he is thought
to be perfectly Cured of all Deseases but Old Age.

Taken from his own mouth at the Well by Samuel Gilbert, etc.
51. The Wife of William Gratewood of Croxon of Staffordshire, having her face
blistered all over (as she thought) by the Scurvy: some few times washing with
this water, Cured her. Attested by William Shaw.

Never so much did this Distemper reign,
In all sorts and Sexes from every vein:
To sad Diseases it is the fatal rise,
Begun, continued, by our acts in vice.
So never Medicine of such force did prove,
As this our Epidemick ill, t'remove.
Cleanse thou from sins this thy body frees,
From filth it is great Physicians only fees.
Till which thou give, and so thy part fulfill,
Scorbutic humors lurk within thee still.
Soars.
52. A Girl of about 17. years of Age, named Harding of Stondon in
Staffordshire, Infirmed with very sore Legs from her Infancy occasioned by the
Rickets, or the small Pox, not being by purge carried off, fell down into her
Legs which occasioned her running Soars that could not be Cured, though they
used the best means they could, till at the Age above named: she was brought to
this Well, where Drinking of, and Bathing in it for a short time, was
perfectly Cured. Attested by Mr. Greenwood Rector of High-Ofly.

53. VVidow Jackson of Norton Vnderhales in Shropshire, Aged about 70. Infirmed
with a dangerous sore, so that for 40. years never skinned over, nor could she
wear whole shoe or Stocken for all that time: this in a short time the water
perfectly Cured. Attested by Mr. John Bradly Rector of Norton,

54. Elizabeth the Wife of Peter Gilworth of Pencle, near New Castle under
Line, had a sore Leg that issued Blood for a long time: At the first Bathing
took away the pain, and stopped the bleeding, and in one days time healed it
beyond belief; from her own mouth Tho. Tildesly Testis.

55 Elizabeth Alman of Laur Delph in Stoak by Newcastle under Line, having had
a sore Leg with eight holes in it, for three years; by this water was perfectly
Cured.

56 Edward Hanks a Tanner in Nampwitch: His man had a sore Leg swelled as big
as two for two years time; none of the Chirurgions there being able to Cure
him, this water performed it in a Months time.

57. Robert Daniel of Gayburst, had a sore Leg with two issues in it for seven
years, which no Surgeon could stop, or Cure: one quart of this water scaled
the Bone, stopped the Issues, and healed the Soars.

58 Mary Nevil of Charms in the Parish of Ecleshall in the County of Stafford,
her Legs being Scratched with a Bryer, fester'd near to a Gangreen, for which
she lay under the Chirurgions hands for two years, rather made worse then
better by them. This water Cured her in ten days time: These three last
affirmed by Tho. Tildesly.

59. Henry Cotton, of Woodseas in the Parish of High-Ofly, had a sore Leg, with
the addition of a pain in his right Arm; both which were Cured by this water,

Samuel Roder Testis.
60. Dorothy the Wife of Francis Moreton of Stafford, grieved with sore Legs
16. years, Cured in one months time, Testis Wall. Wilson.

All sores this sovereign water heals,
Hundreds more then this book reveals.
Then throw away your daubs and Salves,
Which seldom Cures you but by the halves.
With faith your unbelief control,
Then it is but Bathing and be whole.
This Spring has such rare virtues in it,
It Is Surgeon, plaster, probe, and lint.
Swelling.
61. A young woman of Darleston near Wem in Shropshire, having for many years
such a Swelling in her Hands and Feet, that neither her Fingers nor Toes could
be parted, without Cletts of Wood to force them open: By this water in a short
time was perfectly Cured: attested by James Higgins of Newport Confectioner.

62. Goodman Shropshire in Ecleshall Parish, living on Gratewood-heath, having
a gathering on his Hand that disinabled him for doing a days work in twenty
weeks, all remedies he applied, not breaking it, until he came to the Well,
and holding his hand in the water not a quarter of an hour, but off comes a
white skine like a Glove, leaving one blood-red behind it; putting his hand
again into the water, it presently broak it, and without any more than once
Bathing, taking some of the water home with him, dipping Linin Clothes in it,
and applying them to his Hand, made it as perfect as ever; from his own mouth.

63. Mary Lovet 19. years of Age, Diseased five years with a swelling in her
Thighs Legs, Cured by this water,

Thomas Tildesly Testis.
64. Mary Charles of Bloor-heath in Staffordshire, having her Leg and Thigh
swelled extremely, that she was forced to be Carried for a twelvemonth upon all
occasions. Refused both by Physicians and Surgeons as paft Cure; making use
of this water by Drinking and Bathing has thrown away ^he Crutches: and is
perfectly Cured.

65 Mrs. Jean Reynolds of Mucklestone in Staffordshire, having a great pain
and swelling in her Hip, which being Bathed in this water, drove it down into
her Leg with extreme pain and swelling there, and fiery redness: but then
Drinking and Bathing in it for three days, it took away the pain, brought down
the swelling, and reduced it to its natural color again, perfectly Curing her.

Taken from her own mouth, Samuel Gilbert.
66 Andrew Son to Thomas Powel of Drayton Shifnal in Shropshire, having his
Legs swelled as big as his Middle, occasioned by its being formerly wounded
under the Calf thereof with the stub of a tree, healed up by a Surgeon, but
not to the bottom; being brought to the Well in much pain of his Leg and
thigh: Few times washing, or Bathing, broak the swelling, which issued out at
one great hole three inches deep, and two in breadth. In a months time
afterward by Bathing and Drinking, brought his Leg to its just proportion, and
healed the soar. Curing him also of a breaking out all over his body.

Taken from his own mouth by Samuel Gilbert.
67 Edward Bates of Bloor in Staffordshire, swelled in his Body that he was not
able to stoop: Four times Drinking this water, perfectly Cured him, its
operation was by excessive purging as the nature of his Disease required.
Attested by Francis Daniel of Gerards Bromley.

67. Margaret Tingle of Bloor, in Staffordshire, having her Legs excessively
swelled. By Drinking the water but once, and Bathing three or four times; quite
Cured her, Attested by the foregoing Francis Daniel.

68. A man whose name we have forgot came to this Well this Spring with a Leg
swelled a yard about, Drinking and Bathing thereat, reduced it to the smallness
of his other Leg in a small time, witnessed by Captain John Broughton of
Whittington, and Mr. Lutchwood of Blake, both in the County of Stafford.

Some inward cause, this outward ill produces,
Nature is apt to find out many sluices
To disburthen her, from all ill humors,
And throws them off into those swelling Tumors;
Which little Bathing here has taken away.
Gods power in this water's largely shown,
His Goodness, and its virtues let us own.
Whose force like Esops Ox to the Swelling Toad,
Crushes the poisonous humor from abode.
Worms.
69. A young Gentleman of Noble Quality, by two or three days Drinking of the
water, and once Bathing, hilled the Worms, and carried them off by siedge;
which he had in a great quantity.

Affirmed by Samuel Gilbert, etc.
Many persons not mentioned, were left at the well with the strangest soar legs
that were ever seen; especially one woman that lay several years under
Chirurgions hands at Chester without help; several of the King's Evil, of
Consumptions, Dropsies, Scurvy, etc. That are in a fair way of being by it
speedily Cured.

A Table of the Contents of the Cures.
Aches. page 9. Bitings 12. Bloody-slux. 12. Bruises. 13. Burns. 14. Collicks.
15. Consumptions. 16. Contractions. 18 Dropsies. 18 King's Evil. 20. French Pox.
24. Head-scal'd. 25. Lameness. 25. Leprosy. 27. Mother. 28. Palsies. 28.
Relaxations. Rickets. 29. Scurvy. 29. Soars. 31. Swellings. 33. Ulcers, (
vizd) Soars Worms. 36.
All persons that receive that receive benefit by the water of this Well,
either for Internal, or external Distempers, are desired under their own hands,
or by another from their own mouths, to leave at Willowbridge-Lodge an account
thereof; the nature of their Distemper, how they used the Water, what time, and
in what quaintity, how it operated, and what effects ensued; that there may be
the better advantage made of it, from experience for the health of others,
which is the only design of what is done, or Writ concerning this Well.

Of Abana, and Pharphar we,
No praises have, nor Jordan see.
Famous for being our Saviors Font,
What sacred Writ expresses on it.
The Bath and Spaw seem out of date,
And petties Springs of ebber Rate.
Nay even Holy-Well is crossed,
Saint Magnus has its virtues lost.
As if their fate were to enforce;
The power of this new found source.
For here is a Well does quickly do,
What those did but pretend unto.
You need not to Physicians give,
Prepare your Bodies to receive.
This healing spring that runs free,
The God of Mercies needs no Fee.
But in this wondrous water does,
Give Medicine and Physician both.
Outward and inward griefs to ease,
Cures old as well as young-Disease.
In any Sex, or Age more fit,
For the Authors praise then Poets Wit.
You then can Hallelujahs sing,
Your voices raise for this Blest-Spring.
And let the Echoing Woods resound,
Blessed be her that first it found.
Let me further add, that it is impossible any person should receive the like
advantage of this water, using it at a great distance from the Spring, as those
tha^ there make use of it, Because it being full of Volatile spirit which
searches out, and into Distempers will (...) Carriage evaporate, though never
so carefully made up And its Sanative Oyliness, that heals them, left on the
sides of the Vessels in which it is Carried. So that a standing in need thereof
(that can wi^h any convenience) are advised to Bath in it, as well as Drink o^
it fresh from the Spring, e're it loose its Spirits, or by (...) stranding
deprived of the Oyile matter that is in it.

Before I take off my Pen, some who prizes those noble kind of Creatures called
Horses, may have occasion to thank me for these few Lines, more scribbling in
giving a short account of what Diseases this excellent water, both Cured in
Horses ( viz) several of the Pocky Fashions in few days.

Some that have had the Stone, and could not Stale. Many of the Riffe.

All sorts of Soars, Swellings, Sprains, Aches in any part.

Soar Eyes near to Blindness; some in a nights space.

The Names of the Owners of the Horses, or of those that affirmed it, being
eyewitnesses, might (or may) be given if thought necessary.

My muse of late, putting her foot in strrop,
And Pegasus by this Well Cured, does Galop.
With usual speed, never tyring at her rate,
As others do, whose verses trot in state;
Or Trammel all their words for ambling Gate.
Whose muse is dated a month at least,
The slowest motion's from the greatest beast.
Who strikes at all things, that is not his own;
Back Vulpans voice, but a face Spanial tone.
But let such winching Cattle private stick,
Least public they appear, have kick for kick,
Though wine a little harmless Galloway,
Whose work assords no Oats, but lives on Hay.
Is ready sadled; it is but up and ride,
Yet has some fancy too in every stride.
But if unruly grown without a Strap,
You may soon quiet him, with gentle clap.
For his small heats were for to let you know,
From this rare healing Spring what good does flow.
To man, or beast, both ready to befriend,
And runs free, whose Virtues know no End.
It Is thought convenient to avoid Adulteration, or abuse of the Water of this
Well, by any means that may be used by many that fetch it thence to sell it,
(and as we here at very dear Rates.) Least their covetousness should entice
them to put a cheat upon any, by selling them either mixed, or common water for
that of this Spring. We give notice that there is no price taken for any
quantities at the Well: and that the Right Honorable the Lady thereof, is so
careful for persons that cannot come to the Well, to have it without being
Sophisticated; that she will for the future, cause that no water shall be
fetched thence, but upon the Bottle, or Vessels: shall be in Wax when Corked
up, this Seal impressed. A Saltier two Crowned Lions for Supporters, the Crest
a Maremeset. The proper Coat of Arms of her most Hopeful and Lovely Son: The
Right Honorable Digby Lord Gerard, Baron of Geh ards Bromley,

FINIS.

