A TREATISE OF Miscellany Questions: WHEREIN Many useful Questions and Cases
of Conscience are discussed and resolved: For the satisfaction of those, who
desire nothing more, then to search for and find out precious Truths, in the
Controversies of these Times.

By Mr. GEORGE GILLESPIE, late Minister at EDINBURGH.

Published by Mr. PATRIK GILLESPIE, Minister at GLASGOVV.

EDINBURGH, Printed by GEDEON LITHGOVV, Printer to the University of EDINBURGH,
For GEORGE SVVINTOUN, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Kirk style, at the
sign of the Angel. 1649.

The Publisher to the Reader.
IT has been a grand design of the Devil and Instruments acted by him, with
much controversy to darken the light in the very breaking up of this present
Reformation, and to hide the precious Truth that the simple should not find
it, such pure malice does he carry against the high way of the Lord, and so
afraid he Isa. 35. ^.
is, that the Wayfaring men shall not err therein: but they know not the
Counsel of the Lord, nor Mich. 4. 1^
the thoughts of his heart, who is about to clear the Truth, by the manifold
Errors which have risen in these late Times, to work His peoples hearts to a
deep detestation of Error, as well as ungodlines, and to declare his Truth, to
be proof of all the controversy that can be moved against it, when every Work
shall be tried by the fire. There must be Heresies, for making manifest who 1
Cor. 18 19.
are approved, and what is precious and praiseworthy Zech. 14. 7.
Truth, but at the Evening time it shall be light, and the Lord shall make
Truth shine the more brightly, that it has been for a time darkened and born
down, this cloudie Morning shall end in a clear day. This little treatise does
help to blow away and dispell the mists* of Error, and clear many questioned
Truths, beside some points which are practically handled therein. If God had
been pleased to lengthen the Author his life for longer serving his Generation,
I am confident it would have come abroad better polished, if he had completed
it and there survayed the whole Work, when set together. But although this
piece be unperfect, yet having the Authors leave, I have adventured to make it
Public, without any addition or alteration, the christian Reader will correct
the Errata, and look upon it as it is his opus posthumu^, whom God made very
serviceable in his work, in a very short time: I shall only wish that it may
prove as useful and acceptable to the Judicious and godly, as other pieces
which came from his Pen.

I am Thy Servant, PAT* GILLESPIE.

The Contents.
CAP. I.
THat the Ministry is a perpetual Ordinance in the Church, and that Ministers
are to be received as the Ambassadors of Christ, now as well as in the
Primitive times. page 1. An Erastian lately published the Negative, which also
the Sect of the Seekers hold. page 1. The Affirmative is proven from Scripture
by eight Arguments. page 2. 3. Three Objections answered. page 4, 5, 6. How
Believers are an holy Priesthood. Ibid Its proved against that Erastian, that
the ordinary Ministry have an Embassy* from Christ, as well as the Apostles
had. page 7.
CAP. II.
Of the Election of Pastors with the Congregations consent. page 8.. The
question is stated. ibid. The Affirmative is proven from Scripture by three
Arguments page 9, 10, 11, 12. 13. 14, 15. (...) Acts 14* 23. is exponed. ibid.
Its proven also from Antiquity. page 16, 17. Its also the judgment of sound
Protestant Churches and writters. page 18, 19, 20, 21. Its confirmed by five
reasons, page 21. 22. The confession of Adversaries proves it. page 23. Seven
Objections answered, page 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. How we differ from
the Independents in this point. page 24. 25. What is due to the People, and
what to the Magistrate, and what to the Eldership in this point. ibid. The
Elderships votes, and the Peoples consent or dissent are free, and there needs
not be given a reason for them. page, 26. 27 A Schismatic Church has not
just right to the Liberty of a sound Church. page 28. How the Congregation is
to judge if a man be qualified and fit for the Ministry page 29. Incommodities
may be on both hands, but fewer on this. page 28. 30.
CAP. III.
Whether Ordination be Essential to the Calling of a Minister. page 32. Four
Distinctions are premised for the right stating of the Question. page 33. 34.
35. The Affirmative is asserted and confirmed by ten Arguments from Nature and
Scripture to the end. There should be as much order in the Church, as in any
politic Republic. page 35. 36. That place Rom: 10. 15. exponed and the
Socinian exceptions discussed. page 37, 38. 39. 40: 41. 42. 43. How the Office
of (...), belongs to ordinary Pastors. page 38: 39. How the (...), for an
office and the (...) differ. page 40. What a Mission Expectants, and
Probationers have. page 43. The (...), of Church officers cleared. page 43 44.
45. Ordination of Ministers was a Catecheticall head in the Primitive times.
page 47. The diverse names the Ministers of the Gospel gets in Scripture. page
51. The place 2 Timothy: 2. 2. opened up. page 52. 53. What lawful ordination
contributes for the Peoples good. page 54.
CAP. IV.
Objections against the necessity of Ordination answered. page 55. How the
Peoples (...), is consistent with the Elders (...), and both necessary. page
57. How Election and Ordination differ. page 58. The Prophets mentioned 1 Cor:
14. 26. were extraordinarly inspyred, and so no ordinary rule. page 59. How the
Ordination of our Reformers by the Church of Rome is lawful, and how not. page
61, 62. 63 These who reject their Ordination, must all unchurch themselves and
turn Seekers. page 62. What may be done in extraordinary cases, and what must
be done in ordinary in a constitured Church page 63. When the Church of Rome
was most corrupt, there was always a true Church in it.
CAP. V.
Whether these Prophets and prophesyings in the Primitive Church 1 Cor: 14. and
1 Cor. 12. 18. Ephesians: 4. 11. were extraordinary, and so not to continue: Or
whether they are Presidents for the preaching and prophesying of such as are
neither ordained Ministers, nor Probationers for the Ministry. page: 64. There
are three opinions concerning these Prophets, the last whereof is that they
were extraordinary Prophets, which is holden for true, and proven by 13.
Reasons. page 65. ad 75. Prophets in the Apostles enumeration, are preferred to
Pastors and Teachers, yea to evangelists page 66. The difference between
Prophets and Pastors and Teachers is set down. page 68. 69. Three senses only
of the word Propbesying in the new Testament. page: 70. 71 Prophecy is distinct
both from the word of knowledge and the word of wisdom. page 71. In the
Prophet there is (...), as well as (...), and (...) page 72. How the word
(...), is often used for the new Testament. page 72. Prophecy is a special
gift of an Apostle. page 73. Prophecy and the gift of tongues of the same
kind. ibid. Even Prophetesses were not allowed to speak in the Church page 75,
76. That place 1 Cor. 14. 26. exponed and vindicated. page 77, 78, 79. How
Prophecy might be desired. page 81. How Prophets were subject to trial. page
82. How the word Bretbren is sometimes taken. page 84.
CAP. VI.
Whether any but a Minister, lawfully called and ordained, may administer the
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. p. 86. The Negative is justly held
by reformed Churches against Erastians and Socinians, and is proven by eight
arguments. Much of the feeding of the flock confists in the dispensation of the
Sacraments. page 87 What Ezekiels vision concerning the new Temple means. page
88. None without a calling should make bold with Christ's broad Seals. page 89.
Whom the commission to Teach and Baptize is given to. ibid. Christ has
distinguished between Magistracy and Ministry, between Sacred and Civil
vocations. ibid. What comfort it is for Minister and People if the Minister be
lawfully ordained. page 90. That one Text Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. is enough to put
to silence these gainsayers. page 90. 91.
CAP. VII.
Of Prophets and Evangelists in what sense their work and vocation might be
called extraordinary. and in what sense ordinary. p. 91 Their work and Vocation
is mixed. page 92 The higher degrees Ephesians: 4. 11. are comprehensive of the lower,
not contrariwise. ibid. What is the proper work of a Prophet, ibid. What is
the proper and distinguishing work of an Evangelist. page 93. How the word
Evangelist is taken, ibid. Their works how, and in what sense extraordinary,
page 94. What kind of Vocation and Mission they had, page 95. 96. Timothy
had a vocation partly Ordinary, partly extraordinary. ibid.
CAP. VIII.
That the Primitive Apostolical Pattern holds forth unto us for our
imitation, a Presbytery, i. e. an Assembly of Elders having power of
Ordination, with laying on of hands. page 97. How (...)* 1 Timothy: 4. 14. is to be
taken, and that place vindicated from false glosses. page 97, 98, 99, 100. The
change of the Phrase in that place is observeable: page 101. Imposition of
hands is in Scripture an authoritative act: page 102. How Timothy might be
ordained both Presbyter and Evangelist at one time, in one action. page 103.
How Timothy might be ordained Evangelist by the Presbytery. ibid. In what
sense Peter calls himself (...), 1 Pet: 5. 1, 2. page 104, 105, 106, 107. How
imposition of hands is necessary for Ordination, and what kind of rite it is.
page 108. 109.
CAP. IX.
What is meant in Scripture by the word Heresies, and how we are to understand,
that there must be Heresies for making manifest the Godly party, or those that
are approved, 1 Cor. 11. 19. p. 110 Heresy is more nor Divisions and Schisms
page 111. What Heresy is not, answered in two things page 111, 112, 113 Six
things do concur to make a Heresy, page 113, 114, 115. A description of
Heresy. page 115. Why Heresy must be, and how. ibid. Who are the approved,
1 Cor, 11. 19. and who not. page 117. 118. How we should look upon Gods
suffering Heresies in the Church. p. 119 How a Child of God may be drawn over
to Heresy. page: 120. 121. How Heresies makes manifest them, who are approved,
page 122.
CHAP. X.
Of New Lights, and how to keep off from splitting either upon the Charybdis of
pertinacy and tenaciousnesse, or upon the Scylla of Levity, Wavering, and
Scepticisme. page 123. Five Concessions for clearing the Question. page 124.
125. The greatest deceits of Satan have come under the name of new Light. page
125 Many things cried up as new Lights, which are neither Lights nor New. page,
126. Its a false new Light that expels much good old Light. page 127, 128.
Balaam seeks a new Light and gets it in wrath. page 128. Many of our New lights
bring in Egyptian darkness. page 129. Its not good Light that makes certain
truths uncertain. ibid. Scepticisme is no good New light. page 130. Beware of
New Lights which come not from the Sun of righteousness page 131. The
VVeigelians wild fancy. ibid. Take heed of proud and self-conceited New
lights. ibid. Beware of separating new Lights page 132. Beware of New lights
that dare not be seen. ibid. Refuse such Lights as have fellowship with the
works of darkness. p* 133. They are no new Lights which bring no edification.
page 134. Take good heed of New Lights which follow new interests ibid.
CAP. XI.
Of Stability and firmness in the Truth. page 134 Scepticisme is a sin, and
stability in the truth a duty proved from Natures light and Scripture. page
134. 135 Seven reasons confirmed with Scripture proved. page 136. 137. Some
Errors in their own nature damnable. page 138. Nine Preservatives against
wavering, and Helps to stability in the truth. page: 138. 139. 140. Pertinacy
and levitie both to be shunned. page 141. The Sectaries word is yea and nay,
ibid. Seekers should be called Atheists, because Nullifidians ibid.
CAP. XII.
Whether a sound heart and an unsound head can consist together, and vice
versa? or whether Truth and Holiness be not inseparable Companions. page 142.
Every Error is not inconsistent with holiness, yet pro tanto it retards and
hinders it. ibid. Dangerous errors can no other ways consist with true Grace,
no^ dangerous sins. ibid. What are the roots of Heresies and Errors in the
hearts of corrupt men. page 143. 144. All opinions and practices in the world
are reduced to three heads, 1 John 2. 16. ibid. There is a Reciprocal
influence of the will and understanding, and how it is. page 145 As the
Infection of sin is universal, so is the work of Gods spirit in the soul.
page 146. Soul and Spirit, Reasons and affections compared together, ibid.
Both Doctrinals and Practicalls make up a perfect Christian, page 147* To be
led in all Truth, is a work of the Spirit of Truth. ibid. Truth and Grace
compared. ibid. How Erroneous men are distinguished from the Elect, page: 148. A
holy Heretic is a Chymaera, and a profane believer is another. page 149. An
ungodly man's knowledge, is but a form of knowledge. ibid. No sin in the will
without some Error in the understanding. page 150. All professed and mantained
Errors are but manifestos of the corrupt principles secretly lurking in the
judgments of all unrenewed men. page 150, 151. Many hold fast the Truth,
because not yet tempted, ibid. Eleven practical conclusions drawn from the
former Principles, page 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157. 158. Every Religion and
Faith will not save men. page 152. How Heresies are damnable. page 153. 154.
Church censures should strike both against Heretics and profane men. page 155.
There is cause to fast and pray when Heresies abound, ibid. We must not
converse with false Teachers. page 156. Opinions are not free more then
practices. page 157. He who would keep his head, let him keep his heart. ibid.
The approved in trial are these only who have both true piety and a sound
judgment. page 158.
CAP. XIII.
Whether Conscionable Christians and such as love the power and practice of
piety, can without defileing their own conscience, or without a destructive
wounding of the power of godliness, embrace and hold the principles of these
who call themselves the godly party? Or whether they ought not rather to avoid
these who do now Pharisaically and Donatistically appropriat to themselves the
name of the Godly party, as being indeed such, who under the pretense of zeall
for the power of godliness, hold diverse ungodly principles. page 159. Diverse
who now pretend to be the godly party hold many ungodly principles. 1 That none
ought to be punished for preaching or publishing an error in faith, except it
be contrary to the light of nature. ibid. There is need of some Oedipus to
loose this, how these who decline natures light in lesser things, should appeal
to it in sublimer things. page 160. 2 That in questions of Religion we must
only argue from the new testament. ibid. This is shortly refuted. page, 161.
162. 3 That Sectaries and Heretics peaceable in the state ought to be
tolerated and foreborn. page 162. Toleration is the Sectaries holy of holies.
ibid. Its shortly refuted. page 163. 4 That none should believe more nor by
reason he can comprehend, this is not good Divinity. page 164. 165. 5 The only
Gospel Reformation, is the destroying of sin out of the Elect, and that this
work belongs to Christ alone. ibid. This is a destructive and injurious
Doctrine. page 165. 166. 6 Diverse Arminian and Antinomian Tenants are
maintained by them, which strengthen the hands of the wicked. page 167 7 Other
Tenants are current among them which are apt to weaken the hearts and hands of
the Godly. page 168.
CAP. XIV.
Another most useful Case of Conscience discussed and resolved, concerning
associations and confederacies with Idolaters, Infidels, Heretics, or any
other known enemies of truth and godliness. page 169 Three kind of Covenants
distinguished, Civil, sacred, and mixed, the last two are unlawful to be made
with wicked men, and these who differ in Religion. ibid: Civil Covenants called
(...), for peace or commerce are lawful. ibid. Civil Covenants called (...), to
join in Military expeditions together, is unlawful ibid. This is proved from
Scripture. page 170. 171 Three objections from Abraams, and the Maccabees
Covenants, and David's associating with broken men, answered. page 171, 172, 173.
Five particulars which God has forbidden his people in reference to Heathen or
wicked Persons. page 174. 175. 176. Religious Covenants and familiar
conversation is forbidden page 174. Conjugall Covenants is forbidden, page 175
Faedus deditionis, or, pactum Liberatorium forbidden, 176. David did not right
in sparing Ioab and Shimei, ibid. Civil Covenants of War was forbidden, ibid.
This is confirmed more. page 177, 178. The Objection taken from Jehosaphats
joining with Ahab, proves nothing. page 179, Two other Objections answered by
Scripture. page 181. Five Distinctions to take off all other Objections, page
182. Three uses of this point page 183. Six Motives and reasons to drive home
this naill to the head. page 184. 185 Another objection from David's confederacy
with Abner and Amasa answered fully. page 186, 187. 188. What can be drawn from
the example of Christian States and Commonwealths. page 189. An Objection of
Malignants answered. page: 190. How men may be forced into the Covenant. page
191. How Neglect and contempt of a Duty may be censured, and wihall
wickedness in the person who has taken up the practice of the duty. page 192
Another Objection removed. ibid We may no more associat with the wicked of the
same Kingdom, then of another Kingdom. page 193.
CAP. XV.
Of Uniformity in Religion, Worship of God, and Church Government. 194 Why
Luther declined a general Synod for unity in ceremonies, ibid. There is great
difference between the Prelatical conformity and the Presbyteriall uniformitie
ibid. This is branched out in seven particulars. page 195. 196. 197 Both nature
and Scriptures gives presidents for uniformity p. 198. 199. The Church in the
old testament was very uniforme both in the substantials and rituals of their
worship. ibid. It was also prophesied to be under the New testament, and
commended and commanded in it. page ibid. 200 The Church in the ancient times
had a great uniformity page 200.
CAP. XVI.
Whether it be lawful, just and expedient that the taking of the Solemn
League and Covenant be enjoined by the Parliament upon all Persons in the
Kingdom under a considerable penalty. page 201 Nine particulars to be
remembered for the right deducing and stating the matter of fact. page 201. 202.
The grounds and reasons of such an ordinance and appointment may be eleven.
page 203. 204. 205. 206. Four Objections answered. page 207. How this ordinance
would not be tyrranny over men's consciences. ibid The covenant is no temporary
obligation. page 208. If such an ordinance to the Army be scandalum acceptum,
then the not making of it is scandalum datum. page 209.
CAP. XVII.
Of Infant Baptism. page 210 Baptism has succeeded in the room of
Circumcision against Mr. Tombs opinion ibid. Baptizing with water is a divine
institution proved from Scripture. p. 211 Both Hebrews and Heathens, had a
custom of washing infants soon after their birth ibid Unto what the
institution of Baptism by water related. page 212. The Manna and water out of
the Rock, was the same in substance with the Lords supper; and the cloud in the
red sea, was the same with our baptism in eight respects p. ibid and 213. This
infant baptism of theirs is a good warrant for us. p. 214, 215. The original
of Baptism is not derived from the baptism used in the admission of
Proselyts. p. 216. Another text, Ephesians: 5. 26. proves that baptism belongs to
infants. p. 217
CAP. XVIII.
Of the use of a Table in the Lords supper, and of the communicants there
coming to, and receiving at the Table. page 218. The first guests our Savior
entertained, received at the Table. ibid. This sitting was not occasional
only, but had a standing reason for it* p. 219. Successive tables and repeating
the words is no deviation from the rule: p. 221. 222. Another argument taken
from the general notion and nature of the Lords Supper, as it is a banquet and
feast p. ibid. 223. 224. A third reason taken from the name Table which the
Apostle uses, p. 225. 226. 227. The sitting at table together, sets forth the
communion of saints with Christ and among themselves. p. 228 229. The words of
distribution proves there must be a table, all must sit at. p. ibid: and *230.
Antiquity proves it. ibid.
CAP. XIX.
That there was among the Jews a jurisdiction and government Ecclesiastical
distinct from the civil page 231. The Jews had Ecclesiastical Elders or
Church governors which proves the point. ibid. Even under the Roman Emperor
they had their Presbyteri and Arcbisynagogi. Its proved out of Mr. Seldom, that
their Elders received a judicial degree, and were not civil Magistrates. ibid.
232. The Jewish ordination of Elders with imposition of hands proves it also.
page 233. 234. A third argument is taken from the Synag^ga Magna, page 235. The
Hebrews triple Crown proves it. ibid. The Jews exercised Ecclesiastical
discipline, since their dispersion which is a fifth reason. page 236. 237.
CAP. XX.
That necessary consequences from the written word of God do sufficiently and
strongly prove the consequent or conclusion, if Heretical, to be a certain
divine Truth which ought to be believed; and if practical, to be a necessary
duty which we are obliged unto jure divino. page* 238 The assertion is cleared
by some premises. ibid Humane reason drawing the consequence, is not the
ground of our belief* pa. 239. There is a difference between corrupt and
renewed Reason, ibid. Two sorts of consequences distinguished. page 240 The
Assertion is proved, First by the example of Christ and his Apostles. ibid. In
the old Testament as well as in the new, some necessary things were left to be
drawn by necessary consequence from the Law of Moses. page 241. Two sorts of
necessary consequences from the Law, a sortiori and a pari page ibid and 242: A
third reason from the infinite wisdom of God, who must foresee all things
that follows upon his words page 243. Diverse absurdities will follow, if this
truth be not admitted. page 244. These who most cry down this assertion, yet
themselves can bring no other, but consequentiall proffes to prove their
tenants page 245. If this be denied, we deny to the great God what is granted
to the little Gods or Magistrates. ibid.
CAP. XXI.
Of an assurance of an interest in Christ by the marks or fruits of
sanctification, and namely by love to the Brethren. Also how this agrees with,
or differs from assurance by the Testimony of the spirit? and whether there
can be any well grounded assurance without marks of grace. page 246. Three
Cautions for right understanding the question, that is, Marks are not to be
separated, either from the free grace, or from Christ, or from the spirit.
ibid. Its a sure way to seek after assurance of our interest in Jesus by the
marks of Sanctification proved by five reasons. p. 247. 248 A twofold certainty
of the mind distinguished, (...), and (...), and a twofold uncertainty opposed
(...), and (...), page 249. 250 The evidence of marks gives the first kind of
certainty, the testimony of the spirit, gives the second. ibid. This is
illustrat by a simile of believing the Scriptures. p. ibid. and 251. And by
another of the disciples going to Emma^s. ibid. The assurance of Justification
is virtually done in a Syllogistical way. 252 The spirit works the firm belief
of the proposition, a twofold testimony concur to the assumption. page 252.
None should divide these testimonies, they are joined in three Texts of
scripture page 253. D. Crisps objection against assurance from the love of the
Brethren, propounded. page 254 For answer three things are demonstrat. ibid.
This objection militateth as much against their own interpretation. p. 255. The
Antinomian way of settling assurance, is an inextricable labyrinth. page 256.
The testimony of the spirit must be an evidence according to the word of God.
page 257. 258. We say the evidence of marks is privative, they say, it is at
most cumulative. page; 259. The spirit of God is a spirit of Revelation, but not
beside or contrary to the Word. ibid. Another objection of Crispe removed. page
260. 261. How the spirit and word concur to this assurance. ibid. The word is
more sure nor any voice within or without. page 262. Crispe his way of
assurance by the testimony of the spirit received by faith resuted. page 263:
264. He grossly mistakes faith. ibid. Mr. Eton brought against him. page 265. A
sad lamentation of a poor soul holding forth what miserable comforters these
antinomians are. page 266, 267, 268. The love of the Brethren is a sure and
clear mark of one being past from death to life. ibid, Four things observed
touching the Brethren page 269. Its not necessar to have a infallible knowledge
of their regeneration 270 How far particular saints may be known by their
fruits. page 271. Antinomians expone 1 Cor: 13. legally, page 272 5. Marks and
tokens of true and sincere love of the brethren. p. 273, 274 No marks h^eraway
without some mixture of contrary corruption: p. 275 There is always bellum,
though not always proelium, between the flesh and the spirit. page 276.
CAP. XXII.
Of the true real and safe grounds of encouragement to believe in Jesus Christ
Or, Upon what warrands a sinner may adventure to rest, and rely upon Christ for
Salvation* page 277. To say Christ died for all men conditionally, is not the
way to ease troubled consciences. page ibid* and 278 The true and sa^e grounds
of encouragement to believe in Christ, are, First Christ his alsufficiency,
page 279. Its a great part of true faith* to believe Christ is able to save to
the uttermost. ibid. 2. Christ's intention to die for all men, 1. all sorts of
sins or sinners of any kind. page 280. All men exponed ibid. To pray for all
men, and to pray in every place exponed. page 281. 282. Every man, Heb. 9. ^
has the same sense. page: 283. All men can only be all men who are in Christ.
ibid: and 284 The whole world 2 Ioh. 2, 2. exponed. ibid. 285. The world (...)
Ioh. 3. 16. is no larger nor (...). ibid. 3 Jesus Christ has died for
expiation of all forts, and all manner of sins, page 286. The sin against the
holy Ghost only excepted, what it is. ibid: How a blasphemer against the holy
Ghost may repent. page* 287. 4 Christ receives all who come unto him and excluds
none, but such as by their unbelief excludes themselves page 288.
CHAP. I.
That the Ministry is a perpetual Ordinance of Christ in the Church, and that
Ministers are to be received as the Ambassadors of* Christ, now as well as in
the Primitive times.

THat which has long lurked in the hearts of many Atheists, is now professed
and argued for, by that sierce furious Erastiane, whose book was published the
last year at Franeker. He cries out that the world is abused with that notion
of a pretended sacred ministerial calling, that though the Apostles and others
who first preached the Gospel, were indeed sent and set apart for that holy
calling, which was also confirmed by signs and miracles, and they were
therefore to be received and submitted unto, as the Ambassadors of Christ,
yet Ministers and Pastors now are not to be acknowledged, as the Ambassadors
of Christ, neither is there any such thing now to be acknowledged, as a
special distinct sacred calling, or solemn setting apart of men to the
ministry of the Word and Sacraments, but any who is fit and gifted, though
not called or ordained, may both preach and minister the Sacraments, Baptism
and the Lords Supper. The Sect of Seekers also hold that there are not at this
time, neither have been for many ages past any true Ministers or Ambassadors
of Christ. Now for confutation of these Errors, and for the confirmation and
setlement of such as are any way shaken or troubled therewith, I have thought
good here in the first place, to make sure this principle that the Ministry as
it is distinct both from Magistracy, and from private Christians, is a
perpetual standing Ordinance of Christ in his Church to the end of the world.
This I prove first from, Mat. 28. 19, 20. That Commission, Go ye and teach all
nations, baptising them, etc: could not be meant of the Apostles only or other
Ministers of Christ at that time, respectively and personally, but must needs
be extended to true Preachers and baptisers in all ages to the end of the
world, as is manifested by the promise added: and lo I am with you always even
unto the end of the world.

2. From Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Where the Ordinance of Pastors and Teachers, for
the work of the Ministry reaches as far as the perfecting of the whole body
of Christ, and the gathering in of all the Elect, and consequently as far as
the end of the world.

3. From those evangelicall prophesies and promises of Pastors and Teachers,
Ier. 3. 15. and 23. 4. Isa. 30. 20. and 62. 6. 7. and 66. 21. Ezekiell 44. 23.
which are not restricted to the Churches of the primitive times, but the true
Churches of Christ in all ages interested therein.

4. Christ has appointed his Gospel to be preached to all nations, Mat. 24.
14. Luke 24. 47. and all the world over, Mat. 26. 13. and to every creature
under heaven, Mark 16. 15. The preaching of the Gospel is the mean and way
ordained of God to save them that believe, Romans 10* 14. 1 Cor. 1. 23. Now
although there was a large spread of the Gospel in the Apostles times through
so much of the world as was then known, yet that universal commission was not
then so perfectly performed and fulfilled as it shall be before the end be.
And however all the Elect were not gathered in at that time, but many of them
to be yet gathered in, which must be done by preaching. And who can (...) but
(...) who shall do the office of a Herald, but he that is an Herald? The holy
Ghosts word used for preaching, is borrowed from Herauldry.

5. Christ has appointed faithful and wise stewards to be rulers over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in due season, Luke 12. 42. which
was not appointed for the primitive times only, but till he come again, as
appears by verse. 43. Blessed is that servaut whom his Lord when he comes
shall find so doing, and verse. 45. But and if that servant say in his heart,
my Lord delayeth his coming, etc. More of this Scripture afterward.

6. From 1 Timothy 6. 14. The Apostles having in that Epistle given direction
concerning Church officers, Bishops, Elders, Deacons, with many other
particulars belonging to the Ministry, when he comes to the close of the
Epistle, he gives a strict and solemn charge to Timothy to keep this
commandment, without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which cannot be understood of Timothy personally, but it is a charge
given in his person to all the Ministers of the Gospel, who shall live till
the appearing of Christ.

7. From Revel. 2. 24, 25. There is a charge, that which ye have already hold
fast till I come, and this charge is given to two sorts of persons. First (...)
vobis, to you Bishops or Pastors, for there were more of them then one in
Thyatira, as likewise in Philippie, Phil. 1. 1. Antioch, Act. 13. 2. and 15.
35. Ephesus, Act. 20. 17. 28. 36. 37. The like may be observed of other
primitive Churches. Secondly, (...) to the rest of you, viz. of the flock and
body of the Church. As the charge cannot be restricted to the Church of
Thyatira, no more can it be restricted to the Ministry in Thyatira. But in
them Christ charge all both Ministers and Church Members to hold fast the
Jewel of the Gospel till he come again.

8. It is the Privilege of the new Jerusalem which is above, that there is no
temple therein, Revel. 21. 22. no Ministry, no Preaching, no Sacraments in
heaven, but God shall be all in all. An Immediate enjoyment of God in this
world without ordinances is but a delusion. In the Church triumphant prophecies
shall fail, 1 Cor. 13. 8. but in the Church militant, despise not
prophesyings, 1 These. 5. 20.

If any object (as some fanatic persons have done) Ier. 31. 34. and they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor, etc. 1 Ioh. 2. 27. and ye need not that
any man teach you. I answer first, These Scriptures are to be understood
comparatively, in the same sense as God said, he would have mercy and not
sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. The Spirit of illumination and knowledge shall be so
abundantly powered forth under the Gospel, and God shall so writ his laws in
the hearts of his people, that there shall be almost as much difference between
those under the old Covenant, and those under the new Covenant, as there is
between those that need a Teacher, and those that need not a Teacher. 2. As the
Law is not made for a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1. 9. viz. to compel him as with a
bitte and bridle, for he needs no such compulsion, but obeys filially and
willingly, yet the Law is made for a righteous man to be a rule of obedience
to him. So believers under the Gospel need not to be taught by men as
Ignorants are taught, they are not without understanding as the horse or the
mule; for they shall all know me, says the Lord, Ier. 31. 32. and ye know all
things. 1 Ioh. 2. 20. yet they need a teaching Ministry for growing in
knowledge; for their edification building up, for strengthening and confirming
them, and for putting them in remembrance and stirring them up, Ephesians. 4. 12. 2
Pet. 1. 12. and 3. 18. Phil. 1. 9. There shall ever be need of the Ministry,
both to convert such as are not yet converted, and to confirm such as are
converted. The Apostle 1 These. 3. 2. thought it necessary to send Timothy to
the Church of the Thessalonians to establish them, and to comfort them. 3. As
long as we are in this world, that promise that we shall not need any man to
teach us, is not perfectly fulfilled, for we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9.
12. we shall ever need a Teacher til we be in heaven and see Christ face to
face. 4. And thus we must needs understand these Scriptures objected, unless
we will make them to contradict other Scriptures, Ier. 3. 15. Romans 10. 14. 1
Cor. 1. 23. and how can a man understand without a Teacher, Acts 8. 31.

Object 2. But if we believe the Ministry to be a perpetual ordinance, and
if there be a promise that Christ will be with the Ministry to the end of the
world, then we must also believe a succession of Ministers since the Apostles
days, and that in the midst of Popery it self, Christ had a true Ministry.
Answer, If our believing the holy Church universal, and that in all ages
Christ has had and shall have a true Church, does not infer that we must
believe the Church either always visible, or always pure, so our believing a
perpetual Ministry, does not infer that therefore we must believe either
a lineall or visible succession of Ministers, or their purity and preservation
from error. There is nothing of this kind can be objected against our
believing a perpetual Ministry, but it falls as heavy upon our belief of
the perpetuity of the Church.

Object. 3. The multitude of believers are under the new Testament made a
royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto
God, Revel. 1. 6. Answer, First Peter explaineth himself, 1 Pet. 2. 5. ye are
anholy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. What these spiritual sacrifices are we may find in other Scriptures,
the mortification of the flesh and offering up of our selves to God, Romans 12.
1. Contrition Psalm. 51. 17. Prayer and supplications, Psalm. 141. 2. Heb. 5. 7.
Rev. 5. 8. thanksgivings, Psalm. 50. 14. 23. Heb. 13. 15* alms deeds, Phil. 4.
18. Heb. 13. 16. As to these all believers are indeed an holy Preist-hood, but
not as to public Ministerial administrations. 2. This objection drives at the
taking away of Magistracy and civil government, as well as of the Ministry,
for Christ has made believers Kings as well as Priests, and if Kings then not
Subjects. 3. The same thing was said to the people of Israel, Exodus 19. 6. and
ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests, yet God appointed the sons of
Aaron only to be Priests, as to the public administration of holy things* 4.
The same God who has made Christians an holy Priesthood, has promised to the
Church of the new Testament, that he will set a part and take from among them,
or of them (by way of distinction and special calling) Priests who shall
Minister before him in the holy things, Isa. 66. 21. Ezekiel. 44. 15. 16. etc.
Whom he calls Priests not in the Jewish nor Popish sense, but for their
offering up of the Gentiles to God by the preaching of the Gospel, and
sanctified by the holy Ghost, Rom* 15. 16. Or we may conceave they are called
Priests by the Prophets, that they might be the better understood, speaking in
the language of those times: even as for the same reason when the Prophets
spoke of the Church of the new Testament, They mention mount Zion, Jerusalem,
sacrifices, incense, the feast of Tabernacles, etc. But I must not forget what
the Erastian Grallator with so much spite and derision rejects, viz. that
there is not only a perpetual Ministry in the Church, but that Ministers
lawfully called, are to be received as the Ambassadors of Christ, and as sent
of God. If there must be a perpetual Ministry yet. That child of the devil
and Enemy of Christ (for he can be no other who is an Enemy to the Ministry
of the word and Sacraments) cease not to pervert the right ways of the Lord.

He will by no means acknowledge any Ministers in the Reformed Churches to be
the Ambassadors of Christ, though the Apostles were. It seems he hates this
name the more, because Ambassadors by the law of Nations are inviolable
persons, how much more the Ambassadors of Christ? But let us now see whether
the word of God gives not as high a rise and Authority even to the ordinary
Ministry of the Gospel, as an Ambassador from Christ. When Paul says, We
are Ambassadors from Christ, 2 Cor: 5. 20. he speaks it not in reference to
any thing peculiarly apostolical, or any thing incompetent to ordinary
Ministers, the contrary is most plain from the Text it self, He has committed
unto us the word of Reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. Now if Paul was the Ambassador of Christ, because he had
committed unto him the word of reconciliation, then all true Ministers of the
Gospel are also the Ambassadors of Christ for the same reason. See the like
Ephesians: 6. 20. For which I am an Ambassador. for what? Not for working miracles,
casting out Devils, planting Churches in several Kingdoms, or the like, but
for opening my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel, verse.
19. wherein he desires to be helped by the prayers of the Saints. By the same
reason all faithful and lawfully called Ministers are the Ambassadors of
Christ, as well as the Apostles: Even as under the old Testament, the Priests
who were ordinary Teachers, and called in an ordinary mediat way, were the
Angels or Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, Mal: 2. 7. as well as the Prophets.
2. Chron* 36. 16* So wise men and Scribes are said to be sent of God as well as
prophets, Math. 23. 34. And the Ministers of the seven Churches in Asia are
called Angels, Revel: 2. 3. and an Interpreter of the word of God is a
Messenger, Job 33. 23. Now Christ has given to the Church Pastors and
Teachers, as well as Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, all these are from
Heaven, not from men, Ephesians: 4. 11.

CHAP. II.
Of the Election of Pastors with the Congregations consent.

THe Question is not, whether the power of Ecclesiastical government, or
jurisdiction belong to the people, or body of the Church* (for the Tenants of
Brownists and Anabaptists, concerning popular government, we utterly abhor)
nor whether the whole collective body of the Church ought to be assembled, and
their voi es severally asked in Elections, for all may consent when none vote
in Elections, but the representative body of the Church, nor whether the
consent of the people to the admission of a Pastor is to be sought and wished
for, it being generally acknowledged by all, and denied by none, that it is
better to enter with the peoples consent then against it: Nor whether liberty
ought to be granted to the whole congregation, or any member thereof to object
against the man's life or doctrine, or against his qualificatio^ for such a
particular charge, for it is certain that not only the congregation, but others
who know any just impediment against his admissio^, have place to object the
same, nor whether the churches liberty of consent be inconsistant with, or
destructive unto the Presbyteries power of examination and ordination, for
these may stand together: but the question is whether it be necessarily
required to the right vocation of a Pastor, that he be freely elected by the
votes of the Eldership, and with the consent (tacit or expressed) of the major
or better part of the Congregation, so that he be not obtruded, renitente, and
contradicente Ecclesia.

The affirmative part of this question is proved from Scripture, from
antiquity, from Protestant writters, yea Churches and from sound reason, and
from the confessions of opposites. To begin with Scripture, and with the
primitive pattern, the Apostles themselves would not so much as make Deacons
till all the seven were chosen, and presented unto them by the Church, Ast, 6.
2, 3, 5, 6: The Author of the History of Episcopacy, part, 2. page 359. To cut
off our Argument from Acts 6. says. That the seven were to be the stewards of
the people in disposing of their goods, good reason that the election should be
made by them, whose goods and fortunes were to be disposed of, this answer was
made by Bellarmine before him: But Walaeus tom. 2. page 52. reasons other
ways: the feeders of the peoples souls, must be no less (if not more)
beloved and acceptable then the feeders of their bodies; therefore these must
be chosen with their own consent, as well as these. Secondly, Elders (both
ruling and preaching) were chosen by most voices of the Church: the suffrages
being signified, per (...), that is, by lifting up, or stretching out of the
hand, Act. 14. 23. Where the Syriak version does insinuate, that the word
(...), is not to be understood of the Apostles ordination of Elders, but of the
Churches Election of Elders, thus, Moreover they made to themselves, that is,
the Disciples mentioned in the former verse, made to themselves, for they who
were made, were not Elders or Ministers to Paul and Barnabas, ( but to the
multitude of the Disciples) in every Church Elders while they were fasting with
them and praying, and commending them, etc. Now how could this Election be, but
after the Grecian form by the Churches lifting up, or stretching out of
hands. But because some do still stick at this place, it may be further
cleared, thus (...); It may be understood three ways, and all these ways it
saves the peoples right. It may be either the action of the Church only, as
the Syriak makes it, or a joint action both of the Churches, and of Paul and
Barnabas, as Iunius makes it; or an action of Paul and Barnabas, in this sense
that they did constitute Elders to the Churches, by the Churches own voices.
However, the word relates to Election by stretching out, or lifting up of
hands, not to ordination by laying on of hands, which is the sense followed by
the Italian version, and Diodati authorizing and ordaining such a one only to
be an Elder as was (...), which I prove, 1. From the native signification of
the word, where Julius Pollux has (...). Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Gualther and Wolf
Seberus render it manuum extensio, and (...) manus levare, and (...), manibus
refragari, Budaeus interprets, (...) to be plebiscitum, suffragium, H.
Stephanus (...) manum protendo; and attollo manum porrigo: and because, says
he, in giving votes, they did (...), thence came the word to be used, for
scisco, decerno, creo, but properly (...), is (says he) as it were, (...), id
est, (...), Justin Martyr, Quaest. and Resp. ad orthod. Resp. ad quaest. 14.
does expressly distinguish (...) and (...). As words of a most different
signification* where Cedrenus Anno. 526. says Euphranius (...). Pilander, the
interpreter rendereth, Episcopatui, communibus suffragiis deligitur. Scapula,
and Arias Montanus also in his Lexicon tells us, that (...) is manus porrigere,
or elevare, eligere, or creare magistratum per fuffragia, for (...) is most
different from laying on of hands, which is not a stretching out or lifting up,
but a leaning or laying down of the hands on some thing. Wherefore the Hebrews
note laying on of hands by Samak, inniti Chrysostom says the Roman Senate, did
(...) which D: Potter himself turns, did make gods by most voices; Charity
mistaken, page 145. 2. The use of the word in this sense, and in no other sense,
either in Scripture, 2 Cor. 8. 19. or Greek authors that wrote before the new
Testament. So that Luke could not be understood, if he had used it in another
sense, but he wrote so that he might be understood: If he had meant ordination,
he would have used the word (...) as Acts 6. 3. Tit. 1. 5. or (...). as Acts 6.
6. 2. The manner of the Elections among the Graecians testified by Demosthenes,
Cicero, and others, clears the meaning of the word. So they had a phrase
(...), omnium suffragiis obtinet, and (...), no man gives a contrary vote.
When the Grecians choised their Magistrates at their Comitia held solemnly for
that end: he that was nominated, was brought into the threater before the
people, so many as aproved of him, held forth, or stretched forth, or lifted up
their hands: If the major part did thus (...), he partly was then said to be
(...), a Magistrate created by suffrages. So Elias Cretensis in Greg. Nazianz.
orat. 3. I find also in Aeschines orat* contra Cetesipont, some decrees cited
which mention three sorts of Magistrates, and among the rest (...). Those that
were made by the peoples suffrage. In the argument of Demosthenes his oration,
advers. Androtion, these Magistrates are called (...), Magistrates made by the
peoples suffrage, Fronto Ducaeus in his notes upon the fifth tom. of
Chrysostom page 3. confesses that with heathen writters (...), is per
suffragia creare, and therefore the word is rendered in the Tigurine version,
and by Calvin, Bullinger, Beza, and so does Erasmus, upon the place understand
the word: ut intelligamus, says he, suffragiis delectos. 4. (...), joined
with (...), does not at all make against that which I say, as some have
conceaved it does, but rather for it, for (...) here is to be rendered, ipsis
not illis, and so Pasor* in the word (...) rendereth, Acts 14. 23. quumque
ipsis per suffragia creassent Presbyteros. So that (...) here is used for (...)
that the Grecians sometimes use the one for the other. So H: Stephanus, These.
ling. Gr. in the word (...), where he refers us to Budaeus, for examples to
prove it, see the like, Matthew. 12. 57: John 4. 2. Thus therefore the text may
be conceaved, (...), that is, and when they (the Disciples of Lystra, Iconium
and Antioch) had by votes made to themselves Elders in every Church, and had
prayed with fasting, they commended them (to wit, Paul and Barnabas) to the
Lord in whom they believed. It needs not seem strange, that here in one
verse I make (...) to be ipsis, and (...) to be illos, and meant of different
persons, for the like will frequently occur in Scripture, Mark 2. 15. as
Jesus sat at meat in his (...) (that is Levies) house, etc.

2. And they watched him, and they followed him (...), that is Jesus, Mark 3.
whether he would heal him, here is (...) for Jesus, and (...) for the man,
which had the withered hand, Gal. 1. 16. to reveal his Son in me, that I
might preach him, here is (...) ipsius, for God the father, and (...) illum for
Christ. So then the Churches of Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, after choosing of
Elders, who were also solemnly set a part with prayer and fasting, were willing
to let Paul, and Barnabas go from them to the planting and watering of other
Churches, and commended them unto God, that would open unto them a wide and
effectual door, and prosper the work of Christ in their hands, Ephesians. 6. 18.
19. Or they commended them unto God for their safety and preservation, as men
are said to commend their own spirits to God, Luke 23. 46. 1 Pet. 4. 19. This
sense and interpretation which I have only offered to be considered, does not
bring any harshnesse, and much less, offer any violence, either to the text or
context in the Greek. But if another sense be liked better, whether to
understand by (...) the Elders ordained or the Churches commended to God by
Paul and Barnabas, or to understand all the particulars mentioned in that 23.
verse to be common and joint acts done by Paul, Barnabas and the Churches,
that is, that they all concurred in making them Elders by suffrage, in prayer
and fasting, and in commending themselves to the Lord; I shall not contend so
long as the proper and native signification of (...) is retained, yea; although
we should understand by this word, an act of Paul, and Barnabas alone,
distinct from the Churches suffrage and consent even in that sense, we lose not
the argument; For first it cannot be supposed that the business was put to the
lifting, or strething out hands in signum suffragii, between Paul and Barnabas,
as if it had been put to the question between them two alone; whether such a
man should be Elder in such a Church. But how then can it be an act of Paul
and Barnabas? Thus if you will, Their two did (...) creare suffragiis, vel per
suffragia, id est; They ordained such men to be Elders as were chosen by the
Church. They two made or created the Elders, but the people declared by lifted
up hands whom they would have to be Elders. So Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 53.
15. Even as says he, the Roman historians often tells us, that the consul who
held the court, did creat new Magistrates, id est, did receave the vo^es and
preside in the Elections.

5. Luke does usually mention the Churches suffrage in making Church Officers,
or in designing men to sacred employments, as Acts 1. 23. 26. Acts 13. 3. Acts
15. 22. So does Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 3. 2. Cor. 8. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 7. So that it is
not likely there should be no mention of the Churches election here, where
pro^essedly and intentionally mention is made of planting Elders, the prayer
and fasting, as Acts 13. 2, 3. so likewise, Acts 14. 23. was common to the
Church; they prayed and fasted cum discipulis, jej^nantibus says the Gloss)
all being one work, why was not the (...) common to the Churches also. 6.
Protestant writers draw from (...) the Churches suffrage; Magdebur: cent. 1.
lib. 2. cap: 6. Zanchius in 4. Prae. Beza, Cartwright and others, on the place,
Bullinger Decad: 5. Ser. 4. Iunius contro: 5 lib. 1 cap. 7. And others against
Bellarmine, de Cler cap. 7. Gerhard, tom. 6. page 95. Brochmand: Systhem: tom:
2. page 886. Danaeus in 1 Timothy 5. Walaeus in his treatise, quibusnam competat
vocatio Pastorum, and loce: page 474. Of Papists, also Salmeron expondeth this
place by, Acts. 6. And says the Apostles gave the Election to the Churches,
here of Elders, as there of Deacons, Bell: de cler: cap. 7. and Esthius in 2.
Cor. 8. 19. confess that if we look either to the Etimologie of the word, or
the use of Greek authors, it is to choose by votes. If it be objected to me
that (...) being referred to the people, will invest them with a judicial
power; and a forensicall, or juridicall suffrage; and where is then the
authority of the Eldership. Ans. It Is like enough (though I confess not
certain) that no Elderships were yet erected in those Churches, Acts. 14. 23.
But put case they had Elderships, yet (...) might well be referred to the
people, to signify their good liking and consent, for in Athens it self the
people did (...), when they did but like well the persons nominated, as when a
thesaurer offered some to be surety, (...), whom the people shall approve.
Demosthenes advers. Timocr. In which oration it is also to be noted that (...)
the Assembly, and (...) the judicial court or Assembly of judges are plainly
distinguished, so far that they might not be both upon one day; and that,
though the people did (...), yet not they, but the (...), or judges, did (...),
ordain, or appoint a Magistrate, See ibid jusjurandum Heliastarum. As for the
objection from Acts 10. 41. (...) is not the same with (...), but as it were
the preventing of (...) by a prior designation. 2. It is there attribute to God
(...), that in the council of God the Apostles were in a manner Elected by
voices of the Trinity, as faciamus hominem, Genesis 1. and hinders no more the
proper signification of the word applied to men, then (...) ascribed to God,
can prove, that there is no change in men when they repent, because there is
none in God. As for that objection made by a learned man, that even the
Septuagints Isay 58. 9. have (...) not for extensio or elevatio manuum, but for
that which is in the Hebrew immissio or innixus digiti or manus. Answer, 1. It
is not put for innixus digiti, but for extensio digiti, for so is the text. 2.
Sanctius following Cyrill, tells us that the sense of the 70. turning the text
so; was this, Nempe hic intelligi suffragia quibus magistratus creantur, a
quibus raro solet abesse munerum largitio and corruption juris. So that his
argument may be retorted, I do not say that this is the Prophets meaning, but
that it is the 70. their sense of the text in using that word, for the most
Interpreters understand by putting forth the finger there, derision, and
disdain. 3. The 70. certainly did not intend the putting on, but the putting
out of the finger, so the Chaldee has annuere digito, Heirome, extendere
digitum, which well agrees with the Hebrew Shekach digitum extendere. i. e.
malum opus perlongare, says Hugo Cardinalis. It is says Emanuel Sa, minando,
aut convitiando, (which seems the true sense) The Jesuits of Doway read, and
cease to stretch out the finger. Gualther reads emissionem digiti, and
expondeth thus medij digiti, ostensio erat contemptus iudicium, digitis item
minitamur, suppose none of all these signify the laying on of the hands, or
finger, but suppose that it is not laid on, and so much shall suffice
concerning these Scriptures, Acts 6. 2, 3, 5. 6. and Acts 14. 23:

A third argument from Scripture shall be this. If the extraordinary office
bearers in these Primitive times were not chosen, nor put into their functions
without the Churches consent, far less ought there now to be any intrusion of
ordinary Ministers without the consent of the Church; Judas and Silas were
chosen with consent of the whole Church unto an extraordinary embassage, Act.
15. 22. So were Paul's company chosen by the Church, 2 Cor. 8. 19. The
Commissioners of the Church of Corinth, were approved by the Church, 1 Cor. 16.
3. Yea Mathias, though an Apostle (...), that is, was together chosen by
suffrage, namely of the 120 Disciples, Simul suffragiis electus est, as Arias
Montanus, rightly turns the word* Act. 1. 23. 26. Bell. de Cler. cap. 7.
acknowledges, (...) est dare suffragium, and (...) est ipsum suffragium, Paul
and Barnabas were extraordinarily, and immediately called of God, yet when they
were to be sent to the Gentiles, God would have the consent and approbation of
the Church declared, Act. 13. 3. I conclude this argument from Scripture, with
the Magdeburgians cent. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 6. Neque Apostolos, neque alios
ecclesiae ministros sibi solis, sumpsisse protestatem eligendi and ordinandi
Presbyteros and Diaconos, sed ecclesiae totius suffragia and consensum
adhibuisse; tum ex, 1 Cor. 3 21. 22. Patet, tum exemplis probatur, Act. 1. 23.
Act. 6. 6. Act. 14. 23.

The next argument is taken from antiquity, Cyprian Lib. 1. Epist. 4. is very
full and plain, for the Churches right and liberty in elections. D. Field Lib.
5. Cap. 54. cites and Englisheth the words at large, Leo. Epist. 87. Cap. 1.
requires in the Election of Bishops: vota civium, testimonia populorum,
Epistola synodalis concilii. Car: bar. Sussitani apud Augustinum, Enar i^ Psalm:
36. says, Necesse nos fuerat Primiani causam, quem ple^s sa^cta ecclesiae
Carthaginensis* Episcopum fuerat in ovile dei sortita, seniorum literis ejusdem
ecclesiae postulantibus audire atque discutere. The fourth council of
Carthage, Can. 22. requires to the admission of every Clergie-man, civium
assensum, and testimonium and convenientiam. Socrates lib. 4. cap. 25.
records that Ambrose was chosen Bishop of Millane with the uniforme voice of
the Church; and lib. 6. cap. 2. he records the like concerning the Election
of Chrysostom, to be Bishop of Constantinople. Moreover, I find in the
pretended Apostolical, but really ancient constitutions, collected by one
under the name of Clemens, lib. 8. cap. 4* it is appointed to ordain a Bishop,
thus qualified (...), in all things unblamable, one of the best and chosen by
all the people, unto whom let the people, being assembled together on the Lords
day, with the Presbytery, and the Bishops then present give their consent.
Then immediately one of the Bishops asks the Eldership and people, (...), if
they desire that man to be set over them, which if they consent unto, he next
asks them (as a distinct question) whether they all give him a good
testimony for his life, etc. Greg: Nazianz. orat. 31. commends Athanafius
his calling, as being after the apostolical example, because he was chosen
(...), by the suffrage of all the people. The council of Nice in their epistle
to them of Alexandria appoint some to succeed into the vacant places (...),
(...) so that they appear worthy, and the people chose them, Greg: Mag: Epist.
lib. 9. cap. 74. clerum and populum singularum civitatum hortari festina, ut
inter se dissentire non debeant, sed uno sibi consensu, una quaeque civitas
consecrandum eligat sacerdotem, he that would have greater store of antiquity
for this, may read Blondel. apol. page 379. to. 473. Gerhard cites for the
peoples right, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Origin, Isidore, yea twelve Popes, and
diverse ancient examples, as the Election of Sabinianus of Athanasius, Peter
the successor of Athanasius, of Eradius, the successor of Augustine, of
Nectarius, of Ilavianus, and others chosen with the consent of the whole
Church; Gerhard. loc: Com. tom: 6. sect. 95, 96, 97. what need we to say any
more of this, Bilson himself confesses it, de gubern: Eccles. cap. 15. page
417. he says the ancient form was, totam ecclesiam nominationi and probationi
Pastoris sui prius consensisse, quam pro electo haberetur: And he observes
(which another of his mind says with him, Hist: of Epistopacy part. 2. page
360) that the people did more willingly receave, more diligently hear, and
more heartily love these in whose Election their desires were satisfied, Bell:
de Cler: cap. 9. confesses that in the time of Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Augustine, Leo, and Gregory, the received form of Elections was, that both the
Clergy and the People should choose. Ancient testimonies for the Peoples
Election, see also Smectimnus, page 34.

Thirdly, we argue from the judgment of sound Protestant Churches and
writters; The Helvetik confession tells us that the right choising of
Ministers, is by the consent of the Church: The Belgic confession says, we
believe that the Ministers, Seniors, and Deacons ought to be called to these
their functions, and by the lawful Election of the Church to be advanced into
these rooms: see both in the harmony of Confessions, Secl. 11. the French
discipline we shall see afterward: The tenent of Protestants, which Bell: de
Cler: cap. 2. undertaketh to confute, is this; ut sine populi consensu, and
suffragio nemo legittime electus, aut vocatus ad Episcopatum habeatur. And
though our writers disclame many things which he imputes unto them, yet I
find not this disclamed by any of them, who write against him: It is plainly
maintained by Luther, lib. de Potest: Papae* Calv* in Acts 6. 3. Beza confess.
cap. 5. art. 35. Musculus in loc: com. Zanchius in 4. praecept: Iunius animad:
in Bell: Contro. 5 lib. 1. cap 7. Cartwright on Acts 14. 23. Osiander. hist:
Eccles: cent. 4 lib. 3. cap. 38. Gualther on Acts 6, Stutonius Fazius in 1 Timothy
5. 22. Morney de Eccles: cap. 11. Balduin: de instit: Ministrorum cap. 6.
Bruchmand: Systhem: tom* 2. page 885. 886. Walaeus de vocatione pastorum, and in
loc: com: page 474. Bullinger decad. 5. Ser. 3. page 300. Smectymnus, page 33.
34. Whittaker in his manuscript: de Clericis, which was never printed;
ascribes election to the people. So Festus Homius Speginen controv: Belgic.
Art. 31. And many others whose testimonies we can produce if need be, let five
only speak for the rest; Calvin in one of his Epistles, though writing against
the itching ears, and groundless conceits of some people, yet asserteth this
for a certain truth.

Sane oportet Ministrum a populo approbatum esse, antequam i^ Ministerii
possessionem mittatur, quod si quis seipsum intrudit alia via, ubi in Ecclesia
ordo jam constitutus est, legittima vocatione destituitur, see the book of
Spiles, page 482. Edit. Genev: 1617. Gerhard tom: 6. page 95. Vt Ecclesia
consentiente Pastores vocentur, neve quis invitae Ecclesiae obtrudatur; habet
expressa in Scripturis testimonia, and perpetua Ecclesiae primitivae praxi,
comprobatum est, Zanchius in 4. praecept: col. 81. says, est igitur manifestum
nunquam Apostolos quempiam ad Ministerium e^egisse and ordinasse sua tantum
authoritate, sed semper id solitos facere consentiente and approbante Ecclesia,
and col: 782. servatur haec eadem consuetudo etiamnum in mult is Ecclesiis
reformatis, and Col: 783. Eligere Pastores sine plebis consensu, primum non est
Apostolicum, neque legittimum, eoque talis Minister, legittimus non fuerit
Minister, deinde pugnat cum liberate Ecclesiae, eoque adimitur ei quod
Christus donavit, quantum autem est hoc crimen? Tertio non conducit Pastori,
quia nunquam bona conscientia poterit suo fungi officio, neque etiam conducit
Ecclesiae, quia libenter non audiet, neque etiam amabit eum, qui sibi non
consentienti obtrusus est, Danaeus in 1 Timothy 5. 22. quemadmodum totius
Ecclesiae Pastor est futurus, ita ab omnibus debet approbari, ne quisquam gregi
invito Pastor obtrudatur. And after he has cleared the whole matter at length,
he concludes, Ex his autem omnibus apparet, quam nulla sit vel non legittima
eorum dei Ministrorum vel Ecclesiae, Pastorum vocatio, qui solius regis vel
reginae, vel patroni, vel Episcopi, Archi Episcopi authoritate, diplomate,
bullis, jussu, and judicio fiunt vel eliguntur, id quod dolendum est adhuc
fieri in iis Ecclesiis, quae tamen purum Dei verbum habent, and sequuntur,
velut^ in media anglia. The professors of Leyden in Synops: pur. theol: disp:
42. These. 32. Ius pastores eligendi, est penes Ecclesiam, ac proinde plebi
commune, cum presbyteris: jus eos ordinandi soli Presbyterio est proprium. I
must not forget to mention the order of the Church of Scotland, the first book
of Discipline in the fourth head, says, This liberty with all care must be
reserved to every several Kirk, to have their votes and suffrages in election
of their Ministers, The second book of Discipline, cap. 3. says, In the order
of Election it is to be eschewed that any person be intruded in any offices of
the Kirk, contrary to the will of the Congregation to which they are
appointed, or without the voice of the Eldership: The General Assembly at
Edinburgh, in December: 1562. Sess: 3. Made this Ast, that inhibition shall be
made to all and sundry persons, now serving in the Ministry that have not been
presented be the people, or a part thereof to the superintendent: The General
Assembly at Edinburgh, May 1586. Sess. 5. requires the consent of the whole
Parish to a Ministers Election, the wordsare these; Anent the doubt moved if it
be lawful to any town, or city, where there is an University, and a part of
the parish of the same town lying to landward, without their consent and votes
to Elect a Minister to the whole parish and University, pretending the
privilege of an old use and custom. The Kirk has voted thereto negative,
that it is not lawful so to do: The General Assembly at Perth, in March
1596. Sess. 6. Does forbid the choosing of Ministers without the consent of
their own flocks: The General Assembly at Glasgow, Sess. 23. art. 2o. Does
revive the ancient order thus, anent the presenting either of Pastors, or
Elders and Schoolmasters, to particular Congregations, that there be a respect
had to the Congregation, and that no person be intruded in any office of the
Kirk contrary to the will of the Congregation to which they are appointed In
the Treatise called, The order and government of the Church of Scotland
(published anno 1641. For information of the English, and for removing and
preventing all prejudices which the best affected among them had, or might
conceave against our Church government) we have these words, page 8. So that no
man is here intruded upon the people against their open or tacit consent and
approbation, or without the voices of the particular Eldership, with whom he is
to serve in the Ministry. And now if in any Congregation of Scotland, the
practice should be contrary to the profession, and rule established (which God
forbid, and I hope it never shall) it were a double fault and scandle. Finally,
the order of the Church of Scotland is strengthened by the civil law of the
Kingdom: For the second Parliament of King Charles, Act 7. did ordain
Presbyteries to plant vacand Kirks with consent of the Parishes. And Act 8.
anent the Presbyteries providing and admitting Ministers to the Kirks which
belonged to Bishoprics; It is always provided, that this be without prejudice
of the interest of the Parishes, according to the acts and practice of the Kirk
since the Reformation: In the 9. Act of the last Session of the same
Parliament, Presbyteries are appointed to plant vacand Churches upon the suit
and calling of the Congregation.

In the fourth place, the point is confirmed from sound reason. For, 1. It is
very expedient for the credit and better success of the Ministry, that a
Bishop have a good name and testimony even among them that are without, as the
Apostle teaches, 1 Timothy 3. 7. It is much more necessary, that he be well
lyked and approved of them that are within the Church. 2. It is a common maxim
among the Fathers, Schoolmen, and Summists, Quod ad omnes pertinct ommium
consensu siere debet. 3. As the free consent of people in the Election, is a
great obligation and engagement, both to them, to Subject themselves in
Christian and willing obedience to him, whom they have willingly chosen to be
over them in the Lord, and to the person elected to love them, and to offer up
himself gladly upon the service and sacrifice of their faith: So where this
obligation or mutual union of the hearts of Pastor and People is wanting,
mutual duties are not done (...), but as it were by constraint and necessity,
they in the mean time drawing back from the yoke, and he, at the best watching
over them, not with joy, but with grief and sorrow of heart. 4. In stead of
peace and harmony, there shall be contention and contradiction, Gerhard. tom:
6. page: 105. Ministros vocaricum consensu and suffragiis Ecclesiae cui
praeficiuntur, alit mutuam concordiam inter auditores and Pastores, sum
necessariam, a movet etiam dissidia ex neglectu hujus ordinis metuenda. 5. It
breadeth great peace and confidence when one is thus called. Whittaker de
Ecclesia quaest: 5. cap: 6. defends the calling of Luther, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, etc. Upon this ground, quia sunt a populis and gregibus vocati.
6. Experience has made men to know the comfortable fruits of free Election,
and the unhappie success of violent intrusion. Constantius the son of
Constantine, did put Orthodox Bishops from their places, and substitute Arrians
in their room, with the contradiction and reluctation of the Churches. The
like did Papists in the Palatinat, and other places where their Dagon was set
up again. So did the authors and urgers of the Interim in Germany. So did the
Prelates in Scotland, England, Ireland. Upon all which intrusions many
unspeakable evils did follow. If we after a second Reformation should now
permit violent intrusions, this might well be a prologue to much confusion and
disorder.

Lastly, I argue from the confessions of adversaries themselves, we have cited
before the confession of Bilson, and of the author of the history of
Episcopacy, and of Salmeron, I will add Peresius de traditionibus, who
undertaketh to confute the Protestant tenent, That it belongs to the people
to elect or reject their Ministers; He argues from antiquity, and yet in that
same argumentation, he is constrained to speak for us. For speaking of the
three Bishops which by the ancient Canons might ordain a Bishop, he says,
Verum tamen est quod Episcopi isti qui ad electionem Congregabantur, consensum
expectabant cleri and populiut in concilio carthaginensi quarto refertur, qui
consensus magis erat testificatio vitae ejus qui erat ordinandus, and signum
quoddam expressivum ejus desiderii, quod volebat Paulus quando bonum
testimonium populi dicebat expectandum ante ordinationem. Et infra. Hoc enim
modo magis pretiosus esset illis praelatus, magisque amabilis, ne cogerentur
inviti inutiles homines, and inter dum perniciosos suis sudoribus alere. And
Answering to the passage of Cyprian lib: 2. Epist* 5. he says; That tho he
has not read of it, yet forte erat mos tempore ejus in Ecclesiis Hispaniarum
(for they were two Spanish Bishops of whom Cyprian writs in that Epistle) ut
aliqui ex populo vocem haberent, electivam. Quod vero dicit populum posse
recusare indignos, etiam fassi sumus, quantum ad Electionem si indignitas
ordinandi sit not a and populo perniciosa. But what says the Canon law it
self, Decr: part: 1. dest: 62. Electio clericorum est petitio plebis. He was a
Popish Archbishop who condescended that the city of Magdeburg, should have jus
vocandi and c^nstituendi Ecclesiae Ministros: Neither would the city admit of
peace without this condition. Thuan hist: lib: 83. page 85. I had almost forgot
D: Field of the Church lib: 5. cap: 54. Confessing plainly that each People and
Church stand free by Gods law, to admit, maintain, and obey no man as their
Pastor without their lyking: and that the peoples election by themselves, or
their rulers depends on the first principles of humane fellowships and
Assemblies: For which cause, tho Bishops by Gods law have power to examine and
ordain before any man be placed to take charge of Souls, yet bave they no power
to impose a Pastor upon any Church against their wills. He cites diverse
testimonies of antiquity to show that the ancient Elections were by the Church
or the greater part thereof.

It remains to answer some objections. And first it is objected, That this is
a tenent of Anabaptists, Independents, and Separatists. Ans: 1. But shall we
condemn these truths which either they, or Papists, or Arrians do hold? Quid
est, says Cyprian, quia hoc facit Novatianus ut nos non putemus esse
faciendum? We may go one mile with the Scriptures, though we go not two miles
with the Independents, or three miles with the Anabaptists, or Separatists. 2.
Neither in this same point of Elections do we homologat with them, who give to
the collective body of the Church (women and children under age only excepted)
the power of decisive vote and suffrage in Elections, we give the vote only to
the Eldership or Church representative, so that they carry along with them the
consent of the Major or better part of the Congregation. Gamachaeus in primam
secundae quaest: 15 tells us out of Thomas this difference betwixt consent and
election: that though every choosing bea consenting, yetevery consenting is not
a choosing: The liberty of consent is one thing; counsel or deliberation
another thing: The power of a decisive voice in court or judicatory a third
thing. I speak of a constituted Church (for where there is not yet an
Eldership, there can be no such distinction: yet however be there an Eldership
or be there none, the Churches consent must be had.) The first of these we
ascribe to the whole Church, without whose knowledge and consent Ministers may
not be intruded. The second to the ablest and wisest men of the Congregation,
especially to Magistrates, with whose especial advice, privity, and
deliberation the matter ought to be managed. The third which is the formal, and
consistoriall determination of the case of election, consists in the votes of
the Eldership: Their way is much different from this, who would have the matter
prepared by the conference, and deliberation of the Eldership, (as we use to
do in Committees) but determined and decided by the votes of the whole
Congregation. 3. Let them speak for us who have particularly written against
the Separatists and Independents. Laget in his defense of Church Government,
part. 1. cap: 1, In the stating of the question about popular government,
declares that the question is not, whether in matters of greater importance,
and more public concernment, (as admissions, excommunications, and absolutions
of members, elections, and depositions of officers) the case ought to be made
known unto, and determined with the free consent of the people (for all this he
willingly grants.) But whether every cause to be determined, ought to be
brought to the multitude, or body of the Congregation, and they to give their
voices therein together with the officers of the Church.

Mr. Herle the reverend and learned prolocutor of the Assembly of divines at
Westminster in his treatise, entitled, The independency on Scriptures, of the
independency of the Churches, page: 3. While he stateth the question, says, We
acknowledge that the Pastors and other officers were ancientlie, and it is to
be wished they still were chosen (at least) consented to by the members of each
respective Congregation: But that they are to be ordained, d^posed, or
excommunicated by the Presbytery, etc. Moreover they of the Separation, and if
not all, yet (sure) some Independents place the whole essentiality of a calling
in Election, accompting ordination to be no more but the solemnization of the
calling. We say, (...) or the missio potestativa, or the power and commission
given to a man, by which he is made of no Minister to be a Minister, is not
from the Churches electing him, but from the lawful ordaining him: And that
Election does but design such a person to the Ministry of such a Church. For
as Gamachaeus says in tertiam partem Thomae do Sacr: ordin: cap: 7. the
people cannot give spiritual authority which themselves have not: Et quamvis
fateamur, says he, Laicos saepissime vocatos ad electionem Ministrorum
Ecclesiae, tamen long est aliud loqui de ordinatione, quam de electione, etc.

Object: 2: This liberty granted to Congregations prejudgeth the right of
Patrons? Ans: 1: If it were so, yet the argument is not pungent in divinity,
for why should not humane right give place to divine right? Nec Episcopale nec
patronatus jus Ecclesiasticis Canonibus introductum praejudicare potest
potestati jure divino toti Ecclesiae in Ministrorum Electione competenti, says
Gerhard Tom: 6. Sect: 114. The states of Zeeland did abolish patronages, and
give to each Congregation the free Election of their own Minister, which I take
to be one cause why Religion flourishes better there then in any other of the
united provinces.

Object. 3. The Churches liberty of consenting or not consenting, asserted by
the arguments above mentioned, must ever be understood to be rational, so that
the Church may not disassent without objecting somewhat against the doctrine or
life of the person presented. Answ: 1. The author of the history of Epistopacy
part: 6. page: 362. 364. tells us out of the book of Ordination, that the people
are free to except against these that are to be ordained, and are required if
they know any crime, for which they ought not to be received unto the
Ministry, to declare the same. He says further, that Presbyters are elected
by the Patrons, for and in the name of the rest of the people. page: 365. So
Peresius de tradit: part: 3. page: 200. confesses that people should be
required to object what they can against the fitness of the man to be
ordained. Now then if this be all, that people may object, it is no more then
Prelates, yea Papists have yielded. Answ. 2. This objection cannot strike
against the election of a Pastor, by the judgment and votes of the particular
Eldership of that Church where he is to serve: For it is evident by the
Scriptures, testimonies, and reasons above specified, not only that the Church
has liberty of disassenting upon grounds and causes objected, but that the
Eldership has power and liberty positive to elect (by voices) their Ministers.
Now men vote in Elderships, (as in all courts and consistories) freely
according to the judgment of their conscience, and are not called to an
account for a reason of their votes. 3. As the vote of the Eldership is a free
vote, so is the Congregations consent, a free consent, and the objection
holds no more against the latter then against the former, for they are both
jointly required by the Church of Scotland as appears by the citations
foresaid. 4. Any man (though not a member of the Congregation) has place to
object against the admission of him that is presented, if he know such an
impediment as may make him incapable, either at all of the Ministry, or the
Ministry of that Church to which he is presented: So that unless the
Congregation have somewhat more then liberty of objecting, they shall have no
privilege or liberty, but that which is common to strangers as well as to
them. In this fourth answer, I am confirmed by Blondellus a man entrusted, and
set apart by the national Synod of the reformed Churches of France, for
writing and handli^g of controversies. In his Apologia prosententia Hieromini,
page: 383. Replying to Bellarmine who would enervate Cyprians testimonies (for
the peoples right to choose their Ministers) by this evasion which now I speak
to, says, Nec pu^idum in gravi Scriptore commentum ferendum, populum habere
potestatem eligendi and suffragium ferendi, quia potest dicere siquid noverit
boni v^l mali de ordinando, and sic testimonio suo efficere ut non eligatur:
quasi vero is eligendi and suffragium ferendi potestate praeditus eaque usus
dici debeat, qui id tantum prestat, quod omni electionis and suffragii jure
absolute carens praestare (quandocunque libet) potest, autoris quisquam adeo
duri reperiatur ut infidelium pessimos quicquid boni vel mali de ordinando
noverint dicere, and sic testimonio suo ut no^ eligatur efficere posse negare
audeat, habe^unt scilicet ex adversarii hypothesi aequo cum sidelibus jure
eligendi and suffragium ferendi potestatem. 5. Though nothing be objected
against the man's doctrine or life, yet if the people desire another better or
as well qualifyed, by whom they find themselves more edified then by the
other, that is a reason sufficient (i^a reason must be given at all) and it is
allowed by Danaeus in 1. Tim: 5. 22. and by the first book of discipline in the
fourth head, 6. It being condescended upon in the Parliament of Scotland that
his Majesty with consent and advice of the Estates, should nominate the
officers of Estate. The Estates of Parliament were pressed to give a reason of
their disassenting from his Majesty's nomination, but they refused. And I am
sure consenting or not consenting in a matter Ecclesiastical, ought to be as
free, if not more free, then in a matter civil.

Object. 4. This course may prove very dangerous for an apostatizing
Congregation, for a people inclining to Heresy or Schism, will not consent to
the admission of an orthodox and sound Minister. Answ. 1. The intrusion of
Ministers against the Congregations will, does more generally and universally
draw after it, great evils and inconveniences, 2. The corruptions of many
Patrons, and peradventure also some Presbyteries may be more powerful to
intrude insufficient or unsound Ministers, then the unsoundnesse or error of
this or that particular Congregation, can be to hinder the admission of them
that are sound. 3. We shall heartily accord that a heretical or a
Schismatic Church, has not just right to the liberty and privilege of a
sound Church. 4. Zanchius in 4. praec: col: 784. Would have a Congregation
infected with Heresy or Superstition, before there be a Ministry settled
among them, to be first convinced of their error, by some other Pastor sent
unto them by the Christian Magistrate for a time, and extraordinarly as a kind
of Evangelist. At vero says he, cum constitutae sunt and formatae verae
Ecclesiae, cur tune saltem non relinquitur illis libertas eligendi suos
Pastores?

Object: 5. People do often err in their choice, and cannot judge of the
qualifications and abilities of Pastors, but follow blindly the humors of their
Lords or leaders. Answ: 1. We must believe what Christ says, John 10, 4, 5.
That his sheep know his voice, and a stranger they will not follow, but will
flee from him. 2. There are also in Presbyteries and in all Judicatories, some
leading men whose judgment is much respected and hearkened unto. 3. He that
follows another is ever blind: A people may follow leading m^n; and yet see
with their own eyes too. 4. When Bellarmine objecteth that a people cannot
judge, whether a man be fit for the Ministry, Iunius animad: Contr: 5. lib: 1.
cap: 7. not: 24. Answers that the Congregation judges not simply and
absolutely whether one be fit for the Ministry, but whether he be fit to serve
in the Ministry among them. Which two are so different, that of two men
offered to a Congregation, he that is absolutely and simply the best qualifyed
for the Ministry, is not to be for that cause admitted hic and nunc, but he
who is fittest for that Congregation. Now a rude and ignorant people can judge
which of the two speaks best to their capacity and edificatition. 5. When
any Congregation makes choice of an unfit or dangerous person, against whom
there is just exception to be made, they must not therefore be robbed of their
right, but called upon to make a better choice: This right people had from a
Pope, Greg: Mag: Epist: lib. 6. Epist: 38. Habitatores Lucensis civitatis
quendam ad nos Presbyterum adduxerunt, qui eis debuisset Episcopus ordinari,
Sed quia mimine dignus inventus est nec diu sine proprio possunt consistere
sacerdote: a nobis admoniti in se^inio promiserunt alium studiose qu^rere, etc.

Object: 6. Seldom or never shall a Congregation be found all of one mind,
and because this might be answered in the words of Gregorius de valentia in
tam secundae disput: 7. quaest: 5. punct: 5. Nam moraliter loquendo illud tota
communitas facere censetur quod facit major ipsius pars. Therefore to make the
objection stronger, it may be further added, that oftentimes the greater part
shall overcome the better part, because in every corporation there are more bad
then good, more foolish then wise: This inconveniencie is objected by
Bellarmine de Clericis, cap: 7. who tells us further that popular elections are
subject to tumults and seditions. We answer with Iunius ubi supranot: 23. 27.
first inconveniences do also follow upon elections made by Presbyteries and
Patrons without the peoples consent. 2. De incommodis prudenter curandis, non
dear sancta mutanda temere, sapientes videre opportuit. 3. For avoiding
inconvenience of this kind, it is to be remembered, that the Congregation ought
to be kept in unity and order (so far as may be) by the directions and
precedence of their Elders, and by the assistance of Brethren chosen out of
other Churches, when need so requires. 4. Zanchius ubi supra, col: 783.
answers out of Calvin; praesideant plebi in electione alii Pastores, and cum
ipsis etiam Magistratus conjugatur, qui compescat tumultuantes and seditiosos.
Wherein there is great need of caution, lest under pretense of suppressing
tumults, the Churches liberty of consenting or not consenting be taken away;
As upon the other part, the Election is not to be wholly and solely permitted
to the multitude or body of the Church, which is the meaning of the 13. Canon
of the counsel of Laodicaea, as it is expounded by Osiander. Gerhard, Iunius
and others. 5. When a Congregation is rent asunder, and cannot agree among
themselves, this evil may b^e helped in Subordinate, though not in Independent
Churches, for the higher consistories, the Presbyteries and Assemblies of the
Church, can end the controversy and determine the case, after hearing of both
si^es.

Object: 8. As for that which may reflect on Ministers, that have not the
peoples consent. 7. Answ: It is ordination that makes men Ministers. And the
want of the Churches suffrage cannot hinder their being Ministers, it
concludes only that they did not rite and ordinate enter into their Ministry
hic and nunc in such a Church. 2. This also is helped by a posterior
approbation of the Church, as a woman marrying a man unwillingly, yet after
loving him as her husband, removes that impediment.

I conclude with a passage out of the Ecclesiastical discipline of the
reformed Churches in France, cap: 1. The silence of the people, none
contradicting, shall be taken for an express consent, but in case there arise
any Contention, and he that is named should be lyked by the consistory, and
disliked by the people, or by most part of them, his reception is then to be
delayed, and report of all to be made unto the conference or provicniall
Synod, to consider as well the justification of him that is named, as of his
rejection. And although he that is named, should there be justified, yet is he not
to be made or given as a Pastor to the people against their will, nor to the
dislike, displeasure, and discontent of most of them. Nay the Popish French
Church, has no less zealously stood for their liberty in this point in so
much, that the intrusion of men into Ec^lesiasticall charges by the Pope
himself, has been openly opposed, as shall most fully appear to any who shall
read the book entitled. Pro liberate Ecclesiae Gallicanae adversus Romanam
aulam defensio, Parisiensis curiae, Lodo vico undecimo Gallorum Regi, quondam
oblata. In which they do assert against the Papal usurpations, the liberty of
Elections both by Clergy and people, Their reasons are these among others; Cum
Episcopus Ecclesiae sponsus sit, and matrimonium quoddam spirituale inter ipsum
and Ecclesiam contrahatur, necessario consensus Ecclesiae in^ervenire debet.
And after, Cum Episcopus solemniter a collegio eligitur, confirmaturque servata
programma^um and inquisitionum forma, eo certe ma, or est populi de eo
existimatio, magisque eum venerantur, observant and diligunt populares, quam
siipsis invitis obtrudatur. Ideoque doctrina ejus l^nge sructuosior est, and ad
aedificandum multo efficacior. Hinc tametsi Petrus Christi vicarius esset, and
caput Ecclesiae: tamen mortuo Judah qui unus Apostoloru^ erat caeteri omnes
pariter eligerunt, and sors cecidit super Matthiam ut in actis Apostolorum
legitur. Lucius Pontifex Romanus vir sanctus, and Martyr, qui Ecclesiae Romanae
praesuit anno, 154. ita decrevit: Nullus in Ecclesiae ubi duo vel tres fuerunt
in Congregatione, nisi eorum electione canonca Presbyter eligatur, etc. The
same thing does Duarenus de Sacr: Eccles: Minist: lib: 5. cap: 1. Confirm, not
on^y from the ancient Canons, but from the Election of Matthias Act: 1. and
that of the Deacons Act: 6.

CHAP. III.
Whether Ordination be essential to the calling of a Minister.

THis question has been thus stated in a little book entitled (...) wherein
the judgment of the reformed Churches and Protestant Divines is showed;
concerning Ordination, etc. The negative part is there mentioned, also in the
Queries touching the ordination of Ministers, written in opposition to the
learned and much approved book entitled. Ius divinum regiminis Ecclesiastici,
the same contraversie is touched upon frequently with more railing then reason
by that furious Erastian who composed the Gralloe against Apollonius and cries
out that the world is abused with an empty notion of a pretended sacred
Ministerial calling, which may be exercised by none but such as are thereunto
called solemnly set a part, and ordained. This is the same thing which has
been formerly debated by Protestant divines against the Anabaptists and
Socinians. See P. Martyr. loc: com: class: 4. cap. 1. Aretius probl: theol:
loc: 63. The professors of Leyden, Synops: pur: theol: disp: 42. Wal^us in loc:
com: tom: 1. page: 472. 473. Festus Hommius Specim, controv: Belgic. artic: 31.
of the Lutherans, Gerhard in loc: com: tom: 6. cap: 3. lib: 1. Balduin de
institutione ministrorum, cap: 8. and lib: 4. de cas: consc: cap: 6. Brochmand
synt: theol: artic. de minister, Eccles. cap: 2. quaest: 3. Stegmannus in
sphotinianismo disp: 53. The Sociniane tenent against the necessity of
Ordination, see in Socin: tract: de Eccles: Nicol: and tract: de Eccles. and
missione ministi. Yet the Socinans acknowledge it is fit for order, and decency
to retain Ordination in the Church. Peradventure many of the Sectaries of this
time will hardly acknowledge this much: I shall first of all premise some
distinctions and considerations for the better opening of the true state and
nature of this contravesie. Next I shall bring the positive arguments, and
lastly, Answer the contrary objections.

The particulars to be premised are these. First the question is not whether
Ordination be the only thing essential, or necessary to the right calling of a
Minister? I have before pleaded for the necessity of the Churches consent, I
now plead for the necessity of ordination; That ought to be no impediment to
this, nor this to that. 2. Neither is the question, whether imposition of hands
be essential and necessary to the calling of a Minister. Imposition of hands
is a rite used in Ordination, after the example of the primitive Churches (of
which more anon) but the substance, essence, and formal Act of Ordination is
another thing. Therefore not only the Lutheran divines, but Calvin in 1 Timothy:
4. 14. Iunius animad: in Bellar: contr: 5. lib. 1. cap: 3. Bucan^s loc: com:
loc: 42. Gersomus Bucerus and others distinguish between the act of Ordination,
and the rite used in that act. M. Antonius de dominis, lib: 2. de repub:
Eccles: cap: 3. 24. and cap: 4. 13. 19. and lib: 3. cap: 5. 48. Does also
distinguish between the rite or ceremony of laying on of hands, and the
essential act of Ordination which he rightly calls missio potestativa, a
sending of one with power and authority: Which agrees well with Matthew. 10. 1.
Mark 3. 13, 14, 15. where we have first the election of the Apostles to their
office; He calls unto him whom he would, and they came uuto him, Matthew
says, he called unto him his twelve Disciples, Luke 9. 1. He called his
twelve Disciples together. Here was an antecedaneous election or designation of
the persons. Thereafter follows the ordaining or constituting of them in their
office (...) says Mark, and he ordained (or made) twelve that they should be
with him, and that be might send them forth to preach, and to have power to
heal, etc. Luke adds after the calling together of the twelve, that he gave
them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases, and he sent
them to preach, etc. Which sets forth the true nature and essence of
Ordination, that it consists in a sending forth of chosen persons with power
and authority. And this potestative missioun of the twelve is applied, not
only to power over devils and diseases (which was extraordinary and
apostolical) but to power of preaching which belongs to the ordinary Pastor
to call, charge. Pastors and Teachers are Messengers, Job 33. 23. and God has
committed unto them the word of reconciliation, 2. Cor: 5. 19.

3. Neither is the question, what may be done in extraordinary cases when
Ordination cannot be had, or where there are none who have power to ordain.
We read that Aedesius and Frumentius being but private men, became Preachers
of the Gospel, and converted a great nation of the Indians: Likewise that when
the Iberians were converted by a captive woman, their King and Queen became
Teachers of the Gospel to the people. There may be an extraordinary calling
from God where Religion is not yet planted, nor Churches yet constituted. It is
altogether another case in a constituted reformed or reforming Church: I add
with Peter Martyr, that even those persons who set about the work of the
Ministry extraordinarly or among Infidels, if they can come at any who may
ordain them in the usual and right way, they ought not to neglect the seeking
of Ordination.

4. Nor is the question of teaching, exhorting, admonishing, reproving,
comforting one another, or praying for, or with one another, in the way of a
private Christian fellowship, and and brotherly love. For this belongs to the
general calling of Christians as they are Christians, observing therein the
rules of the word, and there is no need nor use of Ordination in all this. But
the question is of the particular, special, sacred calling of the Ministers of
the Gospel to preach and administer the Sacraments, whether Ordination be not
essential and necessary to this calling. The private Christian duties of
teaching one another, reproving, exhorting, etc. Are to be conscionably and
carefully performed by private Christians, Ioh. 4. 28, 29. Acts 18. 26. Ephesians. 5.
19. Col. 3. 16. Heb: 3. 13. But this the Apostle plainly distinguishes from
the special Ministerial function, 1 Thessalonians: 5. 11, 14. with verse: 12, 13. The
affirmation of this question in hand, viz. that Ordination is necessary and
essential to the calling of a minister, may be confirmed by these arguments.
1. Does not nature it self teach you: as the Apostle says in another case,
Shall the visible political Church of Christ, which is the purest and most
perfyt Republic in the world, have less order and more confusion in it nor a
civil Republic. Ambassadors, Commissioners, Officers of State, Judges,
Generals, Admirals, with the subordinate Commanders in Armies and Navies, do
not run unsent, nor act without power authority and commission given them.
How much more unbeseeming, and disorderly were it in the Church, (which
Nicolaides himself, even where he disputes against the necessity of
Ordination, Refut: tract: de missione minister, cap: 10. page: 113.)
acknowledges to be more perfect then any politic Republic in the world) for
any man to assume to himself power and authority which is not given him, or
which he has a non habente potestatem, or to intrude himself into any public
administration unto which he is not appointed. It was justly complained of, as
a great disorder under the Prelates, that Midwives were permitted to baptize
upon pretense of a case of necessity, yea that Deacons were permitted to
baptize, because the administration of baptism, does neither belong to
Deacons, nor to private persons. But that railing Rabshaketh, the anonymous
Erastian before mentioned, goes so far as to cry down all necessity of
Ordination or any special call to the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments,
and allows any Christian, whether Magistrate or Subject, both to Preach,
Baptize, and minister the Lords Supper, having no Ordination or special
Mission to that effect. It Is a sufficient answer to him, offer it now unto thy
governor, will he be pleased with thee? Mal: 1. 8. Who will endure such a
confusion in a State, that any man may assume public offices and
administrations, not being thereunto called and appointed? And shall the Church
(which must go a great deal further than the law and light of nature,) come
short of that which nature it self teaches all humane societies? It Is both a
natural and a scriptura^l rule, Let all things be done decently and in order,
1 Cor: 14. 40: for God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, Ibid.
verse. 33. If it were an intolerable usurpation in a man's own family, if any
man should take upon him the stewards place to dispense meat to the household,
not being thereunto appointed. How much more were it an intolerable usurpation
in the Church, the house of the living God, for any to make themselves stewards
of the mysteries of Christ, not being appointed* 2^ I argue from, Rom: 10. 15.
And how shall they Preach except they be sent? Suppose they be well gifted,
yet they may not preach except they be sent and appointed thereunto. This
sending must needs be Ordination, not the Churches Election: a people may
choose to themselves, but cannot send to themselves: The choosing of an
Ambassador is one thing, the sending him, another thing: The Ambassador
nominated and elected by the King, may not go to his work and act as an
Ambassador, till he be sent forth with his commission and power delivered to
him. There have been several exceptions made, and more may be made against
this argument; yet all of them may be rationally taken off. Except: 1: The
Socinians reply, that the Apostle speaks this of his ownetime when the
doctrine of the Gospel was new, and did therefore require a special mission:
But that now Ministers being to Preach no new doctrine, need not such a
special call. Answ. This is not only, not grounded on the Text, but is
contrary both to the metaphore and to the context: It Is contrary to the
metaphore which the Apostle takes from the sending of Ambassadors, Heralds,
and other public Ministers. These are sent not only to propound that which
was never before propounded, but also often times to revive and renew a thing
before propounded and known. If either Ambassador, or Herald run unsent, and
go out without his commission and appointment, it will be no excuse to him,
that he has declared no new thing, but what was declared by other
Embassadoures, or Heralds before him, for still he may be challenged as one
who run unsent, and it may be said to him: By what authority do thou
these things? It Is contrary to the context too, verse. 13. 14. 15. There are
five necessary Refut. ract. de ^issione sinistroum, cap. 0. non um eiam sen.
(...) esse ^emini liere, do. (...) nisi ^ittatur, (...) Nemiem ulla (...) (...)
prae^care, hoc (...), rem ^vam an^ntiare (...) mitta^r, hoc (...), nisi a (...)
dei unus im^natur.
means and ways which must be had and used by those who look to be saved. 1.
Calling upon the name of the Lord. 2. Believing on him. 3. Hearing his word. 4.
A preaching Ministry. 5. Mission or Ordination. If the first four be
perpetually necessary to the end of the world, so must the fifth be, for the
Apostle lays als great necessity upon this last as upon the rest. If none can
be saved who do not pray, and none can pray who do not believe, and none can
believe who do not hear the word, and none can hear the word without a
preaching Ministry, the last follows hard in the Text, there can be no
Ministerial office without a Mission or Ordination. I have before excepted
extraordinary cases, where there is yet no Church nor no Ministry: even as the
deaf may believe who cannot hear, although the Apostle say, How shall they
believe on him of whom they have not heard!

Except. 2. Nicolaides adds that the Apostle speaks not of what is unlawful
to be, but what is imposible to be, namely, it is impossible that any man can
preach, that is (says he) declare a new thing except God send him. Answ. 1. If
preaching here in this Text must be restricted to the preaching of a new
thing, hearing must be also restricted to the hearing of a new thing, and
believing to the believing of a new thing, and so they who do not hear and
believe some new doctrine, cannot be saved. 2. It is very possible to preach a
new thing, when God has not sent one to preach it: When the Jesuits first
preached their scientia media, they preached a new thing, yet God sent them
not. 3. Let us consider what the Apostle means here by preachiug (...), says
he, It Is from (...) praeco, caduceator. The offices and functions of (...). H.
Stephanus in These: L. Gr: tom: 2. page: 195. 196. describes out of Homer. They
called together the people to the (...) or public Assembly: They enjoined
silence, and called for audience and attention: They were sent in time of war
to ask leave to bury their dead: They were sent with messages from Princes and
great men: They attended Princes and great men to serve them upon occasion:
They served also at the sacrifices: They prepared beasts and received the
guests: What is there in all this, which in a spiritual and ecclesiastical
sense is not competent and incumbent to ordinary Pastors and Teachers as well as
to the Apostles: And if we will have the holy Ghost to expound himself as
ordinary Preachers do (...) or (...) in all ages and all the world over, as well
as those who first preached the Gospel, Mat: 24. 14. and 26. 13. Mark 14. 9.
and 16. 15. Luke 24. 47. Phil: 1. 15. 1 Timothy: 3 16. Romans 2. 21. thou that
preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? 4. I hope (...) here does
not signify one that preaches a new thing, 1 Cor: 1. 23. It pleased God by
the foolishness of preaching ((...)) to save them that believe. Will any who
hopes to be saved, deny that this extends to preaching in all ages?

Except. 3. That (...) before cited, in the second part of it page: 3. 4. says
that the sending which the Apostles means of, is not a Ministerial or
ecclesiastical sending, for then none could be an instrument to convert
another but a Minister or preacher sent. Neither could a man be sure whether he
have faith or no, till he be sure his faith was wrought in him by a Minister
lawfully called. It remains therefore (says he) that the Apostle speaks of a
providentiall sending, by giving men gifts, and working with them in their use
and exercise. Answ. 1: The giving of gifts and pouring out the spirit of a
calling, is plainly distinguished from the mission or sending; yea, in Christ
himself who had received the spirit, not by measure, but above measure, yet his
having the Spirit of the Lord upon him, was not his Mission, but is plainly
distinguished from his Mission and Ordination to his office which he had from
God, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me
to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me, etc. The (...) or ability
of gifts to the office is one thing: the (...) or authority to it, is another
thing. 2. His first reason to prove that the Apostle speaks not of a
Ministerial sending, because thence it would follow that none could convert
another but a Minister, he groundeth thus: for 'its said, none can believe but
by hearing a preacher sent. Now this falls als heavy upon his own
Interpretation, for still this will follow, that no man can be converted but a
Preacher sent providentially with gifts and assistance, when he shall loose
the knot for himself, he shall loose it for us too. 3. So likewise for his
other reason, if the Apostles scope be (as he glosseth) to take away doubting
from men, he does by his Interpretation split upon the same rock which he
thinks we have run upon, for a man must still doubt whether he has faith or
no, and so whether he shall be saved or no, till he be sure his faith was
wrought in him by a Preacher sent providentially with working gifts: now the
description which he makes of the providentiall sending, involveth a man in
greater doubting then before, for either it agrees to false and heretical
Teachers the Ministers of Satan, or not. If he says it does agree to them,
and that false seducing Preachers (pretending to be true, sound, and orthodoxe)
are providentially sent with gifts effectual, viz. to deceave in the secret
judgment of God, according to Ezekiel. 14. 9. 1 King. 22. 23. then how he will
recon^ile his interpretation with Isa. 52. 7. 8. let him see to it. And withal
he leads a man upon this opinion, that he may have faith wrought in him, and
so be saved under any Ministry, true or false, orthodoxe or heretical. He
must also justify the sin so often condemned in the false prophets, that
they run unsent, for (by his principles) they are sent, as well as the true
Prophets. If he will say that his description of the providentiall sending
agrees not to false or heretical Preachers, but to the true Ministers of
Christ, then he leads a man into this doubt, that he cannot be sure that he
believes and shall be saved, unless he be sure that the Preacher
providentially sent to him, is a true Minister of Christ, and not a Minister of
Satan transformed into a Minister of righteousness. 2 Cor. 11. 15. or a wolf
in sheeps clothing, Matthew. 7. 15. But 4. if this providentiall sending be
enough, it takes away the necessity, not only of Ordination, but of the
peoples choosing or consenting. It shall be enough that God give a man a gift,
and work by them, whether the Church consent or not: yet as I take it, he that
makes this objection, holds it necessary, not only that Pastors be chosen by
the Church, but that gifted brethren be allowed by the Church to prophecy,
else that they must not prophecy.

5. His objections does strike against that connection and concat^nation of the
means of salvation, which the Apostle holds forth, and there is no more
strength in that which he objecteth, then as if one should argue, the deaf may
believe, therefore faith may be without hearing. Look how hearing is necessary,
in the same sense, is Preaching, and the sending of the Preacher necessary,
Neither does it make any thing against our sense of the Text, that some may be
converted, by those who are not Ministers, for tho Preaching of the word by
those that are sent to the Ministry of preaching, is the standing Ordinance
and ordinary mean of conversion and faith by this Text: and even those who
perhaps have been first wroght upon by prayer or conference with other
Christians, are hearers of those who are Ministerially s^nt: it will be hard
to prove that any believe, who can hear the word preached by Ministers lawfully
called and sent, and do not hear it.

Except. 4. That Erastian before cited, the Composer of the Grallae, expounds
(as I remember) this text of an extraordinary mission or calling from God, not
an ordinary mission from men: denying the Pastors of Churches and Ministers of
the Gospel in our days to be sent of God and that although the Apostles might
show their Mission and Commission from Christ, yet ordinary Ministers cannot do
it: Therefore this sending belongs not to the ordinary Ministers. Answ. 1
This text does certainly hold forth the necessity of an ordinary and mediat
Mission, when the extraordinary and immediate Mission is ceased, which I prove
this: If a preaching Ministry be a perpetual and standing ordinance, then
Mission is a perpetual and standing ordinance* But a preaching Ministry is a
perpetual and standing ordinance, therefore so is Mission. The preposition is
manifest, both from the kniting together of the parts of this Text, in which
the Apostle screweth up the necessity of Mission as high as the necessity of
preaching: As likewise from Matthew. 28. 19. 20. Which does not only prove a
perpetual Ministry in the Church always even unto the end of the world, but
also that this perpetual Ministry is authorized by Mission or Commission from
Christ. For reference to this perpetual Ministry, Christ says, Go, teach
and baptize, and lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world: So
that who ever does lawfully exercise the office of teaching and baptising, is
certainly sent: he cannot be immediately and extraordinarly in the reformed
Churches, therefore it must be in a mediat and ordinary way. The Assumption is
before proved.

2. As the preaching so the sending is common to ordinary Ministers with the
Apostles. If ordinary Ministers be Preachers ex officio, as well as the
Apostles, which ha^h been before proved, then ordinary Ministers are sent as
well as the Apostles, for how shall they preach except they be sent, and how
shall they be sent in our days, except in a mediat and ordinary way, by those
unto whom the power of Ordination belongs?

Except. 5: But if this Text, Romans 10. 15. be expounded of Ordination, then
expectants or probationaries may not preach, because not yet ordained.

Answ. 1. They neither preach ordinarily, nor ex officio. They Preach
occasionally, and without a Pastoral or Ministerial office.

2. Neither may these sons of the Prophets run to such occasional work,
without approbation and license, for which cause the Directory of worship
established in both Kingdoms, puts in this caution, that such as intend the
Ministry, may occasionally both read the Scriptures, and exercise gifts in
Preaching in the Congregations, being allowed thereunto by the Presbytery. And
so the Text will hold true in all cases, extraordinary Preachers, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, must have an extraordinary Mission. Ordinary Pastors and
Teachers, must have a Mission with power and authority to that effect.
Probationers, and occasional Preachers must have a proportionable kind of
Mission, that is, not to the Pastoral office, but to preach upon occasion.

The third argument shall be taken from that (...) that constituting,
appointing or making of Church officers which is plainly held forth in
Scripture. The seven Deacons being elected by the multitude of the Disciples,
were appointed, set and constituted over that business by the Apostles, Acts
6. 3. Pastors and Teachers have much more need to be appointed to their office,
and for them let us note two Scriptures, one is Luke 12. 42. Who then is that
faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make [(...)] ruler over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in dew season? Grotius upon the
place notes, that the former parable concerning watching is intended for all
Christians, so Mark. 13. 37. but this of stewards belongs to the Pastors of
Churches, for 'its upon occasion of Peter's question concerning the former
parable, (Lord speak thou this parable unto us, or even unto all?) Christ
answers by this parable of stewards, appointed or ordained over the household,
whom he distinguishes from other servants by their ruleing power, verse* 42.
by their greater knowledge, and consequently greater guiltiness, if wicked,
verse. 47. and by the greater trust committed to them, verse. 48. Now least it
should be thought, that this making or appointing of stewards over the
household of Christ, is only meant of the Apostles, as it were of purpose to
discover the vanity of that Socinian error, it is said, verse. 43. Blessed is
that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. Till Christ
come again, and at his coming, there shall be stewards appointed and set over
his house: Which cannot be without the mediate and ordinary way of making,
appointing, and ordaining. The Bishops or Elders, as well as Apostles are the
stewards of God, Tit. 1. 7. And so I come to the other Scripture concerning
those teaching and ruleing officers. The Apostle left Titus at Crete that he
might ordain Elders in every city, verse. 5. The (...) mentioned in the
beginning, replyeth to this Text, that (...) signifie^h to fix, settle,
establish one who was in office before as appears by Psalm* 2. 6. See now with
how little reason this man oppugneth the received principles. The Septuagint
(says he) reads Psalm: 2. 6. thus (...), but David was a King many years
before he took in the hill and fort of Zion. I shall not stand here upon this
erroneous transcribing of the words of the Septuagints: I might tell him again
that Symmachus reads (...). I have an^inted my King, having respect to the
very first making him King, and this is the ne^rest rendering of the Original.
But I will stand to that of the Septuagints: even their reading (without the
least violence to their words) may be understood, not of the settling of David
after he took in the fort of Zion, but of Gods appointing and ordaining him to
rule in, upon, or over Zion, which I do not doubt was their meaning, neither
does the prepositions (...) at all hinder, but help this Interpretation of the
Septuagint. See the like Mat. 25. 21. (...), This is not the fixing and settling
of that good servant in that ruleing power, but it is the first giving of it to
him, the first making him ruler over many things, having before had but a few
things, Luke 12. 44. (...) So Isocrates, (...). I may confu^e him from the
Septuagint themselves, Psalm. 8. 6. (...) Dan. 1. 11: (...), etc. Will he say
that the Septuagint meant that God settled and fixed the dominion which man had
before over the creatures, or that the Prince of the Eunuchs did but settle
and fix that government which Melzar had before over Daniel? If they mean in
those places constituting and appoynting (as it is most manifest they do) why
not also Psalm. 2. 6? God appointed David to be a King upon the holy hill of
Zion, which is all that can be made out of the Septuagint. Well, but I will go
yet further with him, to discover the futility of his exception: It Is true
(...) or (...) is sometime used for restoring and settling that which is out of
'its course, but how did he imagine that this sense of the word could agree to
Tit. 1. 5? Thought he that Titus was left in Crete, for restoring, settling,
and fixing those Elders who had left their station, or had been cast out, or
persecuted, or the like? Does not the Apostle plainly speak of supplying and
making up such things as were yet wanting to those Churches, and of ordaining
Elders to Churches which wanted Elders. Wherefore the ordinary reading and
interpretation is retained (...) is to be understood of making, or ordaining
Elders, even as (...) or (...) and the like, constituere, praeficere, to make
or appoint rulers and judges, by giving them power and authority to rule or
judge. So Asts. 7. 10. (...), which was not a settling and fixing of Joseph; in
the government of Egypt, as if he had been governor of it before, for that was
the first time he was made governor.

The fourth argument is taken from Heb. 5. 4. And no man takes this honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron. If ye would know what
this calling was, see verse. 1. He was taken from among men, and ordained for
men, in things pertaining to God. The Socinian exception against our arguments,
from the example and practice of Ordination in the Apostles times, (namely that
there is no such necessity of ordaining those who are to teach Doctrines
formerly delivered, and received, as there was, for ordaining those who bring a
new Doctrine) cannot here help them; yea, is hereby confuted, for none of the
Priests under the law, no not the high Priest, might teach or pronounce any
other thing, but according to the Law and the Testimony, Deuteronomy. 17. 11. Mal. 2.
7. Yet the Priests were ordained to their office, and might not without such
Ordination enter into it. And this was no typical thing proper to the old
Testament, but has a standing reason. The Socinians therefore have another
evasion from the words, this honor restricting the Apostles meaning, to that
honor of the Priesthood only. Answ. 1. The words (...) need not to be
understood demonstratively, or signanter, but indefinitly, (...) with the
prepositive Article, and so both the Syriak Interpreter: Hierome, Arias
Montanus, and the Tigurin version r^ad it indefinitly, honorem, not hunc
honorem, No man takes honor unto himself, but he, etc. See the very same
words in the same sense, Romans 13. (...), honor to whom honor, not this
honor. So (...), Revel. 21. 26. is not rendered, this honor. 2. Suppose it
be meant signanter, yet our argument is valid.

Although the Apostle give instance only in the high Priesthood, yet by
analogy of reason, the Axiom will hold in reference to the Ministry of the
new Testament, upon which God has put so much honor, that it is called a
worthy work, 1 Timothy: 3. 1. and worthy of double honor. 1 Timothy: 5. 17. and to
be esteemed very highly, 1 Thessalonians: 5. 17. The Ministers of the Gospel are the
Ambassadors of Christ, 2 Cor: 5. 20. and the Angels of the Churches, the
stars in Christ's right hand, Revel: 1. 20. and 2, 1. etc. yea, the glory of
Christ, 2 Cor: 8. 23. And if (comparing state with state) the least in the
kingdom of God, be greater then John Baptist, and John Baptist greater then
any either Priest or Prophet in the old Testament. Then 'its not only as
great, but a greater usurpation, for a man to take this honor of the
Evangelicall Ministry to himself, then it had been of old, for a man to take
that honor of the legal high Priesthood to himself.

The fifth argument I draw from Heb: 6. 1. 2. Where we have an enumeration of
the general Catecheticall heads, which was necessarly required in Catechumens,
before they were baptized and received as Church Members, and where there was
yet no Church planted, these heads were taught, learned, and professed, before
there could be a visible political Ministerial Church erected, that the
Apostles sp^aks to the Hebrews as visible Ministerial Churches is manifest,
both from the particulars here enumerat, and from Chap. 5. 12. 13. and 13. 7.
17. Now he exhorts them to go on unto perfection, and not to be ever about
the laying of foundations, or about the learning of these Catecheticall
principles, the knowledge and profession, whereof did first give them an
entrance, state, and standing in the visible Church of Christ, viz.

1. The foundation of repentance, i. e. Conviction and knowledge of sin by
the law, humiliation and sorrow for it, with a desire of freedom for it. 2.
The foundation of faith in Christ for our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. 3. The foundations of Baptism, i. e. The
abolishing of these diverse legal washings, Hell. 9. 10. and the ordinance of
the Christian baptism for sealing the Covenant of grace, and for initiation in
Church membership: Others say he speaks in the plural, because in those times
many were baptized at once usually. 4. The foundation of laying on of hands,
that is (says Bullinger on the place) of the Ministry, and of their Vocation,
Mission, and authority given them. So also Gualther in his Archetypes upon the
place, Tossanus points at the same thing, as principally intended in the
Text, Which agrees well with that which diverse Divines make one of the marks
of a true visible Church, namely, a Ministry lawfully called and ordained, and
professed subjection thereunto. 5. The foundation of the resurrection from the
dead. 6. The soundation of the last judgment, in which Christ shall adjudge
the righteous to life everlasting, and the wicked to everlasting punishment,
Matthew 25. ult.

That which has obscured and cast a mist upon this Text, was the Popish and
prelaticall confirmation, or Bishopping of children, which they grounded upon
this same Scripture. And this way go the Popish interpreters, expounding it of
their Sacrament of confirmation: Others understand the gifts of the holy Ghost,
which in those days were given by laying on of hands. But it has never been,
nor can never be proved, either that hands were laid upon all baptized
Christians who were grown up to years of knowledge in these Apostolical
times, or that the gifts of the holy Ghost were given with every laying on of
hands in those times. For the laying on of hands, (1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22.)
was not for giving the holy Ghost, but for Ordination. Wherefore I conceave
that the laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. Points at the Ministry, and their
Ordination, which was accompanied with that rite. Many interpreters who extend
the Text further, do not yet acknowledge that the Ordination of Ministers is a
thing intended by the Apostle. Which is the more probable, if you read (...)
dividedly with a comma betwixt, which Erasmus inclines most unto, following
the Greek Scholiasts. So the Tigurin version, baptismatum, doctrinae, ac
impositionis manum. So you shall find seven of these catecheticall principals,
and after baptism, add Doctrine, that is, a preaching or teaching Ministry,
and then the next head contains the necessity of a special calling and
Ordination to this Ministry. However read it conjunctly or dividedly, it makes
a true and good sense to expound, laying on of hands (here) of the ordinance of
a preaching Ministry lawfully called and ordained, for this ordinance and a
professed subjection thereunto, may justly be reckoned among the catecheticall
points, and among the marks of a true visible Ministerial Church. Whereas it
were a dangerous and unsafe interpretation, and I believe that which cannot be
made out, to say, that any of the catecheticall heads enumerate by the Apostle,
was proper to that primitive age, and does not concern after ages: or yet to
affirm that the giving of the holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, was
extended to all Catechumens baptized in those times, or that the knowledge or
profession of the Doctrine concerning the giving of the gifts of the holy
Ghost, by such laying on of hands was such a principle, as that none ignorant
thereof, though insttucted in all the other Articles of Christian faith, could
be received as a Churchmember grounded in catecheticall points.

I shall add a sixth argument from the example and practice of the Apostles
and others who did ordain Church officers in their days, the example is
binding in such things as were not only lawful and good, but have a standing
and perpetual reason. The seven Deacons were ordained with prayer and laying
on of hands, Act: 6. 3. 6. Elders were ordained in every city, Tit: 1. 5.
although those Elders were not to preach any new Gospel, Gal: 1. 8. Paul
warns Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 22. lay hands suddenly on no man. i. e. be not rash
in ordaining any to the work of the Ministry, let them be well examined and
approved. This is the received sense of Interpreters following Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Hierome, and others of the Fathers, yet Nicolaides Refut. tract. de
missione Ministr* will have the Text understood, not of ordaining Ministers,
but of admitting penitents, which was done with imposition of hands. But is
this to expound Scripture by Scripture? or is it not rather to forsake an
Interpretation confirmed by Scripture, and to follow one which is grounded upon
no Scripture? For we read nothing in Scripture of laying on of hands in the
receaving or restoring of penitents. Of the laying on of hands in Ordination,
we do read in Scripture, and least it should be thought the act of one man
only, it is mentioned as the act of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. A place which Gualt^er, Bullinger,
Tossanus and diverse other good Interpreters think to hold forth the way which
Paul would have observed in the calling and appointing of men to the Ministry:
Some understand by (...), the office it self* dignity or degree of an Elder
which was given to Timothy by the laying on of hands: Others understand a
company of Bishops who were Elders and more too: I confess it does not; others
an Assembly of Elders, without any prelaticall disparity. Now neither o^ these
Interpretations can strike against that point which now I plead for, viz. The
point of Ordination, but rather make much for it, yea even they who understand
the office of a Presbyter, do thereby confirm that which I assert in as much
as Timothy was not made an Elder, but by imposition of hands, as these hold. If
so, then certainly Ordination is essential to the calling of a Presbyter. So
that what ever come of the word Presbytery, the laying on of hands which made
the Presbyter, will conclude against them who deny the necessity of Ordination.

The seventh argument shall be drawn from the denominations of the Ministers
of the Gospel in Scripture. 1. They are called Pastors or Shepherds, Ier: 3.
15. Ephesians: 4. 11. He that is not called and appointed by the Lord of the flock,
he that enters not by the door, but breaks in surreptitiously, and makes
himself sheepherd at his own hand, is not a sheepherd but a thief, Ioh. 10. 9.
10. Next they are Angels or messengers, Mat: 23. 24. Rev: 1. 20: and 2 Cor: 8.
23. with 2. 1. and the Ambassadors of Christ, 2 Cor: 5. 20. Ephesians. 6. 20.
Therefore they are sent and appointed, and do not run unsen^.

3. They are called Rulers, (...). 1 Timothy 5. 17. (...), 1 Thessalonians: 5. 12. (...),
Heb: 13. 7. 17. do men make themselves Rullers, Magistrates, Captains at their
own hand, or are they not thereunto appointed by others?

4. They are called ^ishops, or overseers, Act. 20. 28. 1 Timothy* 3. 1. The
Athenians give the name (...) to one whom they appointed, ordained, and sent
forth to be Magistrate or Praetor in any of the Towns, subject to their
jurisdiction. See H. Steph. these: ling. Gr: in the word (...)

5. They are (...) stewards, Luke 12. 42. 1 Cor: 4. 1 Tit. 1. 7. Who dare make
himself a steward in a Kings house; yea, or in a more private house, not being
thereunto appointed and ordained?

6. They are servants who invite and call in guests to the weding, to the
marriage supper, Mat: 22. 3. Luke 14. 17. Will any (except a fool, or a knave,)
go and invite guests to a man's Table, when he is not sent nor appointed:

7. They are (...), Preachers, Heralds, 1 Timothy: 2. 7. and 2 Timothy: 1. 11. Will a
Herald go and proclaim the Kings Edicts, or the ordinances of Parliament, if
he be not thereunto appointed? In both these Texts last cited, the Apostle
speaking of the Gospel, says, Whereunto I am ordained a Preacher, and an
Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles. Mark, he is ordained not an Apostle,
but a Preacher, as he could not be an Apostle without Ordination, so he could
not be so much as (...) a Preacher without Ordination. Now ordinary Pastors
are (...) as well as the Apostles which has been before showed.

An eight argument I collect from 2 Timothy: 2. 2. And the things that thou have
heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also. Which is a most considerable place against
the Socinians, Anabaptists, etc. For it Teaches us these five particulars. 1:
That the Apostles would not have a teaching or preaching Ministry to end with
that time, but was careful to have Pastors or Teachers provided for the
succeeding generation also. 2. These: Teachers of others who were to labor in
the word and doctrine, were to teach no new doctrine, but the very same things
which they received from Timothy, and Timothy from Paul, and which Paul
received from the LORD. It was in sense no new doctrine, when it is taught by
Paul, much less when taught by Timothy, and least of all when taught by these
who received it from Timothy. So that the Socinian distinction of the
necessity of a special calling to the Ministry when the doctrine is new, not
so when the doctrine is not new, cannot here help them. 3. These: Teachers are
distinguished from those who are taught: Every man may not be a Teacher. It is
a peculiar and particular calling, and it is no part of the general calling of
Christians: Therefore both here, and Gal: 6. 6. there is such a distinction ^n
the Church, some are Teachers, some are taught in the Word. 4. Fitness and
abilities; yea, both grace and gifts together, cannot warrant a m^n to assume
to himself the function of Teaching or Preaching to others, except he be
thereunto allowed, and appointed, and entrusted. The Apostle says not, the
things that thou heard of me, the same I will that faithful and able men, who
ever shall be willing to the work, teach others also, faithfulness, and
fitness, or ability cannot make a sufficient calling, but qualify a man for
that which he shall be called unto. Aptitude is one thing: to be clothed with
a calling, power and authority is another thing. 5. There is more that belongs
to the calling of Pastors and Teachers, than the Churches electing, or choosing
of them: for those unto whom the power of Ordination belongs, do also commit
unto them that which they are entrusted with, the same commit thou, etc. (...).
It Is from (...), which (as H: Stephanus in These: ling: Gr: tom. 3. page 1505.
notes) not seldom in the new Testament does signify, depositum alicujus
fidei committere, fiduciarium tradere alicut, where he cites this very Text,
and I shall clear it yet further from Luke: 12. 48. and unto whom men have
committed much (...), of him they will ask the more, which is the conclusion of
the parable concerning a faithful and wise steward, appointed by his Lord to
be ruler over his household; to give them their portion of meat in due season,
and that Parable is meant of Pastors or Ministers lawfully called and sent, as
has been before cleared.

Ninthly, as we are obleidged by our Covenant to endeavor such a Reformation,
as is most agreeable to the word of God, and the Example of the best reformed
Churches, so in this particular of Ordination, and a special call and setting
apart of men to the Ministry, we have not only the example of the ancient and
reformed Churches, but the word of God it self directs us this way. 1.
Before the law when the first borne in families (not all promiscuously) acted
the part of Priests or public Ministers. Whereof there are some express
examples in Enoch a Prophet, Genesis 5. 24. Jude Epistle, verse. 14. Noah, Heb: 11.
7. by whom God preached to the old world, 2 Pet: 2. 5. and so are we to
understand Gen: 6. 3: Abraham a Prophet, Gen: 20. 7. Melchisedeck the Priest of
the most high GOD, is thought by many learned men (following both Ionathans
Targum, and that of Jerusalem) to have been Shem, the first born of Noah: of
Jacob also (who got the birthright from Esau) we read that he built Altars,
and called, upon the name of the Lord, and he was a Prophet, Gen: 49. And it is
often mentioned by Moses, that the sons of Aaron were taken in stead of the
first borne. 2. Under the Law, when not only the Prophets, but the Priests
also who were ordinary Ministers, had a special Ordination to their office. 3.
Under the Gospel in the primitive times, for the Socinians themselves do not
deny that Ordination or special Mission was used in the Apostles times.

Tenthly, and lastly without a clear calling, and lawful Ordination, how shall
people receave the word from the mouths of Ministers, as Gods word, or as from
thos^ who are sent of God? Or how shall people reverence and highly esteem
their Ministers who labor among them, obey them, and submit unto them, as they
are commanded, 1 Thessalonians: 5. 12, 13. Heb: 13. 17? And since he that is taught
ought to communicate unto him that teaches him, in all good things, Gal: 6. 6.
and God will have those who labor in the Word and Doctrine to be maintained,
and that they who sow spiritual things, reap temporal things, 1 Cor. 9. 7, 9,
11, 13. 1 Timothy: 5. 18. Yea, the Apostle puts the stamp of a Ius divinum upon it,
1 Cor: 9. 13, 14. having mentioned the Priests maintenance in the old
testament, he adds: Even so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. So that Socinians and Anabapt^sts will
find themselves puzzled mightily with this dilemma, either it is the will of
God, that none preach the Gospel, but such as are called, appointed, and
ordained thereunto, or otherwise it is his will, that those who preach the
Gospel, not being thereunto chosen, called and ordained, must be maintained as
well as Ministers lawfully ordained and cal^ed, and if so, its like enough
People shall have good store of Preachers, and their purses shall pay well for
it.

CHAP. IIII.
Objections against the necessity of Ordination answered.

I Come now to answer the strongest objections of those who hold Ordination
not necessary, nor essential to the calling of a Minister.

Obejct. 1. From Acts 8. 4. They that were scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the Word. So Acts 11. 19. Apollos also taught boldly in the
Synagogues, Acts 18. 25, 26. yet no word of their Mission or Ordination. The
Jews esteemed Christ himself but a private man, not ordained nor authorized to
any office in the Church, yet they permitted him to preach in their Synagogues.
Answ: 1. Those that after Stephens death, were scattered abroad, and preached
the Word, must needs have been called, sent, and ordained (by the principles of
the Socinians themselves,) for the Doctrine which they preached, was a new
Doctrine, both to Samaria, Acts 8. 5. and to those dispersed Jews, Acts 11. 19.
Themselves confess, that they who preach a new Doctrine, must have a special
Mission and Ordination. 2. Philip was one of those who went abroad preaching
the Word, Acts 8. 45. Now he is expressly called an Evangelist, Acts 8. 8.
therefore no president for private Christians to preach. 3. It is a bad
argument Luke mentions, not their Ordination, therefore they were not
orda^ned. They may as well argue thus. Luke mentions not that they prayed when
they preached, therefore they did not pray when they preached. Or thus: The
Scripture mentions not Ioabs father, but only his mother Zerviah, therefore
he had not a father. 4. And suppose they preached the Word without Mission or
Ordination, this is but like that which Chrysostom, lib: ad eos qui
scandalisati sunt, cap: 19. records as a marvelous extraordinary benefit,
which did accrue from the bloody persecutions of those ancient times, viz. That
in such times, the sheep acted the parts of shepherds, being driven away to
deserts and mountains, where (by the Spirit of God speaking in them) they
converted unbeleevers, and gathered Churches: Which concludes nothing against
the necessity of Ordination, in constituted and reformed Churches, for they who
were scattered abroad, being driven away in the heat of persecution, might not
have the opportunity of Ordination, and they went forth to gather Christians to
plant Churches, to lay foundations where Christ was not known. Such cases were
in the beginning excepted from the sta^e of our present question. 5. If Apollos
preached without Ordination, when he knew only the baptism of John, and
withal when he had to do with those Jews, who were yet to be convinced that
Jesus was the Christ, Acts 18. 25, 26, 28. It is no good argument against the
necessity of Ordination, where the doctrine of Christ is known and received,
and Churches constituted. And withal how will it be proved, that Apollos
having been one of John's Disciples, had not some commission from John to preach
the Word? Or if Apollos was but a gifted brother without any public calling or
authority in the Church, how came he to be so much esteemed, as to be compared
with Peter and Paul, 1 Cor: 1. 12. Lastly as touching Christ's preaching in the
Synagogues, he was looked upon as a Prophet extraordinarly r^ised up in Israel.
Luke 4 15. 16, 24. and the Jews say of him plainly, a great Prophet is risen up
among us Luke 7. 16. Josephus his testimony given to Christ, as a great
Prophet, is known.

Object: 2. The Church does (...), by their voices in Election, make, creat,
constitute or ordain Elders, Acts 14. 23. therefore Elders need no other
Ordination, but are sufficiently ordained or made by the Church, if elected,
and receave their power from the people See this Objection prosecuted in the
(...) page: 9. 10. 11. And in the Queries touching Ordination, page: 33. tom: 37.
Answ: 1. There is no cogent reason brought by these men, why (...), if rendered
thus as they would have it, when they had by voices ordained, must be
therefore understood of Ordination by the people, and not by Paul: and
Barnabas, for as I have before noted out of Calvin: Instit. lib: 4. cap: 3..
15. The sense may be this, Paul and Barnabas did make and ordain Elders
according to the voices of the Churches themselves, that is, they ordained such
as the Church desired. If so, they are double loosers by this their Objection.
2. If (...) be meant of the Churches Act, then it is not ordaining, but
choosing by voices. The (...) ought not to hinder the (...). Election with the
Churches consent, and Ordination are both of them necessary, not inconsistent.
In Athens it self, although the people did (...) choose by voices their
Magistrates or Rulers, yet the persons so elected were not ordained, and
solemnly set apart, appointed and authorized by the people, but by the Judges
called (...) of whom Dem^sthenes orat. advers: Timo^r: tells us that they did
(...), for the (...), took an oath to be faithful in their constituting or
ordaining of Mag strates. 3. In Scripture we find Election and Ordination
frequently distinguished, not only as distinct acts, but often times in distinct
hands, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Moses said unto all Israel, Take ye wise men and
understanding, and known among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over
you. The people choose them who shall be Rulers, but Moses maks them Rulers,
Acts 6. 3. Wherefore brethren look ye out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business. The people choose, the Apostles appoint the Deacons. 4 The choosing
of a person to an office, is not the authorizing of the person elected, but the
designation of the person to be authorized. It Is here with a person chosen, as
with a thing chosen: Ezra was to choose, and to design, when, and how much
silver, wheat, wine, oil, should be taken for the House of the Lord, not
exceeding the proportion of a hundredth, but the power and authority by which
these things were given forth by the Thesaurers, to be applied to such uses,
was from the decree of Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7. 21, 22. So Ester choosed what to
make request for, but the thing was to be performed by authority of the King,
(...). 5. 3, 6. So a man may be chosen to an office by some, and authorized to
act in that office by others. How many subordinat offices, (civil and
military) are there, in which men act by the power and authority, derived from
the ordinances of Parliament, although not nominated and chosen by the
Parliament; but by others, entrusted by the Parliament to choose. 5. Even where
Election and Mission, are in the same hands, yet they are not confounded, but
are looked upon as two distinct acts: Christ first choosed the twelve, and
pitched upon such as he would, and then ordained them, and sent them forth,
Mark: 3. 13. 14. The Synod of the Apostles and Elders first choosed, then sent
Judas and Silas, Acts 15. 22, 25. Where you may observe also by the way, that
the Mission of a man to the Ministry, or Pastoral charge of a Congregation,
does not belong to the people who choose him, they cannot send him to
themselves. When Election and Mission are in the same hands, it is in such cases
as th^se two last cited, when men are sent abroad to others, then indeed they
who choose them, may also send them: but when they are sent to those who choose
them, then they are sent by others, a Minister is sent to the Congregation,
therefore he is not sent by the Congregation, and so that place, Rom: 10. 15.
How shall they preach except they be sent? cannot be understood of the peoples
Election, but of Ordination, or Mission from the Presbytery appointed to
ordain. 6. The same Apostolical Pattern which holds forth unto us the
choosing of Elders in every Church, Acts 14. 23. does also hold forth unto us
the ordaining of Elders in every City, Tit: 1. 5. and these acts in different
hands, therefore not the same; yea, as many conceave in that same Text, Acts
14. 23. beside the Election by voices, th re is a distinct Ordination expressed
under the adjuncts thereof, prayer, and fasting.

Object: 3. The Apostle says, 1 Cor: 14. 26. When ye come together every one
of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has
an Interpretation, verse 13. ye may all prophecy one by one. Therefore all
that preach or proph^sie, need not to be ordain^d Answ: What those Prophets
were, and what is meant by prophesying there, all are not of one opinion. I
hold that these Prophets were in mediatly and extraordinarly inspyred, and I
reckon them among these other administrations, which were not ordinary, or ever
to continue in the Church, Apostles, Evangelists, Workers of miracles. But of
this I am to speak distinctly, and by it self afterward. Mean while, they
that make the Objection, must prove two things, else they conclude nothing
against the necessity of Ordination. 1. That these Prophets were not sent and
ordained, but that their gifts and parts, gave them a sufficient calling to
interpret in the Church. 2. That although they had no Ministerial sending, or
vocation, yet they were not extraordinary Prophets, but that such Prophets are
to continue ordinarily in the Church, I believe it will trouble them to prove
either.

Object. 4. It Is said of the house of Stephanus, 1 Cor: 16. 15. They have
addicted (or ordained) themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, (...). They
were not ordained by others, but they ordained themselves. Answ: 1: This may
well be understood (as it is by diverse) of their devoting themselves to
Minister to the necessities of the Saints, by their works and labor of Love.
Which is else where called, Ministering to the Saints, (...), 2 Cor: 8. 4. Yea,
it is called (...), 2 Cor. 9. 12. the administrations of service. See also,
Ibid. verse: 13. and Romans 15. 31. Where (...) alone is used in the same sense.
2. Others give this sense, that they did willingly and zealously desire to do
service to Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel, according as they should
find a calling. In which sense, if a man desire the office of a Bishop, he
desires a good work, 1 Timothy: 3. 1. So Isa: 6. 8. Here am I, send me. He is very
willing to the work, yet he dare not run, except he be sent, and get a
commission.

Object. 5. He that dug in the earth, and hid his talent, is condemned for
it, Mat. 25. 25. 30. Therefore he that has gifts for preaching, and
administering the Sacraments, cannot answer it to God, except he improve and
use those gifts. Ans. 1. If that Parable be applied to Ministerial talents,
then it will prove, not only a perpetual Ministry, because the Lord says to
his servants, Occupy till I come, Luke: 19. 13. But likewise, that none ought
to intrude themselves into that holy function, except they have a calling as
well as gifts, for Mat: 25. 14, 15. that Lord called his own servants ( Luke
says, he called his ten servants) and delivered unto them his goods: and unto
one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one, to every one
according to his several ability: Where we have a distinction of the calling
and ability, suppose another man had been able enough, yet if he be none of
the called ones, that Parable cannot be applied to him. 2. This Objection may
be made in the behalf of women also; many of whom receave excellent gifts from
God, yea, it was foretold by Joel, and applied by Peter: that women as well as
men should Prophecy, Acts 2. 7. 8. Which being misunderstood, gave some color
to the old Pepuzian Heresy.

Object: 6. If we hold Ordination necessary, and essential to the calling of a
Minister, we bring our selves into this snare, that either the Ministers in
the reformed Churches, are not true Ministers, but falsely pretended to be so,
or otherwise we must hold that those in the Church of Rome, from whom the
Protestant Ministers, in the beginning of the Reformation, had their
Ordination, were true Ministers of Christ. For if those in the Church of Rome
who did ordain, were not true Ministers of Christ, then they had no commission
from Christ to make Ministers for him. And who can bring a clean thing out of
that which is unclean: If so, then the Protestant Ministers, who first ordained
other Protestant Ministers (from whom Ordination has come to us downwards)
having no Ordination, but what they received in the Church of Rome, they had
not power to ordain others with such an Ordination, as has a divine stamp and
character upon it.

This argument is much insisted upon by the Author of the Queries touching
Ordination: If it can do any thing, yet it is no new light, but the very same
which has been formerlie objected by Papists, and answered by Protestant
writers. Whereof see one instance in Gerhard, loc: com: tom: 6. de Minist:
Eccles: 157.

And now that those who drive so furiously after this Popish argument, may
forever be ashamed of it: I return these answers. 1. By retortion, the
argument will conclude as much against the Baptism, and Church estate of
Independents, Anabaptists, and who ever they be that make any use of this way
of arguing against us. For by this argument, those who first gathered their
Churches, bap^ized, and incorporated them into the body of Christ, were not
only no true Ministers, but no true Church Members, having no other baptism,
but what was received, either in the Church of Rome, or from those who were
baptized in the Church of Rome: But who can bring a clean thing, out of that
which is unclean. Where note by the way, that this argument of theirs, will
also make the Scripture it self unclean now, because we have it out of an
unclean thing, (the Church of Rome): So that all that will stand to this
argument, must unchurch, unbaptize, unchristen themselves: If they will have
their recourse to that promise, where two or three are met together, there am I
in the midst of them, and think to lay the foundation of their Churches there,
without any derivation from the Church of Rome, they must allow us to ^o so
too, but then they must pass from their argument. What will they say then?
Either, there can be in our days atr^e Church with all the ordinances of
Christ in it, independent upon the Church of Rome, and without building or
leaning upon a lineall succession, or derivation from the Church of Rome, or
there cannot. If they hold the affirmative, their argument is not worth a
straw, for Ordination being one of the ordinances of Christ (which is here to
be supposed, and has been in the precedent Chapter proved) the reformed
Churches had power to set it up, and restore it by virtue of Christ's own
institution. If the Negative, our Opposits, must all turn Seekers, their
Churches are no Churches, their Baptism no Baptism, etc. 2. Suppose those
protestant Ministers, who first ordained other Ministers, were themselves
ordained by such as had no power to ordain them. Nay suppose the first
reforming Ministers, to have been at the beginning of the Reformation, no
Ministers, but private Persons, not pretending to be ordained. What will they
conclud from this? It proves nothing against that which we hold concerning the
necessity of Ordination: For we plainly say, that in extraordinary cases when
Ordination cannot be had, and when there are none who have commission and
authority from Christ to ordain, then, and there, an inward call from God
enlarging the heart, stirring up, and assisting with the good will and consent
of a people whom God makes willing, can make a Minister authorized to
Ministerial acts. Suppose this to have been the case at the first coming out
from Popery, yet here was a seed for more Churches, and more Ministers. At the
first plantation of Churches, Ordination may be wanting without making void
the Ministry, because Ordination cannot be had, but in constituted Churches,
the want of Ordination does make a Minister no Minister. 3. Touching the Church
of Rome; I answer as a learned country man of mine answered nere 70. years
ago. Although it was a Church miserably corrupted and defaced, yet it was even
then a Church, wherein he professes to follow Luther, Oec lampadius,
Zuinglius, Bucerus, Calvin, Musculus, Bullinger, and the general sense of the
Protestant writers. See the Smetonii respons; ad Hamilton. Apostat. page 6. If
there was not a true Church, when Popery and Antichristianisme had most
universally spread it self, why is it said that Antichrist sits in the Temple
of God, 2. These: 2. 4? And if God had not a people in Babylon, why is it said,
Come out of her, my people Rev. 18. 4? And if there were not all that time,
even before the Reformation, true Ministers of Christ, why are the two
witnesses said to Prophecy 1260. days (compting days for years) in
sackcloath. Rev: 11. 3. 5. Sure the time of the witnesses, their Prophesying in
sackcloath, where ever we fix the beginning and ending of it (which is
contraverted) it does certainly comprehend those ages before the Reformation,
as a part of this time. Therefore Christ had his Witnesses and Ministers all
that while. Protestants as well as Papists, hold the perpetuity of the true
Church and Ministry, though not ever visible or alike pure. And otherwise, how
shall we understand Christ's own word, Mat: 28. 20. Lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world. 4. Wherefore I conclude that those who were
ordained in the Church of Rome before the Reformation, in so far as they were
ordained in the name of Christ, by these who had been themselves ordained
Presbyters as well as Bishops, and authorized to preach the Gospel, and
administer the Sacraments; this far they were true and lawful Ministers,
truly and lawfully ordained. But in so far as they were ordained according
to the Popish statutes and Canons, for teaching and maintaining the traditions
of the Church of Rome, and for offering up the body of Christ in the Mass, in
this consideration; their calling and Ordination was impure and unlawful, like
pure water flowing out of a clean fountain, which contracts impurity from a
filthy channel it runs through. See Synops: Pur: Theol: Disp. 42. These: 48.
and diverse others who might be cited to this purpose.

CHAP. V.
Whether these Prophets and Prophesyings in the primitive Church, 1 Cor. 14.
and 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians: 4. 11. were extraordinary, and so not to continue:
Or whether they are presidents for the Preaching or Prophesying of such, as are
neither ordained Ministers, nor probationers for the Ministry.

THere are three opinions concerning these Prophets mentioned by the Apostle,
1. That they had neither extraordinary and immediate inspirations of the
Spirit, nor yet were ordinary Ministers called to the office of Teaching, but
Church Members out of office, having good gifts of opening and interpreting the
Scriptures, for the edification, instructioun, and comfort of the Church, and
hence is the warrant taken, for the preaching or prophesying of such
Church Members as are well gifted, being neither Ministers, nor intending the
Ministry: Neither do the Independents only, but Socintans, and Arminians
also cry up that libertas prophetandi. 2. That these Prophets were Church
officers, and no more but ordinary Teachers or Interpreters of Scripture in the
Church: without excluding the sons of the Prophets, or Probationers from their
Assembly, and from exercising their gifts in preaching upon occasion, and
fortryall of their gifts, or of the grouth and encreas thereof, yet I remember
no place in the new Testament, where ordinary Pastors are said to prophecy,
except Revel: 11. 3. where notwithstanding, prophecy is ascribed unto them in
no other sense, than the working of miracles, verse: 6. Those have power to shut
heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy, and have power over
waters to turn them into blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues as
often as they will. All which (prophesying and miracles) is spoken by way of
allusion to Moses and Elias. 3. That they were extraordinary Prophets,
immediately and extraordinarly inspyred by the holy Ghost; and that they are to
be reckoned among these other administrations which were notto continue, or be
ordinary in the Church. Synop: pur: theol: disp: 42. these: 22. Martyr, loc:
com: class: 4. cap. 1. Aretius, probl: theol. loc: 62. Calvin. Instit. lib: 4.
cap. 3: 4. Diodati on 1 Cor. 14. 1. the late English Anotations on 1 Cor. 12.
28. Mr. Baine on Ephesians: 4. 11. together with two learned country men of mine,
Mr. David Dikson, on 1 Cor: 14. 31. and Mr: Rutherfurd on his peaceable plea:
c^p. 16. Apostles, Evange ists, Workers of miracles: I know many Protestant
writers of very good note, are of the second opinion. But with all due respect
unto them: I hold the third opinion, with Gerhard, loc: com: Tom: 6. page: 72.
and diverse others; the reasons which move me are these. 1. The Apostle
distinguishes the Prophets from the Pastors and Teachers; 1 Cor: 12. 28, 29.
Ephesians: 4. 11. The Prophets are enumerate among the public Ministers which
Christ has given to the Church; Yet distinct from the ordinary Pastors and
Teachers, 2. They are not only distinguished from Pastors and Teachers, but
seem also to be set before them; yea, before the Evangelists, Ephesians: 4. 11. And
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, or as the Syriak reads, and some Pastors and some
Teachers, so distinguishes Pastors from Teachers, as Mr. Bayne also does:
understanding here five, degrees of those who labor in the Word and Doctrine,
the first three extraordinary, the last two ordinary. I know it is not always
preferred in honor and dignity, which is first mentioned: Yet I think our
dissenting Brethren would not think it fit, nor suitable to enumerate their
gifted and pro. phesying members, next to the Apostles, and before Pastors much
less Evangelists, neither do I ground my argument simply and merely upon the
enumeration, but upon such an enumeration as is noted, with first, second,
third, 1 Cor: 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, where he puts upon the Prophets the
highest eminency and chiefest dignity next to the Apostles, which I think the
prophesyi^g Brethren of this age do not look for; Chrysostom, de diverse: nov:
Test: locis: sermon: 50. proves the chief dignity of Apostleship from these
words: First Apostles: Is it not as good an argument to prove the next
dignity, to belong to prophecy from these words, Secondarilie Prophets. It Is
true helps are mentioned before governments in that same Text. But the Apostle
has left o^ his numericall order, before he come at these, and besides, both
the Deacon and the ruling Elder, are Church officers, and neither of them
Preachers, so that the difproportion is not so great when the Deacon is named
before the ruling Elder: but that such Preachers or Interpreters who had no
office at all in the Church, should be enumerate, not only among officers and
Ministers of the Church, but before Teachers, and that in four Texts, Acts 13.
11. 1 Cor. 12. 28. ibid. verse: 29. Ephesians: 4. 11. and next to the Apostles too,
and that with an order, of first, second, third, is to me utterly improblable
and uncredible. 3. The Apostle mentions Prophets with a note of singularity,
as not common, but more special, 1 Cor: 12. 29, 30. Are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? are all Teachers? are all Workers of miracles? Have all the gifts of
healing? do all speak with tongues? do all Interpret? Here the Apostle makes a
second enumeration of such administrations as were more rare; singular,
special, dignified, and privileged, and not competent to all Church officers,
much less to all Church Members: Therefore here he omitteth the ruling Elder
and Deacon; He says not are all helps? are all governments? As if he had
said; There are some officers appointed only for ruling, some appointed only
for helping and overseeing the poor; These officers are neither Apostles nor
Prophets, etc. And if prophesying be not a privilege of all Church Officers,
how much less of all Church Members: I might add here, it is most agreeable to
the native signification of the word Prophecy, that we understand it to be an
extraordinary and rare thing; For if you consider the very notation of the word
Prophecy is prediction, and (...) is from (...), I foretell, of which more
hereafter. 4. One of the Prophets of that time, is plainly described to have
been inspired with extraordinary revelations, Acts 21. 10, 11. There came down
from Judea a certain Prophet, named Agabus, and when he was come unto us, he
took Paul's girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said; Thus says the
holy Ghost, so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owes this
girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. There were other
Prophets of the same kind with Agabus, for so runs the Text, Acts 11. 27,
28. And in those days came Prophets from Jerusalem to Antioch, and there stood
up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit, that there should be
great dearth in all the world. 5. That these Prophets spoke in the Church from
extraordinary revelation and inspiration, appears by 1 Cor: 14. 26. When they
came together, they had a Psalm, a Doctrine, a Tongue, a Revelation, an
Interpretation, not only a Doctrine, and an Interpretation, but a Revelation,
and verse. 30. after he has said, let the Prophets speak, two or three; He
adds, If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his peace: Upon which Text Gualther, Salmeron, and others who understand by
prophesying in that Chap: the ordinary Ministerial Teaching, are yet made to
acknowledge, that this revealing of somewhat to another, was extemporary and
extraordinary, and that it is no president for our Loc. com. class. 4. Cap. 1.
Sed in primitiva Ecclesia cum Prophetia vigeret, quid discriminis erat inter
Prophetam and Doctorem? Respondeo, quamvis idem fuerit utriusque munus, tamen
Doctores instituebantur a Praeceptoribus: Prophetae vero, ^ine omni open humana,
repent afflatu Spiritus sancti concitatiloquebantur, Probl: theol: loc: 61.
Prophetae ampliora habebant dona ideo Scripturae obstrusiora loca illustrabant
eodem Spititu, quo scripta fuerunt -- ideo de Scripturis rectius praedicabant.
So Calvin. Instit: loc: 4. cap. 3. 4. opening that Text, Ephesians. 4. 11.
understands by Prophets, such as had extraorinarie Revelations.
times. P. Martyr, puts this difference between Teachers and Prophets, that
Teachers were educated and instructed by Masters: Prophets, without all humane
help; spoke as they were on a sudden moved by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost; Yea, although he takes the office and functions of Prophets and
Teachers, to have been one and the same; yet he thus distinguishes between
them. So Aretius, speaking of those that bare office in the primitive Church,
distinguisheh the Prophets from the Pastors and Teachers in this, that the
Prophets had not only greater gifts for opening hard Scriptures, but that they
did interpret Scripture with the same prophetical spirit, by which it was
dictat and written, and likewise foretell things to come. 6. It has been
observed by Mr. Bayne on Ephesians: 4. 11. and others that these degrees are
capacious and comprehensive one of another downwards, not upwards, that is; An
Apostle might prophecy, and do the work of an Evangelist, Pastor, and
Teacher: a Prophet might do the work of an Evangelist, Pastor, and Teacher: the
Evangelist might do the work of a Pastor and Teacher. But every Pastor and
Teacher could not do the work of an Evangelist, or of a Prophet, etc. If this
observation hold, which has pleased many, then we cannot understand those
Prophets to have been no more but Pastors and Teachers, much less to have been
any thing less than Pastors and Teachers, viz. Church Members, well gifted for
exponding Scripture edifyingly, Chrysostom de diverse: N. T. locis sermon: 50.
leans very much toward that same notion, for he calls Apostles the root,
which was comprehensive of all the rest; a Prophet (says he) Justin Martyr,
dial. cum. Tryph. Iud. (...), etc. For even to this present time, there are
prophetical gifts, so that we ought to understand that the gifts which were of
old in your nation are transferred unto us.
might not be an Apostle, but an Apostle was a Prophet, Evangelist, etc. To
prove that an Apostle did prophecy, he cites these prophetical praedictions,
2 Timothy: 3. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. Whereby it is manifest that he understands the
prophecy mentioned by Paul to be extraordinary. 7. Unless we understand those
prophets which Christ gave to the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. and cap. 14. Ephesians: 4.
11. to have been extraordinarly inspired by the Spirit, then we shall not be
able to prove from Scripture, that Christ has given to the Church of the new
Testament, any extraordinary Prophets to foretell things to come. But it is
certain that Christ has given such extraordinary Prophets to the Church of the
new Testament, such as Agabus, and the daughters of Philip: Eusebius tells us
there were such Prophets in the Church, till the days of Justin Martyr; which
we have also from Justinius himself. And now having the occasion, I must say it
to the glory of God, there were in the Church of Scotland, both in the time of
our first Reformation, and after the Reformation such extraordinary men, as
were more then ordinary Pastors and Teachers, even holy Prophets receaving
extraordinary Revelations from God, and foret^lling diverse strange and
remarkable things, which did accordingly come to paste punctually, to the great
admiration of all who knew the particulars, such were Mr. Wishart the Martyr,
Mr. Knox the Reformer; also Mr. John Welsh, Mr. John Davidsoune, Mr. Robert
Bruce, Mr. Alexander Simson, Mr. Fergusson, and others: It were too long to
make a narration here of all such particulars, and there are so many of them
stupendous, that to give instance in some few, might seem to derogat from the
rest. But if God give me opportunity, I shall think it worth the while to make a
collection of these things: Mean while although such Prophets be extraordinary,
and but seldom raised up in the Church, yet such there have been: I dare say,
not only in the primitive times, but amongst our first Reformers, and others.
And upon what Scripture can we pitch for such extraordinary Prophets. If not
upon those Scriptures which are applied by some to the prophesying Brethren, or
gifted Church Members; 8. There are but three senses of the word Prophesying,
which I can find any where else in the new Testament.

1. For such prophesying as is competent to all converted and gifted persons,
when they are filled with a spirit of illumination, and speak with other
tongues as the spirit gives them utterance: In which sense Joel foretold, that
daughters as well as sons, hand maids as well as menservants, young and old
should prophecy, Acts 2. 17, 18. Which was accordingly fulfilled upon the day
of Penticost, for Acts 1. 14. and 2. 1. 4. This Spirit of Prophecy was powered
out upon all the Disciples, men and women.

2. For such prophesying, ^s is the preaching of ordinary Ministers, although I
know no Text where without any controversy, the word is used for the ordinary
Ministerial preaching; Yet I understand the word to be used, in this sense,
(though by allusion only where of before). Revel. 11. 3. And I will give power
unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundredth and
threescore days clothed in sackcloath.

3. For extraordinary prophesying from immediate and miraculous inspiration, in
which sense it is often used in the new Testament, as I shall show anon.

But a fourth sense, viz. The prophesying of gifted Brethren, (not sisters) out
of office, and that publicly, and by an ordinary gift, I can find no where;
and if we go either higher or lower, then the ordinary Pastoral preaching,
women as well as men might prophecy. in the Scripture language, Prophetesses,
as well as Prophets. 9. The Apostle plainly distinguishes, Prophecy, both
from the word of knowledge, and from the word of wisdom, 1 Cor. 12. 8. 9. 10
For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge by the same Spirit, to another prophecy; now what is that gift and
manifestation of the Spirit, which is supposed to be given to gifted and
prophesying-members, must it not fall under that enumeration, 1 Cor: 12. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. Is it then the interpretation, o^ opening of Scripture, that is the
Teachers part, the word of knowledge: Is it both to interpre^, and apply
Scripture, that is the pastors part, the word of wisdom; Is it to prophecy,
that is more nor either the word of (...), or the word of wisdom, and is
therefored (...) from both. 10. In that Text last cited, prophecy is
mentioned, not only as a gift by which the Spirit works, for the profit and
edification of the Church, but as a Ministry, function, and ad^inistration in
the Church, for ve^s. 4. 5, 6. The Apostle teaches us, that there are
diversiti^s. 1 Of gifts (...), 2. Of administrations, (...). 3. Of operations,
(...), thereafter in reference to all these three, he adds the enumeration of
the particulars, ver. 8. 9, 10. In a Prophet hterefore there is (...)
Ministerium, as well as (...), and (...), or (...). Now (...) is frequently
used in the new Testament for the Ministry, not only of ruling Elders and
Deacons, Rom: 12. 7. of Pastors and Teachers; yea, of Evangelists and Apostles,
Ephesians: 4. 12. Col: 4. 17. 2 Timothy: 4. 5. 11. Acts 1. 17. 25. and 12. 25. and 20.
24. and 2^. 19. Romans 11. 13. 2 Cor: 4. 1. and 5. 18. and 6. 3. and 9. 1. and
else where the English translators in these places render it sometimes
Ministry, sometimes Office, sometimes indeed (...) is used in the new
Testament for any Ministering to the necessities of the poor Saints, by charity
and alms. But no body that I know does imagine or can imagine that this is the
sense of the word, 1 Cor: 12. where (...) is joined with (...) and (...).
Therefore I conclude that the Prophets in these primitive times, had an office
or Ministry in the Church. 11. The word Prophesying is often used in the new
Testament, for that which is extraordinary, and by Revelation, Mat. 26. 68.
Rev: 1. 3. Acts 21. 9. Luke 1. 67. Revel. 22. 10. 19. Revel. 10. 11. Mark: 7.
6. 1 Peter 1. 10. Jud: 14. John Baptist is called a Prophet, Luke 1. 76. and 7.
28. Matthew: 21. 26. and 14. 5. Christ himself is called a Prophet, Matthew. 13.
57. Luke 7. 16 and 24. 19. John 4. 19. and 9. 17. Elymas the Sorcerer is called
a false Prophet, Acts. 13. 6. Prophesying in the name of Christ, is joined with
other miraculous, gifts, Mat: 7. 22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils, and
in thy name done many wonderful works, Acts 19. 6. and when Paul laid his
hands on them, the holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues, and
prophesied. In this sense is the word used, when it is said that Cajaphas
prophesied, John 11. 51. the same word is used for prophetical prediction, 1 Timothy: 1. 18. according to the prophesies which went before on the Rev. 2. 22.
Jezebel did call her self a Prophetess. 12 Prophecy (as Paul speaks of it)
is so far from being a common privilege of gifted Saints out of office, that
it is one of the special and rarest gifts which the Apostles themselves had or
could have, 1 Cor. 13. 2. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, which stands there between the
gift of tongues, and the faith of miracles: again, 1 Cor: 14. 16. Now brethren,
if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I prosite you, except I
shall speak unto you, either by Revelation, or by knowledge, or by Prophesying,
or by Doctrine. The first two, Revelation, and knowledge are immanent in the
Apostle: The other two Prophesying and Doctrine; are transient from the Apostle
to the Church. What shall my gift of tongues profit you, says he; or how
shall you be edified or satisfied thereby, unless, either I utter some
Revelation unto you by Prophesying, or utter my knowledge unto you by Doctrine,
so distinguishing Prophesying from Doctrine as greater then it; because
Prophesying proceeds from Revelation, Doctrine from knowledge, in him that
teaches. 13. I have yet another reason, which I think will be a hard knot to
our dissenting Brethren, the Apostle compares in that 14. Chap: the gifts of
tongues, and the gifts of prophecy. He commends both, as desirable, verse: 1.
and wishes to them all both these gifts, verse: 6. but rather prophecy as
comparatively the better for edifying the Church. Et magis and minus, non
variant speciem. There are both good and desirable gifts of the Spirit, given
to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7, 10, 11. The Apostle also allows as many to
speak with tongues in the Church, as he allows to prophecy in the Church;
that is, as two or three of the Prophets may speak by course in one Assembly,
so may two or three speak by course in a strange tongue, so that one interpret,
1 Cor: 14. 27, 29. Moreover, whereas it is supposed by our dissenting brethren,
that all or most of the Church, women excepted, did prophecy; they must upon
the very same ground, suppose that all or most of the Church, women excepted;
spoke strange tongues in the Church. For in the same place where it is said,
that every one of them had a Doctrine and Revelation, it is said also that every
one of them had a tongue and an Interpretation, 1. Cor: 14. 26. Which tongues
considered and compared together, it will be found, that if the reasons hold
good, and the consequences be valid, which are brought for the prophesying of
gifted members out of office, and that therein they have the Church of Corinth
a president, the like reasons, and als strong consequences will prove, that any
two or three of a Church, who shall happily have the gift of strange tongues,
may speak by course in the Church, so that one Interpret, and that the Church
of Corinth is as good a president for this, as for the other; Let our Brethren
therefore, either make both these gifts (prophecy, and tongues) in the Church
of Corinth, to be extraordinary and miraculous, and so neither of them to be
an ordinary president: or otherwise, they must make them both to be set forth
for ordinary Patterns and presidents, and so begin to cry up tongues, as well
as prophesying, for if the gift of prophecy, be such as men may attain by
industry and study, so is the gift of tongues: I know no way to loose the knot
without acknowledging, that both the gift of tongues and that of prophecy,
were extraordinary and miraculous, which is the truth.

These are the reasons which I lean to in this matter. I come next to answer,
Objections. The first three Objections I find in the (...) concerning
Ordination: But I shall answer other Objections also omitted there, but which
have been objected by others.

Object. 1. The Prophets, 1 Cor: 14 were not immediately inspired with
prediction; for women that were so inspired, might deliver their prophecy in
the Church, but there women are forbidden to speak, verse: 34. Answ: 1. But
where find we that women which were prophetesses, and immediately inspired,
were allowed to deliver their prophecy in the Church. I suppose he had a
respect to 1 Cor: 11. 5. But every woman that prays or prophesies with her
head covered, dishonors her head, which is meaned of the public Assembly,
for the Apostle is speaking of covering, or uncovering the head in the Church.
But diverse Interpreters understand here by a woman, that prays or
prophesies, a woman that joyneth as a hearer in the public Assembly, and so
verse: 4. by a man that prays or prophesies, a man that is a hearer, and
joyneth in the ordinances. So that the Geneva annotation upon verse 5. gives a
good sense of that Text: That women which show themselves in public and
ecclesiastical Assemblies, without the sign and token of their subjection,
that is to sa^, uncovered, shame themselves. See more for th^s in Junius his
annotations on the Arabike version in that place. ^. If the Apostle by
prophesying, 1 Cor: 11. 4. 5. Understand prophesying by immediate inspiration,
then the Objection may be retorted and turned into an Argument against the
Objectors: For the sense of the word prophesying in the 11. Chap: may give
light to the word prophesying in the 14. Chap. 3. Peter Martyr, loc: com:
eccles: 4. cap: 1. Is indeed of opinion, that women which were prophetesses,
and extraordinarly inspired, might sp^ak in the Church, provided that their
heads were covered, in token of foeminine subjection, and that the forbidding
of women to speak in the Church, extends to such, and so he reconcileth, 1
Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 13. with 2 Cor: 11. 5. I doubt his opinion in this
particular is not well grounded, only so far I make use of it, that if 1
Cor: 11. 5. be meant of prophetesses, praying or prophesying in the Church,
(which the Objector has to prove). Then certainly the forbidding of women to
speak in the Church, cannot be understood universallie, but with a reserve and
exception of extraordinary cases: But how can this exception of prophetesses
consist with with the Text, Let your women keep silence in the Church, Why
(...), Your women, they had prophesying women, as is supposed by these of the
other opinion, from 1 Cor: 11. 5. Nay, even your women must be silent says the
Apostle; and the reasons which he adds, are so universal as to comdrehend
even prophetesses, they are commanded to be under obedience, and to be in
subjection, which Martyr himself notes, holds true of prophesying women, as
well as others, and that for that cause their heads were to be covered: Another
reason is added, 1 Timothy 2. 14. Adam was not deceaved, but the woman being
deceaved, was in the transgression: It might be feared, says P. Martyr, if
women were permitted to speak in the Church, Satan should return to his first
wyle, and deceave the man by the woman. Surely he that made use of Evah, might
also make use of a prophesying woman to deceave, and so much the more, because,
now since the fall, both man and woman are more subject to tentation. So that
both the Apostles command, and the reasons of it seem plainly to exclude, even
prophesying women from speaking in the Church, and if they be allowed to
deliver extraordinary prophesies and revelations in the Church; why not also to
prophecy as other gifted members. If that which is greater be allowed them,
why not that which is less? And if prophetesses be excepted from the rule, 1
Cor: 14. 34. Why not also other women of excellent gifts.

Object: 2. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 26. speaks of prophecy as a gift in
all, or most of the members of the Church, and forbids it to none, but women.
Answ: 1. I have already proved from, 1 Cor: 12. 28, 29. and 13. 2. and 14. 6.
that prophecy even in those days, was not a common, but a rare and singular
gift. So, ibid: verse. 5 when he says, I would that all spoke with tongues, but
rather that ye prophesied; he intimates that all of them did not prophecy.
2. When the Apostle speaks by way of supposition, verse; 24: But if all
prophecy, this proves not that all did prophecy, neither can the very
supposition be understood universally: For if an unbeleever had come into
their Assembly, and heard all, and every one of them prophesying; sure he had
been so far from being won thereby, that he had been more alienated from
such a confusion. 3. That which gives greatest color to the Objection, is
verse: 26. When ye come together every one of you has a Psalm, has a
Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an Interpretation: I shall
freely offer my judgment concerning this Text to be considered. I hold the
first hint from Cajetan upon the place; It is not said, every one of you can
speak a strange tongue, or can utter a Revelation, etc. But (...) has ^. g.
every one in the Church has these things for his good and benefit, when one
prophesies, or two, or three, every one in the Church has that prophecy, the
like of Psalms, Tongues, etc. Even as 1 Cor: 3. 21. 22. all things are yours,
whether Paul or Apollo, etc. Where it may be truly added, or Psalms, or
Tongues, or Doctrines, or Revelations, or Interpretations, all these are yours,
all these has Christ given to the Church for her good, men are said to have
these things of which they have the good fruit, use, benefit, at least are
allowed to have, and may have the benefit thereof, Luke 16. 29 they have Moses
and the Prophets, Ephesians: 1. 7. and Col. 1. 14. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, 1 Cor. 2. 16. But we have the mind of Christ; Philip. 3.
17. ye have us for an example, Heb: 13. 10. we have an Altar, 2 Pet. 1. 15. we
have a more sure word of prophecy, and the like. And thus I understand the
Text now in controversy, the Apostle having from the beginning of that 14.
Chap: persuaded that the gifts of tongues and prophecy might be used, not so
as the men might be most admired, but so as the Church might be most edified,
and that not so much the gifts, as the profitable use of the gifts was to be
desired, he concludes this point, verse: 26. Making a transition to certain
Canons, for order in the use of tongues and prophecy, as if he had said, If
these gifts be thus improved to edify, then although every one of you has not
the gifts of tongues, prophecy, etc. Yet when ye come together, every one of
you has all these tongues, prophesies, etc. They being yours, for your good
and edification. 4. But if our dissenting Brethren will not receave this sense,
(which is quite contrary to theirs). Yet in this Text, here, they can no more
extend to all or most of the members of the Church, one of these branches, then
another: If all or most of them did prophecy, then all or most of them had the
gift of tongues, and the Interpretation of tongues, and Revelations, and the
^ift of composing Psalms, and so the same president shall bring in strange
tongues, as well as prophesying, (of which more before) beside that of
composing Psalms. I shall hardly believe that our dissenting Brethren
themselves will say, that all or most of the Church of Corinth had the gift of
tongues. Let us see then, how they will restrict the words (...) every one of
you in reference to tongues, they must allow us to make the same restruction in
reference to prophecy: But if they will say at large, that all or most of the
Church of Corinth, had the gifts of tongues, as well as that of prophecy, then
they are loosers another way, by yielding the president of the Church of
Corinth (in that very place upon which they build their prophesying) to be
extraordinary and miraculous. 5. Whereas the Objection says, that all or most
of them did prophecy, this addition, of most of them, is fictious and
fallacious to hide weakness, for the Text has no such thing, but says, every
one of you: Themselves dare not understand every one of you, universally, but
in a restricted sense, for then Prophets, and Brethren should be acciprocall,
and convertible names in the Epistles to the Corinthians, and when it is said,
the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 32. the
sense should be no more, but equivalent (upon the matter) to this, the spirits
of all the Brethren are subject to the Brethren. 6. Wherefore, every one of
you, verse: 26. (if extended to prophesying) can be no more, but every one of
you prophets, even as Isa: 1. 23. every one. i. e. every one of the Princes;
Heb: 2. 9. Jesus tasted death for every man; i. e. for every man whom the
Father had given him, or chosen to be redeemed, 1 Cor: 12. 7. But the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man; i. e. that is, to every
gifted man in the Church, to profit withal; Ephesians. 5. 33. (...), let every
one of you in particular, so love his wife; that is, every one of you husbands,
Isa: 9. 17. every one is a hypocrite, that is; every wicked person who comes
to worship before me; Luke 13. 15. Does not each one of you on the Sabbah,
loose his ox or his ass, that is, each of you who has an ox or an ass: many
other such instances might be given from Scripture. 7. Bullinger notes out of
the Greek Scholiast, that the Apostle here, 1 Cor: 14. 26. uses (...), for
(...), and (...), that is, one of you has a Psalm, another a Doctrine,
another a Tongue, etc. Beza gives us the same sense, and refers us to 1 Cor: 1.
12. which is a notable clearing of this Text, for the very same phrase: (...),
is there used: Every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of
Cephas, and I of Christ, yet every one of them did not say all this, but one
said, I am of Paul, another said, I am of Apollo, etc. The Syriak confirms
the same sense, for 1 Cor: 14. 26. he rendereth thus: Whosoever of you has a
Psalm, let him say on, and he who has a Doctrine, and he who has a
Revelation, and he who has a tongue, and he who has an Interpretation: So the
Arabik version (which Iunius on his Marginall annotations upon it here
commends) runs thus. If any of you has a kind of Psalm to say, and he
that has a Doctrine, and he that has a Revelation, and he that has a Tongue,
and he that has an Interpretation, let all this be done to edifying.

Object: 3. These gifts which are required in a Prophet, 1 Cor: 14. 3. 26. are
such as men ordinarily may, and do attain by industry and study Answ. 1. The
contrary has been clearly proved, and that weary Text, verse: 26. proves it;
the more strange it is, that a Text which mentions revelation, tongues,
should be cited for ordinary study and industry. 2. It Is said indeed, verse: 3.
He that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation, and
comfort. What then; did not an extraordinary Prophet, an Apostle, an Evangelist
speak unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort? No man dare deny,
but they did, yet this cannot prove that Apostles and evangelists were not
extraordinary Ministers: The edification and fruit which come to the Church by
these Prophets, is one thing, the way of revelation and inspiration by which
the prophecy came, another thing: the Apostle is there only comparing two
extraordinary and miraculous gifts together, tongues and prophecy: Of the two,
prophecy is rather to be desired, for the edifying of the Church, for he that
speaks a strange tongue, cannot edify the Church, except it be interpreted,
but he that prophesies, edifieth the Church by his very gift of prophecy,
with less business, and without an interpreter; This being the scope and
sense of the Text, it may discover the weakness of that ground, upon which
many have supposed that the Apostle means nothing by prophecy, but the
ordinary gift of expounding, and applying Scripture; yea, verse: 6. prophecy
and revelation, are at once held forth, both as edifying, and as distinct from
doctrine, and revelation distinct from knowledge, must needs be taken a gift,
and not to be numbered among ordinary gifts (as Iunius upon the Arabike, in the
place notes) what ever acceptions of the word, we may find else where in
Scripture.

Object. 4. But the Apostle bids them desire that they may prophecy, verse: 1.
how can one desire, or pray in faith for a miraculous and extraordinary gift of
the Spirit. Answ: 1. He bids them not only desire, that they might prophecy,
but that they might have other spiritual gifts, such as the gifts of tongues,
So verse: 1. and the interpretations of tongues, and he wishes to them all the
gift of tongues, now the gift of tongues was extraordinary and miraculous, as
Acts 2. 6, 7, 8. They might desire both the one gift and the other, to glorify
God, and to profit withal. 1 Cor: 12. 7. yea, they might pray for it in faith
for these ends, and so much the more, because Mark. 16. 17. the promise is made
to believers of that first age. And these signs shall follow them that
believe, in my name shall they cast out devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, etc. And why might not the prayer of faith obtain the gift of
prophecy, as well as recover the sick, Iam: 5. 15. although neither the one
nor the other might be prayed for, with that absoluteness, and peremptorinesse
of desire, as saving mercies and graces necessary to salvation, which is
intimated in part by the different phrase, noted by Erasmus, and others to be
used, 1 Cor: 14. 1. follow after charity, (...), pursue it, or as (the Syriak)
run after it, so follow after love, as never to be satisfied till ye overtake
it, be earnest in the pursuit of it. But concerning tongues, prophecy, and
the like, he adds; and desire spiritual gifts (...) a word which falls
short of the other, not signifying any affecting of any thing with all our
endeavor (as the other word does) but only a high esteeming, valuing,
admiring, wishing of a thing which, yet, if it be denied to us, we must sit
down satisfied without it.

Object: 5. But these Prophets were to be judged, examined and tried, 1 Cor:
14. 29. 32. therefore it seems they were not extraordinary Prophets infallibly
inspired. Answ: 1. If those who came under the name of extraordinary Prophets,
might not be tried and examined, why are there so many caveats in the new
Testament, to beware of false Prophets, Mat: 7. 15. and 24. 11, 24. 1 John 4.
1. Did not the Lord admit of Moses his objection, that peradventure the
children of Israel would not believe him, that God had appeared unto him, and
sent him, wherein God will have him to satisfy them by signs and miracles,
Exodus 4. 1. to verse: 10. are not the Bereans commended, Acts 17. 11. for
proving and trying the Doctrine of the Apostles themselves by the Scriptures?
2. Although such as had the gift of prophecy, did not, nor could not err, so
far as they were inspired by the holy Ghost in prophesying, much less in
writing Scripture, yet they might have, and some had their own mistakes and
errors in particular cases; whereof I shall have one instance in Elias, who
said, he was left alone: But what says the answer of God unto him, I have
reserved to my self seven thousand, etc. He spoke from his own spirit, when he
said he was left alone, but the answer of God corrects his mistake. Another
instance in those prophesying Disciples, Acts 21. 4. Who said to Paul through
the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. Therefore foretelling and
foreknowing of Paul's danger at Jerusalem, was from the spirit of prophecy, but
the consequence they did draw from hence, that therefore Paul should not go up
to Jerusalem. This Interpreters conceave, was only from their own spirits,
though they misfathered it upon the Spirit of God. 3. It Is well observed in the
English annotations upon 1 Cor. 14. 32. That although those prophesies were
infused by the holy Ghost, that cannot err, yet all things are not always
revealed to one, and that which is not revealed to one, is oftentimes revealed
to more, and sometimes in clearer manner. There might be also some thing
mingled with that which the Prophets received, and it might fall out, that that
which they added of their own, by way of confirmation, illustration or
application, might be justly subject to censure, wheher it must be tried and
judged by others, whether the prophesies proceed from the inspiration of the
holy Spirit, and according to the rule of faith, Esa. 8. 20.

Object: 6. The Apostle distinguishes Prophecy from ministry, Romans 12. 6, 7.
therefore they who prophesied, were gifted persons out of office. Answ: 1.
Diverse resolve that Text thus, that first the Apostle makes a general
division of Ecclesiastical offices, Prophecy, comprehending these that labor
in the word and doctrine, Ministry comprehending those that labor not in the
word and doctrine, and that thereafter the Apostle subdivideth prophesying into
the pastoral and doctorall function: and Ministry, he subdivideth into the
office of the ruling Elder, Deacon, and the other of showing mercy, which was
committed sometimes to old men, sometimes to widows. 2. When I look again and
again unto that Text, I rather incline to understand by prophecy there, the
extraordinary prophecy, and by Ministry, the ordinary offices in the Church.
Having then gifts says the Apostle, and differing according to the grace that
is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion
of faith* that under the color of prophecy and revelation, we bring nothing
which is not agreeable to the rule of faith, Or Ministry, let us wait on
Ministry. If our office and administration be ordinary, let us attend it; and
not slight it, because it is ordinary. Then he enlarges this last by an
enumeration of the ordinary offices in the Church, Pastors, Teachers, ruling
Elders and Deacons. While I am writing these things, I find Gomarus upon Romans
12. 6, 7. of the same opinion, that prophecy is meant here of that which is
extraordinary, Ministry of that which is ordinary.

Object. 7. But that Text, The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets, is applied by many Presbyteriall writers, for the upholding the
authority of Classes, and Synods, which is not a good argument of these
prophets, if these Prophets were extraordinary. Answ. This makes the argument
nothing the weaker but so much the stronger. For if Prophets who were
immediately inspired, were to be subject to the examination, and judgment, and
censure of other Prophets, and if Paul and Barnabas gave an account, before the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem of their doctrine, so much opposed by some at
Antioh, Acts 15. and if Peter being accused for going in to the uncircumcised,
was put to make his defense to them at Jerusalem, Acts 11. then a fortiori, it
does much more become ordinary Pastors and Teachers, to submit to the judgment
of an Assembly of Pastors and Teachers; And generally as in civil justice, it is
a good and equal rule, that a man be judged per pares, so proportionably in
Church censures, it will hold among Church officers or Ministers, that they
should be judged per pares, an Apostle by the Apostles, a Prophet by the
Prophets, an Elder by the Elders.

Object. 8. Judas and Stlas are called Prophets, Acts 15. 32. and they exhorted
the Church, yet they were out of office, for they are distinguished from the
Apostles and Elders, and said to be chief men among the Brethren, verse: 22.
Answ: 1. This president will carry the prophesying Brethren very high, for
Silas is reckoned by Divines to have been an Evangelist, which may be collected
from his traveling through so many places with Paul, for spreading the
Gospel, Acts 16. 17. Act: 17. 4, 10. 14, 15. Act. 18. 5. others think he had
a Ministerial charge at Jerusalem, but the former opinion seems to be better
grounded. 2. The word Brethren and Brother, does not ever note such as were out
of office in the Church, but it is diverse times used, (and so I take it here)
of such as were neither fixed as Elders nor so eminent in the Church as
Apostles, but had speci^l and extraordinary employments, or administrations in
the Church, as 2 Cor: 8. 18. 22, 23 1 Cor: 16. 12. 2 Cor: 1. 1. Heb: 13. 23. 1
Cor: 1. 1. 1 Pet: 5. 12. Ephesians: 6. 21. Col: 4. 7. Philem: 1. 20. From which
places it is manifest, that the Apostles fellow laborers in their
extraordinary administrations, are often called Brethren, and among these
Brethren, Judas and Silas were chief men, either for the greatness of their
gifts, or more abundant labors.

And now in the close, my advise and exhortationis unto such Brethren as take
upon them to preach, or prophecy, neither being nor intending to be ordained
to the Ministry, that they would yet take them to serious second thoughts of
this business, and seeing that prophesying which they take for their
president, has been so clearly proved to have been extraordinary, seeing also
Christ has appointed Pastors and Teachers for the ordinary work of the
public teaching, edifying the Church, and perfecting the Saints, Ephesians: 4.
11. 12. (which ordinance is sufficient for that end), those Brethren should do
well to improve their gifts in another way, by writing, and by occasional
exhorting, admonishing, instructing, reproving, comforting others, in that
fraternall manner, which is suitable to Christians out of office: If they desire
any other work in the Church, let them desire the Pastoral office, and offer
themselves to trial in order thereunto, for as Greg: Nazianzen says, orat: 7.
Christ has appointed this order in his Church, that the flock may be one
thing, Pastors another thing; And again, it is a great business to teach, but
it is safe and harmless to learn, why make thou thy self a Pastor, when
thou art one of the flock.

CHAP. VI.
Whether any other but a Minister, lawfully called and ordained, may administer
the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords supper.

THe Socinians and the Erastian Crutch-maker before mentioned, so plead against
the necessity of Ordination, that they held it lawful and free to gifted
persons not ordained, not only to preach, but to administer the Sacraments
whether they extend this to women as well as men, I know not. Peradventure they
will borrow from the Pagans those she priests whom Gellius out of Cicero, calls
Antistitas, not Antistites, or happily they hold with the old Pepuzians, that
women may both preach and administer the Sacraments, at least, if they may not
speak in the Church, (because that is forbidden, 1 Cor. 14. 32. although some
are so bold as to restrict that prohibition to married women, whereof they
think they have some color from the context) that yet they may both preach and
administer the Sacraments in private places. And if there be no more necessary
to one that preaches or ministereth the Sacraments, but only gifts and
abilities, how can they avoid to allow gifted women, as well as gifted men to
perform these holy things?

But it is justly held by the reformed Churches, and ordered in the Directorie
of Worship agreed upon by both Kingdoms, and mentioned also in the late
Confession of faith, chap: 27. that neither Baptism nor the Lords Supper may
be dispensed by any, but by a Minister of the Word lawfully ordained. Nay (say
the soundest Protestant writers) not upon pretense of whatsoever necessity be
it among Jews, Turks, Pagans, or to children dying, or the like.

The arguments I lean to, are these. 1. God has appointed the Minister of the
word, lawfully called and ordained, and no other to be the stewards and
dispensers of the mysteries of Christ, 1 Cor: 4. 1. Let a man so account of us,
as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. Moreover
it is required of Stewards, that a man be found faithful. Which the Apostle
does not only apply to himself and Apollo, verse: 6. (where by the way it may
be remembered that Apollo was neither an Apostle, nor Evangelist, but a
powerful Minister of the Gospel) and to Sosthenes (as appears by comparing
the Text new cited with 1 Cor: 1. 1.) but he also applies the same to every
lawful Bishop, or ordinary Minister, Tit. 1. 7. for a Bishop must be
blameless as the steward of God, and this steward is ordained, verse: 5. So
Luke 12. 42. Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall
make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season.
It Is not Christ's will that any one of the household, who is faithful, wise, and
discreet, may take upon him the stewards office, to dispense meat to the rest.
But there is a steward constituted and appointed for that purpose. There are
stewards appointed in the Church, which is the house of the living God, and
those to continue till the coming of Christ, ibid: verse: 43. 46. and there is
nothing which more properly belongs to the Ecclesiastical stewards, then the
dispensation of the Sacraments.

2. Ministers lawfully called and ordained, and none other has Christ
appointed to be Pastors or Sheepherds, to feed the flock of God, Ier: 3. 15.
Ephesians: 4. 11. Act: 20. 28. 1 Pet: 5. 2. Much of this feeding consists in the
dispensation of the Sacraments. And he who has appointed this food to be
received by some, has also appointed to be given, and administered by others.
Surely he who is so much displeased with Pastors, who feed themselves and not
the flock, will not be well pleased with the flock which will be their own
feeders only, and will not be fed by the Pastor. Grotius had an extravagant
notion of communicating, where there are no Sacramental Elements, or where
there are no Pastors to administer, yet although he went too far, those
against whom I now argue, do far outreach him, for where there are both
Elements and Pastors to administer, they hold there may be a Sacrament without
any Pastor; Yea, this Socinian and Anabaptisticall way, takes away the very
distinction of Pastor and flock in the Church, as if any of the sheep were to
feed the sheepherd, as well as he them.

3. Ezekiels vision concerning the new Temple, is generally acknowledged to be
an Evangelicall prophecy, which I have also else where demonstrate by
infallible reasons: But I conceave the Sectaries of this time, who cry down
the Ministry and Ordination, do not nor will not deny it. Sure I am such a
material Temple as is described in that vision, never yet was. Now among other
things, it is there prophesied concerning the Ministers of the Gospel, Ezekiel:
44. 16. They shall enter into my Sanctuary, and they shall come near unto my
table to Minister unto me; and they shall keep my charge. Whereof we can make
no Gospel sense, except it belong to the charge of Ministers, lawfully called
and entered into that work, to administer the Sacraments, and namely that of
the Lords Supper at his Table. These Ministers are also in that Chapter plainly
distinguished from the people, or children of Israel, verse: 15. 19, 22, 23, 28.

4. The Sacraments are seals of the righteousness of faith, or covenant of
grace, as Divines commonly speak, borrowing the phrase from Rom: 4. 11. This
truly has been justly accounted so necessary, that both the Houses of
Parliament after consultation, had with the Assembly of Divines, did by the
Ordinance dated, October: 20. 1645. appoint that who ever does not know that the
Sacraments are seals of the Covenant of grace, shall not be admitted to the
Lord's Supper, but shall be suspended from it, as an ignorant person. Now if it
were an intolerable usurpation among men, if a private person should take the
broad Seal of the Kingdom, and append it to such Signatures as he thinks good;
yea, (put case) to these Signatures only, whereunto it is to be, and ought to
be put by those who are entrusted with the keeping of it: Now much more were it
a provoking sin, and usurpation against Jesus Christ (who is jealous of his
glory, and tender of his ordinances) to make bold with his Seals, without being
called, and appointed thereunto.

5. Christ gives a commission to the Apostles, to Teach, and Baptize, and
extends the same commission to all Teaching Ministers, to the end of the world,
Mat: 28. 19. 20. from which place it is plain; 1. That Jesus Christ would have
the distinction of Teachers and Taught: Baptizers and Baptized to have place in
the Church always, even unto the end. 2. That the commission to Teach and
Baptize, was not given to all who believe in Jesus Christ, but to some only.
3. That these some who received this commission, are not only the Apostles, but
ordinary Ministers, as is manifested by the explaining of the commission, and
promise to the end of the world.

6. Christ has distinguished between Magistracy and Ministry, between civil
and sacred vocations, Mat: 22. 21. Mat: 16. 19. etc. 18. 18, etc: 28. 19. Ioh:
20. 23. Rom: 13. 1. 7. 1 Timothy: 2. 2. 1 Pet: 2. 13, 14. compared with Rom: 12. 6,
7, 8. 1 Cor: 12. 28. Ephesians: 4. 11. 1 These: 5. 12. Heb: 13. 7, 17. So that as
Ministers may not assume civil dignities and administrations, nor exercise
seculare power, Luke 12. 14. etc. 22. 25. 26. Ioh: 18. 36. 2 Cor: 10. 4. 2 Timothy:
2. 4. It is no less contrary to the ordinance of Christ, that Magistrates (or
any other civil persons) stretch themselves beyond their line, and get (with
Pompey) into the holy of holies, or with Vzziah to the burning of incense, in
both which examples, such intrusion was examplarily punished. As it may be said
to a secularized Minister, who made thee a Judge, or a civil Magistrate? so it
may be said, to a Ministerialized civil person, who made thee a dispenser of
the Word and Sacraments?

7. We have clear and convincing examples in the new Testament, that the
Sacraments were administered by public Ministers, called and appointed
thereunto, as Baptism by John, ( Ioh: 1. 33. he has sent me to baptize) and
frequently by the Apostles in the story of the Acts. The Lords supper
administered by Christ himself, (whose example in things imitable we are bidden
follow, who also himself then commanded (...), this do). And by the Apostle
Paul, Acts 20. 7, 11. so the breaking of bread is joined with the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, Acts 2. 42. Ministers being also called the stewards
and dispensers of the mysteries of God, where of before: So that a lawful
Minister may in faith administer, and the receavers receave from him in faith
the Sacraments, having Scripture warrands for so doing. But there is neither
any commission from Christ, to such as are no Church officers, to administer
the Sacraments: Nor can there any clear example be found in the new Testament,
of administering either the one Sacrament or the other, by any person who can
be proved, not to have been a Minister lawfully called and ordained. Therefore
such persons cannot in faith administer, nor others in faith receave from them,
either Baptism or the Lords supper.

8. That one Text, Ephesians: 4. 11. 12, 13. is enough to put to silence these
gainsayers. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ, till we
all come, etc. Is not the administration of the Sacraments a part of the
perfecting of the Saints, of the work of the Ministry, of the edifying of the
body of Christ? And are we not told that this shall continue till the whole
number of the Elect be fulfilled? And whom has Christ given here to his Church
for this work? Has he given any other but Pastors and Teachers (setting aside
the extraordinary officers) and who are the Pastors and Teachers appointed
hereunto? All, or whosoever will? Nay not all, but some, says the Text.

CHAP. VII.
Of Prophets and Evangelists, in what sense their Work and Vocation might be
called extraordinary; and in what sense ordinary.

THis Question appears to be very perplexed and thornie, yet I am led upon it
both by the contraversies of the times, concerning the necessity of Mission and
Ordination unto all Ministers of holy things, and likewise by occasion of that
which is maintained by some men of Learning that there are still or may be
Evangelists in the Church. Calvin holds indeed that in that age of his, God
raised up Evangelists to rescue the Church from Popery Instit lib. 4. cap. 3.
4. and Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy, lib. 5. Sect: 78. tells us out
of Eusebius eccles: hist: lib. 3. cap: 34. that in Trajans days many of the
Apostles Disciples and Scholars who were then alive, sold their possessions,
which they gave to the poor, and betaking themselves to travel, undertook the
labor of Evangelists, that is, they painfully preached Christ, and delivered
to them who as yet never heard the doctrine of Faith. Concerning Prophets, I
have before showed out of Iustine Martyr dial: cum Tryph: Iud. That in his
days there were still some in the Church, who had an extraordinary gift of
prophecy, and such there have been also in other places, and at other times.
Of which there might be diverse instances given, I shall here speak somewhat,
first of the work of Prophets and Evangelists.

Their Work and Administration, I conceave to be partly ordinary, partly
extraordinary. Ordinary, because the higher degrees. Ephesians. 4. 11. are
comprehensive of the lower, not contrariwise, a Pastor does the work of a
Teacher, an Evangelist does the work of a Pastor and Teacher, a Prophet does
the work of an Evangelist, Pastor and Teacher, an Apostle the work of all
those, which I have also before touched, following Chrysostom, and Mr. Bayne.
Prophets and Evangelists edify the Church by preaching as well as ordinary
Pastors, 1 Cor. 14. 3. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 2. 5. From which Scriptures
and others of that sort, as Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Some have collected that
Evangelists had a fixed charge in some cer^aine Church, which they attended and
took the oversight thereof for the work of the Ministry als often, and als
long as other pressing and public occasions of the Church could permit. See
Zeperus de polit: eccl: lib: 2. cap: 1. Aret: probl: Theol: loc: 62.

I say again the work of Prophets and Evangelists was extraordinary, for the
distinguishing or characteristicall property of a Prophet, i. e. the outmost
he could do, which the ordinary officers could not do, nor any other, but an
Apostle, is the opening of great secrets or foreshewing things to come, by the
special and extraordinary inspiration of the holy Ghost. Their very name
intimates so much for (...) and (...) come from (...) I foretell. According to
which sense of the word, all these were called Prophets of old, who foretold
things to come, as Magitians, Astrologians, Prognosticators, Nativitie or
figure-casters, etc. See Olivarius de Prophetia page: 9. 10. The Priests and
Interpreters of the Oracles were also called Prophets, and the Apostle Tit: 1.
12. calls Epimenides a Prophet of the Cretians, qui quasi praesenserit futura,
says Erasmus. As likewise says he, because that book of Epimenides out of
which that verse is cited has its title (...) de oraculis. But in the Church
notion of the word which the Fathers took from Scripture: Prophecy is a
prediction of things to come from a special inspiration of the holy Ghost.

But what is the distinguishing work and characteristicall property of an
Evangelist, i. e. that which an ordinary Pastor and Teacher might not do, and
which none else could do but an Apostle or a Prophet? That I may speak to this
more clearly, it is to be remembered, that the word Evangelist is not here taken
in that restricted vulgar sense, for a penman of the holy Ghost writing
Gospel; for in that sense there were but four Evangelists, and two of them
Apostles. But this is not the Scripture notion of the word, which tells us that
Philip and Timothy were Evangelists, Act. 21. 8. 2 Timothy 4. 5. And that Christ
has given Evangelists to his Church for the work of the Ministry. Ephesians. 4. 11,
12. Now if we take the word as the Scripture does, the proper work of an
Evangelist i. e. that which none but an Evangelist as an Evangelist, or he who
was more then an Evangelist could do, I conceave to stand in two things: the
first is, to lay foundations of Churches, and to preach Christ to an
unbelieving people, who have not yet recieved the Gospel, or at least who have
not the true Doctrine of Christ among them. So Philip the Evangelist preached
Christ to the city of Samaria, and baptized them before any of the Apostles
came unto them. Act. 8. 5. 12. And if the 70 Disciples Luk 10 were Evangelists
(as many think, and Calvin Instit: lib: 4. cap: 3. 4. thinks it probable) their
proper work as Evangelists, was to preach the Gospel to those cities which had
not received it. Their second work is a traveling and negotiating as Messengers
and Agents upon extraordinary occasions, and special emergencies which is often
times between one Church and another, and so distinct from the first which is a
traveling among them that are yet without. Of this second there are diverse
examples in Scripture, as 2 Cor. 8. 23. Phil: 2. 19. 25. 2 Timothy: 4. 9. Tit: 3 12
Act: 15 22 25. In this last example, although some are of opinion that Silas
was of Jerusalem, and had an ordinary Ministerial function there, yet the best
writers do commonly reckon Silas among the Evangelists, and I do not doubt but
as he was a Prophet, Act. 15. 32. so also an Evangelist, which may appear by
his traveling through many places, in the work of preaching the Gospel,
sometimes with Paul, as his fellow labourer and helper: Act 16 19 etc. 17. 4.
10. sometimes with Timothy, Act: 17. 14. 15. and 18 15.

Now when I call these works and administrations of Prophets and Evangelists
extraordinary, my meaning is not, that they are altogether and every way
extraordinary even as Apostleship. For I dare not say that since the days of
the Apostles there has never been, or that to the end of the world there shall
never be any raised up by God with such gifts, and for such administrations, as
I have now described to be proper to Prophets and Evangelists, i. e: the fore
telling of things to come, the traveling among Unbelievers to convert them by
the preaching of the Gospel, and between one Church and another, upon
extraordinary errands. But I call the work of Prophets and Evangelists
extraordinary in Calvin's sense (expressed by him in the place before cited) i.
e. it is not ordinary like that of Pastors and Teachers, which has place
constantly in the best constituted and settled Churches. Shortly, I take the
word Extraordinary here, not for that which ceased with the first age of the
Christian Church, but for that which is not, neither needs to be ordinary.
And so much of their work:

As for the vocation of Prophets and Evangelists, 1. I cannot pass without an
animadversion, a passage in Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical policy. lib: 5 sect:
78. where he will not have the Prophets mentioned, 1 Cor. 12 28. to be reckoned
with those whom he calls (after the then common idiome) the Clergy, because
no man's gifts or qualities can make him a Minister of holy things, unless
Ordination do give him power; and we no where find Prophets to have been made
by Ordination. If we shall take the word Prophets so largely as to comprehend
all who have any gift of Prophecy, and so Prophetesses also, I shall not
contend against that which he says, but if we shall understand that the
Apostle in that place does enumerat not only diversities of Gifts, but
diversities of Administrations, which God has appointed in the Church (and
this may easily appear by comparing v. 28. with v. 4. 5.) and so take
prophecy for an Administration or Service in the Church als well as a Gift;
surely it was not without a Mission or Vocation thereunto. For as they were
extraordinary Ministers, so they had an extraordinary Mission or Ordination als
well as the Apostles, Luke 11. 49. Christ says, I will send them Prophets and
Apostles, and 1 Cor: 12 28. God has set or appointed Prophets in the Church.
Yea as their work was partly ordinary and common to Pastors and Teachers, so a
Prophet was examined and allowed by an Assembly of Prophets, as well as an
Elder by an Assembly of Elders, which I gather from 1 Cor: 14 32. And the
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Touching the Vocation of an Evangelist, the Author of the Queries concerning
Ordination, quest. 19. to elude our argument for the standing ordinance of
Christ, for Ordination of Ministers drawn from 1 Timothy 4. 14. answers among
other things, that Timothy being an Evangelist, and Evangelists being (by
common consent) extraordinary by Calling, he had no need to pass through the
common door of Ordination. The extraordinarinesse of Evangelists is not so
much without controversy, as he would bear his reader in hand, as may appear
by what I have but now said: Neither can he prove that at that time, when the
Presbytery laid hands on Timothy, he was even then an Evangelist or more then a
Presbyter. However this I will say, that as the work, so also the Vocation of
Evangelists, was partly extraordinary and partly ordinary, and as there may be
still occasion for some of their extraordinary work, so there ought to be a
special Mission and Vocation thereunto, not only inwardly from the Spirit of
Gods stirring up unto and en^bling for the work, but outwardly also and orderly
in the Church The 70 Disciples were ordained by Christ himself, Luke 10. 1. The
Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two. An Angel of the
Lord spoke unto Philip and called him from one place to another, Acts 8. 26.
The Apostle Paul sent Epaphroditus and resolved to send Timothy to the Church
of the Philippians, Phil: 2. 25. 28. These are examples of extraordinary
Mission, such I mean as ceased with that age, none being now immediately sent by
Christ or his Apostles. But there are other examples of a Mission or Calling to
somewhat of the proper work of Evangelists, which are not to be restricted to
that age only; for they who were Agents and did travel and negotiat in the
great and special affairs of the Church, had a special delegation and
orderly call thereunto. So I understand that of the Messengers of the Churches,
2 Cor: 8. 23. And Epaphroditus being sent from the Church of Philippians to
Paul, is called there Apostle or Messenger. Phil* 2. 25. So Judas and Silas who
went out for the setlement of the distracted Churches, had a special
commission and delegation thereunto from the Synod of the Apostles and Elders.
It Is therefore most agreeable to the Primitive pattern, that where Synods or at
least Classes may be had, and are not by persecution scattered or hindered to
meet, such as undertake either to go and preach the Gospel to Infidels,
Papists, Turks or the like, or go about any negotiation abroad in any common
bussines of the Church ought to be approved, and authorized by a national
Synod, or (when that cannot be had, and if there be withal great danger in the
delay) by a provincial Synod, or at least, (where this cannot he had) by a
Classis.

CHAP. VIII.
That the primitive Apostolical pattern holds forth unto us for our
imitation, a Presbytery. i. e. an Assembly of Elders, having power of
Ordination, with laying on of hands.

THis I gather from 1. Tim: 4. 14. neglect not the gift that is in thee, which
was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, I have already evinced from this Text, the necessity of
Ordination. Let us now see, whether it does not also show us the right hands,
unto which Christ has committed this power. It is a Text most miserably
darkened and obscured by controversall Glosses, put upon it by Popish and
Prelaticall writers: Some would have (...) here to be a company of Bishops,
who were both Elders, and more then Elders as they hold. This Interpretation
had so little probability of reason to strengthen it, that it was abandoned by
some of the ablest friends of Episcopacy; Camero: praelect: in Mat: 18. 17. Dr.
Forbesse Irenic: lib. 2. cap: 11. page: 161. And why should we understand by
Presbytery, a company of Bishops, when it is yielded even by writers of that
side, that in these Cities where the Apostles planted the Gospel, there was
Collegium Presbyterorum, a College or company of Presbyters. So Mr. Thorndike,
of the government of Churches, cap. 3. The author of the History of Episcopacy,
part: 2. page: 28. etc. Both of them in this following Hooker. It was also
acknowledged by them, that this College of Presbyters did together with the
Apostles lay on hands in Ordination, thereby contributing their blessing and
assisting with their prayers, Whence (as was alleged) came the custom of the
Presbyters, their laying on of hands in the Ordination, together with the
Bishop, conc: Carthag: 4. can: 3. so that even themselves say as much as may
make us understand by (...) in this Text, Concessus Presbyterorum as Camero
calls it. The footsteps of Ordination by Presbyteries might be seen, not only
in that Canon of Carthage, but in the Canon law it self, which appoints the
same thing, Did: 23. cap: 8. Both Ambrose in Ephesians: 4. and Augustine in
quaest: ex utroque Test* 4. 101. bear witness that Presbyters did ordain in
Egypt, when a Bishop was not present, Dr. Forbesse Irenie: lib: 2. page 177.
cites out of Panormitan, Olim Presbyteri in communi regebant Ecclesiam and
ordinabant sacerdotes.

There is another Gloss which the Erastians (who love not the name of
Presbytery, with any power at all jure divino) are glad to take hold off. It Is
that which Bilson, Stutlivius and other Episcopal writers made use of,
distrusting (as it should seem) that other Interpretation last mentioned: And
they had it from Bellarmine, and some Popish expositors. See Gorranus upon the
place: I confess it was also one of Calvin's few (for they were but very few)
mistakes, and it is diligently caught at by those who set at naught Calvin's
judgment in other things. But quandoque dormitat Homerus.

I think it worth the while to examine this Gloss. And I shall offer these
reasons following, to make it appear that (...) is not here the office of an
Elder, but the Assembly of Elders, commonly called the Presbytery. 1. The word
(...) is no where used by the holy Ghost, for the office it self, or degree of
an Elder: But it is used in two other places in the new Testament, for an
Assembly or Counsel of Elders, Luke 22. 66. Acts 22. 5. in which places Arias
Montanus* rendereth it by Senatus. Beza in the first of these places, retains
the word Presbyterium. In the other place, both his version and the Tigurine
has totus Seniorum ordo. But the old English translation, reads the company
of Elders. However both places are clearly meaned of the company of Elders, not
of the office it self, for the office of Elders could not meet together, as in
that place of Luke: Neither could the office of Elders bear witness to Paul,
as in that place of the Acts. Mr. Seldom in his upon Ebraica, lib: 1. cap: 15.
understands the word (...) in both these places to be used by Luke, for the
great Sanhedrin, the highest Assembly of Elders. Now then, why shall we not
understand the same word, 1 Timothy: 4. 14. to be the Assembly, not the office it
self of Elders. And I shall ask those who think the Apostle means the office
of Elders, upon what imaginable ground can they conceave that this is the
Apostles meaning, or how come they to divine this thing, or how could the
Apostles words be understood in that sense? The holy Gh^st never uses the word
in that sense. The Septuagint never use the word in that sense, for they use it
not at all. No Greek Author that lived before Paul, can be found to have used
the word in that sense, for the word it self is not found in heathen writers. I
find only one place where the word (...) is conceaved to be used for the
office of an Elder. And that is in the Apocrypha story of Susanna verse: 50. But
H: Stephanus, tom: 3. page: 545. makes a doubt whether it should not be written
in that signification (...), and suppose it be to be read there (...), yet that
Geek is not so old as Paul, for it is ascribed to Theodotio, as Mr. Seldon
tells us in that place last cited out of him. Yea, the Jesuits of the English
College of Doway in their Bible acknowledge, that this story is translated out
of Theodotions edition, and this is the oldest Original which they can allege
for it. And besides this it may be understood of the Assembly of Elders, when
the Elders say to Daniel, (...), which those Jesuits of Doway render thus,
because God has given thee the honor of old age. Others the honor of an
Elder, or an ancient. But I know no reason why the word may not here signify
there Assembly of Elders. God has given thee the Assembly of Elders, that is,
God has given thee thy petition, and thy desire, which was the meeting again
of the Assembly of Elders, as is plain by the verses preceding: Even as God
gave to his praying children this present Parliament,

2. If the Apostle had meant to express the dignity or degree of an Elder, he
would rather have used the word (...) or (...), which Greek writers use pro
senum honor vel dignitate, then (...), which is not used in that sense.

3. And if he had meant to stir up Timothy from the honor or dignity of that
office and degree, which was conferred upon him he had rather mentioned the
degree of an Evangelist, than of an Elder. Even as he says to him else where,
do the work of an Evangelist.

4. The very Popish Interpreters are forced to confess that the Apostle means
an Assembly of Elders, Plurium Presbyterorum, says Mariana: caetus
Presbyterorum, says Salmeron* Esthius upon the place notes, that imposition
of hands, was a pluribus adhibita, according to that Canon of Carthage. Hugo
Cardinalis, notes here the great honor of Presbyters, that three of them at
least, laid on hands in Ordination.

Wherefore I can see no sense which can agree to the Text, but that which is
the ordinary and known sense of the word; (...), that is an Assembly of Elders.
In which sense it is also frequently used by ancient writers, whereof, he that
will, may read good store of examples in D. Blondelli Apollogia pro sententia
Hieronymi. page: 89 90.

It has been objected by some, that 1 Timothy: 4. 14. holds forth no president for
ordinary Presbyteries, because 1. Here is mention of prophecy which was an
extraordinary thing, 2. Timothy, was ordained by the laying on of the Apostle
Paul his hands, 2. Tim: 1. 6. Lastly Timothy was an Evangelist, and how could a
Presbyter ordain an Evangelist?

Answ: 1. Those very things which are objected, to depresse the Presbytery,
do put upon it so much the more abundant honor. Although prophesies had gone
before concerning Timothy, and some extraordinar predictions, 1 Timothy: 1. 18.
Although likewise the Apostle Paul himself is supposed to have been present, and
to have laid on hands at the sametime, yet neither the extraordinary
prophesies, nor the laying on of the hands of an Apostle, did swallow up, take
away or hinder the ordinary power and right of the Presbytery, to be acted and
put forth in the ordaining of Timothy, or did exempt Timothy from entering by
that ordinary door, and passage, through those ordinary hands of the
Presbytery.

2. It Is not certain, that either the prophetical predictions concerning
Timothy, (which the Apostle calls (...), praegress as, or quae praecesserunt)
or the laying on of Paul's hands, was at the same time with the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery. But whether these things were done together, or at
several times, it is very observable, that to these the Apostle prefixeth (...)
by, but to the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, (...) with, 1 Timothy: 1.
6. that thou stir up the gift which is in thee, by the putting on of my
hands. 1 Timothy: 4. 14. the gift which was given thee by prophecy: then he adds
with (not by) the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: By this change of
the phrase on purpose intimating, that the prophecy and laying on of Paul's
hands, were things extraordinary, because by these the gift, aptitude, and
ability of parts, or the (...) was given to Timothy, but the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, was according to the ordinary rule then and there
settled, being a rite used in Ordination, so that Timothy had not by the act of
the Presbytery, any gift or (...), but the (...) or a potestative,
authoritative Ministerial Mission (for to what other use or end could there
be a laying on of the hands of the Presbytery?) Therefore Athanasius in
apologia ad Imper: Constantium citing this Text, and applying it to ordinary
Ministers, he lives out that part concerning prophecy, and the rest of the
Text he applies thus, (...). The Apostle Paul has commanded each one of us in
his disciple, saying, neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given
unto thee with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.

3. If it be said that the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery was only
to show their consent, and joining in prayer, and hearty wishes with the
Apostle for Timothy: The answer is ready; let these who allege this show us
from Scripture, where laying on of hands was ever used, for a bare testimony of
consent, or of joint prayers and wishes. I know imposition of hands has been
used in prayers, of blessing, or benediction by such as had a special power,
authority and privilege, as Gen: 48. Jacob when he blessed the sons of
Joseph, laid his hands upon them, but we read not that Joseph, or any other,
whose heart joined in prayer and hearty wishes for them, did therefore lay on
hands together with Jacob, Mat. 19. 15. Mark: 10. 16. When Christ blessed the
little children, he laid his hands upon them: But will any man imagine, that
they who brought the children to be blessed by him, did together with him lay
their hands upon them? And generally if we consider the use of laying on hands
in Scripture, we must conclude that the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, was an authoritative act, not a testimony of consenting and joining
only.

4. It Is thought by some Episcopal writers, that Timothy was twice ordained,
first to be a Presbyter, and after to be a Bishop. See the history of
Episcopacy, page, 117. I should rather say, peradventure he was first ordained a
Presbyter, by the Presbytery. And after ordained an Evangelist by the Apostle
Paul. However the Presbyteries act needs to be extended no further, but to the
ordaining him a Presbyter, what was more, ( viz. Ordination to the office of an
Evangelist,) might proceed from the Apostle: I mean, suppose he was ordained
once, both Presbyter and Evangelist, and that both the Apostle, and Presbyter
did lay on their hands together, in this mixed action, we may very well
distinguish what was ordinary, what was extraordinary, ascribing that to the
Presbytery, this to the Apostle.

5. And if the Presbytery had ordained, and sent forth Timothy as an
Evangelist, what inconsistency, or absurdity had been in it? You will object
the less is blessed of the greater, and not the greater of the less, Heb: 7.
7. I answer, although Timothy as an Evangelist, was greater then a single
Presbyter, yet that proves not, that he was (even in that capacity,) greater
then the whole presbytery, one of the house of Lords, is greater then one of
the house of Commons, but he is not therefore greater then the house of
Commons. When a King and his people is compared together, we use to say, that
he is major singulis, minor universis. Moreover, he that blesses, is not every
way greater then he who is blessed, but he is greater qua talis, in so far as
he blesses. And why might not the Presbytery be greater then an Evangelist,
not simply and absolutely, but in so far as they blessed and ordained him. So
Ananias put his hands upon Paul, Acts 9. 17. and afterward certain Prophets
and Teachers at Anti^ch laid hands on him, and Barnabas, Acts 13. 1, 3. And in
so far there was a majority and preeminence in those who laid on their hands
though simply and absolutely they were the greater, on whom the hands were laid.

This takes off some of the chief exceptions brought by the Author of the
Queries concerning Ordination, quest: 19. which done, his other exceptions are
the more easily mastered. He himself passes from one of them, as not being
very considerable, viz. that Presbytery there is used to signify not a
company of Elders, but the Ordinance or office it self. Of which before. There
are but two other answers of his. One is that Timothy being an Evangelist had
no need to pass through the common door of Ordination. Of which hereafter.

The other is a conjecture of his own, which if it be a light, I confess it is
a new light. It seems more probable (says he) be far that when Paul laid
his hands on ^imothy, 2 Timothy: 1. 6. there were some other Apostles, or Apostles
fellows that joined with him in that action. And that Apostles should be
called Presb^ters or Elders, and a company of them a Presbytery or Eldership,
is an expression consonant to other Scriptures where the appellation of Elder
is attributed unto them, 1 Pet: 5 1. 2. Epist: Ioh: 1. etc. 3 Epist: 1. Ans: 1
In the last two Scriptures which he cites, the word Elder is a name of age not
of office, and we are to understand, (...) in those places to be only a degree
more then (...): Epist, to Philemon. v. 9. Paul the aged, So John the elder. i.
e. now full of years and very old. For which reason also some have noted that
frequently in his first Epistle he uses this compellation, my li^le children.
2. Peter indeed speaks of himself as one of the Elders by office, wherein we
ought rath^r to observe his humility, condescension, and prudent insinuation,
then make any such use of it as this Querist does. It had been more for his
purpose if another had said it of Peter, and not he of himself. For as
O^cumenius upon the place te^s us, Peter calls himself so for modesties cause,
and the better to enforce the following exhortation, that the Elders should not
lift up themselves above others, as he did not lift up himself above them. Sure
Apostles and Elders were ordinarily distinguishing names, as it is manifest from
Act. 15. 2. 4. 6. 22: 23. Why then would the Querist leave the ordinary
Scripture notion of the word, Elder, and ground his own interpretation of the
word Presbytery, upon Peter's calling himself an Elder: he might als well
argue, that the believing Romans who are called the servants of God, Rom: 6.
22. or these believing Strangers who have the same name, 1 Pet: 2. 16. were
Apostles, and that we are to understand by the servants of God in these Texts,
Apostles, because Tit: 1. 1. The Apostle Paul calls himself a servant of God.
By the like Logic he may argue that the ordaining of Elders, Act: 14. 23. Tit:
1 5. is meant of ordaining Apostles, because the Scripture calls the Apostles
Elders. 3. Peter calls not himself (...), an Elder, but (...). The sense of
the word is explained two ways, both are mentioned by H. Stephanus in These:
ling: Gr: Tom: 3, page: 545. and both of them make against that which this
Querist drives at. First the sense is conceived to be this, qui sum and ipse
Presbyter: so the Tigurine, who am also an Elder so the English ^ranslators.
Now the Text running thus, The Elders who are among you I exhort, who am also
an Elder, i. e. I who give this exhortation unto you Elders, as I am an
Apostle, so my Apostleship does not exclude me from being one of you, for I am
also an Elder: Thus (I say) this very Text makes against the Querist, for even
here we see that they who were commonly called Elders, were not Apostles. But
there is a second sense, which maks yet more against the Querist: For H.
Stephanus expresses the sense of (...) thus, qu^ and ipse e seniorum and
Presbyterorum Collegio est, he who is of the Assembly or College of Elders
commonly called the Presbytery: Hierome did happily intend the same thing by
the word Compresbyter. And likewise Beza by his rendering ego una Presbyter, i.
e. I who am together with you a Presbyter, or you and I being Presbyters all of
us together. And so the Text may be red thus, The Elders who are among you I
exhort, who am also of your Presbyteries. There were Presbyteries among them,
or Assemblies of Elders properly so called, and of these Presbyteries Peter was
also a member, and when he was present in any of the Presbyteries in Pontus,
Gallacia, Capadocia, Asia, and ^ythinia, he joined and acted as an Elder, and
as in a Presbytery. This sense I prefer to the other. For if he had intended
no more but to tell them that he also was an Elder, I should think he would have
chosen another and plainer expression as (...). The Elders who are among you I
exhort, for I also am an Elder. or thus, (...) The Elders who are among you I
exhort, as being my self also an Elder. Or thus, (...); The Elders who are
among you I exhort, I my self also being an Elder. But now when he purposely
chooses the word (...), he intimates somewhat more then that he was an Elder.
viz: that he was Presbyterated together with them, as being also of their
Presbyteries, or Assemblies of Elders. Words of the like composition in the
Greek tongue, may help to give us light in this particular, (...), which Pollux
uses for contubernalis, is not simply, he who is also a guest, or who is also
a companion but he who is a guest in the same Inn, or a chamber fellow; (...)
is not any who ever he be, that does also lodge, live, and eat, but he who
lives together and eats together: (...), or (...), may not be rendered, he
who is also an Ambassador, but he who is a colleague in the same Embassy,
^ollega in legatione. (...) is not simply he who also is a witness (for then he
who is a thousand miles off being witness in another cause is (...)) but he who
bears witness together in the same thing, or he who joyneth in the same
testimony, as Rom: 8 16. Pollux has also, (...), qui est ejus de^ decuriae,
not he who is also of a band or company, but he who is of the same band or
company, (...), is not he who is also a Disciple, (for then a Scholar among
our Antipodes is (...)) but a condisciple in the same school. And if we speak
properly we will not call every Minister of holy things, (...), Symmista, but
he who is our colleague, or associat or a Minister of our own company. So (...)
H. Stephanus well explaineth complures simul collecti, non sigillarim, (...) is
not used for a counsel which is also taken, but for a counsel taken jointly or
together. Many like instances might be given both in the Greek, (...), or
(...), or (...), and such like; and likewise in the Latin, compotator,
compransor, combennones, commolitor, commurmuratio, compatior, competitor,
compingo, comp^icatio, comploratio, compossessor, compromitto, comprovincialis,
concivis, concriminatio, concolor condiscipulus, confabulatio, confaederatio,
congener, congerminalis, congenitus, c^ngerminasco, conjubilatio, conjurati,
connutritus, conservus, consedeo, consocer, consorbio, conterraneus,
contemporaneus, contribulis, convelificor, converberatus, conviv^, convictus,
and I know not how many more of that kind, in which words the preposition
cannot be rendered by also, but by together in the same thing jointly or of the
same: And now I hope it may appear that the Scripture, objected by the Querist
does not hurt but help the Presbytery 4. Suppose the Presbytery, 1 Timothy: 4. 14.
to be an Assembly of Apostles, as the Querist would have it, what shall he
gain thereby? For the name Presbytery being purposely chosen in this Text,
which mentions laying on of hands in Ordination, will prove that the Apostles
did these as Elders, and as an act of one Assembly of Elders, not as any thing
peculiar to the Apostles. For no rational man will imagine, that the holy
Ghost intending to express some extraordinary thing, which the Apostles did as
Apostles, and which belongs not to ordinary Elders, would in that very thing
purposely call them (...) or an Assembly of Elders. 5. That (...) here is not
an Assembly of Apostles, but of Elders who were not Apostles may appear plainly
by comparing the Text now in controversy with 2 Timothy: 1. 6. the gift of God
which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. If an Assembly of Apostles had
laid hands on Timothy, and so joined in that action with Paul, as the Querist
supposes, Paul had not thus distinguished his laying on of hands, from that of
his fellow Apostles, as if the gifts of the holy Ghost had been given to
Timothy only by the laying of his hands, and not by, but with the laying on of
the hands of his fellow Apostles* Of this difference of the phrase in the one
Text and in the other, I have spoken before, which indeed fitly expresses the
difference betwixt the laying of Paul's hands, and the laying on of the Elders
hands, but there could be no such difference among the Apostles themselves, or
Apostles fellows.

But I have not yet done with the vindication and clearing of this Text, which
holds forth a president for ordination by a Presbytery. It may be further
objected, 1. If this Text must be understood of Ordination by a Presbytery,
then the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery is necessary to Ordination;
and then, what shall become of th^se who were not ordained by a Pressbytery;
and what shall also become of that which so many protestant writers have
pleaded against the Popish Sacrament of Orders: viz. that the rite or sign in
Ordination, i.e. imposition of hands, is not instituted or commanded by Christ
or his Apostles?

To the first I answer, 1. although I hold the Imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery to be no Sacrament, nor efficacious and operative for giving of the
holy Ghost, as the laying on of the Apostles hands was: nor, 2. necessary to
Ordination, necessitate medii vel finis, as if Ordination were void and no
Ordination without it, or as if they who were not ordained with the laying on
of the hands of the Presbytery, were therefore ^o be thought unordained, or
unministeriated: Although likewise 3. I do not hold the laying on of hands to
be the substantial part or act of Ordination (which I have before prooved to
be essential to the calling of a Minister) but only the rituall part in
Ordination. And although, 4. I hold the laying on of hands to be such a rite,
whereunto we ought to be very sparing to ascribe mysterious significations,
wherein some have gone too far, and taken too much liberty, yet I hold (with
the generality of prot^stant writers, and with the best refo^med Churches) that
the laying on of hands is to be still retained in Ordination. I hold also that
this laying on of hands is an Ordinance of the new Testament (and so do our
dissenting Brethren of the Independent way hold also) and that it is necessary
by the necessity of precept, and Institution, and in point of duty. For
although there is no certain precept extant, concerning laying on of hands, yet
because we see the Apostles did always use it, their so ac^urat observing of
it ought to be unto us in stead of a Precept, ^aith Calvin Instit. lib: 4. cap:
31, 6. For the Examples of the Apostles or Apostolic Churches, in approved
things which have a standing reas^n, are binding, and in stead of Institutions.
The laying on of the hands of the Apostles in so far as the holy Ghost was
given thereby, was extraordinary, and ceased with themselves, yet in so far as
the Apostles, yea and the Presbytery too, laid on hands in their ordaining of
Ministers, there is a standing reason why we should do in like manner: the
laying on of hands being a rite properly belonging to the praying over these
whom we bless in the name of the Lord, with an authoritative benediction, as
is manifest by these examples of laying on of hands, in Jacobs blessing of
Ephraim and Manasseh. Gen: 48. and in Christ's blessing and praying over the
little Children, Mat: 19. 15. Mark: 10 16. Looking thus upon laying on of
hands; 1. as a rite in blessing and prayer over; 2. as a rite for publik
designation and so emne setting apart of such a person; and if you will, 3. as
a rite of giving up, dedicating and offering unto the Lord, of which use of
laying on hands there are diverse examples in the Books of Moses: In these
respects and under these considerations we use laying on of hands in
Ordination, and ought to do so in regard of the Primitive pattern. Wallaeus
Tom: 1. page 473. thinks that the negative precept. 1. Tim: 5. 22. lay hands
suddenly ^n no man, does also contain an affirmative, to lay hands upon such
as are worthy and approved.

CHAP. IX.
What is meant in Scripture by the word Heresies, and how we are to understand,
that there must be Heresies, for making manifest the the godly parti^ or these
that are approved. 1 Cor: 11. 19.

FOr there must be also Heresies among you, says the Apostle, that they which
are approved may be made manifest among you, or as others read, that they which
are approved among you may be manifest.

By Heresies here some understand no more but divisions and Sects, and conceave
that Heresies in point of opinion or doctrine, are not here meant. So
Chrysostom, Erasmus and others. If so, then the very divisions and sects, will
make a discovery who are approved, who not, before it come to Heretical
opinions, i. e. Sectaries are not approved, and these who are indeed approved,
are none of theirs, but keep themselves unspotted, and free from them. So Tit.
3. 10. (...) is rendered in the Tigurin Bible, Sectarum authorem, and in the
margin f^ctiosum, i. e. a man that is an author of sects (or factions) after
the first and second admonition, reject, and 1 Cor: 11 19. they read, opportet
enim and Sectas in vobis esse. Sometimes the word, (...) is taken in the new
Testament for a sect, yet (to note that by the way) only for such a sect, as
either was indeed, or was esteemed to be of some heretical opinion, as Act. 5.
17. and 15. 5. and 24. 5. and 26. 5. and 28. 22. The Apostle has the word
(...), twice in his Epistles, and in both places he makes some difference, and
distinction between heresies, and divisions, or strifes and variance, 1 Cor:
11. 18, 19. Gal: 5. 20. For every division, strife, or variance, is not
Heresy. Therefore in the Text which I now speak to, I understand Heresy to be
some what more then division. The Arabic 1 Cor: 14. 2. that is in the Greek,
and our Translations, 1 Cor: 11. 19. repeateth the word Schisms out of the
precedent verse: and adds moreover the word Heresies, reading (...); for there
most arise Schisms and Heresies among you, that these of you who are godly may
be known: it seems that they who understand, only divisions to be meant by the
word Heresies, do not observe the rising of the Apostles speech, for after he
has spoken of their (...), or Schismatical divisions contrary to the rule of
love; Tertull. de praescript. advers: haeret. Cum ideo credidisse se dicat
(Apostolus) de Schismalibus and dissensionibus quia scilicet etiam haereses
op^orteret esse. Ostendit enim gravioris mali respectu, de levioribus se facile
credidisse.
he adds (...), etc. For there must be also Heresies among you. I partly
believe it, says he, that there are divisions among you, for there must be,
not only Schisms, but worse then that, there must be Heresies also! If you
ask now, what is Heresy? I shall without any implicit following of Writers,
ground my answer on Scripture it self. And I answer first negativelie, then
positively. Negatively,

1. Heresy is neither to be so far taken at large, as to be extended to
every error, which may be confuted by Scripture, although happily such an error
be too tenaciously maintained. Nor yet is it to be so far restricted, as that
no error shall be accounted Heretical, but that which is destructive to some
fundamental Article of the Christian faith, if by a fundamental Article, you
understand such a truth without the knowledge and faith whereof, it is
impossible to get salvation. When Peter Martyr defines Heresy, he makes no
mention of a fundamental error, but of an error contrary to the Scriptures,
loc: com. class: 2. cap: 4. 50. So Calvin: Instit: lib: 4. cap: 2. 5.
understands all such to be Heretics, as make a breach in the Church by false
Doctrines. Walaeus, tom: 1. page: 57. says, Heretical Churches do either err
in the foundation, or only in some other things built upon the foundation.
When Peter speaks of such Heresies, as take away the very foundation, Jesus
Christ, he thinks it too little to call them simple Heresies, but he calls these
damnable Heresies. But if you understand by fundamental truths, all the chief
and substantial principles (I do not mean only the first Rudiments, or A, B,
C, of a Catechism, which we first of all put to new beginners, but I mean all
such truths as are commonly put in the confessions of faith, and in the more
full and large Catechismes of the reformed Churches, or all such truths, as all
and every one who live in a true Christian reformed Church, are commanded, and
required to learn and know, as they exspect in the ordinary dispensation of God
to be saved,) in this sense, I may yield that Heresy is always contrary to
some fundamental truth. It Is one thing to dispute of the absolute sovereign
power of God, and what are the truths, without the belief whereof it is
absolutely, and altogether impossible that one can be saved: Which question (I
doubt) is hardly determinable by Scripture, nor do I know what edification
there is in the canvassing of it* sure I am it is a question much abused. It Is
another thing to dispute what are these truths, which in a Church where the
Gospel is truly preached, all and every one, (come to years of knowledge and
discretion) and having means and occasions to learn, are bound to know, (and
according to the revealed will and ordinary dispensation of God) must learn,
as they desire or exspect to have a true fellowship with Christ in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, or to be accepted of God, and saved eternally:
2. We must not think that no man is a Heretic, but he who is consistorially or
judicially admonished, and thereafter continues pertinaciously in his error.
For where it is said Tit: 3. 10 A man that is an Heretic after the first and
second admonition, reject: It Is intimated that he is an Heretic before such
admonition. Positively, I concieve that these six things do concur to make a
Heresy. 1. It Is an error held by some Minister or member of a Church, I mean
either a true Church or an assembly pretending and professing to be a true
Church. For both Peter and Paul where they foretell that Heresies were to come,
2 Pet: 2. 1. 1 Cor: 11. 19. they add (...), among you, i.e. among you
Christians. So Act: 20. 30. also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things. Therefore the Scripture gives no^ the name of Hereti^ks to
these who are altogether without the visible Church, but it calls such by the
names of Heathens or unbel^evers, or they that are without, or the like. 2. It Is
an error volunntarlie and freely chosen, both in the first invention and
broaching of it, (which is proper to the Heresiarchs,) and in the maintaining
of it, or adhering to it, (which is common to all Heretics.) This I collect
from the very name which the Scripture gives to it for, (...), comes from
(...), I choose. Therefore we give not the name of Heretics to such Christians
as are compelled in time of persecution to profess such or such an error, which
peradventure were a formal* Heresy, if voluntarly and without compulsion
professed. They ought indeed to die, and to endure the greatest torments,
before they profess what they know to be an error: but this their sin is not
properly called Heresy, for an Heretic does freely and voluntarily hold that
which is his Tertul de praescrip: advers: haeret. Haereses dictae graeca voce
ex interpretatione electionis, quia quis sive ad instituendas siv ad
suscip^endas ^as utitur. Ideo and sibi ^amnatum dixit Haereticum: quia and in
quo damnatu^ sibi elegit
error. And in this respect and consideration, Tertullian thinks that an
Heretic is said to be (...), condemned of himself. Tit: 3. 10. because he has
of himself choosed that which does condemn him. The Apostle there has
commanded to reject an Heretic. If I reject him (might one say) then I loose
him, I destroy his soul. Nay (says the Apostle) his perdition is of himself,
for he has chosen his own ways, and his soul delights in his abominations.
This interpretation is much surer and safer, then to say that a Heretic is
called (...), or selfcondemned, because he goes against his own light, and
against the principles received and acknowledged by himself: Which sense is
accompanied with many dangerous consequences. 3. It Is such a choosing of error
as is accompanied with a rejecting of Truth. A Heretic puts light for
darkness, and darkness ^or light; good for evil, and evil for good, he
chooses e^ror as truth, and ref^seth truth as error, they that give heed to
seducing ^pirits and doctrines of Devils, do also depart from the faith, 1 Timothy
4. 1. resist the (...), 2 Timothy 3. 8, and turn away their ears from the truth, 2 Timothy: 4. 4. their course has a te^minus a quo als well as ad quem. 4 It Is an
error professed and maintained, and which ^y that means becomes a scandal and
snare to others. For although there may be Heresy (a^s well as other kinds of
sin^urking and hid in the thoughts, yet that belongs to Gods judgment only,
not to man's. The Heresies which are spoken of, 1 Cor: 11. ^9. are certainly
known and apparently discriminative; even among men. And Heretic^s are
scandalous persons to be avoided and rejected, Rom: 16. 17. Tit: 3. 10. which
could not be, except their errors were known. 5. It Is an error contradictory to
some chief and substantial^ truth grounded upon, or be necessary consequence
drawn from, the holy Scripture. There was never yet any Heretic in the
Christian world who contradicted that which is literally and syllabically in
Scripture. The most damnable Heretic will offer to subscribe to the Scripture
in stead of a Confession of Faith, who yet will not subscribe to all truths,
which necessarily follow from the words of Scripture. But I call not every
error Heresy which is contrary to any consequentiall truth, grounded upon
Scripture. As the Scr^pture reckons not all who sin, to be workers of
iniquity, so it reckons not all who err to be Heretics. Although there is
not any, either sin or error, in the own nature of it venial, yet every sin
is not a gross and heinous sin, and every error is not Heresy. Heresies are
mentioned as greater evils then Schisms. 1 Cor: 11. 18. 19. which could not
be so, if every error were an Heresy. 6. It Is an error factiously
maintained, with a renting of the Church, and drawing away of Disciples after
it. In which respect Augustine said, Errare potero, Haereti us non ero, I may
e^re, but I shall not be an Heretic. Heretics are deceivers and seducers who
endeavor to pervert others, and to overthrow their faith, 2 Timothy: 3, 13. Act.
20: 30. 2 Timothy 2. 17. 18. Rom: 16. 17, 18, 19. 2 Pet: 2. 2. All known and noted
Heretics are also Schismatics who make a rupture, and strengthen their own
party by drawing after them, or confirming unto them Disciples and followers
(in so much that (...), is often used for a Sect, as Act. 5, 17. and 15. 5. and
24. 5. and 26. 5.) For this cause, the Donatists were condemned, as Heretics,
without imputation of Heresy to Cyprian. And O strange turning about of
things! (says vincentius Lirinensis advers: haeret: cap: 11.) the Authors of
the same opinion are judged Catholics, but the followers Heretics. The Masters
are absolved, the Disciples are condemned. The writers of these books are the
Children of the Kingdom, but Hell shall receive the assertors or mantainers.
This last ingredient which is found in Heresy, is hinted by the Arabic
interpreter, 1 Cor: 11. 19. where he joyneth Schisms and Heresies as was noted
before. And indeed in the Original, the particle (...), and the rising of the
speech, sets forth Heresy as carrying schism with it in its bosom: I believe
says the Apostle in part, what I hear of your schisms, for there must be also
Heresies, i.e. both Schisms and somewhat more. Calvin Institut. lib: 4. cap:
2.. 5. makes the breaking of Church communion and the making of a rent, a thing
common both to Heretics, and Schismatics: for Heretics break one band of
Church communion which is consent in doctrine: Schismatics break another, which
is love, though sometimes they agree in the like faith.

From all which Scripturall observations we may make up a description of
Heresy, to this sense. Heresy is agrosse and dangerous error voluntarily
held, and factiously maintained by some person or persons within the visible
Church, in opposition to some chief or substantial truth or truths grounded
upon and drawn from the holy Scripture by necessary consequence.

But next, why says the Apostle that there must be Heresies? This is not a
simple or absolute necessity, but ex Hypothesi. I mean, not only upon
supposition of Satan's malice, and men's corruption, but upon supposition of
Gods eternal, and infallible foreknowledge: and not only so, but upon
supposition of the eternal decree of God, whereby he did decree to permit
Satan, and corrupt men, to introduce Heresies into the Church, purposing in
the most wise, and most holy counsel of his will, to disabuse (as I may so
say) his Church by these Heresies, that is to order and overruled them, for the
praise of his grace and mercy, to manifest such as are approved, and from the
glory of his justice, in sending strong delusion upon such as received not the
love of the truth, but had pleasure in unrig^teousnesse. These things being so,
i. e. Satan's malice, and men's corruption being such, and there being such a
foreknowledge; yea, such a decree in God, therefore it is, that there must be
Heresies, and so we a^e also to understand, Mat: 18. 17. it must needs be that
offenses come: These things I do but touch by the way.

That which I here aim at, is the good use which God in ^is most wise and
sovereign providence, can, and does make of Heresies: It Is, that they which
are approved, may be made manifest. Whereby (...), they which are approved, we
can understand nothing but such as are true and sincere Saints, approved and
accepted of God, or (as Bullinger on the place) vere pii, truly godly: In
which sense the same word is used, Rom: 16. 10. 2 Cor: 10. 18. 2 Timothy: 2. 15.
Ia^ 1. 12. The word is properly used of good money, or silver well refined,
(...). It Is transferred to Saints with special reference to their
mortification, or to the refyning of them from the dross of their corrup^ions,
and so notes such as walk in the spirit, and not in the flesh. The contrary
word is (...), Reprobate, rejectaneous, naughty, or to be cast away like the
dross of silver, 1 Cor: 9. 27. 2 Cor: 13. 5, 6. But how is it that by means,
or occasion of Heresies, the godly party is made manifest? Surely the meaning
of the Apostle is not, that the authors, and followers of Heresies are the
godly party, for he calls Heresy, a work of the flesh. Gal: 5 20. and will
have an Heretic to be rejected, as one who is of himself condemned, Tit: 3.
10. Therefore most certainly his meaning is that (...), they which are
approved, are known by this; as one of their characters, they hate, avoid, and
resist Heresies, and earnestly contend for the faith, they hold fast the truth
of Christ without wavering. And those who broach, or adhere unto Heresies, are
thereby known to be (...), unapproved, and such as are like reprobat silver.
Whosoever therefore sideth, or ingadgeth with Heresies, or Heretics; yea,
whoever stands not fast in the faith, does ipso facto declare himself to be
none of Paul's godly party. So contrary is the holy Ghosts language to the tone
of Sectaries in these day^s. Neither is it in this Scripture alone, but in
diverse other Scriptures, that the holy Ghost distinguishes those that are
approved of God, from such as turn away from the truth after false doctrines,
and believe seducing spirits, as well as from those who are of an ungodly life.
So Deuteronomy: 13. 3. when a false Prophet arose, and the sign or wonder came to
pass, what was Gods meaning in permitting these things? The Lord your God
proves you to know whether ye love the Lord your God, with all your heart, and
with all your soul. They therefore that hearkened to the false Prophet, even
when his sign or wonder came to pass, made themselves known thereby, that
they had not been lovers of God with all their heart. Again Matthew. 24* 24.
those that are elect, are not deceived by false Christ's, and the false
Prophets: and by the rule of contraries, they who are deceived by them, and go
in their error to the end, are not elect, but reprobat, Gal: 5. 20. 21.
Heresy is a work of the flesh, and is reckoned among these things which render
a person incapable of inheriting the Kingdom of God. They therefore who walk
in the spirit, and not in the flesh, and are made meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, are not only no Heretics, but resist and
oppose Heresy, as being a work of the flesh. Ioh. 8. 31. They who are Christ's
Discples indeed, continue in his word. They who continue not in his word, are
not his Disciples indeed, 1 Ioh: 2. 24. with ^. Epist. of John, verse: 9. They
who have fellowship with the Father and the Son, abide in the Doctrine of
Christ: They who abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, have no fellowship with
the Father and the Son, the like in diverse other Scriptures.

If therefore they must be Heresies even for this reason, to make more manifest
who are approved, who not: Then let no thoughts arise in our hearts, toward the
accusing of divine providence in this particular. Justin Martyr. Quaest, and
respons: ad orthod. quaest.

1. Answering this doubt: If God has taken away the Idolatries, superstitious,
and false religion of Heathens, and has also abolished the Jewish worship, why
has he suffered Heresies to enter into the Christian Church? He gives this
solution, that although Heresies come into the Church through men's negligence,
and flothfulnesse, (for while men slept, the enemy sowed the ^ares among the
wheat, Mat: 13. 25:) Yet the providence of God was no way slothful in the
business, for he foresaw, and foretold that Heresies should come, and has
given plain warning in his word concerning the same. He adds that the some
God who did destroy the Heathenish and the Jewi^h religion, will also destroy
Heresies, after he has suffered them for a time. Although we had no distinct
knowledge, what God intends to work out of Heresies, yet we ought not to
censure, but humbly, and reverently, to adore Gods most wise, and most holy,
(though secret and un^earchable) dispensations. If we should see somewhat
which is deadly poison among some drugges, which a skilled and approved
Physician is making use of, we must not rushly censure the Physician, for he
knows how to disabuse that which is in it self poysonable, and to make it one
of the ingredients in a most sovereign medicine. Or if we should come into the
shop of a curious Artificer, or I^geneer, and there see some ugly and ill
favored instruments, which we think can serve for no good but for evil, yet
it were foolishly done to censure the Artificer, who knows to make an
excellent good use of these things, though we know not. How much more foolish
and sinful is it, to suffer thoughts to rise in our hearts against the wisdom
and providence of God, even alth^ugh we know not what he intends to work out
of such things? We were most of all inexcusable to accuse his providence, now
when he has made known in his word to us, that by occasion of Heresies, he
will make manifest who are approved, who not. Wherefore (says Chryso^ome, de
diverse* etc. tom: loc: Ser: 21.) that no man might say, why has Christ
permitted this, Paul says, this permission shall not hurt thee, if thou art
one who are approved, for by this means thou shall be made more manifest. Yet
all this cannot excuse, either the Heretics, or Sectaries themselves, or these
who connive at them, for that which Christ says in genere of scandals, is true
in specie of Heresies, it must needs be that Heresies come, but woe be to him
by whom they come, I add, and woe also to him who does not according to his
place and calling, endeavor the extirpation of them. The Text which I now speak
to, 1 Cor: 11. 17. has not reference to the will of Gods commandment, which
is the rule of our duty, but to the will of Gods decree, or the secret counsel
of his will. It Is Gods purpose to permit Heresies, and to over rule them for
this end; that his graces in his children may the more shine forth, and that
even Heresies (contrary to the intentions of Satan and Heretics) may make
manifest who are approved, scilicet quos non potuerint depravare, says
Tertullian, opening this Scripture. De praescr: adv: haer: to wit (says he)
such as Heresies could not pervert and deprave, no other are the approved ones.

But there are two things may be here objected: 1. May not one chosen and
justified, and regenerat be drawn away, and infected with Heresy through the
flight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceave? If
so, then Heresies, do not make manifest who are approved. who not. 2* May not
many who are not approved of God be preserved from the infections of Heresies;
Yea, be forward in resisting and opposing them? If so, then preservation from,
and resisting of Heresies cannot make manifest that one is approved of God.
These objections are no more against me, then against the Text of Scripture.
To the first, I answer, a regenerat person may be tempted and drawn over to
Heresy, as he may be tempted and drawn over to other great sins. Heresy does
no otherwise consist with the state of grace in any person, then other works of
the flesh, adultery, fornication, drunkenness, or the like. Look upon an elect
and justified person, while lying in some great sin, for instance, Noah, Lot,
David, Peter, even so must ye look upon an elect and justified person poisoned
with Heresy. But then that person being elected, justified and regenerate,
cannot be supposed to live and die in that sinful estate, but God will
certainly heal his backslidings, and rescue his soul out of the snare of the
devil by repentance, for the elect cannot be deceived, so as to continue and
die in a Heresy, Mat: 24. 24. And while he continues in such a gross sin or
Heresy, you may truly say, that for that time he is (...), unapproved, or
like dross and unrefined silver, in which sens the word is used by the
Apostle, where he speaks of his bringing his body into subjection, lest he
himself should be found (...), where the old English translation reads, Lest
I my self should be reprooved, which is too soft a word. The new Translation
has, Lest I my self should be a cast away. Beza, ne ipse rejectaneus fiam. In
the same sense it is used, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know you not your own selves, how that
Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobats. Beza, nisi rejectanei estis. H.
Stephanus expones, (...), minime probus non probandus: Item adulterinus non
sincerus, and he cites Aristotle, (...). In this sense even an elect and
regenerat person supposed to be a maintainer or follower of Here^e (while such)
is certainly, (...), unapproved, greatly reproveable, to be rejected and cast
away to the furnace like drossie and unrefined silver, and no marvel, for in
that estate he does not act his graces but his corruptions, and by his great
sin does extremely grieve and dangerously quench the holy Spirit once given to
him.

To the other objection I answer, First, Although the full and perfect
discovery (who are approved, who not) is reserved to the great and last day,
and there is no company, Assembly, nor visible Church in this world, without a
mixture of Hypocrites, yet surely the word of the Lord has been and shall be
so far fulfilled, that in a great measure and according to the knowledge which
the church can have of her members in this life, there is in times of Heresies
and Schisms a discovery made who are the approved Ones, who not. 2. We must
remember it is not the scope of this Text to give us a note of distinction
between these who are approved, and all counterfits or unapproved Christians,
but between these who are approved, and these who are the fomenters or
followers of Heresies. Thus they who are indeed approved of God continue in the
truth of Christ, grounded and settled, and stand fast in the faith and contend
for it: and this is one of the characters, found in all such as are approved.
And thus far, says Augustine, are Heretics profitable to the Church, for by
their means, those August. Tom. 1. lib de vera relig. cap. 8. sunt enim
innumerabiles in Ecclesia sancta, Deo probati vi^i, sed ma nifesti non fiunt
inter nos, quam diu imperitiae nostrae tenebris delectatidormire malumus, quam
luce^ veritatis ^ntueri.
who are approved of God and spiritual men, are stirred up to vindicat, open,
and hold forth the truth, whereby they become more manifest then otherwise
they could have been. Upon the other part, who ever turn away from the truth,
and from the Doctrine of Christ, and turn aside after Heresies, do thereby
infalliblely declare themselves to be unapproved, whatsoever profession or show
of holine ^e they have: Whatsoever become of the white mark of these who are
approved (which also holds true as I have explained it) most certainly, this
black mark cannot fail upon the other side, and he who supposes any person who
is of a Heretical belief and faction, to be holy, spiritual, mortified, and
approved, or one that walks in the spirit, and not in the flesh, does but
suppose that which is impossible. And I do not doubt, but God is (by the
Heresies and Schisms of these times) making a discovery of many unapproved,
unmortified Professors, who pretended to Piety. So that I may transfer to our
time what Chrysostom observed of his own, lib. 1 ad eos qui scandali^ati
sunt. cap. 19. How many are there clothed with a shadow and show of godliness,
how many who have a counterfit meekness, how many who were thought to be some
great Ones, and they were not so, have been in this time (when so many fall off
and make defection) quickly manifested, and their Hypocrisy detected, they
have appeared what they were, not what they feigned themselves; and most falsely
pretend to be? Neither is this a small matter, but very much for the profit
and edification of these that will observe it, even to know distinguishingly
these who are clothed in sheeps clothing, and not to reckon promiscuously those
Woolves (so hid) among the true sheep. For this time is become a furnace
discovering the false Copper coin, melting the lead, burning up the Chafe,
making more manifest the precious Metals. This also Paul signified when he
said: For there must be also Heresies, that they who are approved, may be made
manifest among you.

Vincentius Lirinensis does also record to this purpose, that Vin. Lirin.
advers. haer. cap. 6 tunc quisquis verus Christi amator and cultor exstitit
antiquam fidem novellae perfidiae praeferendo, nulla contagii ipsius peste
maculatus est.
when almost the whole world was infected with the Arrian Heresy, some being
compelled to it, others cheated into it, yet every true lover and worshipper of
Christ was preserved pure from it.

CHAP. X.
Of new Lights, and how to keep off from splitting either upon the Charybdis of
pertinacy and tenaciousnesse, or upon the Scylla of Levity, Wavering and
Scepticisme.

It Is pleaded by some who pretend to more tenderness of conscience then others,
that to establish by the Law of the Land a Confession of Faith, or a Directory
of the worship of God, and of the Government of the Church, and to appoint
penalties or punishments upon such as maintain the contrary Doctrines or
practices, is to hold out and shut the door upon new Light. That as the State
and Church has discovered the evil of diverse things, which were sometime
approved and strengthened by the Law of the Land, so there may be afterward a
discovery made by the light of Experience, and a further search of the
Scripture, to make manifest the falsehood of those Doctrines which are now
received as true, and the evil of that Government and way which is now embraced
as good, for (...).

For satisfaction in this difficulty, First of all, I do not deny but most
willingly yield, yea assert as a necessary truth, that as our knowledge (at its
best in this world) is imperfect, (for we know but in part) so it ought to be
our desire and endeavor to grow in the knowledge of the mind of Christ, to
follow on to know the Lord, to seek after more and more light, for the path of
the Just is as the shyning light, that shines more and more unto the perfect
day, Prove. 4. 18. Secondly, I acknowledge that this imperfection of our
knowledge, is not only in degrees, but in parts, that is, we may know
afterward not only more of that good, or evil, or truth, or error, of which
we knew somewhat before, but we may happily come to know the evil of that
whereof we knew no evil before, or the good of that in which we knew no good
before, so may we come to know diverse truths which before we knew not.
Thirdly, I acknowledge there is not only this imperfection, but often times a
great mistake, misunderstanding, error, and unsoundnesse in the judgment of
Christian persons or Churches, so that godly men and true Churches may come to
know that to be evil which they sometime thought good, and that to be false
which sometime they thought true, or contrariwise. Which experience has
taught, and may teach again. Fourthly, I confess it is no shame for an
Augustine to writ a Book of Retractations. It is the duty, not only of
particular Christians, but of reforming, yea reformed, yea the best reformed
Churhes, whenever any error in their doctrine, or any evil in their
Government or form of worship, shall be demonstrated to them from the word of
God, (although it were by one single person, and one perhaps of no great
reputation for parts or learning, like Paphnu^ius among the many learned
Bishops in the counsel of Nice) to take in and not to shut out further light:
to embrace the will of Christ held forth unto them, and to amend what is
amiss, being discovered unto them. Fifthly, I also believe that toward the
evening of the world, there shall be more light, and knowledge shall be
increased, Dan: 12. 4. and many hid things in Scripture better understood, when
the Jews shall be brought home, and the Spirit of grace and illumination more
abundantly powered forth. We have great cause to long and pray for the
conversion of the Jews, surely we shall be much the better of them.

But on the other hand, the greatest deceits and depths of Satan have been
brought into the world, under the name or notion of new Lights. Did not the
serpent beguile Evah with this notion of a new light, Gen: 3. 5? Which example
the Apostle sets before our eyes, 2 Cor: 11. 3 plainly warning us that
Satan is transformed into an Angel of light, and his apostles into the
Apostles of Christ, verse. 13. 14. So Rev: 2. 2. Did not Jeroboam make Israel to
sin by a false new Light? It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, behold
thy Gods, O Israel, etc. 1. Kings. 12. 28. He would show to the ten Tribes, how
they might in all matters of Religion be independent upon Jerusalem; howbeit
(to note that by the way) he did not erect Independent Churches, without an
Independent Commonwealth. He would show them also that they were abused with a
pretended sacred order of the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, therefore no
jure divino men, but Ministers dependent, 2 Chronicles: 11. 14. 15. And so he would
needs make Priests of the lowest of the people, verse. 31. for all which he had
a pretense of power or liberty from God, 1 Kings, 11. 37. His new light made an
Independent Church, and a dependent Ministry. The Gnostics had their name
from the profound knowledge and greater light which they pretended to, above
all others, yet the ancient writers tell us they were but a profane Sect.
Maho^et himself pretended that the Angel Gabriel taught him his Alcoran, that
so he might purchase the greater credit to it.

Now it is to be observed, there are many cautions necessary, and that there is
much to be said against many of these things which now go under the name of
new Lights among those who plead for Liberty of conscience.

New Light is now become a beguiling Word, as once among the Graecians, (...),
a new swallow. A beguiling word, I may well call it, for most of those things
which are now cried up as new lights, are neither lights nor new. Not lights,
because not according to the word from whence all true light must be derived.
Not new, because the very same things have been before moved and maintained,
Antinomianisme, Anabaptisme, universal atonement by the death of Christ,
universal salvation, a temporal and earthly kingdom of Christ, and the
Saints liberty of conscience etc. have been maintained and confuted also before
this age. Independency it self, if it be a light, yet it is no new one lately
struck out, for it was long since a known tenent of the Arminians, that Synods
or Counsels ought only to debate, deliberat, consult, and advise, but not to
exercise any Jurisdiction, to inflict any censure, or to enjoin any thing under
pain of censure. See the propositions offered by the Arminians in the 25th
Session of the Synod of Dort. See also Episcopii disp: Theol: part: 2 disp: 54.
These: 9, 10. and part 3, disp: 32, these: 4. 5, 11. But I come to the particular
cautions concerning new Lights.

First, it is but a false new light which expels not only the old darkness,
but much of the good old light. As in Medecins the Paracelsian way is most
dangerous when it is destructive to the Galenik way, and overthrows the old
approved principles, yet it is of very good use when prudently, and skilfully
managed, for perfecting the Galenik way, and for doing things more speedily,
easily, and pleasantly, than the Galenik way could do: So in Divinity, such
new Lights as do not expel, but retain, improve, and perfect the old, may be
of singular good use: but those new Lights which are destructive and expulsive
of the old true Lights, those new ways which lead us away from the old and the
good way, are to be utterly disliked and avoided, 2 Epist: of John verse: 8.
Look to your selves, that we lose not th^se things which we have gained. He
speaks it against those deceavers who would have seduced them from the Doctrine
of Christ, as is evident both from the preceding verse and from that which
follows: Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ,
has not God, etc Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned,
and avoid them. A Bishop, says Paul, must hold fast the faithful word, as he
has been taught, ^it* 1. 9. Phil. 3. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have
already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us be of the same mind.
This he adds as a prevention of a dangerous mistake, and abuse of that which
he had said immediately before: And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you. Behold, a reserve for any new Light, might
some say: Nay but take ^eed says the Apostle, you do not shut forth, but keep
fast the light you have already attained unto, you must not under pretense of
new light, loose what you have gained, Col. 2. 6, 7, 8. As ye have therefore
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and built up in him,
and stablisht in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with
thanksgiving: Beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain
deceit; etc. These Apostolical rules, are very far contrary to the
Accademicall; yea, Pyrrhonian demurre and dubitation, by which some call in
question the most received Doctrines in the Christian Church. If Skepticisme
be tolerable in the Christian faith, why are we bidden stand fast in the
faith, 1 Cor: 16. 13. and again Heb. 10. 23. let us hold fast the profession of
our faith without wavering? And why did Jesus Christ himself write to those
who had not received the false Doctrines of that time, that which ye have
already, hold fast till I come, Rev: 2. 24? It was a foul error in Balaam the
false Prophet, that after God had said to him concerning Balaks messengers,
Thou shall not go with them, thou shall not curse the people, for they are
blessed, Number: 22 12. yet at the next sending of Messengers, he would needs seek
(forsooth) a new Light from God, verse: 18. 19. If Balak would give me his
housefull of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God,
to do less or more Now therefore I pray you, tarry ye also here this night,
that I may know what the Lord will say unto me more. God gave him a n^w light
indeed, but in wrath and judgment, quite extinguishing and expelling
judicially that light which the false Prophet himself had not entertained, but
wickedly forsaken, verse: 20. And God came to Balaam at night, and said unto
him, if the men come to call thee, rise up and go with them. Behold the fruit
of not entertaining light, once received from God. So likewise the young
Prophet, 1 Kings 13. for not holding fast what he had received from God but
taking in a new false light from the old Prophet, was most exemplarly and
severly punished for it. This is the first caution most necessary for the
Sectaries of this time, whose new lights are such, that among them vetera
deperdita, and nova reperta, go hand in hand together, and are almost
convertible terms, as if a man should not keep what he had, because he finds
somewhat which he had not.

Secondly, many of those new lights which some brag off, not only expel much
of the good old light, but bring in gross Egyptian darkness. There is a woe
denounced against those who put darkness for light, as well as against those
who put light for darkness, Isay 5. 20. I may well say, that gross darkness
is introduced, when the fundamental Articles of faith are called in question,
denied, and oppugned, as the Godhead of Jesus Christ, the divine authority of
the Scriptures; the immortality of the Soul, the eternity of glory to the
Elect, and of torments to the Reprobate, etc. If the foundations be shaken,
what can the righteous do? If we hold not fast this Gospel, if we embrace
not this Savior, we cannot have another, 1 Cor: 3. 11. For other foundation
can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, Gal: 1. 6. I marvel
that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ,
unto another Gospel, verse, 8. But though we or an Angel from heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed.

Thirdly, beware of those new Lights, which make any certain truth (although
neither fundamental, nor circumfundamentall) to be uncertain, as we ought
not to say of any sin, so neither of any truth: Is it not a little one? Let
every truth be highly valued. Buy the truth, and sell it not; say not, This
truth is but a matter of discipline, let it go, 'ts not worth the buying? He
that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: and he
that is un^ust in the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16. 10. Melchior
Adamus, both in the life of Carolostadius, and in the life of Luther, observes
the great evil which grew out of Luthers dislike of Carolostadius, his
strictness, zeal, and forewardnesse, in abolishing auricular confession, and
difference of meats, and casting out images out of Churches, at which things
Luther was the more offended, because done by Carolostadius in Wittenbreg,
during Luthers absence, and without his knowledge and counsel. Luther did also
allege that Carolostadius, his strictness and zeal in these lesser things,
hindered and retarded the Reformation in more substantial points of Doctrine.
However the story notes, that hence was the first rise of that deplorable
Sacramentarian controversy, which has ever since made so great a rupture in
Germany. I could never yet observe, or read, or hear of controversies about
discipline in any Christian Church, but still they grew higher and higher, and
those who rejected, or slighted the will of Christ in smaller things, did
afterward slight it in greater things.

Fourthly, beware of those new lights, which not only refuse to admit some
certain truths, but refuse to admit any truth, now held or professed in the
reformed Churches, as sure and certain and infallible, as if, because men's
judgments are not infallible, but subject to error, therefore, we cannot be
sure, nor infallibly persuaded of this or that Article. The holy Scripture will
teach us, that believers may attain to a certain and infallible knowledge of
some truths, for it was no impossible thing that Paul prayed for, when he
prayed that the Colossians might have all riches of the full assurance of
understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father,
and of Christ. The mystery of God that he is, and that he is eternal,
invisible, omnipotent, etc: his nature, and attributes, the mystery of the
Father, or that there is a distinction of persons in the holy Trinity, and an
eternal generation, the mystery of Christ, his person, natures, offices,
birth, passion, death, resurrection, ascension, and intercession: these are
things of which the Apostle would have us most fully and certainly persuaded.
Timothy was assured of the things he had learned, 2 Timothy 3. 14. so was
Theophilus, Luke. 1. 4. A Mariner is not infallible in his judgment, yet he
may be assured infallibly, that such a thing is a rock which he must avoid,
and such a way, is the way he must direct his course: A Physician is not
infallible in his judgment concerning the symptoms, causes and cures of
diseases, yet he may be most certainly persuaded, such a disease is deadly, and
there is no cure for it, or such a thing may be cured, and this is the cure. So
in Divinty the obnoxiousnesse of men's judgment to error hinders not, but
they may be infallibly persuaded of this, and this, and the other truth.

Fifthly, beware of those new Lights, which come not from the Sun of
righteousness: To the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according
to this word, it is, because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. When men
walk in the light of their own sparks, they shall lie down in darkness: New
fancies are not new lights, it is no truth, which cannot be grounded upon the
word of truth?

It was a wild fancy of the Weigelians, that there is a time to come (which
they call seculum Spiritus sancti,) in which God shall by his Spirit reveal much
more knowledge and light, then was revealed by Christ and his Apostles in the
Scriptures. There is so much revealed in Scripture, as the Apostle calls the
wisdom of God, and the hidden wisdom of God, 1 Cor: 2. 7. the things which
are preached and written to us, are the things which the very Angels desire to
look or pry into, 1 Pet. 1. 12. and says not Christ; That which ye have
already, hold fast till I come, Revel: 2. 25? more of this error, see in Brochm
and System. theol: com: 1. Article 6. cap: 2. quaest: 12.

Sixthly, take heed of proud, and lofty, and self conceited new Lights, 1 Cor:
14. 32, 33. And the spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets; for
God is not the author of confusion, but of peace. If the spirits of the
Prophets must be so subject, how much more the spirits of private persons?
Wherefore in a reformed Church, all pretended new Lights, which are against the
received Doctrine, government, or form of worship, ought to be in all humility
and submission, offered to be tried by a learned and godly Synod. The Lo^rean
severity was such, that no man might move for a new law, but with a rope about
his neck, that if his motion were thought good, he might be spared: but if bad,
hanged. So Demosthenes advers: Timocr: tells us. I will not allow this severity
against such as offer new Lights, or move for new changes in the Church. But I
may well apply here, the Athenian law recorded by Demosthenes in the same
Oration. The Athenians went not so far as the Locri, yet no man might move
for a new law in Athens, unless the motion were offered and submitted to the
Senate, who were to judge, whether the old or the new were better.

Seventhly, beware of separating new Lights, to separat from, or gather
Churches out of the true reformed or reforming Churches, has not the least
warrant from the word of God. When we see this or that amiss in a Church, we
are bidden exhort one another, and provoke one another to good, but not to
separate, Heb. 10. 24, 25. Zuinglius conferred amicably with the Anabaptists in
Zurik, as with dissenting brethren, and no course was taken to suppress or
restrain them by the secular power, till they grew to gather Churches out of
the true reformed Churches, but when it came to that, they could not be
suffered or forborne, it was thought necessary to restrain them.

Eighthly, beware of those new Lights which dare not be seen, and are kept up in
corners. Truth seeks no corners: light does not shun light: a candle is not
lighted to be put under a bushel, but on a candlestick, Matthew: 5. 15. 1 Ioh: 3.
20, 21. Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved, but he that does truth, comes to
the light, Prove. 4. 19. The way of the wicked, is as darkness: they know not
at what they stumble. I add to make up the Antithesis to verse: 18. their way
is darkened more and more until the dark night. I have heard when the
Arminians were p^tto it in the Synod of Dort, to declare their judgment and
sense which they would hold at, they declined it, and Episcopius answered in
the name of the rest, Dies diem docet. And is it not so with the Sectaries of
this time, from whom you cannot draw a clear model of what they hold?

Ninthly, refuse such new Lights as have fellowship with the unfruitful work^
of darkness, Ephesians 5. 11. It Is a deceitful new Light, which makes men forbear
to reprove, speak, or petition against those evils in a state which their
consciences know to be sinful, and to wink at such things, as publikly
dishonor God in a nation, upon hopes that themselves shall be winked at and
tolerated. But what communion has light with darkness, 2 Cor. 6. 14. There
are some who pretend to new Light, and to tenderness of conscience, who yet
are content, to combine and associat themselves with those of another and
different way, (which themselves condemn as a sinful way) in that common cause
of theirs, for crying up their great Diana, liberty of conscience, and for
opposing the Church government by Presbyteries and Synods. How they who would
not assist the Presbyterians, for the purging of their Congregations, and keep
off all scandalous persons from the Sacrament, and yet do assist and strengthen
Separatists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Socinians, Erastians, S^ekers, in
seeking after tolleration, how (I say) they will answer this to God and their
own consciences, let them look to it. Again, many of the pretended new Lights:
have communion with darkness in another respect, because they are borrowed
from Heresies, buried in darkness. How many new Lights are now brought from
the Arrians, Manichees, Novatians, Donatists, the contemplative Monks and
Friars, the Photinians, Socinians, Arminians, etc. These are no more new
Lights, then a beggars cloak is a new garment, being newly made up, out of many
old riven and rotten clo^ts sowed together.

Tenthly, away with those new Lights which let men see nothing better, which
bring no edification, those Baeoti^ aenigmata, those none sense and naughty
high notions, in which some frothie spirits evanish. Let all things be done
unto edifying, 1 Cor: 14. 26. There are vain bablings, and science falsely so
called, which has made men err from the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 20, 21.

Lastly, take good heed of those new Lights, which follow new interests. Such
was that of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12. 26. to the end; and that of Balaam; Number: 22.
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. There are some who suppose that gain is godliness,
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy: 6. 5. and so there are some who suppose new
interests, to be new Lights.

CHAP. XI.
Of Stability and firmness in the truth.

IT is good Divinity to maintain that Skepticisme, fluctuation and wavering
concerning those things which God has revealed, to be believed or done by us,
is a sin: and to be firm ^xed and established in the truth, to hold fast
the profession thereof, to stand fast in the faith, is a duty commanded. I shall
first prove it to be so; then give reasons for it, and thirdly, some helps to
this duty, and preservatives against this sin.

For proof of the thing, somewhat might be said from the very light of nature,
for h^th a nation changed their Gods, ^er: 2. 11. Religion has the very name
of it, a Religando, so far it is, a Relaxando. The heathen Greeks called a
^ubricus and inconstant man (...). They said also, that he who erres or
miscarries in his Religion, does (...), drink out of a bored or foraminous cup.
How firm and constant have heathen Philosophers been in maintaining their
opinions? they could not only displease their friends, amicus Plato, etc. but
suffer the heaviest things for their opinions. And shall not we much more hold
fast the profession of the true faith? Zonaras Annall, tom: 3. In the reign of
Michael the Emperor, the son of Theophilus, tells us* that when the sister of
the Prince of Bulgaria became a Christian, and the Prince also by her means
converted, the ^ulgarians conspired against him for this change of Religion.
This diabolical steadfastness of theirs, provoked him to a true Christian
steadfastness, till by Gods assistance and blessing, they were made to turn to
him, but he turned not again to them. The Athenians impeached Socrates upon his
life, for going about to innovat and change their Religion. But to set aside
natures light, there is not any of the primitive Churches, to which the
Apostles wrote Epistles, but they were expressly warned either positively to
stand fast in the faith, to hold fast their profession, or negatively to beware
of and to avoid false teachers, and not to be carried about with diverse and
strange Doctrines. Now it must needs be, not only a truth, but a most special
and necessary truth, which the Apostles thought fit, thus to press upon the
Churches in all their Epistles written to them. See Rom: 16. 17, 18. 1 Cor: 16.
13 2 Cor. 11: 3, 4. Gal: 1 6, 8. Ephesians: 4. 14. Phil. 3. 2. 18. Col: 2. 6. 7, 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. 3. Hebr. 10. 23 and 13. 9. James 5. 19, 20. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. and
3. 16, 17, 18. 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Jude ep: verse: 3. 4. All these Texts are full and
plain, as to this point which I speak to, and in that respect most worthy of
our frequent thoughts and observations, especially at such a time when this
corner of the world is so full of new and strange Doctrines.

As for the reasons, take these. 1. If we be not steadfast and unmovable in the
profession of our faith, we frustrat (as to us) the end for which the
Scriptures were written. Luke gives this reason to his Theophilus, why he wrote
the story of Christ's birth, life and death. That thou might know the
certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed, Luke. 1. 4. When
Peter has mentioned the voice which came from heaven concerning Christ, he
adds the certainty of the Scripture as a greater certainty. We have also a
more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take he^d, as unto
a light that shines in a dark place, 2. Pet: 1. 19. A voice from heaven might
sooner deceive us, then the written word of God. 2. To maintain and profess
the true Doctrine, and the true faith is by all protestant orthodoxe writers
made one, (yea the principal) mark of a true visible Church. Christ himself*
Ioh. 10. 4, 5. gives us this mark of his sheep, the sheep follow him (their
shepherd) for they know his voice, and a s^ranger will they not follow, for
they know not the voice of strangers. 3. If once we forsake the way of truth,
and go into an erroneous way, we shall not know where to find our paths, we
shall wander from mountain to hill, and forget our resting place As one wave
comes after another, so does one error come after another. As a canker
spreads, so does error, 2. Tim 2. 17, Evil men and seducers, shall wax
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived 2 Timothy: 3. 13. Which has made
some, and I hope will make more, who were too inclinable to the new Doctrine
and practices of Sectaries at first, now to fall off from them, when they
increase unto more ungodliness, and unto more error, and there is no end, one
error breeds a hundredth, and a hundredth will breed ten thousand. What was it
that made so many fall off from the Prelates, who once joined with them? Was it
not, because they were growing from the old ceremonies to many new ones, and
each year almost, brought in some new superstition, and from Popish rites, they
grew to Popish doctrines? 4. If w^e waver, and be led about with diverse and
strange doctrine;, then the prophesies which have gone before of the true
Church, shall not be made good in us. It was promised concerning the Church and
kingdom of Christ, Isa. 32. 4, 5. The heart also of the rash, shall understand
knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly,
the vile person shall be no more called liberal, etc. that is those who simply
and rashly were led about with every wind of Doctrine, shall be so wise and
knowing, as to distinguish between truth and error, between virtue and vice,
and call each thing by its right name. So, Isa. 33. 6. And wisdom and
knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and strength of salvation. 5.
Instability and forsaking the way of Truth, maks us loss much that we had
gained, 2 ep. of John, verse. 8. all the comfort we enjoyed, all the good that
ever our souls received of such a Truth, such a cause, such a ministry, all
that ever we did or spoke or suffered for the Truth, all this we loss when we
turn aside after an erroneous way. 6. It greatly hinders our spiritual
comfort and contentment, Col: 2, 2. To be knit together in love is one mean,
and to have all riches of the full assurance of understanding to the
acknowledgement of Gospel truths, is another mean, by which the Apostle wishes
the hearts of Christians to be comforted. It adds much to Paul's comfort that
he could say, I have kept the Faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8. 7. We run a great hazard of our souls and our
sa^vation, when we turn aside from truth to error. It is said of the unstable,
that they wrest the Scriptures unto their own destruction, 2 Pet: 3. 16, Like a
man fallen into quick sands, the more he wrestles out, the more he sinks. When
the Apostle has spoken of Christ's purchasing of our reconciliation,
justification and sanctification, he adds an If, Col: 1. 23: If ye continue
in the faith grounded and settled and be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel which ye have heard. Not that our persevering in the true faith was
acondition in Christ's purchasing of these blessings, but it is a condition
without which we cannot possess and enjoy what Christ has purchased; that is,
he that falls away from the true Doctrine of the Gospel, proves himself to have
no part of the benefits of Christ.

Some errors are in their own nature damnable and inconsistent with the state
of grace, or a fellowship with God, 2 Pet: 2. 1. So 2 ep* John v. 9. Whosoever
transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God. Sure it
may be said, of Arrians, Socinians, Papists, Libertines, they have not God,
because they abide not in the doctrine of Christ, so Gal: 5. 4. Other error,
there are, of which I may say, whatsoever they are comparatively, impenitency
and continuing in them, does condemn: whence it is that the Apostle James
reckons him who erres from the truth, to be in a way of death and danger of
damnation, Ia* 5. 19. 20.

Now the preservatives against Wavering, and helps to steadfastness in the
Faith, are these: 1. Grow in knowledge and circumspection; be not simple as
Children in understanding. There is a slight of men and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive: So speaks the Apostle of these that spread
diverse and strange Doctrines, Ephesians: 4. 14. and Rom* 16. 18. he wars us that
they do by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Thou
have therefore need of the wisdom of the serpent that thou be not deceived, as
well as of the fimplicity of the Dove, that thou be not a deceiver, Phil: 1. 9:
10. Do not rashly engage into any new opinion, much less into the spreading of
it. With the welladvised is wisdom: Pythagoras would have us Scholars only
to hear, and not to speak for five years. Be swift to hear but not to speak or
engage: Prove all things, and when thou have proved, then be sure to hold fast
that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Mat: 7. 15. 17. There was never an Heresy
yet broached, but under some fair plausible pretense; beguiling unstable
souls, as Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Pro: 14. 15. The simple believes every
word. Be not like the two hundredth that went in the simplicity of their hearts
after Absalom in his rebellion, not knowing any thing, but that he was to pay
his vow in Hebron, 2 Samuel: 15. 11. 2. Grow in grace and holiness, and the love
of the truth, for the stability of the mind in the truth, and the stability of
the heart in grace, go hand in hand together, Heb: 13. 9. David's rule is good,
Ps. 24. 12. What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose. Which is also Christ's rule, Ioh. 7. 17. If any man will do
his will he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of my self. See also Deuteronomy: 11. 13, 16. Elisha healed the unwholesome
waters of Jericho by casting salt into the fountain, 2, Kings 2. 21, so must
the bitter streams of pernicious errors be healed by geting the salt of
mortification, and true sanctifying grace in the fountain.

3 Be sure to cleave to thy faithful and sound teachers, the sheep that
follows the shepherd, are best kept from the Wolf. I find the exhortation
to stability in the faith, joined with the fruitful labors of faithful
Teachers, Phil. 3. 16. 17. Heb: 13 7, 9. So the Apostle Ephesians: 4. from the work
of the Ministry verse 11. 12, 13. draws this consequence v. 14. that we
henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine. The Galatians were easily seduced, als soon as they were
made to disgust Paul.

4 Watch and be vigilant against the first beginnings of declining, against the
first seeds of error, Gal: 5. 9. It was while men flept, that the enemy came
and sowed tears among the Wheat, and when he had done, went his way, Mat. 13.
25. Therefore watch ye, stand fast in the faith, 1 Cor. 16, 13. go hand in hand
together. 5. Avoid and withdraw from the Authors and fpreaders of Heresies and
dangerous errors, Romans 16. 17. 1 Timothy: 6, 5. 2. epist. John. 10. 11. Phil. 3. 2.
He that would be godly should not use ungodly company, and he that would be
Orthodox should not use Heretical company, unless he have some good hopes to
convert some who have erred from the truth, and come into their company only
for that end, Ia: 5. 19, 20: I remember Chrysostom in diverse places warns
his hearers how much they endangered their souls by going into the Jewish
synagogues, and there was a great zeal in the Ancient Church to keep
Christians that were Orthodox from the Assemblies and company of Heretics. 6.
Get Church Discipline established and duly exercised, which is ordained to
purge the Church from false Doctrine. Rev 2. 14. 20. 7. Lean not to thy own
understanding, and be not wise in thine own eyes, Prove. 3. 5. 7. Let reason be
brought in captivity to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor: 10, 5. That which made
the Antitrinitarians and Socinians fall away from the belief of the Trinity of
persons in the godhead, and of the union of the two natures of God and Man in
the person of Christ, was because their reason could not comprehend these
articles: which is the ground of their opinion professed by themselves. When I
speak of Captivating reason, I do not mean implicit faith: the eyes of my
understanding must be so far opened by the holy Ghost, that I may know such an
article is held forth in Scripture to be believed, and therefore I do believe
that it is, though my reason cannot comprehend how it is. 8. Count thy cost,
and be well resolved before hand what it will cost thee to be a Disciple of
Christ, to be a constant professor of the Truth. Luk: 14. 26. to verse: 34. Act
14. 22. Confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom
of God. This is surer then to confirm our selves with the hopes of a golden
age of prosperity in which we shall feel no affliction. 9. Search the
Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 39, Act, 17. 11. Do not take upon trust new Lights from any
man, be he never so eminent for parts or for grace, but to the law and the
Testimony.

The up shot of all is that we ought to hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering, and be steadfast and even unmovable in the truth, and not to
give place to the adversaries, no not for an hour, Gal: 2, 4, 5. I do not mean
pertinacy in the least error, nor a vain presumptuous overveening conceit of
our knowledge, to make us despise any Light which others may give us from
Scripture: Pertinacy is an evil upon the one hand, and to be too tenacious of
our own opinions. But that (...), and (...), that Levity, inconstancy,
wavering, Scepticisme is an evil upon the other hand, 2 Thessalonians: 2, 2, be not
soon shaken in mind, etc. And this is the Epidemicall disease of the
Sectaries of this time, which I have now been laboring to cure, their word is
yea and nay, and not unlike to that which Salust objected to Cicero, that he
said one thing sitting, another thing standing, yet it may be sometimes
observed that these who are the greatest Sceptiks and Pyrrhonians in reference
to the common and received tenants, are the most pertinacious and tenacious in
Tenants invented by themselves. I have read it observed of Socinus, that as he
set at naught Fathers, counsels, and the whole current of ancient and modern
interpreters of Scripture, so vain glory made him to maintain stiffely and
tenaciously any opinion or invention of his own, as if he had been infallible,
men are sooner drawn from truth then from error. Some are unstable in the
truth, and unstable in error too, you may find among them annuas atque
menstruas fides (to use Hilaries phrase) they are of a new faith, and a new
religion, every year, if not every Month. Remember Reubens reproach, Gen, 49.
4. unstable as water, thou shall not excel. One sort of the Sectaries there is
indeed, which will not engage to hold any thing, but are known by believing
nothing, these pass now under the name of Seekers: yet if one of the ancient
Fathers, or of the Reformers themselves who lived an hundredth years ago, were
now alive, they could tell us that these Seekers* were in their days called
Atheists, and in deed what other name is due to these Nullifidians who are of
no Religion?

CHAP. XII.
Whether a sound heart and an unsound head can consist together, and vice
versa? or whether truth and holiness be not inseparable companions.

It Is one of the greatest objections against the suppressing and punishing of
Heresies, errors and Schisms. O say they, this is a persecuting of those that
are godly, this is a wound to Piety, and the power of godliness. I do not
deny but there may be, and is true piety in many who are somewhat infected
with the leaven of false Doctrine, and live in some erroneous opinion, I dare
not appropriat the name of the godly party to those who are free from any of
the errors of the times: those that are truly godly may in diverse things
differ in opinion, every error is not inconsistant with holiness, yet every
error does pro tanto, and proportionably, retard, hinder, and prejudge holiness,
and although the Devil sow his tares among Christ's wheat (I mean in the same
persons als well as in the same Church) yet who will say that a field of wheat
is nothing the worse of the tares, for then to what end did the enemy watch an
opportunity of that malicious hostile act, to sow the tares among the wheat? 2.
Dangerous and damnable errors can no otherwise consist with true grace, then
dangerous and damnable sins, and this I will hold as a good rule in practical
Divinity, that as the want of true piety maks a person (if tempted) apt to be
infected with error, so error of judgment, if continued in, does not only
hinder growing, but maks a dangerous decreasing and falling short in true
piety, or thus, the stability of the mind and judgment in the faith of the
Gospel, and in the true reformed religion and the stability of the heart in
grace, and true piety; stand or fall together; floorish or fade away together,
lodge or (...) together, live or die together.

First of all (to make good what I assert) let it be well observed that the
Scripture finds out the roots of Heresies and errors in the corrupt hearts of
men, in some reigning unmortified lust, an unstable Heart maks an unstable
Head, and a corrupt affection maks a corrupt Judgment. This may appear in the
general from Gal. 5. 20. where Heresies are reckoned among the works of the
flesh, Col: 2, 18. where a superstitious mind is called a fleshly mind; 1 Timothy: 1. 19. where faith is compared to a precious Treasure carried in a ship; a
good conscience to the ship that caries it, the loss of the ship is the loss
of the loadning. 2 Timothy: 3. 6. 2 These: ^ 10. 11, 12. Gal. 6. 12. 2 Timothy: 4. 3. 1 John, 2. 19. It is therefore a good argument that protestant writers have used
against the Popes infallibility. The Pope has been and may be impious,
profane, sensual, carnal, proud, covetous. Therefore he may dangerously err
in his indictment* and decrees. Some have derived the original of all the
Popish errors from ambition and avarice, or (as others) from the Cardinals
caps, and the Monks bellies.

The Apostle John reduces all the cares, courses, studies, endeavors,
opinions or practices, of the Children of this world, to one of these three, 1
Ioh. 2, 16. the lust of the flesh, peculiarly so called, uncleanness,
wantonness, gluttony, drunkenness. The lust of the eyes, when the soul is
catched with something from without in the world which tempts, such a thing
is goodly to the eye, it enters in upon the soul by the senses, riches,
houses, lands, brave apparel, ornaments, etc. The pride of life, so called,
because where Pride reigns, a man will als soon quite his life, as that thing
which his proud Spirit loves, he had rather be dead before he get not his pride
satisfied, so that his pride and his life are all one to him, and as it were
things convertible.

You shall find many who have embraced new and erroneous ways, have been led
away with the lust of the flesh, Romans 16, 18* Philip, 3: 19. 2 P^t 2, 13, 14,
18. Numb* 25. 1, 2, 3, 1 Kings 11. 1. 4, 5. It was the sensual pleasantness
of the groves, and high places which made the Jews in so much love with them,
that even in the times of Reformation, yet the people still sacrificed in the
high places. The lust of the eyes has drawn away others from the way of truth,
and from the true Faith, 2 Pet: 2. 3. 1 Timothy: 6. 9, 10, Luke 16. 4. Tit* 1. 11.
1 Timothy: 6* 5, these count gain to be godliness, and have men's persons in
admiration for advantage: They will no longer adhere to the profession of the
Truth then they may enjoy the world withal, 2 Timothy* 4: 10. Such a one was that
Eccebolus, who under Constantius seemed to be a precise Christian, but
afterward under Julian the Apostate, he fell away and became a Pa^an, yet
after all this turned Christian again under the next Christian Emperor.

The pride of life has corrupted the judgment of others, and p^rverted them
in the way of Religion, it was the love of pre-eminence which perverted
Diotrephes, 1 ^o. 3. 9. 10. It was pride which made Coreth, Dathan and Abiram
cry down the Magistracy of Moses, and the priesthood of Aaron, and cry up the
whole congregation as holy, it was the love of a crown that made Jeroboam set
up his Calves, and make another A'tar, and other priests, and erect that
independent Church of his, which should not go up with their hard cases to the
Sanhedrin at Jerusalem Henry the fourth of France, who was once a Protestant,
changed his Religion for the same cause* that he might get a Crown: So did
Julian the Apostate once a Christian* Porphyrius forsook the Christians, that
he might be the better avenged upon some Christian in C^sarea of Palestina, who
had done him a wrong, yea there is an innate pride in all men by nature against
Jesus Christ, Psalm. 2. 3. Luke 19. 14. Which pride must be mortified, 2 Cor: 10.
5.

Secondly, there is a reciprocal influence, as of the will and affections,
upon the understanding, so of the understanding upon the will and affections,
the will determines the understanding, quo ad exercitium, but the understanding
determines the will, quo ad specificationem actus, that is; the will applies
the understanding unto, or hinders it from the discerning of good, and evil;
yet the will it self has not light in it self, but is guided by the light of
the understanding; wherefore, as the rain makes vapoures, and the vapoures
make rain, so a bad understanding, makes a bad will, and a bad will: makes a
bad understanding, if the eye be single, the body is full of light, Matthew. 6.
22. which makes good what the Schoolmen tells us, that bonitas voluntatis
dependet a recta ratione velut regula, the goodness of the will depends on
right reason as 'its rule. See Aquinas, qu: 2ae quest, 19. Art: 3. and the
Commentators upon that place. It Is to be observed, that sometimes the Scripture
speaks of an error of the judgment concerning the faith, as a fountain and
cause of ungodliness, prophannesse, Atheism, 2 Timothy: 2. 16, 17, 18, 19. Gal:
5. 4. 2 Epist: of John 9. as contrary wise, there is a Light and knowledge,
which preserves from sin and ungodliness, and leads the soul in ways of
holiness and obedience, Psalm: 9. 10. and 119. 33. 34 John 17. 17. If the
knowledge of God, of his Christ, and of his Word, and Will, and Name, and
statutes preserve us from sin, and lead us in the ways of obedience, then by
the rule of contraries, error of judgment in these things, will ensnare us in
sin and wickedness, for instance, an error concerning God; whether father,
Ioh. 15. 21. son 1 Cor: 2. 8. 1 Ioh* 2. 23. 2 Epis: verse: 9. or holy Ghost,
Ioh: 14. 17.

Thirdly, as the infection of sin spreads it self, throughout the whole
soul, and all the faculties and powers thereof, so does the work of the
Spirit of God. We find light and holiness, 1 Pet. 2. 9. joined together like
the Vrim and Thummim. See also 1 These: 5. 23. here is both Soul and Spirit
sanctified, which two are plainly distinguished, Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is
so quick and powerful* as that it pierces even to the dividing asunder of the
Soul and Spirit, if either the intellectuals be not sound, or if the vitals and
animals be not right, the word will find it out. A well meaning pious soul; a
good heart and affection, which perhaps, a person may sit down satisfied with,
will not excuse a corrupt mind, an erroneous spirit; neither will a sound and
orthodox judgment excuse a corrupt heart, and inordinat affections: Aristotle
himself could distinguish Art and knowledge from virtue, because the most
excellent intellectuals, cannot make a man so much as morally virtuous, without
the practice and exercise of virtue. Both soul and spirit, both the inferior
and superior part of the soul* must be sanctified. Reason is as the helm, the
affections as the sails, let the helm be stirred never so right, if the
wind either blow not at all, or blow cross in the sails, the ship makes no
speed in her way, let the wind blow never so fair, and fill all the sails,
yet if the helm be off 'its hingers, or be not rightly stirred, the ship may
quickly run upon a rock, or run a shore where it is not saife: so he that has a
sound judgment without good affections, cannot move heaven ward. He that has
good affections, without a sound judgment, will make more haste than good
speed: Reason is as the rider: affections as a nimble horse, a man is but in an
ill taking, if either this rider mistake his way, or the horse run away with
him out of the way, having no raines to govern him, or if the horse be lame
and cannot ride.

Fourthly, consider what the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. He tells us of
four ends and uses of Scripture, the first two are commonly referred to
doctrinals, the last two to practicalls, the Scripture is profitable for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction, in righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto ali good works. If any
of these be wanting, a Christian is not perfect, so much as in the perfection
of parts. He is but half a Christian, who is an orthodox believer, if he be
not practical also: and he is but half a Christian who is practical, if he
be not an orthodox believer. These ends of Scripture do not consist, nor stand
sure one without another.

Fifthly, to be led into all truth, and preserved from error, is a work of the
spirit of truth, and this spirit of the truth is the Comforter, and the spirit
of sanctification, which spirit the Mediator prays the Father to give unto
those that are his, Ioh: 14. 16, 17. and 16. 13, 14. 1 Ioh: 2. 27. no promise
of being led into all truth, but to those that receave the anointing of the
holy Ghost. Isa. 54. 13 Psalm: 25. 12.

Sixthly, by how much a man falls from the truth, by so much he falls from
grace, and by how much a man falls from grace, by so much he falls from the
truth, for stability in the stat^ of grace, depends in a manner upon
stability in the truth, for proof whereof mark three Ifs, Christ's, Ioh. 8. 31.
Paul's, Col 1. 23. Iohnes, 1 Ioh. 2. 34. Again, stability in the truth,
depends upon stability in grace: For proof whereof, mark a fourth If, 1 Ioh.
2. 19. These Scripturall Ifs have much in them, and should make us very
cautious and headfull, that we do not so far deceave our selves, as to divide
what God has joined together, a sound head and a sound heart, Chrysostom
exhorts his hearers, to join Christian virtues, and purity of doctrines
together, for says he, it profits us nothing to be orthodox, if the life be
vitiated: as upon the other part, a incorrupt De verbis Apost. Ser. 24.
life profits nothing without soundness of faith, licentiousness of
judgment in Doctrines, will certainly introduce licentiousness of heart and
life, in practicalls. Arminius himself (although many of his followers have
cried up, Septicisme in ^rat. de ^ompon. ^elig: dissilio.
Religion,) could say that different doctrines produce in a people, a
dubitation, or hesitation concerning Religion* that this doubting of the truth
produces* despairing to find the truth, and thence follows Atheism and
Epicurisme, yet when Heresies and false Doctrines introduce Atheism and
Epicurisme, they do but discover those roots of bitterness which were before in
the heart. Therefore as Christ tells those Jews that believed on him, if they
continue not in his word, they are not his disciples indeed, Ioh: 8. 31. so the
Apostle John gives this reason, why Simon Mag^s, Hymeneus, Alexander, Philetus,
Me^ander, Carpocrates, Basilides, Ebion, Cerinthus, and such like, went out and
separated from the Church, and from the profession of the truth, because says
he, they were not of us* meaning, in respect of lively faith; true grace and
regeneration, therefore they went out from us, 1 Ioh: 2. 19. which Text in
John, Hierome in the close of his first book upon Jeremiah, applies to
Heretics in this respect, when they fall away openly, they do but show those
very idols of their hearts, which in their in ward parts they worshipped before.

I will add a seventh reason, look how the Scripture distinguishes the Elect
from those who are of an ungodly life, in the same manner it distinguishes
them who are of an erroneous belief, 1 Cor: 11. 19: the Apostle. 2 These: 2. 10,
11. tells us that these who perish, believe a lie: i. e. an error pretending to
be a truth, but verse: 13. he gives thanks for the believing Thessalonians,
because God had chosen them to sa^vation, through sanctification of the spirit,
and belief of the truth: so that they who believe not the truth, are no more
elected, then the uns^nctified. Our Savior, Mat: 24. 24. intimates, that it
is impossible that the Elect should be deceaved by false prophets, that is, in
the same sense, as he that is borne of God, does not commit sin, 1 Ioh: 3. 9.
Christ characterizeth his true disciples, and distinguishes them from others,
not only by obedience and a good life, Mat: 7. 17. 24. and 25. 35. Ioh: 13.
35. but also by light in the eye of the understanding, Matthew* 6. 22. 23. with
Ephesians 1. 17. 18. by continuing in his word, Ioh: 8. 31. by knowing his voice,
and fleeing from a stranger, Ioh: 10. 4. 5. I hope I have abundantly proved
what I undertook, and so I conclude that he said right, who compared truth to
the teacher, holiness and righteousness to the ruling Elders: I add where
Heresy is the teacher, ungodlynesse and unrighteousness, are the ruling
Elders, a holy Heretic is a Chimera, and a profane person, believing a right
is another.

But here peradventure some will think, that the great objection lies, may not
a profane person have a sound or orthodox judgment in all controverted
truths* May not a man understand all mysteries and all knowledge, who yet has
no love, nor true sanctification? 1 Cor: 13. 2. May not a person hold fast the
profession of the true faith without wavering, whose heart not withstanding, is
not right with God nor steadfast in his Covenant?

I answer first, where there is but a form of godliness, there is but aforme
of knowledge, (...) is a word no where used by the holy Ghost, but in two
places, a form of knowledge, Rom: 2. 20. and a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.
5. It is not the true and real form, either of knowledge or godliness, which
as they have a true matter, so a true form. He says not (...), (which had
been the proper word for a true form,) but (...) speciem scientiae, speciem
pietatis. If we have respect to the notation of the word, it is a formation or
forming, I may call it a forming without mattering, so that the form of
knowledge, more then which an ungodly man has not, be he never so learned)
has not the truth substance, and reality of knowledge, Theophilact says, some
understand it to be the image, and false resemblance of knowledge, so Hesychius
and Suydas understand (...), to be (...) an image of a thing.

Secondly, there is no sinfullnesse in the will and affections without some
error in the understanding, all lusts which, a natural man lives in, are lusts
of Ignorance, 1 Pet, 1. 14. the sins of the people are called the errors of the
people, Heb: 9, 7: and the wicked person is the fool in the Proverbs, the
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, and what is the
reason, because they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor: 2, 14. the world cannot receive
the spirit of Truth, because it knows him not, Ioh: 14, 17. The ^opish
Doctrines of free will, of Justification by works, of meat, of implicit Faith,
of believing the Scriptures because the Church receives them, (and what marvel
that they do so whose eyes are not opened to see the Sun beam of Divine light
in the Scripture it self, which is Spiritually discerned.) Of the Sacraments
conferring of Grace, and the like, also the So^inian tenants that a man is no^
bound to believe any Arti^le of Faith, nor any interpretation of Scripture,
except it agree with his reason, that Pastors and Ministers of the word have
not now any distinguishing sacred vocation, authorizing them to be the
Ambassadors of Christ, to preach and minister the Sacraments more nor other
Christians (which is also maintained by a late Erastian writer in the
Netherlands.) These and the like errors professed and maintained by them, what
are they but so many legible commentaries and manifest interpretations of those
corrupt and erroneous principles, which are lurking and secretly seated in the
judgments and understandings of natural and unregenerated persons, als well
learned as uulearned: these Heretics do but bring forth to the light of the
Sun, what is hid within the mynds of other unregenerat persons, as in so many
dark dungeons: The like I say of the Arminian Doctrine of universal grace; and
universal atonement by Christ's death And of Original sin, that it is not
properly sin, (which doctrines are common to many Anabaptists, with the
Arminians,) the like I say also of the Antinomian doctrines, that Christ has
abolished not only the curse and rigor and compulsion, but the very rule it
self of the moral Law; so that they who are under the Covenant of Grace, are
not bound to walk by that rule, that they ought not to repent and mourn for
sin, that God does not aff^ict them for sin, that Faith without the evidence of
any marks, or fruits of Sanctification does assure the soul of its interest in
Christ, and what is that scientia media which the Jesuits glory of as a new
Light, but the very old error of natural men, which looks upon things
contingent as not decreed and determined by the will of God, and what is the
Erastian way which oppugneth suspension from the Lords Table, Excommunication,
and all Church government. 5. What is it but a declaration or manifesto of the
proud imaginations of men's corruptions, which say within themselves, Let us
break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us: And y e take too
much upon you Moses and Aaron, seeing all the congregation are holy every one
of them, and the Lord is among them. I conclude this point, every natural man
has in his heart, somewhat of Popery, somewhat of Socinianisme, somewhat of
Arminianisme, somewhat of Anabaptisme, somewhat of Antinomianisme, somewhat of
Erastianisme, (and I cannot bu^ add) somewhat of Independency too, so far as
it pleads for more liberty then Christ has allowed, and if every man has a
Pope in his belly, as Luther said, then every man has an Independent in his
belly, (for the Pope is the greatest Independent in the world) and it is natural
(I think) to every man to desire to be judged by no man.

Thirdly, when an unregenerat or unsanctified person holds last the profession
of the Faith, take heed it be not, because he is not yet tempted, nor put to it
in that thing which is the idol of his heart, let him be brought to this,
either to quite the truth and the faith, or to quite what is dearest to him in
the world, and see what he will do in that case. His fruit is but such a^
grows upon the stony ground, but stay till the Sun of persecution arise and
scorch him.

I have the more fully and strongly asserted the inconsistencie of Heresy, and
holiness, as likewise of sound believing, and profane living, and have showed
the joint fading or flourishing of true grace and true holiness, that this
being demonstrated and laid down for a sure principle, may lead us to many
practical and useful conclusions and corrolaries which I will only here
point at,

First, it cuts off the exception of those who cry out against the censuring,
suppressing and punishing of Heretics by the Christian Magistrate, as if this
were a persecuting of piety or pious persons, when it is indeed a suppressing
of a work of the flesh ^for Heresy is no other, Gal: 5. 20.) and of that which
is either the cause or effect, either the usher or page of someimpiety.

Secondly, it confuteth that most pernic^ous and cursed opinion, that if a man
live well, he may be saved in any Religion or any Faith. Socinus did hold, that
all, whether Lutherans, or Vide ora^* in au Abrah: Calov^i. Anno. 1643.
Calvinists, or Anabaptists, or Arians, so that they live well, shall be saved
(as has been observed) he was a follower of Mahomet, for Machomet having
compyled his Alcoran, partly out of the Jewish, and partly out of the Christian
Tenants, and made it an hotch potch out of both, that he might concili^t favor
unto it among both, he held that every one*who lives well, whether Jew or
Christian shall be saved, he that holds a man may be saved what ever he believe,
may with as much truth hold that a man may be saved what ever he do, or
howev^r helive.

Thirdly, it stops the mouths of Heretics and Sectaries, who call
themselves the godly party, Arrius, Photinus, Socinus, Arminius, and generally
the chief Heresiarches, which ever rose up in the Church, have been cried up by
their followers, for men of extraordinary piety, as well as parts, all are not
sheep that comes in sheeps clothing, a false Prophet is a wolf in sheeps
clothing, Math. 7. 15. but it is added, ye shall know them by their fruits,
mark by their fruits, not by their green leaves, nor fair flourishes, let them
pretend what they will, we must believe the word of the Lord, that one of the
marks of those who are approved, is to hold fast Gospel truths against
Heresies, 1 Cor. 11. 19. and by the rules of contraries, those infected with
Heresy, are made manifest, not to be approved. If that which I have formerly
asserted and cleared from Scripture be a truth, as most certainly it is, then
it is no truth, but a most dangerous and grace-destroying doctrine which some
hold: 1. viz. That it is to be much questioned; Mr. J. Goodwi^ Hagioma stix
sect: 634. 65*
whether any opinions or Heresies (as they are called) be absolutely
inconsistent with believing in Jesus Christ (and so damnable, that is,
accompanied with eternal damnation) but only that which is formerlie
contradictorie to such a believing. This writer (who is one of the fomenters of
the Scepticisme of this time) makes much question, whether any error or Heresy
be damnable, which does not formally contradict this proposition, that
whosoever believes in Jesus Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting life,
but I have showed elsewhere that Heresies denying the Godhead of Jesus Christ,
are accompanied with damnation (and no marvel) for whosoever believes in
Christ, and yet believes not him to be eternal God, does but believe in a
creature, and no creature can redeem us from hell, nor satisfy infinite
justice, so are the Heresies concerning justification (which hold that
something besides Christ's righteousness, whither our faith, or works is
imputed to us to justification) damnable, if continued in, Gal. 5. 4. that if
by damnable Heresies we mean, such errors as are of dangerous consequence, and
in this respect, justly and deeply condemnable, or censurable by men, many who
hold, and publicly maintain damnable Heresies, in this sense may have, yea,
and some (as far as men are able to discern, de facto) have true grace and
goodness. If he mean that such have true grace and goodness, in that sense,
as David, during the time of his continuing in the sin of adultery, or Peter,
during the time of his denying Christ, had true grace and goodness; that is,
that such do not totally fall away from true grace, but have the seed of God
abidi^g in them: then he pleads no better, then as if one should say, the
sin of adultery, the sin of denying of Christ, are not damnable sins, at
least, not inconsistent with true grace and goodness, but if he will yield
that errors of dangerous consequence, which are justly and deeply condemnable,
are inconsistent with true grace and goodness in the same sense, as gross
sins are inconsistent therewith; that is, that gross and condemnable errors
are inconsistent with the souls growing, thriving, prospering, and
flourishing, yea, with any lively acting, and putting forth of true grace,
yea, that gross errors do greatly and dangerously impare, abate, diminish,
weaken, wound, hurt and blast true grace and goodness, and do extremly
grieve, and in a great measure quench the spirit of grace: Then he must also
grant, that to bear with, or wink at gross er^ors, is to bear with, or wink at
such things as are extremly prejudicial, obstructive, and impeditive to true
grace and goodness.

4. It is but an ignorant mistake, and a dangerous soul deceaving presumption,
for a profane loose-liver, or for a close immortified and rotten hearted
hypocrite, to think or promise, that he will stand fast in the faith, and hold
fast the truth without wavering. Whosoever makes ship wrack of a good
conscience, cannot but make shipwreck of faith too. He that is overcome of a
sin, may be overcome of an error too, when he is tempted in that which is the
idol of his heart. Therefore let him who would have light from Christ, awake
from his sins, Ephesians. 5. 14. He that has not pious affections, and thinks
his orthodoxe judgment will make him steadfast in the faith, is as great a
fool, as he that thinks to ride without a horse, or a Captain that thinks to
fight the enemy without soldiers, or a Mariner that thinks to make out his
voyage when his ship wants sails.

5. They that would have Church censures, put forth only upon Heretics,
Apostats, or such as are unsound in the faith, but not upon profane livers in
the Church (which was the error of Erastus, and before him, of the Princes and
States of Germany, in the 100. Grievances, the Original of which error, so
far as I can find, was from the darkness of Popery, for there was an
opinion that the Pope might be deposed for Heresy, but not for a scandalous
life which opinion Aeneus Sylvius, de^gest is concilii Basil, lib: 1.
confuteth, they also upon the other hand, that would have the censure of
excommunication put forth upon loose and scandalous livers within the Church,
but not for those things, which the reformed Churches call Heresies. So (
Grotius annot: on Luke 6. 22. and diverse Arminians, diverse also of the
Sectaries in England.) These I say, both of the one and of the other opinion,
do but separat those things which ought not, cannot be separated.

6. There is cause to set a part days of fasting and prayers, when Heresies
and errors abound, as well as when prophannesse, and gross wickedness
abounds in the lives of people, Christ does in five of his Epistles to the
Churches of Asia (to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatyra, Philadelphia) take
notice of false Teachers, Sects, and erroneous Doctrines, commending the zeal
in Ephesus against them, blaming those in Pergamos and Thyatira, for
tollerating such amongst them, encouraging those in Smyrna and Philadelphia, by
expressing his displeasure against those Sects. No mention of loose and
scandalous livers, distinguished from the Sects in those Churches. Either there
were such scandalous livers in those Churches at that time, or not. If there
were, then observe, Christ mentions not them, but the false Teachers and
Sectaries, for although both are condemnable, yet he takes special notice of
scandals in Doctrine, and profession, as being matters of the highest treason
against him, and the most provoking sins in a Church, as being also the more
deceitful, and secreet poison honeyed over with plausible pretenses, and
therefore the more needing a discovery? If there were no such scandalous and
profane livers in these Churches. Then note, that Christ will have a great
controversy against a Church, which has false Doctrin^s, and pernicious Sects
in it, although there were never a scandalous person more in it. There is
therefore cause to fast and pray, for which Christ makes a matter of
controversy against his Churches: If we have prayed away Popery, Prelacy; the
old superstitious ceremonies, the Malignant Armies, etc. O let us cry mightily
for this also, see if we can pray away Heresies, and pernicious Doctrines,
Sects and Schisms.

7. We must turn away from, and avoid the fellowship of false Teachers, and
the spreaders of dangerous Doctrines, not only that we may be steadfast in the
truth, but that our hearts may be established with grace, for there are such
reasons given in Scripture, for avoiding the company of that kind of men, as
highly concern piety, avoid them, because they serve not Christ, but their
own bellies, Romans 16. 17, 18. from such turn away, because they are men of
corrupt minds, supposing gain to be godliness, and their disputings breed
envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 1 Timothy: 6. 4, 5. receave them not into
your houses, who bring not the Doctrine of Christ, because such have not God, 2
epist. of John verse. 9. 10, 11.

8. Let no man think that opinions are free, more then practices, or that a man
runs no hazard of his salvation, by erroneous and heretical opinions. Error
of judgment, as well as wickedness of practice, may bring death and
destruction upon the soul, Iam: 5. 19. 20. 2 Pet: 2. 1. and 3. 16. Gal. 2. 21.
Heretics as well as murderers and drunkards, are there excluded from the
kingdom of heaven.

9. If thou would keep thy head from erring, be sure to keep thy heart from
erring, Psalm: 95. 10. It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have
not known my ways, as thou desire not to be a backslider in the profession
of the true faith, be not a backslider in heart, Prove. 14. 14. If thou would
be preserved from erroneous opinions, pray for the mortification of thy
corruptions, Gal. 5. 20. with 24.

10. If thou would be firm and stable in the truth, thou must not only
have grace in the heart, but be established in grace, Heb* 13. 9. Be not
carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, for it is a good thing that
the heart (he says not have grace, but) be established (...) in grace, he
that is not established in the present truth: i. e. in the truth of the times,
proves himself (or otherwise makes himself) to be unstable in grace. If (...),
be (...), if he that is no profane one; be yet an unstable one, what does it
profit? It is plainly intimated to us, 1 Pet: 5. 8. 9. that such as are not
sted fast in the faith, do not resist Satan, but are devoured by him, and 2
Pet. 1. 12. The Apostle thinks it not enough that Christians be established in
the present truth, if they be not also growing in grace, and making sure their
calling and election, and adding one grace to another, wherefore, says he, I
will not be negligent, to put you always in remembrance of these things, (^to
wit, which belong to the establishing of the heart in grace) though ye know
them, and be established in the present truth.

Now that the heart may be established in grace, (and so also in the truth,)
let us endeavor to walk always, as under the eye of God, Psalm: 16. 8. Heb*
11. 27. to improve the promises, and rest upon Christ for stability of heart, 1
Cor: 1. 8. for he is our wisdom and sanctification, as well as righteousness
and redemption, ibid. verse: 30. Let us intertaine the Spirit of grace, and not
grieve him, nor quench him, for by the Spirit of the Lord are we upholden,
stablished, strengthened, Psalm: 51. 11, 12. Ephesians. 3. 16*

11. When it comes to a time of try all, and to the sifting of the whole house
of Israel, as corn is sifted in a sive, Amos 9. 9. they only are made
manifest to be approved, in whom there is both sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth, both true piety, and sound judgment, if either of
these be found wanting, be sure the other is wanting too; what ever show there
may be to the contrary. There is a Text, 1 Cor: 11. 19. worthy to be much and
often thought upon in these days; For there must be Heresies, (or Sects) among
you, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among you: of which
Text moreanone. Now then for as much as the Church is sometimes tried by
Heresies, sometimes by persecutions, sometimes by both, sometimes by other
tentations, and for our part, we know not what further trials we must endure,
before this work be at an end, or before we go off the stage. As we desire to
hold out in a time of trial, let us hold fast truth and holiness together,
and cast away from us whatsoever makes us to offend, whether it be the right
eye of an erroneous opinion, or the right hand of a sinful will, or the right
foot of a carnal affection.

CHAP. XIII.
Whether conscionable Christians and such as love the power and practice of
piety, can without defiling their conscience, or without a destructive wounding
of the power of godliness, embrace and hold the principles of these who call
themselves the godly party? Or whether they ought not rather to avoid those who
do now Pharisaically and Donatistically appropriat to them selves the name of
the godly party, as being indeed, such who under pretense of Zeal, for the
power of godliness, hold diverse ungodly principles.

LEt no man here stumble in the threshold, or be scandalized at the case I
put: I intend nothing, either against piety, or truly pious persons, but to
vindicat both from those principles of impiety, which some maintain and adhere
unto, under color of piety. The Arrians, Ebionites, and Socinians in Poland,
have pretended to be the godly party there, in so much that Faustus Socinus
wrote a book entitled thus, That the men of the kingdom of Poland, and the
great Duchy of Lithuania, commonly called Evangelicks, who were studious of
solid piety, ought altogether to adjoyne themselves to the Assembly of those,
who in the same places are falsely and undescrvedly called Arrians and
Ebionites.

There is as little truth in that pretense, which diverse Sectaries now make to
the way of godliness, observe but these principles of theirs.

1. That none ought to be punished for Preaching, Printing, or maintaining any
error in Faith or Religion, except it be contrary to the very light of nature.

Hence it will follow, that none is to be punished for Preaching or publishing
these errors: That the Scripture is not the word of God. That Jesus Christ was
an impostor or deceaver, for the light of nature will never serve to confute
these or such like errors concerning the Scriptures, the truths concerning
them, being wholly supernatural. Mr. I: Goodwin in his Hagiomastix sect: 58.
holds, that he who will hold that there is no Christ, is not so pernicious nor
punishable, as that man who lives, as if there were no Christ, and one of his
reasons is this, because, says he, the sins mentioned, adultery, theft, etc.
are clearly, and at first sight against the light and law of nature, but the
denial of the being of such a person as Christ, who is both God and man, is
not contrary to any law or principle in nature. I desire that the reader may
here observe the words of Mr. Burroughes, in the Epistle dedicatorie of his
Sermon preached before the house of Peers, November: 26. 1645. For connivence at
blasphemies, or damnable Heresies; God forbid, any should open his mouth, these
who are guilty herein against the light of nature, should be taken off from the
face of the earth; and such as a^e guilty against supernatural light, are to
be refrained and kept from the society of men, that they infect not others. The
latter part of that which he says, I accept, and I would to God, that so much
were put in execution. But why no other Heretics, or blasphemers should be
taken off from the face of the earth, but those only who are guilty against
the light of nature: I find no reason brought for it, and I do not understand
how it comes to pass, that any who look so much forward to new lights, should
herein fall so far backwark as to the light of nature; or that those who
decline the light of nature in matter of Church government, subordination,
appeals, and the like, should nothwithstanding in matters of faith, which are
much more sublime, appeal to the light of nature: There is need of some Oedipus
here.

2. That in controversies or questions of Religion, we must not argue from the
old Testament, but from the new. Hence are these exclamations against old
Testament Spirits, etc. which might indeed beseem the Manichees, who denied and
acknowledged not the old Testament. But to be heard in a reformed Church,
among those who acknowledge the old Testament to be the word of God, as well as
the new, it is most strange.

Our orthodox protestant writers, condemn as well the Anabaptists, who reject
and s^orne at arguments brought against them from the old Testament, as the
Manichees who did repudiat the old Testament, as having proceeded from an evil
God. See P* Martyr in 1 Cor. 10. 12. Aret: proble: theol: loc. 56.

By this principle they shall not hold it contrary to the will of God under the
new Testament, that a man marry his fathers brothers wife, this not being
forbidden in the new Testament, but in the old. Some indeed of this time have
maintained, that it is not unlawful to us to marry within these degrees which
are forbidden, Lev: 18. See Mr. Edwards in the third part of Gangraena, page 3.
These hold, it is only forbidden to commit fornication with such as are within
these degrees, not being married, as if (...) were not unlawful to commit
fornication with any, be they never so far without these degrees. By the same
principle which rejects old Testament proofs, they must deny the duty of
children under the new Testament, to marry with their parents consent, and this
is one of the foul errors of some Sectaries now adays, that though consent of
parents unto childrens marriage, was commanded under the law to them that lived
then, yet because that was but a ceremony, it is now lawful to marry without
their consent, because we live under the Gospel. See that same third part of
Gangraena, page: 14. By the same principle they must deny that an oath (be it
never so just and necessary) may be imposed by authority* Or that the Magistrate
ought to put to death, a blasphemer, an incestuous person, an adulterer, a
Witch, or the like, (the Scripturall warrants which make these crimes capital,
being in the old, not in the new Testament.) Says not the Apostle, 2 Timothy: 3.
16. all Scripture (and consequently the lawful examples, and la^dable
presidents of the old Testament,) is given by in spiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were
written for our learning. Is not our justification by faith proved, by the
example of Abraham's justification by faith? Rom: 4. Does not Christ himself
defend his Disciples there, plucking the ears of corn upon the Sabbath day, by
the example of David's eating the show bread, and by the example of the Priests
killing of sacrifices upon the Sabbath day, Matthew: 12. Yea, those that most cry
out against proofs from examples of the old Testament, are as ready as others
to borrow proofs from thence, when they think to serve their turn thereby,
which Aretius, probl: theol: loc. 56. instanceth in the Anabaptists, who would
not admit proofs from examples of the old Testament, yet many of them justified
the Bowrs bloody war, by the example of the Israelits rising against Pharaoh.

3. That if Sectaries and Heretics make a breach of peace, disturb the
State, or do evil against the Commonwealth in civil things, then the
Magistrate may punish and suppress them. But Sectaries and Heretics, who are
otherwise peaceable in the State, and subject to the Laws, and lawful power
of the civil Magistrate, ought to be tolerated and forborne. This is their
Kodesh hakkodashim, their holy of holies: indeed their (...). See the
compassionat Samaritan, page: 10* John the Baptist, page: 57* The bloody Tenent,
Chap: 52. M. S* to A. S. page* 53. 54. The ancient bounds, Chap: 1. See now how
far this principle will reach. A man may deny, and cry down the word of God,
Sacraments, Ordinances, all the Fundamentals of faith, all Religious Worship.
One may have leave to plead no Church, no Minister, no Ordinances; yea, to
blaspheme Jesus Christ, and God himself, and yet to escape the hand of the
Magistrate, as being no troubler of the State. This I gather from Mr. Williams
himself in his bloody Tenent, Chap. 6. where he distinguishes between the
spiritual and the civil peace, and cleares in the instance of Ephesus: N^w
suppose (says he) that God remove the candlestick from Ephesus: yea, though
the whole worship of the city of Ephesus should be altered. Yet (if men be true
and honestly ingenuous to city Covenants, Combinations, and principles) all
this might be without the least impeachment or infringment of the peace of the
city of Ephesus. So that by their principles, if the city of London were
turning peaceably to Mahumetanisme, or Paganism, the Parliament ought not to
apply their power for reducing them. If this be not to care for men's own
things, not for the things of Christ, what is? And must the Magistrate purchase,
or hold them quiet of the state at so dear a rate, as the lose of many souls?
What says Mr. Williams himself Bloody Tenent, chap. 33. It is a truth, the
mischief of a blind Pharisie, blind guidance, is greater then if he acted
treasons, murderers, etc. And the lose of one soul by his seduction, is a
greater mischief, then if he blew up Parliaments, and cut the throats of Kings
or Emperors, so precious is that invaluable Jewel of ^ Soul. I could wish
this written in marble, or recorded upon the Parliament walls, as the
confession of one who has pleaded most for liberty and tolleration from the
Magistrate, to soul murdering Heretics and deceavers.

But if any Magistrates will not have respect to the honor of God, and
salvation of souls, let them take heed to their own interest* When the Church
of Christ sinketh in a State, let not that State think to swim: Religion and
Righteousness must flourish or fade away, stand or fall together. They who are
false to God, shall not be faithful to men. It was a pious saying of
Constantine, Quomodo fidem praestabunt Imperato^i inviolatam, qui Deo sunt
persidi? It Is more then paradoxall, and I fear no less then Atheistical,
which Mr. Williams chap. 70. of the Bloody Tenent, holds, viz. that a false*
Religion and Worship will not hurt the civil State, incase the worshippers
break no civil Law.

4. That Socinian principle, does now pass for^ good among diverse Sectaries,
that a man is bound to believe no more then by his reason he can comprehend.
Mr. I: Goodwin, in his 38. Quaerees concerning the Ordinance, for the
preventing of the growing and spreading of Heresies, quaest: 29. tells us, that
if reason ought not to regulat, or limit men about the object, or matter of
their believing, then are they bound to believe these things, concerning which
there is no ground or reason at all, why they should be believed.

As if this (being understood of humane or natural reason) were an absurdity*
Divine Revelation in Scripture, or thus says the Lord, is the ground or reason
of believing, or as School men speak, the Objectum formale fidei. But we are
bound to believe, because of thus says the Lord, some things which we are not
able to comprehend by our reason; for instance, The Trinity of persons in the
God* head, the incarnation of the Son of God, his conception of a Virgin, the
union of two natures, of God and man in one person. It is therefore a question
tending of it self to the subversion of the Christian faith, and so of piety,
which that Quaerist there propounds, viz. Whether ought any man (at least in
sensu comsito) to believe the deepest or highest mystery in Religion, any
further or any otherwise, then as, and as far as, he has reason to judge it
to be a truth? The same writer in his Hagiomastix, sect. 90. tells us, that
this is sound Divinity, that reason ought to be every man's leader, guide and
director in his faith, or about what he is, or ought to believe: and that no
man ought to leap wit^ his faith, till he has looked with his reason, and
discovered what is meet to be believed, what not. If this be good Divinity,
then Paul's Divinity is not good, Romans 8. 7. 1 Cor: 2. 14. 2 Cor* 10. 5.

5. That the only right Reformation under the Gospel, is the mortifying,
destroying, and utter abolishing out of the faithful and elect, all that
sin, corruption, lust, evil, that did flow in upon them, through the fall of
Adam. This is true Gospel Reformation, says Mr. Dell: Sermon. on Heb. 9. 10. and
besides this I know no other. And after, page 11* Christ dying for us, is our
redemption, Christ dwelling and living in us, is our Reformation. Again, page:
12. For the taking away transgression for us, and from us, which is the only
Reformation of the new Testament, is a work agreeable to none, but the Son of
God, as it is written, His Name shall be called JESUS, for he shall save his
people from their sins; whereupon all alongs he speaks much against
Ecclesiastical Reformation, and page: 14. He advises the Parliament to lay
aside their intentions (how pious soever) of the work of Church Reformation,
because they are men of war, and the care of this work belongs only to Christ,
the Prince of peace.

This Doctrine, 1. Is destructive to the solemn League and Covenant of the
three Kingdoms, obligeing them to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government. 2. It Is destructive to the
Reformation begun by Luther, continued and prosecuted by all thereformed
Churches, and by the Independent Churches as well as others. 3. It Is contrary
to the example of the Apostles themselves, and condemns them as well as us,
for they did not only teach and commend to the Churches, that Reformation which
Mr. Dell calls the mortifying, or destroying of corruption and lust, or Christ
dwelling and living in us, but likewise an external Ecclesiastical
Reformation, and several Canons concerning the Reformation of external
abuses* and scandals in the Church: as for instance, that the Churches should
abstain from blood, and things strangled; that two or three at most should
prophecy in the Church at one meeting; that the men should pray with their
heads uncovered, the women covered; that young widows should be no longer
admitted to serve the Church in attending the sick* and that such widows must
be at least 60. years old, and the like* 4. This Doctrine puts Jesus Christ
himself in the wrong, because he challenged the Churches of Pergamus* and
Thyatira, for suffering and having amongst them these that taught the Doctrine
of B^laam. ^5. Mr. Dell, his doctrine opens a wide door to the tolleration
of the grossest and most horrid Idolatries, Blasphemies, Abominations. I^
thousands in the Kingdom should set up the Mass, and bread Worship, or should
worship the Sun, or should publicly maintain that there is no God, nor any
judgment to come, nor Heaven, nor Hell, the Parliament ought not, may not, (by
his doctrine) endeavor the reducing and reforming of such people, or the
suppressing of such abominations: these offenders must be let alone till
Christ reform them, and mortify sin in them, which is to him the only
Reformation now under the Gospel. 6. And while he appropriateth this
Reformation to the time of the Gospel since Christ came in the flesh, he
does by necessary consequence hold, that there was no godly or mortifyed
person in the old Testament, and that we must not take Abraham, Moses, David,
Job, etc. for examples of a personal Reformation, or of true holiness and
mortification. As this does necessarily follow from this Doctrine, so it seems
to have been not far from his meaning and intention. For page: 3. 4. speaking of
the time of the old Testament, he says* There was no true Reformation, but
under all that outward Religion, men were inwardly as corrupt and wicked as
the very Heathen, and without any true Reformation before God, till Christ who
was God in the flesh came with the ministration of the Spirit, and then indeed
was the time of Reformation. Then he comes to explain what this true
Reformation is, viz. The taking away and destroying of the body of sin out of
the faithful, etc. Whence it cannot but follow, that there was no such thing
before the coming of Christ, as the taking away and destroying the body of
sin out of the faithful.

6. There are diverse Arminian and Antinomian Tenants, which very much
strengthen the hands of the wicked in his wickedness, yet such Tenants are
maintained by many of these, who call themselves the godly party, for instance
that of universal atonement, and Christ dying for all men, mark but the title
of Mr. Moors book: The universality of Gods free grace in Christ, to mankind
proclaimed and displayed, etc. that all might be comforted, encouraged, every
one consirmed, and assured of the propitiation and death of Christ for the
whole race of mankind, and so for himself in particular.

Hereby the same sweetness of Gospel comforts, and the same assurance of an
interest in Jesus Christ and his death, is imparted and extended to the
humbled, and the unhumbled, to the convinced, and to the unconvinced, to the
wounded, and to the unwounded, to believers, and to the unbeleevers, to the
converted, and to the unconverted; as if all and every one were fit to be
comforted and capable of an assurance, that Jesus Christ has redeemed them,
and made satisfaction to the Divine justice in their behalf. If this be not
to sow pillows, which sinners may securely lie down and sleep upon, what is?

The like I say of that position which Mr. Sam: Lane in his Vindication of free
grace has oppugned, as an Arminian position, preached and asserted by Mr. J.
Goodwin, Natural men may do such things, as whereunto God has by way of
promise annexed grace and acceptance. Which takes away the necessity of
preventing grace, and the impotency of nature unto, yea, 'its averseness from
any true spiritual good, which can be acceptable unto God: every such exalting
of nature, is a depressing of grace, and Ministereth occasion to unregenerat
persons to please themselves too much with their present natural estate.

7. Other Tenants are current among many of that party, which are apt to weaken
the hearts and hands of the godly in the exercises of humiliation, repentance,
mortification, and fruits of sanctification, by holding that God does not
chastise his children for sin; that there is not so much as a fatherly
displeasure, or anger in God against the faults of his children* that God sees
no sin in Israel, so much as to afflict them for it in this world; that
believers are not bound to live according to the rule of the moral law; that
believers are not to be terrified, or at all wrought upon by any threatenings,
or by danger and punishment of sin; that believers ought not to try their
spiritual estate, or seek assurance of their interest in Jesus Christ, and the
Covenant of grace, by any gracious signs or qualifications, or by any fruits
of sanctification in themselves, but only by the inward testimony of the
Spirit and light of faith, which (say they) are of sufficient credit by
themselves, without the help of any marks of grace. It is informed, that among
some of the Sectaries of this time, are found these Tenants, that adultery is
no sin, and that drunkenness is none neither, but a help to see Christ the
better; that there is no resurrection of the dead, nor no hell. See Mr.
Edwards, in the third part of Gangraena, page: 14. 107.

CHAP. XIV.
Another most useful case of Conscience discussed and resolved, concerning
Associations and Confederacies with Idolaters, Infidels, H^reticks, or any
other known Enemies of truth, and Godliness.

WHile I have occasion to speak of humane Covenants, it shall not be
unprofitable to speak somewhat to that question so much debated, as well among
Divines, as among Politicians and Lawyers, whether a confederacy and
association with wicked men, or such as are of another Religion, be lawful,
yea, or no. For answer whereunto shortly, let us distinguish, 1. Civil
Covenants. 2. Ecclesiastical, Sacred or Religious Covenants. 3. Mixed
Covenants, partly civil, partly Religious. Zeperus. de pol. Mos. lib* 6. cap.
4* Pelargus in Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2, Par^us i^ Genesis 14. ^ivetus in Exodus 23. 32.
Tarnovi us tract. de foede^ bus.
The last two being made with wicked men, and such as differ in Religion from
us, I hold to be unlawful, and so do the best Writers. When the Israelites are
forbidden a Covenant with the Canaanites, special mention is made of their
gods, altars, images, Exodus 23. 32. and 34. 13. 14. Iud. 2. 2. that no such
superstitious, unlawful worship might beetolerated. As for civil Covenants, if
they be for commerce or peace, which were called (...), they are allowed
according to the Scriptures, Genesis 14. 13. Genesis 31. 44. 1 Kings 5. 12. Ier. 29.
7. Romans 12. 18. Such Covenants the Venetians have with the Turk, because of
vicinity: Such Covenants also Christian Emperors of old, had sometimes with
the Pagans. It was the breach of a civil Covenant of peace with the Turk,
that God punished so exemplarly in Vladyslaus King of Hungary: But if the
civil Covenant be such a Covenant as the Grecians See Vict^ Srigel. in 7
paralip ^5. 2* Also Zep^erus, (...), Tarnovi^, ubi su^. Lava^ in 2 Paralip.*
^5. and in Ezekiel. 16. 26. P* Martyr Loc. Com. Clas. 4. cap 16. Number. 23. and
comment. in 1 Reg. 15. ^7. etc. The same thing is ^olden by Tostatus in 3. Reg.
15. Quest 14. Corn. (...) Lat pide in 3. Page 22. 3.
called (...) to join in military expeditions together, of this is the
greatest debate and controversy among Writers; for my part, I hold it
unlawful with diverse good Writers; And I conceive that Exodus 34. God
forbids not only Religious Covenants with the Canaanites, but even civil
Covenants, verse. 12. and conjugall Covenants, verse. 16. Which is also Iunius
his opinion in his Analysis upon that place. The reason for the unlawfulness
of such confederacies are brought. 1. From the Law, Exodus, 23. 32. and 34. 12.
15. Deuteronomy. 7. 2. Yea God makes this a principal stipulation and condition upon
their part, while he is making a Covenant with them, Exodus 34. 10. 12. Iud. 2.
1. 2. and lest it should be thought that this is meant only of these seven
Nations enumerate, Deuteronomy. 7. the same Law is interpret of four other Nations, 1.
Kings 11. 1, 2. so that it is to be understood generally against confederacies
with Idolaters and those of a false Religion: And the reason of the Law is
Moral and perpetual, viz. the danger of ensnaring the people of God:
therefore they were forbidden to Covenant either with their gods, or with
themselves, for a conjunction of Counsels, and familiar conversation (which are
consequents of a Covenant) draws in end to a fellowship in Religion. 2. From
disallowed and condemned examples, as Asa his Covenant with Benhadad, 2. Chron.
16. to verse. 10. And Ahaz, his Covenant with the King of Assyria, 2 Kings 16.
7. 10. 2 Chro. 28. 16. to 23. And if it should be objected, these are but
examples of Covenants with Idolatrous heathens, there is not the like reason to
condemn confederacies, and associations with wicked men of the same Religion;
I answer. 1. It holds a fortiori against confederacies with such of the seed of
Jacob as h^d made defection from true Religion, for Grotius de jure belli and
pocis lib. 2. Cap 15. Number. 9. notes, God would have such to be more abominated
then heathens, and to be destroyed from among their people, Deuteronomy. 13. 13.
Besides this I add. 2. We have in other Scriptures examples, which meet with
that case also; for Iehosaphats confederacy with Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18. 3. with
Chron. 19. 2 and after with Ahaziah 2. Chron. 20. 35. are condemned, which made
Iehosaphat (although once relapsing into that sin) yet afterward mend his
fault, for he would not again join with Ahaziah, when he sought that
association the second time, 1 Kings. 22. 49. So Amaziah having associate
himself in an expedition with the Israelites, when God was not with them, did
upon the Prophets admonition disjoin himself from them, and take his hazard of
their anger: 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8, 9, 10. Lavater upon the place applying that
example, notes this as one of the causes why the Christian Wars with the Turk
had so ill success, why says he, consider what Soldiers were employed, this
is the fruit of associations with the wicked. 3. These confederacies proceed
from an evil heart of unbelief, as is manifest by the reasons which are
brought against Ahaz his League with Benhadad, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8, 9. and by
that which is said against the confederacy with the King of Assyria, Isay 8.
12, 13. for as Calvin upon the place notes, the unbeleevers among the people
considering their own inability for managing so great a War, thought it
necessary to have a confederacy with the Assyrians; but this was from
faithless fears, from want of faith to stay and rest upon God as
all-sufficient 4. If we must avoid fellowship and conversation with the sons of
Belial, (except where natural bonds or the necessity of a calling tyeth us)
Psalm. 6. 8. Prove. 9. 6 and 24. 1. 2 Cor 6. 14, 15. and if we should account
Gods enemies ourenemies, Psa. 139. 21. then how can we join with them, as
confederates and associates, for by this means we shall have fellowship with
them, and look on them as friends.

Now as to the Arguments which use to be brought for the contrary opinion,
First it is objected that Abraham had a confederacy with Aner, Eschol, and
Mamre, Genesis 14. 13. Abraham with Abimelech, Genesis 21. 27. 32 and Isaac
with Abimelech, Genesis 26. Jacob with Laban, Gen, 31. 44. Solomon, with Hiram, 1
Kings 5. 11. Answ. 1 It cannot be proved that these confederates of Abraham,
Isaac, and Solomon were either idolaters or wicked; Laban indeed was an
idolater: But there are good interpreters who conceive that Abraham's three
confederates feared God; and that Abimelech also feared God, because he
speaks reverently of God, and ascri^eth to God the blessing and prosperity of
those Patriarchs.

It Is presumed also that Hiram was a pious man, because of his Epistle to
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 2. 11, 12. however, 2. Those confederacies were civil,
either for commerce, or for peace and mutual security that they should not
wrong one another, as that with Laban, Genesis 31. 52. and with Abimelech. Genesis
26. 29. which kind of confederacy is not controverted.

It Is objected also that the Maccabees had a Covenant with the Romans and
Lac^monians, 1 Macca. 8, and 12. 1, 2. Answ. 1. That Covenant is disallowed by
many good Writers; yet it is observed from the Story that they had not the
better, but the worse success, nor the less but the more trouble following
it. 2. The Story it self, 1 Macc. 1. 12. tells us that the first motion of a
confederacy with the heathen in those times proceeded from the children of
Belial in Israel. Lastly, it may be objected that persons discontented, and of
broken fortunes were gathered to David; and that he received them, and became a
Captain unto them, 1 Samuel 22. 2. Answ. 1. Some think (and it is probable) they
were such as were oppressed and wronged by Saul's tyranny, and were therefore in
debt and discontented, and that David in receiving them was a type of Christ
who is a refuge for the afflicted, and touched with the feeling of their
infirmities. 2. Whoever they were, David took care that no profane nor wicked
person might be in his company, Psalm. 101. yea, Psalm. 34. 11. (which was penned
at that same time when he departed from Achish and became Captain of those 400
men) he says to them, Come ye children harken unto me, I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. 3. I shall bring a better Argument from David's example
against the joining with such associates in Wa^ as are known to be malignant
and wicked, Psalm. 118. 7. The Lord takes my part with them that help me,
therefore I shall see my desire upon mine enemies, Psalm. 54. 4. The Lord is
with them that uphold my soul. Upon this last place, both Calvin and Gesnerus
observe, that although David's helpers were few and weak, yet God being in them,
and with them, his confidence was that they should prove stronger then all the
wicked; he intimates also, that if he had not known that God was with his
helpers, leading and inspireing them, he had looked for no help by them: 2 Chronicles 25. 7, 8. That David's helpers in the War were looked upon as sincere,
cordial, and stirred up of God, may further appear from 1 Chronicles. 12. where
David joyneth with himself fidos homines qui idem cum eo senti^ent, says
Lavater on the place, faithful men of his own mind: he adds, that they
were such as hated Saul's impiety and in^ustice, and loved David's virtue. Vict.
Strigelious calls them, fideles amicos, faithful friends. The text it self
tells us, that diverse of them joined themselves to David while he was yet in
distress and shut up in Zicklag: verse. 1. (which was an Argument of sincerity)
also, that some of Benjamin (Saul's own tribe) adjoined themselves to David, and
the spirit came upon Amasai, who by a special Divine instinct spoke to assure
David of their sincerity, verse. 2. 16, 18. They also who joined themselves with
David after Saul's death, verse. 23. were not of a double heart, but of a perfect
heart, verse. 33. 38. and they all agreed that the first great business to be
undertaken, should be Religion, the bringing back of the Arc: 1 Chronicles. 13. 3,
4.

This point of the unlawfulness of confederacies with men of a false Religion
is strangely misapplyed by Lutherans, against confederacies with us, whom they
call Calvinists: So argues Tarnovius Tract. de Foederib. But we may make a
very good use of it: for as we ought to pray and endeavor that all who are
Christ's may be made one in him, so we ought to pray against and by all means
avoid fellowship, familiarity, Marriages, and military confederacies with
known wicked persons, and such as are of a false or heretical Religion: I
shall branch forth this matter in five particulars, which God forbade to his
people in reference to the Canaanites and other heathens, which also (partly by
parity of reason, partly by concluding more strongly) will militate against
confederacies and conjunctions with such as under the profession of the
Christian Religion do either maintain Heresies and dangerous Errors, or live a
profane and wicked life.

First, God forbade all Religious Covenants with such, and would not have his
people to tolerate the gods, images, altars or groves of idolaters: Exodus 23.
32. and 34. 13. Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Judge. 2: 2. And although the letter of the Law
mention this in reference to the Canaanites, yet the best reforming Kings of
Judah applied and executed this Law in taking away the groves and high places
abused by the Jews in their superstition: And what marvel? If such things
were not to be tolerated Socrat. hist: lib. 5 Cap. 10.
in the Canaanites, much less in the Jews. Theodosius is comm^nded for his
suppressing and punishing Heretics.

2. God forbade familiar conversation with these heathens, that they should not
dwell together with his people, nay, not in the land with them, Exodus 23. 33.
lest one of them being familiar with an Israelite, might call him to a feast,
and make him eat of things sacrificed to idols, Exodus 3. 15, Compare this with
Iud. 1. 21. Psalm 106. 35. Now the Apostle lays much more restraint upon us,
from conversing, eating and drinking with a scandalous Christian, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
then with a Pagan or unbeleever, 1 Cor. 1. 27. There is a conversing and
companying with wicked persons, which is our affliction, not our fault, that is
when we cannot be rid of them, do what we can, 1 Cor. 5. 10. which is an
argument against separating and departing from a true Church, because of
s^andalous persons in it. The Apostle gives this check to such, go where they
will, they shall find scandalous persons all the world over. There is again a
conversing and companying with wicked persons, which natural and civil bonds,
or near relations, or our calling tyeth us unto, as between husband and wife,
Parent and Child, Pastor and People, Magistrate and those of his charge. But
wittingly and willingly to converse and have fellowship either with heretical
or profane persons, whether it be out of love to them and delight in them, or
for our own interest or some worldly benefit this is certainly sinful and
inexcusable. If we take care of our bodily safety, by flying the company of
such as have the plague, yea if we take care of the safety of our beasts, and
would not to our knowledge suffer a scabbed or rotten sheep to infect the rest,
shall we not much more take care of our own and neighbors souls, by avoiding
and warning others to avoid the fellowship of the ungodly, whereby spiritual
infection comes. Remember it was but a kind visit of Iehosaphat to Ahab which
was the occasion of ingageing him into a confederacy with that wicked man, 2 Chronicles. 18. 2* 3.

3 God forbade conjugall Covenants or Marrying with them. Exodus: 34, 16. Deuteronomy:
7, 3. The rule is the same against matching with other wicked persons, whether
Idolaters or professing the same Religion with us. We read not of Idolatry or
any professed doctrinall differences in Religion between the Posterity of Seth
and the posterity of Cain, yet this was the great thing that corrupted the old
world and brought on the flood, that the children of God joined themselves in
Marriage with the profane, Gen: 6, 1, 2, 3. Iehoram married not an heathen,
but the daughter of Ahab; but it is marked, he did evil as did the house of
Ahab; And what is the reason given for this? For the daughter of Ahab was his
wife, 2 Kings 8, 18, and by and by, verse: 27. the like is marked of Ahaziah the
son of Iehoram, who did evil in the sight of the Lord as did the house of
Ahab, for he was the son in law of the house of Ahab. The Apostle Peter
supposes that Christians marry such as are heirs together of the grace of
life, 1 Peter 3, 7. see also, Pro: 31. 30.

4. God forbade his people to make with the Canaanites foedus deditionis or
subactionis, (or as others speak) pactum liberatorium, he would have his people
show no mercy to those whom he had destinate to destruction, Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
Herein Ahab sinned, making a brotherly Covenant of friendship with Benhadad,
when God had delivered him into his hand, 1 Kings 20. 32, 33, 34. So in all
Christian commonwealths, the Magistrate, Gods vicegerent ought to cut off such
evil doers, as Gods Word appoints to be cut off. David's sparing of Ioab and
Shimei, being partly necessitate thereto, partly induced by political reasons,
(whereof he repented when he was dying, nor could his conscience beat-ease,
till he left a charge upon Solomon, for executing justice upon both Ioab and
Shimei, 1 Kings 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.) are no good presidents or warrands to
Christian Magistrates, to neglect the executing of justice. It Is a better
president which David resolves, upon more deliberatly, Psalm. 101. 8. I will
early destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all wicked doers
from the City of the Lord. Mark this all, of what degree or quality soever,
without respect of persons, and that early, and without delay. Lastly, and even
Ioab himself was so far punished by David, that he was cast out of his place
and command, 2 Samuel 19. 3. and 20. 4.

5. The Law is also to be applied against civil Covenants, not of peace, or of
commerce, but of war; that is, a League offensive and defensive, wherein we
associate our selves with idolaters, infidels, heretics, or any other known
enemies of truth or godliness, so as to have the same friends or enemies. A
covenant of Peace or commerce with such may happen to be unlawful in respect
of some circumstances as when Peace is given to those Rebels, Murderers,
Incendiaries in the Kingdom, who by the law of God ought to be destroyed by
the hand of Justice, or when commerce with idolaters is so abused, as to furn
sh them with the things that they are known to make use of in their idolatry.
But as for (...), a confederacy ingageing us into a War with such associats,
it is absolutely and in its own nature unlawful: And I find it condemned by
good Writers, of the Popish party, of the Lutheran party, and of the Orthodoxe
party. Some of all these are before cited. What holiness God required in the
Armies of Israel, see Deuteronomy: 23. 9, 11, 12, 13, 14: we may well argue as
Isidorus P^lusiota does, lib. 3 Epist. 14. If the Law was so severe against
such uncleanness as were not voluntary, how much less would God suffer such
as did voluntarily and wickedly defile themselves. It Is marked as a part of
A^imelechs sin, Iud: 9. 4. that he hired vain and light persons which followed
him. God would have Amaziah to dismiss an hundred thousand men of Israel being
already with him in a body, and told him he should fall before the enemy if
these went with him, because God was not with them, 2 Chronicles. 25. 7. etc. If
they had not yet been gathered into a body, it had been much to abstain from
gathering them, upon the Prophets admonition, but this is much more, that he
sends them away after they are in a body, and takes his hazard of all the hurt
that so many enraged Soldiers could do to him or his people, and indeed they
did much hurt in going back, verse: 13, yet God rewarded Amaziahs obedience with
a great Victory. In the last age shortly after the begun Reformation in
Germany, this case of conscience concerning the unlawfulness of such
confederacies was much looked at. The city of Strassburg, Anno, 1629. made
Sleid. com. lib. 7. page 106.
a defensive League with Zurik, Berne, and Basil, Qui and vicini erant, and
dogmate magis conveniebant, says Sleidan, they were not only neighbors, but
of the same Faith and Religion, therefore Ibid: lib: 8 page 127, de Helvetiis
infoedus recipiendis* quod civitates valde cupiebant, Saxo per Legatos
respondet, quoniam de coena Dom. diversum sequantur dogma non sibi licere
societatem cum ipsis ullam coire: quanti sit ipsorum conjunctio, propter vires
atque potentiam, non se quidem latere, sed eo sibi minime respiciendum esse, ne
tristis inde sequatur exitus, quod iis accidisse Scriptura testetur, qui
muniendi sui causa, cujusque modi praesidiis usi fuissent. Vide etiam page 1 3.
Quod si Zuingliani faterentur errorem atque desisterent, comprehendi etiam in
hac pace sin minus, tum deserendos, nec auxilii quicquam cis communicandum,
neque foedus ullum cum ipsis faciendum esse. Et infra lib. 9. page 156. Et
recipiendos esse placet in hoc foedus (Smalcaldicum) qui velint atque cupiant
modo, Doctrina Augustae propositam in Comitiis profiteantur, and sortem
communem subeant.
they made a confederacy with them. About two years after the Elector of
Saxony refused to take into confederacy those Eelvetians, because although they
were powerful, and might be very helpful to him, yet they differing in
Religion, concerning the Article of the Lords Supper, he said, he durst not
join with them as confederats, lest such sad things might befall him, as the
Scripture testifies to have befallen those who for their help or defense took
any assistance they could get.

The rule was good in thesi. although in that particular case misapplyed. The
very heathens had a notion of the unlawfulness of confederacies with wicked
men, for as Victorinus Strigelius on 2 Chronicles: 25. notes out of Aeschylus his
tragedy, entitled, Seven to Thebe, Amphiaraus a wise virtuous man was
therefore swallowed up in the earth with seven men, and seven horses, because
he had associat himself with Tydeus; Capaneus, and other impious Commanders
marching to the siege of Thebe. Lastly, take this reason for further
confirmation, as we must do all to the glory of God, so we must not make
Wars to our selves, but to the Lord; hence the book of the Wars of the
Lord, Number: 21, 14, and, the battle is not ours, but the Lords. 1 Samuel: 25, 28, 2 Chronicles: 20, 15. Now how shall we employ them that hate the Lord, to help the
Lord? or how shall the enemies of his glory do for his glory? Shall rebels and
traitors be taken to fight in the Kings Wars? Offer it to thy Governor, as it
is said, Mal. 1. see if he would take this well.

As for the Objections from Scripture, they are before answered. There are many
other exceptions of men's corrupt reason, which yet may be easily taken off, if
we will receive Scripture light. That very case of Iehosophats confederacy
with Ahab, takes off many of them; for although, 1. Iehosophat was a good man,
and continued so after that association, not drawn away into Idolatry, nor
infected with Ahabs Religion, but only assisting him in a civil business* 2.
Ahab lived in the Church of Israel, which was still a Church, although greatly
corrupted, and he was no professed hater of God, (only he had professed to
hate Micajah the man of God,) yea, lately besore this he appeared very
penitent, and some think Iehosaphat now judged charitably of Ahab, because of
that great humilation and repentance of his, which God did accept, so far, as
to reward it with a temporal sparing mercy, 1 Kings 21. at the end: then
follows immediately, Chap: 22. Iehosaphats association with him. Although
Iehosaphat was also joined in affinity with Ahab, Ahabs daughter being married
to his son. 3. The enemy was the King of Syria; and Iehosaphat does not join
with a wicked Man against any of Gods people, but against the infidel Syrians;
even as Amaziah was beginning to join with those of the ten Tribes against the
Edomites. 4. The cause seems to have been good, as Carthusian on 1 Kings 22.
3. and Lavater upon Polit. Christ. lib 7. Cap. 1.
2 Chronicles: 19. 2. note. For Ramoth-Gilead was a city of refuge, pertaining to
the Levites in the Tribe of Gad, and should have been restored by the King of
Syria to Ahab, according to their Covenant, 1 Kings 20. 34. Daneus* brings that
same example of Ahabs going up against Ramoth-Gilead, to prove that it is just
to make war against these who have broken Covenant with us. 5, Iehosaphats
manner of proceeding, was pious in this respect, that he said to Ahab, enquire
I pray thee of the word of the Lord to day, and again, is there not here a
Prophet of the Lord besides, he enquireth ultra, and seeks all the light he
could there have in point of conscience from Prophets of the Lord, which makes
it probable, that those 400. Prophets did not profess, or were not known to
Iehosaphat to be Prophets of Baal; but were looked upon as Prophets of the Lord,
as Cajetan thinks. Therefore they answer also in the name of the Lord, the
Lord shall deliver it. It Is not likely that Iehosaphat would desire the
Prophets of Baal to be consulted, or that he would hearken to them more, then
to the Prophet of the Lord Micajah, yet in this he failed extremly, that he had
too far engaged himself to Ahab, before the enquiring at the word of the Lord.
How ever it seems, he was by this enquiring, seeking a fair way to come off
again. 6. Iehosaphats end was good, Martyr on 1 Kings 22. thinks Iehosaphat
entered into this confederacy with Ahab, for the peace and safety of his
Kingdom, and to prevent a new War between Judah and Israel, such as had been
between Asa his father, and Baasha King of Israel, for which end also
Carthusian ibid. thinks that Iehosaphat took Ahabs daughter to his son. Yet
notwithstanding of all this, the Prophet Iehu says to him, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
Should thou help the ungodly, or love them that hate the Lord. The LXX:
read, hated of the Lord, which comes all to one thing. And least it should be
thought a venial or light matter, headdeth, therefore is wrath upon thee from
before the Lord. So that from this example we learn; That let us keep our
selves unspotted of the false Religion, or errors of those with whom we
associate, let wicked men seem never so penitent, and our relations to them be
never so near, let the common enemy be an Infidel, let the cause be never so
good, let the manner of proceeding be never so pious, and the end also good;
yet all this cannot excuse, nor justify confederacies and associations with
wicked and ungodly men. And if God was so angry at Iehosaphat, when there were
so many things concurring, as might seem to excuse or extenuate his fault, it
being also in him a sin of infirmity only, and not without a reluctation of
conscience, and a conflict of the spirit against the flesh (which Pareus upon 1
Kings 22. does well collect from his desire of enquiring at the word of the
Lord, that he might have occasion to come off) how much more will God be
angry with such as go on with an high hand in this trespass, casting his word
behind them, and hating to be reformed.

If it be further objected, that we are not able without such confederacies,
and help to prosecute a great war alone. This also the holy Ghost has before
hand answered, in the example of Ahaz his confederacy with the King of Assyria;
for he had a great war to manage, both against the Syrians, and against the
King of Israel, 2 Kings 16. 7. also against the Edomites and Philistims, 2 Chronicles: 28. 16, 17, 18. yet although he had so much to do, this could not excuse
the confederacy with the Assyrian: he should have trusted to God, and not used
unlawful means. God can save by few, as well as by many; yea, sometimes God
thinks not fit to save by many, Iud. 7. It shall not be the strength of
battle, to have unlawful confederats, but rather to want them, Exodus 23. 22.

If it be said, it is dangerous to provoke, and incense many wicked men by
casting them off. This is plainly answered from the example of Amaziah, and the
100000. men of Israel with him, of which before. If furthermore objection be
made, that he must be gentle and patient toward all, and in meekness,
instruct those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. Answ: 1. Yet he bids
us turn away from the wicked, ibid: Chap: 3. 5. We ought in meekness to
instruct, even him that is excommunicate, 2 Thessalonians: 3. 15. yet we are there
warned, verse: 14. to have no company with him. 2. The Angel of the Church at
Ephesus, is at on ecommended, both for his patience, and that he could not bear
them which were evil.

I shall add five distinctions which will take off all other objections that I
have yet met with. 1. Distinguish between a confederacy, which is more
discretive, and discriminative and a confederacy which is more unitive. And
here is the Reason why Covenants of peace and commerce, even with infidels and
wicked persons are allowed, yet military associations with such, disallowed:
for the former keeps them, and us still divided as two: the latter unites us
and them, as one, and imbodieth us together with them: for Thucidides defines
(...) to be such a Covenant, as makes us and our confederates Keckermde Repub.
Spart. disp. 4. lib. 2. Cap. 20.
to have the same friends and enemies, and it is mentioned by writers, as a
further degree of Uniou then (...), or Covenants of peace. 2. Distinguish
between endeavor of duty, and the perfection of the things, which answers
that exception. O then, we must have an army all of Saints (it should be said,
without any known wicked person in it;) Now even as it is our duty to endeavor
a purging of the Church, from wicked and scandalous persons, yet when we have
done all we can, the Lords field shall not be perfectly purged from tares, til
the end of the world, Matthew. 13. So when we have done all that ever we can, to
avoid wicked persons in an expedition, yet we cannot be rid of them all; but we
must use our utmost endeavors, that we may be able to say, it is our
affliction, not our fault. 3. Distinguish between some particular wicked
persons, here and there mixing themselves with us; and between a wicked
faction, and Malignant party: The former should be avoided as much as is
possible, but much more a conjunction with a wicked faction. David would by no
means meet and consult with the Kahal meregnim, the Assembly of Malignants;
neither did he only shun to meet and consult with vain persons; who openly
show and bewray themselves; but even with dissemblers, or (as the Chaldee) with
those that hide themselves, that they may do evil, Psalm. 26. 4, 5. We can know
better how to do with a whole field of tares, in which is no wheat, then we
can do with tares growing here and there among the wheat. 4. Distinguish
between such a fellowship with some wicked persons, as is necessary (which is
the case of those that are married, and of parents and children) or
unavoidable, which is the case of those, whose lot is to cohabite in one Town,
or in one Family, in a case of necessity, traveling or sailing together;
Distinguish, I say, between these and an elective, or voluntary fellowship with
wicked men, when love to them, or our own benefit draws us thereunto. We
neither loose natural bonds, nor require impossibilities, but that we keep our
selves pure, by not choosing or consenting to such fellowship. 5. Distinguish
between Infidels, Heretics, wicked persons repenting, and those who go on in
their trespass: what ever men have been, yet as soon as the signs of
repentance, and new fruits appear in them, we are ready to receave them into
favor and fellowship: Then indeed the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and
the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together,
meaning, such as were Wolves, Leopards, Bears, and now begin to change their
nature* not so with the obstinate, contumacious, and impenitent, who still
remain Wolves, etc.

Let us now, 1: Examine our selves, whether there be so much tenderness of
conscience in us, as to close with those Scripture Truths, or whether we are
still in a way of consulting with flesh and blood. 2. Be humbled for former
miscarriages, and failings in the particulars, and for not walking accuratly,
according to these Scripture rules. 3. Beward for the future: remember and
apply these rules, when we have to do with the practice of them: And that I may
drive home this nail to the head: I add, (beside what was said before) these
Reasons and Motives. First, it is a great judgment when God mingleth a perverse
Spirit in the midst of a people, Isay 19. 14. shall we then make that a
voluntary act of our own, which the Word mentions as a dreadful judgment?
With this spiritual judgment, is oftentimes joined a temporal judgment, as
2 Chren: 16. 9: and 20. 37. and 28* 22. so Hos: 5. 13. 7, 8. compared with Hos:
8. 8, 9. Where their judgment, sounds forth their sin as by an Echo: The
Chaldee paraphrase in the place last cited, says, The house of Israel is
delivered into the hands of the people whom they loved. Secondly, remember what
followed upon Gods peoples mingling themselves with the heathen, Psalm. 106. 35.
They were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, Hos: 7. 8.
Ephraim, he has mixed himself among the people, that is, by making confe
deracies with the heathen, (as Luther exponds the place) and by seeking their
help and assistance, Hos: 5. 13. But what follows, Ephraim is a cake not
turned, hot and overbaken in the nether side, but cold and raw in the upper
side. This will prove the fruit of such confederacies and associations, to make
us zealous for some earthly or humane thing, but remiss and cold in the things
of Christ; to be too hot on our nether side, and too raw on the upper side.
Whereas, not mingling our selves with the wicked: we shall through Gods mercy
be like a cake turned, that heat and zeal which was before downward, shall now
be upward, Heavenward, Godward, let it also be remembered, how both Ahaz, 2.
Kings 16. 10. and Asa himself, 2 Chronicles: 16. 10. (though a good man) were drawn
into other great sins, upon occasion of these associations, with the enemies
of God and his people: this sin will certainly ensnare men in other sins.
It Is well said by Calvin upon Ezekiel: 16. 26. That as we are too prone of our
selves to wickedness, so when we enter into confederacies with wicked men, we
are but seeking new temptations, and as it were a bellows to blow up our own
corruptions, as wine being mixed with water loses of its spirits, and white
being mixed with black, loses much of its whiteness: so the people of God, if
once mixed with wicked enemies, shall certainly loss of their purity and
integrity. Thirdly, as these unlawful confederacies draw us both into great
judgments and great sins, so into a great security and stupidity under these
great plagues and sins, which will make the estate of such to be yet worse,
Hos: 7, 9, after Ephraims mixing himself among the people, it is added, Strangers
have devoured his strength, and he knows it not, yea, gray hairs are here and
there upon him, yet he knows it not: although his confederats have distressed
him, and not strengthened him, and although there may be observed in him diverse
signs of a decaying dying condition, yet he knows it not, nor takes it to
heart; The same thing is insisted upon verse: 11. Ephraim also is like a silly
Dove without heart; They call to Egypt, they go up to Assyria. He is as void
of understanding as a silly Dove, whose nest being spoiled, and her young ones
taken from her (which the Chaldee paraphrase adds for explications cause) yet
she still returns to those places where, and among those people by whom she
has been so spoiled; So Israel will still be meddling with those that have done
him great hurt. Fourthly, we find that such confederacy or association either
with idolaters or known impious persons, is seldom or never recorded in the
book of God, without a reproof, or some greater mark of Gods displeasure put
upon it. If it were like the Polygamie of the Patriarchs, often mentioned and
not reproved, it were the less marvel to hear it so much debated. But now
when God has so purposely set so many Beacons upon those rocks, and Shelves
that we may beware of them, O why shall we be so mad, as still to run upon them?
It was reproved in the time of the Judges, Judge: 2, 1, 2, 3. It was reproved in
the time of the Kings; Ahabs Covenant with Benhadad, Asa's Covenant with
Benhadad, Ahaz his confederacy with the Assyrian; Iehosophats association,
first with Ahab, then with Ahaziah: Amaziahs association with those 100000. men
of Ephraim, when God was not with them, all those are plainly disallowed and
condemned. Moreover that reproof, Ier: 2. 18: And now, what have thou to do in
the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? Or what have thou to do in the
way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the River? the Chaldee has thus; what
have ye to do to associat with Pharaoh King of Egypt -- And what have ye to do
to make a Covenant with the Assyrian? Again after the captivity, Ezra: 9. the
Jews mingling of themselves with the heathen is lamented. Fifthly, the great
and precious promises of God, may encourage us so, as we shall never say to the
wicked, a confederacy: for upon condition of our avoiding all such
confederacies and conjunctions, God promises never to break his Covenant with
us, Judge: 2: 1, 2. and to receive us as his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor: 6. 14,
16, 17, 18. Sixthly, it is one of Gods great mercies which he has Covenanted and
promised, I will purge out from among you the Rebels, and them that transgress
against me, Ezekiel. 20, 38. Why should we then forsake our own mercy, and despise
the counsel of God against our own souls. Seventhly, as it was in Asa his
experience, 2 Chronicles, 16, 7, 8, so it has been in our own, God has done his
greatest works for us, when we were most unmixed with such men.

There is another Objection, which at the writing hereof I have met with: It Is
David's confederacy and association, both with Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 12, 13. and with
Amasa, 2 Samuel: 19. 13. whom according to agreement he made General of his
Host, 2 Samuel: 20, 4. although both of them had been David's enemies, and born
arms against him, Abner being also scandalous, both for his whoredom, 2 Samuel
3, 7. and his treachery against Ishbosheth in aspyring to the Crown (which is
collected from his going in unto Saul's Concubine, as Absalom did unto David's
afterward) yea for that he had born Arms against David, when he knew that God
had sworn to make David King, and so against the light of his conscience, 2 Samuel: 39, 18. Answ: 1 Peter Martyr commenting upon those places, dissaloweth
David's practice in both these cases, especially his League with Abner. Should
we follow these two examples, not being allowed or commended in Scripture? or
should we not rather avoid such confederacies, because of many examples
thereof, plainly condemned in the word of God? 2. What soever may ^e conceived
to be allowable or excusable in these examples of David, yet it cannot be
applied, except in like cases. When David covenanted with Abner, he was but
King of Judah, Abner undertakes to bring about all Israel to him, and that he
should make him reign over all the tribes, whereas otherwise there was no
appearance of David's subdueing of all the other tribes; but by a long and
bloody War. Again, when David covenanted and capitulated with Amasa, he was
in a manner fled out of the land for Absalom, 2 Samuel: 19. 9. and Sanctius and
Corn. a Lapide in 2 Samuel 19.
was forced to abide in the land of Gilead beyond Jordan, fearing also (as
interpreters observe) that the men of Judah having strengthened Jerusalem and
kept it with a garrison for Absalom, and having done so much in assisting
Absalom against David, should grow desperate in holding out against him, hoping
for no mercy, therefore he is content to make Amasa General of his Army, upon
condition that he would cause the men of Judah to bring him back to Jerusalem,
which Amasa moves the men of Judah to do, 2 Samuel: 19, 14; for it was done by his
authority, as Josephus also writes, nor could it be done without Antiq. Jud.
lib. 7. Cap. 10. ^
his authority, for Absalom and Ahitophel being dead, Amasa had the whole power
and sole headship of that Army and of all that faction that had followed
Absalom. Now then let them that will plead for the lawfullnesse of
confederacies with wicked persons from these examples of David, first make the
case alike, that is, that the wicked one have power of an Army, and of a great
body of the Kingdom, to make them either continue in Rebellion and enmity, or
to come in and submit. Next let it be remembered that both Abner and Amasa did a
great service, (which was most meritorious at the hands of men) for the good,
peace, and safety of King and Kingdom, and they did it at that time also when
David was but weak, and they had power enough to have continued a War against
him. Which is a very rare case, and far different from the case of such as have
done and are doing all that they can to pervert and mislead many thousands of
the people of God, instead of reducing many thousands to obedience; as Abner
and Amasa did. 3. There are some other answers proper to the one case and the
other. There is nothing in the Text to prove, that David made such a Covenant
with Abner, as the Grecians call (...), or that he Covenanted to make him
General of his Army, (as afterward he Covenanted with Amasa,) for at that
time he could have no color of reason for casting Ioab out of his place, as
afterward he had; Therefore I understand with Sanctius that the League which
Abner sought from David, was Foedus pacis, a Covenant of Peace. Hierome
reads, fac mecum amicitias, make friendship with me, for before they had been
enemies: So that this League is not of that kind which is chiefly controverted.
As for Amasa, I shall not go about (as some have done) to excuse or extenuate
his fault in joining with Absalom, as not being from any malice or wicked
intention against David his Uncle; But there is some probability that Amasa was
a penitent and hopeful man. Sure David had better hopes of him, then of Ioab:
And if it be true which Josephus writes, that before David sent Zadock and
Abiathar to the men of Judah, and to Amasa, frequent messages came from them to
the King, desiring to be received into his favor; how ever Amasa being so
willing and ready to do so much for David, when he might have done so much
against him, David as he could not do his business without him, so he had
some ground to hope well of him; considering withal, that Amasa was not set
upon this business by any offense or displeasure at the other party, as Abner
was. 4. Even as this example, so far as concerns the laying aside, and
casting off of Ioab, and not preferring his brother Abishai in his room (both
of them being gui^ty of Abners blood, 2 Samuel 3. 30. and both of them being too
hard for David) helps to strengthen that which I have been pleading for.

The point being now so fully cleared from Scripture, here is the less reason
to argue contrariwise from human examples in Christian States and
Commonwealths. See Mr. Fox. acts and monuments, vol. 2 page 86. 9. 870. edit.
1489.
The word of God must not stoop to men's practices, but they to it. Yet even
among those whose examples is alleged for the contrary opinion, there want not
instances for cautiousnesse and conscientiousnesse, in choosing or refusing
confederats. As namely among the Helvetians or Suitzers. They of Zurik and
Berne, when once reformed, renounced their League made before with the French
King, for assisting him in his Wars, and resolved only to keep peace with him;
but would not continue the League of (...), or joining with him in his Wars.
See the Estates Principalities and Empires of the world, translated by
Grimston, page: 364. to 370.
And whatsoever were the old Leagues about 300. years ago, mutually binding
those Cantons each to other for aid and succor, and for the common defense of
their country, and for preservation of their particular rights and liberties,
and for a way of decideing controversies and pleas, between men of one Canton
and of another (which Leagues are recorded by those that write of that
Commonwealth) yet after the Reformation of Religion, there was so much zeal on
both sides, that it grew to a war between the Popish and the Protestant
Cantons, wherein as the Popish side strengthened themselves by a confederacy
with ^erdinand the Emperors brother, so Acts and moun. ments, ubi supra page
872. Sleid. Com. lib. 7. page 106 110* 120.
the Protestant side, Zurik, Berne, and Basil entered into a confederacy, first
with the city of Strasburgh, and shortly thereafter with the Lantgrave of
Hesse, that thereby they might be strengthened, and aided against the Popish
Cantons. The differences of Religion put them to it, to choose other
confederates. Nevertheless, I can easily admit what Lavater judiciously
observes, upon Ezekiel. 16. 26, 27, 28, 29. that Covenants made before true
Religion did shine among a people, are not to be rashly broken; even as the
believing husband, ought not to put away the unbeleiving wife, whom he married
when himself also was an unbeleever, if she be willing still to abide with him.
Whatsoever may be said for such Covenants, yet confederacies with enemies of
true Religion, made after the light of Reformation, are altogether unexcusable.

Peradventure some have yet another Objection: this is an hard saying (say
diverse Malignants) we are looked upon as enemies, if we come not in and take
the Covenant, and when we are come in and have taken the Covenant, we are
still esteemed enemies to the cause of God, and to his servants. Answ. This is
just, as if those traitors, Covenant breakers, and other scandalous persons,
from which the Apostle bids us turn away, 2 Tit. 3. 5. had objected, if we
have no form of Godliness, we are looked upon as aliens, and such as are not
to be numbered among Gods people, yet now when we have taken on a form of
godliness, we are in no better esteem with Paul, but still he will have
Christians to turn away from us: Yea, it is as if workers of iniquity living in
the true Church, should object against Christ himself, if we pray not, if we
hear not the word, etc. we are not accepted, but rejected for the neglect of
necessary duties, yet when we have prayed, heard, etc: we are told for all
that: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you. Men must be
judged according to their fruits, according to their words and works, and
course of living; and if any who have taken the Covenant, show themselves in
their words and actions, to be still wicked enemies, our eyes must not be put
out with their hand at the Covenant.

If any disaffected shall still insist and say; But why then are we received,
both to the Covenant and to the Sacrament, nay, why are we forced and
compelled into the Covenant. Answ. 1. If any known Malignant, or complier with
the Rebels, or with any enemy of this Cause has been received, either to the
Covenant or Sacrament, without signs of repentance for the former Malignancy,
and scandale (such signs of Repentance, I mean, as men in charity ought to be
satisfied with,) it is more then Ministers and Elderships can answer, either to
God, or the Acts and constitutions of this national Church. I trust all
faithful and conscientious Ministers have labored to keep themselves pure in
such things. Yea, the General Assembly has ordained, that known compliers
with the Rebels, and such as did procure protections from the enemy, or keep
correspondence and intelligence with him, shall be suspended from the
Lord's Supper, till they manifest their repentance before the Congregation. Now
if any after signs, and declaration of repentance, have turned again to their
old ways of Malignancy, their iniquity be upon themselves, not upon us. 2.
Men are no otherwise drawn or forced into the Covenant, then into other
necessary duties. Nay it ought not to be called a forceing or compelling. Are
men forced to spare their neighbors life, because murder is severly punished?
Or are men compelled to be loyal, because traitors are examplarily punished?
There may, and must be a willingness and freeness in the doing of the
contrary duty; although great sins must not go away unpunished. Men are not
compelled to virtue, because vice is punished, else virtue were not virtue.
Those that refuse the Covenant, reproach it, or rail against it, ought to be
looked upon as enemies to it, and dealt with accordingly: yet if any man were
known to take the Covenant against his will, he were not to be received. 3.
These two may well stand together, to censure the contempt or neglect of a
duty, and withal to censure wickedness in the person that has taken up the
practice of the duty. If any Israelite would not worship the true God, he was
to be put to death, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. but withal, if worshipping the true God,
he was found to be a murderer, an adulterer, etc. for this also he was to
be put to death. The General Assembly of this Church has appointed, that
such as after admonition, continue in an usual neglect of Prayer, and the
Worship of God in their families, shall be suspended from the Lord's Supper,
till they ^mend: Yet if any man shall be found to make Family Worship a cloak
to his swearing, drunkenness; adultery or the like, must these scandalous
sins be uncensured, because he has taken upon him a form of godliness?
God forbid. It Is just so here, refusers of the Covenant, and railers against
it, are justly censured: But withal, if wickedness and Malignancie, be found
in any that have taken the Covenant; their offense and censure is not to be
extenuated, but to be aggravated.

I had been but very short in the handling of this question, if new objections
coming to my ears, had not drawn me forth to this length. And now I find one
objection more. Some say, the arguments before brought from Scripture, prove
not the unlawfulness of confederacies, and associations with Idolaters,
Heretics, or profane persons of the same Kingdom, but only with those of
another Kingdom. Answ. 1. Then by the concession of those that make the
objection, it is at least unlawful, to associate our selves with any of another
Kingdom, who are of a false Religion, or wicked life. 2. If familiar
fellowship, even with the wicked of the same Kingdom be unlawful, then is a
military association with them unlawful; for it cannot be without consulting,
conferring, conversing frequently together. It were a profane abusing, and
mocking of Scripture to say, that we are forbidden to converse familiarly with
the ungodly of another kingdom, but not with the ungodly of the same kingdom,
or that we are forbidden to marry with the ungodly of another Kingdom, but not
with the ungodly of the same Kingdom, for what is this, but to open a wide gate
upon the one hand; while we seem to shut a narrow gate upon the other hand? 3.
Were not those military associations, 2 Chronicles* 19. 2. and 25. 7, 8. condemned
upon this reason, because the associats were ungodly, haters of the Lord, and
because God was not with them. Now then, a quatenus ad omne, the reason holds
equally against associations with any, of whom it can be truly said, they are
ungodly, haters of the Lord, and God is not with them. 4. God would have the
Camp of Israel altogether holy and clean, Deuteronomy. 23. 9. to 14* clean from whom?
not so much from wicked heathens (there was not so much fear of that) as from
wicked Israelites. 5. Says not David, I will early destroy all the wicked of
the land, Psalm. 101. 8. and, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, Psalm.
6. 9. How can it then be imagined, that he would make any of them his
associats, and helpers in War.

Amandus Polanus Comment, in Ezekiel: 16* 26, 27, 28. Qui Ecclesiae scortationem,
hoc est idololatriam vel falsam doctrinam, and confederationes cum impiis
reprehendit, non est Hereticus, non est Schismaticus, non est ingratus adversus
matrem Eccelesiam: Alioqui^ etiam Ezekiel cum Jeremia, aliisque Prophetis,
fuisset Hereticus, aut Schismaticus, aut ingratus.

CHAP. XV.
Of uniformity in Religion, worship of God, and Church Government.

THe word Uniformity is become als odious to diverse who plead for Liberty and
Tolleration, as the word Conformity was in the Prelates times. Hence proceeded
Mr Delles book against uniformity, and Mr Burtons book, entitled, Conformities
deformity. I confess my love and desire of uniformity has not made me any
whit to depart from my former principles against the Prelaticall conformity, or
the astricting of men's consciences (at least in point of practice and
observation) to certain rites, whether unlawful or indifferent in their own
nature, under pain of censure. Yet I must needs justify (as not only lawful,
but laudable) what the solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms,
obliges us unto, namely to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in one Confession of Faith,
one Directory of Worship, one form of Church Government and Catechism.

It is always to be remembered, that good things, yea the best things may be
dangerously abused by the corruptions of Men, especially when the times are
generally corrupted. Luther had reason in his time, and as the case stood then,
to decline a general Synod of Protestants for unity in ceremonies (which some
moved for) before the doctrine of Faith, and the substance of the Gospel was
settled. He said the name of Synods and Counsels was almost als much suspected
with him, as the name of free will, and that he would have the Churches freely
and voluntarly to comply and conform in external rites, by following the best
examples in these things, but by no means to be compelled to it, or snares
prepared for the consciences of the weak. See Melchior Adamus in vit: Lutheri
page: 128, 129. But if Luther had found als good opportunity and als much
possibility of attayning a right uniformity in Church government and Worship,
as God vouchsafes us in this age, I do not doubt, but he had been more zealous
for it, then any of us now are, or if he had been in Calvin's stead, I make no
question he had done in this business as Calvin did. So that we ought to
impute it rather to their times and places in which they lived, then to the
difference of their Spirits, that Luthers zeal was wholly spent upon the
doctrine of Free grace. Calvin's zeal did also extendit self to Discipline,
about which Luther was unwilling to make any business at all. But for further
satisfaction to truly tender consciences, and that they may not fear we are
leading them back again to Egypt, I desire that these particular differences
between the Prelaticall Conformity, and the Presbyteriall uniformity according
to the Covenant, may be well observed.

First, they did after the Heathenish and Popish manner affectat ceremonies, and
a Pompous external splendour and spectability, and made the Kingdom of God
come with observation. Mentes humanae mirifice c piuntur and fascina^tur ceremo
nialium splendore and p^mpa Hospin: epist: ante lib de orig: monacho.
We desire to retain only the ancient Apostolical simplicity and singleness,
and we conceive the fewer ceremonies, the better, knowing that the minds of
people are thereby inveagled and distracted from the spiritual and inward
duties.

2. Much of the Prelaticall Conformity consisted in such things as were in
themselves and in their own nature unlawful, and contrary to the word. Show us
the like in any part of our uniformity, then let that thing never more be heard
of. Uniformity in any thing which is unlawful is a great aggravation of the
sin.

3 They conformed to the Papists, we to the example of the best reformed
Churches, which differs als much from their way, as she that is dressed like
other honest women distereth from her that is dressed like a whore.

4. The Prelatical conformity was for the most part made up of sacred
ceremonies, which had been grossly and notoriously abused either to Idolatry
or Superstition, and therefore being things of no necessary use, ought not to
have been continued, but abolished as the brazen serpent was by Hezekiah.

But in our uniformity now excepted against, I know no such thing (and I am
confident no man can give instance of any such thing in it) as a sacred
Religious rite or thing which has neither from Scripture nor nature any
necessary use, and has been notoriously abused to idolatry or superstition, if
any such thing can be found, I shall confess it ought not to be continued.

5. They imposed upon others and practiced themselves ceremonies (acknowledged
by themselves to be in their own nature merely indifferent, but looked upon by
many thousands of godly people, as unlawful and contrary to the word) to the
great scandal and offense of their brethren. Our principle is, that things
indifferent ought not to be practiced with the scandal and offense of the
godly.

6. Their way was destructive to true Christian Liberty both of Conscience and
practice, compelling the practice and conscience it self, by the mere will and
authority of the Lawmakers. Obedite praepositis was the great argument with
them to satisfy consciences, Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas. We
say that no Canons nor constitutions of the Church can bind the conscience nisi
per and propter verbum Dei, i.e. except in so far as they are grounded upon and
warrantable by the word of God, at least by consequence, and by the General
rules thereof. And that Canons concerning things indifferent bind not extra
casum scandali and contemptus, i,e. when they may be omitted without giving
scandal, or showing any contempt of the Ecclesiastical authority.

7. The Prelaticall ordinances were after the commandments and Doctrines of
men, as the Apostle speaks, Col: 2, 22. compare Mat: 15. 9. But in vain do they
worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Where doctrines
may fitly express the nature of significant mysterious ceremonies (such as was
the Pharisaicall washing of hands, cups, tables, etc. to teach and signify
holiness) all sacred significant ceremonies of man's devysing, we condemn as an
addition to the word of God, which is forbidden no less then a diminution from
it. Let many of those who object against our uniformity, examine whether their
own way has not somewhat in it, which is a sacred significant ceremony of
humane invention, and without the word; for instance, the anointing of the sick
in these days when the miracle is ceased, the Church Covenant, etc. For our
part, except it be a circumstance, such as belongs to the decency and order,
which ought to appear in all humane societies and actions whether civil or
sacred, we hold that the Church has not power to determine or enjoyne any
thing belonging to Religion: And even of these circumstances we say that
although they be so numerous and so various, that all circumstances belonging
to all times and places could not be particularly determined in Scripture, yet
the Church ought to order them so, and has no power to order them otherwise,
then as may best agree with the general rules of the Word. Now setting aside
the circumstantials, there is not any substantial part of the uniformity
according to the Covenant, which is not either expressly grounded upon the word
of God, or by necessary consequence drawn from it, and so no commandment of
men, but of God.

Other differences I might add, but these may abundantly suffice to show that
the Prelaticall conformity and the Presbyterian uniformity are no less
contrary one to another, then darkness and light, black and white, bitter and
sweet, bad and good.

And now having thus cleared the true nature and notion of Uniformity, that its
altogether another thing from that which its opposers apprehend it to be, the
work of arguing for it may be the shorter and easier, M^, Dell in his discourse
against uniformity, argues against it both from nature and from Scripture. I
confess if one will transire de genere in genus, as he does, its easy to find
a disconformity between one thing and another, either in the works of Creation,
or in the things recorded in Scripture. But if one will look after uniformity
in uno and eodem genere, in one and the same kind of things (which is the
uniformity we plead for) then both nature and Scripture gives us presidents
not against uniformity, but for it. It is a maxim in natural Philosophy, that
motus Coeliest semper uniformis velocitate, the Heavens do not move sometime
more slowly, sometime more swiftly, but ever uniformly. God himself tells us of
the sweet influences of Pleiades, of the bands of Orion, of the bringing forth
of Mazaroth in his season, and of the other ordinances of Heaven, which all the
power on earth cannot alter nor put out of course, Job 38, 31, 32, 33. of the
sea which is shut up within the decreed place, and within the doors and bars
which it cannot pass, verse: 10, 11. And generally all the great works which
God does there discourse of, each of them in its own kind is uniforme to it
self: So likewise, Psalm: 104. Has not God said, that while the earth
remains, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, day
and night shall not cease, Gen* 8, 22. If there were not an uniformity in
nature, how could fair weather be known by a red sky in the evening, or foul
weather by a red and lou^ing sky in the morning? Mat: 16, 2, 3. If there be not
an uniformity in nature, why says Solomon, The thing that has been, it is
that which shall be, and there is no new thing under the Sun? Eccl. 1. 9. is it
not an uniformity in nature that the St^rk in the heavens knows her appointed
times, and the Turtle, and the Cran, and the Swallow observe the time of their
coming, Ier. 8. 75. Is not that an uniformity in nature? Io. 4. 35. There are
yet four moan hs and then comes harvest? As the Apostle says of the members
of the body which we think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow more
abundant honor, 1 Cor. 12. 23, so I may say of these things in nature which
may perhaps seem to have least uniformity in them (such as the waxing and
weaning of the Moon, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and the like) even in
these a very great uniformity may be observed.

As for Scripture presidents, There was in the old Testament a marvelous great
uniformity both in the substantialls and rituals of the worship and service of
God. For instance, Number. 9. 3. it is said of the Passover, ye shall keep it in
his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to all
the ceremonies thereof shall ye keep it. Exodus 12, 49. One Law shall be to him
that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojurneth among you. Another
instance see in the Sacrifices, Levit, first 7. chapters. Another instance Act.
15, 21. For Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, being
raed in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. A fourth instance in the courses and
services of the Priests and Levits, 1 Chronicles, 23, 24, 25, and 26. Luke 1. 8, 9.
The like in other instances.

Of the Church of the new Testament, it was prophesied, that God would give
them one way, as well as one heart, Ier: 32. 39. that there shall not only be
one Lord, but his Name one, Zack: 14. 9. We are exhorted to walk by the same
rule, so far as we have attained, that is, to study uniformity, not diversity
in those things which are agreed upon to be good and right, Phil. 3. 16. Does
not the Apostle plainly intimat and commend an uniformity in the Worship of
God, 1 Cor. 14. 27. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it beby two, or,
at the most, by three, and that by course, and let one interpret, verse 33. for
God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the
Saints, verse. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. He limiteth
the Prophets to that same number, of two or three; even as he limiteth those
that had the gift of tongues, verse, 29. And was it not a great uniformity, that
he would have every man who prayed, or prophesied, to have his head uncovered,
and every woman covered, 1 Cor. 11. Does not the same Apostle, besides the
Doctrine of faith, and practical duties of a Christian life, deliver several
Canons to be observed in the Ordination and Admission of Elders and Deacons,
concerning widows, concerning accusations, admonitions, censures, and other
things belonging to Church policy, a, appears, especially from the Epistles
to Timothy and Titus? And 1 Cor: 16. 1, 2. he will have an uniformity between
the Churches of Galatia, and of Corinth, in the very day of putting forth their
charity. Now concerning the colection for the Saints, as I have given order to
the Churches of Galatia, even so do you, upon the first day of the week, let
every one of you lay by him in store, etc. In the ancient Church, although
there was not an uniformity in all particulars among all the Churches; for
instance in the point of fasting, some fasting on the Sabbath, some not, some
taking the Lord's Supper fasting, some after meals, which differences in
fasting, gave occasion to the old rule: dissonantia ^ejunii non dissolvit
consonantiam fidei. Although likewise, there was a great difference between the
custom of one Church and another, in the time and manner of celebrating the
Lord's Supper. And in other particulars, as Augustine, Socrates and the Author
of the Tripartite History, record unto us. Yet the Centuryes and other
ecclesiastical Historians, show us in every Century, a great uniformity in
those ancient times, even in very many things belonging to Church government,
and form of Worship. Neither can any man doubt of the great uniformity in the
ancient Church: Who is not a stranger to the Canons of the ancient Counsels.
And although Irenaeus and others justly blamed Victor Bishop of Rome, for
excommunicating the Churches of Asia, and the Quartodecimans, because of their
disconformity, in keeping of Easter, yet the endeavoring of the nearest
uniformity in that particular, was so far from being blamed, that it was one
cause (though neither the sole nor principal) of the calling and conveening
the Council of Nice, which Council did not leave it arbitary to every one, to
follow their own opinion concerning Easter, but by their Canon determined,
that it should not be keept upon the same day with the Jews, that is, upon the
14. day of the month.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether it be lawful, just, and expedient, that there be an ordinance of
Parliament, for the taking of the solemn League and Covevenant, by all persons
in the Kingdom, under a considerable penalty. Or an answer returned to a
Gentleman, who had consulted a friend concerning this question.

FIrst of all, that I may rightly deduce and state the matter of fact, it is to
be remembered.

That the solemn League and Covenant has been the strongest band of Union in
this common cause of Religion and Liberty, and that which the common enemies,
have mainly endeavored with all their might to overthrow.

That the chief motive to engage Scotland, was professed to be the Reformation
of Religion, and uniformity according to the Covenant.

That the League and Treaty between the two Kingdoms, is in pursuance of the
ends of the Covenant, especially the aforsaid ends of Religion.

That the declaration of both Kindomes, emitted to other Nations, does hold
forth to the world, that our war is for the ends of the Covenant, and that we
should never lay down arms, till these were obtained.

That by order of Parliament, the Covenant was turned in Latin, and sent
abroad to the reformed Churches, with letters from the Assembly of Divines.

That upon the former assurances, the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, the Assembly of Divines, the city of London, and
many thousands in England, have taken the Covenant, and have sworn most
solemnly, that they shall constantly, really, and sincerly, during all the
days of their lifetime, with their lives and fortunes, stand to the
performance of it. And both Kingdoms have suffered the loss of their goods
cheerfully, laid out their means, and laid down their lives resolutly in
pursuance thereof.

At the Treaty of Vxbridge, the propositions for Religion (of which the
confirming of the Covenant, is the first and chiefest) were acknowledged to be
of such excellency, and absolute necessity, as they were appointed to be
treated of in the first place, and that no peace nor agreement should be, till
they were first agreed unto.

The same Propositions for Religion, are yet set down in the first place
amongst the Propositions sent last to the King, as being agreed unto by the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

And that now the Kings answer to the Propositions is delayed, the house of
Commons have thought fit, to turn the Propositions into Ordinances, to show
their constant resolution of adhering thereto, and that they may be of greater
force, and receave the better obedience from the Subjects, have converted the
Propositions for civil matters into Ordinances, and (that their zeal and
constancy may appear for Religion, which is of greatest moment, and wherein the
glory of God, and the good of his Church is most concerned) it is desired, that
the Propositions concerning the Covenant, may be likewise turned into an
ordinance, with a considerable penalty, that so we may give some real
evidence, that we do not s^ek the things of this world in the first place, and
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness of it in the last; Much less,
that Demas* like we forsake it as lovers of this present world.

Now the grounds and reasons for such an Ordinance may be these.

1. It were a great unthankfulnsse to God, if after sacred and solemn vows
made in time of our greatest dangers, and when after our vows, God has begun
to deliver us, and has dissipated our Enemies, we should now grow weary of
paying, and performing those vows. We may say of the Covenant, as the Prophet
said of the laying of the foundation of the second Temple. Consider whether
from that very day God did not sensibly bless us, and give a testimony from
Heaven, to his own Cause and Covenant. And now shall the Covenant which was our
glory and ornament before God and men, be laid aside as a worn or moth-eaten
garment? God forbid.

2. If the taking of the solemn League and Covenant, be not enjoined by
authority of Parliaments, under a penalty, but left arbitrary, this were an
opening in stead of shutting of the door unto as many as are apt and
inclinable ^o refuse and oppose the Covenant, yea, to as many as write or speak
against it, and maintain opinions or practices contrary to it. The impiety and
obstinacy of such persons, if not punished, but connived at, or tacitly
permitted by the Parliaments, involveth them and the Nation as partakers of the
sin, and so consequently of the judgment.

Although the oath which Joshua and the Princes of Israel made to the
Gibeonites, was made unadvisedly, and without asking counsel from the mouth of
the Lord, yet some hundred years after being broken, that breach brought a
national judgment, till justice was done upon the offenders. How much more
may a National judgment be feared, if even in our days the contempt and
violation of a most lawful and sacred oath, be winked at? Surely God will not
wink at their sin, who wink at his dishonor. Better not to have vowed, then
not to pay and perform.

3. When King Josiah made a solemn Covenant (the effect whereof was a through
Reformation, the taking away of the ancient and long continued high places, the
destroying of Baals Vessels, Altars, Priests, etc. 2 Kings 23. through out) he
did not leave this Covenant arbitrary: But he caused all that were present in
Jerusalem, and Benjamine to stand to it, 2 Chronicles. 34. 32. In all which he is
set forth as a president to Christian Reformers, that they may know their duty
in like cases.

4. All who did take the solemn League and Covenant are thereby obleiged in
their several places and callings (and so the houses of Parliament in their
place and calling) to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Heresy,
Schism, Superstition, and Prophannesse. How is this part of the oath of God
fulfilled, if the Covenant it self, made for the extirpation of all these, be
left arbitrary?

5. The Vow and Protestation was not left arbitrary. For by the vote, July 30.
1641. it was resolved upon the question, that whosoever would not take that
Protestation, are declared to be unfit to bear any office in the Church or
State, which was accordingly published. But the solemn League and Covenant
must be at least more effectual then the Protestation, for the narrative, or
preface of the Covenant, holds forth the necessity of the same, as a more
effectual means to be used, after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance,
and Protestation.

6. This same solemn League and Covenant was not in the beginning left
arbitrary, for some members were suspended from the house, for not taking it.
And in the Ordinance, 2 Feb. 1643. it is ordained and enjoined, that it be
solemnly taken in all places throughout the Kingdom of England, and dominion
of Wales. And withal, in the instructions and orders of Parliament, then sent
into the Committees, it was appointed that the names of such as refuse it,
should be returned to the Parliament, that they may take such further course
with them, as they shall think fit. In the Ordinance of Parliament, for
Ordination of Ministers, (both the first and the last Ordinance) the person to
be ordained, is appointed and obleiged to address himself to the Presbytery:
and bring with him a testimony of his taking the Covenant of the three
Kingdoms. Again, by the ordinance for election of Elders, dated the 19. of
Aug: 1645. No member of any Congregation, may concur or have voice in the
choosing of Elders, but such as have taken the National Covenant.

7. In the first Article of the Treaty between the Kingdoms, signed November:
29. 1643. It Is agreed and concluded, that the Covenant be sworn and
subscribed by both Kingdoms, not that it shall be taken by as many as will in
both Kingdoms, but that it shall be taken by both Kingdoms. How shall this
be performed, if it be still left arbitrary?

8. In the Propositions of peace, it is plainly supposed and intimated, that the
taking of the Covenant shall be enjoined under some penalty. Otherwise we have
not dealt faithfully, neither with God nor man, in tendering that second
Proposition to the King, concerning his consent to an act of Parliament in both
Kingdoms respectively, for the enjoining the taking of the Covenant, by all
the Subjects of the three Kingdoms with such penalties as by mutual advice of
both Kingdoms, shall be agreed upon.

9. If other Propositions of peace be turned into Ordinances, and this of the
Covenant not so, it will strengthen the calumnies cast upon the Parliament by
the Malignant party, that they have had no intention to setle Religion
according to the Covenant, but that they entered into the Covenant for bringing
in the Scots to their assistance, and for gaining the good opinion of the
reformed Churches.

10. It will also be a dangerous president to separat between the legislative
power, and the corrective or punitive power. For if after the ordinance of
Parliament injoyning and ordaining that the Covenant be taken universally
throughout the whole Kingdom, there be no sanction nor penalty upon these who
shall refuse it, let wise men judge, whether this may not expose the authority
of Parliament to contempt.

11 I shall conclud with this Syllogism, That which is not only sinful in it
self, but a great dishonor to God, a great scandal to the Church, and with
all a disobedience to the lawful Ordinance of authority, may and ought to be
punished, by this Christian and reforming Parliament. But their offense which
still refuse to take the Covenant, is not only sinful in it self, but a great
dishonor to God, a great scandal to the Church, and with all a disobedience
to the lawful Ordinance of Authority.

Therefore the offense of these who still refuse to take the Covenant, may and
ought to be punished by this Christian and reforming Parliament.

Objections answered.
1. Object. The Covenant ought not to be compulsory but free: Good things grow
evil when men's consciences are thereunto forced* Answ. 1. An Ordinance
injoyning the taking of it under a certain penalty, were no other compulsion,
then was used by King Josiah and others, yea by this present Parliament upon
their own Members, and upon Ministers to be ordained, as is evident by the
passages above expressed. The Parliament has also by their Ordinance dated the
23. of August 1645. imposed the Directory of Worship under certain mulcts and
penalties to be inflicted upon such as do not observe it, or preach or write
against it. 2. It Is no tyranny overmens consciences, to punish a great and
scandalous sin (such as the refusing and opposing of the Covenant, or a
divyding from it) although the offender in his conscience believe it to be no
sin, yea peradventur believe it to be a duty. Otherwise it had been tyranny
over the Conscience to punish those who killed the Apostles, because they
thought they were doing God good service, Ioh: 16, 2. Thirdly, if they who make
this Objection be so tender of men's consciences, why would they keep up an Army
when there is no Enemy, and continue taxes and burdens upon the exhausted
Counties, which are altogether against the consciences of the generality of
people in the Kingdom. If in these things they will have the conscience of any
to be forced, and in the Covenant the consciences of some left at liberty, this
is not fair and equal, and it will be generally apprehended, that such men
study their own interest more then the Public.

2. Object: The Covenant was occasional, and temporary, being made upon the
occasion of the prevalency and growing power of the Enemy (as is mentioned in
the narrative) which fundation being taken away, the superstructure cannot
stand. Answ. 1. Ex malis moribus bonae nascuntur Leges. Shall we therefore be
no longer bound to obey and maintain good laws, because the evils which gave
occasion to their making have ceased. 2. The Covenant does in express words
oblige us constantly, and all the days of our lives, to pursue the ends
therein expressed. So that to hold it but a Temporary obligation is a breach of
Covenant. 3. There is not any one of the ends of the Covenant which is yet
fully attained. The very Directory of Worship is not observed in most places of
the Kingdom. Neither is the abolitione of Prelacy, and of the Book of common
prayer yet established by Act of Parliament. 4. If we had attained the ends of
the Covenant (which we have not) yet non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta
tueri, and the recidivation may prove worse then the first disease.

3. Object. Some things in the Covenant are disputable, for instance, good and
learned men differ in their opinions about Prelacy. Answ: 1. The oath of
Supremacy was much more disputable, and great disputs there were among good and
learned men about it, yet it has been imposed upon all Members of Parliament.
2. If the very materials of the Covenant be stuck at, whether they be good in
themselves, there is the greater danger to leave all men to abound in their own
sense, concerning things of the highest consequence.

4. Object: The Army which has served us so faithfully and regained our
Liberties, shall by this Ordinance loose their own greatest Liberty, which is
the Liberty of their consciences* Answ: 1. In the Ordinance and Instructions of
Parliament dated the 2 Feb: 1643. It was ordained that the Covenant should be
speedily sent to my Lord General, and the Lord Admiral, and all other
Commanders in Cheiff, Governors of Towns, etc. to the end it may be taken by
all Officers and Soldiers under their command. I hope the Parliament did not
here take from their Army the Liberty of their consciences. 2. The Army must
either take Laws from the Parliament, or give Laws to the Parliament. If they
will as the Parliaments servants, submit themselves to the Ordinances of the
Parliament (which has ever been professed they would do) then the objection
is taken away. But if they will be the Parliaments Masters or fellows, and
Independent upon the Parliament it self, and at liberty to reject as they list
so good or wholesome an Ordinance a^ the taking of the Covenant, then God have
mercy upon us, if the Parliament do not preserve their own rights and
privileges, with which the Kingdom has entrusted them. 3. If an Ordinance
imposing the taking of the Covenant under a considerable penalty, be to the
Army scandalum acceptum. The not passing of such an Ordinance will be scandalum
datum to the city of London, and to many thousands of the godly and well
affected of the Kingdom, both Ministers and People, who have faithfully
adhered to, and served the Parliament, and will still hazard their lives and
fo^tunes in pursuance of the ends of the Covenant; yea, a horrible scandal to
the reformed Churches abroad, whose hearts were once comforted and raised up to
expect better things. 4. God forbid, there be any such in the houses of
Parliament, as would admit of deformation instead of Reformation, and all manner
of confusion in place of government. Would not this be the ready way to banish
all Religion, and open a door for all sorts of Schism and Haeresie? And shall
this be the fruits of the Labors, blood and expenses of the three Kingdoms,
in place of Reformation and Uniformity, to admit of such a Liberty and horrible
confusion? Let it not be told in Gath, nor published in Askelon, least the
Philistims rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Infant Baptism.

MAster Tombs in his Apology for the two Treatises, and appendix concerning
Infant Baptism, inserts a letter to Mr. Seldom, page 90. in which he
intimates his opinion, that Paedobaptisme did not succeed into the room of
circumcision, wherein he says, he was the more confirmed, having read of
Baptism, used among the Jews before the time of John Baptist, in their
admitting of Proselytes, and that therefore John was not accused for Baptizing,
as if that had been a Novation or new rite introduced, but for Baptizing
without authority.

I do not marvel that Mr. Tombs is so cautious, that Baptism should not be
thought to succeed into the room of circumcision, for so he should make
baptism more like to the circumcision of the Arabians, who are not
circumcised, till they be 13. years old (as Zonaras Annal. tom. 1. de rebus
Iudaicis, page: 13. tells us) because their forefather Ishmael was circumcised
about that age, then to the circumcision of the eight day, ordinarily used among
the people of God under the old Testament. For my part, I think the Apostle,
Col. 2. 11, 12, does plainly hold forth, that baptism has succeeded into the
room of circumcision: which is also the common and received opinion of
Divines. However, because Mr. Tombs does rather think that the Christian
baptism, succeeds to that baptism used among the Jews in their admission of
Proselytes, this has Ministered occasion to me, to apply my thoughts, to
search a little into the Original of Baptism by ^ater, and whether the
Original thereof, or that which God had respect unto in the institution
thereof, makes any thing against, or for Infant Baptism.

That Baptizing with water is a divine institution, is plain from John 1. 33.
He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit descending, etc. As for that which this institution had
reference unto in the old Testament, or Jewish customs, first of all consider
Ezech. 16. 4. As for thy nativity in the day thou wast borne, thy navell was
not cut, neither was thou washed in water to supple thee, etc. Where the
Chaldee says, The Congregation of Israel was like unto a child cast out into
the open field, whose navell is not cut, and it is not washed in water, that it
might be cleansed. The Septuagint whom Hierome follows, and thou art not
washed in water unto salvation. (...) in salutem. Hierome applies it to Hier.
in Ezech. 16. and in aqua non es lota in salutem. Cruenta infantium corpora,
statim ut emittuntur ex utero lavari solent. Ita ut generatio spiritualis,
lavacro indiget salutari. Nullus enim mundus a sorde nec si unius quidem diei
fuerit vita ejus, and in Psalmis legitur: In iniquitatibus conceptus sum, and
in delictis concepit me matter mea. Secunda nativitas solvit primam nativitatem.
Scriptum est enim. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and Spiritu Sancto, non
potest intrare in regnum dei. Multaque sunt lavacra quae Ethnici in Mysteriis
suis, and Haeretici pollicentur, qui omnes lavant, sed non lavant in salutem.
Propterea additum est, and aqua non es lota in salutem. Quod quidem non solum
de Haereticis, sed de Ecclesiasticis intelligi potest; qui non plena fide
accipiunt Baptismum salutare.
Baptism, as being necessary even to Infants who are in their blood and
siufull pollution, and have therefore need to be washed in the Laver of
regeneration, and baptized.

Not only the Hebrews, but the Heathens had a custom of washing Infants soon
after their birth, in those hot countries. Hence that of Virgil. lib. 9.
Aeneid. --

Durum a stirpe genus, natos ad flumina primum
Deferimus, saevoque geluduramus, and aestu.
Pineda de rebus Solomonis, lib 1. cap: 13. notes that from the Hebrews and
Egyptians, this custom of washing new born babes was derived almost to all
nations, for which purpose, he cites many Testimonies.

In the next place consider, that as the institution of Baptism by water
related to that in Ezech: 16. 4. So also to the Typical Baptism of all the
Children of Israel, men, women, and children in the red sea, and in the cloud,
1 Cor: 10. 1. 2. Moreover brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how
that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea. And
were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and the sea. The Apostle speaking
there of the Church which was brought out of Egypt (whom he calls our fathers,
because they were the people and Church of God long before us, and from them
the law and service of God was transmitted and propagated to us) shows that
as their Sacraments could not profit them to salvation, they living in sin
and provoking God after they had received those Sacraments, no more can our
Sacraments profit us, if we sin as they did. For their privileges were the
same with ours. The Manna and Water out of the Rock was the same for substance
and signification to them, which the Supper of the Lord is to us; the same
spiritual meat, the same spiritual drink was given both to them and us. So
likewise their passing through the Sea, and under the cloud was the very same
for substance and signification with our Baptism, and they were externally
baptized with a true Sacrament of Baptism, as well as we. That Baptism of
theirs, did fitly resemble this Baptism of ours in diverse respects. For
instance. 1. They were first brought out of Egypt before they were brought
through the sea, so we are first redeemed by Christ, and find grace and favor
in his eyes, before we receave the seals of the Covenant of grace. Baptism is
intended only for the redeemed of the Lord. 2. They were baptized unto Moses,
(or as the Syriak, and Arabik, as likewise Augustine, by Moses) that is, Moses
was the leader and commander of the people, (so Theophylact) and he the
Captain of their salvation, or rather Moses was a typical Mediator typifying
Christ; or they were baptized unto Moses, that is, they were by Baptism
dedicated and consecrated to that Doctrine, Covenant, promise of life, faith
and obedience, which God revealed by the hand of Moses. So are we baptized unto
Christ, or unto his death, and the benefits and fruits thereof. The same
Covenant of grace for substance, was sealed by their Baptism and ours. 3. That
Baptism of theirs did visibly separat between them and the Egyptians: for the
cloud divided them from the Egyptians, and the Sea drowned the Egyptians. So
our Baptism, which is unto us a token of Salvation, is unto aliens and those
without, a token of perdition, and distinguishes between the Church and the
rest of the world. 4. Their Baptism was by water, both in the sea and cloud
(it being also probably conceaved that they were sprinkled with drops both of
the sea and cloud) so is ours by water. 5. The sea resembles the water, the
cloud resembles the Spirit in our Baptism. So Athanasius. that is beside the
water in Baptism, the Spirit is also powered out from on high, and there is an
influence of grace from above, according to the good pleasure of Gods will,
upon so many as are ordained to eternal life. That the cloud did typifie the
Spirit was Damascens observation, who is herein followed by some interpreters.
6. They passed but once through the red sea; but the cloud continued always
with them in the wilderness. So the external Baptism is a transient action,
and but once used to one person, not reiterated; but the Spirit and gracious
presence of God continues ever with them in this world. 7. They passed through
the sea, and were under the cloud, and so baptized, before they did eat of the
Manna, or drink of water out of the Rock, so must we be baptized, before we
be fit to receave the Lords supper. 8. All that were baptized in the sea and
cloud, were not acceptable to God, for with many of them God was not well
pleased, and he swear in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest;
so of those that are now baptized, many are excluded from the heavenly Canaan.

For these and the like respects the Apostle compares, paralelleth and
equalleth their Sacramental privilege of Baptism with ours. And as P. Martyr
observes upon the place, the Apostle does not give instance in their
circumcision, but in their Baptism, that his parallel and comparison with our
Baptism might be the more evident. Now therefore if this parallel hold so
fully, then add two considerations more to make it yet more full; they are
both of them against the Anabaptists. First they were truly baptized with
water, when but wet or besprinkled under the cloud, (and therefore the Apostle
says, they were baptized in the cloud) so are we and our children truly
baptized with water, when sprinkled as well as dipped, which is not at all
inconsistent, but most agreeable to the signification of the verb (...). For
although it signifies immergere, tingere in which sense Julius Pollux, lib: 1.
cap, 9. reckons among the passions of a ship, (...), submergi to be drowned or
run under water (and if any shall contend that the native signification of
(...), is mergo, or tingo, I neither think it can be convincingly proved, nor
that it makes against sprinkling though it were proved) this I hope cannot be
denied that (...), does also signify abluo, lavo and so is used for any manner
of washing by water, which whosoever will deny shall contradict Hesyclius,
Budaeus, Stephanus, Scapula, Arias Montanus, Pasor in their Lexicons, and the
Holy Ghost himself, 1 Cor: 10. 2. 2 Heb: 9. 10 Luke 11. 38. with Mark. 7. 3, 4.
Secondly I observe, that though the infants of the people of Israel were not
fit to eat of the Manna and drink of the water out of the Rock, as those of
some age did, yet the youngest of their Infants were baptized and received a
sacramental seal of their interest in Christ and the covenant of Grace, which
is a notable president to our Infant Baptism, and it must needs hold, unless
we weaken, yea subvert the Apostles argumentation in that place. For what more
certain then that among so many hundredth thousand people, there were diverse
Infants who had not yet the use of reason, nor were able to give an account of
their Faith? What more uncontravertable then that these Infants were with the
rest of the congregation baptized in the Sea and under the cloud, being
externally incorporated in the Commonwealth of Israel, and the seed of Abraham?
What more manifest then that the Apostle holds forth to us that their baptism
was materially or substantially the same with ours, both for the grace
signified and sealed, and for the very element of water? So that this
Infant Baptism of theirs, is (upon the matter and according to the Apostles
doctrine) a good warrant for Infant Baptism among us, as well as if the new
Testament had expressly told us that some Infants were baptized Synops. purior.
Theol. Disp. 44. These. 48. Item exempla infantium Israeliticorum, qui non minus
quam Israelitae adulti, sub nube and in mari rubro fuerunt Baptizati, test
Apostolo 1 Cor. 10. Gualther. Archetyp. in 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Confutantur
Anabaptistarum errores. Negant infantibus baptismum, quia nuspia^ legatur esse
baptizatos, and quia mysterium non intelligant. At Baptizati sunt omnes qui
mare transierunt, inter quos infantes quoque fuerunt. Exodus 20. Deinde neque
isti intellexer unt mysteria, nec ideo Symbola prophanata sunt.
by Christ or his Apostles. This argument has taken deep impression in my
thoughts, and while I look after the suffrage of Divines, I find some of very
good note have had the same notion from this Text against the Anabaptists,
showing also that their objections against Infant Baptism fall as heavy upon
that baptism of the children of Israel. My Reverent Brother Mr. Baillie, has
drawn an argument from the same Text for Infant Baptism. See Anabaptisme. p.
149, 150.

But now thirdly whereas it is stood upon that the Original of Baptism was
derived from the Baptism used among the Jews in the admission of Proselytes,
first it must be proved by these who are of this opinion, that the Jewish
custom of baptizing with water the Proselytes whom they received, is older
then John Baptist, which I find supposed, yet not proved. Mr. Ainsworth on
Gen: 17. 12. is indeed of that opinion that the custom of baptizing
Proselytes, is older then John Baptist, but he ^rings no Testimony for this,
older then Moses Maimonides. Mr Marshall in his defense of Infant baptism page
170. yields to Mr. Tombs, that Baptism was a known rite among the Jews at
their admitting of Proselytes, long before it begun to be a Sacrament of Divine
Institution. And so from Mr. Tombs his own supposition, he argues for
Infant Baptism, which he had reason to do. Nevertheless I have never yet
read any proofor. Testimony brought to prove the Baptism of Proselytes, which
is not far short of John Baptist or Christ's days. The Scripture mentions no
sign or seal or ceremony of the initiation of Proselytes, but circumcision,
after profession of their faith and desire to worship the true God and to be of
his people. The baptizing of Proselytes was one of the Jewish traditions and
inventions in their later and declining times. When it began I have not yet
found, neither have I yet seen any proof which can make that custom older then
John Baptist, or as old as Christ's baptism. Next let it be proved to be as old
as it can, yet the greatest searchers of the Jewish Antiquities have observed
that the Baptism of Proselytes was administered Buzt. Lex. Chald. Rabb. and
Talumd. page 407. proselyto minorem; conferunt Baptisrum ex decreto domus
judicii, hoc est, Senatus. M. Seldom de jure not. and gent. lib. 2. cap. 2. ut
Gentiles majores ad hunc modum exanimi sui sententia proselyti fiebant, ita
minores (masculi ante annum decimum tertium praeter diem unicum, foeminae ante
annum duodecimum and diem insuper expletum) ex sententia sive patris sive fori
cui suberant in Judaismum pariter cooptati. Atque actus tam forensis quam
paternus assensum eorum tum in circumcisione and Baptismo, tum in sacrificio
offerendo quod sequebatur, supplebat. Si vero minor, simulac aetatem
compieverat, Judaismo renunciasser, nec eum omnino postquam major erat, fuisset
amplexus, ita them evanuit, quicquid per initiamenta quibus ex assensu sive
paterno, sive forensi cooptatus est, ut in Gentilis plane conditionem rediret.
not only to those who were grown up and of age, but to children also under
age. So Dr Buxtorf. and Mr Seldom.

Such a Proselyte under age the Hebrew writers call (...), Ger katan: and they
reckon a son to be minor and puer, from his Filius ex quo natus est, dum
fuerit tredecim annorum vocatur minor et puer.
nativity till he be thirteen years old (for which see Buxtorf in the word
(...)) so that by their principles a child of one year or two years old might
be baptized as a Proselyt upon the consent of the Father or of the court.

I conclude, that since the institution of Baptism by water has respect unto
those baptizings or washings in the old Testament, which are mentioned Ezekiel:
16, 4. 1 Cor, 10. 1. 2. whereof Infants as well as aged persons were partakers;
and since the very Talmudists admit the Infants of Proselytes als well as
themselves to Baptism, surely Mr. Tombs has gained nothing, but loosed much
by starting this question.

I add another Text, Ephesians: 5. 26. where the Apostle (having respect as I
conceive to those passages in the old Testament) says, that Christ loved the
Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word, that he might present it, etc. Are not the
children of the faithful parts of this Church, which Christ loved, and for
which he gave himself, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, and that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle? If
so, then remember that whole Text is copulative; and none that belong to the
Church and body of Christ may be secluded from any part of the Text. We may
al^ well hold that the Children of beleivers not yet grown up to knowledge and
the use of reason, are incapable of the love of Christ, or of justification,
sanctification and glorisication by Christ, as to hold that they are incapable
of the washing of water by the word, i.e. of Baptism, which cannot be made
void, but is efficacious to all the members of Christ, young and old, by virtue
of the word of promise and Covenant of grace sealed in that Sacrament;
according to that of Augustine, Accedit verbum ad elementum and fit
Sacramentum: The washing of water, by the word, can no more be restricted to
the Church of aged or actual believers, then Christ's love and death with the
ends and effects thereof, can be restricted to such. The complication of these
benefits, is clearer in the Original; the the nearest rendering, whereof is
thus, That cleansing it with the laver of water, by the word, he might
sanctify it. The Tigurine version thus, ut illam sanctificaret, mundatam
lavacro aquae, etc.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the use of a Table in the Lords Supper. And of the communicants their
coming to, and receaving at the Table.

THat a Table ought to be so far used, as that the Elements of bread and wine
ought to be set upon it, is not (I think) controverted; but whether therebe so
much light from Scripture, as that all the communicants ought to come to, and
receave at the Table; This I conceave to be the question. For resolution
whereof, I humbly offer these following considerations.

First of all it may easily appear, that the first guests whom our Savior
entertained at this Sacrament of his body and blood, received at the Table.
Chrysostom de proditione Iudae, Sermon. 30. Comparing the Eucharisticall supper
with the passover, says, that both of them was celebrated, (...) at or on the
very same Table. The common Supper, the Paschall and the Eucharisticall were
all at the Table, Luke 22. 21. But behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me,
is with me on the table. John 13. 28. Now no man at the Table knew, etc. Which
Texts I do not understand of the Lords Supper (as some do) but of the common
Supper. But I suppose no man did ever imagine, that the Apostles being before
set at the Table, did remove from it when they were to receave the Lords Table.
Peradventure it will be replied (for so it has been replied by some) that the
first Communicants their sitting and receaving at the Table, was occasional,
in respect that they had been sitting before at the common and at the Paschal
supper, so that in this particular, we are no more bound to follow Christ's
example, then in the other occasional cicumstances, the upper chamber,
unleavened bread, after supper, etc. Beside, Christ had but twelve
communicants, unto whom he was to give the Sacrament, and so might conveniently
make them all sit at the table, which now in many Churches cannot conveniently
be done. Finally, that it is as great a deviation from Christ's example to have
diverse successive tables, without which innumerous Congregations, all the
communicants cannot receave at the table.

I answer. 1. It Is gratis dictum, that sitting at the Table was occasional, or
such as has not a standing, but a temporary reason for it, and there is this
reason to the contrary: occasional circumstances in that action, which are not
to be imitated by us, were such as Christ was limited unto by the law, or by
the providence of God, so that therein he was not left at a liberty or latitude
to choose to do otherwise. For instance, it was not allowed by the Law to have
any other bread in Jerusalem, during the feast of passover, but unleavened
bread only. The upper room was the place assigned by the Master of the house,
God so ordering. After supper it must be, because it must succeed to the
passover, being also the Testament, or latter will of Jesus Christ. There was
also a providentiall limitation, to such and so many communicants, that is, not
exceeding the number which was allowed to eat the passover together. Let some
such reason be brought to prove that sitting at table, was occasional, else
let it not be called so. Sure if Christ had not thought it fittest, and choosed
it as the best way, that his Disciples should receave his last Supper at the
table, it was free to him to have changed their posture without encroachment
upon any law of Moses, or upon any providentiall limitation. Secondly, I am
herein the more confirmed, because Christ himself, as it were on purpose to
show, that the sitting and receaving at Table was not occasional, but such a
thing as he meant to commend unto us for our imitation, he gives this standing
and permanent reason for it, that it is a piece of honor that he will have put
upon those whom he inviteth, calls, and allows to eat and drink with him,
Luke 22. 27. for whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or he that
serves? Is not he that sits at meat?

This at meat is not in the Original, where we find only (...), he that
sits, we may as well and better supply at table, from verse: 21. add verse:
30. That ye may (here I supply from verse: 27. and Matthew. 8. 11. Sit down and)
eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. Here is an honor of Communion, and an honor of
Jurisdiction: The honor of Communion, is to eat and drink at his Table in his
Kingdom, and this honor (signified by their sitting, eating and drinking at
his table in his last Supper) he puts upon them as believing communicants, so
that it belongs to all such. There is another honor joined with a special
judicial prerogative, to sit on Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel, and herein there is somewhat meant peculiarly of the Apostles, which is
notwithstanding mentioned else were in a different phrase, as a Prerogative of
all the Saints, 1 Cor: 6. 2. Thirdly, it cannot be denied, but that the first
communicants who received from Christ, might with more ease and convenience be
placed at the table, then can be now in many Churches, which have been
accustomed to another way. But we must not bring down our rule to our
conveniences, rather bring up our conveniences to our rule. It is no hard
matter to alter pewes and such like things in Churches, where the present
posture is inconsistent with following the pattern: and a less alteration
will serve then is apprehended. Fourthly, the flux and reflux (so to speak) of
several successive tables, where there is a great number to communicate, and
the repeating, or pronouncing, and applying to those several tables of
receavers, the words, Take ye, eat ye, which Christ pronounced but once in one
act of distribution, these things (I say) cannot be justly charged as
deviations from the example of Christ, when the same providence which limited
him to a fewer number, calls us to distribute to a great number: Neither can
they who so charge us, ever make good what they allege, unless they prove
that although Christ had been distributing this Sacrament to all the 500.
Disciples, to whom he appeared after his resurrection (suppose I say, there
had been so many communicants) yet he had given them all at once the elements,
and had said but once, Take ye, eat ye, and that there had been no
intermission at all, nor no partition into several successive Companies. If
this can be proved, then they say much against the use of successive Tables,
otherwise not. Fifthly, our dissenting brethren of the Independent way, who
dislike our several and successive tables in one Congregation, as a dividing
of those who ought to communicate all together, (for they would have none of the
Communicants receave the cup, before all of the Congregation who communicate,
have received the bread) these brethren, I say, may satisfy themselves from
their own principles; For they hold, that although a Congregation increase so
much, as that they cannot, or be so persecuted, that they may not meet safely
in one place, for the Word and Sacraments, and supposing the Church of
Jerusalem before the dispersion, Acts 8. 1. to have been so numerous, and to
have accressed to so many thousands, as could not receave the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, nor ordinarily assemble into one place for the Worship of God,
(that they received the Lords Supper in several companies, and several
houses, is ordinarily collected from Acts 2. 46. and breaking bread from house
to house, which the Syriak expounds expressly of the Eucharist.) Yet all
this (say they) breaks not the Church, but they are still one particular
Church. Now if several companies of the same Church assembled, and receaving
the Lords Supper in several places, be not a breaking or dividing of the
Congregation, nor a deviation from the example of Christ, much less can they
with any reason, charge our communicating by several companies at successive
tables, in the same meeting place or Assembly, to be a breaking of the
Congregation, or a deviation from Christ's example. If one of their
Congregations may receave the Sacrament in several houses, when (by reason of
numerousnesse) they cannot all receave it together in one house, I cannot
conceive why they may not much more allow us several successive tables in the
Assembly, when the whole cannot communicate at one table, so much for my first
argument taken from Christ's example.

The second Argument, I shall take from the general notion and nature of the
Lords Supper, as it is epulum, a banquet or feast. As those things which are
competent to every humane society, or lawful Assembly, are also competent to
the Church and people of God; And that which every speaker which speaks in any
publik audience ought to do, the same ought a preacher who speaks to the
Church, do (for instance the posture of his body, and the extension of his
voice, ought to be such as he may be best seen and heard) so likewise those
things that are competent, and convenient to every feast or banquet, ought not
to be wanting in the Lords Supper, which is the marriage feast of the Kings
son, Matthew: 22. 2, 3. a great Supper, Luke 14. 16. the Feast, 1 Cor. 5. 8.
Prove. 9. 2. Cant: 5. 1. whatsoever is more meant in these Texts, sure the Lords
Supper is one thing, and a principal thing which is intended. The Lords Supper
is not only a feast, but a type, and representation of the Everlasting feast
and communion with Christ in glory, Luke 14. 15. Rev. 19. 9. It Is true the
marrow and fatness, the substance and sweetness of this feast in the
Lord's Supper, lies in the spiritual and invisible part, yet (as Irenaeus said)
a Sacrament consists of two parts, one earthly and visible, another heavenly
and invisible, so that in the very external part, although there is that which
may difference it from a carnal feast, yet there is that which has a
resemblance of a feast, viz. the eating and drinking of many together in a
public place, a table covered, comely vessels, etc. Otherwise if in the
external dispensation, there were no resemblance of a feast, then we should
take away the Analogy betwixt the sign and the thing signified. Now among
other things which are suitable to every feast or banquet, even ex more recepto
apud omnes gentes, one is, that the guests come to, and sit at the Table; which
by the very light of nature, and general consent of the Nations, is a token of
respect, dignity, and honor put upon the guests. As likewise of friendship and
commaradship, or sodalitium. Thence the Greek proverb (...), not to violat the
salt and table. i.e. friendship, whereof eating at one table was a symbol.
Thence also that Plautin phrase, communicabo te semper mensa mea. It is
aggravation of falsehood, and treachery they shall speak lies at one Table, that
is, under a profession and sign of friendship, Dan. 11. 27. When David said to
Mephibosheth, thou shall eat bread at my table continually, 2 Samuel: 9. 7. do
we think that David meant no more, but that Mephibosheth should eat of the
Kings meat, and be maintained by his favor? Nay Mephibosheths servant had so
much. But there is an Emphasis put upon eating at the Kings table, more then
upon eating of the Kings meat: So the King expounds himself, verse: 11. As
for Mephibosheth said the King, he shall eat at my Table, as one of the Kings
Sons, so also does Mephibosheth interpret it, 2 Samuel, 19. 28. Another example
(though perhaps it rise not so high) see 1 Kings 2. 7. But show kindness to
the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy
Table. It was an argument of Iezebels favor to the Prophets of the groves,
that they did eat at her Table, 1 Kings 18. 19. So did Nehemiah, express his
friendship, to the 150 Jews and Rulers who did eat at his Table, Neh. 5. 17.
Peradventure in the two last examples, there were some successive (at least
several Tables:) However, eating at any man's Table was ever a Symbol of
friendship with him. Wherefore looking upon the Lords Supper as a feast or a
great Supper made by the great King, it ought not to be without this friendly
respect, dignation, and honor, which has been universally among the Nations
signified and expressed by placeing the guests at the Table. And I can esteem
it no less then an erring toto genere, when the order and decency, which is
universally observed in all other feasts, (as such, that is, not as lavish,
excessive, disorderly, but as feasts) is not observed in the Church-feast, the
Lords Supper. When the old Prophet did invite the young Prophet to eat bread,
and drink water with him, common civility made a table necessary in this single
intertainment. 1 Kings 13. 20. And it came to pass as they sat at the Table,
etc. If it were a disrespect to invite friends to eat and drink with us, and
yet when they come, not to place them at a Table (where a Table may be had) I
know no reason why it ought not also to be conceived a wronging of Christ's
guests, when they are not placed at his Table.

Thirdly, I argue from the name Table, which the Apostle makes use of in this
Ordinance. 1 Cor. 10. 21. ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the
Table of devils. The table of Devils was that which they did sit at, and eat
at, in the Idols temple, 1 Cor. 8 10. The Lords Table was that which they did
sit at, and eat at in the Church, and in those times (to note that Vide. H.
Grotii annot. in Matthew. 26. 25.
by the way) they did eat their love feasts before the Lords Supper in
imitation of Christ, who had the Sacrament after Supper, which does to me put
it the more out of doubt, that those primitive Christians received the Lords
Supper at the Table. The name table is also used (not without respect to the
Lords Supper) Prove. 9. 2. Wisdom has killed her beasts (or according to the
Hebrew, her killing^ She has mingled her wine, she has also furnished her
Table, where there is another distinct Emphasis upon the furnishing of her
Table, beside the preparing of meat and drink. Again Cant: 1. 12. while the
King sits at his Table, my Spiknard sends forth the smell thereof. It
appear^ by this smell that she was also at Table with the King: for the words
intimat that, when the Church is nearest to Christ, even sitting at Table with
him, then her graces send forth the most pleasant smell, and then does Christ
sup with the Church upon her graces, als well as she with him upon his mercies
and comforts, so that here is a mutual intertainment and communion In that
Evangelicall vision of Ezekiel concerning the second house, which is the Church
of Christ, there is also mention of a Table and of coming to it, Ezekiel. 44. 16.
and they shall come near to my Table. It has been alleged by some, that the
name table is but figurative when the Scriprure uses it in reference to the
Sacrament, and that to partake of the Lords table is no more but to partake of
the body and blood of the Lord. So Psalm 78. 19. Can GOD furnish a Table in
the wilderness i. e. give us flesh. To this I answer, when the Name Table is
used for meat and drink, this very use of the word does not exclude but plainly
suppose a material Table, at which men use to eat and drink, and so a Table is
used promensa dapibus instructa, so (...), secundae mensae: Auferre men's as, or
the like, though not meant of the wooden table, yet do suppose the wooden
Table. I do not doubt, but they in the wilderness lusted after a perfect
furnished Table, and not merely after flesh, though that was the chief thing
they desired* and I make als little question, but there were both Tables and
beds in the wilderness, such as might be had, and such as Armies use when they
encampe and pitch their Tents. But I ask, ought there to be a material Table
in the Lords Supper, or ought there not, or is it indifferent? I never yet read
it, or heard it doubted by any, but there ought to be a material Table. All
that have been zealous for throwing down Altars, would yet have a Table. If so,
by virtue of what warrant ought there to be a Table, and for what use? First by
virtue of what warrant? Is it by virtue of Christ's example, or any other
Scripturall warrant; or is it because of a natural convenience and decency? If
by a Scripturall warrant, I have what I desire. The same Scripturall warrant
which will prove that there ought to be a Table, will also prove that the
Communicants ought to come to it, and communicate together at it. For the
Scripture allows not a greater honor to be put upon some Communicants, that
they eat of the Kings meat, and at the Kings Table too, and a lesser honor to
be put upon other communicants, that they eat of the Kings meat, but not at the
Kings Table. If it be said, that a material Table has not its rise from any
scripturall warrant, but from natural convenience or decency, then it shall be
no trespass against the word of God, to have no material Table at all,
otherwise then as a natural indecency. And beside, I still urge the same
argument which I was even now hinting, be it by virtue of a scripturall
warrant, or be it by virtue of a natural convenience, the argument is the
same, how ever* all the communicants should come to it, or none at all, for if
some come to the Table, and some come not, this is not agreeable to that (...),
or equal honor and dignation, which all the communicants ought to have.
Natural decency a's well as Scripturall warrants are of equal concernment to
all the communicants. The second Quaere was, for what end and use ought there
to be a material table? Is it merely to be a cupboard for holding the vessels
and cups which contain the Elements, and that the Minister may carry them from
the Table to those who are to receive? Then it is no Table, for (...) is a
Table which we dine or sup at, no by-boord for holding things which servants
are to present unto those who sit at the Table. What then? Is the Table of the
Lord in the new Testament intended for the same end and use as the Table of the
Lord in the old Testament, Mal: 1. 7. The table of the Lord is centemptible? If
so, then we make the Table an Altar, and the Sacrament a sacrifice. For the
Sacrifice was Gods meat eaten up by fire from Heaven, and the Altar Gods Table,
because it contained his meat. But now the Table of the Lord must have another
sense in the new Testament; the Lords Supper being no sacrifice, but epulum ex
oblatis, a feast upon the body and blood of Christ offered upon the cross for
us. Of this nature of the Lords Supper, Mr Cudworth has learnedly discoursed
in a Treatise printed Anno 1642. I conclude the Table which we speak of, is not
for a sacrifice, but for a Sacrament, for a feast, for meat which God offers to
us not we to him. Therefore we ought to come unto the Table of the Lord to
receive the mystical food in the Sacrament, als well as we come to our
ordinary Table for our ordinary food. Otherwise what ever use we may devise for
a Table in the Sacrament, sure it serves not for the use of a table, at least
not to all the Communicants.

Fourthly, I offer also this argument. The coming to and receiving at the
Table serves to set forth the communion of Saints with Christ and among
themselves, which is a principal thing intended in this Sacrament, and without
such a symbol as I now plead for, is not plainly and clearly set forth in
this Ordinance. To eat in the same house, and of the same meat, is nothing near
such a sign of fellowship or communion, as to eat at the same Table. This
difference is noted between Martha and Lazarus, Ioh. 12. 2. when they made a
supper to Jesus in Bethany, Martha served, but Lazarus was one of them who sat
at the Table with him. Lazarus therefore had more fellowship with Christ at
that time. Peter Martyr on 1 Cor: 10. notes out of Chrysostom that
communicare does imply sodalitium, and is more then participare, to communicate
is more then to partake, for one may partake of the same bread, who does not
communicate in the same bread. He ha eats of the same thing, but not at the
same Table, cannot be altogether or properly called (...), or, (...). you shame
them that have not, ( or them that are poor) says the Apostle. What shall I
say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. 1 Cor: 11: 22. So say
I those that receive the Sacrament in their Pewes, shame the poor that have no
Pewes, wherein they are not to be praised. Sure it were more communion like to
sit and receive at one Table. It is the most suitable and significant setting
forth of the communion of Saints, when the children of God are like Olive
plants round about his Table, Psalm: 128. 3. Therefore the Apostle having
mentioned our partaking of one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. adds verse 21. our
partaking of one Table, which is the Lords Table. When Communicants come not to
the Table, but abide in their Pewes, some here, some there, this is indeed a
dividing of the congregation in varias parts partiumque particulas: Neither
can they be said to divide the cup amongst themselves, (which by the
institution they ought to do in testimony of their communion) when they are
not within reach, yea oftentimes not within sight of one another. There is
nothing like a dividing it amongst themselves, where they come not to the
Table, and there give the cup each to other. I know some have scrupled whether
our Saviors words, Luke 22. 17. Take this and divide it amongst your selves;
be meant of the Eucharisticall cup, or of the Paschall. But they go upon surer
reasons who put it out of question, that it is meant of the Eucharisticall cup
(which is there mentioned by Luke by way of Anticipation, I shall for the
present give but this reason, which I know has satisfied some who were of
another opinion (although much more might be said) that which Luke records to
have been spoken by Christ concerning that cup, which he bade them divide
amongst themselves, the very same do Matthew and Mark record to have been
spoken by him, concerning the Eucharisticall cup, which was drunk last of all,
and after the Paschall supper, viz. That thencefoorth he would not drink of the
fruit of the Vine until he should drink it in the Kingdom of God, which does
not hold true if understood of the Paschall cup, therefore those other
Evangelists plainly apply it to the Eucharisticall cup, and there withal they
close the history of the Sacrament, adding only that a hymn was sung, Math:
26. 27, 28, 29. Mark, 14. 23, 24, 25. with Luke 22. 17, 18. And if
notwithstanding some will not be persuaded that the words, divide it amongst
your selves, were meant of the Eucharisticall cup, as I am confident they are
in a mistake, so I hope they will at last yield this argument, a fortiori. If
there was such a symbol of communion in the Pascall cup, that the receivers
were to divide it amongst themselves, sure this ought to have place much more
in the Eucharisticall cup, for the Lords supper does more clearly and fully set
forth the communion of Saints, then the Passover did.

The fifth Argument I shall draw from the words which Christ used in the
distribution, Take ye, eat ye, this is my body which is broken for you, and of
the cup, Drink ye all of it. The institution is our rule and pattern, and it is
high presumption for any man to be wiser than the Son of God, or to speak to
the communicants individually in the distribution, Take thou, eat thou, This is
the Lords body broken for thee, etc. When Christ thought fit in the
distribution to speak in the plural, Take ye, eat ye, etc. It Is no answer to
say, that the words, Take ye, eat ye, etc. are used in the consecration, for
then they are but related Historically. Here is the strength of the Argument,
Christ spoke so in the act of distribution, and by way of application to the
Communicants in a demonstrative enunciation, therefore so should we. But now
this cannot be, where the communicants do not receave at the Table, but in
their several Pewes: This very thing has occasioned the change of the words
of the institution, from the plural to the singular.

Sixthly, we have some light from antiquity also in this particular, for which
purpose there are some notable passages in Chrysostom, tom: 5. de Diverse. Nov.
Test. locis. Ser: 21. where opening these abuses in the matter of love feasts,
reproved in the Corinthians, who joined together with these the Sacrament, 1
Cor: 11. this he much insists upon as a principal abuse, that they did eat
(...) by themselves, or severally: and (...), the table is not made Common, for
the rich did eat by themselves, not together with the poor. Christ did not so
with his Disciples in his last Supper, (...). For in that Supper, both the
Master and all the servants sat together. Chrysostom shows further from the
Churches custom and form observed in the administration of the Lords Supper,
how justly the Apostle challenges that abuse in the love feasts. For in the
Lord's Supper all approach unto, and receave at the same table For, says he,
that spiritual and holy Table is common to all, both rich and poor -- (...),
there is the same honor, the same access and approach for all. (...) (...).
And until all do partake of this spiritual and holy Table, the things which
are set upon the Table, are not taken away, but all the Priests, (or Ministers)
stand expecting even him who is the poorest, or smallest of all. So that
according to this form and custom which he holds forth unto us, the
Ministers did not go about with the Elements unto the several pewes of the
Communicants, but they stood still at the table, and all the Communicants, both
poor and rich come to the Table.

CHAP. XIX.
That there was among the Jews a jurisdiction and government Ecclesiastical,
distinct from the civil.

FIrst, they had Elders who were Spiritual or Ecclesiastical (not civil)
rulers. Whence it is that Salmasius de primatu papae, page: 3. and long before
Ambrose in 1 Timothy: 5. does parallel the Jewish Elders not to the Christian
Magistrate, but to the Elders of the Christian Church ordained by the Apostles.
I do not say that they had no Elders who were civil Magistrates; but they had
some Elders who were Church Governors, or had an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
Which I prove 1. By the arguments brought before, Book 1 chap: 3. page: 26. 27.

2. The Jews when they had lost their State, power, and civil Government, had
still under the Roman Emperors their Presbyteri and Archisynagogi. Whereof
Mr. Seldom in Eutych: page: 15. 16. brings clear instances under Arcadius and
Honorius. Now the Roman Emperors did not permit to the Jews their own
civil Government, but only an Autonomy in Religion. So ibid: page: 34. he
shows us that the Kings of England have permitted to the Jews in England
their Presbyteratus, which he does not deny, but half yield, to have been the
same with their Sacerdotium.

3. Although Mr. Seldom, comment: in Eutych: Orig: page 17. etc. to 34. and in
his Vxor Ebraica. lib. 1. chap. 15. holds that the Jewish Elders or
Presbyters, were such as were created by impositione of hands, receaving
thereby a judicial faculty or degree, so that thence forth they were capable
of membership in the Sanhedrim, either of 23. or 71. and were fit to preside in
judging of civil causes: and so endeavors to show that it was a civil, not
a sacred or Ecclesiastical dignity and preferment; Yet he furnishes me with
some considerable arguments to confirm my opinion, beside that which was last
mentioned. As 1. He tells us in Eutych. page 16. that nomina officiorum
Sacrorum, ut patriarcha, Pr^byter, Apostolus, Diaconus, Primas Et Episcopus, in
Christianismum ex Iudaismi veteris usu, etc. manarunt. But if the Jewish Elders
were not promoted to a sacred, but to a civil jurisdiction, that name should
have been transferred to Magistrates, Judges, Parliament men, rather then to
Church officers. 2. He tells of a divided, distinct, bounded and particular
Ordniation of the Jewish Elders, some of them being ordained to a faculty or
power of judging, but not to judge of lawful or unlawful rites, others of
them being ordained to judge of rites, but not of pecuniary causes. The form
of words which he cites, is this, Et sit tibi sacultas judicandi, sed ita ut
minime sit tibi facultas decernendi quinam ritus illiciti, quinam liciti, aut
sit tibi hujusmodi facultas decernendi, ita tamen ut causas pecuniarias non sit
tibi facultas judicandi. Behold a sacred and a civil jurisdiction
distinguished. Mr. Seldom himself, uxor. Ebr. lib. 1 cap. 15. tells us that the
word Presbyters or Elders, is by the Talmudicall writers used no only for those
who were created by imposition of hands to a Magistraticall or judicial
faculty, such as the members of the Sanhedrim, or such as were candidats in
that faculty, and as it were expectants of a place, and memberships in their
Courts of justice, but also for other fit and idoneous persons, who might be
called for counsel or advice. Therefore all their Elders were not civil
Magistrates.

My second Argument shall be taken from the Jewish Ordination of Elders,
(Ordination being an act of the power of jurisdiction, not of order) with
imposition of hands, from which Mr. Seldom, Eutych. page 24. 25. tells us, the
Christian Ordination and imposition of hands upon Presbyters, was bo rowed
(even as the Christian baptism from the Jewish baptism at the admission of
Proselytes, and the Lords Supper from what was used in the passover,)
whereunto he says, any man will assent, if he consider what is found in the
Talmudicall writers of the number of three, (which was the least number which
could suffice to the ordaining of a Jewish Elder; and the same was the least
number which the ancient Church thought sufficient for Ordination:) Also of the
internal effect of that Jewish Ordination, with laying on of hands, which
effect was the resting of the holy Ghost upon the Elder so ordained. And this
was drawn from Number. 11. 26. Deuteronomy. 34. 9. See ibid. 21. 22. There is so much of
the Christian Ordination borrowed from the Jewish, that D. Buxtorf: lex:
Rabbin. page: 1499. where he speaks of the Jewish Ordination, referrests to 1 Timothy 4. 14. I will add other three cited by Mr. Seldom, ibid: page: 22. First,
I. Scaliger, Elench* Triher: cap: 20. When I turn to this place, I find
Scaliger moves the question, how it came to pass that Christ was permitted to
sit, and to teach among the Doctors in the Temple, not being ordained. (Mark
here an Ordination which was for public teaching, not for a power of civil
judicature, which Christ never assumed) and how it came that both he and John
Baptist were called Rabbi: also he paralells one newly ordained among the
Jews, with a young Bishop in the ancient Canons. The next shall be, H. Grotius
annot. in Evan. page: 329. When I turn hither, I find Grotius speaking thus,
Manuum impositio apud Iudaeos indicabat invocationem divinae potentiae: ut
alibi diximus. unde factum est ut munia publica eo ritu conferentur, etiam
civilia ut Senatorum. Sed and in archisynagogis and senioribus synagogae, idem
observatum, unde mos (...) ad Christianos transiit. Here is an Ecclesiastical
Ordination to offices in the Synagogue, which he distinguishes from civil
offices. Lastly I turn to Itiner Beni. page: 73. 74. Where I read of one D.
Daniel Filius Husday, called caput exulum, unto whom the dispersed Jews in
several Provinces, have their recourse for Ordination of their Preachers or
Teachers. Hi omnes Israelitarum caetus ab exulum capite potestatem accipiunt,
sibi in singulis Congregationibus professorem and concionatorem praeficiendi.
Nam ipsum convenient, ut manuum impositione potestatem accipiant. Was this
Ordination now to a civil rule or judicature? A Doctor or Professor in the
School, and a Preacher in the Synagogue, are here joined as the common and
ordinary rulers in the particular Assemblies of the Jews, as L' Empereur
notes, not. in Benjam: 148. 149. where he also clears, that this (...)
Chazan mentioned there by Benjamin was not a civil ruler, but praelector and
concionator, a reader and expounder of Scripture. See Buxtorf: lex: Rabbin. at
the same word. Hic maxim oratione sive precibus and cantu Ecclesiae praeibat,
praeerat lectioni legali, docens quod and quomodo legendum, and similibus quae
ad sacra pertinebant. And after he says of this word, pro Ministro Sacrorum
passim usitatissimum. it is a rabbinicall word, sounding somewhat near chozim,
seers, which was a name given to the Prophets, from (...) vidit. Moreover
observe this passage of Elias in Tisbite, at the word (...) Cuicunque manus
imposita est ad Magisterium, sed non dum idoneus est ut doceat dogma, quo
vocetur doctor noster Magister, eum Magistri socium seu familiarem dicunt. This
is cited by Scaliger, Elench Triher. cap: 20. and by L' Empereur not. in
Benjam: page: 188. Where he illustrateth it by the fellows in the English
Universities, who though not yet Masters, yet are diverse times promoted to the
degree of Batchellours; yea, Doctors of Divinity. So then hands were laid on
such a person as intended to be a Teacher, and if he had not yet a dogmaticall
faculty for Teaching, he was counted but a fellow.

A third argument I take from the Synagoga magni, see Aarons Rod, page 4. 5.
137. 146. Add Mr. Seldom in Eutych* page: 42. where he tells us out of the
Jerusalem Gemara, Centum and viginti Presbyteri, e quibus octoginta prophetae
fuere aut instar Prophetarum, hanc precandi formulam institueruut. Mark they
were Elders, and that an Assembly was an Eldership or Sanhedrim. But is it
credible that Ezra Zerubbabell, Haggai, Zechariah and Malachia would consent
that such an Assembly, for which there been neither institution nor president
before, should assume that great power in Church affairs? Salom. Glassius
Phil. sacr: lib. 1. Tract. 1. page: 26. 27. Rectius est originem ejus (Masorae)
ad veros Synagogae seu consistorii magni (cujus praeses Ezra sacerdos, legis
divinae peritissimus, Ezra 7. 6. Symmistae and (...), Haggaeus, Zacharias,
Malachias, Nehemias, Zorobabel, Sacerdos, Jehoshua, aliique primarii Sacerdotes
and Levitae, ducis Zorobabelis ex Babylonia comites, numero centum viginti)
reducere, Ezra 7. 10. and haec communis Hebraeorum est sententia. Following the
most received opinion of the Hebrews themselves, ascribes the making and
composing of the Masora (a most ingenious and laborious critical doctrine upon
the Hebrew Text) to the men of the great Synagogue.

Fourthly, consider the triple Crown which the Hebrews speak of Pirke Aboth,
cap. 4. sect: 13. Tres sunt coronae, corona legis, sacerdotii, and regni. Here
is an Ecclesiastical and civil Government, and jus divinum over both. Pirke
Aboth. cap. 6. sect. 5. Major est lex sacerdotio aut regno. See Aarons rod,
page: 36. Philo says, Moses divided the Civil and Ecclesiastical
administration.

The fifth Argument I shall take from that Ecclesiastical Government and
discipline which the Jews since their dispersion and the destruction of
Jerusalem and of the Temple, have exercised, where they had at all liberty to
exercise their Religion. I read much in Itinerarium Benjaminis of the
Antistites, praepositi, praesides, praefecti, Moderatoris Synagoga, synedria
and capita synedriorum, among the dispersed Jews. page 70. december in ista
civitate (in Bagdado) sunt concessus sive Synedria, Chrisost. lib. 1, quod
Christus sit Deus, makes mention of a Patriarch of the dispersed Jews, (...),
and he had a great power and rule among the Jews, as may be collected from that
and other places of Chrysostom. This can be no civil Government or
Magistraticall courts (though Benjamine is too vainglorious that way) as Constable.
L' Empereur in his preface to the reader, proves from the Testimonies of Jews
themselves, Kimchi, Abrabaniel, Maimonides, and the Chaldee paraphrase on Hos.
3. all making it manifest, that after their second dispersion, they had no
Magistraticall nor judicial power: See also for this, L' Empereur his
annotations in Benjam. page: 196. 200. Which answers that of Mr. Seldom in
prolegom. ante lib. de success: Nullo adeo in aevo fere non erat hoc nationi
huic (judaeorum) singular, suis fere legibus alieno in regno seu republica
uti. Well, what then was the power of those rulers and courts of the Jews in
Benjamins observation, who wrote in the twelfth Century? He tells page: 30. of
their excommunicating of Epicurean Jews, and page: 73. 74. 115. of their
ordaining of Rabbis, Readers and Preachers. From page 92, he tells a story of
one David Alroi, who being a witty sorcerer, rebelled against the King of the
Persians, called himself the King of the Jews, and got some followers. After
he was in the hands of this King of the Persians, he escaped by his magical
Arts, and though pursued, could not be overtaken and caught, whereupon this
Persian King, writes to Caliphas a Machumetan Prince residing at Bagdadum, that
he would deal wit D. Daniel filius Has dai caput exulum, and with the capita
Synedriorum, there also residing, to forbid this David Al^ci, and to restrain
him, otherwise said the Persian King, I will kill all the Jews whom I find in
my Kingdom, which put all the Jews throughout Persia in great sea^e, so that
they wrote ad exulum principem and Synedriorum capita qui Bagdadi habitabant,
to their Pope, as I may so sa^, and heads of the Courts at Bagdadum, that they
would by their authority prohibit that man, through whom they were in danger
of their lives. After this, the heads of those Sanhedrims at Bagdadum by their
auctority gave forth letters to this purpose. Scito redemptionis tempus nondum
advenisse, necdum signa nostra a nobis conspecta: nam inflato suo animo nemo
praevalebit. Itaque jubemus ut te cohibeas, quo minus talia in posteru^
moliaris: quod si non pareas, esto excommunicatus a toto Israele.

Observe here when the Jewish Government and Discipline at that time, was
driven to the height, even for preventing the destruction of many of their
brethren, they had not a Magistraticall secular power; but they did
dogmatically declare against that man, and ordained him to be excommunicated in
case of his obstinacy, which makes manifest these two things, that they had
not a Magistraticall power, and that they had an Ecclesiastical power of
Government and censures. But all this preveiled not with David Alroi, who still
persisted in his course, till Zin Al-din a Turkish King sent against him some
who killed him.

And if we will learn from Chrysostom what the Patriarchs of the dispersed
Jews were in those days, see him, Tom: 5. Orat: 4. adversus Iudaeos. Will thou
that I rehearse unto thee Laws concerning the Priesthood, that so thou may
understand that they who are now among you called Patriarchs, are not Priests,
but hypocritically act the part of Priests; etc. A little after he concludes,
because they had not sacrifices, nor sprinkling of blood, nor the anointing of
oil, etc. it is manifest that the Priest which is now among them (meaning their
Patriarch who pretended to be a Priest) is impure unlawful, and profane.
Whence it appears, that among the dispersed Jews there remained a shadow and
footstep of Ecclesiastical Governors and Government.

CHAP. XX.
That necessary consequences from the written word of God, do sufficiently and
strongly prove the consequent or conclusion, if Theoreticall, to be a certain
divine truth which ought to be believed, and if practical, to be a necessary
duty, which we are obleidged unto, jure Divino.

THis assertion must neither be so far enlarged as to comprehend the
erroneous reasonings and consequences from Scripture which this or that man, or
this or that Church, apprehend and believe to be strong and necessary
consequences. I speak of what is, not of what is thought to be a necessary
consequence, neither yet must it be so far c^arctat and straightened, as the
Arminians would have it, who admit of no proofs from Scripture, but either
plain explicit Texts, or such consequences as are nulli non obviae, as neither
are nor can be contraverted by any man who is rationis compos. See there praef
ante exam: cens: and their examen. cap: 25. page 283. By which principle, if
embraced, we must renounce many necessary truths which the reformed Churches
hold against the Arians, Antitrinitarians, Socinians, Papists, because the
consequences and arguments from Scripture brought to prove them, are not
admitted as good by the adversaries.

This also I must in the second place premise, that the meaning of the
assertion is not that humane reason drawing a consequence from Scripture can be
the ground of our belief or conscience. For although the consequence or
argumentation be drawn forth by men's reasons, yet the consequent it self or
conclusion is not believed nor embraced by the strength of reason, but because
it is the truth and will of God, which Camero prael: tom: 1. p. 364. does very
well clear.

Ante omnia hoc tenendum est, aliud esse consequentiae rationem deprehendere,
aliud ipsum consequens; nam ut monuimus supra saepenumero deprehenditur
consequentiae ratio, cum nec comprehendatur antecedens nec deprehendatur
consequens, tantum intelligitur hoc ex illo sequi. I am hoc constituto dicimus
non esse sidei proprium sed rationis etiam despicere consequentiae rationem,
dicimus tamen fidei esse proprium consequens credere Nec inde tamen sequitur
sidem (quia consequens creditur) niti ratione, quia ratio non hic argumentum
sed instrumentum est, quemadmodum (...) sides dicitur esse ex auditu, auditus
non est argumentum fidei, sed est instrumentum.

Thirdly let us here observe with Gerhard, a distinction bebetween Loc. The: de
Eccl. number. 252. distingue^dum igitur est inter rationem sibirelicta^ ac solutam
quae sine froeno discurrit, ac suis fertur logismis, quae judicat ac statuit ex
suis principiis, quae sunt communes notiones, sensus, experientia, etc. and
inter rationem per verbum Dei refrenatam and sub obseqnium Christi redactam,
quae judicat an statuit ex proprio Theologiae principio, viz. ex verbo Dei in
Scripturis sacris proposito.
corrupt reason, and renewed or rectified reason: or between natural reason
arguing in divine things from natural and carnal principalls, sense,
experience and the like: and reason captivated and subdued to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor: 10. 4, 5. judging of divine things not by humane but by divine
rules, and standing to scriptural principals, how opposite so ever they may be
to the wisdom of the flesh. It Is the latter not the former reason which will
be convinced and satisfied with consequences and conclusions drawn from
Scripture, in things which concern the glory of God, and matters spiritual or
divine.

Fourthly, there are two sorts of consequences which Aquinas prima part:
quaest. 32. art. 1. 2um. distinguishes. 1. Such as make a sufficient and
strong poof, or where the consequence is necessary and certain, as for
instance says he, when reason is brought in natural science to prove that
the motion of the Heaven is ever of uniforme swiftness, not at one time slower
and another time swifter. 2. By way of agreablenesse or convenience* as in
Astrology (says he) thy reason is brought for the Excentricks or Epicycles,
because by these being supposed) the Phoenomena, or appa entia sensibila in the
Celestial motions may be salved Which he thinks is no necessary proof,
because their Phoenomena may be salved another way, and by making another
supposition. Now the consequences from Scripture are likewise of two sorts,
some necessary, strong, and certain, and of these I here speak in this
assertion; others which are good consequences to prove a sutablenesse or
agreablenes of this or that to Scripture, though another thing may be also
proved to be agreeable unto the same Scripture in the same or another place.
This latter sort are in diverse things of very use. But for the present I speak
of necessary consequences. I have now explained the assertion, I will next
prove it by these arguments. First, from the example of Christ and his
Apostles, Christ proved against the Sadduces the Resurrection of the dead, from
the Pentateuch, which was the only Scripture acknowledged by them, as many
think, though some others hold there is no warrant for thinking so, Mat. 22 31,
3. Luke 20. 37, 38. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the
Bush, when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, for he is not a God of the dead but of the living: for all
live unto him.

Again, Ioh. 10. 34, 35, 36. Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods.
If he called them gods unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture
cannot be broken; Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent unto
the world, thou plasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God?

The Apostle Paul proved by consequence from Scripture Christ's Resurrection,
Act: 13. 33, 34. He has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the
second Psalm, thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. And as
concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to
corruption, he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David.
His God head is proved, Heb: 1. 6. From these words, Let all the Angels of God
worship him. Divine worship cannot be due, and may not be given to any that is
not God.

2. Argum: Although Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy, and other Prelaticall
writers did hold this difference between the old and new Testament, that Christ
and his Apostles has not descended into all particularities with us as Moses
did with the Jews, yet upon examination it will be found that all the
ordinances and holy things of the Christian Church are no less determined and
contained in the new Testament, then the Ordinances in the Jewish Church were
determined in the old, and that there were some necessary things left to be
collected by necessary consequences, from the Law of Moses, as well as now from
the new Testament, If we consult the Talmud, we find there that the Law, Number:
15. 31. concerning the soul to be cut off, for despysing the word of the Lord
is applied to those who denied necessary consequences from the Law, and (says
the Talmud) if a man would acknowledge the whole Law to be from Heaven, praeter
istam collectionem amajori aut minori, istamve, a pari, is notatur illa
sententia quia verbum Domini aspernatus est, Exc. Gem ar. Senhedrin. cap: 11.
sect. 38. So that here are two sorts of necessary consequences from the Law,
one is a majori aut minori or if ye will, a fortiori: another a pari either of
which being refused, the Law it self was despised, yea it is further to be
observed with Mr. Seldom in his Vxor Haebraica lib: 1. cap: 3. that the Karaei
or Iudaei scripturarii who reject the additaments or traditions of the
Talmudicall Masters, and profess to adhere to the literal and simple sense of
the Law, without adding to it, or diminishing from it, yet even they themselves
do not require express words of Scripture for every Divine Institution; but
what they hold to be commanded or forbidden by the law of God, such commandment
or prohibition they draw from the Law three ways, either from the very words
of the Scripture it self, or by argumentation from Scripture, or by the
hereditary transmission of interpretations, which interpretations of Scripture
formerly received, the following Generations were allowed after to correct and
alter upon further discovery or better reason. The second way which was by
argumentation, was by the principles of the Karaei themselves of two sorts, a
pari or a fortiori. Which agrees with the passage of the Talmud before cited.
And herein our writers agree with the Karaei, that all kinds of unlawful and
forbidden marriages are not expressly mentioned in the law, but diverse of them
to be collected by consequence, that is, either by parity of reason, or by
greater strength of reason: for instance, Levit* 18. 10. The nakedness of thy
Sons daughter, or of thy daughters daughter, even their nakedness thou shall
not uncover: For theirs is thine own nakedness. Hence the consequence is drawn
a pari. Therefore a man may not uncover the nakedness of his great
grandchild, or of her who is the daughter of his Sons daughter. For that
also is his own nakedness, being a descent in linea recta from himself. From
the same Text, it is collected a fortiori, that much less a man may uncover the
nakedness of his own daughter, which yet is not expressly forbiden in the
Law, but left to be thus collected by necessary consequence from the very same
Text, it is likewise a necessary consequence that a man may not uncover the
nakedness of her who is daughter to his wives son, or to his wives daughter.
For here the reason holds, it is his own nakedness, his wife and he being one
flesh, which gives ground to that general received rule, that a man may not
marry any of his wives blood, nearer than he may of his own, neither may a wife
marry any of her husbands blood, nearer then she may of her own. Again, Levit:
18. 14. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy fathers brother, etc.
Hence it follows a pari, that a man may not uncover the nakedness of his
mothers brother, and by parity of reason (ever since that law was made,) it is
also unlawful for a woman to marry him who has been husband to her father
sister, or to her mothers sister, the nearness of blood being alike between
Uncle and Niece, as between Ant and Nephew. Other instances may be given, but
these may suffice to prove that what does by necessary consequence follow from
the law, must be understood to be commanded, or forbidden by God, as well as
that which is expressly commanded or forbidden in the Text of Scripture.

3. Argument, If we say that necessary consequences from Scripture prove not a
jus divinum, we say that which is inconsistent with the infinite wisdom of
God, for although necessary consequences may be drawn from a man's word which
do not agree with his mind and intention, and so men are oftentimes ensnared
by their words; yet (as Camero well notes) God being infinitely wise, it were a
blasphemous opinion, to hold that any thing can be drawn by a certain and
necessary consequence from his holy word, which is not his will. This were to
make the only wise God as foolish man, that cannot foresee all things which
will follow from his words. Therefore we must needs hold, it is the mind of
God which necessary follows from the word of God.

4. Argument, diverse other great absurdities must follow, if this truth be not
admitted. How can it be proved that women may partake of the Sacrament of the
Lords supper, unless we prove it by necessary consequence from Scripture? How
can it be proved that this or that Church, is a true Church, and the Ministry
thereof, a true Ministry, and the Baptism Ministered therein true Baptism?
Sure no express Scripture will prove it, but necessary consequence will. How
shall this or that individual believer, collect from Scripture, that to him,
even to him the Covenant of grace and the promises thereof belong? Will
Scripture prove this otherwise, than by necessary consequence? How will it be
proved from Scripture, that the late war against the Popish and Prelaticall
party, in desence of our Religion and Liberties, was lawful, that the solemn
League and Covenant was an acceptable service to God? Necessary consequence
from Scripture will prove all this; but express Scriptures will not. The like
I say of fastings and thansgiving now and then, upon this or that occasion, God
calls us to these duties, and it is his will that we perform them, yet this
cannot be proved from Scripture, but by necessary consequences.

This fourth Argument will serve for the extension of the present assertion
(which I now prove) to 'its just latitude, that is, that Arguments from
Scripture by necessary consequence, will not only help to prove and strengthen
such things which may be otherwise proved from express and plain Scriptures,
but will be good and sufficient to prove such things to be by the will and
appointment of God, or as we commonly say, Iure divino which cannot be proved
to be such, from any express Text of Scripture.

5. Argument, I shall here take notice of the concession of Theophilus
Nicolaides, the Socinian in his Tractat, de Ecclesia and missione ministrorum,
cap. 10. page: 121. Although he professes his dissent, both from the Reformed
and Roman Churches thus far, that he does not believe things drawn by
consequence from Scripture to be equally necessary to salvation, as those
things contained expressly in Scripture, yet he yeelddeth the things drawn by
consequence to be as certain as the the other, quantumuis, says he, aeque
certa sint quae ex sacris literis de ducuntur atque ea quae in illis express
and (...) habentur. And generally it may be observed, that even they who most
cry down consequences from Scripture, and call for express Scriptures, do
notwithstanding, when themselves come to prove from Scripture their particular
Tenants, bring no other but consequentiall prooffs. So far is wisdom
justified, not only of her Children, but even of her Enemies. Neither is it
possible that any Socinian, Erastian, etc. can disput from Scripture against a
Christian, who receaveth and believes the Scripture to be the word of God, but
he must needs take himself to consequentiall prooffs: for no Christian will
deny what is (...) literally and syllabically in Scripture, but all the
controversies of Faith or Religion in the Christian world, were and are
concerning the sense of Scripture, and consequences, drawn from Scripture.

6. Argument. If we do not admit necessary consequences from Sripture to prove
a jus divinum, we shall deny to the great God that which is a privilege of
the little Gods or Magistrates. Take but one instance in our own age; When the
Earl of Strafford was impeached for high treason, one of his defenses was,
that no Law of the Land had determined any of those particulars, which were
proved against him to be high treason. Which defense of his was not confuted by
any Law, which literally and syllabically made many of those particulars to be
high treason, but by comparing together of several Laws, and several matters
of fact, and by drawing of necessary consequences from one thing to another,
which made up against him a constructive treason. If there be a constructive or
consequentiall jus humanum, there must be much more (for the considerations
before mentioned) a constructive or consequentiall jus divinum.

CHAP. XXI.
Of an assurance of an interest in Christ, by the marks and fruits of
sanctification, and namely by love to the Brethren. Also how this agrees with,
or differs from assurance by the Testimony of the Spirit? and whether there
can be any well grounded assurance without marks of grace.

It Is a right, a safe, a sure way to seek after, and to enjoy assurance of our
interest in Christ, and in the Covenant of grace, by the marks and fruits of
Sanctification. Which (before I come to the proof of it) that it may not be
mistaken, but understood aright, take these three cautions; first, our best
marks can contribute nothing to our justification, but only to our
consolation, cannot avail to peace with God, but to peace with our selves;
gracious marks can prove our justification and peace with God, but cannot be
isntrumental toward it, that is proper to faith. Faith cannot lodge in the
soul alone, and without other graces, yet faith alone justifies before God.
Secondly, beware that marks of grace do not lead us from Christ, or make us
look upon our selves, as any thing at all out of Christ. Thou bear not the
root; but the root bears thee. Christ is made unto us of God, sanctification
as well as righteousness. Thy very inherent grace and sanctification is in
Christ, as light in the sun, as water in the fountain, as sap in the root,
as money in the treasure. It Is thine only by irradiation, effluence,
diffusion, and debursement from Jesus Christ. It Is Christ's by propriety, thine
only by participation. It Is thy Union with Christ, which conveighs the habits
of grace to thy soul. It Is thy communion with Christ, which stirs up,
actuateth, and puts forth those habits into holy duties and operations.
It Is no acceptable duty, no good fruit, which flows not from the inward
acting and exerciseing of grace in the soul. It Is no right acting of grace in
the soul, which flows not from habitual grace, and a new nature. It Is no
new nature which flows not from Christ. Thirdly, all thy marks will leave
thee in the dark, if the spirit of grace do not open thine eyes, that thou
may know the things which are freely given thee of God. Hagar could not see
the well, though she was beside it, till her eyes were opened. Marks of grace
are useless, undiscernable, and unsatisfactory, to the deserted and
overclouded soul. These cautions being in our eye, that we may not separat our
marks, either from the free grace of God, or from Christ, or from the spirit:
I proceed to the proof of that point, which I propounded in the beginning.

First, It may be abundantly proved from these Texts, Psalm: 17. 3. and 119.
6. 2 Cor: 1. 12. 1 John 1. 6, 7. and 2. 3. and 3. 9, 10, 14.

Secondly, our passing from the state of nature and wrath, into the state of
grace, and to be in Christ, is compared in Scripture to such things as are
most decernable, and perceptible by their proper marks. It Is called a passing
from death Isi. d. Hispal. de differ. spirit. diff. 32. Dilectio in Deum origo
est dilectionis in proximum; and dilectio in proximu^, cognitio est dilectionis
in deum.
to life, from darkness to light, from being far off, to be near, etc. all
which things are known by manifest and certain evidences. The spirit of grace
is compared to fire, water, wind, which are known by sensible signs.
Conversion is a returning of one who had turned away, and is not returning
discernable by certain tokens? The new creature is a good tree, and is not a
good tree known by good fruits, Matthew. 7. 17, 18.

Thirdly, both in Philosophy and Divinity; yea, in common sense it is allowed to
reason from the effects to the causes, here is burning, therefore here is fire;
here is the blossoming of trees and flowers, therefore it is spring, and the
Sun is turning again in his course; here is perfect day light* therefore the
Sun is risen; here is good fruit growing, therefore here is a good tree. It Is
a consequence no less sure and infallible, here is unfeigned love to the
brethen, therefore here is regeneration; here are spiritual motions,
affections, desires, acts and operations, therefore here is spiritual life.

Fourthly, the marks of grace have so much evidence in them, as forms in
others of the Saints and servants of God, a well grounded judgment; yea,
persuasion of charity, that those in whom they behold these marks, are in the
state of grace and regeneration. If they could see into the hearts of others,
to be sure of the sincerity and soundness of their graces, they could have a
judgment of certainty concerning them. But this they cannot, for who knows
the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him. Sure a Saint may
know more of himself then another Saint can know of him, for he is conscious
to the sincerity of his own heart in in those things, whereof another Saint
sees but the outside. And unless one will say, that a Saint can know no more
of himself by marks, then another Saint can know of him by the same marks, it
must needs be yielded that, a Saint may certainly and assuredly know himself
by the marks of grace which are in him.

Fifthly, without a trial by marks, we cannot distinguish between a well
grounded and an ill grounded assurance, between a true and a false peace,
between the consolation of the Spirit of God, and a delusion. How many times
does a soul take Satan for Samuel; and how shall the soul in such a case be
undeceived without a trial by marks? But it may be objected that this remedy
may prove, and does often prove no remedy; for may not Satan deceive the soul
in the way of marks, as well as without it? Can he not deceive the soul
syllogistically by false reasonings, as well as positively by false
suggestions? I answer, no doubt he can, and often does, yet the mistaking of
marks may be rectified in the Children of God: Wisdom is justified of her
children; but the rejecting and slighting of all marks cannot be rectified,
but is a certain and unavoidable snare to the soul. If marks of grace become
snares to the Reprobate, that proves nothing against the use of marks. The
word of God is a snare and a gin to the Reprobate, that they may go and fall
backward, and be broken and snared and taken: yet the word is in it self the
power of God to salvation. So, the way of marks is a sure and safe way in it
self, and to every well informed conscience: When any conscience through
error or presumption mistakes the mark, that is the fault of the person, not
of the way of marks, and the personal error may be helped by personal light
and Information, if the party will receave it. Whereas to make no trial by
marks, and to trust an inward testimony, under the notion of the holy Ghosts
testimony, when it is without the least evidence of any true gracious mark,
this way (of its own nature, and intrinsecally, or in it self is) a deluding
and insnaring of the conscience.

But it may be asked, and it is a question worthy to be Quest.
looked into, (though I must confess I have not read it, nor heard it handled
before) how does this assurance by marks agree with, or differ from assurance
by the testimony of the holy Ghost? May the soul have assurance either way, or
must there be a concurrence of both (for I suppose they are not one and the
same thing) to make up the assurance?

For answer whereunto, I shall first of all distinguish a twofold Answ.
certainty, even in reference to the mind of man, or in his conscience, (for I
speak not hear de ^ertitudine entis, but mentis) the one may be called (...),
when the conscience is in tuto, may be secure; needs not fear and be
troubled. The Graecians have used the word (...), when they were speaking H.
Steph. in these. ling. Gr. tom. 3. page 1173.
of giving security and assurance by safe conducts, or by pledges, or by
sureties, or the like. The other is (...), a full persuasion, when the soul
does not only stir a right and safe course, and needs not fear danger,
but sail, before the wind, and with all it is sails full. So there is
answerably a double uncertainty, the one may be called (...), when a man is in
himself perplexed and difficulted, and not without cause, having no grounds of
assurance; when a man does doubt and hesitate concerning a conclusion, because
he has no reasons or arguments to prove it, when a man is in a wilderness
where he can have no way, or shut up where he can have no safe escaping. The
other is (...), which is a doubting that arises not from want of arguments, or
from the inextricable difficulty of the grounds, but from a disease of the
mind, which makes it suspend or retain it is assent, even when it has
sufficient grounds upon which it may be assured. Now it is the evidence of
signs or marks of grace, which gives that first kind of certainty, and
removes that first kind of uncertainty: But it is the testimony of the Spirit
of the Lord, which gives the second kind of certainty, and removes the
second kind of uncertainty. Take a simile two or three for illustration. The
Scripture is known to be indeed the word of God, by the beams of divine
auctority which it has in it self, and by certain distinguishing Characters,
which do infallibly prove it to be the word of God, such as the heavenlynesse
of the matter; the Majesty of the style, the irresistible power over the
conscience; the general scope, to a base man, and to exalt God, nothing driven
at but Gods glory and man's salvation; The extraordinary holiness of the Penmen
of the holy Ghost, without any respect to particular interests of their own,
or of others of their nearest relations, (which is manifest by their writings)
the supernatural mysteries revealed therein, which could never have entered
inthe reason of men, the marvailous consent of all parts and passages (though
written by diverse and several Penmen) even where there is some appearance of
difference; the fulfilling of prophesies, the miracles wrought by Christ, by
the Prophets and Apostles; the conservation of the Scripture against the malice
of Satan, and fury of persecuters. These and the like are characters and
marks, which evidence the Scriptures to be the word of God; yet all these
cannot beget in the soul a full persuasion of faith, that the Scriptures are
the word; this Mr. I. Goodwi^l in his Haglomastix.
persuasion is from the holy Ghost in our hearts. And it has been the common
resolution of so^nd Protestant writers (though now called in question by the
Scepticks of this age) that these arguments and infallible characters in the
Scripture it self, which most certainly prove it to be the word of God, cannot
produce a certainty of persuasion in our hearts, but this is done by the Spirit
of God within us, according to these Scriptures, 1 Cor: 2. 10, 11, 14, 15. 1
These: 1. 5. 1 John 2. 27. and 5. 6, 7, 8, 10. Ioh: 6. 45.

In like manner, a Scholar or a young disputant may argue and dispute (be it
in Philosophy or Divinity) upon very right and sure principles, yet
perdventure, not without great fear and doubting in his own thoughts, till he
be put out of that fear, by the approbation and testimony of his learned
Master who presideth in the dispute. The evidence of good marks while it is
opened unto us, may make our hearts to burn within us, as those Disciples
said, which were going to Emmaus, but yet our eyes are held (as it was with
them) that we do not know Christ in us, or talking with us, until our eyes
be opened by the Spirit. No doubt they had much light breaking in upon their
understandings, while Christ expounded unto them the Scriptures by the way, and
this light was with life and heat in their hearts: But after they knew Christ
in breaking of bread, then, and not till then, came the fullness of persuasion,
and then they could say, The Lord is risen indeed. Luke 24. 15, 16, 30, 31, 32,
34. Our inward evidence of graces or use of signs may bring the Children to
the birth (I mean in point of assurance) but it is the evidence of the Spirit of
God, which gives strength to come forth. Without this evidence of the Spirit
of God, the soul does but grope after a full assurance, as it were in the
dark; but when the holy Ghost comes to do the office of a Comforter, then
there is light and liberty.

Our assurance of justification, adoption, grace and salvation, is virtually in
a syllogisticall way: Whoever believes on the Son of God, shall not perish,
but have life everlasting. But I believe on the Son of God. Therefore, etc.
Whoever judge themselves shall not be judged of the Lord. But I judge my self.
Therefore, etc. Whoever loves the Brethren, has passed from death to life.
But I love the Brethren. Therefore, etc. In these or the like proofs, it is the
Spirit of grace which gives us the right understanding, and firm belief of
the proposition. As for the assumption which has in it the evidence of graces,
it is made good by a twofold testimony, the testimony of our consciences, 2 Cor:
1. 12. 1 John. 3 19. 20, 21. and the testimony of the Spirit it self, bearing
witness together with our consciences. And although both propositions be made
good, yet we are so slow of heart to believe, that we cannot without the
special help of the Comforter the holy Ghost, freely, boldly, joyfully, and
with a firm persuasion, infer the conclusion as a most certain truth. So
that in the business of assurance and full persuasion, the evidence of graces,
and the testimony of the Spirit are two concurrent couses or helps, both of
them necessary without the evidence of graces, it is not a safe nor a well
grounded assurance, without the testimony of the Spirit, it is not a plerophory
or full assurance. There were two evidences of purchase in use among the Jews,
one sealed, another open, Ier: 32. 11. Which custom Hierome says, was
continued till his time. The evidence of the Spirit is like that which was
sealed; the evidence of marks, like that which was open. Therefore let no man
divide the things which God has joined together. See them joined in three
Texts of Scripture, Rom: 8. 16. neither our spirit alone, nor the spirit of the
Lord alone bears witness that we are the Children of God; but both these
together bear witness of this thing. The spirit it self bears witness with
our spirit, 1 Cor: 2. 10. 12. we read, that the spirit reveals unto us, and
makes us to know the things which are fre^ly given to us of God. But withal
verse: 13. there is a comparing spiritual things with spiritual, and so among
other things compared together, there is a comparing of spiritual marks, with
a spiritual state, of spiritual fruit, with a spiritual tree, etc. 1 John 5.
6. the spirits witnessing, is joined with the witnessing of the water and
blood, that is with the evidence of grace, the evidence of justification, and a
pacified conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ: and purged from the
guilt of sin, also the evidence of sanctification and a pure conscience,
purged from the inherent filth and stain of corruption; the former of these is
the testimony of the blood; the latter is the testimony of the water, and both
these not enough (as to the point of assurance) without the testimony of the
spirit, nor it enough without them.

In the next place let us take a trial of this way of assurance, so far as
concerns the evidence of graces, so much opposed by the Antinomians. Let us
take that notable evidence, 1 John 3. 14. And now hear the Antinomian
Objections against this assurance, from the evidence of love to the Brethren.

It Is objected, that a soul must be exceedingly puzzled with this mark of love
to the brethren, before it can clear the case Dr. Crispes Sermons, the 23.
volum, Sermon: 15.
that it belongs to Christ, for if you will try your self by this mark, you
must know first what it is to love the brethren, secondly, that they are the
brethren whom you love. The nature of love is described, 1 Cor: 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Charity, (or love) suffers long, and is kind: Charity envieth not* Charity
vaunteth not it self: is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not
in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: bears all things, believes all
things, hops all things, endures all things. Come now, and bring your hearts
to these particulars in your examination.. Is there no envying in me at all
toward the Brethren? Is there no thinking evil of any of the Brethren? Is
there no seeking my self, or my own good in my love to them? Is there a
bearing all things for their sakes? Is there no being puffed up, or vaunting
above the brethren? Is there no thinking better of my self, then of them? --
So that a soul must attain to a mighty high measure of sanctification and
victory over a man's self, before it can reach to this to say, I love the
Brethren. But suppose you find all this love in your selves, do you know they
are the brethren you love; you know the brotherhood consi^s in being united
unto Christ, that is an invisible thing, none can know it but God only; no man
can say, such a one is a brother. And if you say, though I am not certain that
he is a Brother, yet I love him under the notion of a brother: to this it is
replied: Take all the Sects in the world, they will love their own Sects as
Brethren: And after a description of the Antinomians, it is added, These are the
Brethren; do you love these men? Oh, there are many that go by signs and
marks, that cannot endure the Brethren, they go with them under the name of
Libertines. I have now the objection before me, as full and strong as one of
the best gifted Antinomians of this age could make it. For answer whereunto I
will demonstrate these three things. 1. That this objection destroys as much
and more, their own exposition of this Text in 1 Ioh. 3. 14 That the Antinomian
way of removing scruples and doubts of conscience, and settling a soul in peace
and assurance, is a most inextricable Labyrinth, and lays knots faster upon
the conscience, in stead of loosing them. 3. That this way of assurance by the
mark of love to the brethren, is a sure and safe way, and has no such
inextricablenesse in it, as is here objected.

First I say, their objection militateth as strongly, yea much more strongly
against their own interpretation of my Text: For the same Antinomian in that
same Sermon, and others of that way understand the scope of this Text to be for
comforting the brethren against the difesteem the world had of them; the world
hates them, verse: 13. But we know (says he) that we are translated from death
to life, because we love the ^rethren; that is, whatever the world judges of
us, we perceive and know one another by this mark, that we love the Brethren.
In short, they say, this seems rather to be a mark how my brother may know
me, then that by which I should know my self. Which interpretation, how ill
grounded it is, and how inconsistent with verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. who sees not?
Only I now observe that they cast down what themselves build: For if I cannot
know my self by the inside of love, much less can my brother know me by the
out side of love: and if I cannot have any solid or safe comfort from this,
that I love the Brethren; how much less can this comfort me that others judge
me to be a lover of the brethren? And how do I know them to be the brethren who
judge so of me? For (by their rule) no man can say such a one is a brother, so
that they do but tie themselves with their own knots, and must therefore either
quite their sense of the Text and take ours, or else hold that this text has
no comfort at all in it, which yet is most full of comfort, and sweet as the
honey and the honey comb.

But secondly will you see these men falling yet more foully in the ditch they
have dug for others? While they object so much against a believers examining
or assuring his conscience by fruits of sanctification, sincerity of heart,
hatred of sin, respect to all the commandments, love to the Brethren; while
they tell us that none of these can be sure evidences to the soul, and while
they pretend to show other soul satisfying evidences, which can resolve,
quiet, comfort, and assure the conscience, they do but more and more lead John
Eaton his honey comb of free* justification. cap. 9.
the soul into a labyrinth, and make the spirits of men to wander from
mountain to hill, and to forget their resting place. I might here take notice
of the six remedies against doubting, which one of them offers, as an
antidote and preservative against all objections whatsoever, yet all the six
put together cannot resolve nor clear the conscience in the point of a
personal or particular interest in Christ; I hear much (will the perplexed
soul say) of the nature of faith, of free justification, of the things sealed
in Baptism, etc. But oh I cannot see that I have any interest for my part in
these things. Not to insist upon these six remedies, which are indeed most
insufficient as to this point, my present work shall be, to speak unto those
personal and particular evidences of an interest in Christ, which are held
forth by their chief writers. Do but observe their way, and you shall see that
either they fall in at last into our way of gracious marks and qualifications,
or otherwise leave the Conscience much more perplexed and Dr. Crisp. in the 2.
volume of his Sermons. Ser. 16.
unsatisfied, then they found it. They tell us of two evidences, a revealing
evidence, and a receiving evidence: that by the spirits testimony, this by
faith. The revealing evidence of interest in the privileges of Christ, which
will put an end to all objections, is the voice of the Spirit of God to a man's
own spirit. This is the great evidence indeed and the evidence which at last
does determine the question, and put an end to all objections. Well: But does
the Spirit of God give testimony to the soul, any otherwise then Ibid. page
483. 48^
according to the word of God? No, says the same writer, by no means, for it
is most certainly true, (says he) that every voice in man speaking peace,
being contrary to the word of grace, that voice is not the voice of the spirit
of the Lord, -- it is the voice of the spirit of delusion. Immediately he moves
this doubt, But how shall I know that this voice, though it be according to the
word of grace, is indeed the voice of the spirit of the Lord, and be satisfied
that it is so. He might have moved this doubt, which is greater, how shall I
know that this voice or this testimony does indeed speak according to the word,
or whether it speak contrary to the word, and so be the voice of the spirit of
delusion. Peradventure he had found it difficult, and even impossible to answer
this doubt, without making use of and having recourse unto the way of signs or
marks, such as the word holds forth: And this agrees to that twofold joint
witnessing, Rom: 8. 16. the spirit of God is not simply (...), a witness, but
(...), qui simul testimonium dicit, he bears witness not only to, but with our
spirit, that is, with our conscience, So that if the witness of our Conscience
be blank and can testify nothing of sincerity, hatred of sin, love to the
Brethren, or the like, then the spirit of God witnesses no peace nor comfort
to that soul, and the voice which speaks peace to a person who has no
gracious mark or qualification in him, does not speak according to the word,
but contrary to the word, and is therefore a spirit of Delusion. I shall not
contend about the precedence or order between these two Testimonies in the
soul, so that we hold them together, and do not separat them in our assuring or
comforting of our hearts before God. And here I must take notice of another
Passage, where he whose principles I now examine says, I do not determine
peremptorily, that a man cannot by way of evidence Ibid. Se^. 17. page 497.
receive any comfort from his sanctification, which he thus clears. The
spirit of the Lord must first reveal the gracious mind of the Lord to our
spirits, and give to us Faith to receive that Testimony of the Spirit, and to
sit down as satisfied with his Testimony before ever any work of Sanctification
can possibly give any evidence; But when the Testimony of the Spirit of the
Lord is received by Faith, and the soul sits down satisfied with that
Testimony of the Lord, then also all the gifts of Gods Spirit do bear witness
together with the Spirit of the Lord, and the Faith of a Believer. Surely such
a Testimony or voice in the soul, as the soul sits down satisfied with before
ever any work of sanctification can possibly give any evidence, is not an
evidence according to the word, but contrary to the word, and therefore not the
revealing evidence of the spirit of God, so that in this I must needs dissent
from him, for he casts the soul upon a most dangerous precipice, neither is
the danger helped, but rather increased by that posteriour evidence, or after
comfort of sanctification, which he speaks of, for the soul being before set
down satisfied with the Testimony of the spirit of the Lord, and Faith
receiving that Testimony (so he supposes) it cannot now examine whether its
sanctification be sound or not sound, whether its graces be common or special,
seeming or real: It implies a contradiction if I say that I am assured by the
evidence of the spirit of God, and by the evidence of Faith that I am in
Christ, and in Covenant with God, and that notwithstanding I sit down satisfied
with this assurance, yet I am not sure of the soundness of my Sanctification.
Therefore to put the soul upon a looking after the evidence of graces, and the
comfort of sanctification, when the soul is before hand fully assured and
satisfied against all objections and doubtings, is not only to lay no weight
at all upon these marks of Sanctification, in the point of resolving or
clearing the Conscience, but it is much worse then so, it is a confirming or
strengthening of the Soul in such a Testimony or assurance, as it has settled
upon contrary to the Scripture. And here is a great difference between these
Antinomian principles and ours: We hold the assurance or evidence of marks to
be privative, they yield no more but that it is at most cumulative to the
evidence of the Spirit of God and of Faith. For my part I dare not think
otherwise, but that person is deluded who thinks himlseffully assured of his
interest in Christ by the voice of the Spirit of the Lord, and by the evidence
of Faith, when in the mean time his Conscience cannot bear him witness of the
least mark of true grace or Sanctification in him. And I must needs hold that
whatsoever voice in man speaking peace to him, is antecedaneus unto, and
separated or disjoined from all or any evidence of the marks of true (although
very imperfect) Sanctification, is not the voice of the Spirit of the Lord,
neither speaks according, but contrary to the written Word of God.

I heartily yield that the Spirit of the Lord is a Spirit of Revelation, and it
is by the Spirit of God, that we know the things which are freely given us of
God, so that without the Comforter, the Holy Ghost himself bearing witness
with our Spirit, all our marks cannot give us a plerophory or comfortable
assurance. But this I say, that which we have seen described by the Antinomians
as the Testimony of the Spirit of the Lord is a very unsafe and unsure
evidence, and speaks beside, yea contrary to the written Word. The Word speaks
no peace to the wicked, to the ungodly, to hypocrites, to moral Christians, to
the presumptuous, to the self* confident, to the unmortified carnal
professors, to temporary believers. Christ and his benefits are indeed offered
and held forth unto all that are in the Church, and all called upon to come
unto Christ, that they may have life in him, and whoever comes shall not be
cast out, this is certain: but yet the Word speaks no peace nor assurance, save
to the humble and contrite, to those that tremble at his word, to those that
are convinced of sin, to those that do not regard iniquity in their hearts; but
hate sin with sincere hatred; to those that believe on the Son of God, that
love the Brethren, etc. Now therefore the Spirit of the Lord which speaks not
to the soul, but according to the word of grace (as is confessed) does not
speak comfort or assurance to any others, but these only. And if a man would
know certainly whether the voice or Testimony which speaks to his Spirit be a
delusion or not, he must to the Law and to the Testimony, and search whether it
speak according to this Word. It Is granted to us that if the voice which speaks
peace in man be not according to the written word of God, it is not the Spirit
of the Lord. But withal it is cautiously declined by these men, that the voice
which speaks in the soul be tried by the written word. They tell us, it is not
the Word that maks us Dr. Crisps ibid. sermon. 16. page 492. 483. 485. 486.
believe the Spirit, But it is the Spirit that makes us give credit to the
Word: That it is only the Spirit of God that can truly satisfy the spirit of
a man, that it is his own testimony; and not the spirit of Delusion. That as,
in all Arts and Sciences there are some Principles -- beyond which there must
be no inquiry, so also in divine things. -- Is there any thing in the world of
better credit, or that may rather be believed with men then the Spirit himself?
Nay can any believe, but by this Spirit? If not, then nothing else is able
satisfyingly to bear witness to the Spirit, but it self. This is as if we
should receive the Testimony of the Spirit upon the credit of some other thing.

Whereunto I answer first, It Is to be remembered, The question is not whether the
Word of the Lord can satisfy or pacify a sinners conscience without the
Spirit; for we say plainly that as the best marks of grace, so the richest and
sweetest promises and comforts of the word cannot make the soul sit down
satisfied, till the spirit of the Lord himself speak peace and comfort within
us. Whence it was that after Nathan had said to David in the name of the Lord,
The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die, yet even then David prayed,
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation and uphold me with thy free
Spirit. Psalm. 51, 8: 12. with 2 Samuel 12: 13: But it is another thing which is
here in question, for clearing whereof, observe that the efficient cause, or
revealing evidence which maks us believe and be assured is one thing: The
objectum fomale fidei or that for which we believe and are assured, is another
thing. In humane sciences a Teacher is necessary to a young Student, yet the
Student does not believe the conclusions because his Teacher teaches him so,
but because these conclusions follow necessarily from the known and received
principles of the Sciences, and although he had never understood either the
principles or the conclusions, without the help of a Teacher, yet he were an
ill scholar who cannot give an account of his knowledge from demonstration,
but only from this that he was taught so. In seeking a legal assurance or
security we consult our Lawyers, who peradventure will give us light and
knowledge of that which we little imagined: yet a man cannot build a well
grounded assurance, nor be secure because of the Testimony of Lawyers, but
because of the deeds themselves, Charters, Contracts or the like. So we cannot
be assured of our interest in Christ, without the work of the holy Ghost, and
his revealing evidence in our hearts; yet the ground and reason of our
assurance, or that for which we are assured, is not his act of revealing, but
the truth of the thing it self which he does reveal unto us from the word of
God. Secondly, this is not to receive the Testimony of the Spirit upon the
credit of some other thing, for the Spirit that speaks in the Word, is not
another thing from the Spirit that speaks in our hearts, and says, we are
the Children of God, when we receive the Testimony or evidence in our hearts,
upon the credit of the Word, we receive it upon the Holy Ghosts own credit,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual, as the Apostle says. The holy
Scripture is called a more sure word then that voice of God which came from
heaven concerning his welbeloved Son, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19. and so by parity
of Reason, if not a fortiori, the written word of God, is surer then any voice
which can speak in the soul of a man, and an inward Testimony may sooner
deceive us, then the written word can, which being so, we may and ought to try
the voice which speaks in the soul by the voice of the Lord which speaks in
the Scripture. If it agree not, then we have not losed, but have made a right
discovery and found out a depth of Satan, and so gained by the trial. If it
do agree, so likewise we are gainers, being confirmed in the assurance, not
upon the Testimony of another, but upon the surest and best known Testimony of
the holy Ghost himself. Thirdly, if these things be not admitted, and if the
Antinomian argument which now I speak to, stand good, then it shall be easy
for any deluded person to repel the most searching convictions which can be
offered to him from Scripture, for he shall still think with himself, (though
unhumbled and unregenerat) it is the voice of the spirit of the Lord, which
speaks peace to my soul, and this voice I know is according to the word,
because I am assured by the same spirit that it is indeed according to the
Word, and other evidence I will not look after, because I am to receive the
Testimony of the Spirit upon his own credit, and not upon the credit of some
other thing: The voice of the spirit which speaks in my soul is that, beyond
which there must be no inquiry. I ask now, how shall the Antinomians convince
such a one from Scriptur? Nay how can they choose but (according to their
principles) confirm him in his delusory, imaginary assurance? Fourthly, the
very same Antinomian Author, who speaks of the Testimony of the spirit of God
in the soul, as that beyond which there must be no inquiry; and which puts an
end to all objections, even he himself does by and by tell us of aliquid ultra,
and puts the soul upon a further inquiry, (which as I said before) shall either
resolve into our way of assurance by marks, or otherwise leave the soul
overclouded, and more in the dark then at the beginning. And so I come to his
second evidence, which he calls the receiving evide^ce.

Though the spirit of the Lord (says he) do reveal the mind of Dt. Crisp.
ibid. sermon. 17. page 504.
the Lord to men, yet they are not fully resolved concerning this mind of the
Lord to their own spirits, till by Faith they do receive it -- Now till men do
receive this Testimony and believe it, they are never resolved; but when men do
receive it and believe it, that ibid. page 514. 515* 516.
it is a true Testimony, then they sit down satisfied. Again, Faith is an
evidence as it does take possession of that which the spirit of the Lord
reveals, and manifests and gives to a person. -- The spirit indeed makes the
title good, but faith maks good the entry and possession, and so clears the
title to us, though good in it self before: -- Is there a voice behind thee, or
within thee, saying particularly to thee in thy self, thy sins are forgiven
thee? Do thou see this voice agree with the word of Grace? -- If thou do
receive the Testimony of the Spirit according to that word. If thou do
indeed receive it, here is thy evidence. Thereafter he moves this objection.
But you will say, if there be not fruits of faith following, that Ibid. page
518. 519 520.
faith is a dead faith, and therefore there must be something to evidence with
it. For answer whereunto, first he rejects this as a great indignity to Faith,
If faith be not able of it self to give Testimony, or must not be credited,
when it does give Testimony, except something will come and testify for it, to
give credit unto it. Next he answers thus, that which has the whole essence
of faith, is not a dead, but a living faith: Now the whole essence of faith is
nothing else but the Echo of the heart answering the foregoing voice of the
spirit, and word of Grace, thy sins are forgiven thee says the spirit and word
of Grace, my sins are forgiven me, says Faith. If therefore the Echo to the
voice of Spirit and word of Grace, be the essence, nay be the whole essence of
believing, this is certain, where there is receiving or beleiving, there cannot
be a dead faith.

Now behold him at a loss, all resolves into this issue, no assurance by the
Testimony of the spirit and word of grace, unless this testimony be received
by faith, no entry and possession, no clearing of the title to the soul, no
resolution or satisfaction to the conscience till it believe. But then while
the soul examines it self, whether it have a true lively faith, or only a dead
faith, he dare not admit the trial of faith by the fruits of it, as if it were
an indignity to the tree to be known by the fruit, or to the fire to be known
by the heat. Faith purifieth the heart, says the Scripture. Faith works by
love. Faith shows it self by works. This Antinomian durst not adventure upon
this trial by the Scripture marks of faith: yea, to avoid this, he runs
into a great and dangerous error, that the whole essence of faith is nothing
else, but the Echo of the heart answering the voice of the spirit, and saying,
my sins are forgiven me, as if there were no faith where there is no
assurance of the forgiveness of sins, and as if faith were quite lost, as
often and as long as the soul cannot say with assurance, my sins are
forgiven me. Again, may there not be a false Echo in the heart: may not a
temporary believer who receaves the word of grace with joy, say within himself,
my sins are forgiven me? Where is the clearing of the conscience now? Is it
in that last word, where there is receaving or believing, there cannot be a
dead faith? But how shall I know that there is indeed a receving and beleving?
The essence of faith is the receaving of Christ in the word of grace, and a
^esting upon him for righteousness and life. Now another Antinomian tells us,
that to receave Christ and his benefits I. Eaton in the honey comb, Chap. 9.
truly, does necessarily include in it these four particular points. 1, To
know our lost state by the least sin, our misery without Christ, and what
need we have of him. 2. To see the excellency and worth of Christ and his
benefits. 3. A taking and having of Christ and his benefits to ones own self
in particular. 4. To be filled with great joy and thankful zeal. If these
things be so, then I am sure, many do imagine they have received Christ and
his benefits by faith, who have not truly and really received him: so that
the (soul searching it self in this point, whether have I any more then a dead
faith, or a counterfeit faith?) dare not acquiesce nor sit down satisfied with
that resolution, where there is receaving or believing, there cannot be a dead
faith. For the soul must still enquire, whether is my receaving or believing
true, real, sound, lively, and such as cannot agree to a dead faith? The same
Author whom I last cited, where he puts a difference between a counterfeit
faith, and a true faith, he says, that the counterfeit faith Honey comb.
chap. 16. p* 481, 482*
neither renews nor changes the heart, it makes not a new man; but leaves
him in the vanity of his former opinion and conversation. Whence I inf^r that
he who will thoroughly and rightly examine himself in this particular, have I
true faith, yea or no? Must needs (before he have a solid resolution) be put
upon this further inquiry, is there any heart-renewing or heartchanging work in
me? or am I still in the vanity of my former opinion and conversation, yea or
no?

I shall now after all this, appeall to any tender conscience which is sadly
and seriously searching it self, whether it be in the faith, whether Christ be
in the soul and the soul in Christ, let any poor wearied soul which is longing
and seeking after rest, refreshment, ease, peace comfort and assurance, judge
and say whether it can possibly, or dare sit down satisfied with the Antinomian
way of assurance, before largely declared, which yet has been held forth by
those of that stamp, as the only way to satisfy and assure the conscience, and
to put an end to all objections. I begin to hear as it were sounding in mine
ears the sad lamentation of a poor soul which has gone along with their way
of comfort, and assurance, and has followed it to the utmost, as far as it
will go.

Oh (says the soul) I have applied my self to search and find out, and to be
clearly resolved in this great and tender point, whether I be in Christ or
not? whether I have passed from death to life, from the state of nature into
the state of grace, or not? whether I be acquit from the curse and condemnation
of the Law, and my sins pardoned, or not? when, O when shall I be truly,
clearly, and certainly resolved in this thing? It Is as darkness and death to
me, to be unresolved and unsatisfied in it. I refused to be comforted without
this comfort. Is id, go to now and prove and see this Antinomian way, and when
I had proved it, I communed with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent
search. Then said I of it, thou art madness and folly. Their doctrine
pretends to drop as the honey comb, yet at the last it byteth like a serpent,
and stingeth like an Adder, I find their words at first to be soft as oil and
butter, yet I find them at last as swords and spears to my perplexed heart. I
am forbidden to try my spiritual condition, or to seek after assurance of my
interest in Christ, by any mark or fruit of sanctification, be it sincerity of
heart, hatred of sin, love to the Brethren, or be what it will be: I am told it
is unsafe and dangerous for me to adventure upon any such marks; I do not mean
as causes, conditions, or any way isntrumental in my justification, (for in
that consideration I have ever disclaimed my graces) nay I do not mean of any
comfort or assurance by my sanctification, otherwise then as it flows from
Christ, who is made unto me of God sanctification als well as righteousness. But
I am told by these Antinomians, that even in the point of consolation and
assurance, it is not safe for me to reason and conclud from the fruit to the
tree, from the light to the sun, from the heat to the fire, from the effect to
the cause, I love the brethren with true and unfeigned love, therefore I have
passed from death to life. They say, I dare not, I cannot have any true comfort
or assurance grounded upon this or any such mark. They promised me a shorter,
an easier, a surer, a sweeter way to come by the assurance which I so much long
after. They put me upon the revealing evidence or Testimony of the holy Ghost,
which I know indeed to be so necessary, that without it, all my marks will
leave me in the dark* But as they open and explain it unto me, I must not try
by the written word, whether the voice or Testimony that speaks in my heart, be
indeed the voice of the Spirit of the Lord, yet they themselves tell me that
every voice in man which speaks peace to him, and speaks not according to
the word of grace, is a spirit of delusion. Again they tell me this Testimony of
the Spirit of the Lord will put an end to all objections, and is that beyond
which there must be no inquiry, yet by and by they tell me there must there
must be more then this, there must be a receiving evidence of faith, and till I
believe, I do not possess Christ or his benefits, neither can sit down
satisfied and assured. Oh then said I, how shall I know that I have true faith?
Shall I try faith by the fruits of faith? No, say they, by no means, but try it
by the echo in the heart which answers the voice of the spirit, as face
answers to face in water. But what if there be no such Echo in my heart? What
if I cannot say with assurance my sins are forgiven me? must I then conclude I
have no faith? And what if there be such an Echo in mine heart? how shall I
know whether it be the voice of a true faith, or whether it be a delusion? Has
every one a true faith whose heart suggesteth and sings, my sins are forgiven
me? But where there is a receiving and believing said they, there cannot be a
dead faith. Alas, said I, they leave me where I was: How shall I know whether
there be Honey ^ombe chap. 16. p. 475.
a believing or receiving? Do not themselves tell me, there is a great
difference between a true faith, and a counterfeit faith? are not these
miserable comforte^s who tell me that true faith has fruits, and yet will not
give me leave to try it Rob. Lansaster praef before Dr. Crisp. sermons.
by its fruits? They teach me that Justification is like the fire, so that he
that is not Zealous in holiness and righteousness by Sanctification, it is to be
feared that he never had the fire of Justification. Another of them s^ith, does
not love manifested as truly and infallibly kindle love again, a fire kindles
fire. Sure then if I do not love God and his children, the Echo in my heart
which says, my sins are forgiven me, is but a delusion. Oh how have these
men been charming and cheating me out of the right way? They have unsettled me,
and frighted me out of all my marks of grace, or fruits of faith, and when they
have promised me a clear resolution, behold they leave me much more
unsatisfied: They have deceived me and I was deceived. When all comes to all in
their way, I must either conclude (which I dare not) that I have true faith,
because my heart suggesteth, and says my sins are forgiven me, without any
trial of faith by the fruits thereof, or otherwise I am left in a labyrinth,
believe I must, and they will allow me no marks to know whether I believe or
not. Wherefore I will not come into their secret, I will come out of their
paths which lead down to the Chambers of death, I will return to the good old
way, the Scripture way, Christ's way, the Apostles way, in which I shall find
rest to my soul.

The third point now remains, viz. that there is no such inextricable
difficulty, darkness or mist in this mark, the love of the brethren; but that
the children of God may, and sometimes do clearly and safely assure their
hearts by this mark, that they have passed from death to life. Which that it
may appear, I shall speak first to the Object, the Brethren, then to the Act,
which is love.

Touching the Object, let four things be observed. First. this we certainly
know, that there are Saints on earth, we believe the holy universal Church:
Now all who have passed from death to life, those and none but those have a
true and sincere love to the saints in general, praying heartily for them,
sympathizing with their suffering, and rejoicing at their felicity. None but a
Saint can say in truth, and with a sincere selfe-denying affection, If I forget
thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; If: I do not remember
thee, let my tongue cleave to theroof of my mouth; If I prefer not Jerusalem
above my chief joy. Ps. 137. 5. 6. The Apostle commends praying for all Saints,
Ephesians: 6. 18. and love to all the Saints. Col: 1. 4. I conceive he means, not
only all the Saints known to us, but the whole invisible Church of Saints on
earth. That prayer and protestation, Psalm. 122. 7, 8. when uttered in Spirit
and Truth, can proceed from no other, but a gracious renewed heart; peace be
within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces. For my brethren and
companions sake, I will now say* peace be within thee. This very love to the
Saints in general as to the excellent and precious ones of the earth, is a
fruit of Sanctification, and a mark of a renewed and gracious estate; even as
contrary wise they that have no love to the Saints in their species or kind,
that love and esteem men only for some earthly respect and consideration, the
Rich, the Honorable, the Mighty, etc. or for some particular humane relation,
Parents, Wives, Children, Kindred Friends, Benefactors, etc. much more they
that delight in the company and fellowship of the profane and ungodly, prove
themselves to be such as have not yet passed from death to life.

Secondly, it is neither necessary nor possible that we have a a certain and
infallible knowledge of the true Saintship and regeneration of these particular
persons whom we love, under the notion of Brethren and Saints. The Apostles
themselves did once look upon and love some as Saints, who were no Saints,
Judas, Simon Magus, Ananias, and Saphyra, and others of that kind. It is Gods
own prerogative to know certainly the hearts of men. To require a certain
knowledge of the Saintship of others, before we can say, we love the Brethren,
does not only strike at the mark of love, but at the duty of love, and makes
the yoke of Christ heavy, yea unsupportable, and the very Evangelicall
commandment of love to be most grievous, yea impossible: And if the Antinomian
objection hold good, no man on earth can perform acceptably this duty of
Love, except he know the hearts of those whom he loves under the notion of
Saints. If it be replied that the commandment of Christ is acceptably
performed, when to my best knowledge and observation, and according to the best
trial which one Christian is allowed by Christ to take of another, they are
Saints whom I love under that notion, and that ti^ not necessary to the
acceptable p^rformance of the duty of love, that I know infallibly such a one
to be a true Saint: Then it will follow by the like rule and by parity of
reason, that comfort and assurance may be had from this mark, I love the
Brethren, although I cannot certainly and infallibly say, these whom I love are
true Saints. For if I can be clear in point of the duty, and that my
obedience to the new commandment of Christ, love one another, is acceptable to
God, then may I also be clear in point of the mark or sign, this proposition,
I love the Brethren, being a necessary consequent from that proposition, I
have, through the grace of Christ, so far performed the duty of Love, as that
it is acceptable to God in point of new obedience, and this leads me to a third
answer.

3. Particular or individual Saints may be so far known by their fruits, and
are so far discernable and visible, as that our love to them under that
notion may be known to be an acceptable service to God, and so a comfortable
mark or evidence to our selves. Which plainly appears from what Christ says
Math: 10. 41. 42. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward; And he that receives a righteous man in the name of
a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whoever shall give
to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name
of a Disciple, verily. I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward
Before verse 11. Into whatsoever City or Town ye shall enter, enquire who in it
is worthy, and there abide till ye go thence. Heb: 6. 20. For God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of Love which ye have showed toward
his name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. These
believing Hebrews did not infallibly know that they were Saints to whom they
ministered, yet the Apostle tells them, their work was acceptable to God, and
made himself to be persuaded of them things that accompany Salvation. They to
whom he writes, being conscious to themselves of the truth and sincerity of
their love, might much more be persuaded of themselves things that accompany
Salvation from this mark of Love, although they could not know infallibly the
hearts of those whom they loved, as Saints. We may without either revelation or
infallibility of judgment, by the marks which the word gives us for judging
and discerning of others, so far be persuaded in a judgment of Charity, that
this or that person is a Saint, a Brother, a Sister, one in Christ, as that our
love to the person under that notion, is according to the rules of Christ,
flows from faith which works by love, and is acceptable to God as a part of
our new obedience. If it were not so, this absurdity would also follow, there
could be no communion of Saints one with another, at least no such thing done
in faith. Do not Believers act in Faith, and not doubtingly, when they have
communion one with another, when they exhort and comfort one another, when they
pray one with another, when they sympathize one with another? If they do not
act these things in Faith, they sin, for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.
4. It is to be observed that he who objects to others, they cannot know whether
this or that man be a Brother, even he himself aches upon him to judge, who are
the Brethren. He makes a description of the Antinomians, under fair and
plausible expressions, and then concludes, These are the Brethren, do ye love
these men? It seems, if it had been condescended upon, that the Antinomians are
the Brethren, there had been an end of his objection. But is not this Popish,
Donatisticall, Pharisaicall, to appropriat to themselves the name of the
Brethren, the godly party, the true Church, excluding many thousands of those
who are truly godly, and dear to Jesus Christ, although different in opinion
from them? And what if one should fancy that the Antinomians are only the
Brethren, yet how should one know that this or that Antinomian is a Brother?
Does not his own objection fall upon him, the Brotherhood consists in being
united unto Christ, that is an invisible thing, none can know it, but God only,
no man can say such a one is a Brother? So much of the certainty of the Object,
the Brethren. Now to the certainty of the Act, which is Love.

The nature of Love was described out of 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Then to fright
the soul from examining it self by this mark, it was added, Is there no envying
at all toward the Brethren? Is there no thinking evil of any of the Brethren?
Is there no seeking Honey comb, chap 6. page 45 6
my self or my own good, in my love to them? etc. Who is the legal Preacher
now? Here is a racking of the conscience with necessity of egall perfection in
our sanctification and Evangelicall graces? Do not themselves say that our
Justification is perfect, but our Sanctification unperfect; why then will they
not suffer the soul to take any comfort from the fruits of Sanctification,
except they be perfect? When John says, hereby we know that we have passed
from death to Life, because we love the Brethren; I ask, does he mean, perfect
Love which is every way what it ought to be? If so, then they put a false sense
upon the Text; for there neither is now, nor was then any such Love in the
world. Does he mean of true unfeigned sound love, although imperfect? Then
there is no place for their objection. For a true Believer has in himself a
true love to the Brethren, which Love puts forth and exercises it self in a
sincere and conscionable endeavor of all those duties which are reckoned
forth, 1 Cor: 13. as effects, or (if you will) acts of Love. This soundness
and sincerity of Love may be a sure mark to the soul, although I confess
without this sincerity, the very work and labor of love is no sure mark to the
conscience to examine it self by; for as the Apostle there teaches us, a man
may give all his goods to the poor, and yet not have true love. O but how
shall I know (says the doubting Christian) that my love to the Brethren is a
true, sincere, sound love?

To that I say, thou may know it by these tokens. First, if thou love the
Saints as Saints, and because they are Saints, not for their excellent Gifts or
parts so much as for their Graces, not for any relation to thy self so much as
for relation to Christ. It Is true repentance when we sorrow for sin as sin:
It Is true love when we love the Saints as Saints, that is, for this cause and
consideration chiefly, because the Image of God appears in them. Papists
pretend that with one act of adoration they worship Christ and his image. But
we say with more truth and reason, with one affection and one act of love we
love both Christ himself and those who bear his Image, both God and his
Children. I mean, it is Christ himself whom we love in his Saints.

Secondly, thy love, when thou love all Saints, Col: 1. 4. epist: to Philemon
v. 5. And this follows necessarily from the first mark. For a quatenus ad
omne. If as Saints, then all saints. Love thou all the saints in general
praying for them all? Love thou all the Saints in particular whom thou
know, that is, thou dare not confine or limit this love to those Saints
only who are altogether of thy opinion (which, it appears from the objection
before mentioned, the Antinomians have dared to do) or who have some intimacy
of friendship with thee, nay nor to these who never wronged thee, never
strov^with thee, who never spoke evil of thee; but all whom thou have reason
to judge to be saints, thou love them, wishest well to them, art ready to do
them good according to thy power, and if thou be at variance or difference with
any of them, tho ^ prayest God to make them and thy self of one heart, and of
one mind, and it is an affliction of spirit to thee to be at variance with any
that are Christ's: Can thou thus clear thy self in thy conscience, and dare
thou say these things before the searcher of hearts? Then is thy love a true
Love.

Thirdly, thou art a sincere Lover of the Brethren, when thou love them in
all their different estats and conditions, the Poor as well as the Rich, them
of low degree, as well as them of high degree, the persecuted, as well as the
prospering, the reproached as well as the commended. This is also a necessary
consectary upon the first mark: For if thou love saints as saints, the
variation or difference of their outward condition, will not make thy love
toward them to cease. Obadiah was a sincere Lover of the Brethren, and he gave
this good Testimony of it, he was a kind friend to the Prophets of the Lord,
when they were persecuted by Ahab and Iezabel.

Foorthly, thy Love to the Brethren is true and sincere, when it puts forth it
self in all thy relations, when a man desires to choose a wife that fears God,
and a woman desires to marie none who is not godly; when a Master seeks godly
servants, and a servant seeks a godly master; when a people choose godly
Ministers, and godly Magistrates, godly Commanders and Officers of Armies, etc.
And again, Magistrates, Commanders, Ministers, love, countenance, encourage and
strengthen the hands of such under their Charge, as are godly: when a man if he
be to choose a friend to consult with, yea if he were but to choose a Lodging
where he is a sojourner, he desires and seeks after a godly Friend, a godly
Family, etc.

Fifthly Love is true and sincere, when the action of Love is not without the
affection of Love, 1 Cor. 13. 3. and when the affection of Love is not without
the action of Love, 1 John. 3 17 when love opens both the heart and the hand,
both the Bowels and the bosom.

I do not mean that all or any of these marks can be found in any saint on
earth, without some mixture, of the contrary corruptions; for we must not look
that an imperfect grace (such as love to the Brethren is in this world) must
needs be proved by such marks as have no imperfection in them. If the marks be
true, then is the grace true, and that is enough to the point which I now
assert. But as the grace is not perfect, no more are the marks of it perfect.
And as there is no faith here without some unbelief, no repentance without some
impenitency, no watchfulness without some security, no contrition without some
hardness, no self-denial without some selfseeking; So no love to the Brethren
without some want of Love to the Brethren, no marks of true Love without some
imperfection and falling short, and no marvel, because no spirit without
flesh, no grace without corruption. Feel thou then those contrary
corruptions, those roots of bitterness in thy heart, if thou warrest against
them through the strength of Jesus Christ, and endeavourest to have thy love
every way such as has been described, then God looks upon thee, and would have
thee to look upon thy self as a lover of the Brethren. As long as thou art in
this world, thou shall have cause to walk humbly with thy God, because of the
great imperfection of all thy graces, and of thy love to the Brethren among the
rest, and still thou shall have flesh and corruption to war against all the
powers, parts, and acts of thy inward man. Let there be but a reciprocal
warring of the spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5. 17, so shall thou pass in
Christ's account for a spiritual, not for a carnal person. Neither do I say,
that thou must always find a perpetual conflict or battle between the flesh
and the spirit, or otherwise no ground of assurance. The Apostle speaks of
warring, not of conflicting or fighting: there is always bellu^, though not
always praeliu^, between the flesh and the spirit. The new man dare not make
peace with the old man, nay nor agree to a cessation of Arms with him, dare
not allow or approve corruption, nor allow the neglect of means and endeavors.
Yet the new man is sometimes taken napping and sleeping, sometime assaulted and
spoiled, and bound hand and foot, he may be carried away as a poor prisoner;
but Christ will again relieve his own prisoner, and set him in a fresh military
posture against Satan and sin.

I hope I have now so far scattered those mists and clouds cast by Antinomians,
and so far extricated a poor soul out of those doubtings into which they
would drive it, as that a Believer may knowingly and confidently say, I love
the Brethren sincerly and unfeignedly, and hereby I know that I have passed
from death to life; which is a good and sure argument, whether we consult
scripture or the experience of Saints.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the true, real and safe Grounds of en^uragement to believe in Jesus
Christ. OR, Upon what warrants a sinner may adventure to rest and rely upon
Christ for Salvation.

THere are some Divines abroad who condemning This Chapter was left by the
Author not perfected. Yet so much as is in the copy is printed for the readers
aedification, and to stir up others to pros^cnte the like purpose, and in the
meantime to make the best use of these.
Arminianisme (and much more Pelagianisme) yet have not adhered to the orthodox
Doctrine asserted by the most approved Protestants writers and received by the
best reformed Churches against the Arminians, in the article concerning the
death of Christ. These have found out a middle and a singular way of their own,
that Christ died for all men conditionally, viz, if they shall believe in him,
that he has redeemed all upon condition of Faith. One of their arguments is
because otherwise we cannot encourage sinners to believe nor satisfy a
troubled conscience, nor keep it from desparing. Upon the like ground that all
may be comforted (every man being assured that Christ died for all men and so
for himself) Mr Moore has written a tractat of the universalitie of Gods
grace, and of Christ dying for all men as himself expresses in the title of
his Book. It Is also one of Mr Saltma^sh his encouragements which he gives to
sinners, that Christ died for sinners as sinners, as he speaks, whereupon it
follows (according to the rule, a quatenus ad omne) that he died for all
sinners.

Surely this is not the way (as is pretended) to ease and encourage the
troubled and terrified conscience: Neither can they by their principles
minister solid comfort to a sinner, tempted to despair of mercy. All the
scrupulosity and unsatisfaction of conscience which they object against our
Doctrine (that Christ died not for all, but for the Elect only whom the Father
gave him) follows as much yea more (as I shall show afterward) upon their
own way. First of all when they give comfort and encouragement to sinners upon
this ground, that Christ has dyed for all upon condition of faith, it is to be
remembered that conditio nihil ponit in re, the generality of men can draw no
result from the death of Christ (as it is set forth by their Doctrine) but that
Christ has by his death made sure this proposition, that whoever believes on
him shall be saved, or that all men shall be saved, if all men believe: Now a
conditional proposition is true in the connection of one thing to another, (if
this be that shall be) although neither the one nor the other shall ever have
an actual existence. If Satan and wicked men get their will, Christ shall
have no Church on earth, if the Elect fall away from faith and obedience they
shall perish, If the damned in hell had place and grace to repent and to
believe in Christ, they should be saved, or the like. So what solid comfort can
the soul have from that conditional proposition (which is all the
encouragement they do or dare give from the death of Christ, to all men) all
men shall be saved by Christ if they believe on him. Is it not as true and as
certain, (may a sinner think with himself) that no man on earth shall be saved,
if no man on earth believe, and for my part, if I believe not I shall be
damned? If all this hang upon the condition of my believing (says the troubled
conscience) why then, has not Christ merited to m^e, and will he not give me
the grace of believing? That new Doctrine answers that Christ has merited
faith and gives the grace of believing not to all, but to the Elect only, that
God has in his eternal decree, in^ended to pass by in the dispensation of
his grace the greatest part of mankind, and to keep back from them that grace
without which he knows they cannot believe on Jesus Christ: That though Christ
meant that all men should have some sort of call to believe on him, and should
be saved upon condition of their believing; yet he had no thought nor intention
by his death to procure unto all men that grace without which they cannot
believe. This doctrine of theirs while it undertaketh to comfort all men and to
encourage all to believe, it tells them withal upon the matter that all cannot
be saved because all cannot believe, that God will not give faith, and so not
salvation either, unto millions of sinners. What comfort is it then to know
that all shall be saved, if all believe, when men are told withal, that all
shall not, cannot believe, and so shall not be saved? This latter they hold as
well as we, therefore their universal comfort taken from Christ's dying for all
men upon condition of Faith, amounts to as much as nothing.

The true and safe grounds of encouragement to faith in Christ are these.
First, Christ's all sufficiency, if he will he can, He is able to save to the
uttermost, Heb: 7. 25. art thou a sinner to the uttermost, his plaster is
broad enough to cover the broadest sore. As Gods mercy, so Christ's merit is
infinite, and the reason is, because the blood is the blood of God as well as
of man, Act: 20. 28. This is a good strong foundation of comfort, if a soul
convinced of its own sinful estate, and of the vanity of creature comforts,
does so far settle its thoughts upon Christ that as he is the only Savior so
an alsufficient Savior. Then is the sinner so far encouraged (which is no small
encouragement) as to resolve there is virtue enough in the blood of Christ to
cleanse my crimson sins, even mine. There is no help for me out of Christ, but
in him there is help for all that come unto God by him. It Is a great part of
true faith to believe that Christ is able and all-sufficient. Therefore he
himself said to the blind men, Mat. 9. 28, 29. Believe ye that I am able to do
this? They said unto him, ye a Lord, then touched he their eyes saying
according to your faith, be it unto you. He that said, Lord if thou will thou
can make me clean, was not rejected by Christ as an unbeliever, but he got
from him a good answer, I will, be thou clean, Mat: 8. 2, 3. So every poor
sinner that comes unto Christ alsufficient, and believing that Christ and
Christ only can purge him from all sin and save his soul, has a true, though
imperfect faith, and is in a fair way for Salvation There is many a true
believer, whose faith cannot as yet rise so high as to stay and rest upon the
good will and love of Jesus Christ to him in particular: But the soul believes
the alsufficiency of Christ, and that he only is the Savior, and so comes and
draws near unto God by and in Christ, as the summum bonum which he values
above all things; and this his faith, although it has not yet attained to a
particular recumbency on the love of Christ to him is a true faith, which
Christ will not despise.

Secondly, Christ's intention to die for all men and for the whole world, that
is for all sorts of sinners in the world, and so for sinners of my kind, may
every poor sinner in particular think with himself. Here is an universal
encouragement unto all from a true and real ground, and drawn from the will and
intention, as well as from the power and alsufficiency of Christ, which I shall
make good from Scripture, for he has died for all sorts of persons, there is
no condition excluded. For this I take the 1 Timothy: 2. 6. Who gave himself a
ransom for all; so ver. 4. who will have all men to be saved. The meaning must
needs be of all sorts, not of all persons. For besides that the Apostles all
can be no more then Christ's many. Mat. 20. 28. the Son of man came to give
his life a ransom for many, this very Text has abundance of light to give it
self, if we look to the context either before or behind; before there is an
exhortation to pray for all men, verse. 1. which although the Arminians make an
argument that all men is meant of all persons and not only of all sorts, both
in that verse and verse: 4. and 6. because say they we ought to pray for all men
universally pro singulis generu^, and not only for all sorts; yet it is indeed an
argument for the contrary. For to pray for all men without exception of any
person is not commanded, but we find the contrary commanded. Jeremiah was
forbidden to pray or make intercession for the obstinat, incorrigible Jews,
Ier: 7. 16. and 11. 14. and 14. 11. God would not have Samuel to mourn for
Saul, after he was rejected of the Lord, 1 Samuel: 16. 1. and we ought not to pray
for such as sin unto death, i. e. the sin of bl^sphemy against the holy
Ghost, 1 Io: 5. 16. Paul is so far from praying for Alexander the copper-smith,
that he imprecats the vengeance of God upon him, 2 Timothy: 4. 14. we may not pray
for the Pope who is the great Antichrist and son of perdition; neither may we
pray for, but against Babylon, especially after the people of God are out of
her. We are bidden pray for our enemies, but not for the malicious incorrigible
enemies of Christ. Wh^refore when the Apostle bids us pray for all men. His
meaning is, that we should exclud no degree nor kind of ^en great o^ small, Jew
or Gentile, bound or free, etc. and so he does upon the matter explain himself
in the very next words, for Kings and for all that are in authority, he says,
not for all Kings, but he will not have us exclude Kings nor Queens as such
from our prayers, nor any other subordinat Rulers: When he says all that are
in authority, he means any kind of lawful authority; for we may not pray for
those who are in any unlawful or usurped authority in the Church, Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. which prayer were an approbation of their
unlawful callings in the Church. I do not say that we may not pray for the
persons of any Archbishops, Bishops, etc. but we may not pray for them as
clothed with such an office or authority, as we are there bid pray for Kings
quatenus Kings, that we may live under them a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: so that a King or Emperor as he is clothed with such
authority may not be excluded from our prayers: But if we look upon all Kings
and Emperors personally, individually or num^cally, so it cannot hold true
that we ought to pray for all that are in Authority, otherwise the ancient
Church had been bound to pray for Julian the apostate.

Again, if we look to that which (there) follows after we find verse: 8. I will
therefore that men pray every where (or in every place) lifting up holy hands.
What means he by (...)? He means not in every individual place without
excepti^n, for this were neither possible (because there are many places in
which there are not, neither can be any to pray) nor fit, because we ought not
to pray with lifted up hands in the streets or in the market places, there are
fit places both for public and private prayer, and there are also unfit places
either for private or public prayer. The meaning therefore is, that the worship
of God is not restricted to Jerusalem, now under the new Testament. ^o: 4. 21.
23. But that any place being otherwise convenient and fit for prayer, is
sanctified for Prayer, and that Prayer made in any such place is no less
acceptable to God then the prayer which was made in the ^emple of Jerusalem.
And now why should we not understand (...), verse: 4. and (...), v: 6. even as
(...), verse: 8. and the rather if we consider what is interlaced, for the Text
runs thus, who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time,
whereunto I am ordained a Teacher of the Gentil^s in ^aith and verity. I will
therefore that men may pray every where. Whereby it appears that the Apostles
plain scope is to take away that difference between Jew and Gentile, and to
intimate that we must pray for all sorts of persons, b^ause Christ died for all
sorts of persons, and will be worshipped in every nation under the Heaven. So
that Beza did fitly express the sense when he rendered verse: 1, 2. 6. pro
quibusvis, verse. 4. quosvis, and verse. 8. in quovis loco, to note an
universality of kinds, not of individualls. Grotius also on Mark* 9. 49. notes
the same thing, that (...), is used for quivis, not only in the new Testament,
but by Aristophanes and Sophocles. Lastly, I know no reason but our
Translatours should have rendered, 1 Timothy: 2. 4. who will have all manner of men
to be saved, and verse: 6 who gave himself a ransom for all manner of men, as
well as Mat: 4. 23. they render (...), all manner of sickness, Mat 12* 31.
(...), all manner of sin, and Acts 10. 12. (...), all manner of foure-footed
Beasts.

In the same sense I understand Heb. 2. 19. that he by the grace of God should
taste death for every man, (...): which phrase the apostle rather uses to the
Hebrews, to wear out that common opinion of the Jews, that the Messiah was only
to be a Savior to them, as under the Law the Sacrifices were offered only for
the sins of the congregation of Israel. Howbeit I may further add for clearing
this Text. 1. Seeing the Text has no more but (...), that is, (as the Tigurine
rightly rendereth the letter of the Text) pro omni, we may well supply it thus,
(...), pro omni filio, not for every man, (which though it be the expres^on of
the English Translators cannot be necessarily drawn from the original) but for
every son, whether Jew or Gentile, i. e. for every one predestined to the
adoption of children, which I confirm from the two next verses (both of them
having a manifest connection with v: 9) ^or these all for whom Christ tasted
death are called many sons v: 10. and they who are sanctified, also Brethren,
verse. 11 See the like phrase Mark 9. 49. (...), for every one shall be salted
with fire, i. e. every one who shall enter into life: for this sense is to be
gathered from the v. 43, 45. 47. and when it is said, 3 epist: John v. 12.
Demetrius has good report of all men, we must either understand all the
Brethren, or make some such restriction of that universal expression, (...),
for most men in the world knew not Demetrius. So Luke 16. 16. from that time
the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses unto it, (...). Now
therefore there can be no further of (...), in that Text to the Hebrews, then
in these other texts here cited. 2. It may be also supplied thus, (...), and
it is in it self true that Christ tasted death for every Nation, or for every
people, for in him are all the Nations and Kind^eds of the earth blessed, Act:
3. 25. Gal. 3. 8. that is, the Elect of all the Nations, which upon the matter
comes to one and the same thing with the ^ormer sense, although the former
expression suteth better to the context: yea although it had been said that
Christ tasted death (...), for every man, (which is not said) yet every man
could be here no more then all men, Romans 5. 18. as by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation; ev^n so by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men unto Justification of life. Wherein the
second branch, all men, (...), is no more, and can be no more, but all who are
in Christ, or all regenerat and justified persons. For 1. by these all men the
Apostle understands (as is manifest by comparing this with the precedent verse)
they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, and
he adds concerning them, that they shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.
2. The comparison between Christ and Adam clears it, for they are both set
forth as public persons, all who are in Adam a^e actually involved into the
sentence of Condemnation, and all who are in Christ are actually translated
from the state of condemnation into the state of Justification. But I proceed.

Another Scripture which has been understood for Christ's dying for all men,
being indeed meant of all sorts, is 1 Io. 2. 2. And he is the propitiation for
our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world:
which is to be expounded by that promise made to Abraham, that in his seed all
the families or kinreds of the earth should be blessed, Act. 3. 25. Gal: 3. 8.
and by Rev. 5. 9. thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God by by thy blood,
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. So Rev. 7. 9. after
the sealing of a hundredth forty and four thousand out of all the Tribs of
Israel, it is added, After this Ibeheld and lo, a great multitud which no man
could number of all Nations, and kindreds, and people and tongues stood before
the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robs, and palms in their
hands. For which cause also the news of a Savior are called good tidings to
all people, or to every people, Luke 2. 10. So the Apostle John who was of the
Jews, tells us there that Christ is a propitiation, not only for the sins of
himself, and of others of his Nation, who were then believers, but likewise for
the Elect of all Nations and all the World over.

To the same purpose it is said, Ioh. 3. 16 for God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Where (...) is of no larger extent then (...), which
the Tigurine rendereth, omnis qui credit, not quisquis, that every one who
believes in him should not perish, so that every one who believes is an
exegesis or explanation of the word World. Howbeit if any like better the
ordinary reading, that whosoever believes, it comes in the issue to the same
thing. For it is a great mistake to think that the world here is a genus, which
is divided in believers and unbelievers, and that the word whosoever is added
in reference not to the world before mentioned, but only to one kind or sort
of the world. Which (by the way) is also inconsistent with their principles who
hold that Christ dyed for all, to purchase life to all, upon condition of
believing; for if so, there can be no partition here of the world but the
latter branch as large as the first. But if there be any partition here of the
world, (I say if there be, for the Text may be understood, exegetice, not
partitive, as I have showed already, it is not partitio generis in species, but
totius in parts, that is, the world which God loved is not divided into
believers and unbelievers, but by the world is meant the elect of all nations,
and this whole world is subdivided into its parts by the word whosoever, that
is, whether Jew or Gentile, whether Barbarian or Scythian, whether bound or
fre^ etc. For this, the Apostle explaineth the very same words, (...) Romans 10.
11, 12. Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed, for there is no
difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over a^l is rich
unto all that call upon him. So Gal. 3. 28. Col: 3. 11. Act. 10. 34, 35. And
though some have with much scorn set at naught that expression, The world of
the Elect, i. e the Elect of all the world, yet it will puzle them to give any
other sense to Io: 6. 33. where it is said, that Christ gives life unto the
world, or to Io. ^6. 8. where the Spirit is said to convince the world of sin,
of righteousness and judgment, or Io: 17. 21. where Christ prays, that the
world may believe, and the Father hear^th him always as in other petitions, so
in this.

The third encouragement to believing is, that Jesus Christ has died, as for
persons of all sorts and conditions, so for the expiation of all so^ts, and all
manner of sins, and has plainly assured us, that all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men. Mat: 12. 13. he excepteth only one kind,
but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. Where
exceptio firmat regula^ in non exceptis; this being the sole exception, makes
the general promise the surer, that not some sorts only, but all sort of sins,
yea of blasphemies, not only may, but shall be forgiven unto men. Now to be
clear concerning that one sin excepted. 1. It Is not properly any sin of the
second table, but of the first, and is therefore called blasphemy, 2. It Is not
every blasphemy, for any other blasphemy is declared in that text to be
pardonable. 3. It Is a wilful blasphemy contrary to the illumination of the holy
Ghost and knowledge of the truth once received, Heb: 6. 4. and 10. 26. For
which reason Paul's sin when he blasphemed the name of Christ and was
exceedingly mad against it, was not the blasphemy against the holy Ghost,
because he did it ignorantly. If P^ter had at that time sinned Paul's sin, it
had been the blasphemy against the holy Ghost and so unpardonable, for it
wanted nothing, but knowledge and illumination to make it that unpardonable
sin, which the Apostle himself, 1 Timothy 1. 13. does intimat. 4. Neither is it
every blasphemy against knowledge, but such as is joined with a hatred of
Christ, so far that if they could they would pull him down from Heaven and
crucify him again. There was mercy for these who crucified Christ ignorantly,
but no mercy to those who would do it knowingly. Moreover, although they cannot
get Christ himself again crucified, yet they revile, reproach, disgrace and
p^rsecute him in his Members, Ministers, Ord^nances, and all the ways they can
put him to shame and dishonor. Now there are two sorts of these who sin by
blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Some do not profess Christ and the truth of
the Gospel, yet maliciously and against their knowledge reproach or persecut
it. So the Pharisees Mark: 3. 28, 29, 30. in saying that Christ had an unclean
spirit, did blaspheme against the holy Ghost. Others do profess Christ and his
Gospel, and truth, yet fall away to be malicious enemies thereunto, against
their knowledge. Such a one was Judas, neither is there any thing to move us to
think that Judas did not blaspheme the holy Ghost, except that he repented
himself afterward: But there is nothing in Scripture against the possibility of
a desperate repentance in these who blaspheme the holy Ghost, but only that they
can never so r^pent as to be renewed again, H^b: 6. 6. That all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.
7. i, e. all manner of sin is purged away by the blood of Christ, and atonement
made for all sorts of sinners, was also signified, both by Christ's healing all
manner of diseases among the people, Mat: 4. 23. and by Peter's vision of all
manner of four footed beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the Air, let
down as it were in a sheet from Heaven to be killed, and eaten, Act* 10. 11, 12.

So that as the promise of Mercy and free Grace comes home not only to thy
nation and to persons of thy condition, state and degree, yea and to thy
kindred and Family, but also to thy case in respect of sin, it comes fully
home to sinners of thy kind or case, it tendereth Christ even to such a sinner
as thou art.

Fourthly Christ receives all who come unto him, and excludes none but such
as by their unbelief exclude themselves. Joh: 6. 37.

Fifthly it is an encouragement to believing, that we are commanded to believe*
1 John. 3. 23. and this is his commandment, that we should believe in the name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment

Observe the sa^e authority that commands us to love one another, injoynes
also that we believe on Christ.

But if any shall say, I cannot believe, I have no strength nor Grace to
believe, I answer, (and let this be the sixth encouragement to believing) That
God sets forth himself to be the giver of faith Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. and
his Son to be the author and finisher of our faith. Heb. 12. 2.

If it be objected, I know it is so indeed. But God works faith only in the
Elect, and I know not whether I be Elected or not. I answer, thou art
discharged (in this case) to run back to Election (which is Gods secret) and
art commanded to obey the revea^ed command, according to that of Deuteronomy: 29. 29.
The secret things belong un^o the Lord our God, but these things which are
revealed, belong unto us and to our Children, that we may d^e all the words of
this Law. And therefore seeing ye are commanded to believe in God, and hears
that he is the Author and finisher of Faith; Say with Augustine, Da domine quod
jubes and jube quod vis. And with the Disciples, Lord increase our faith, Luk:
17. 5. or with that man in the Gospel, I believe, Lord help my unbelief, Mark
9. 24. and request him who has promised to give the spirit of Grace and
supplication, that ye may look on him whom you have pierced, Zech* 12. 10. to
lighten your eyes, lest ye sleep unto death, Psalm. 13. 3. For this looking on
Christ (promised in Zecharie) is nothing else then believing on him. As the
looking on the brazen serpent which was the tipe of Christ, is accomplished
when we believe in Christ who was typified thereby, as is to be gathered by
comparing John 3. 14. 15. with Numb: 21. 8.

Errata.
Page, 19. for Spegmen, read Specimen. Page 28. for autoris, read aut oris.
Page 29. for is ever blind, read is not ever blind. P. 31. for Object. 8.
read Object. 7. P. 32. for Ecclesiae and Canonca, read Ecclesia and Canonica.
P. 67. for improblable, read improbable. P. 40. for but a Preacher, read but by
a Preacher. P. 46, for (...) read (...). P 79. ^or (...), read (...). P. 162.
for (...), read (...). P. 169. for (...), read (...).


