AN ASSIZE SERMON, Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice
GLYN, and Mr Sergeant EARL Judges of Assize at Bridgnorth in Shropshire, July
the 2d 1657.

By Thomas Gilbert Minister of the Gospel at Edgmond in that County.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Francis Tyton at the Three Daggers in
Fleet Street, 1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Chief Justice GLYN.
Right Honorable;
THis pains which another called to the Pulpit, your Honor has commanded to
the Press: I would hope but to a second Impression of it, the first being in
your own and others hearts. Your attention spoke your affection to it in the
preaching: your judgment of it (so much above mine own) will be Apology
sufficient for the Printing (in this almost as much Printing as Scribbling age:)
and your Authority commanding it the Pr^ss, has even therein engaged for the
Patronage of it printed. I promise my self also the third Impression in the
whole course of Judicature, at the stern whereof your Honor sits Lord Chief
Justice, hearing (and I am persuaded deservedly) The best Book-man of the
Nation, and knownly no less exquisitely able in the disquisition of a Cause,
then in the knowledge of the Rule: Now if your Honor either already did not, or
did not still resolve with this, either Ability to answer your Trust, and make
good your Style, you would not have desired the light of this Sermon also to
stare you in the face.

Nor may this Sermon have its use only with your Lordship in this your so
Honorable Public station, but more especially in your private Christian
cap^city, as your Remembran^er, in all, often to lay your self to the line of
that Law of Liberty, by which Public Judges, as well as private Christians
must be judged. That the Lord would follow it with his Blessing, both Preached
and Printed, to some measure of usefullness, both to your Honor and others, is
the prayer of

Right Honorable, Your Honors most humble Remembrancer at the Throne of
Grace, THOMAS GILBERT.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL EDMUND WARING Esquire High Sheriff of the County of SALOP, and
Captain of the County-Troop.
Truly Honored Sir;
THis Sermon is not bec^me less Yours for becoming so much Another: Nor will
that Honorable Person grudg You a part in the Dedication from whom the whole
had its Rise. Its appearance in another Dress, does no more vary the Case, than
a Servants changing his clothes changes his Relation to his Master.

You have in your single Hand a twofold POSSE both Civil and Military of this
County; an Interest in it above both; and I think for your time above any
Gentleman's of your Rank in any County of England. You have received all from
the Supreme Lord, and must render an account of all to the Supreme Judge held
forth in this Sermon. Which that you may do with Joy, and not with Grief, when
judged by the Law of Liberty, is the Prayer of

Truly Honored Sir; Your Friend and Chaplain THOMAS GILBERT.

AN ASSIZE SERMON.
JAMES IId VER. XIIth So Speak Ye, and so Do, as they that shall be judged by
the Law of Liberty.


THE NINE first Verses of this Chapter, Coherence.
mine Apostle bestow's in reproving those he writes to for, and dehorting them
from their sinful respect of Persons; and after sundry Arguments to that
purpose managed, and an emergent Objection in the tenth and eleventh Verses, by
way of Prolepsis, or Anticipation answered, he lays in a most powerful
Argument in my Text, as especially against the forementioned, so generally
against all sinful: and for all gracious behavior, the most free and
impartial Judgment they were to expect from God, according to his most free and
impartial Law.

So Speak Ye, and so Do, etc.

In the words you have

Division.
1. A twofold Act.

1. Obedience. 2. Judgment.
2. A twofold Agent.

1. Man of the Act of Obedience expressed, YE. 2. God of the Act of Judgment
implied in both the Act and Rule of Judgment.
3. Man's Act of Obedience commanded, and that in two Particulars.

1. Words -- Speak. 2. Works -- Do. -- And these two used by a Synecdoche of
some Specials for the whole general of Obedience; Thoughts too here to be
understood, as Ver. 4th expressed.
4. As man's Obedience commanded, so Gods Judgment foretold, shall be Judged.

5. Gods Judgment foretold in form of a Motive to man's Obedience commanded in
form of an Exhortation, So Speak, and so Do, as they that shall be judged.

6. One and the same Rule both of Man's Act of Obedience, and Gods Act of
Judgment, THE LAW OF LIBERTY: Which Phrase only is of necessity to be explained.

E^plica^ion.
(...), by a common Hebraism for (...) the Law of freedom for the free Law; (as
to name no more examples) Ephesians 4.24. (...) for (...), Holiness of truth, for
true holiness. Now where the Genitive of the Substantive, is by such an
Hebraism used for an Adjective of quality, it is to express the ^minent measure
of the quality; and accordingly ye have in the first Chapter, Verse. 25th of
this Epistle, this same Phrase by this same Apostle thus filled up, The perfect
Law of Liberty or Freedom, for the Law of perfect Freedom, or the perfectly
free Law; A Law so free that nothing is wanting to the freedom of it. So that
here the Law of Liberty or freedom is as much as the most free Law; most free
from all partial by-respects censured in the Context. A most free and impartial
Rule of man's Obedience, commanding Obedience, and forbidding disobedience of
one kind as well as another, to one person as well as another, and a most free
and impartial Rule of Gods Judgment of all persons whomsoever, according to
whatsoever their obedience or disobedience. This Interpretation however
Commentators vary, the Phrase it self, scope, and context, the best Rule of
expounding necessarily bespeak.

So that now the whole amounts to thus much: Be you sure in your Obedience to
conform to the Impartial Law of God; A brief Paraphrase.
For God will be sure to conform to it in his judgment of you.

And passing the several Observations the severals of this Text would furnish
out; The Doctrine that takes in the main strength of the whole, and therefore
deserves to be insisted on, is this:

The same Law of God is the Rule of Man's obedience, and of Gods Judgment.
Doctrine.


This I shall first prove by Scripture, and then answer some Quere^ for the
better clearing of it.

For S^ripture-proof take one out of the Old T^stament.

Isaiah 33.22. The Lord is our Judge: Confirmation.
the Lord is our Lawgi^^r. As Judge he observes the same Law for the Rule of his
judgment, which as Lawgiver he appoints the Rule of man's obedience.

Out of the New Testament two or three Proofs.

Joh. 12 48. The Word that I have spoken, viz. as a Rule of obedience now, THE
SAME shall judge him, viz. as a Rule of Judgment at the last day.

Romans 2 16. In that day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jes^s Christ,
according to my Gospel. God who delegates Christ the Judge, appoints the Rule of
Judgment, the same as of man's Obedience Paul's Gospel; Not any fifth Gospel
written by Paul as some of the Papists fondly imagine; nor yet the Gospel
written by St Luke as Paul's Amanuensis; But the Gospel, says Austin Aug. lib.
20. de ^^v. (...) c^p. 14.
, contained Propheticis and Apostolicis Libris, in the Books of the Apostles
and Prophets; called PAVLS, because he is the Preacher of it, by much better
right then I call JAMES MINE APOSTLE, when Preaching upon a T^xt of his Epistle.

Rev. 20.12. The last Proof I shall offer, ye have a solemn representation made
to John by Vision of the last general Assize, the Throne set, Books opened, and
dead judged. Orig cap. 14. ad Romans
Origin and Ambr. in Psalm 1
Ambrose interpret the Books there said to be opened, the Books o^ men's
Conscience, and Gods omniscience. Aust ubi supra and Hom. 17. in Apoc. prope
med.
Austin and our old Countryman Bid, the Bo^ks o^ the Old and New Testament.
Why may not these Ancients divide the truth between them? When it is said the
Books were opened, I conceive both may be taken in. When it is said the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the Books according their
works, I conceive both must be taken in, Origens Books, the Books of men's
conscience, and Gods omniscience, as Records of Fact; Austins Books, the Books
of the Old and New Testament, as Records of Law; That in these (as Austin
says) might be seen what Laws God has commanded to be observed in those. Not
as Austin in that of life, how men had, or had not observed them.

The Point thus proved, I shall now in the second place make some Queres for
the better learning of the Doctrine.

Amplification.
QUERE I.

Quere I.
How the same Law of God is the Rule of man's Obedience, and Gods Judgment.

Answ.
Answ. The same Law in different respects. The Rule of Man's Obedience in the
Precepts and Prohibitions; Gods Judgment, in the Promises and Thre^tnings.


1. The Law of God is the Rule of man's Obedience in the Precepts, and
Prohibitions: For, as where no Law is, there is no Transgression: no sins of
Commission, where no Negative Laws or Prohibitions; No sins of Omission,
where no Affirmative Laws or Precepts: So where no Law is, there is no Obedience
neither; Man might, and must have been subject to God, as supreme Lord without
any Laws; He could not without Laws be obedient to God, as Rector.

2. The Law of God is the Rule of Gods Judgment in the Promises and
Threatenings, annexed to the Precepts and Prohibitions: For as the Precepts and
Prohibitions determine man's duty, and sin, what shall be his duty, and what
his sin; so the annexed Promises and Threatenings, determine Gods Rewards and
Punishments; The Promises, what shall be Gods reward of man's duty the
Threatenings, what shall be man's demerit of Gods punishment for his sin. So that
had no Promise been annexed to the Precepts and Prohibitions, man obeying both,
had indeed been capable of reward, but God is not bound ^o confer it: and had
no Threatening been annexed to the Precepts and Prohibitions, man disobeying
both had indeed been capable of Punishment, but not bound to suffer it, much
less God to inflict it: For the very Threatening annexed in the mere nature of a
Threatening, if it be not a denunciation also, b^nds not God to inflict, but man
only to suffer if God inflict. I have been the more brief in this first Quere,
because to be more large in the second.

QUERE II.

What Law of God it is that is the Rule of man's Obedience and Gods Judgment?
Quere II.


Answ. Not one and the same Law to all, Answ.
but different according to the different state and condition of the persons to
be ruled and judged by it; yet so, that the same persons have still the same
Law, the Rule of their Obedience, and Gods Judgment.

Now there is a threefold different state and condition of persons to be ruled
and judged by the Law of God: Some

1. Who never had Christ, or not sufficiently discovered and proposed to them.

2. Who having had Christ sufficiently proposed to them, have not by saving
Faith received and closed with him.

3. Who having had Christ sufficiently proposed to them, have by saving Faith
received, and closed with him.

1. That Law of God, which is the Rule of their obedience to God, and Gods
judging of them, who never had Christ, or not sufficiently discovered and
proposed to them as the Law of nature, under the formality of a Covenant of
works written in their hearts, if Gentiles, or in Tables also, if Jews.

None of these, whether J^ws or G^n^^les, are requir^d Obedience according to
the Law of Gospel-Faith never pub^ished among them; neither shall they be saved
by that Gospel-Faith they never had in them, nor be condemned for want of that
Gospel-Faith, never required of them in a Mediator, never, or not sufficiently
held forth to them. For Credibile sufficienter proposi^um ad sidem obligat: Now
Christ ^s only sufficiently proposed, where himself the end for which, and
Terms, on which he is proposed are sufficiently made known: Where this is not
done, there is no obligation of duty to Believe, and therefore, There can be no
obligation of guilt for not so believing. So that here the Gospel can neither
be the rule of man's Obedience, nor of Gods Judgment. But

1. If they be Gentiles, in this condition, their obedience or disobedience
shall be scanned according to the Law of nature written in their hearts, (and
this Law of nature written in men's hearts being as capable of sanction by
Promises and Threats, as written in Tables) judgment accordingly passed on
them. See both these Romans 2. v. 14. this Law their rule of ^bedience: These
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves. Ver. 12. this Law Gods Rule of
Judgment; They shall perish without Law; Gods judgment of all such, a judgment
of condemnation for their disobedience to the Law. For though some of them may
do (as the Apostle says) (...), the things contained in the Law, he means
but some things; And of those some things for the matter, which they do,
contained in the Law; they do nothing for the manner and measure of doing
required by the Law. Now D^ut. 6.25. it shall be our righteousness if we
observe to do all these Commandments before the Lord of God, As he has
commanded us; not only All, commanded for matter, but As commanded for manner
or measure, or no Legal Righteousness.

Object.
And if it be here Objected, That the same essentials of the moral creature,
(according to that of the Apostle) are a Law unto themselves, are at once man's
both Rule and Principle of obedience, and therefore, The one cannot be more
perfect, or imperfect than the other; and an imperfect principle may come up to
perfect obedience to a Rule equally imperfect with it self, and so Gods
Judgment must be according: Not to dispute the Suppositum.

Answer 1. The condition of the Law of nature, as it has the Super-added
formality of a Covenant of Works is such, Answ. 1.
that being once broken it can never be performed by him that breaks it. The
souls of just men made perf^ct, could not con^inue a moment in Heaven, in the
right of their own perfect inherent righteousness; it being the righteousness
of persons who had sinned.

2. That the esse^tials of the moral creature, Man, if they Law, so requiring,
that they cannot but require obedience; But in the capacity of a Principle they
are a free principle, so able to yield, that they may not yield obedience: And,
(which is more) never did any fallen man do what he was able by his essentials,
as a Principle of obedience to the same essentials as a Law.

3. That man at first had not only natural principle enableing Law, but a
supernatural Principle also enabling to the manner of doing required by the
Law; That by his fall his naturals were indeed but corrupted, and that perhaps
equally, both as a Law requiring of, and Principle enabling to the things to be
done for the matter; But his supernaturals enabling to the gra^ious manner of
doing were wholly lost.

4. That man has indeed by sin, as much blur'd, and blotted, rent, and razed
his counterpart of the Law, and Covenant of works, as he has vitiated, and
weakened his natural Principle; But God has kept his counterpart of the same
Law pure, and entire. Now Gods procedure in judgment will not be according to
Heathen men's rent, and razed, but his own pure and perfect counterpart of that
Law; as a Landlord will deal with a Tenant in the like case of a Lease.

So that the Infidel Heathen, as he sins without, shall i. e. does not in
sinning, shall not in judging come under the aggravation of the Jews sin
against, or judgment by the Law written in Tables, no more then of the
unbelieving Christians sin against, or judgment by the Gospel; But shall be
judged by, as he sins against the Law written in his heart, and not only as
in his heart corrupted and defaced, but as in the incorrupt counterpart, the
great Judge keeps by him.

2. Whereof more briefly, if they be Jews in the forementioned condition (as
it is conceived many of those people especially since the dispersion are) their
obedience, or disobedience shall be measured according to the line, and rule of
the Law written in Tables, and Gods proceeding in Judgment with them
accordingly. Rom 2 12. As many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by
the Law, it is clearly spoken of the Jew; As many as have sinned (...) in the
Law, commonly interpreted by (...) having the Law: But I conceive there is more,
much more in the expression then so: (...), In the Law, means in the midst of
so much Law, in the face and light of so pure and clear Law: As many as have
thus sinned in the Law shall be accordingly judged by the Law, so much more
severely, then the Infidel Heathen, as they have sinned more hainously against a
perfect Transcript by the hand of that perfect counterpart in the hand of the
great Lawgiver himself, never purchased to the Infidel Heathen: Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil, of the Jew first, and
also of the Gentile.

2. Those who have had Christ, whether Jews, or carnal Christians, sufficiently
proposed to them, but never by saving Faith closed with him, have both Law and
Gospel the rule of their obedience, and shall have of Gods Judgment.

They have

1. Both the Law, and Gospel the Rule of their ob^dience.

1. The Law and Covenant of Works, because they are under it; under it as the
Law of nature, as men, that, binding all whether in, or out of Christ to its
obedience; under it as the the Covenant of Works, as men out of Christ, there
being but two Covenants of Works, and grace between God and man, and every man
under one of them, if not that of grace, the other of works: For, neither could
man's first disobedience, nor succeeding disability thereupon bastle the
rigorous demands of it is Precepts.

2. The Gospel also is to such a rule of obedience requiring them to come under
its new Positives of Faith and Repentance. Mar. 16.15 Preach the Gospel to
every creature. 1.15. Repent and b^lieve the G^sp^l. Whatsoever the Law
speaks, it speaks to them that are under the Law, but the Gospel speaks to
men that yet are not under, to come under it, and it is their great sin that
they do not obey.

2. Such shall have both Law, and Gospel Gods rule of Judging them.

1. The Law and Covenant of Works, because broken by them, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them. For, if by disobeying the Precept, they did not void the
powers of the Precept, much less of the Threatening. Nay, they could no
otherwise forfeit the Promise, and incur the Threatening than by disobeying the
Precept.

2. The Gospel and Law of Faith, because they finally reject it: Now it is more
heinous finally to dis-believe the Gospel, then first to disobey the Law: And
this aggravates as their sin against the Gospel as the rule of their obedience,
so also the wrath of the Gospel against them, as the Rule of Gods Judgment.

John 13.22. 3.18, 19

3. Those who have had Christ sufficiently proposed to them, and by saving
Faith closed with him, have both the Gospel, and Law of nature, or moral Law
the rule of their obedience to God, and shall have both Gods rule of judging of
them.

1. They have them the Rule of their obedience unto God.

1. The Gospel requiring of them perseverance in obedience to it is Positives.
Be thou faithful unto death, Rev. 2.10. For as faith is required to the
getting, so perseverance in Faith to the keeping of a Gospel Title.

2. The moral Law or Law of nature requiring Perseverance, and improvement in
obedience to its morals. 1 Cor. 15. ult. Always abounding in the work of the
Lord. And this their obedience not, to God as Creator only, but as Redeemer
also: Not as it self the condition of the Covenant of Works, but as fruit, and
evidence of the condition of the Covenant of Grace Gospel Faith, and the way to
the possession of that Inheritance Gospel Faith entitles to.

2. Such shall have both these the rule of Gods Judging them.

1. The Gospel in the Promise of life annexed to its Possitive of believing.

For such is both the wisdom and mercy of God, that that life man forfeited by
transgressing a Legal Positive eating the forbidden fruit; he should recover by
obse^ving a Gospel-Positive Faith in a Med^atiour. Faith in God is of the Law
Moral; Faith in a Mediatiour a Gospel-Positive; Now to this Gospel-Positive is
annexed the Promise of ete^nal life. Act. 13.39. -- 16.31, etc. And from this
Gospel-Promise of life annexed to this Gospel-Precept of ^aith in a Mediator,
has faith the nature and notion of a Title, and will accordingly be so judged
by God. In relation to the Precept it has the nature of obedience, in relation
to the Promise the nature of a Title. There is indeed in the nature of Faith,
as a receiving Grace a peculiar aptitude above other Graces to become a Title,
but that it actually becomes such is from the constitution, and ordination of
God by his Gospel-Promise.

As the Rainbow had its peculiar aptitude by nature above all other Meteors to
become the Sign of that Covenant God made with Noah, no more to destroy the
World by Water; that Bow being always placed by the Pencil of the Sun beams,
in so thin a dewy Cloud from which no great Rain can ensue; but that it should
be a sign of no universal deluge ever after to ensue from the collection of any
other Clouds was merely by Divine Institution.

So Faith of its own nature as a receiving grace had a special aptness above
all other graces to become the condition of the Covenant of Grace; But that it
actually became such, the condition of the Covenant of Grace, and title to the
Grace of the Covenant, was merely by the free Constitution of God. And his
Judiciary Sentence will be according to his Gospel-Constitution.

2. And as God will judge here according to his Promise, annexed to his Positive
Precept of the Gospel for Faith in a Mediator; so will he judge here too
according to his Promise, annexed to his moral Precepts of the Law for
obedience, as fruit and evidence of that Faith, Romans 8.1. Mat. 25.34, 35, etc.

In the former place non-condemnation, and consequently salvation is made the
privilege both of those that are in Christ by Gospel-Faith, and those that
walk after the Spirit, but principally of a state in Christ by Gospel-Faith, of
walking after the Spirit as Characteristical and signative of that state and
condition.

In the latter place you have the Sentence passed accordingly: Come ye bl^ssed
o^ my Father. There Is their (...) Adoption and Sonship by Christ, with the
blessedness of that state: Receive the Kingdom: There Is the Inheritance
adjudged to them. For ye have done, so, and so that (For) not inferential of
the moral meritoriousness of their works of mercy to Christ and his Members,
but of their own Membership by faith evidenced by their works of mercy to their
Fellow Members.

Thus largely, too largely I fear for the Straitness of time though not for the
weight of the things, of the second Qu^re.

A third Quere should have been

What manner of Rul^ of man's Obedience, and Gods Judgment the Law of God is?

And for Answer I should have showed that it is

1. An obliging Rule, for that is the nature of a Law, Regula Obligans, I think
as just a definition of Lex as most given.

1. An obliging Rule in respect of man's obedience; As a Rule it is an Act of the
Divine understanding showing man in what way he may walk as his convenience,
Regula indicat, as an obliging Rule or Law, it is an act of the Divine will
requiring man to walk in that way as his duty, Lex imperat. See both these in
that one Scripture, Mich. 68. He has Showed thee, oh man, what is good:
There Is the Proper Act of the Law of God simply as a Rule; And what does the
Lord Require of th^^, etc. There Is the proper Act of the Law of God as an
obliging Rule.

2. An obliging Rule in respect of Gods Judgment, and there proportionably as a
Rule it shows what rewards God may apportion to man's obedience, or punishments
to man's disobedience. As an obliging Rule or Law i^'s obliging upon God to
confer such rewards upon man's obedience, and obliging, not upon God to
inflict, but upon man to undergo such punishments upon his disobedience, if God
infl^ct them on him.

2. The first obliging Rule: As the will of God exerting or putting forth his
natural power or strength, is in natural things the first effici^nt cause; So
the will of God exerting, or putting forth his moral power or authority, is in
moral things the first obliging Rule: and as all things in nature act
dependingly upon the Will of God, putting forth his natural power as the first
efficient cause: so in morality all Laws oblige dependingly upon the Will of
God putting forth his moral power as the first obliging Rule, whether in point
of obedience or judgment. This, such Judges and Pleaders of Law, as are Makers
of Law too among us, have special reason to take notice of. Therefore for the
exellently both full and clear handling of this Point and many singular
Corollaries drawn down from it, I shall refer them to Petr. de Alliaco the
Learn^d Cardinal of Cambray in Princ. in Prim Sentent. in quaest. d^term. in
vesper. ad calcem. 4.^^ Senten.

3. A Rule obliging in the first place to obedience, and in the second to
Judgment. First, obliging man to obedience, and secondly either upon his
performance obliging God to confer the rewards promised, or upon his
nonperformance obliging man to suffer (if God inflict) the Punishments
threatened. This clear, as in the nature of the things, so in the order of the
Words in the Text; So Speak Ye, and so Do, as they that shall be judged.

4. A most freely and impartially obliging Rule both in point of obedience and
Judgment. This too in the Text: The Law of Liberty, and that in the Explication
sufficiently cleared, and we have not time, actum agere.

These Reasons also of the Point had been given, would the time have permitted.
Reas.


1. That there might be nothing of encouragement wanting

2. That there might remain nothing of pretext or excuse to

3. Because, as man cannot obey or disobey God but in relation to a Law; so
neither can God judge man, obeying, or disobeying, but in relation to a Law. As
man (as before you heard) might have been subject to God as supreme Lord, not
obedient to him as Rectour without Law, so proportionably God as supreme Lord
could have disposed of; He could not as Rectour judge man without Law, nor judge
him according to any other Law, than what is the Rule of his obedience: For,
this would be no more judiciary then, but as much arbitrary as the other.

The Point now sufficiently cleared and confirmed, I come at length to

Use and Application. Vuse.

1. To all in general.

1. Information. 1. Information.


1. The Power of God is the supreme Power of the World. and disobedience,
rewards and punishments of all the people in a Nation, is an act of the supreme
Power (wheresoever it reside) of the Nation: so to make Laws to determine the
spiritual obedience, and disobedience, and the temporal, spiritual, and eternal
rewards and pu^ishments of all the people in the world, must needs be an act of
the supreme Power of the world.

How far the Majesty of Heaven is from aff^cting the exercise of an Arbitrary
power. The great Potentates of the earth have it not, and would usurp it. The
great, and only Po^entate of Heaven and Earth has it, and will not use it,
except in case of extraordinary concernment to his own glory, and his Subjects
good, and then as little, and with as speedy return as may be to method, or
course of Law again, as in the case of bringing in the New Covenant by Christ.
According to his absolute Power and Dominion he might (had he pleased) have
disposed of, as he pleased his whole moral Creature; all mankind to their last
end of weal or woe, merely as Lord without any Law; but he was pleased to
become Lawgiver, and according to his Laws given, will dispose of them to
their last end as Rectour.

God will never judge the best works of mere men meritorious: God judges
according to the nature of the things to be judged, and according to his own
Word the Rule of Judgment. That good works merit of their own nature, not many
at this day of the Papists will affirm; and as such (as you heard in the
Doctrine) they are only capable of, do not merit a reward. That they merit by
any Ordination of God in his Word, all the Papists together, will never be able
to prove. He has indeed Ordained that the least good work, even a cup of cold
water to a Disciple, shall have a reward: not that the greatest, even fire and
faggot for the Master Christ himself, should merit a reward. He has Ordained
Christ should merit; they should have, not deserve a reward.

In evil works, sin and guilt differ. As the former noted against the Papist,
so this against the Antinomian, who will have sin and guilt to be one and the
same thing, and tells us we can never have sound peace, till we see the filth
and power, as well as the guilt of sin, charged upon Christ: But the
difference between them I make out from the Doctrine thus:

1. They have relation to the Law under different Considerations; Sin as the
rule of obedience, guilt as the rule of Judgment

2. They have relation to different parts of the Law; Sin to the Precepts, and
Prohibitions, as a rule of obedience; guilt to the Threatenings as a rule of
Judgment.

3. They have different kinds of Relation to the different parts of the Law
under those different Considerations; Sin, a relation of deformity to the
Precepts and Prohibitions, whereto it is contrary as a Rule of Obedience to the
Precept (if a sin of omission,) to the Prohibition (if of commission.) Guilt
a relation of conformity, to the Threatening whereto it is agreeable, as a rule
of Judgment: For it is agreeable to the Threatening that sin should deserve
death in all, bind over unto death in all out of Christ; Now Divines make that
desert of punishment the habitual, as this obligation unto it, the actual guilt
of sin. -- So much for Information. I come now to

2. Several sorts of Inference according to the several conditions of people
mentioned in the Doctrine. And

1. It calls for pity and Prayer for those whether Gentiles, or There being
none other name under Heaven given amongst men, whereby they must be saved,
neither is there salvation in any other, Act 4 12.

That if Gentiles, God would make Christ a Light, yet further to enlighten
them: That the people which sit in darkness, and see no light, may have this
great light shining unto them, that the fullness of the Gentiles may be so
brought in.

That if Jews, God that first persuaded Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Sem,
would now persuade Sem to dwell in the Tents of Japhet, that the Children of
Israel may return and seek the Lord their God, and David (the Son of David)
their King in these letter days; Look unto him, whom they have pierced, and
mourn, that his blood be no longer upon them, and their Children, only, in the
guilt of it; but for the pardoning of the guilt of that blood shed, and all
other their sins. This should we say for our Elder Sister, which has no
Breasts in the day she is to be spoken for; that the Scatterings of the Jews
may be recollected and grafted in again.

That whether Gentiles, or Jews, they may not have the Law, and Covenant of
Works Gods Rule of Judging of them, with a Judgment of condemnation, but the
Gospel, and Covenant of Grace, his Rule of judging them with the Judgment of
Absolution and Salvation.

It should speak terror to those amongst us that will not obey the
Gospel-Positive of Faith enjoined them, but will reject Christ in the Gospel
sufficiently proposed to them.

1. They shall be judged with the Infidel Heathen for transgressing the Law of
Works, written in their hearts, have the way to the Tree of Life armed against
them with a flaming Sword in the hand of an Angel waving this way, and that way.

2. Above these, with the unbeliving Jew for transgressing the Law written in
Tables; have that Law executed upon them with more of thunder, and lightning,
and blackness, and darkness, and tempest, than it was promulgate and published
with: For if so terrible were the promulgation, that Moses himself, who was out
of the reach and Gunshot of the curse of this Law, exceedingly feared, and
quaked, how much more dismal, and dreadful must be the execution of it upon
those souls that fall under it?

3. Above both these, with that wrath peculiar to them for rejecting Christ so
sufficiently, so much, and often, plainly, and powerfully proposed to, and
pressed upon them in the Preaching of the Gospel. Heb. 2.2, 3. -- 12.25. Wrath
so great, that to describe it, Peter is put to the like artifice, as the
Painter, who being to draw so mournful a face, as his Art could not reach to
the exact limning of, drew a shadow before it, giving leave to men's fancies to
help out, and supply, where his Art was defective, and came short: So the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.17. draws (as 'twere) the Curtain of this interogation, (What
shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?) before the hideous
and deformed face of hell, giving men leave to lose themselves (as himself
seems to be lost) in the consideration of the thick darkness of it. For as the
love of God, Ephesians. 3.19. so his wrath too, passes knowledge. As neither eye has
seen, nor ear heard, 4 Cor. 2.9.
neither have entered into the heart of man, the good things which God has
prepared for them that love him; None can conceive Heaven so heavenly, as
indeed they will find it, who shall be received into those glorious Mansions:
So neither has eye seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man the evil things, which God has prepared for those that do not love him,
and obey his Gospel: None can conceive Hell so hellish, as indeed they will
find it, when thrust into that utter darkness.

Now if the Lord should by this thunder clap please to awaken any among us out
of their carnal security, after Christ, and Faith, let them take this one
(since the time will give leave but for one) special Direction:

Let them attend upon a Gospel Ministry, be much in hearing and meditating upon
Gospel-Pomises; Such must not think to bring faith to, but suck it from a
Promise: The same Gospel-Promise that conveyes from God the nature of a Title
to Faith, conveyes also the grace of Faith unto men: That (says the Apostle,
Romans 10.8. is the Word of Faith, which we preach: not only as the object of
Faith about which it is conversant, or Precept of Faith by which it is
commanded, but also the Instrumental means of Faith by which it is conveyed.

3. And lastly, It speaks to those that by Gospel-Faith have

First, It speaks comfort to such: Your Faith though in relation to the Precept
as a rule of duty, a legally imperfect obedience, is in relation to the Promise
as a rule of Judgment, a Gospel perfect Title, your perfect Title to the
righteousness of Christ; your perfect Title to Heaven and Glory. There is no
condemnation to you being in him, Romans 8.1. Shall be none to you, believing on
him, Joh. 5.24. He had nothing of his own to be condemned for; nothing of his
own to be acquitted from; He was condemned to pay your debt, as your surety,
and therefore you cannot be condemned too. He was acquitted from it, being paid
as your Surety, and therefore you cannot but be acquitted ^oo. He appeared the
first time with your sin to h^s condemnation; He shall appear the second t^me
without your sin unto your salvat^on, Heb. 9 28. When he shall be revealed in
flaming fi^e taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus christ, He shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and to be admired in all you that Believe, 2 These. 1.8, 10. When others
trembling, and confounded shall hear, Depart ye cursed into ^verlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, according to the Threatening; you
rejoicing, and exceeding glad shall hear, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, according to
P^omise.

so Speak and so Do; but carry it, as if they had one Law for the Rule of their
obedience, and expected another for the Rule of Gods Judgment; nay, so divide
in their obedience, as if they had one Law to speak, and an other to do by, one
Rule of Talking, and anoth^r Rule of Wa^king, talk of the light of grace, but
walk below the light of nature; Speak according to the Gospel the Law of Faith,
but do after their own hearts lust. Do you so Speak, and so Do, and so think
you ought, So to Speak, and so to Do, as those that shall be Judged, etc. Think
not that Christ has redeemed you from the guilt of your sins, that ye should
wallow in the filth, and serve in the power of your sins: Think not that
those sins should be with you upon the Th^one, that were with Christ upon the
Cross; That those sins should be matter of carnal and sensual pleasure, and
satisfaction to you, that were of so much Soul-trouble and sorrow unto Jesus
Christ, when but imputed to him; when really inherent in your Souls. Think, ye
ought no longer study how to gratify, and how to satisfy, but how to
mortify, and how to crucify them. Think nothing less then the very death of
those sins ought to satisfy you, which nothing less would satisfy, and
satisfy for, than the precious death of the Lord Jesus Christ. Think, and know
that same God, by that same Law whereby he has required your faith, has
required your obedience, as fruit and evidence of your ^aith; that you should
justify that faith by your works, which justifies you without your works:
That being by f^i^h Heirs of the Kingdom, ye ought by obedience to walk as
Hei^s, and toward the Possession of it. Here are many can tell you ye must go
a right way to take Possession according to a right Title. So Speak ye, etc.
Walk every way worthy your freedom from the thr^atned Penalties, and your title
to the promised rewards of this Law.

I had prepar^d nothing for my Brethren of the Ministry, conceiving none would
have been present on this preparation day to the Sabbath; But seeing, beyond
expectation, the faces of so very many here, I shall by Gods assistance
adventure a word to them also.

If it be so, that the same Law of God is the rule of man's obedience and Gods
Judgment, Let Ministers preach it as such -- Some on the one hand, preach the
Law of God as the Rule of man's obedience, too little, and too much as the rule
of Gods Judgment. And even here some the promised rewards of it, the bliss, and
happiness of Heaven, and glory too much, and the threatened punishments of it
the misery, and wretchedness of death and hell too little: Others the
punishments threatened too much, and the rewards promised too little. Some on
the other hand preach the Law of God too little as the rule of Gods Judgment,
and too much as the rule of man's obedience: And here some Moral Precepts too
much, and Gospel-Positives too little, and thereupon hear legal Preachers;
Others moral-Precepts too little, and Gospel- Positives too much, and thereupon
hear Antinomian Preachers. Satan has two great designs afoot at this day; The
one to dash in pieces Moral-Precepts against Gospel-Positives, and this he is
carrying on by the An^inomian; The other to dash in pieces Gospel-Positives
against Moral-Precepts, and this he is carrying on by the Papist and Socinian.
The Ministers of the Gospel must set themselves to Counterwork Satan ^n both
these designs. And this shall we do if we preach the Law of God, as the Rule
of man's obed^ence and Gods judgment in their due measure, one as well as
another, and in their sweet agreement one with another, and especially if we
take heed to square our own lives accordingly. So to Speak, and so to do.

Special Application to the special Occasion:
Let it be so with the gods on Earth too: Let the same Law of man be the Rule
of men's Civil Obedience, and the Civil Magistrates Judgment. Let not men be
required obedience according to Law, and proceeded with in Judgment according
to will and pleasure, besides, and against Law. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Thou shall not
wrest Judgment. The word in the Original rendered wrest, is sometimes used in a
general sense for retching or stretching of a thing into another posture then
it was in. Josh 8* 26. Joshuah dr^w not his hand back (...) wherewith he
str^tched, or which he stretched out with the spear: And so it signifies not
only the wrenching or wresting of a straight thing to make it crooked, but of a
crooked thing also to make it straight. And this general sense has it is
special application to Judges respectively, whether of Law or Fact: Of Law
thus: Let them not in Judgment make the Law a Lesbian Rule, wrest, or crook the
straight Rule of the Law, to give countenance to crooked, or discountenance to
straight matters of Fact; For this would be their wresting of Judgment,
wresting of the Law their Rule of Judgment. For Judges of Fact thus: Let not
them strengthen crooked matters of Fact to receive countenance, or crook
straight matters of Fact to receive discountenance from the straight Rul^ of
the Law: For this is their wresting of Judgment.

Sometimes the Word is taken in special sense, for bending or bowing of
straight thing to make it crooked, as Genesis 49.15. (...) He bowed his shoulder.
And more especially, Ezekiel. 7.10 where (...) a word of the same Original rendered
by our Translators, The Rod: Schyndler renders Inclinans, and interprets
Detorquens, perve^tens Rectum, the wrester or perverter of that which is right
flourished; An interpretation much countenanced by that which follows, Ver. 11.
Violence is risen up (...) into a rod of wickedness. And in this special sense
has its general application to Judges both of Law and Fact: Let neither the
one, nor the other, call evil good, or good evil, a distorted or crooked,
straight, or straight crooked: For that is no less a crooked Judgment, that
judges crooked straight, than that which ju^geth straight crooked: because no
less contrary to the Law the right Rule, which as it discovers straight or
crooked, right or wrong matter of Fact as a Rule of obedience, so as a Rule of
Judgment it discovers straigh^ or crooked, right or wrong Judgment. For, Rectum
est in^ex sui and o^liqui.

Nor is their Judgment thus wrested only, if they judge straight crooked, or
crooked straight, but also (though in less measure) if they judge straight less
straight; or crooked less crooked then evidence of Law, and fact discover it to
be. This being contrary to the Law as the Rule of Judgment for measure and
degree, as the other for nature and kinds: And therefore it follows Verse. 20.
That which is altogether Just shall thou Do. In the Original Justice, Justice:
(...)
Justice for measure and degree, as well as kind and nature.

For MOTIVES to this DVTY.
Consider Motiv.


1. Your Office -- A Judge is to be the Soul of the Law; and Romans, Jus
Animatum, animated Right, and among the Grecians, (...) Living Law. Gods own
Law, is but a dead Rule without Gods enlivening of it: Much more are men's Laws,
without these earthly Gods quickening of them. Some talk much of one other Law
to be made for execution of all the rest. But who then shall look to the
execution of that? Execution is indeed the life of the Law, but the Judge must
be the soul to impart it; and that according to the mind of the L^w, otherwise
he does not execute Law, but Lust, not quicken, but kill it, is the Executioner
of the Law, as the Hangman of the Thief. Good Laws are the foundations of a
Nation, as many interpret those places, Psalm. 11.3. -- 82* 5. Good Judges are
the Corner-stones in those foundations, as most interpret that place Zech.
10.4. Now the Cornerstone does not undermine and weaken, but stablish and
strengthen the foundation; does not as those corrupt Judges, Psalm. 82. Put
these foundations out of, but into course, keeps them upon their legs, and
makes them run also: Currat Lex.

Your Dialect. You style your Orders of Court-Rules: I suppose not only nor so
much because Regulae Regulantes, Rules ruling of men, as because Regulae
Regulatae, Rules ruled by Law; as in the like Phraseology you call judged Cases
Ruled Cases; one would think in imitation of God, who styles his Laws
Judgments, because Rules of his Judgment. Now remember the Text: So Speak Ye,
and so Do. Let your Deeds answer your Dialect.

What God has done for our Laws. Men have thrust sore at them that they might
fall, but God has holden them up, made them know a Protector in more senses
than one, own His Highness not only a Protector of the People, but of
themselves, the Laws too. A Protector of the People of the Land, according to
the Laws of the Land. God has by Him delivered them from a storm, a very
Whirle wind of giddy men. Let not our Judges suffer them to lay becalmed, and
wind-bound for want of Due Execution.

The fourth and fifth Motive I shall off^r out of Act. 23.3. God shall smite
thee thou whited wall: For sit thou to judge me after the Law, and
command me to be smitten contrary to the Law?

It Is arch-hypocrisie to do otherwise. -- Thou whited-wall, etc. The
Periphrasis and Circumlocution of an Hypocrite, as you will see, if you compare
it with the like Expressions, Ezekiel 13.10. Mat. 23.37. And Seneca, as if he had
commented upon the words; Miseri sunt, Sordidi, Turpes, and ad Similitudi^em
Parietum suorum extrinsecus culti. As to pretend to carry all in Sacred
affairs according to the Law of God, and do the contrary is Church-hypocrisie;
so to pretend to carry all in civil affairs according to the Law of the Land,
and do the contrary is State-hypocrisie; Hypocrisy toward the Law, like that
of Judas toward Christ Kissing and crucifying together: For as Execution is
the Life, so non-execution the Death; Contrary-execution the most shameful,
and reproachful death of the Law, even the crucifying of it.

5. God will require a severe acoount of it. God shall smite His Law, that judge
others contrary to their Rule of Judgment, the Law of the Land: And that more
severely then the open professed Tyrants of the world, that carry all according
to their own will and Pleasure, and pretend no other. For as in
Church-hypocrites, their dissembled Sanctity is double sin: So in such
State-hypocrites, their dissembled Justice is doubled injustice, against both
men and Laws, and shall accordingly be dealt with by God, Job. 36.13. The
Hypocrites in heart (of what kind soever) Heap up wrath. Those that corrupt
wholesome Laws into poison, turn judgment and righteousness into Worme-wood,
Gall, and Hemlock, Amos 5 7. -- 6 12. The Lord will feed them with worme-wood,
and give them water of gall to drink, Jer. 9 15. So speak ye therefore, and so
do in your Judgment, as those that shall be judged by the Perfect Law of
Liberty.

6. And lastly, If Judges do not according to the Law as: Partly because of
their example, as ill humors fall down from the head, and corrupt the body. No
wonder if people think they may be as bold with their part of the Law, as
Rulers are with theirs: If these call wrong right, and right wrong, they even
teach these to call evil good, and good evil, Vice Virtue, and Virtue Vice.
Qualis Praetor, was one of the three P^ whereby Charles the Fifth would judge,
Qualis Res Publica: And partly because in Law Promises of Rewards, and threats
of Penalties the rule of Judgment are Mound and Fence to Precepts of duty, and
Prohibitions of sins the Rule of obedience, and if those be thrown down, no
marvel if these be trampled and trod under foot. Some few (may be) will do
well, Virtutis amore, though Virtue be not rewarded, nay though it be punished
and Vice rewarded: But very few, none in comparison, Mic. 7.1, 2, 3.

DIRECTIONS:
Directions.
If Judges would now exactly observe the Law as their Rule of Judgment,

Let THEM
Be well Skilled in the Laws. Psalm. 2.10 Be Inst^ucted or Learned, Ye Judges of
the Earth. The great Judge of Heaven and Earth, is without study and Learning
exactly Skilled in his Law, for observance of it as his Rule of Judgment. That
the Judges of the Earth may observe the Law of the Land as their Rule of
Judgment, they must by instruction and study be Learned in it. And therefore
Austin says, Ignorantia Judicis ^st Calamitas Innocentis. A private man's
ignorance is his Private blemish and mischief, but a Judges ignorance, a
Public Calamity. An Artificer cannot work by a Rule, nor a Pilot sail by a
compass, he does not understand: no more can a Judge proceed in Judicature
according to a Law he is not Skilled in. Besides, How will a cunning Lawyer work
upon such an advantage? What false glosses will he put upon Truth of Law? What a
mist of subtilty will he cast before the eyes of an Ignorant though otherwise
well-meaning Judge? So that if he that with Job, Job 29.15. Should be Eyes to
the Blind, be himself Blind also, they are both like to fall into the Ditch.

2. Use able and diligent Disquisition of the Cause. Deuteronomy. Both the men between
whom the controversy is shall stand before the Lord; And the Judges shall make
diligent inquisition. Judges must know the Cause, as well as the L^w before
they can judge the Cause according to Law. For this cause were Counselors and
(as some say) Judges of Old called Cognitores, knowers (as Prophets) Videntes,
Seers, 2 Chronicles. 33.18. And Seneca in his Tragedes bids Si judicas cognosce:
Before you judge, know what ye judge. Truth in these Cases, whether Civil or
Criminal (as in natural inquiries) In Alto latet involuta, lies often deep and
dark and requires skill and pains to boy it up, and bring it to light:
insomuch that the wisest Judges, and some are excellent Crafts-Masters at it,
as we need not go far for a President, are sometimes put to use every clew
they have to wind themselves out of a Labyrinth of subtilty -- perplexed
iniquity. Put Questions, poize Testimonies, weigh Reasons, compare Evidenc^s,
consider Circumstances and the like: In such a case 'twas, that Judge Job says,
Job. 29 16. The Cause he knew not, he searched out. The cause he knew not at
first sight, he searched into it till he searched it out: and so must all that
will judge of a Cause according to Law.

3. Make a right application of the Fact to the Law, or This holds as in foro
interiori, in the private judgment of conscience, so in Foro exteriori, in the
Public Judgment of authority too. An Artificer that understands both his Rule
and his Work, may work wrong by a right Rule if he make not a right application
of his Rule to his work. So a Judge who is never so well acquainted with the Law
the Rule of Judgment, and with the cause too, the matter to be judged, may yet
err in Judgment, if he make not a due application of the Rule of Law to the
matter of Fact; as David says those his Judges did, Psalm. 58.2. It Is to be
supposed they knew both the Law and his Actions well enough: for he charge
them not with ignorance of either, and they seem to make application of the
known Law to his known actions; for he sets them forth with the Emblems of
Justice; Scales in their hands, and the application, and use of these Scales
too: for he says they Weighed, but not Right. They weighed violence, or wrong
in their hands else they could never have burdened his just Actions with the
censure of Rebellion, and Treason.

Beware of Partiality: Make your Law as God his a Law of Liberty, and judge
according to Yours, as God to his, freely and without respect of Persons,
Levit. 19.15. Thou shall not Respect the Person of the Poor, nor Honor the
Person of the Mighty, and this, that thou do no Unrighteousness in Judgment.
Private persons and public persons, out of the Public case of Judicature may
and ought respect Persons, according to their Ranks and conditions, Whence
their days cannot be expected to be long in the Land.
Ver. 32 of that Chap. And the Quakers (who reject the fifth, as the Papist the
second commandment out of the dialogue) may as soon prove Poor out of the case
of judicature, not to be Respected with the Respect of Pity and Charity, as
others not with Civil Honor and Regard according to their respective Ranks and
Conditions. But in the case of judicature there is not any Respect to be had to
any Person upon any foreign or by Consideration of Rich, or Poor, High, or Low,
Small, or Great, Mean, or Mighty, nor indeed Godly, or Ungodly; But only
according to the intrinsecall Merits of the Cause, and that least there be
unrighteousnes in judgment; Persons regarded more then Laws. As an artificer
that Staring and gazing on the Persons he works for, when his eye should be
upon his Rule, and Work is like to fault in his Work; So a Judge that is Partial
in his Respect to the Persons to be judged is in the ready way to err in
Judgment, and be Partial in the Law: Mat. 2.9. Where the Margin renders, Ye
have accepted Faces, or Persons, the Text reads Ye have been Partial in the
Law. (...).

Beware of gifts. Qui accipit Beneficium v^ndit Libertatem. He that receives a
gift sels his liberty. Seneca makes it a general Rule. It has (if any where)
its special truth and force in our Case. The judge that receives a gift sels
his own liberty, and the Laws together; The liberty of his eyes to see, and the
liberty of his tongue to Sentence according to the Liberty of the Law. Deuteronomy.
16.19. A gift does blind the eyes of the Wise, and Pervert the Words of the
Righteous Though otherwise a wise Judge, 'twill so blind his eyes, as to
disenable him look either into Rule or Cause; And though otherwise a righteous
Judge, so pervert his words, as to disenable him pass Sentence accordingly, if
he could look into them. But though his private Personal Judgment were
according to Rule, his Public Authoritative Sentence would be against it.

6. Take heed of passion; that they neither bring their Heates Heat themselves
on the Bench. Gifts will make a wise Judge blind; Anger will make him Mad, Ira
furor bre^is est. Now a Mad man is little less like to walk according to rule
then a blind; Prove. 14.17. He that is soon angry deals foolishly: That
therefore of mine Apostle, Chap. 1. Verse. ^9. is good counsel hereto; Be swift
to Hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: and for good reason to our purpose,
Verse. 20. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. The Judge
that is (as Joseph says Herod was) Irae servus, slave to his anger, will be
(as he says Herod was) Legis Dominus Lord of the Law; and a Tyrannical Lord
too; Rule it, not be ruled by it.

7. And lastly, and above all the rest, Get hearts cast into the This will make
the gods on the Earth be and do like the God of Heaven: because like his Law
that is so like him as coming out of his mouth. Greatness and goodness cannot be
severed in God; They may be, and too often are in men. But when they are not
only Psalm. 82.6. Children of the most high bearing the Image of his Power and
Authority, but of the most Holy too, bearing the Image of his Purity and
Holiness, they will then be sure in their measures to act like the most High
and Holy One; more especially get hearts awed with the fear, and affected with
the love of the Law of God, those two qualifications of Jethro's Judges, Exodus
18.21. He that fears God will fear, if ignorant of the Laws to fill up a
place he does not suffice for; and if skilled in them, he will make diligent
inquisition into the fact, a right application of the Rule to it, beware of
partiality, gifts, and passion. Therefore is this Jehoshaphats first direction
to his Judges 2 Ch^on. 19.7. Let the fear of the Lord be upon you. And the
unjust Judge his not regarding men (what he did to them) had the want of the
fear of God at the bottom of it, Luke 18.2. And for love of the Law of God, it
will first hold men's hearts close to the Law of God, and then to the Law of the
Land, so far as according to the Law of God: And further, I neither exhort,
nor direct.

To the JURORS, who have here for some years past been recovering in their
credit; That they may do so still, one word more than what has been said to
them: Do not any one of you Exodus 23.2. follow a multitude, much less a
multitude of you follow some one crafty companion to do evil; Least of all lead
in it. So speak Ye, and especially so swear, and do as they that shall be
judged.

To the Council Learned in the Law.
If I understand your work, it is only so to open, and argue your Clyents Cause,
that Judges both of Law and Fact may be able to make out a right Judgment of
it. Speak not ye in a Cause to pervert Judgment, Exo. 23.2. Go not about to get
the Opinion of good Lawyers by corrupting good Laws: Consider, you plead not
only before earthly Gods, and those wise as an Angel of God, but before the God
of Heaven too, who is with them in the Judgment. Dare not be unrighteous
Advocates for any Clyent before him on earth, before whom you need a righteous
Advocate in Heaven, less able to plead your own cause there, than the simplest
of your Clyents his here. So speak ye, and so do, that the storm fall not yet
upon the Lawyers, that is now off from the Laws.

To the Witnesses.
Do not you Exodus 23.1. raise a false report; or if raised by others, do not
bear it in false witness, to prevent or pervert Right Judgment. Jesus Christ
the faithful and true Witness, will be now Witness, and hereafter judge of your
fals-witness, and make you true Witnesses against your selves, who are
fals-witnesses for, or against others.

So Speak Ye, and all others not spoken to, and so Do, at this Assize, as they
that at the general Assize shall be judged by the Law of Liberty.

Errata.
PAge 4. l. 13. r. according to. ib. 21. r. better clearing. p. 5. l. 26. r. i^
the p 6. l. 30. r. our God. ib. l. 32. r. manner or. p. 8. l. 23. r. never
v^uchsafed. p. 19. l. 3. r. matter of. p. 21. l. 3. for (...)

FINIS.

