THE TEMPLE REBUILT. A DISCOURSE On Zachary 6.13. Preached at a GENERAL
MEETING of the ASSOCIATED MINISTERS Of the County of Cumberland at Keswick, May
19. By RICHARD GILPIN, Pastor of the Church at Graistock in Cumberland.

Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts, Zach.
4. v. 6. LONDON, Printed by E. T. for Luke Fawn, at the Parrat in
Pauls-Church-yard, and are to be sold by Richard Scott, Bookseller in Carlisle.
1658.

We the Associate Ministers of the County of Cumberland, do earnestly desire
our Reverend Brother, Mr. Richard Gilpin, to Print his Acceptable Sermon,
Preached this day at our General Meeting,

Keswick in Cumberland. May 20. 1658. Signed by TIMOTHY TVLLIE Moderator Pro
Temp. JOHN IACKSON, Scribe.

To my Reverend, Peaceable and dearly Beloved Brethren, THE ASSOCIATED
MINISTERS of the County of CUMBERLAND.
Reverend Brethren,
WHat your Commands have wrested from me (for of that force and prevalency with
me are your desires) I new lay it at your feet. If I could have prevailed with
you to have altered your vote, or (after you had passed it) durst have
resisted; this had gone no further then your own hearing. But when you would
not be persuaded, I endeavored to conform my self to those Christians in Act.
21.14. and took up with that which put a stop to their entreaties, The will of
the Lord be done, remembering that speech of Antoninus Pius to his Council,
Aequius est, ut ego tot talium amicorum consilium sequar, quam, ut tot tales
amici meam unius sequantur voluntatem.

Well! you have saved me the labor of an Apology, and, having adopted this
issue for your own, you must expect not only to bear a share with me in the
censures which may be occasioned by its deformity; but must wholly by your
selves bear all the blame of troubling the world with it: and if it should be
raised (above its own deserts) to be of any use in the Church by the hand of
him who works mightily (sometimes) by unlikely means (though I cannot
discover within kenning any ground for such an expectation, but this, That it
was the resolute, solemn entreaty and order of such, and so serious a company:)
yet, if it should be thus blessed, I am willing (for my part) that, next to
God, the thanks be wholly yours.

Among the many favors which God has bestowed upon us, and the County where
we live; this is none of the least, That God has poured upon us some measure
of his Spirit of peace, and has blessed us thus far in it; the blessed fruits
of concord which we have already tasted (if we should never see more) together
with the sweetness of the testimony of Conscience (thus far acquitting us from
the guilt of Church-murther) are a sufficient recompense for all the trouble it
has given us. Great are the advantages that we and our people have from hence;
united Counsels promise more safety, and justly challenge a greater respect and
reverence to our proceedings: our joint concurrence in what we practice puts us
in a better posture of mutual communication of gifts, graces, strength and
assistance (stones in conjunction as in an arch, will support one another and
bear up the weight of the whole Fabric, which, being divided and scattered,
they cannot do) besides, it may do much to cure that itch after novelties, that
intemperancy of roaving, doubting and skepticism in Christians about
Government, when they see their leaders unanimous, and not so wedded to their
opinions as to undo the Church for Punctilios; and that which is more, while
others are toiling in the sweat and dust of disputations, and as fruitlesly
wearing themselves as the Grammarians in Erasmus about finding out the meaning
of Anticomarita; we have happily gained an opportunity of pressing and
practicing the great things of Gods Law. Disputings often drown the voice of
truth by their noise and clamor, they prodigally lavish out the spirits and
affections of men on smaller matters which should be reserved for higher
objects; and, though they have their fruits, yet are they like trees growing
upon a rocky precipice, where the fruit cannot be gathered by all, and not by
any without difficulty and hazard.

Brethren, Tou have put your hands to this work, 2 John 8.
Now look to your selves, that you loose not those things which ye have
wrought, but that ye receive a full reward; do not think (now that the work is
upon the wheels) that you may slacken your diligence, or abate any thing of
your watchfulness against temptations, or of the jealousies and suspicions over
your own hearts. There is yet much to do, and if there were not; Virum
oporteret jam metae vicinum cursum remittere? An magis intendere?
yet (as Diogenes answered the man that persuaded him to give over study,
because he was grown old) the nearer you come to the mark you should put forth
more strength, and run the faster. Dream not of ease in an employment of this
nature, God, Angels and men have their eyes upon you to see how you will bestir
your selves; it is your duty and not a matter of unnecessary courtesy, which
you may give or hold back at your pleasure: 1 Timothy 4.15.
he that has commanded you (...) to give your selves up wholly to these
things; will not take himself to be beholden to you when you have done your
best: neither is it any disparagement to you to become even servants to any; so
that you may but gain them, and forward Christ's work; they that think it below
them to trouble themselves so much with Catechizing, reproof, admonition, etc.
are of Prolemaeus his mind, who changed the title of Heraclides his book from
(...), to (...); as if laboriousness were nothing but an Ass-like dullness,
making a man crouch under every burden; but God having made the ox which
treads out the corn to be the Hieroglyphick of your employment; he does thereby
teach you that labor and patience are so far from being a disgrace to you,
that they are necessary qualifications for the calling of the Ministry.

Opposition, (I suppose) you all expect, and partly find already, can any man
think otherwise but that they who are like bullocks, unaccustomed to the yoke
will struggle? is it a wonder if they think all bonds to be fetters? every
restraint to be cruelty, and the dressing of their wounds (though in order to
their cure and Salvation) to be unsufferable tyranny? but what then! is the
work ever the worse for that? has not God called you out to oppose the
Carnal interests and desires of men? the Critic before mentioned (when he
thrust into the theater against the throng of people coming out; (being asked
the reason, gives this account of it, hoc in omni vita facere studio: He
thought it was the perfection of Philosophy to go contrary to the Generality of
men, and the likeliest way to find out Virtue; and Plato, showing himself
courteous to all, was thus censured, quid illi tribuendum est, qui tot annos in
philosophia versatus, nullum hactenus dolor affecit; you know how to apply it,
what a shame would it be that we who have better instructions, greater
obligations, and sure promises of help should give off with the excuse of the
sluggard? Oh there is a Lion in the way! let us not fear, difficulties there
will be, but they are only or mostly difficulties to the fearful and
unbelieving, which do their work negligently and by halves; be courageous and
faithful, and God will make the rough ways plain before you.

As for the design of peace it self, though it may be secretly maligned and
whispered against, yet I do not expect to see any so hardy as to take up Arms
against it publicly; it has such a glory and majesty in it as will keep off
such attempts; except peradventure some man's ignorant zeal or vainglory put
him upon, seeking a name, (as he did who burnt Diana's Temple) by blemishing
something of more then ordinary worth. I perceive by Mr. Firmius late book of
Scisme, etc. that some upon their own misunderstanding have privately excepted
against the first rule in our book of association, p. 3. Wherein we say, That
in the exercise of Discipline it is not only the most safe course, but also
most conducing to brotherly union and satisfaction, that particular Churches
carry on as much of their work with joint and mutual assistance, as they can
with convenience and edification, and as little as may be in their actings, to
stand distinctly by themselves, and apart from each other: he indeed has
answered for us (and for the kindness, I shall take the boldness to return
him thanks in your names,) and has hit our sense right enough; the truth is,
the thing is so plain, that I wonder any body (let his prejudice be as strong
as it may be) should miss it: he might have seen that we intend not to cut off
the liberty of particular Congregations by the middle, by that Principle. 1.
The words convenience and edification, would have told them as much; they stand
not there for Ciphers. 2. The whole book (if he had diligently considered it,)
would have taken that exception off; for what we build upon that bottom is
there expressed: now, what article or line can be find which may bear that
charge? 3. Our Practice speaks for us, let him or others enquire, and then
accuse if they have cause; but I see men speak in their have: it is now so common
for men to write against books before they understand them; that this fault may
well be pardoned by the courtesy of England. Pardon this prolixity and
plainness, and go on yet to be more diligent and peaceful. Warn the unruly,
support the weak, be patient toward all men; be ensamples to the flock. And,
when the chief Sepherd shall appear, you shall receive a Crown of Glory that
fades not away.

Graistock, Aug. 1. 1658. Your unworthy fellow servants RICHARD GILPIN.

ZACH. 6 13. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a Priest upon
his Throne, and the Counsel of peace shall be between them both.


I Have read to you a very glorious Promise concerning the reparation of Gods
Temple, and (me thinks) it contains a Cordial abundantly sufficient to quell
those fears about the state of the Church: wherewith the mourners of Sion have
obstructed their spirits, and distressed their hearts.

This Prophet is full of Prophetical visions: God raised him up with Haggai,
(who began to Prophecy but two months before him, as appears by the date of
their Prophesies) for the strengthening of the hands of the people in building
the house of the Lord. Their discouragements were many; Darius his Decree and
Commission for the work was not yet come forth, as appears from Ezra, Chap. 5,
and 6. Cyrus indeed had given Commandment before to build the house of the
Lord, Ezra. 1.2. But, upon the misinformation of the adversaries of Judah, who
had hired Counselors against them to frustrate their purpose, the work
cease; Ezra 4.24. and that for a long time; it is the pleasure of Artaxerxes
Ahasuerus, (for some suppose that these two names design but one person,
Artaxerxes being a common name to the Kings of Persia) he has weighty reasons
of state for it, he fears (and his Counselors suggest) that, if the Church
and Religion flourish, it may indammage the King; by incroaching upon his
rights, by occasioning tumults and divisions, or, by hightning the spirits of
his Subjects to insoleney and stubbornness. These have been still the secret
jealousies, and open outcries too, some times, of Statesmen and others,
against reformation and the Government of the Church; this has commonly made
them fearful of entrusting the Church with any Power, which they themselves
might not hold the reins of: instances hereof are frequent in history.

Besides this hinderance from their enemies, their own brethren weaken their
hands; some are backward, and think they must wait till another time; they say
the time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built; Hag. 1, 2.
Others weep at the laying of the foundation, and think it contemptible in
comparison of the former building that was destroyed; Ezr. 3.12. Hag. 2.3. Thus
(as is usual in all reformations) they oppose their own happiness; some from a
timorous, dastardly sloathfulness; others, from prejudice, emulation, and
crossenesse of nature.

Yet, that Gods intended work might not fall to the ground, he is pleased to
provide extraordinary encouragements for them, by these two Propets, Haggai,
and Zachary: where (amongst other things) the people are assured from God of
his presence with them; of the destruction of their enemies; of the certain
prospering and finishing of their work; of his special assistance in, and
acceptance of, their services: he foretells them the birth, offices, and
sufferings of Christ; the destruction of the Jews by the Romans; their calling
again and repentance; and, generally, from the Temple which they were building,
and the glory of it; he takes occasion to Prophecy of the beauty of that
spiritual house, the Church of God, in the times of the New Testament.

This Text which I am now upon, by the general consent of Interpreters, relates
to the time after the coming of Christ in the flesh: the Analysis of the
context is plain and obvious, wherein the Prophet presents:

1. The Type, that was Joshua the High Priest crowned, ver. 11. He was a great
instrument in this work; God resolves to put a glory upon the instruments of
his service: he will put his own Crown upon their head, and cloth them with
his own garments of praise, and make their very adversaries to proclaim before
them, Lo, thus shall it be done to the man whom the King will honor.

2. The thing typified, ver. 12. which is the honor and dignity of Jesus
Christ, in building and governing the New-Testament-Church; though God in the
type intended a special respect to Joshua, for his forwardness and zeal in
repairing the Temple; yet, he immediately calls off their thoughts from Joshua,
to fix them upon the Man whose name is the Branch; that they might contemplate
the greater work of him that was to come, and his greater praise.

That by that phrase [The Man whose Name is the Branch] both in this place, and
also Chap. 3.8. Christ is to be understood, is evident enough; I might fetch a
proof of it from the Critics; (...) Tsemach, which is the word here used for
Branch, is Synonimus, of the same signification with (...) Netzer, (for they
are promiscuously rendered by the LXX, (...).) Now (as Junius observes) Netzer
is but twice found among the Prophets (haebraice, scilicet, loquentes, non
Caldaisantes,) and, in both places referred to Christ: so, these two names
seem to be peculiarly appropriated to him: that Rod out of the stem of Jess,
and the branch out of his root, in Esa. 11.1. Cannot be applied to any but
Christ, as the following verses declare; I might add further strength to this
from the usual interpretation of Mat. 2. ult. That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophets: He shall be called a Nazarene; This is generally
concluded that his dwelling at Nazareth was providentiall, that the place might
give the rise, and occasion to that name of Nazarene, which was given to Christ
long before in the Old Testament upon another account. The place (as Spanhemius
observes) is difficult and very obnoxious to the cavills of the Jews; Dub.
Evan. par. 2. Dub. 87.
and the pinch of the question lies here, Where is Christ called a Nazarene in
the Prophets? it is answered (both by Papists, as Salmero, Maldonate, Jansenius,
etc. and Protestants, as Tremelius, Pareus, Piscator, Causabon, Junius, English
Annotations, etc.) That he is so called in those places of Esaias and Zachariah,
where he is termed, Netzer, and Tsemach, a Branch; others indeed (as Bucer,
Calvin, Chemnitius, Perkins, etc.) though they keep to the same ground of
exposition with the former, yet, they dissent from them in answering the
Question, and do rather think that Mat. 2. ult. refers to those places where
Christ is either expressly called (...) nazir, nazaraens, separatus, one
separated or set apart to God (as in Dan. 9.24. where Christ is called the most
Holy) or typified by those that were called Nazaraei, or separeted (as Joseph,
Genesis 49.26. Who was a Type of Christ, and there said to be separated from his
brethren, and Sampson Judge. 13.5.) This answer avoids many objections wherewith
the other interpretation is encumbered; How Osiander unties the knot, or how
some of the Papists cut it; I shall not trouble you: it is enough to our purpose
to know, that however they differ about the exposition of Matthew, yet, all
agree that the term, [the Branch] undoubtedly belongs to Christ in this place.

In the Text the Prophet lays open four things.

1. He foretells the great work of Christ, he shall build the Temple of the
Lord.

2. The glory of that employment, and his interest in it; the building shall be
magnificent and beautiful, the beholders shall with shoutings cry grace, grace
unto it, and whatever the instruments are, or have done, Christ shall bear away
the Glory; it is a praise like that of Esa. 22.24. where it is said of Eliakim,
they shall hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house; Christ shall not
only be the great standard bearer to display the Churches glory, and the nail
to support and bear the weight of it: but he also shall have all the honor
ascribed to him: his servants shall so heap their praises upon him, that the
glory of the instruments shall be eclipsed, and seem nothing in comparison.

3. He explains the manner of this undertaking, the way that Christ will take,
and the means he will use for the building of his Temple, which shall be 1. By
reducing his people under government and rule, by making them stoop to his
Scepter: He shall sit and rule. 2. By the Administration of Ordinances: He
shall be a Priest. 3. By the Exaltation of both, when they have power and
efficacy in them, when discipline and Ordinances are the Throne.

I am not ignorant that others go another way in the Expofition of this place,
understanding by it the Kingly and Priestly Offices of Christ: neither do I
exclude them from this work of Temple-reparation: for it cannot be denied but
that the Government and Ordinances of the Church do proceed from the Offices of
Christ; yet cannot I think that this Text intends only a declaration of the
offices that Christ must have and execute for the Salvation of sinners, for 1.
The Prophetic Office is not mentioned in the Text, and then it would seem to
be less useful, this will have some harshnesse in it, notwithstanding that
plea come in to allay it, That it is included in the other two Offices, the
Text is very punctual, it shall be between them both. 2. This would restrain
the Text to the days wherein Christ was in the flesh; for, granting it to be
understood of offices, none will say, that the Text speaks of conferring new
Offices on Christ, which he had not, or exercised not before; and then must
they expound it of the more remarkable execution of those offices, in teaching
miracles, and suffering, whilst Christ was on earth; and this seems not a
little inconvenient, if the context be well weighed. Now if any will extend it
beyond the death of Christ, then they come to what I have asserted. 3. The Text
speaks not of constituting a Church: but of restoration and re-establishment.
4. This blessing of Christ's building, etc. is promised conditionally, v. 15. It
shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord; and the
time of its accomplishment feems to be stated, viz. The Gentiles shall combine
with the Jews in building, they that are afar off shall come and build in the
Temple. v. 15. This place then (as it seems to me) does not well suit with that
interpretation.

4. The Prophet explains what is the glorious accomplishment of that structure,
to wit Peace, issuing from the throne, the vigorous administration of
Government and Ordinances: those that do jointly interpret, as before, do here
differ; Junius thus explains it, He shall declare the counsel and glad tidings
of the Gospel of peace to both those that are near, and those that are afar
off; Both to Jews and Gentiles. Diodate, and English Annotations, etc. thus,
These two Offices of Justice and mercy shall agree and be at peace betwixt
themselves; thus also Ribera, Summus consensus erit inter illos duos.

But (supposing that to be truth, which I laid down before) this is the
meaning, The Churches peace (which is the very end, the glory and finishing of
Christ's design) shall be brought about and established by the power of
Government and Ordinances, it shall proceed from between them both.

For the avoiding of further trouble, I shall gather the Doct.
sum of the words into this one Doctrine.

Christ (when he arises to build his Church) will so establish the peace
thereof, by the power of Government and Ordinances, that the honor of that
glorious work shall be chiefly his.

Before I come to the application I shall explain these four particulars in the
Doctrine.

1. That Christ will certainly repair the desolations of his Church. 2. That
this work, when ever it is done, will be a glorious work. 3. That whoever be
the agents, the honor will be chiefly Christ's. 4. That this work shall then be
done, when peace shall possess the Church, by the power of Government and
Ordinances.
1. First Branch of the Doctrine.
That Christ will certainly repair the desolations of his Church; It is a known
truth that the Church cannot totally fail; though the bush may be in the fire,
and some of the outmost branches here and there may possibly be scorched and
consumed; yet, it cannot be wholly raked up in ashes, The gates of hell shall
not prevail against it, says Christ, in that famous place of Matthew. 16.18.
Where, whatever the contest be amongst interpreters; Vid. Godwin Moses and
Aaron, lib. 5 p. 211
this conclusion is beyond all dispute, That the Magazine and councel-boord of
hell (I suppose I need not insist upon the known allusion; in the word Gates to
the customs of the Jews) shall never be able wholly to destroy and overturn the
Church.

This is also an article of the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church, not
that we are hereby engaged to believe, as the Church believes by an implicit
Faith; (...), etc.
it is not, I believe in the Church, but, I believe the Church to be Catholic,
temporum, personarum, and locorum ratione, in respect of time, persons and
place. viz. Asted. Theol. Cate. p. 352.
I believe that there always was, is, and shall be a Church upon earth, etc.

I might from hence prove the certain recovery of the Church from outward and
inward spiritual desolations; but I shall wave this, and yet evidence this
truth from these particulars.

engaged for his Churches rebuilding, and he cannot go back; so that we find
these very engagements do work upon him, when other things will not move him;
this is much insisted upon by God, Ezekiel. 20.9, 14, 22. he lays it down as the
great motive that turned the scales even when he was upon the point of
destroying Israel in Egypt, and in the Wilderness for their rebellions. I said
I will pour out my fury upon them, but I wrought for my Names sake, etc. The
earnestness of the expressions and the repetitions of them, show that God would
have them take notice, that this was the very thing that stood betwixt them,
and ruin; He is more plain in Eze. 36.22. I do not this for your sakes O house
of Israel, but for my holy Names sake, Joshua knew the weight of this, when he
made it the main argument of his prayer for the people: And what will thou do
for thy great name, Josh. 7.9. Samuel also had encouragement for them upon the
same ground, 1 Samuel 12.22. The Lord will not forsake his people for his great
Names sake. And no wonder if we consider what these engagements are; it is a
six-fold cord. He is engaged:

1. 6. Engagements on God for repairing the Church.
By his Covenant and Oath, he has lifted up his hand to Heaven and sworn, his
truth and faithfulness lies at the stake; when then we have these two immutable
things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we cannot want consolation and
assurance of this thing. Gods Promise and Oath make the thing promised to
become Dominus ipse fecit se debitorem, non accipiendo, sed promittendo. Aug.
confess. lib. 1. cap 4.
debt, though not so much to us, as to Non creaturae sed sibi ipsi, Daven. Jus.
habit. and actual. p. 640.
himself; and the non-payment of this debt is altogether inconsistent with the
divine nature. We can then humbly challenge it upon the score of justice and
righteousness, and God himself has put this plea into our mouths; when he
tells us that we obtain our faith and eternal life ( called therefore a crown
of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.) from his righteousness and justice in fulfilling
promises, 2 Pet. 1.1. We read indeed that God does dispense sometime with his
precepts, but not with absolute, nor yet with conditional promises (if the
conditions be performed;) and indeed he cannot, except he should cease to be
God, viz. Holy, Just and True, etc. Hence the Schoolmen conclude, that such
precepts are Praetepta indispensabilia sunt quae versantur circa (...) habentes
emanantem ex imagine Dei.
indispensable (as well as promises) whose objects are things that have an
intrinsecal goodness in them flowing from the Image of God, because if he
should dispense with these he should deny his own Image and himself, which is
impossible; if oaths are such sacred obligations in the very Hinc (...). Apud
Suidam.
Judgment of the Heathens, that they thought God a special observer and an
avenger of their violation; can it be thought that God should forget, or not
perform what his own lips have attered! Quid est Dei very veracisque juratio,
nisi promissi confirmario, and infidelium quaedam increpatio? Aug. civit. Dei
lib. 16. cap. 32
His oath is enough to establish our cou^^^^ence, and to check our unbelief.

2. By the special interest which he has in his Church, as Creator of all
things, all the world is his, but his own people are his, by a more peculiar
title; the wicked belong to him as the lumber of his house, as the wastes of
his demain, as his vessels of dishonor: his Church is his, not as a man's goods
are his, 2 Timothy 2.20.
but as a man's wife, or child is his. He calls it his sealed fountain, His
enclosed garden, Cant. 4.12. His chosen people, His people known of all the
families of the earth, Amos 3.2. His portion, and the lot, or cord of his
inheritance, as the Hebrew has it, Deuteronomy. 32.9. as if he should say, I have
divided the world by lot, and measured it by a cord, and out of all I have
only chosen my Church, as the garden wherein I will walk, the house wherein I
will dwell, the spouse with whom I will delight my self.

All interests have not an engaging force; though every post-head about our
house, or every stake or thorn in our hedge be ours; yet, we do not find our
selves moved with pity, or inclined to rescue them from breaking or burning.
God himself can let the wicked of the world consume, as the rotten branches of
a tree in the fire, and yet never think himself engaged to pluck them out,
though they belong to him; He that made them will not have mercy on them, he
that formed them will show them no favor, Esa. 27.11. Yet peculiar interests
are obliging; this peculiarity arises not barely from the absoluteness of
dominion and sovereignty (for then God should have less soverainty and dominion
over the wicked, who are not his peculiar people) nor from better natural
^^^^ities or inclinations in them above others, but from greater love and a
designment to a higher use and end; a man's dunghill is as truly his own as his
garden, yet such a love has he to this piece of ground, that he will hedge,
dress and weed it; when he will not do so to the other. The Sanctuary then
cannot still lie waste, he will not give up the inheritance which is so
peculiarly his own. Christ's interest in the Church is so great that it prevails
with him to put his own name upon her (as, 1 Cor. 12.12. so also is Christ, the
head and body are joined in one name, also, Col. 1.24.) he will surely then
awake for her. Shall we find our selves engaged to help to the utmost, when our
wife and our child is wronged, and shall not God do so for his sons and
daughters? Shall he upon the account of interest charge us to provide for our
Families, and will he neglect his own.

3. He is yet further engaged, by what he has already done for it; Christ
bought it at the full rate, he suffered, he gave himself for it; he has
preserved it all along from the beginning, and is at cost with it every day. If
then he had purposed to forsake it; would he (as Manoahs wife pleaded in
another case, Judge, 13.23.) have done all this for it? What waste would this
have been?

I find it an ordinary piece of Scripture-Logick to conclude the certainty of
mercies desired, from mercies already bestowed, because one mercy engages God
to another; thus the Apostle argues, if he have given his Son, will he not
together with him give us all things? Romans 8.32. so 2 Pet. 1.2, 3. He concludes
that grace will be multiplied, because he has given the seeds and beginnings
of it. The argument rests upon this bottom, He that has begun, will also
perfect. Romans 8.26.
This very pleading the Spirit of God makes use of in the prayers of his people
for the Church, which shows it to be very binding and strong: for as God knows
the mind of the spirit; So the spirit knows the mind of God, and will use no
argument, which he knows will not prevail. We find Joshua pressing this upon
God, Josh. 7.7. Wherefore have thou at all brought this people over Jordan?
Jehoshaphat urges it, 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Thou did drive out the inhabitants of
this Land, and gave it to the seed of Abraham. David also more fully, Psalm.
80.8, 9. And thou have brought a vine out of Egypt, thou have cast out the
Heathen, and planted it, Why then have thou broken down her hedges? etc. v. 12.

Yea, it is further to be observed, that the price we pay, and the sufferings,
or hardships we undergo for any thing, does not only engage our honor to see
it effected; but our affections also. They say, Ephesians. 5.25.
mothers love those children best that put them to most pain in the birth; we
may say that Christ giving himself for his Church, is not only a demonstration
and an effect of his love, but also a motive and engagement to a further
complacency. If these undertakings of Christ for his people had proceeded from
humor, or inconsiderate rashness, we might then have feared that the feeling
of his sufferings might have changed his resolutions; Habet omnir amorvim suam,
nec potest vacare. Aug. in Ps. 121.
but oh! they were the results of an eternal deliberate counsel, and managed by
a person to whom it can never be objected, This man began to build and is not
willing, or not able to finish.

4. By the love he carries to it. It is the nature of love to be operative, it
cannot be (...). Gr. Nazi. car. jamb.
idle, it is in perpetual motion, it sets the heart on (a) fire, and puts on
strength and resolution against the greatest oppositions, it teaches the very
bruits to expose themselves to dangers for the safety of their young ones, and
makes the very tame and fearful creatures to be violent and courageous above
their strength. We find the little sparks of our love to be thus powerful upon
our selves: but what the Ocean of Gods infinite love is, who can comprehend?
Who has Esa. 40.12.
measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meated out Heaven with the
span? Though we have no exact standard to measure it by; yet, if we look into
our selves, Quamvis Deus non cognoscitur quidditative, and comprehensive,
cognoscitur tamen, via negationis, via aeminentiae and per operationes suas.
we can guess it to be more then we can speak: we know certainly it is greater
then ours, more pure, not self-by-assed, not pettish, fickle, unconstant, etc.
What a strong engagement must that be that arises from an infinitely powerful
working love? If we doubt of the certainty, or constancy of it, we may be
satisfied from his own mouth; he has so fixed the earth that it cannot be
moved; and yet his love is more firm, Esa. 54.10. The mountains shall depart
and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee. Natural
affections of the most tenderhearted mother to her child, are nothing to this,
Esa. 49.15, 16. They may forget, yet will not I forget thee, I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me; He cannot
look upon himself, nor upon the hangings of Heaven (if I may so speak) but he
will see the names of his people, and must remember them. Sing then O Sion, and
thou that lie in the dust, the time of thy visitation will come, because thy
God delights in thee.

5. By the public declarations of this love and interest in his people, had
these been only secret intendments kept within his own breast, who could have
laid claim to them? Or, if they had not been performed, who could have said to
him, What do thou? But he has made public Proclamations of it to the Isses
afar off, and in the hearing of the Heathen round about. Moses in his prayer
takes hold on this, Numb. 14.14, 15. The Inhabitants of this land have heard
that thou, Lord, art among this people, the Nations have heard the fame of
thee, and what will they say if thou should destroy us? God himself
confesses that he has respect to this, Esa. 45.19. Israel shall be saved in
the Lord with an everlasting Salvation, v. 17. But what moves God to this? he
straightway tells us, I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the
Earth; my Promises were not made in a corner, but openly.

6. By the scorus, taunts, and bitter reflections, which the adversaries would
pour upon him if he should suffer the hedge of his Vineyard to be still
trodden down, 1. They would asperse him with cruelty, tyranny, and
carelessenesse, they would say, for mischief did he bring them out to slay
them in the mountains, Exodus 32.12. or 2. With impotency, as if he could not
deliver, because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which
he spoke unto them, therefore has he slain them in the wilderness, Numb.
14.16. Though these seem to be the objections of professed Athiests and
Heathens only; yet, even people that profess to know God have two much of
this in their hearts: we are naturally prone to have hard thoughts of God, when
we see or feel those dispensations that seem to be rugged or harsh. Sion her
self is apt to say, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me,
Esa. 49.14. 3. There is yet another conclusion which (with more plausibility,
and yet with as much distaste to God) is raised from these premises: they that
dare not call Gods power or faithfulness into question; yet will they question
the truth of the Church; if God seem to forsake it, can this be Gods Church
(say they) that's thus afflicted and tossed? God looks upon himself as much
concerned in all these, he cannot suffer his Name to be thus abused, and
therefore he often resolves the deliverance of his servants, that thereby he
might take an occasion to vindicate both himself and them: how often hear we
this? Esa. 49.23. and 60.16. and 62.11, 12.
I will arise and they shall know that I am the Lord, and they shall know that
you are my people, Jer. 30.17. I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal
thee of thy wounds, says the Lord, because they called thee an outcast,
saying. This is Zion whom no man seeks after.

great thing which God in the Creation of the Word had an eye upon, (as a
means of glorifying himself) so is it likewise the main object of providence;
had it not been for this, he would not have created the World, Ephesians. 3.9, 10.
We have two things asserted by the Apostle. 1. That all things were created by
Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator and Savior of his Church; and consequently
all this was done in reference to the great design of his Church: (I understand
the place to speak of the Creation of the World, as Joh. 1.3. And not of the
work of redemption, though I know many expound it so) 2. That he appointed his
Church to be the great means of displaying to Men and Angels, that wonderful
variety of wisdom which is more to be seen in it then in all the Creation
besides. (...).


And were it not for his Church he would not uphold the world, the righteous
are the pillars of the earth, he extends indeed his providence to all, even the
least and most despicable things: but he has a special care of his Church,
Zach. 1.8. We find Christ mounted with his attendants on red horses, speckled
and white, that is ready to execute judgment, or mercy, or a mixture of both;
the place where he keeps his guards, is said to be among the Myrtle trees in
the bottom the Myrtle trees figure out unto us the Church, they are low, but
precious plants, the bottom where these trees grow, shows us the Churches
hazards, she is subject to storms, and inundations, but yet Christ incamps in
the midst of her, in a place most commodious for the succor and help of every
corner, yea and he is on horseback, and riding as being in a posture of service
and watchfulness for their good. To the same purpose in Zach. 3.9. we have
mention made of seven eyes (which in cap. 4.10. are expressly called the seven
eyes of God, which run to and fro through the earth:) not to trouble you with
the number seven, in a word, these eyes are Gods Providence; now observe, they
are said to be fixed upon one stone, (that is Jesus Christ the Corner stone,
and the Church which is built upon it) it seems they are very intent upon the
Church; and yet cap. 4. they are said but to run to and fro, (not so fixedly
dwelling) upon all the earth beside. 1 King. 18.27.
If God had been like the blind careless sleepy vanities of the heathens, or
if his Providence had only kept it self within the circuit of Heaven (as some
Epecurei, quae opinio a quibusdam Aristoteli tribuitur.

Si quid in terris curant dii, non nisi maxima curant.


Philosophers and others thought, Job 22.13, 14.) or if he had only minded the
greatest and highest matters among the sons of men (as many have dreamed) then
possibly the Church might have been neglected: but if his eye Job 28.24.
sees under the whole heaven, if he keep and water his Vineyard every moment.
Esa. 27.3. We may confidently add the Conclusion of the Prophet, v. 6. He shall
cause them that come of Jacob to take root, Israel shall blossom and bud.

constant aim of God is the good of his people, so the means which he would
rather use for bringing it about are loving kindness and mercies.

1. We are sure of this, that God intends his Church no hurt, true indeed, take
a single affliction (abstracted from the tendency of Gods design, and the
concurrent means which must bring it about) and it will seem to hurt; the
thunder and lightnings may affright them, the iron may enter into their souls:
but view the whole frame, and you will see how one wheel turns about another
(like the wheels of a watch) which (though they have cross and contrary
motions) all conspire and (...).
work together for good, Romans 8.28.

2. We are as sure of this also, that he rather delights to lead his people
with the cords of love, and with the bands of a man: he assures us he afflicts
not willingly, Lam. 3.33. Judgment is his strange work, believe it, God
delights not to be still beating his Children; he will not take up the rod but
when he is forced to it, and when nothing else will prevail: with what
reluctance and striving does God chastise his servants, to the very turning of
his heart, and the kindling of his repentings? Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee
up Ephraim? etc. If then it be the unalterable purpose of God to do good to his
Church, if by afflictions, he does not break down his Sanctuary: but rather
take it down, as a workman does with a frame which he intends to set up again
in better order; (thus he took down Israel by the Chaldeans with an intent to
build them better, Jer. 24.5, 6.) if he delights in the prosperity of servants,
and will not afflict more then he needs must; how cheerfully then may we take
up that of the Ppophet, Lam. 3.32. Though he cause grief yet will he have
compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies.

Insolency of the enemy, upon their successes, is exceeding provoking; Esa.
10.5, etc.
God makes the wicked his rod, his agents, and executioners, in chastising his
children, and withal he sets them their limits; these forget who imloyes them,
and presently over-act their Commission: they cannot indeed go a hairs breadth
beyond Gods secret permission, yet they can leap over the bounds of his
revealled will, and moderation; they can enlarge their boastings, and join
their utmost spite, with their endeavors, and prosecute their own ends instead
of Gods. If God send the Assyrian against an hypocritical Nation, presently
his design and thoughts go beyond the work which God will do by him; Esa.
10.7. Howbeit he means not so, but it is in his heart to destroy, and cut off
Nations, not a few; God takes notice of this, and truly it falls out well for
the Church, that their enemies are so excessive in their rage and insolency;
for this interests God in the quarrel of his people. They speak wickedly
concerning oppression, they speak loftily against the Church, and in so doing,
they set their mouth against the heavens, Psalm. 73.8, 9. Deuteronomy. 32.27. God tells
us that he is not so severe against his own, as he otherwise would be upon this
ground, I would scatter them into corners, were it not that I fear the wrath of
the enemy: lest they should behave themselves strangely, etc. Again, the
adversaries by their outrageous cruelty do but treasure up a greater vengeance
for themselves. Obad. v. 10.12. For thy violence against thy brother Jacob,
shame shall cover thee; thou should not have looked on the day of thy
Brother, etc. Likewise, Zach, 1.15. I am very sore displeased with the heathen
that are at ease, for I was but a little displeased (with Sion) and they helped
forward the affliction; this made loss of children and widowhood to come upon
Babylon, in their perfection, in a moment, in one day, Esa. 47.6, 8. Because I
was wrath with my people, and thou did show them no mercy; can God endure to
hear the shoutings of Edom, when they cry, Psalm. 137.7.
raze it, raze it even to the ground? can he see them clap the hand, and wag
the head over Sion in misery? can he (think you) suffer the brags of the
wicked, when they say, our hand is high, By the strength of my hand have I done
it? Deuteronomy. 32 27. Esa. 10.13.15.
shall the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? or shall the
saw magnify it self against him that shakes it? the Husband may some time
be displeased with his wife, but if any other shall upon this ground beat or
revile her, this will make the husband and the wife agree again, and set them
both with joint indignation against the forwardness of the other party; the
greatest opposers the Church has, shall do this kindness for her, (in dispite
of their hearts,) even when they think to do most against her.

hinder deliverance, when God will work indeed; it may be in this, as it is
with the heart of a man in the work of coversion, he may resist struglingly,
but not conqueringly; the Devil and men may oppose Gods design, but overturn
it they cannot.

1. Power cannot prevail; though they unite all their strength and utmost
forces, yet shall they be ashamed; assemble your selves, and you shall be
broken: has man an arm like God? Esa. 27.4.
who then will set briars and thorns against him in battle? will he not go
through them, and burn them together? the attempts of men against God will as
little prevail, as the shoutings of shepherds upon a Lion roaring upon his
prey; You have the Comparison, Esa. 31.4, 5. When a multitude of shepherds is
called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase
himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of Hosts come down to fight
for Mount Sion, and for the hill thereof.

2. Though Policy should be joined to power, yet all would not serve; that this
will do more then strength sometimes, is testified by multitudes of instances,
Katherine de Medices of France, used to say, She could do more against the
Protestants with a sheet of paper, then with an Army: but God can look through
their plots, and make their own counsels cast them down; while they be folded
together as thorns, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry, Nahum 1.10.

3. Neither will pity prevail with God; if the lives and safety of a whole
Nation stand in the way of his peoples good, he thinks it nothing to throw them
all away for his Church: he will reprove Kings for their sakes; what is it to
him to ransom his servants with the destruction of Kingdoms? Esa. 43.3. I gave
Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia, and Seba for thee.

necessary consequence of the promises which God the Father made to Christ as
Mediator; these are reckoned up under several heads, by Rutherford, Cov. of
grace Part. 2. cap. 11.
some: I shall not need to insist upon them largely: not only was a seed
promised, he shall see his seed, and that a numerous offspring; (by profession)
Nations which knew not thee shall run unto thee, Esa. 55.5. Many Nations shall
be joined unto the Lord, Zach. 2.11. Blessed be Egypt my people (shall God say)
and Assyria the work of my hands, Esa. 19.24. but also victory over the enemies
of the Church; Esa. 53.12. I will devide him a portion with the great, and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong, his Dominion shall be from sea to sea,
Zach. 9, 10. Yea further, there are promises of assistance given to Christ
particularly respecting the building of his Church, Esaias 49.8. In a day of
salvation have I helped thee, I will preserve thee (not so much in reference to
his Person, as to his Church and Kingdom; so Diodate, and others expound) to
establish the earth, and to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; also Esa.
42.6. and many places more.

Why then are our hearts troubled? Zach. 9.11.
what though we be prisoners in a pit where is not water? what if we be as
dried bones scattered upon the earth? shall we not live? let us cast the
business upon Christ with a holy carelessnes, (pardon the expression) let him
see to it; his Church cannot fall, si ruimus nos ruit and Christus etc. Luther.
but he must fall first; yea, the Father must then be unfaithful to Christ;
for how can that be fulfilled which God has promised to him, if the Church be
still covered with a cloud in anger, if she still be solitary as a widow, or,
if the ways of Zion do still mourn?

These 6 evidences do (as I suppose) fully clear the first branch of the
Doctrine, the second (which I am next to speak to) is,

2. This work (when it comes to be accomplished,) shall be very glorious; let
us look a little into this, The second Branch of the Doctrine.
and we shall find several things concurring to make up the glory of it.

1. The former misery of the Church will add no small luster to its building:
its formere tears, blackness, and desolations shall now make it more
beautiful; what a change shall that be? when she that was cast our as the
filth and offscouring of all things; she whom no eye pitied; against whom
every tongue let loose the bridle, and uttered disdainful taunts, and cruel
revilings; is now advanced to the throne, and her head lift up above her
enemies round about? Crowns and Scepters are but small advancements to one that
is already but a little below them; it is but one remove, but for one that but
now embraced the dunghill, to be called to sit above Princes, this is much! it is
a great deal more for Joseph to come from the prison to be next to Pharaoh,
or, for Merdecai to come from the gate to the Kings Robes, then for those that
are great already to be advanced a little above their present dignities.

This will not highten the glory of the Church of the admiration and envy of
their adversaries, but it will also sweeten their former afflictions, Lam.
3.19.20.
and their present deliverance; the wormwood and the gall they are bitter in
the taste, yet sweet to the remembrance afterward; when Sion is restored, it
will be pleasant to review and look back upon her late pressures, she can then
with delight remember the waters of Babylon, where she sat and wept; they that
before time were wont to wag the head and clap their hands, saying, Is this the
City that men call the perfection of beauty? Lam. 2.15.
shall now turn their tune, and say, Is this the City that was trodden down and
despised? the Children of God shall also with tears of Joy and mutual
congratulations, compare their restoration with their old calamities, Hag. 2.4.
inverting that of Haggai, Who is there left among among us that saw this house
in her former Desolations, and how do we see it now? this is the Lords doing
and it is mavelous in our eyes.

2. Great will be the hight of its advancement, it will not be an ordinary
building, the Promises which are made to the New-Testament-Church speak of
great things, Esa. 22. Micha 4.1. In the last days it shall come to pass that
the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established, in the top of the
Mountains, it shall be exalted above the hills. 1. Its exaltation shall be
conspicuous to the eyes of all. 2. It shall have a tryumphing glory after
mountanous difficulties. 3. A glory above worldly states and kingdoms (which
are called mountains and hills, Psalm. 68.15, 16) 4. Diodate and Junius in loc.
A well bottomed glory, not overturned by every tempest of opposition, though
like a City on an hill, it be very obnoxious to winds and storms; all these
seem to be pointed at in the next Text.

And indeed, if we consider; 1. The power, skill and love, of the workman
(God) to his Church, or 2. the preparations he makes for this building, in
hewing and dressing the materials; we may well expect a glorious Fabric, a
Palace of silver, Cant. 8.9.
nothing mean can come from his hands; much less can he be guilty of pompous
trifling, or of making a great show, and bringing forth nothing (like the birth
of the mountains in Aesop) 3. If God should do no more but scowr off the filth,
which his people contract by lying among the pots, Psalm. 68.13.
their native beauty would make them shine like the wings of a dove; Who can
express what a pleasing sight it would be to see the Church in its naked glory?
Now when God restores her, he does not only take off the vails of persecution
and distemper (in a great part) which did much obscure her; but, fourthly, he
gives some remarkable addition to her glory; if you cast your eye backward upon
the notable changes that have happened to the Church, you will find that when
he has turned to her, he not only set her where she was before: but advanced
her estate above her former prosperity; and if we look before us, we shall find
in the womb of the promises more glory entailed upon the Church, then yet she
has enjoyed: and this to be brought forth after the great hour of temptation,
that shall come to try the Inhabitants of the earth, upon the rising again of
the witnesses, Rev. 11.11. These promises (I forbear to mention them) in the
Old and New Testament, though they do not win me to the Millenaries opinion,
about the personal reign of Christ on earth a thousand years: yet, this seems
to me an undoubted truth from them; that the Church shall be more glorious then
heretofore, in holiness, unity, peace, numerousness and conquest of her enemies.

3. The unexpectedness of the change (when God turns the captivity of his
people) will be a very considerable circumstance to heighten their glory;
suddenness aggravates grief and joy. When the Church was freed from the
Babylonish captivity, Psalm. 126.1. it was so unexpected and wonderful, That
they were like those that dream: though they hoped for it; yet they could
scarce believe it when it was come, their deliverance seemed rather a dream
then a realty; this filled their mouth with laughter, and their tongue with
singing.

4. The seasonableness of it sets the glory yet a step higher; among men the
seasonableness of their favors is almost the very essence of them, that which
comes out of season, often does no more then show the good will of those that
pity us; but proves not helpful: what is physic, or a pardon to a man that is
dead? Had they come in time they might have done good. God never misseth the
right season; he that requires of us fruits in season, will not do his own
works out of season; he that waits to be gracious, and stays for the fittest
opportunity of showing mercy, will not neglect it when it presents it self; it
is Gods design to put an honor upon all his ways and works, and therefore
when we wax wanton and undervalue his blessings, he takes them away: till the
bitterness of affliction makes us prize and and relish them better: it is his
design also to make our troubles to carry a just proportion to our strength; he
will not inflict too much at once least we be overwhelmed; Esa 57.16.
nor continue it too long least the spirits should fail before him, and the
Souls that he has made; hence is it that he brings his people to the pits
brink and then delivers them: so far he carries them, that they might see the
worth of their deliverance, and the seasonableness of their escape: and no
further, because he intends not to destroy them.

How seasonable is meat to the fainting Soul? Even unsavory and bitter things
are precious and sweet to the hungry; how seasonable and glorious is
deliverance to a Church wasted and desolate? When his servant are ready to say,
The Lord has forgotten to be gracious; or as Lam. 3.17, 18. Thou have removed
my Soul far off from peace, I forgot prosperity, and I said, My strength and my
hope is perished from the Lord; Then for God to step in betwixt them and
despair, and so seasonably to recover them, when they give all for lost, how
glorious a mercy is it?

5. God will do his work in a glorious way, the manner and means will be
miraculous and wonderful; thus he brought Israel out of the house of bondage,
with signs and wonder, and in after times (though the Church cannot expect the
very same miracles of killing the first born of their enemies, dividing the red
Sea, etc.) yet, God has promised he will set those before him as his pattern;
and that there shall be some resemblance and correspondency betwixt their
deliverances, and that out of Egypt, Mich. 7.15. According to the days of thy
coming out of the land of Egypt will I show unto him mavelous things.

David, when he returns thanks to God for delivering him out of the hand of all
his enemies, 2 Samuel 22.8, 9, Vide Dickson, on Psalm. 18.
etc. he alludes to the most glorious manifestations of God in the behalf of
his people, as if they were the same miracles acted over again, which God
showed; 1. At Sinai in giving the Law, The earth shook and trembled, etc. v. 8.
2. At the battle against the five Kings, Josh. 10.11. whom God overthrew with
hailstones, The Lord thundered ut of Heaven, he sent forth his arrows and
scattered them, v. 14. And 3. at the red sea, The channels of water were seen,
etc. v. 15. If David, being but one single person, finds in his deliverances
something resembling those noble act of God, much more may the Church: and if
Gods ways were seriously studied, we should find wonders and miracles in every
deliverance.

6. God will raise the Glory of his enterprise upon the confusion and
astonishment of his adversaries; it was the custom of the Romans and others,
to reserve many of their Captives to augment the glory of their triumphs. Thus
will God do, when he will redeem Zion, he will give the stout adversaries as
dust to their sword, and as driven stubble to their bow. He will make them
arise and thresh the mountains, Esa. 41.2, 15.
and beat the hills as chaff; where will then be the glory of their proud
looks? This is excellently set forth in Mich 7.10, 16. When God brings his
servants to the light; Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame
shall cover her; which said, Where is the Lord thy God. The Nations shall see
and be confounded at all their might, they shall lay their hand upon their
mouth; their ears shall be deaf, they shall lick the dust like a Serpent: they
shall move out of their holes, like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid
of the Lord our God, and shall fear because of thee.

7. There is one thing more which will beautify the Church when God comes to
plead her cause, she shall (beside what is inherent) have a derivative glory; a
ray of the beauty and majesty of Christ her Lord and husband, shall be upon
her, as Moses his face became shining by Converesing with God. It is true the
Church has no beauty which is not borrowed, she is comely by the comeliness
which Christ puts upon her; but this is a radiancy occasional and for the time,
begetting a greater reverance and awe from her adversaries; this seems to be
spoken of Psalm. 90.17. Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; and Esa.
4.5. I will create upon every dwelling place in mount Sion, and upon her
assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night, and upon all the glory shall be a defense. Where God alludes to the
pillar of fire, and his glory coming down upon the Tabernacle; that as in those
glorious appearances the Tabernacle did shine with the glory of God; So should
his Church, when he appears gloriously in it: and this shall highten the
admiration of the spirits of men toward his people.

3. The third thing comes now to be spoken to; The third Branch of the Doctrine.
viz. That whoever be the instrument, yet the chief honor of the work is
Christ's; this will be easily cleared.

1. The Father committed this work, and all power to manage it into Christ's
hand, Matthew 28.18. All power is given to me in Heaven and in earth; to Christ
as Mediator belongs sole, supreme and absolute authority for the gathering,
upholding and governing his Church; and hence he gives encouragement and
commission to the Apostles, to go and preach, Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, v. 19. I need not here trouble that Question about the twofold
Kingdom of Christ, as God, and as Mediator; or whether Magistracy be from
Christ as head of the Church; Gillespy, Aarons Rod. lib. 2. cap. 6. Iranes.
it is enough to our present purpose to take what is already granted by all:
that the Mediator is God equal with the Father, and so Rules over all, and as
God-man he has a least all Ecclesiastical power, (...), Kingly Government;
Yea, and (...), a power and overruling Providence, by which he can dispose of
all things; for his glory and his Churches good, this will prove the building
of the Temple to be his work, and then it is easy to infer that (...), the
glory of it is his also.

Men, indeed, are instruments in this employment, and they are styled
fellow-workers, but they can do nothing alone, no more then the tool can work
without the workman; and if they could (yet seeing they are but servants)
Christ has the honor of all that is done by them, 2 Samuel 21.22.
and that upon a more unquestionable account then the victories of David
servants are ascribed to David himself, not unto us (let his servants say) but
to thy name be the praise.

2. The glorious perfection which he brings his work unto, shows it to be
beyond the power or skill of men and Angels. We may perceive the traces of
infinite power, wisdom and love, in every parcel and piece of it, much more
then when we see the whole frame together. Church reparation is the creating of
new Heavens and new Earth, and who will ascribe such a thing to man? In Esa.
54.11. he declares the state of his restored Church thus: I will lay thy stones
with fair colors, and thy foundations with Saphirs, I will make thy windows of
Agates and thy gates of Carbuncles, etc. These expressions resemble the Church
to a building made up all of precious stones, with curious art and
contrivement. We do not use to father exact pieces upon ignorance and
impotence, and we may as well attribute the building of our Castles and Palaces
to birds and flies, as the establishment and beauty of the Church to men.

3. He does this quickly as in a moment; you may know by his pace that it is
not the goings of a man, Cant. 2.8.
but of him that rides upon the wings of the wind, Who comes leaping upon the
mountains and scipping upon the hills. He can quickly blast the greatness of
men, and as quickly lift up from the earth him that was fallen if ye doubt of
this, consider how quickly and easily the Heaven and Earth were created, and
how suddenly it shall be destroyed at last! though God seems to delay
deliverance for a time (as the sense of the burden makes it seem a longer time
to the afflicted then it is) yet when he arises, he will make a quick
dispatch; peace is a work of Creation, Behold I create peace, etc. and Creation
takes not up much time, it is done in an instant; the Lord calls us out to
wonder at this, Esa. 66.8. Who has heard such a thing? Who bath seen such a
thing? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Or shall a Nation be
born at once? For as soon as Sion traveled she brought forth her children;
Veni, Vidi, Vici.
He makes more have then if corn should come to maturity the same day it was
sown, etc. Julius Caesar's swift conquests are nothing to the conquests of him
that does but speak and it is done; it must then be stupendous ignorance or
arrogance that gives not Christ the honor of such actions.

4. He brings his work through visible contradictions and unlikelyhoods, Esa.
43.19. I will make a way in the Wilderness, and rivers in the Desert; and in
Hos. 2.15. He promises to give her vine yards from the Wilderness, I will
bring her into the Wilderness, and will give her her vine-yards from thence;
Surely, the barren heath of the Wilderness is an unlikely place to make a
vineyard of: so we read Deuteronomy. 32.13. He made them to suck honey out of the
rock, and oil out of the flinty rock. Buroughs, Hos. p. 501.
Not that honey and oil came out of the rock as the waters did, after the
smiting of Moses: but that they had their sweetness and comforts where, and
from whence, They might least expect them: out of rocky difficulties, all ages
have given testimony to this, the wounds of the Church, the poisonous arrows of
adversaries, the apostasies of the wicked, dissentions, martyrdoms, every thing
that seemed to destroy have been bended about (contrary to the intendments of
men) to further the Churches more lasting peace and happiness. We our selves
have seen that the storm that threatened our ruin has cast us upon a rock,
where we have a greater security from the waves, a safer standing, the great
shipwreck of Faith and Conscience that many have made; has discovered
hypocrites, manifested who are fincere, puts men on unity, shows the necessity
of Church discipline and government, with the restraint of licentious opinions
and practices, has occasioned the clearing and vindicating of truths, and has
quickened and cautioned both Ministers and people.

Moses argues from the strange and unusual death of Corah, that it was not
chance but Gods immediate hand, that destroyed those Rebels, Numb. 16.29, 30.
And so may we in this case say, God is seen in the strangeness of his workings,
the dullest heads, the most envious hearts shall acknowledge his finger, Esa.
43.20. The Beasts of the field shall honor me, the dragg us and the owls,
because I give waters in the wilderness; Deuteronomy. 32.3. Psalm. 68.34.
much more shall his People ascribe greatness to God.

5. He does all this for his Church, when she has the fewest helpers; when
lover and friend forsakes her, nay, when friends wound her, when they that
should make up her breaches, make them wider, when the keepers of the wall
smite her, and take away her vail; It Is the design of God, that in works of this
nature little of man should be seen, least he should say mine own wisdom and
strength has done it; and often he lets them weary themselves in their own
endeavors, and then when they see they can do nothing: he appears with this
acknowledgment from all; Lord, thou have wrought all our works in us, Esa.
63.5. I looked and there was none to help, therefore mine own harm brought
Salvation; The Glory then of this deliverance is Christ's.

I have now brought you to the fourth Branch of the Doctrine. Branch 4. Of the
Doctrine.
This work shall then be done, when peace shall possess the Church by the
Power of Government and Ordinances.

The Peace of the Church is the accomplishment and completement of this
building; all the conflicts, battles, desolations, and conquests of the
Church, they are but the noise of the axe, and hammer fitting and squaring the
matereialls; but when the Temple is built, the noise of them cease.

1. Peace is the end and aim of God, in all the preparations he makes for this
building.

2. It Is the great subject of the Promises made to the Church, and sometime
whatever concerns the happiness of Sion, is wrapped up in that word, great shall
be the peace of thy children, Esa. 54.13. Behold I will extend Peace to her
like a River. Esa. 66.12. and many places more.

Quest. But What Peace is requisite to make up Temple-reparation?

Ans. 1. There must be outward Peace; Peace from adversaries round about; when
God makes the destroyer to cease, and gives his Churches rest; for while it is
Persecuted, the Sanctuary is said to be trodden down; this is the building of
the outer wall, and fence, which preserves the tender plants from the violence
of the wild hoare, and gives opportunity and advantage for growth; the Church
indeed will thrive and increase under afflictions sometime, and that not only
in the root, in strength and solidity, but also in the branches, in its extent
and number; thus we read in the Acts, Acts 12.24. and 5.14.
while the Apostles were imprisoned and forbidden to speak in the Name of
Christ, that the Word of the Lord grew exceedingly, and many were added to the
Church, multitudes both of men and women; but the greatest season of growing
is, when the storm is over, for then the Word of the Lord prevails mightily,
and (like the heat of the Sun after Winter) invites those plants to appear,
which the frost kept und er ground, those which we call growing sicknesses, do
not appear to be so, till the sickness is over, for then the parties shoot up
in length, so that we may better ascribe the growing to health then to
sickness; when peace is abused, it fills the Church with corrupt humors,
formality, neglect, hypocrisy, etc. and then God purges it by afflictions, and
after the humors are evacuated, then he sends peace again, that it may
increase, as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining
after rain.

2. There must be inward Peace, for this is the maine, the intestine divisions
of the Church do it more harm, then the sword of the Enemy; a spirit of
giddiness and confusion will do more to waste it, then fire and sword can do;
floating bottels will sooner break by their own clashing, then by the violence
of the waves alone. I might here tell you the stories of the Primitive times,
wha^ work did Arrianisme, etc. make? for the Cure of this the Lord promises
the blessing of unity and concord, which is,

1. Unity of heart, when a Spirit of love animates them.

2. Unity of way, when the Lord is one, and his Name one, when they serve him
with one lip, and one shoulder, they shall be of one heart, and of one way.

3. This unity must arise from Government and Ordinances, it is not every
confederacy or combination that repaires the Church; even Thieves and Pirates
have a kind of unity among themselves; Peace (if it be right) must be in
conjunction with holiness.

1. Such a Peace is well grounded, it is of the right kind, when it bears Gods
image and superscription, it should lean upon the basis of Divine Institution,
not on the staff of Egypt, the broken reed of humane Constitution and policy,
and this declares the Conquest to be of God, not of man.

2. It Is well guarded, and more lasting, whatsoever arises not from this
ground, has the principles of confusion in it self, and cannot be kept up
long.

3. This is a growing peace, a peace that has a seed in it self, which though
in the beginning it be smll, yet its latter end shall greatly increase; it is
glorious in its first rising, but like the Sun it will shine clearly even unto
the perfect day.

4. It mutually gives to, and receives advantage from holiness, holiness is
that which becomes Gods servants and house for ever, it is the beauty of them;
Government and Ordinances procure peace, for it is their end to weed out of the
Vineyard whatever may offend, to repress and beat down every root of
bitterness, it arises from order, and does preserve it.

Application
You have heard the Doctrine explained and opened: I shall now bring it nearer
to you by drawing forth those practical inferences which it will afford us.

infult over the Church when she is in distress, seeing he that has smitten
will certainly heal it; though he hide his face a little while, yet he will
return with everlasting compassions; deceive not your selves ye infulting foes,
ye shall not accomplish your design, it is not in your Power to reverse the
decrees of heaven; The Vision will speak in its appointed time, and will not
lie, Mich. 7.8. Rejoice not against me O mine Enemy: when I fall I shall arise;
when I fit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me; nay, know that the
time will come when you shall eat your spiteful words, and disdainful
speeches; they are upon record in Gods book: he forgets them not; all your
greatness and splendour will not keep God from making a stepping-stone of you,
and laying you in the dirt; nay, God will make you instruments (though against
your will,) to help on that work, which you so much oppose; you are but Gods
Pionneeres, to digg up the rubbish, and to make way for the foundation: He that
can make the wrath of man to praise him, will bring good out of all the evil
you intend to do; take heed, you prepare a scourge for your selves; Jerusalem
shall be a burdensome stone, all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in
pieces, Zach. 12.3.

What God may do with his Church in England, I cannot now enquire, to determine
whether our hopes will out weigh our fears, would ask a longer time then I can
now take; But this I am sure of, that (whatsever become of us) his Church will
be yet glorious in the World, and if we should be scattered, there shall not a
grain of the good corn be lost; nay, that scattering (as the dispersion of the
Disciples, Acts 8.1, 4.) would but be a seed-time, which would undoubtedly make
way for a larger harvest in other Kingdoms and Nations.

intercept the praise that is due to Christ, seeing the work is his, let him
have the Honor of it; it is not for us to be solicitous about the advancement
of our own glory: it is the Fathers design that Christ should in every thing
have the pre-eminence; and if we could but so master the pride of our own
hearts, as to be sincerely nothing in our own eyes; even then when God does
most by us: Prove. 10.7.
he that gives grace to the humble, will not be behind with us, he will look to
our names to keep them from rotting; let him have his own in the first place,
when he uses you as instruments in his service, and then see if he will grudge
to perfume your memories in the Churches of God; though there is nothing due to
the best of men, when they have done their utmost for him: yet, he does
vouchsafe to make them Copartners in his praise, calling them Saviors, and
repairers of the breach; let us be single hearted, not minding our own things,
nor studying selfe-exaltation, 1. This is envious carriage toward Christ; a
proud self-seeking heart has always an evil eye, 2. It Is a vain attempt;
Christ will have the honor whether you will or no, as he is the Alpha the
beginner, and author of every work, so will he be the Omega, to whom all shall
be ascribed; it is as impossible for men to divest Christ of his Glory, as it is
for them to muffle the Sun in perperpetuall darkness, or, to imprison the
Rivers upon the earth; which, (though they may be diverted from their usual
course, or dammed up for a space) yet with a greater violence will break into
the Ocean at last; 3. He that is secretly jealous that his glory will be
ecclipsed by giving all to Christ, shall certainly loose the Honor he seeks
after. 4. There is no such lovely frame of spirit as that which makes a man
willing to decrease, so that Christ may increase. Joh. 3.30.

3. Mourn over the Temples desolations; the building is glorious, and who can
behold the ruins of it without tears and sadness? one can scarce be excessive
in sorrow for the calamities of the Church, except his grief be mixed with
repinings and distrust.

Look abroad into the World, and consider the face of things; you have heard
what has been done in Germany, and in the Palatinate, and of late in Piedmont
and Poland; the horrid inquisitions, bloody massacres, unmercifull expulsions,
banishments and cruelties that the Church has groaned under, you cannot be
ignorant of; neither can we so easily forget what has been done here in these
Nations where we live: far be it from me to nourish unthankful murmurings
against the goodness of God, who has given us so much liberty in the
enjoyment of his Gospel. Though we have great cause to be thankful; yet,
still we have cause to take up a Lamentation, that the Sanctuary is not
cleansed, and that the building is not yet perfected; how fearfully are many
drunk and mad with error? did those honest hearts that so earnestly followed
God with tears when reformation first was spoken of, ever think to hear so many
outrageous blasphemies vented and pleaded for as now they do? how have we been
undone by an unlimited Christian-Liberty? who would have thought that this
would have been wrested to patronize licentiousness? how unwilling are most to
bear the yoke of Christ's Government? how has the Devil by little and little
drawn men to a carelessenesse of Religion, thereby making way to a growing
Athiesme, as appears by the scorns of some, and the Apostasies of others? how
cowardly, and sinfully shamefaced are many, when they should plead for God, and
truth, as if their own hearts did secretly question the reality of Religion?
how strangely do many of the Gentry spend their time? what irreligious
prayerlesse families do some of them keep (when they should show better example
to the meaner sort (and yet, how consid ently can they censure others for
hypocrites, (sometime unjustly concluding against the strictness of Gods
ways, from the hypocrisy of some Professors,) not considering what their own
carriage and vanity do testify against themselves? how do we needlessly
multiply our controversies and disputes? and with what bitterness do we manage
them, even then when the strife is merely about words and method? and generally
how is the Name of God and religion abused to serve the designs of men? what
strange Religious People have we? some must needs be religious by taking up a
singular conceit and opinion, though a man may easily see their hearts through
their lives: others have all their religion on their tongues end; they can have
good discourses, and yet be unconscionable in their callings, shops and
tradings.

Are not these instances enough to move your compassions? and yet I have not
spoken all, neither can I. They have hard hearts that are not affected with
these things; How is our silver become dross, our wine mixed with water? upon
the fall of Saul and Jonathan, David taught the children of Israel the Bow; 2 Samuel 1.18. Weems Jud. Law. vol. 2. cap. 44.
not the art and use of shooting (as some expound) for they knew that before,
but the Lamentation which was called the Bow, (it was usual to style their
Elegies and Songs by the names of Arcus, Ala, Securis, Scutum, etc. Bow, wing,
etc.) much more reason have we to teach our hearts to mourn when the Sanctuary
of the Lord lies desolate.

1. Ps. 48.2.
The Church is a Glorious building, beautiful for situation, the Joy of the
whole earth, and can thy heart be strong, or, thine eyes forbear when thou
beholdest this forsaken and made an heap? walk about Sion, tell the towers
thereof, Psalm. 48.12.
mark well her bulwarks, it may be thou have not well considered her beauty, if
thou have, thou can not but be distressed for it, when it becomes solitary,
Lam. 1.1. Esa. 1.8.
and as a widow; when it is brought to this, to be like a cottage in a Vineyard,
or a lodge in a garden of Cucumbers; can Jonah vex himself when his gourd
withers? Can the Merchants of Tire bewail the fall of their City? and shall not
thy Countenance be sad (with Nehemiah chap. 2.3.) when the City, the place of
thy fathers sepulchers, lies wast, and the gates thereof are consumed with
fire.

2. When it comes to this, then be sure that God is very angry; he would not
give his darling to the power of the dog upon a light displeasure; and if the
Lion roar, shall not all the beasts of the forest tremble? Amos 3.8.
Will not a towardly child be more troubled at the anger of his father, then at
the smart of his rod? Have you found his loving kindness sweet, his smiles
better then life? and will not his frowns then cut you to the heart?

3. His people also are surely guilty of more then ordinary sins at such a
time; if any ask, Why has the Lord done thus to his people? Deuteronomy. 29.24.
What means the heat of his great anger? Will not any one return this answer;
They have sinned greatly, God does not use severity but upon great
provocations, and does not sin call for mourning?

4. Gods honor seems to suffer deeply, when the Church is trodden down and laid
wast, and is this nothing to you?

5. Gods Children have usually been overwhelmed with grief upon this occasion.
Jeremiah desires to weep a flood of tears for this, Jer. 9.1. Oh! that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears that I might weep day and night,
etc. And yet he wept till sorrow overcame him, till his heart was ready to
break, Jer. 4.19. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very heart, my heart
makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O my
Soul, the sound of the trumpet, etc. Esaias is resolute in Lamentation and (like
Rachel weeping for her children) will not be comforted, Esa. 22.4. Look away
from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me; because of the
spoiling of the daughter of my people. Eze. 9.3.
Ezra plucked off the hair of his head and the hair of his beard, and sits down
astonished. Daniel refuses his comforts and refreshments; Dan. 10.2.
He eat not pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in his mouth, neither
did be unnoint himself till three weeks were fulfilled. If thy heart then be
not Adamant or Steel, thou can not choose but weep for company.

6. If thou can not mourn for the Church, thou will at least have cause to
mourn for thy self, both for thy obdurateness and for the judgments thou shall
surely feel; if God should sweep us away in a common deluge, yet, he will
provide an Ark for the mourners of Sion. He would be a little sanctuary to them
in the Countries where they should come, Ezekiel. 11.16.
and for that end he sets a mark upon such; Ezekiel. 9.4, 6.
but for such as are at-ease not grieving for the afflictions of Joseph, they
shall have the first and saddest share of the Judgments, Amos 6.1, 4, 5, 6, 7.
They are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, Therefore, now shall they go
captive with the first that go captive, etc.

It may be, when you hear the words of this curse, you bless your selves in
your heart, supposing that you have learned and practiced this lesson; let me
therefore bring your grief to the touchstone, by propounding two or three
Questions.

1. What is it that most afflicts thee? Is it the loss of thine estate or
friends? Is it the advancement of some meaner persons to riches and command:
whilst thou fittest at their footstool? Is it because thy way or party does
not thrive as thou would have it? If these only grieve thee, then it is thy
pride, wordliness, envy, and selfishness that troubles thee; but how does the
spiritual desolations, the unprofitableness and unfruitfulness of the Church
affect thee? Are those a sword in thy bones?

2. What do thou most desire for the Church? What would thou have (if thou
might) at the first wish? Ask thy heart? Would thou have God reconciled to
us? Would thou have the light of his countenance?

3. How much art thou troubled? How deep goes thy grief? Coulst thou be pleased
to have thy peace and plenty, to enjoy thy desires in a corner, and let become
of the Church what will? Is thy bed easy, thy sleep sweet, thy estate
comfortable, whilst the Name of God is profaned and blasphemed? Or rather, is
not all nothing to thee whilst it is thus? Or, can thou solidly and seriously
mourn more for the Churches miseries then for thy personal afflictions? Can
thou lament at the rate of Eli and his daughter-in-law, 1 Samuel 4.22. Is it the
Chief of thy sorrow that the Ark of God is taken?

4. What would thou be content to do for the help of the Church? Could thou
give thy pleasant things for it? How often, or how earnestly do thou wrestle
with God on her behalf? What sins (for they are the troubles of Israel) have
thou left for her sake? Could thou be content to sacrifice, thy honor, and
estate for it? What have thou done to heal it? Have thou prosecuted her peace?
Art thou willing, for thy part, to lay down thy own conceits and opinions, to
abate something of thy stifness, rather then she should be undone by continual
divisions? They are idle, Moses non voluit se deleri e libro vitae agnino; Sed
Physico. Vult Apostolus perire in carne, ut alii salveantur in spiritu.
unprofitable and unacceptable tears that are not joined with endeavors. Moses
could be content to be blotted out of Gods book, rather then the Church should
be laid waste, Exodus 32.32. Paul would be an Anathema for Isreal's sake, Romans
9.3. (not that these desires reached so far as eternal death: but, that they
were willing to suffer a temporal death; or, those tortures which sometime
seized upon the bodies of those who were delivered to Satan by
excommunication) they were willing to buy the Churches peace with death and
sufferings, and will thou do nothing for it? Vid. Arrow-Smith, Tract. sacr. lib
3. cap. 2. Sect. X, XI.
be not deceived, God will not be mocked.

let us be strong, rise up and build, work, for He also will work; do not think
(you that are private Christians) that you are unconcerned in this duty, the
meanest of you may do something, they that have no gold may yet bring badgers
skins, 2 Cor. 8.12.
or goats hair for the sanctuary: If there be a willing mind it is accepted
according to what a man has. Magistrates and Ministers are specially to look
to this, I shall therefore speak to you both in a few directions.

1. Be like minded, be of one accord; it is the Apostles direction, Phil. 2.2.
If the builders disagree among themselves the work will cease, if the Lord
confound your Languages, it will be but a Babel. But you will say, you have not
so much power over your understanding as to believe any thing; you hold nothing
but what you take to be truth. Answ. 1. Though your persuasions do differ, yet
you may all have the same design of peace. 2. You may all speak the same
things, 1 Cor. 1.10. You agree in the main, and you need not speak or urge
those things wherein you think differently: you ought not to dote about
Questions which gender strife. 1 Timothy 6.4.


2. Condescend one to another as much as may be, it is in vain to expect
concord without this; the Apostle Romans 15.12. enjoins the strong to bear the
infirmities of the weak, (...) Vid. Willet in loc. and Leigh. Crit. sac.
not only to tolerate them, but to take them upon our selves, to trouble our
selves with them, by undertaking to cure them, in nos suscipere ut curemus; and
for this end, commands that we study to please our neighbor for his good,
rather then our selves; that is, in small matters, not to use the utmost of our
own liberty and opinions, but to suffer some inconveniences that way, by
condescension. We are engaged to this, by the rule of expediency, 1 Cor. 6.12.
(all things are lawful, but all are not expedient) by the law of Charity (Romans
14.15. thou walk not charitably, thou destroyest thy brother by the liberty)
and by our own need (lege talionis) the best of us shall stand in need of the
condescension of other men to us, as well as they may need ours to them, the
head cannot say to the foot, (...).
I have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12.21. And therefore we should have the same
care one to another, v. 25. studying how to accommodate our selves to others as
well as how others may yied to us. He that will not learn this lesson, shall
never be honored with the titles of healer and peacemaker.

3. Let nothing be done Through strife or vain glory, Phil. 2.3. though you do
not cross one another, yet if you are carried up by these principles, you will
one time or other fail, grow pettish, and undo all again, as your temptations
lead you; nay, God may refuse to accept, or bless your endeavors. Such a
perverse, cross foundation, may expect to be thrown up again by the fire of
divine jealousy, as that of the Temple was in the times of Julian.

4. Let the work be suitable to the foundation; 1 Cor. 3.12.
build not hay and stubble upon it, trifle not in a work so weighty and
serious, regard that most which is not necessary, busy not your selves so much
about petty ornaments for the house, till the main work (foundation, walls, and
roof) be up. How much of Religion and Reformation is placed in Circumstances
(by some) in a Garb, form and a nicety of affected expressions; I am ashamed
to think how some disgrace Religion this way, Tything Mint, Annis, and Cummin,
while the weightier matters of the Law are neglected.

5. If you are not perfectly joined together in the same mind and judgment
about some disputable things, yet censure not one another for differences. All
of you may hold the head, though your consciences be not alike satisfied in all
things; nay, be not over confident of your own understandings: (I am speaking
of the disputes about Discipline and Government) some of you (it may be) have
been confident heretofore of something which now you judge an error, and why
may you not suppose that your present confidence may possibly deceive you, in
what you now take to be truth; be modest and jealous of your selves, have
Charity for those that think not as you do; it is a Common fault among
Christians, the respect and love they carry to a person, m^^^ their affections
and judgments to his way and opinion; (...) yet they venture boldly to condemn
others for what t^^^ understand not.

6. Be laborious in your stations; there goes m^^^ more to building then bare
wishes; though it will ^^ver be effected by humane strength and might alone;
(...) it will never be done without means, men think t^^^ have done all when
they subscribe a paper, or pr^^^ consent to such a way, and then blame others
beca^^^ the work is not done. What? Do you think the f^^ming of a model for
Government and the Recomm^^ding, or Establishment of it is all that is required
(...) the Completing of the Lords House? If the Supre^^ Majesty should
interpose his authority, and bring on (...) work thus far, yet still the
fitting and squaring of (...) materials would be a sufficient task both for
Minist^^ and others; do not think to reap without plowing (...) sowing: set to
it then with all your might, and, quicken you, let me recommend to you the
dilig^^^ perusal of Mr. Baxters book of the Reformed Pastor.

7. Join prudence to zeal, this is necessary; it is (...) enough to be a
forward actor, except you have skill take the advantages and fittest
opportunities; the w^^^ of man works not the righteousness of God, Ja^^ 20.
How unserviceable do many Good Christians ma^^ themselves by imprudence? This
occasions mistakes, (...) offenses, brings grace under suspicion of hypocrisy,
(...) at least, blocks up the way by prejudice.

8. Build in Gods way; expect not to see the happin^^ of the Church by
man-pleasing or flattery; this Fabri^^ will not stand if it be daubed with
untempered mort^^ Be faithful to the Souls of men, though in so doing (...)
displease them, still aim at holiness, be always pres^^^^ forward, toward
perfection; So shall the couns^^ of Peace at last be established.

FINIS.

