Canon Gilbert' s SERMON Preached at St. Andrew' s Plymouth, January 30th,
School/9.

A SERMON Preached at St. Andrew' s Plymouth, January 30th, School/9.

By JOHN GILBERT, M. A. Vicar there; and Canon of Exeter.

With a PREFACE, DEFENDING King Charles the Martyr, And the Observation of His
Day, against the Libels, and Practice of such, who are Enemies to both.

LONDON: Printed by Sam. Darker, for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1699.

THE Publisher to the Reader, In Defense of KING CHARLES THE MARTYR, And the
Observation of His Day.
THE Importunity of Friends, and the Reflection made by others, on this Sermon,
gave the Reverend Preacher just Cause to permit its Publication, that he might
Gratify the Desires of the one, and Confute the wrong Surmises of the other.

DISCOURSES of this Nature, never were more seasonable and needful than now;
while many, with such Freedom (to call it no worse) calumniate the good Name,
and trample on the Ashes of that Glorious Sufferer, the Martyr of the Day:
whose pious Memory, and Righteousness, are, by the Command and Example of the
highest Authority in England, Yearly Commemorated and Recognized to God and the
World.

NO Men pretend greater Regard and Deference to the Authority and Judgment of
Parliaments, than many of those, who in the Case of K. Charles, contradict, and
give them the Lie. If they Determine or Enact agreeable to the Humor and
Interest of those Partial Men, they magnify the Judgment of our Representatives
to a Pitch near Infallibility, and make their Power boundless. But if many
successive Parliaments Declare, or Decree, contrary to their Opinions, or
Principles, or opposite to their Humors and Inclinations, or Credit, no Men
less regard, submit, or conform to it, than they.

OF this, the R. Martyr's Case is a Notorious Instance; for he, though declared
in many Acts of diverse Parliaments, A Righteous, Just, Innocent Prinse, and as
such, Yearly Commemorated, by their solemn Lamentation on His Day; and ordering
public Thanks to the Preachers, and printing the Sermons then delivered before
them (which ought to sway the Judgments of those Men, or at least, to stop
their Mouths. But maugre all that, they spare not to Reproach his Memory, and
Brand his Name, with the Odious Characters of Bloody Tyrant, Perjured Popish
Pseudo-Martyr, and a Spoyler of the English Government. And do this, not in
private Corners, but public Coffee-houses, not only in Cabals and Clubs, such
as the Rhiming Conventicle of the Protestant Joyner, and the Calveshead Meeting
of Factious Atheists, every 30th of January, but in Swarms of Libels, openly
sold in Westminster Hall, and Cried by the Hawkers at the King's Palace Gate,
in the Face of the Supreme Authority, and Highest Judicature of the Nation, who
have so often, and do so frequently declare and protest against the Falsehood
and Scandals which those Venomous Libels impudently Disperse, to Reproach His
Majesty's most Innocent, and Illustrious Progenitor.

AT the same time, the same Men, with matchless Boldness, do as Openly, and in
Print, Extol Ludlow's Mem. Oats, Icon. 1. Op, Reform. Pref. to Milton's
Letters, vind. of O. C. vind. L. Parl.
and Applaud, as Protestant Heroes, English Patriots, Men full of Grace, the
Knowledge of God, and true Religion; Men of Honor, Prudence, etc. Those
execrable Traitors, and proscribed Regicides, who in diverse Statutes, stand
Branded for horrid Murderers, Parricides, Miscreants, Sons of Belial, neither
true Subjects, nor true Protestants, but Authors of the greatest Reproach and
Infamy, it was possible for the greatest Enemies of God and the King, to bring
on the Protestant Religion, and the Nation.

THE Preface to a Sermon will not afford room to say all I can, to confute
these Men, to show the Wickedness of their Principles, the Falseness and
Injustice of their Reproaches; and the Innocence of K. Charles. But I have
prepared, and will shortly publish, full, and unquestionable Proof of them all.

FOR, upon a full and impartial Survey of all that has been Written on both
sides of the Controversy, between the R. M. and his Enemies, I find, though
they had the Advantage, by their Success, to be thought the Right Cause, yet
they wanted that Strength of Law and Reason, which they had in Arms and
Legions. And in this Judgment I am confirmed, by the Concurrence of all the
many Parliaments we have had ever since that Tragical Dispute; every of them
having judged for the King, and condemned his Enemies; declared Him in the
Right, and they in the Wrong And, beside the Determination of those most
competent Judges, we have the Evidence of very many Men, who Acted with the
greatest Zeal and Violence against Him; and were literally, His Mortal Enemies;
who being afterward convinced of their Error, publicly Recanted; declared
their Repentance and Remorse; gave Testimony to His Innocence, and the
Righteousness of his Cause and from Inveterate Adversaries, became Advocates,
and Compurgators.

NOW, were there no other Evidence, or Argument (as there are abundance) to
prove the Innocence of this Holy King, these Two were enough, viz. The constant
and agreeing Judgment, and Declarations, of many Parliaments; and the Testimony
of many of His greatest Foes. These render all other Pleas needless, and
supersede, as well as surmount, all other Proof whatsoever, either from
Judgment, or Evidence, or both.

FOR the Parliament, i. e. and the King, and Coke, Jurisd. of Courts, c. 1.
Idem, Instit. page 109.
three Estates of the Realm assembled, being by none more than the Royal M.
Enemies, accounted the most absolute, and supreme Judges of right, and wrong;
and the Evidence of an Enemy, reputed the most credible in a Man's behalf; and
both these full, and clear in the Vindication of King Charles: The Controverfy
must End here, unless they will deny what all grant to be true; and themselves
with great Ardour, and Zeal, have often asserted. By this Law, and by this
Testimony, we will therefore be Tried, and Judged, and let those that will not
be convinced by them, be accounted, as the Scripture says, Men that have no
truth in them.

MY Work then, in this short Defense, and Pleading for K. Charles, is to prove
(1st.) the Validity, and Competency of their Judgments, or the power, and
rights of Parliaments to judge fully, and finally, in all matters of right, or
wrong. (2dly.) That they have given, or declared for the King. And (lastly)
that many of his greatest, and most malicious Foes, by the Invincible power and
force of Truth, or Conscience, have done the same. So that his very Enemies,
being Judges, and Witnesses, King Charles appears Just, and Innocent.

THE power and right of Parliaments to judge, and make final determination, in
the matter before us, appears by their own Declaratory Statutes, The nature and
practice of all late Parliaments, and by consent and testimony of the King's
Enemies.

THE transcendent power of Parliaments to judge finally in all Cases, of which
they take cognizance, is evident among many of their own Declarations. One
especially made not only before the Union of the Kingdoms, but before the
uniting of the contending Royal Houses of Lancaster and York; is done in words
very significant, and expressive: The Parliament, say they, is of such
Authority, Rot. Parliam. apud Westminster. 1 Ric. 3.
that manifestation, or declaration, of any Truth or Right, made by them,
makes before all other things, most faith and certainty; quieting Men's Minds,
and removing the Occasion of all doubts.

IF we consider the Nature, and look into the Practice of all late Parliaments,
they afford us great reason to trust their Integrity, and rely on their
Judgments. Having shown themselves such irreconcilable Adversaries and Opposers
of Popery and Tyranny; and so quick-sighted, to discover it far off, and always
showing their Abhorrence of those detestable Faults in a King; and expressed
their Indignation with a witness. But when, or where, have they said of a
popish Tyrant, as they do of the R. Martyr? And enjoin anniversary
Lamentations, in the most solemn-manner, and most sensible Expressions for the
loss of him; and in the height of a National Ferment, against Popery and
Tyranny Vote, as they did, 70000 l. to erect a Monument A. D. 1678.
to his Blessed Memory.

Thirdly, NONE more Magnify, and cry up the Power and Credit of Parliaments,
either as Judges, or Evidences, than those who Writ, Fought, and Preached
against K. Charles, the Martyr, both before, and since, His Murder: So that if
they submit not to their Decision in this, as well as other Cases, they must be
Men of great confidence and partiality.

THE L. P. Rem. May 26. 1642, declare themselves Husb. Colled. vol. 1. p. 270.
Judges between the King and His People in all matters of Right. -- The
Parliament is, say they, at another time, the Reason of the King and Kingdom,
The only competent Judges where the Fault is -- when page 278.
the Question is, Who is King? or, What is best? -- What ever they declare,
ought not to be questioned by any one; and all who guide themselves by their
Declaration, 288.
ought to be free from all Accounts* and Penalties. This was said of them, when
they were scarce half two Estates; without Lords Spiritual, and against their
Head, the King; And so were but an headless Trunk, or Carcass, as Bracton and
Fortescue Fall. 109. cap. 12.
says of the English Community, when without a King: For He is, as my Lord
Coke calls him, Caput principium, and finis Parliamenti, so essential to the
making of a Parliament, that He is Head, Beginning, and End of it.

W* Prinne, in the height of their Reign, published four Books concerning the
Sovereign Power of Parliaments: Wherein he makes them sole Judges of Wrong done
by any one, especially the King; and affirms it Treason to deny it, or refuse
Submissions to their Judgments and Declarations.

THE Regicides, on the Bench, and the fame Traitors at the Bar, insisted on
this infallible Judgment, and Power of Parliament, to warrant their execrable
Treason: But they had no such Power or Judgment to justify them.

Mr. Baxter says, The Parliament has Power to Holy C. Wealth, p. 355, 439,
471, etc.
declare what is Just, and what is* Unjust; What is Law, and what is against
Law; They are our Eyes, etc. And we are bound to believe them, a the most
competent Judges* and Witnesses. And although this was written during, and in
justification of, a Rebellion, and Usurpation: Yet, to do Mr. Baxter right, he
did conform to the Judgment of the next complete Parliament; and declared the
R. M. Innocent, and the Person of the King inviolable; and for so doing, has
been lashed in his Grave, by one otherwise of his own Kidney. All Judgments,
especially in things of the greatest moment, are to be Respited, till they have
Pref. to E. Strafford 's Trial.
declared and judged, says Rushworth. Mr. Johnson has, as much as any Man,
asserted the Power, and vouched the Credibility of Parliaments, though he
Argum. p. ^2.
sometimes takes the liberty to censure such as they have declared Innocent;
and deny some Prerogatives of the Crown, fixed to it by many Statutes.

I forbear to produce the Opinions of Horn, Bracton, Fleta, Fortescue, Sir Tho.
Smith, Mr. Cambden, Sir W. Rawleigh, Sir Ed. Coke, Sir R. Cotton, and many
others, learned in the Law, Constitution, and History of England, and go on to
show what our Parliament, those Infallible Judges, say to the Case in
Controversy.

THE healing Parliament, was convened without a King, under an Illegal and
Usurped Power, and consisted, for the most part, of such as had been active,
either in Council, or Arms, against the R. M. so that they knew well what was
done, and where the Right lay: And none more than they asserted His Innocence,
detested the Principles, and branded the Men by whom He fell, as may be seen in
most of their Acts.

ALL the succeeding Parliaments, to this Day, do, on all the Occasions they
have to mention this good King, repeat, and confirm, the Judgment of their
Predecessors, and declare Him Innocent, Sacred, most Excellent, Gracious, and
of ever Blessed Memory. Eulogies which belong not, nor will ever be given, to a
Popish Tyrant, by any, much less by many, Protestant Parliaments. Vide 12. Car.
2. 11, 12, 14. 30. 13. Car. 2. 5. 9. 38. 14. Car. 2. 9. 21. 22. 29. 16. Car. 2.
1. 6, and 7. Guliel. and Mariae, etc. I refer to the Statute Book for abundance
of this kind, and present you with the Extract of one Declaration very
Emphatical; not to be found there, because the Act is expired, which contains
it: But in the Role, 14. Car. 2. 8. we have it in these words: Whereas there
was a Loyal Party, which, through all hazards and extremities in Defense of the
KING's Person, Crown, and Dignity, the Rights and Privilege of Parliament, the
Laws and Honor of the English Nation, did bear Arms, by the command of His
late Majesty, of ever blessed Memory: And, according to their Duty, and the
known Laws of the Land, oppose that Barbarous Rebellion, raised against His
most Excellent Majesty in the Year 1640, by some of the Men then sitting at
Westminster -- by the Rapin, and Oppression of a long Rebellion, Treason, and
Usurpation, the Kingdom became exhausted, etc. Here you have the Matter fully
displayed, the true Characters and Right of the King's Cause set forth, the
Loyalty of His Friends declared and approved, the Wickedness of His Enemies
justly censured and condemned, their Resisting and taking up Arms against Him
declared Traitorous and Unlawful, and the Direful Effects of that Rebellion,
briefly, but fully, described: Which shows how contrary to Law and Truth, in
Right and Fact, those late Libels are, which Accuse the King, Justify the
Traitors, and Vindicate that Rebellion; calling Him Tyrant, them Patriots, and
that a Blessed Reformation: Cujus contrarium.

IF we look into the Sermons yearly preached before the House of P. and observe
their Thanks, and Order to Print such wherein the R. M. is said to be, the best
of Kings, a strict Observer of Justice, Honor and Truth; a Prince that had
done no harm, nor committed any fault; of perfect Innocence, an upright Man,
one that feared God, and eschewed Evil, (like Josiah) a Saint that did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord, the Best of Men, the Best of Kings,
the most excellent Example of Virtue and Piety that ever the World produced, as
Dr. Lancaster, Dr. Langford, and Mr. Blackall, have done the last three
Anniversaries: we cannot but see it is still their Judgment and Opinion of K.
Charles: And admire at the Impudence and Falsehood of those many Libels, daily
published to tell the Nation, That so many Parliaments have vouched a
pernicious Lie; allowed and confirmed by public Sanction such a Character of
an odious Tyrant, as the best of Princes have not deserved.

And now I would ask all sober Men of Sense, to which of these ought we to
adhere, and submit our Judgments and Belief of this injured Monarch? Where
shall we find the Truth? Who is most likely to be in the right, the Law, or the
Libels? Parliament, or Pamphlets? Surely, all unprejudiced Men will believe the
former, before Cook, Milton, Goodwin, Ludlow, Jones, Oats, and all the rest of
these scandalous Traitors, who so falsely and impudently gainsay them, and
accuse Him, whom they have acquitted, and declared Not Guilty.

HAVING thus cleared up the Royal Martyr's Innocence, by the inculcated Verdict
and solemn Judgment of the highest Judicature, and supreme Court of England,
which is the Sense and Judgment of the whole Kingdom, it may seem needless to
produce any thing else in His behalf.

BUT, in regard many of His Enemies became convinced of His Justice and
Innocence, and made open confession thereof, I will produce a few of them, to
Evidence the Truth and Justice of that Judgment our Parliament have given of
this Wronged INNOCENT.

O. Cromwell, who was the chiefest in Arms, Council and Judgment against Him,
shall be the first I will produce for Him; it may seem incredible, that he
should ever think, or speak favorably of the R. M. whose Life and Throne he
took from Him: But we are assured, by diverse of his own Party, that he not only
declared his Sense of the King's Goodness, and the Wrong done Him but engaged
to Rescue Him out of His Enemies Hands, and settle Him on His Throne. Sir W.
Waller's Apologetical Narrative, Sir Tho. Herbert's Threnod. Car. Major
Huntington's Address to the Parliament: See also M. Hunt. Letter to Sir W.
Dugdal,
Aug 1648, Col. George's Account of the Army's Proceedings: All report the
Courtship Cromwell and Ireton made to the King, while he was their Prisoner,
1647, and that they often confessed him to be the best of Kings, His Cause
Rightful, and page 270.
His Enemies in the Wrong. Ludlow also, in his Memoirs, says, Cromwell, a
little before His Murder, promised to do all he could to Serve and Save Him.
And there is lately published, by R. Baldwin, John Darby, etc. Memoirs of Sir
John Barkley, which tells us, That Cromwell, while the King was his Prisoner,
told him, weeping, that he had been abused by a wrong Opinion of the King, who
he now thought the most upright, and the most conscientious Man in the three
Kingdoms.

THE Conversion of this infamous Traitor, may seem but a Copy of his
Countenance, a Feign, to gain his Point, and delude the King. But the Crocodile
said as much after he had murdered Him and got into his Throne, as we are told
by the Author of a Paraphrase on the King's Speech, printed 1648. Cromwell,
says he, confessed, the Martyred P. 19.
King was a Man of most excellent Parts; great Piety, as a Christian; exceeding
Honesty, as a Man; supreme Wisdom, as a King; and of Knowledge, as a Commander,
exceeding all his Generals; but being the Son of King James, 'twas needful that
he died.

Mr. P. Sterry, the Sunday after Cromwell's Death, 18 New Q. Print. 1659.
said in his Sermon at the Chapel Royal, That as sure as the Word of God was
in his Hand, the late Protector was at the right Hand of God, intercedeing for
this Nation. If those People think him such a deified Saint, they cannot refuse
credit to what he confesses; especially of an Enemy.

IRETON declared himself so much a Convert to Loyalty, and sensible of the
King's Righteousness, and the Justice of his Cause, that he declared, as Mr.
Huntington relates, ut supra, that if he had but six Men to join him, he would
Fight for it; that he would purge, and purge the House, 'till all his Enemies
were outed.

COOK, the infamous Solicitor at the High Court of Justice, who Impeached the
King, used him Rudely, and afterward writ a Vindication of Reg. Trials, p. 116.
134.
that horrid Villainy; did, both before and after the Murder, as was proved,
and confessed at his Trial, declare, That he believed King Charles to be as
Wise and Gracious a Prince, as any was in the whole World, but he must die, and
Monarchy with him And in that scandalous Fardle of Treason, he writ to defend
that hellish Fact. He confessed, That the Appeal. p. 35.
King was a great Student, had more Learning, and Dexterity in State Affairs,
undoubtedly, than all the Kings in Christendom, and for Parts, had they been
sanctified, (i. e. Infatuated by Enthusiasm) a second Solomon.

H. MARTIN who commanded a Regiment C. Walker, Hist. Ind. vol, 1. p. 171.
of Horse in the Service of the L. P. and, as one of the Party writes, a
Regiment of Whores in his own; sat a Judge at the Trial and Sentence of K.
Charles, and published a Vindication thereof; yet afterward, he declared in the
H. of Commons, upon H. M. Polit. and Oecon. Letters.
a Motion for making Cromwell King, That if a King were necessary, it had been
better keep the last, being the fittest for it, of any Gentleman in England;
and C. Walker, ubi supra, p. 149. Trial, p. 249.
that there was no fault in the Person, but the Office; and at his Trial,
confessed his Trason and Repentance.

SURELY such true Protestant Patriots, such Babes of Grace, such Bulwarks of
the Reformed Religion, and Rights of the People, as these Bloody Parricides
were by some accounted, would not have said this, of one they thought a Tyrant
or a Papist; so that they were such Judges as Pontius Pilat, who condemned to
the Cross, a King, in whom he confessed he found no Fault.

SIR W. Waller, was a Member of the L. P. and one of their Generals, a great
Scholar, and a great Soldier; but after he had by his Sword in the Field, and
his Voice in the House of Commons, opposed the Royal Cause and Party, 'till
their Overthrow, and the King's Captivity at Holdenby; then he became a
penitent Convert, and writ an Account of the Transactions of those Times,
wherein he Justifies and Applauds the King, and abhors the Rebellion and
Murder. In his time, says he, under Apolog. Nar. p. 140.
a complaint of Slavery, we lived like Freemen. -- I do utterly declare the
Proceedings against him, as contrary to Faith, Example, Duty, and Oaths; he
granted more than any King ever did to any Parliament, or more than any
Parliament ever demanded of any King; and more than the fatal Long Parliament
could in the Beginning hope or wish. I do not so much as in Thought, P. 139.
reflect on the Honor of His late Majesty, whose Memory shall remain Sacred
and Glorious, while that of His Enemies shall rot and stink.

SEVERAL others, who bore Arms against the King at that time, had the like
Remorse and Sentiments, and showed it openly, even while Nol was in his
Altitudes, and drove Army, Parliament, and all before him.

M. R. Huntington, Coll. George, Coll. E. Crook, Iconoclastes. pref. p. 8.
of Higham, Coll. Mat. Tomlinson, were some of them. So true was it, that
Milton, the most Inveterate of the King's Enemies observed, that those who
hated him, and fought against him with displayed Banners in the Field,
afterward applauded and extolled him, as a Prince, the Wisest, and most
Religious, that ever lived.

BUT, besides the Sword Men, who became convinced, and dropped their Weapons,
many of His busiest Enemies, the great Incendiaries in the Parliament, Pulpit,
or Press, had the same Conviction, when the Heat of their Jealousy and Rage was
abated; and they had time to consider, or opportunity to converse with him:
Then they became convinced, and admired him more than the Q of Sheba did
Solomon, for she came to see a Man famous for Wisdom, and found him to exceed
her Expectation. But these, a Man Infamous for Folly and Wickedness; and found
him so much the contrary, that they cried out, Ecce! plus quam Solomon! Mr.
Long ag Walker, p. 48. Dr. Hollings. Jan. 30th. 93.
Thus Mr. Vines, after the Dispute at Newport, cried out, Lo! a second Solomon!
A. Henderson after that at New Castle, was so charmed with the King's Learning,
Wisdom, etc. that he became severely penitent for what he had acted many Years
against him, retired to Scotland, Whitlock Mem. p. 123. Saunderson, Hist. p.
921. Perinchiff, Hist. K. Char. p. 39. Heath, Chr. p. 115. Ravilak Red. p. 4.
Athen. Oxon. vol. 2. p. 520. 436, 205.
and there died of Grief; leaving such a Character of Him, as his greatest
Friends have not exceeded. Sir Tho. Herbert and Mr. Harrington, put into the
King's Bedchamber, upon the removal of his Loyal Servants, by the Army, became
Converts, and boldly vindicated Him against the Calumnies of His Enemies; and
declared him a most Wise and Excellent King. So did Speaker Lental, W. Prinn,
Mr. Corbet, etc. Hist. Indep. vol. 2. p. 109. 138, 201.
He was the most sanctified, virtuous, and knowing Prince in the World: had
learnt the whole Method of Human Perfection, said C. Walker, 1650. who was a
Covenanter a Member of the L. Parliament, and had, as himself boasts,
faithfully served them from the beginning, with great Pain, Hazard, vast
expense of Health and Money, Gratis, and in pure Love of the good old Cause,
and Hatred of the King's Will, 1647. The famous Mr. A. Marvel, during Cromwell's
Usurpation, was his Under Secretary to Milton, and a great Admirer of both. And
although after the Restoration, he became the great Idol of the publicans, a
Lampooner of the Court, and Friend to its Enemies; yet on all Occasions, he met
with in his reflective and satirical Writings, to mention the R. Martyr, he
speaks of him with Applause. When the War broke out, quoth he, Hell broke
loose; Hist. Judep. vol. 2. p. 109. 138, 201.
the L. P. ought, and might have trusted the King with Rehearsal Transprosed,
part 1. p. 302. Part 2. p. 349.
the whole Matter, about which they quarrelled, he was of so accurate and
piercing a Judgment -- the best Prince that ever wielded the Scepter of these
Kingdoms, very pious and religious, of exquisite Understanding; Further Instr.
to Painter, 1670.
-- Holy Charles, was like Marcus Aurelius --

THERE cannot be a truer, or better Character given of this most excellent
Prince, than in a Hist K. Char. 1649.
Libel written 1649. by W. Lilly, on purpose to defame Him, and renown his
Murderers; but it is too long for this Preface. Most of those who embrued their
Hands in his Blood, recanted, confessed their Guilt in shedding the Innocent
Blood of a Sacred King, of ever blessed Memory; with Tears abhorred the Fact,
and themselves for committing it; and like Joseph's Brethren, accused one
another at the Bar, for what they had done together on the Bench; as may be
seen in Authentic Reports of their Trials; though a late scandalous Libeller
has the Impudence to affirm, That those who condemned King Charles to Death,
were steadfast to the T. O. first (...), p. 73
last, few of them having so little Grace to repent of what they had done; but
what he Swears, and what he Writes, are alike with him; usually the breadth of
Heaven wide from Truth: For though Rebellion be like the Sin of Witchcraft,
seldom or never repented of; yet 23, that is almost all those execrable
Regicides, who by a Mockery of Justice, perpetrated that cruel Villainy; were
sometimes by the Power of Truth and Conscience, forced, in the midst of, or
soon after all their Railing at this Martyred King, to cry out, as Satan did to
our Savior, I know Thee, thou art the Son of God! And declare Voice from
Heaven, to the Com. Wealth, 1651.
openly to the World, as A. Evans soon after the Murder, that He was a Prince
Able, Wise, Faithful, of an undefiled good Spirit; perfect in all things,
Justified of God and Men; and by His own Enemies.

THUS much for the Evidence given in behalf of the R. M. by many of his
Adversaries and Murderers. There are a (loud of Witnesses beside, who, though
his Friends, cannot be thought Partial in his Favor, some of them being Men of
Honor, who well knew Him, Testified for him when he was Dead; and they Dying
by the same Hand that bereft him, 'twas no Time or Subject for Flattery or
Falsehood.

I will, therefore, produce a couple of them, to clench the whole, and perfume
the Court, after that filthy pack who have appeared in this Cause, and then
adjourn.

THAT Loyal Martyr, and Noble Patriot, the Lord Capel, was Famous, even among
his Enemies, for Piety, Integrity, Wisdom, and Heroic Virtue; when he came to
Die for his Fidelity to this Excellent Prince, he gave Him this Eulogy, with
his last Breath: I have considered the Images of all the Greatest Speech on the
Scaffold.
and most Virtuous Princes which have been in the World, and cannot find one
more sufficient than K. Charles.

AND Duke Hamilton, who Died with him for Hamilton's Memoirs, p. 398.
the same Cause, took God to witness, at his last moments, that he knew the
King to have as eminent Virtues, and few Vices, as any Man; that He was an
excellent Protestant, free from intending Tyranny, or Arbitrary Government.

WHAT a multitude of such Characters are there extant from the Tongues and Pens
of Great and Good Men, who would not Flatter, could not be Deceived, knowing
what they said to be true? In what Rapture and Ecstasy have His Praises been
celebrated, and the highest Eulogies given of this incomparable King, in the
most solemn and greatest Assembly of the Nation, for its Number and Quality? I
mean our Parliaments, who, every Year, as I have already observed, approve and
publish the Praises and Celebrations of this King's Innocence, Righteousness,
Wisdom, and great Virtues.

AND now I appeal to all Rational Men, which is of most Credit in such a case?
The Evidence of Mortal Enemies undeceived and penitent, the Judgment of the
highest Judicature, the Verdict of an English General Council, the Declaration
of our Oracles, and the Dying Testimony of Men of Honor, Integrity, and a
public Spirit: Or the Slanders of such Scandalous Witnesses, as are already
Convict of Perjury, and proved non probus; the Calumnies of such proscribed
Traitors as Ludlow; or the Lies, Reproaches, popular Defamations, Falsehoods of
Grub street, and Factious Cabals, which have neither Foundation, or Proof; and
the Divulgers of which are ashamed to be known? Judge, like English Men, and
speak your minds!

I must end here; and reserve the abundance more I have to say on this Head,
for another Occasion; after a few Words to such as are made believe King
Charles was not Author of (...), and to those who Neglect, or Oppose the
Observation of His Day.

THE former I refer to the Second Edition of that Excellent Defense, lately
made of His Right to that Seraphick Book, by Mr. Wagstaff, and is Sold by H.
Hindmarsh, in Cornhill: Where all Objections are obviated; and its being
Genuine, proved by irrefragable Arguments, and unquestionable Evidence. The
same is done by the Author of the Princely Pelican. Restitution to the R.
Author. Mr. Long's Answer to Dr. Walker. And in several Tracts lately written
by Dr. Hollingworth, and many others.

TO those who are so barbarous as to Affront God, and the Law, in making this
Day a Festival; A. D. 1694. came out a Libel, writ by J. G. on purpose to
dissuade the People of England from obeying a Law of their Country, viz.
Statute 3. 2. Car. 12.
if they are English Subjects, I will only urge the Command of a Statute Law,
the Practice of the King and three Estates, and the Generality of the Nation;
and beg of them to consider, if not in Conformity and Obedience to the Law and
Good Manners to the King, Lords and Commons; (for many Dissent from, and grow
Regardless of, all those) yet for the Reasons pathetically urged by the
Reverend Preacher of this Sermon, they at least forbear to Affront and Pervert
the solemn Anniversary Celebration of the Day, on which, for our Sins, the R.
Martyr went to Heaven; and pray with that Church, in, and for which He Died:
That His Memory may be ever blessed among us; that we may follow the Example of
His Courage, Constancy, Meekness, great Patience, and Charity: And that this
our Land may be freed from the Vengeance of His Righteous Blood, and Gods Mercy
glorified in the Forgiveness of our Sins, Amen.

Yet, mighty God! Yet, yet, we Humbly crave,
This Floating Isle from Shipwreck save;
And though to wash that Blood which does it stain,
It well deserves to sink into the Main; Mr. Cowley.

Yet for the Royal Martyr's Prayer,
(The Royal Martyr Prays we know)
This guilty perishing Vessel spare;
Hear but His Soul above! And not His Blood below!
Ita Canit. James Young.

A SERMON Preached at St. Andrew' s Plymouth, On the 30th of January, School/9.
2 SAMUEL xxi. Chap. part of the first Ver. And the Lord answered, It is for
Saul, and for his Bloody House, because he slew the Gibeonites.
IN the former part of this Verse, we find there was a Famine in the Days of
David Three Years, Year after Year; and DAVID enquired of the LORD.

In the Reign of David, though a Man after God's own heart, an heavy Judgment,
a Famine, for Three Years, was inflicted on God's ancient People: And the
Famine having continued so long a time, David might reasonably imagine, there
was more than a natural Cause; and that God, for some reason not known to him,
might inflict the heavy Judgment upon him and his People. And, therefore, being
careful of their Welfare, he enquired of the Lord, that is, by the High Priest,
with the Vrim and Thummim, by whom God, upon extraordinary Occasions, did give
answer to such enquiries: And the Answer to this, we have in the Text.

And the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and his bloody House, because he slew
the Gibeonites.

Now we may find in the following Verse, who thief Gibeonites were, and why
Soul slew them. The Gibeonites were not of the Children of Israel, but a
remnant of the Amorites, and Saul sought to slay them in his Zeal to the
Children of Israel and Judah.

For a further understanding of this Matter, we must have recourse to the 9th
Chapter of the Book of Joshua, where we find, that this People, when they had
heard that Joshua and the Israelites had destroyed Jericho, and Ai, they sent
Ambassadors, pretending they came from a far Country, saying, They heard of the
Fame of God, and all that He did in Egypt, and to all the Kings of the
Amorites; and therefore, they desired to make a League with them. And that they
might the better delude them, they put on old Garments, and brought Provision
that was dry and moldy, saying, These things became so by their long Journey.
By this Craft and Dissimulation they obtained a League, confirmed by the Oath
of the Princes of Israel. But there was great murmuring, when the People
understood how they were outwitted by these Gibeonites, and deceived by their
Craft and Dissimulation; for they belonged to a City of the Amorites, who, by
God's Command, were to be destroyed with the rest of the Canaanites. And though
they pretended they came a long Journey, lived not three Days Journey from
them. But to quiet the People, Joshua and the Princes appointed them to be
Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water; but spared their Lives, because they had
Sworn unto them by the Name of the Lord God of Israel. And in this mean and
survile condition, they continued till the Days of Saul, who slew them; for
which, in the Days of David, long after this Act of bloody Cruelty was
committed, God punished that People with a Famine, which continued Three Years.

Now there is one Thing needs Explication, before I come to those Observations,
which I design to be the main Subjuct of my Discourse at this time. These
Gibeonites being Amorites, how could Saul offend in Killing them, since, by
God's express Command, they were to be destroyed? For though God allowed them
to make Peace with those that were far off; yet for the Cities of the
Canaanites, which God gave them for an Inheritance, the Command was, Thou shall
save nothing alive that breaths, 20. chap. Deuteronomy. 16. ver.

But, in Answer to this, it must be considered, Aequitate quadam erat
interpretanda ut cum aeterna Dei clementia congrueret. Mas. in Josh. p. 169.
that, according to the most learned Interpreters, the Command to Destroy all,
and Save nothing alive, was to be understood with some mitigation, and under
some limitations, that it might comport with the Mercies of God, and His
readiness to Save Lex universe edicta esset propter eorum paucitatem qui vitae
ante-actae paenitentia essent meritas paenas essugituri: ibid.
those who leave their Sins, and turn to Him. And though the Command have no
such express Limitation; yet the reason might be, because there were so few who
would leave their Idolatry, and desire Peace with the People of God; these, and
Rahab, being the only instances of such a Repentance among all the numerous
Inhabitants then in Canaan.

But how does it appear, may you say, that these Gibeonites did thus Repent and
leave their Idolatrous Worship, and embrace that of the God of Israel? Now
though this be not expressed in the Sacred History, yet we may collect it from
several Passages of it. It is plain these Gibeonites were by some means or
other acquainted with the wonders God did in Egypt, and that God had commanded
the Inhabitants of Canaan should be destroyed. And this they believed, as
appears by their saying, they were sore afraid of their Lives. And this
Belief and Terror Josh. 9. 24.
must needs dispose them to embrace the Worship of that God, who alone they
thought was able to Save them.

And, besides, it is said, That Joshua made them Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of
Water for the Congregation, and for the Altar of the Lord, and it is very
unlikely that Joshua Quis non intelliget eos afae do Demoniorum cultu debuisse
alienissimos esse qui in aede Dei opt. Max. officio atque muneri alicui
praeessent. Mas. p. 172.
would have admitted them to any Service, relating to the Altar of God, if they
had been Vile Idolators, and Enemies to the Worship of the true God.

Joshua and the Princes of Israel in his time, were Men that feared God, and
acted by a better Zeal than that of Saul. And if they had, by the subtilty of
the Gibeonites, been drawn into a League contrary to God's Command, no doubt
but they would have broken the Sinful League, and destroyed the Gibeonites with
the rest of the Amorites, all solemn Leagues and Covenants, that are ungodly,
being better renounced than kept.

This therefore was an exempt Case; these Gibeonites did not join with the rest
of the Amorites to oppose God's People, and his design to settle them in the
Land of Canaan; they desire to be their Servants, and asked only their Lives:
They offered to Nihil factum est contra legem, vide 1 Reg. 8. 20, Grot.
leave their Idolatry, and to Worship with them, the only true God.

In such a case, it was not against God's Command to spare a Canaanite, as
appeared by another Instance, that of Rahab and her Family, as I intimated
before. And we may say of these Gibeonites as the Apostle does of Rahab, By
Faith they perished Heb. 11. 9. Eadem ratione vita concessa est Rachabae and
tori Familiae Paternae. Jun.
not, with them that believed not.

So that it was a greater Sin, an Act of Bloody Cruelty in Saul to kill the
Gibeonites who were Proselytes, embraced the true Religion, lived peaceably,
and were very serviceable to the People of Israel. And though God deferred his
Vengeance for this Bloody Act for a time, yet it fell the heavier at last, in
David's Days, by a three Years Famine.

The Words being explained, we may from them observe Two things.

1. That Innocence is no security against the Violence and Oppression of Bloody
Men.

2. That the Oppression and Violence of Bloody Men of one Generation, may be
punished in another.

1. That Innocence is no security against the Violence and Oppression of Bloody
Men.

In the prosecution of this,

1. I shall give some Instances, the best Proof of the Truth of it.

2. I shall show this is not inconsistent with the Justice of God's Providence,
in answer to the main Objection against it. And,

Lastly, Conclude with a brief Application.

1st. I shall give some Instances, by which it may appear, that Innocence is no
security against the Oppression and Violence of Bloody Men.

A great part of sacred and profane History, is made up of Instances of this
Nature. Such unjust and violent Proceedings began soon after the Creation, and
Fall of Man, as appears by Cain's murdering his Brother Abel. And there have
been many in all Ages, who, as St. Jude says, have Verse 11.
gone in the way of Cain, and have ran greedily after the error of Balaam for
Reward. Those of whom the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 37, 38.
were, as the Apostle says, stoned, saw'n asunder, and slain with the Sword.
This was the Usage which Prophets and Holy Men met with under the Law: And our
Savior himself, the Apostles, and many eminent Bishops which succeeded them,
met with no better under the Gospel.

Our blessed Savior was not only a Lamb without spot, a Person of incomparable
Piety and Virtue, but also, one that went about doing good, curing Diseases,
restoring the Lame to their Strength, the Blind to their Sight, and the Dead to
Life. But neither his Innocence, nor Benificence, could secure him against the
Blood-thirsty Scribes and Pharisees, who often sought his Life, and at last,
with pretended Forms of Justice, condemned him as a Malefactor, and Crucified
him with Thieves. And the Apostles, when they received the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, and were sent to preach the Gospel to all Nations, they were sent as
Lambs among Wolves; the purity of their Doctrine, the innocence of their Lives,
the benefit of their Miracles, could not preserve them from the Violence of
Bloody Men: And though by their Miracles they saved other Men's lives, yet by
Violence they lost their own. The time would fail me to speak of those eminent
Bishops and other excellent Christians, who in all Ages, though harmless in
their Lives as those Gibeonites, but more serviceable, helping Men to that
Living water, of which, St. John 4. 14.
those that drink shall never thirst, met with some as Bloody as Saul, who by
their unjust Violence defiled their Hands with their innocent Blood. But
amongst the Noble Army of Martyrs, we must not forget The Glorious Martyr of
this Day, which singular Instance, if there were no other, was sufficient to
convince us, that the best of Men are no more secure from Violence than from
Natural Death. I proceed now in the

2d. Place, To show how this can consist with the Justice of God's Providence,
a seeming Contradiction to this being the maine Objection against it.

We must consider, with Job, that God does great Things past finding out, so
that his Judgments are a great Deep, and our Reason Chap. 9. 10.
cannot reach it.

St. Paul, speaking of God's dealing with the Jews, who were His chosen People,
and a long time favored by Him above all other Nations, and at last rejected,
and suffered the effects of His heaviest Displeasure: I say, the Apostle
speaking of this instance of the Divine Providence, acknowledges it above his
Comprehension; How unsearcahble are His Judgments, and His Ways past finding
out! And so this Act of the Divine Providence, in giving up the most Innocent
to the Rage and Fury of Blood-Thirsty Men, is thought somewhat obscure and
unaccountable to the Reason of Men. But we ought to own the Justice and Wisdom
of God in all His Proceedings, and though we cannot understand how they can
consist with those Perfections, yet we ought firmly to believe, That the Lord
is Righteous in all His Ways, and Holy in all His Works.

And yet this was not so great a Difficulty as to puzzle the reason of
Philosophical and Inquisitive Men amongst the Heathens, as appears by Plutarch,
Simplicius, Cicero, and Seneca.

But I am speaking to Christians, who believe God's Holy Word, by which Divine
Revelation we may best be satisfied in this matter; and I shall thence produce
a few of those Reasons, by which the Justice of God's Providence is Vindicated
against this Objection.

1. The Calamities of this Life, which may befall the best of Men, are
consistant with the Justice of God's Providence, because the best of Men, as
the Apostle says, offend God in many things. And the least Sin against God,
justly deserves the heaviest Calamities of this Life, the Wages of Sin being
Death, Eternal as well as Temporal. And therefore the Prophet says, Why does a
Lam. 3. 39.
living Man complain a Man for the Punishment of his Sin? That is, no Man can
reasonably complain, he suffers more than he deserves from the Justice of
God.

2. These Calamities of Good Men are consistant with the Justice of God's
Providence, because, by the Wisdom and Goodness of that Providence, they
receive Benefit and Advantage from them, which David acknowledged, saying, It
is good for me that I have been afflicted.

It would take up too much Time to show the many Advantages Good Men receive by
their Sufferings in this Life. In short, by this, they are more fully weaned
from the Love of the World, and their Hearts and Affections are more firmly set
upon Spiritual and Heavenly Things, and thereby their Sufferings yield the
Peaceable Fruit of Righteousness; so that by this means their Title to the
Eternal Happiness of Heaven is Strengthened and Confirmed: And this is not all;
they are hereby qualified and prepared for a sweeter relish of the Felicities
of that Blissful State. The Plenty of Canaan was the greater Happiness after
the Bondage of Egypt, and the scarcity and miseries of the Wilderness: And an
Haven is not so welcome to those who have Sailed with fair and gentle Gales, as
to those who have met with Storms and Tempests. And that Rest which remains
for the People of God, will be received with a peculiar Joy and Satisfaction by
those, who have been tossed upon the Waves of a tempestuous and unquiet World.
And the Peace and Love, the Harmony and Concord, which the glorious MARTYR of
this Day enjoys with the Saints above, is the more sweet and pleasant,
because of the Tumults and Insurrections, the Contradiction and Scorn, he met
with from those who assumed that Name here below.

3. Great Glory redoundeth to God by the Patience, the Courage, and Constancy
of his Servants, suffering for his sake, the Violence and Oppression of Bloody
Men. And God's Justice cannot reasonably be questioned for those Disposals of
his Providence, which tend to His Glory as well as the Good of Men. God was
glorified by Job's Patience in his Afflictions, as well as by his Justice and
Charity in his Prosperous State. And the Royal MARTYR of this Day, brought more
Glory to God, by his incomparable Patience, Humility, and Constancy, than other
Princes, who were blessed with Victory and Triumph over their Enemies.

Last. Above all, a full and clear Vindication of God's Providence in this
Matter, will appear by the Retributions of the Life to come. Were there no
other Life but this, and no other Reward for men's Virtue and Goodness but what
they receive in this World, then we have an Instance by the Murder mentioned
in the Text, and a far greater from that of this Day; which will yield an
unanswerable Argument against the Justice of God's Providence. But since God
has appointed a Day, in which he will after this Life reward the Sufferings of
Holy and Innocent Men, with unspeakable and eternal Happiness, whatsoever they
suffer in this Life, makes no Argument against His Justice toward them. The
Providence of God over his Servants, is to be considered as one continued Work,
from their first Entrance into this World, till they take Possession of a
better. And if any of them pass through an afflicted Life, an unjust and a
bloody Death to this blisful State, they have no more reason to complain of
Injustice or Severity in God, than the Israelites had, because God led them
through the Wilderness and the Red Sea, the safest Way to take Possession of
the Promised Land.

The Gibeonites therefore in the Text could have no reason to complain, if God
took them from a slavish and painful, to a blissful and happy Life. And the
same we may say of our late Sovereign this Day barbarously Murdered, whom God
rewarded with an incorruptible Crown, for losing one for his sake, that was
corruptible and fading. And thus having showed that Innocence is no security
against the Violence and Oppression of Bloody Men, by giving some Proof of this
Assertion, and answering the great Objection against it; the Application I
promised, in the Last place shall be very Brief, only to make us more cautious
of passing Sentence upon Men as guilty of great Crimes, because they meet with
great Calamities in this Life.

We cannot make a right Estimate of Men's Innocence or Guilt, by what befalls
them in this World, one Event happening to the Righteous and the Wicked, as the
wise Man says. Therefore as Prosperity is no certain Rule whereby to judge of
Men's Virtue and Goodness; so neither is Affliction and Misery a sure Rule to
pronounce them Guilty. By this Rule we must acquit Saul and his Bloody House,
and condemn the poor Gibeonites, whose Cause God did plead; and which would be
a greater Error, we may condemn the whole Army of Martyrs, and justify that of
Rebels. And into what Absurdities will this way of Judging bring us? For by
this Rule, the pretended Judges of our late Sovereign must be Saints when they
sat in Westminster Hall, and fall from that Grace and become Reprobates, when
they received their just Punishments at Tyburn.

I proceed now to the

2d. Observation, That the Oppression and Violence of Bloody Men in one
Generation may be punished in another. Of this,

1. I shall give some Proof.

2. I shall show in what Cases God takes this Method. And

Lastly, Conclude with some Application.

1. For some Proof of this Assertion, That the Oppression and Violence of
Bloody Men in one Generation may be punished in another.

This Proof depends most upon Matter of Fact, and of which we have one plain
and undeniable Instance in the Text.

But the Truth of this may be farther confirmed by many other Matters of the
like Nature; but I shall mention but a few.

The First, I Collect from the 23th. Chap. of St. Matthew. Ver. 35. 36. where our
Savior says, That upon that Generation should come all the righteous Blood
shed upon Earth, from the Blood of righteous Abel, to the Blood of Zacharias.
Here it is plainly threatened, that this Generation should suffer the Vengeance
of God for the Blood of Abel, that was shed by Cain in the beginning of the
World; and for the Blood of Zacharias, who, if he were that Zacharias mentioned
in the second Book of the Chronicles (as is very probable) he was slain about
Seven Hundred Years before this Generation.

The bloody Cruelty of the Jews in the Crucifixion of our Savior, is another
Instance. The Destruction of Jerusalem by the Emperor Titus, was chiefly for
the Punishment of that horrible Murder; but this was nigh Forty Years after
the Fact, and those suffered for it, who were not born when it was committed.

The same we may observe in the Destruction of Babylon; of which we read in the
18th Chapter of the Revelation of St. John, in the 21st Verse it is said, A
mighty Angel took up a Stone like a great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea,
saying, Thus with Violence shall that great City of Babylon be cast down, and
shall be found no more at all.

I shall not enter into the consideration of what City St. John means by this
City of Babylon; and whether this Prophesy was fulfilled in the Destruction of
the Old Heathen Rome, which was the Opinion of several of the ancient Fathers,
or is yet to be fulfilled by the Destruction of this Present Rome, which is the
Opinion of later Interpreters. That which I observe is, that in the Destruction
of Babylon Men are punished, not only for their own bloody Cruelties, but also
for those that were committed by their Ancestors, and in the Ages before them.
And this is evident from the last Verse of that Chapter, And in her was found
the Blood of the Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the
Earth. So that they were charged with the bloody Cruelties of others in
preceding Ages, and were punished for them. These Instances as well as that in
the Text, are a full Proof of the Truth of what was observed.

I proceed in the

2d. Place, to show in what Cases God takes this Method, and inflicts
Judgments on the present for the Oppression and Violence of Bloody Men, in
passed Generations.

This is not the constant Method of the Divine Providence, but only in some
particular Cases, in which the Justice of His Providence cannot reasonably be
questioned, and they are such as these that follow.

1st. When the present Generation have no Sense of the Blood and Violence of a
former, no Pity and Compasion for those Innocent and Holy Ones, who suffered by
the Tyranny and Cruelty of Men. This, some think, was the Case of David and his
People with respect to the Gibeonites. Videbatur David rem negligere, says
one. David Pet. Mart.
and his People took no notice of what was done under a former Reign; and for
this reason they were Punished for it. For we ought to be Humbled for the Sins
that were committed before we were Born; as appears by the Examples of God's
Servants, recorded in His Word, who made Confession of the Sins of their
Forefathers, as well as their own, that neither might pull down God's
Judgments upon them.

2d. God takes this Method, and Punishes Men of a succeeding Generation for
the Violence and Oppression of a former, when they enjoy the Fruits of that
unjust Violence, and make no Restitution to the Posterity of Men unjustly
Ruined and Undone.

And this some learned Expositors observe also in the case of the Gibeonites,
in the Text. It is said in the following Verse, Saul sought to slay the
Gibeonites, in his Zeal for the Children of Israel and Judah. Ais Pretense was
the Command of God beforementioned, to destroy all the Canaanites, and to take
Possession of their Cities, which, with all they enjoyed, and had gotten by
their hard Labor, He gave to the People to ingratiate himself with them. And
this was afterward in David's time enjoyed by those on whom he bestowed it, or
their Posterity. For this God punishes them with a long Famine, and it is that
noted Case in which God Visits the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children,
who Inherit an ill-gotten Estate, and on which a Curse is usually entailed.

3d. The present Generation may suffer for the Blood and Violence of a former,
when they own, applaud, and justify such violent and unjust Practices. And this
was the Case of the Jews, with respect to the Crucifixion of our Savior. The
following Generation adhered to the Unbelief of the former; they rejected the
only Son of God as an Impostor; Persecuted even to Death all that believed on
Him; and by this means made themselves as accountable for His Blood, as those
that cried out, His Blood be upon us and our Children.

Last. The present Generation may suffer for the Blood and Violence of a
former, when they hold the same Principles, and are of the same Temper, by
which their Ancestors were engaged in such Actions before their time. And this
was the Case of the Scribes and Pharisees, with respect to the Blood of Abel
and Zacharias, and of those Prophets and Holy Men that were slain before they
were Born. What they profess in the 23. chap. of St. Mat. verse. 30. That if
they had been in the days of their Fathers, they would not have been partakers
with them in the. Blood of the Prophets, was Falsehood and Hipocrisy. Malitia ad
omnes extendere vellet si posset, as one observes upon that place.

They had the same malicious and bloody Temper with their Forefathers, and
they who murdered Christ and His Apostles, would have done the same to Abel
and Zacharias, yea, to Moses and the Prophets, if they had lived in their Days.

And thus having showed, in what Cases we are to understand God's afflicting
Judgments on a present, for the Blood and Violence of a preceding Generation.
In the

Last Place, the Application I shall make, shall be to show,

1st. What cause we have yet to fear the Judgments of God to avenge the
innocent Blood of our late SOVEREIGN, who was upon this Day Barbarously
Murdered. And

2d. What Course we should take to prevent the Execution of such Judgments.

1st. To show what cause we have yet to fear the Judgments of God to Avenge the
innocent Blood of our late SOVEREIGN, who was Barbarously Murdered on this Day.

I suppose I need not spend time, to prove to you who are before me, that the
Executing of our late SOVEREIGN, was not an Act of Justice, but of Inhumane and
Barbarous Cruelty. If we are not convinced of this, it is vile Hipocrisy to
assemble upon this occasion.

The Act of Parliament, by which this Day is set apart, and enjoined for
Humiliation and Prayer, declares the putting our late SOVEREIGN to Death, to
be An Horrid, Impious, Execrable 2 Car. 12.
Murder, and unparalleled Treason, committed by a party of Wretched Men,
desperately Wicked, and hardened in Impiety, who were neither true Protestants
nor true Subjects, but Miscreants, whose Fanatic Rage gave the Protestant
Religion the greatest VVound and Reproach, and the People of England the most
insupportable Shame and Infamy it was possible for the Enemies of GOD and the
KING to bring upon them.

And in the Prayers which we Offer up to God this Day; the Virtues of this
Murdered Prince, His Courage and Constancy, His Patience and Charity are
commemorated; His Innocence is asserted, His Cause is justified, in that His
Death is styled a Martyrdom, by which we may know how to judge of that which is
called the good Old Cause; Old indeed as that of Lucifer, but no better, though
more prosperous. We, certainly, who offer up such Prayers as those, if we have
one grain of sincerity, must be well satisfied that the Blood of this Day was
Innocent, and therefore may justly provoke God, when he makes Inquisition for
Blood, to punish our Sinful Land wherein this was shed. Taking it then for
granted, that the Arraigning, Condemning, and Executing King Charles the First,
of Blessed Memory, was an Act of Barbarous Injustice and Cruelty; I proceed to
show what reason we have to fear God may deal with us as he did with David, and
the People of Israel for Readiness Murdering the Gibeonites.

If we compare the Person Murdered on this Day, with those mentioned in the
Text, we shall find his Quality to be such, that it will aggravate the Shedding
of his Blood, above that which was punished with a Three Years Famine.

Our late Murdered Sovereign had the Piety of David without his Sins: No Vriah
fell by his Cruelty, no Bethsheba was defiled by his Lust. And if David was
worth Ten Thousand Israelites, as they all declared, 2 Samuel 18. 3.
the Martyr of this Day was more worth then all the Gibeonites; and therefore
we may fear, his innocent Blood may pull down more than a Three Years Famine.

If with the generality of Interpreters, we look upon the Murder of the
Gibeonites as more Heinous, because of the Perjury conjoined with it, by the
Violation of that Oath which was taken for their Preservation, has not the
Murder of this Day the same Aggravation, but in a higher Degree? That was an
Oath taken by Joshua and the Princes of Israel, some Hundred Years before
Readiness time: But the Authors of this Day's Murder, had Personally taken the
Legal Oath of Alegiance, and that Illegal one of the Covenant, and were obliged
by both to preserve the Life of this excellent Prince, and his Honor too.

And if we proceed to compare our Case with those beforementioned, in which
you heard God inflicts Judgments for the Blood and Violence of a preceding
Generation, we may see farther Cause to fear, that when God makes Inquisition
for Blood, that of this Day may be remembered.

Did not David, as you hear befored, mind the killing of the Gibeonites, nor
the Hardships those were under who did survive that Cruelty? Is it not plain,
the Two last Kings (though something was done to avenge their Father's Blood) had
little Regard to the Service and Sufferings of his Friends? For many of those
found more Favor, who ventured their Lives and Fortunes to bring the King to
the Block, then those who Hazarded both to keep him from it.

Were the Jews Punished for Crucifying our Savior Forty Years after, because
they owned and justified that bloody Fact? And were the Scribes and Pharisees
threatened to be punished for the Blood of Abel and Zacharias, because they were
acted by the same Temper and Principles, by which those unjust and cruel
Actions were committed? It is plain, our Case carries great Resemblance to
these. For, are there not Books openly Printed and Sold, in which the Murder
of this Day is Justified? Do we not in Conversation often hear the Righteous
Cause of our late Murdered Sovereign Arraigned and Condemned, and his sacred
Memory Blasphemed? And by this it is plain, there are many amongst us, who want
nothing but Age, to have appeared in the Court, in which the late King was
Condemned, or on the Scaffold on which he was Executed. And does not that
Hatred of Monarchy, and Zeal for another Species of Government, the Principles
by which our late Sovereign was brought to the Block, increase amongst us?
These are Matters too Evident to be denied, though it is very strange it should
be so, under the Government of a Crowned Head, the Grandson of our Royal
Martyr, who has the same Blood running in his Veins which was this Day shed.

And thus having showed that we have Cause to fear there may be more Judgments
in Store to avenge the Royal and Innocent Blood this Day shed; I proceed in the

2d. Place, to consider what Course we should take to prevent the Execution of
these Judgments. And what more effectual way can be thought on, than what the
Authority and Wisdom of the Nation has appointed? The Observation, I mean, of
this Day, for Humiliation and Prayer; To implore the Mercy of God, that the
Guilt of that Sacred and Innocent Blood may not be Visited on us, or our
Posterity, as the Statute sensibly expressed it.

Were not too many so Cross-grained, as to turn this Fast into a Feast? Were
not those who appoint so many Fasts for the private Concerns of a Conventicle,
so Froward, as to Despise this which is Commanded by Authority, for a General
and Public Good? Did we all Assemble this Day, to Humble our selves before God
for our Sins, to declare our Abhorrence for the Murder of this Day, and to
Deprecate the Vengeance it may provoke GOD to Inflict? Did we to such an
Observation of this Day, add a sincere Reformation of our Lives, endeavoring
to live Peaceably and quietly in all Godliness and Honesty, then we might turn
our Fears of Divine Vengeance, into Hopes of Enjoying many Years of Peace and
Prosperity under His present Majesty, whom GOD has set over us: Which God of
his infinite Mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by, Charles Yeo, John Pearce, and Philip Bishop,
BOOKSELLERS in EXON.
SElect Hymns, each fitted to two Tunes, to be Sung in Churches.

The Beauty of Holiness: Or, a short Defense and Vindication of the pious
Decency, Regularity, and Order, of Reading the Communion-Service, at the
Communion Table; offered to a dissatisfied Neighbor, from his Minister.

A Form of Prayer for Married Persons, for the most part taken out of the
Liturgy.

A Practical Treatise concerning Evil Thoughts; wherein are some Things more
especially useful for Melancholy Persons. By William Chilcot, M. A.

Mr. Blount's Oracles of Reason, Examined and Answered in Nine Sections: In
which his many Heterodox Opinions are Refuted, the Holy Scriptures and Revealed
Religion are Asserted, against Deism and Atheism. By Josiah King, M. A. and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable James Earl of Anglesey.

A Sermon preached in the Parish Church of Bovey Tracy, on Easter Day, School. By
Francis Stooke, M. A.

A Sermon preached in St. Savior's Church in Dartmouth, July 24th, School.
Together with some Reflections on the Opinion of those, who affirm, That the
only Difference between the Church and the Meeting House, is that of a few
Ceremonies. In a Letter to a Friend. By Humfry Smith, M. A.


