A FALSE WITNESS EXAMINED and REBUKED; AND THE Steadfast, Sincere Obedience Of
the People called Quakers, unto CHRIST JESUS, Their Souls Captain, Bishop and
High Priest, ASSERTED and VINDICATED: Being an Answer to a Book, entitled, A
Declaration concerning the People called QUAKERS, etc.

Given forth by I know not Who: There is subscribed to the said Book,
^HRISTODVLVS ECCLESTONE; but whether this be the Name of the Author, or only a
Feigned Name, is a Question; But I do not know the Author by that Name, nor do
I hear of any that does, neither did I ever know any Man or Woman by that Name.

By a Servant of Christ, William Gibson.

For he said, Surely they are my People, Children that will not Lie; so he was
their Savior, Isa. 63.8. -- A faithful Witne^^ will not Lie, but a false
Witness will utter Lies, Prove. 14 5. -- Ye are of your Father the Devil, and
the Lust of your Father you will do. he was a Murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the Truth; when he speaks a Lie, he spe^keth of his own, ^^r he
is a Lya^, and the Father of it, Joh. 8.44. -- A false Witness shall not be
unpunished; and he that speaks Lies shall not escape, Prove. 19 5. -- They
bend their Tongues like their Bows for Lies; but they are not valiant for the
Truth, etc. Jer. 9.3. -- His Lies shall not so effect it, Jer. 48.30. Printed
in the Year 16^^

The EPISTLE to the READER.
Reader,
CHrist Jesus, in whose Mouth never Guile was found, has said, that God is a
Spirit; and they that worship him, must worship him in the Spirit and in Truth:
And he has said, that No Lie is of the Truth: And the beloved Apostle John
said, God is Love; they that dwell in God, dwell in Love; and, he that loves
God, lovet. his Brother also: 1 Cor. 13. read it throughout.
And another beloved Apostle says, Love thinks no Evil; it Envieth not; it
does not behave it self Unseemly: Love is the fulfilling of the Law, as it is
written, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and thy Neighbor
as thy self. God is that holy, immutable, infinite Spirit, whose Presence fills
Heaven and Earth, who has given Life and Being to all Mankind, and whom all
ought to fear and serve with their Souls and Bodies, which are his: He is that
immutable, holy Fountain, from whom all Good does originally come; as Love,
Meekness, Patience, Justice, Equity and Mercy, and all other Blessings and
Mercies, whether spiritual or temporal, which the Sons of Men do enjoy. And
this God, who is an infinite Spirit, he is near unto all Mankind, to show them
what is Good, and what he requires of them, that is, To do justly one to
another, to Love Mercy; that is, to be Merciful, as he is Merciful: And this is
he of whom the Prophet testified, saying, He that formed the Mountains, and
created the Winds, and shows unto man his Thoughts, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name: Amos 4.13.
And this is he of whom the Apostle testified, saying, 2 Cor. 4.6.
God has shined in our Hearts to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ; and this Treasure (says the Apostle)
have we in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and
not of us. Oh! happy are all they who are given up to follow and obey this holy
Fountain of Love, Life, Joy, Peace, Justice and Mercy, etc. for them will he
fill with these heavenly Virtues, and bring them into his heavenly Likeness, in
which man was made in the beginning.

But alas! there is another spirit, which has gotten by Usurpation the Rule
and Government over many of the Sons and Daughters of Men, Ephesians 2.2.
which the holy Apostle calls the Prince of the Power of the Air, who works
in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience; 2 Cor. 4.4.
and he is also called the God of the World, who has blinded the Minds of them
that believe not (in the true God) This is he that lead man first from the true
God: This is he that lead Cain to kill Abel, because his own Works were Evil,
and his Brother s Righteous: This is he that led the Old World into those many
provoaking Sins, which caused God to overthrow it; who preserved Noah, that
Preacher of Righteousness, and did not destroy him with that Ungodly
Generation: This is he that led the People of Sodom and Gomorrah into those
many Grievous Abominations for which God destroyed them with Fire from Heaven,
but delivered just Lot, who was vexed with their Ungodly Conversation: This is
he who led Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and his Taskmasters to oppress the Israel
of God, whom God delivered out of their Hands, and overthrew them in the Red
Sea: This is he who Reigned in the Apostate Jews, who went from the Law of God,
and made them mad against the Lord's Prophets, so that they put them to Death:
This is he who led Judas to betray his Master for Thirty Pieces of Silver; and
led Demas to forsake Paul in his Suffering, and to turn to the Evil World: This
is he who set the Hypocritical Professing Jews into a Rage against Christ
Jesus, the Right Heir, when he came amongst them, and did the Mighty Works that
never man did; they would not believe him, but said, By Beelzebub, the Prince
of Devils, he cast out Devils: They spit upon him, he was crowned with Thorns,
and afterward crucified, whom God raised the third day, according to the
Scriptures, and who is ascended and exalted at the Right Hand of the Majesty on
high, etc. These Professing Jews were the chief Instruments against him, though
they were assisted in this work of Wick^dness by the Gentiles: This is he who
was those Persecutors Father, as Christ told them, You are of your Father the
Devil (says he) f^r the Works of your Father you do; for he was a Liar and a
Murderer from the beginning: when he speaks a Lie, he speaks of himself; for
he is a Liar, and the Father of it: And this is he who led the Heathens to
Belie the Primitive Christians, and their Principles, and to put them to Death:
And this is he who has led an hypocritical Generation of Professors of
Christianity, who are in the Apostasy from the Life of Christ, to belie us and
our Principles, and to persecute us for our Obedience to Christ Jesus, yea,
even some of us to Death: Oh! that they might find a Place of Repentance, and
obtain Forgiveness at the Hand of the Lord God: This is he who has led this
Author to Belie us and our Principles and Practices, as may be seen in the
following Book: So as it is written, He that is born after the Flesh,
persecutes him that is born after the Spirit; and they that will live God-like
in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution; and Evil Men and Seducers wax worse
and worse, deceiving and being deceived -- Oh! Woe and Misery will come upon all
those who continue unto the End of their Days in the Obedience unto this Lying
and Murdering Spirit, which is the Original and first Cause of all Idolatry and
false Worship, that is, and ever was upon the Earth, and of all Sin that is and
ever was committed against God and his Christ. Oh! that the Professors of
Christianity in our time might see how they are led by him into Envy, Lies and
Slanders against the People called Quakers: Oh that they might come to see what
a bad Master they serve: Our Desires are, that they might forsake him, and
believe in the Light, which Christ has lighted them with, that so that might
stay their Minds out of Evil, and exercise their Minds to God in that which is
Good, that so they might come to know the Life of Christ made manifest in their
mortal Flesh, as the primitive Christians did, and as a Remnant now do; for
that is it that makes a real Christian: and without that no man can be a real
Christian, though he profess all the good Words of God and Christ, the Prophets
and Apostles, that are written in the holy Scriptures, and though he should
practice all the Shadows of the Heavenly Things, that were practiced both under
the Law and afterward.

There is one considerable Reason to expect, that such of the Confederate-Body
of the several so^^s of Professors, who are in such a great Outrage against
the People called Quakers, will not espouse this Author, and his false
Declaration into their Confederacy against the People called Quakers; the
Reason is this; he says in his Epistle, That the Light of Christ in every Man
and Woman's Conscience is the Way to God; and that there is no other Way under
Heaven to attain Salvation.

Now th^se Professors having declared their implacable Envy against the Light
within, how can they espouse him and his Declaration into their Confederacy
against the aforesaid People? But if they will agree to Persecute, Belie and
Slander the People called Quakers, notwithstanding these their great and
fundamental Differences amongst themselves, the People called Quakers are
resolved in the Strength and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to bear and go
through all their Reproaches, Lies, and Slanders, and that with Cheerfulness;
esteeming Reproaches for Christ's sake far greater Riches then the fading
Glory, Riches and Honor of this World; for this People have an Eye to a
spiritual Recompense of Reward in the World to come; and this People endure
Afflictions with Cheerfulness, because they see and feel the invisible God to
be their Support; to him be all Glory, Praises and Honor, now and for
evermore, Amen.

Take Counsel together, and it comes to naught; speak the Word, and it shall
not stand; for God is with us. For the Lord spoak thus to me with a strong
Hand, and instructed Me, that I should not walk in the Way of this People,
saying, Say ye not a Confederacy to all them to whom this People shall say, A
Confederacy, neither fear ye their Fear, nor be afraid; sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself, and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread, Isa. 8.10,
11, 12, 13.

William Gibson.
London, the 22th of the 9th Month, 1674.
A False Witness Examined and Rebuked; and the Steadfast, Sincere Obedience of
the People called Quakers, unto CHRIST JESUS, their Souls Captain, Bishop and
High Priest, Asserted and Vindicated: Being an Answer to a Book, entitled, A
Declaration concerning the People called QVAKERS, etc.
THis Author begins his Epistle to his Reader in the following words: I give
thee to understand (says he) that my Intent in publishing this Book, is not in
the least to Vilify or Undervalue that Principle which the People called
Quakers, do preach and profess -- or to draw thy Mind from it; But with
Confidence do bear my Testimony to the Truth of it, etc. to wit, That the Light
of Christ in every Man's and Woman's Conscience, which makes manifest
Darkness, and discovers Sin and Iniquity, is the Way to God; and that there is
no other way under Heaven to attain Salvation. God is Light (says he) and
whoever comes to him, must come to him in his Light, etc.

To this I answer; These fair Words might cause People to think, that this man
is a great Friend to the LIGHT within, which the despised People (of God)
called Quakers, do preach, bear witness to, and live and walk in; and also, to
those People who do so live and walk in the Light: But alas! it is quite
contrary, as will appear in the latter part of his Epistle, and also in the
following Book: For his Feigned Commendation of the Light, and bearing
Testimony to it, does and will appear unto the Children of Light to rile from
the same Ground of Darkness and Envy, which theirs did whom the Apostle
mentions, who did preach Christ of Envy, who through their preaching did design
to add Afflictions to his Bonds, as he himself has said: That this man's Work
of Darkness has the like Tendency, the Children of the Light do and will see,
considering the Nature of it, as also the Time of its being brought forth into
the World, even in a Time, when the Rage and Fury, Combinations and
Confederacies of diverse sorts of Professors are great against us, chiefly
because of our confessing to, and walking in the Eternal, Spiritual and Divine
Light, wherewith God and Christ has enlightened our inward Man.

This pretended Friend to the Light within, tells his Reader in the latter part
of his Epistle, That the Selfish Serpent has deceived the People called
Quakers, of the Simplicity which God had brought them into (yea, says he) even
many of them which are accounted the Heads and Leaders of them, has brought
them again into Selfishness, Covetousness, and Pride, and Fullness of Bread,
etc. so that now the Fleshpots of Egypt are more desirable then the hidden
Manna.

Answ. I do in the Presence and Power of God charge this Author to be a Liar.
One Lie is, in Charging those which he accounts Heads and Leaders, to have
brought the People into Selfishness, Pride, Fullness of Bread, etc. Another Lie
is, That the Fleshpots of Egypt are more desired by us then the hidden Manna:
Another Lie which he charge upon those he calls Heads and Leaders, is, that
they claim Lordship and Dominion over the People, the Heritage of God; and so
rob God of his Glory. There are more Lies in his Epistle, but I pass them for
Brevity. This in brief in Answer to his Epistle.

I having diligently read and considered his following Book; I find that which
is most notoriously Wicked, and therefore most worthy of my Notice to be in the
latter part of his Book; and there I shall begin with him, and examine his Book
backward so far as I esteem it worthy of my Notice.

The first thing I shall take Notice of in his Book, is in Page 21. where he
gives a Relation of Jeroboham's setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, and of
his Self-Interest in so doing, and how his so doing was a great Sin before God,
and became a Snare to Israel.

So now amongst this People (says he) the Spirit of Jeroboham cries out, It
is too much for you to worship God in a Testimony against Tithes; There is a
Calf in Bethel, and another in Dan; There is a Meeting on First, Second, Third,
Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Days, Worship God there, and it is well enough.

Answ. Oh thou Lying, Presumtuous, Scornful Spirit! The Lord rebuke thee, who
comparest the Meetings of the Lord's People, gathered by his own Spirit and
Power, and established in the same, to the Calves which Jeroboam set up at Dan
and Bethel: Thou would insinuate, That the People (of God) called Quakers, do
count it too much to Worship God in a Testimony against Tithes, and that they
have denied their Testimony therein which they bare formerly. In this thou art
notoriously Wicked; for if thou have taken notice of this People for 18 or 20
Years, as thou signifiest in thy Book, I conclude thou can not be ignorant
that these People have and dosuffermuch, both in Spoil of Goods, and
Inprisonment of Body, yea several even until Death, There are at this Day many
of the People called Quakers, Prisoners in the several Prisons in and about
London, and in the several Counties of England, because they cannot in good
Conscience give Tithes and Offerings unto the Priests and others who demand
them. Claist being come who has ended them by offering up himself once for
all, who is the one Offering, Hebr. 10.10, 14. Read the Chapter throughout.
in a Testimony for God against Tithes. Diverse of those People are brought up
Prisoners to London from foreign parts of the Nation; and in many Counties of
England, these People at this Day lay in Prison and have layn long in a
Testimony for God against Tithes. Diverse Books have been given forth by several
of these People in Testimony against Tithes, which have been generally received
and owned by these People; One by that faithful Servant of Christ Francis
Howgill, who has faithfully ended his Travails and Sufferings upon Earth, and
is entered into the Heavenly Paradyse and Kingdom of God, where he does possess
that Eternal Crown, and inherit that Eternal Peace and Joy which never shall
have End, which God, the Righteous Judge, laid up for him; who has the like
spiritual Plessings in Store for all that love his Appearance, and abide in
Faithfulness to him to the End. There are also several other Books given forth
against Tithes; one lately, intitul'd, Tithes ^^ded by Christ.

This reviling Author in the Page aforesaid proceeds after his former Manner,
saying, It is too much for you to worship God in a Testimony against the
Observation of Days; what need you to run the Hazard of your Estates and
Libe^ties? there is a Calf at Bethel and another at Dan; there is a Meeting on
1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th and 6th Days, etc.

Herein he would insinuate, that the People called Quakers, have denied their
Testimony which they formerly bore against the Observation of Days: This
Wickedness is like the former; for if he be a Person so well acquainted with
us, as he pretends, he cannot be Ignorant, that the People called Quak^rs, do
continue their Testimony against the Observation of Days, for which some have
lately been imprisoned, and many have had their Goods spoiled, and suffered
diverse other Wrongs for this their faithful Testimony; and whether he know this
or not, yet the Thing is true.

This Author goes on in the Page aforesaid, after his former slanderous Manner,
and says, It is too much for you to worship God in a Testimony against the
World's Worship and their Priests, etc. There is (...) Calf at Bethel and
another in Dan; there is a Meeting on 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th and 6th Days, etc.

In this his Wickedness is very notorious; for who is it that knows not that we
continue our Testimony against that which is Evil in the Priests, and their
Worship; the Priests them elves may be Witnesses against him in this that he is
a Liar; I am assured, that the Priests would be glad if he said the Truth of us
in this matter.

He goes on in the page aforesaid after his former Manner, and says, It is too
much for you to worship God in a Testimony against the sending in of Arms,
wherewith they slay and shed the Blood of Men; there is a Calf at Bethel and
another in Dan; there is Meetings on 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th and 6th Days, etc.

Here after his former manner he would make People believe, if he could, that
we have denied our former Testimony against Wars and Fighting, which arise from
men's Lust: But herein the Magistrates themselves may bear witness against him,
who have given out Warrants for the distraining of the Goods of the People
called Quakers, for not appearing with, or sending in Arms, according to the
Laws in those Causes made; and the Bailiffs and under Officers, who have
distrained upon our Friends Goods for the Cause aforesaid, may witness against
him also.

He yet proceeds further in his Wickedness in the page aforesaid, after his
former manner, ^aying, It is (...) for you to worship God in a Testimony
against Pride, Covetousness, Fullness of Bread, etc. there is a Calf at Bethel
and another in Dan; there is Meetings m^st days in the Week, etc.

To this I answer this Ungodly Slanderer, thus; It is too much for us to do any
thing that is Good of our selves, because of our selves we can do nothing that
is Good; but through Christ Jesus, the Lord of Life, the People called Quakers
have been raised up to worship God in a Testimony against Pride, Covetousness,
Fullness of Bread, and many other Abominations: And this People has not only
been raised up through Christ to worship God, as aforesaid, but they are upheld
to this day by Christ in their Testimony against Pride, Covetousness, Envy,
Murder, Lying, ^tealing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Idolatry, and all manner of
Ungodliness; Glory, Glory to the Lord God for the same: And as the holy Apostle
said, so the People called Quakers do experimentally say, that Of themselves
they can do nothing that is good; but as he said, I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me; so there is a Remnant can say at this day, for
which they give Praise and Glory to God, who is worthy of the same for evermore.

In the latter end of the 20th page, and beginning of the 21th, this Reviling
Author charges the People called Quakers to have bound themselves with a Bond
of Covetousness, and also says, That the Old, Subtle, Proud, Covetous Serpent
has got such a Head and Dominion over the People called Quakers, that hardly
one of them dare speak the Truth of him, though they see it never so evident.

Answ. To this Great Slander I answer, The Devil is a Liar, and the Father of
all Lies and Liars, and so has begotten this Lying Spirit in this Author; so
the Lying Spirit must inherit the Lake with its Father: I could be glad that
this Lying Spirit might be cast out of this Author by Christ Jesus, the true
Light and Life of men, before his days be ended in this World, that so his
Soul might live in Peace with God in the World to come. This Author is
outwardly a Stranger to me; but who ever he be, I exhort him to Repent of his
Envy, and Lies and Slanders, which he has cast upon the People of God called
Quakers; and if he do not suddenly cease from such evil Work as this, and
Repent unfeignedly, that Misery will come upon him, which is hard to express in
words, and not only upon him, but also upon all such Workers in Darkness as he
is, who Repent not: And I tell him, That God Almighty has raised that Nobility
and Courage in Thousands of the People called Quakers, wherein they are bold at
this day to speak against the Old, Subtle, Proud; Envious, Covetous, Lying
Serpent; God has given them a spiritual Bow and a spiritual Quiver full of
Arrows, and has made their Arms strong, and given them a skilful Hand to shoot
at him in Mystery Babylon, where he is King over all Liars, Slanderers and
False Witnesses, who rise up against God and his People, and Christ and his
Followers, but who do not agree in their False Witness against Christ and his
Followers, but like the False Witnesses of old, are confounded in their Work:
The Boldness and Courage, which God has raised in the despised People called
Quakers, to testify against the Devil, Dragon and Serpent, and against all
sorts of his Works and Work-Folks, this has made him to Page and Fret, as he
does at this day, in his diverse sorts of Work Folks; but notwithstanding his
great working and raging in his Work Folks, yet the Lamb and the Saints must
have the Victory over him and his Army.

In page 17, 18. this Slanderer and Envious Busie-B^dy says, That these whom
he calls- Heads and Leaders, have brought themselves into a Church Order and
Fellowship, and as other Sects and Heaps of Religions have divided the
Countries into Provinces, Dioceses and Parishes, and every Particular Pla^^ his
respective Officers as Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons and Deacons, and
every inferior Officer to give Submission to his Superiors, and that
Submission and Obedience of the Commonality to them all, as their Heads: Thus
by Degrees (says he) they got Lordship, and Mastership and Dominion over the
People, and brought People to a Conformity by Force and Rigor.

He further adds Lie upon Lie, saying, That this People have One in every
Liberty, who has the Supremacy and Mastership over the inferior Officers, to
whom they yield their Submission and Obedience; and so every one according to
his Degree and Office has his Degree of Rule and Seal of Mastership, etc.

Answ. Oh thou Ungodly Person! How do thou throw forth thy Fardels of Lies
and Slanders against the Heritage of the Lord, and thereby manifests thy self
to be void of the true Fear of God? I do tell thee, that I do not remember that
I have ever read any Pamphlet of any Apostate, Judas or Demas, or any other
Enemy of God and his People, that has fardell'd up so many Lies and Slanders
in so little room, as thou have done; all which are for the Lake, with the
Father of them. Thou pretendest thou have known this People about Eighteen or
Twenty Years; and also signifiest, thou knewst their Coming forth, and have
taken Notice of their Proceedings till this time: And if so, thou art under the
greater Guilt and Condemnation, for giving such a false Testimony or
Declaration of them, as thou have done; for if thou have known them, and
beholden their Order, as thou pretendest, it must needs be, thou lie against
thy own Conscience, and abusest thy own Understanding, in speaking of them
(through Malice) that which thou must needs know to be false. I now tell thee,
I have known this People above the space of Twenty Years, and have had my
Conversation amongst them, and born my Testimony for the Lord amongst them,
according to the Ability which I have received from him, above the space of
Eighteen Years; and I have good Cause to believe, that I have known and do know
this People better then thou do, having been conversant with them, both in
their public and private Meetings so many years, and that from East to West,
from North to South of this Island, and else where also; and I do tell thee,
that the before-cited words of thine are all false, wicked and slanderous; for
there is not many Masters or Lords amongst us, as thou wickedly endeavourest to
insinuate; but one is our Lord and Master, even Christ Jesus, the Son of the
Living God; and we are all Brethren, some Elder, some Younger, according as the
Lord has pleased to call and raise us up; and our Lord and Master has
clothed, and is daily more and more clothing of us with the Garments of
Humility and true Love, in which we serve him with Cheerfulness, and one
another in the same Love: And I tell thee, we have found Peace in learning
Humility of our Lord and Master, and in coming to the fulfilling of the
Apostle's Doctrine, who said, Be ye all clothed with Humility, and serve one
another in Love; and who said, Submit your selves one to another in the Fear of
God.

And whereas this Slanderous Author says, Those whom he calls Heads, etc. have
by FORCE and RIGOVR brought this People called Quakers in^o a Conformity unto
them.

This is also notoriously wicked and slanderous, as many Thousands of those
People can from true Experience testify, and I know would readily do it to the
Face of this Author, if they knew him, and had Time and Place convenient for
it; and they have this Testimony in their Hearts on the behalf of those whom
God has raised up to labor amongst them in preaching the Gospel, That they
have not been, nor sought to be Lords over the Faith which God has freely
given them; but on the contrary, have been Fellow-Helpers of their Joy.

And whereas this Author says, The Heads, etc. have divided the Country into
Provinces, Dioceses and Parishes.

That is false and slanderous: The Lord God, who is a God of Order in all the
Churches (and not of Confusion) has raised up a People to worship him in
Spirit and Truth in the several Counties of this Island; and they have been
ordered by him who has gathered them to provide convenient Places to meet in
to wait upon him, and at such Places God has ordered them in his Wisdom to
meet together upon several Occasions, wherein he has laid a Concern and Care
upon them, as particularly to take Care for Relief for their Poor Brethren and
Sisters, Widows and Fatherless Children, and Prisoners and Strangers, and
diverse other Services of Love, which he calls for at their Hands.

This busy ill-minded Author is troubled at our Meetings, wherein the Lord
has ordered us by his pure Wisdom, to take Care that such who profess the
Truth amongst us, may walk Orderly, as becomes the Gospel, that so whatsoever
we do, whether Eat or Drink, Buy or Sell, Marry or give in Marriage, we may do
all to the Praise and Glory of God, as being led and governed in all these
things by the good Spirit of God.

In the 19th page he says, The chief Man or Metropolitan with the Elders and
Deacons, etc. do assemble themselves together to hear and determine Matters;
and when Judgment is given, it must stand, be it Right or Wrong.

I answer, This is a Notorious Wicked Slander (added to his former Score, for
which God will Reckon with him in his due time) For the Just God has led this
People to be Just in giving Judgment for him betwixt Man and Man, in such
Matters wherein they have been concerned; and of this they have the Testimony
of the Good Spirit of God bearing Witness with their Spirits: And they also
have a Testimony in the Consciences of those whom they have been concerned with
in giving Judgment; and all false Judgment, Oppression and Wrong is denied and
abhorred by them. And I have told him before, that there is not many Masters,
or Lords or Metropolitans amongst us; but we have One Master and One Lord,
Christ Jesus: And though we own Eldership in the Truth, as the Primitive
Christians did; yet in that Eldership which is in Christ, the Head of the Body,
of which we are Members, there is no Lordship, as he endeavors wickedly to
insinuate: For if one of the Least or Youngest amongst us be raised up of the
Lord in his Wisdom and Power, either as a public Preacher of the Gospel, or as
a Help in Government, the Eldest amongst us will not Oppose, Gainsay or
Discourage him in what the Lord does require of him; but contrariwise, will
cherish and encourage him in the Service of God: And thus both Younger and
Elder have been, and now are a Joy, and Comfort, and Strength one to another in
the Lord.

This Malicious Author proceeds in the page aforesaid to show his Enmity
against us, in belying of us concerning the Management of our Affairs, which
does relate to the Relieving of the Poor: he says, The Elders and Deacons must
give Account who gives liberally toward the Relief of the Poor.

I charge this upon him as an absolute Lie; for there is no Person amongst us
required to give in that Account, but every one is lest free, to give as the
Lord has enabled them, and as he opens their Hearts thereunto.

And he further says, That the Money that the Elders and Deacons, etc. have
Overplus or in Bank, they deliver to their Superiors.

This is another Notorious Lie; for as I have told him before, There are not
many Masters, or Lords, or Superiors amongst us; but One is our Lord, Master
and Superior, Christ Jesus; and that Mind is judged and denied by us which
would be greatest; and we dearly own Christ's Doctrine, who said, Who would be
greatest amongst you, shall be your Servant; and who said, Learn of me, for I
am Meek and Lowly, and you shall find Rest unto your Souls.

This Author proceeds further in his Wickedness in the page aforesaid, in
slandering of those who have the disposing of the Money which is given for the
Relief of the Poor; saying, That if a Man of great Dealings in the World can
keep a close Correspondency with such, if he stands in need of One Hundred
Pounds, or Two, more or less, he may have a Supply out of their Treasury.

This is a Slander, for we neither know nor own any such Practice amongst us,
That the Money which is given for the Relief of the Poor, should be put into
great Traders Hands to get them great Estates or Advantages; But our Principle
and Practice is, that that which is given for the Relief of the Poor, may be
kept and improved for that Use (only) and distributed to them in the Wisdom of
God, as there is Occasion.

This Author has uttered many more Lies and abusive Expressions in this and
the following page, against tho e whom G d has raised up to take Care for the
Relief of the Poor, which I shall pass by at present.

In pa^. 19, 20. this Slandering Person rambles on according to his former
Manner, telling how the People called Quakers send out their Dreadful Sentences
of Excommunications against them that pry into their Secrets, and like them
not, but opposes them; which (says he) make such a Noise and Rattling amongst
the People, as if it were one of the Pope's Bulls.

Answ. Oh thou Scoffing Ishmaelite! Here thou show thy self to be in the
Brotherhood with our open Adversaries and old Persecutors, who have long talked
at this rate against us, and made Lies their Refuges against us, as thou do;
and while they have been laboring to make People believe that we are Jesuits,
Papists, etc. they have been acting Cruelty against us, for no Evil done by us
unto any of them, but only for our Obedience unto the Lord our God; which Work
of Cruelty and Persecution of theirs, as one lately has well observed, is one
of the worst Parts of Popery; as witness the Hypocritical Professors Bloody
Tragedy, in putting our Friends to Death in New England.

Here are many more Lies in these two Pages, which for Brevity I may at this
time pass by: Yet there is one thing more in the 20th page, which I am not
willing to pass wholely in Silence, and that is, This Author charges the People
called Quakers, with having bound themselves with a Bond of Covetousness,
because at some one time some among us may have refused an Apostate Liberty to
lay his Dead in our Burying-Ground, who did, while he wa^ked amongst us, give
something toward the Purchase of the same.

Ans It is certainly known to many, that both in City and Country, the Bodies of
several, both Men, Women and Children, who were not of us, have been laid in
our Burying-Grounds, who never gave any thing to the Purchase of the same: And
it is not our Principle nor Practice, to make Wives and Children suffer for
their Fathers and Husbands supposed or real Iniquities, which this Malicious
Author has slanderously charged upon us; though a particular Instance or
Instances might be brought, that some amongst us have refused some Apostate, or
Apostates Liberty to bury their Dead amongst us; and our Readiness to give
Liberty unto those who are not of us, to bury their Dead in our Burying
Grounds, who never gave any thing to the Purchase of the same, will clear us in
the Sight of impartial and unprejudiced People, from his unjust Charge against
us of Covetousness in this Matter. And I do tell this slanderous Author, That
if some Person or Persons amongst us, have refused an Apostate Liberty to Bury
his Dead in our Grounds; Though as I am credibly informed, such an Apostate as
this Author may in end, had his Child laid in the Burying-ground which does
belong to the People (of God) called Quakers in London.
this Denial did not arise from Covetousness, as he wickedly would insinuate;
but was done in Zeal, as a Testimony against such an Apostate: And if the Body
of the Deceased Wife or Children, or other Relation of such an Apostate have
been refused to be laid in our Burying-Ground [only] at the said Apostate's
Desire, I ask this Author, What Suffering this Denial can bring upon the
Deceased Wife, Child, or other Relation of the aforesaid Apostate?

In the 15th, 16th and 17th pages this Uncharitable, Cavilling Busy Body
throws out his Slanders upon some of the Servants of Christ, who long have been
and yet are a Blessing in the Hand of the Lord amongst his People; he
slanderously charges some such amongst us, who at first were raised up to
declare the Eternal Truth (as he says) to be Changed, or Apostatized, and by
their Evil Example to have been Instrumental in leading the People called
Quakers from their former Sincerity to God.

Answ. If the Father of Lies, and old Accuser of the Brethren, were not Head in
him, then these Slanders would not proceed from him; But out of the Abundance
of the Evil Treasure, that the Evil One has put into his Heart, he brings
forth these Evil Things, for which the Just God will bring him to Judgment in
his own due time: And those whom he thus slanders and revi^es do in their
Hearts desire, that he, and such as he, might find a time and place to Repent
of all their Hard Speeches and Ungodly Deeds, which they have done and said
against the Lord and his People, that so they might obtain Forgiveness at the
Hand of the Lord God.

This Uncharitable Caviller has taken upen him to judge the Servants of the
Lord concerning their Food and Raiment, which they do receive from the great
Creator, who blesses and sanctifies the same unto them by his Word and Power,
which dwells in them. I do tell this Busy Body in other men's Matters, That
these men, whom he enviously accuses have received Wisdom and Counsel from
their Lord, Christ Jesus, how to behave themselves in his Church, both with
respect to their Food and Raiment, and all those other things wherein they are
judged by him: I do on their behalf, as knowing them better then he does, turn
his Slanders back upon his own Head; and let him know, that both they and I do
refuse to learn of such Envious Slanderers, as he is: Glory to the Lord, we
have a better Teacher. And I further tell him, that Pride in Apparel, and
Excess in Eat^^^ and Drinking, whether Wines or other Liquors, with all Idle,
Vain and Sinful Discourse or Communications of what sort soever, is at this da^
denied and witnessed against by those men upon whom he has cast his Slanders,
both in their Doctrine, and also in their Lives and Conversations, as many Thou
ands can witness; Glory to the Lord God for the same.

This Author begins in the 10th page to tell a long rambling Story concerning a
Tailor and a Shoemaker, whom he calls Quakers; this Story lasts from the page
aforesaid to the 14th page; and he calls this Story, A Dialogue between a
Tailor a Quaker, and a Shoemaker a Quaker; b^t he does not tell us the Names
of this Tailor and Shoemaker, nor where we may find them, and therefore we
have Cause to suspect, that it is ( Thomas Hicks-like) a Dialogue of his own
framing, to abuse the People called Quakers with.

But if that which he speaks in the Taylor's and Shoe-Maker's Name, be a Real
Discourse between a Tailor and a Shoemaker, who esteem themselves of that
People who are called Quakers; then I tell him, That as God has no Pleasure in
him that draws back, but in him that presses forward to the saving of the Soul;
so the faithful People of God called Quakers, have no Pleasure that this Tailor
and Shoemaker, or any other, should draw back from God into any Evil which God
has once redeemed them out of; and when any that come amongst us do go back
into Evil, it is Cause of Grief unto us.

But if this was a Real Discourse between a Tailor and a Shoemaker, who
esteemed themselves of that People called Quakers; and that what thou have said
in their Name against the People called Quakers, was really their words; then I
must tell thee, these men were nearer of Kindred to thee, and such as thou art,
then to those People; and I shall briefly endeavor to show thee wherein.

In page 14, 15. thou speak thus in their Names, viz. I think I may speak it
between thee and I, says the Tailor, There is much Lo^^iness and Pride amongst
Friends, as there is amongst any Sect of Religion whatever: And thou make the
Shoemaker to say, Yes, it is True.

Answ. But I say it is False and Slanderous, and Thousands of the People called
Quakers, and others, have a Testimony in their own Consciences it is False: and
so, if thou have speaken Truth of the Tailor and the Shoemaker in this Matter,
then we deny them and their Testimony in this Matter; and also testify against
their Backsliding, and do desire that they may Repent, and do their First
Works, lest God take them away in his Anger.

This Author begins another rambling airy Story much like to the former, in
page 8. which ends the latter end of page 10. Though this is not called a
Dialogue, yet it is writ Dialogue-wise, like the other; they are so like one to
the other, that they seem as though they had both one Father or Author, and
whether this Author is the Author of one or both of them, is known to the
Heart-searching God. The Story is concerning a Tradesman or Shopkeeper,
called a Quaker, and a Man of some other Profession, this Author suggests, that
the Person who is called a Quaker, did, when he came to the Knowledge of the
Truth, deny for the Truth's sake the selling of some Unlawful or Unnecessary
Commodities; But he is not so honest and plain as to tell us, who this
Shopkeeper is, or what those Commodities are; yet he now charges it upon him,
That he meeting with one of his old Customers, a Man of another Profession,
after they had saluted one another with a How d^st do? and How do you do, Sir,
etc. the said Shopkeeper did ask his old Customer, What do want any of such
and such Commodities? Upon which his old Customer (as this Author words it)
answered, What do you sell such Goods again, Sir? And the other (as he says)
replied, Yea, I think as good as ever thou saw.

The Matter charged by this Author against this Shopkeeper is, That he now
sells again, for his Earthly Advantage, some Unlawful or Unnecessary
Commodities, which by the Power of God he was constrained to deny to sell in
former time.

To this I answer, If it be really so, as thou say, I say concerning him and
all others in his State, as I said before in the Case of the Tailor and the
Shoemaker, that is, That as God has no Pleasure in those that draw back
toward Perdition, but delights that all should press forward to the Salvation
of their Souls; so God's faithful Remnant (in Scorn called Quakers) have no
Pleasure in the Unfaithfulness or Backsliding of any that know and profess the
Truth amongst us: But our tender Breathings and Desires are, That all that know
and profess the Truth, may live and grow up in it, as Trees of Righteousness,
bringing forth more and more Fruit to the Praise of the Lord God Almighty, who
is worthy to be feared and served in Faithfulness by all who have tasted how
Good and how Gracious he is; to him be all Glory, Praises, Dominion and Honor,
now and for evermore, Amen.

In page 15. this Envious Author utters two Slanders against the People of God
called Quakers; the first is, That if a man ^m^^^st us lives poorly, though
never so honestly, and stands in need of some Relief or Assistance from this
People, then this People pronounce hard Sentence against him, That he is not
Faithful to God, and That he is Cursed in his Basket and in his Store, etc. and
That he has little or no Part in the Kingdom of God.

I answer, This is a Notorious Slander, proceeding from the Father of Lies, as
the Honest Upright hearted Poor People amongst that People, both in London and
in many Parts of England, can and will testify; and as God has made all
Nations of one Blood to dwell upon the ^ace of the whole Earth: We know, that
an Upright, Honest-hearted, Poor Man and Woman, is as near and dear to the
great God their Creator, and the Lord J^s^s Christ, who has tasted Death for
every man ((...) and Poor) as the Rich Man or Woman is: And with God there is
no Respect of Persons, because of their Riches or Poverty (outwardly) as with
respect to spiritual Rewards or Blessings upon their Immortal Souls; and as to
the Lord, so they are to us the Lord knows, and our Practice testifies it.

The other Slander, which I purpose to speakto, which is contained in this
page, is; This ungodly Author says, (...) now G^in amongst the People called
Quakers is accounted Godliness, that is (as he says in the same page) A great
House, and Furniture, and Fullness of Corn, Wine and Oil, etc.

Ans. I may say unto this Lying Tongue as a Man of God once said, What shall be
given thee, oh Lying Tongue? ^t Coa^s of Juniper: The Wrath of God is treasured
up against that Lying Spirit, which is thy Head, which God in his due time will
pour forth upon it, which to it will be an endless Cup of Torment.

Now I shall come to speak something to the first page of this Author's Book,
he begins to the People called Quakes thus, speaking to them in general terms,
saying, Before the Way of the Lord was manifested, your States and Conditions
were miserable, as to God-wards, living in Pride, Filthiness and all manner of
Uncleanness, in Covetousness, Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Whoredom,
Hypocrisy, Disimulution, etc.

Answ. Here he speaks at Random, not like a Man sent of God to judge and teach
us; for he does not Divide right, and therefore he is not the Lord's Mouth unto
us: For though we shall readily confess, that we have all sinned, some more,
and some less, and so have all come short of the Glory of God, and so our
States were miserable; Though the Vail of Darkness and Ignorance long abode
upon several of our Hearts, yet we can say, In that dark time the Lord God was
near unto us, who by his pure Spirit kept us out of such Gross Evils, as this
Unruly-tongu'd Author would cast upon us; And in a deep Sense of the dear Love
of God in preserving us in that dark Time, we do in deep Humility give Glory
unto him, for he is worthy.
yet that we generally (even in our most estranged state from God) did live in
all manner of Uncleanness, as he charge us, is utterly denied by us; for many
of us can say, as having God's Spirit bearing Witness to our Spirits to the
Truth of what we say, That we were never guilty of diverse things which he
charges upon us in general Terms. But had he been sent of God to teach us, he
would have distinguished aright, as the holy Apostle did, who asked the Saints,
saying, Know ye not that no Whoremonger, or Adulterer, or Covetous Man, who is
an Idolater, etc. has any part in the Kingdom of God or of his Christ? and he
said unto them, Such were SOME of you: [Mark that] He did not say, they had all
been such, or that they had all lived in all mauner of Uncleanness.

To conclude with this Author at this time, I say, Though some professing the
Truth amongst us, may, through their Unfaithfulness to God, have helped to fill
his Evil Heart with this Evil Treasury, of whom he may have said something that
is true in it self (yet with and in that bad Spirit, he will never make them
better) Yet I tell him, there are many thousands who are clear from his
Accusations, who have the Testimony of the Good Spirit of God bearing witness
with their Spirits. that they are his Children, who are led by the spiritual
Appearance of his Beloved Son. Christ Jesus, out of their former Vain and
Sinful Conversation; and who are upheld by him, that they do not draw back
toward Perdition; but do daily wait upon him, and by the Ve^tue of his Power
are pressing forward to the perfect (...) Immortal Souls: And as I have told
him before, As God has (...) that draw back neither have his saithful People;
But they are grieved with the Backsliding and Unfaithfulness of any who have
Known Redemption by Christ Jesus out of their Sins in any measure: And we do
desire, that such may hasten to seek a Place of Repentance, and that they may
come to the doing of their First Works, lest God cut them off in his Anger.
Some there are who came with us to taste of the Heavenly Gift, and of the Power
of that World which is without End, who are fallen away, and Apostatized from
it, and are turned into Enmity against it, and against the despised People
called Quakers, who keep their First Love to it, and Habitation in it: and as
those are gone out from us, because they were not of us; so likewise some few
there may be, who may yet appear amongst us, who being gone from that Pure
Divine Life of Christ Jesus, by which (alone) we are upheld to God, such are
not of us; and if they do not return unto the Lord by Unfeigned Repentance,
them will the Lord reject, they being as the Salt which has lost its Savor,
and as the withered Branches, who are separated from Christ, the living Vine:
And though some few are already gone out from us, and some such may yet go, and
add to the Number of the envious Apestates, of which Generation this envious
slandering Author bears a great Resemblance; yet the Work of the Lord amongst
the People called Quakers does daily prosper; God has the whole Body of
Mankind to work upon; He that gave unto his Prophet the Vision of the Valley
full of Dry Bones, and gave him a Command to Prophecy unto them, and they
stood up at his Command, and became an exceeding great Army; he is the same at
this day as ever he was, whose Voice is crying through the Earth, and daily
raising Desires in fallen Man and Woman after himself; so that though here and
there an Unfaithful Person full away from God, and so from Unity with his
People, yet many more are raised up in their stead, and the Number of the
Lamb's Followers are daily increased; for which the People of God called
Quakers do give Glory, and Honor, and Praise unto him, whose Will is, That all
men might know the Truth, and he saved: As I live, says the Lord, I have no
Pleasure in the Death of him that dies; but that every one might turn from his
Wickedness, and live. And this Holy Pure God, who is a Fountain of Love and
Life, gives a general Call and Invitation unto all the fallen Sons and Daughters
of Adam to come unto him, saying, Look unto me O all ye Ends of the Earth, AND
BE YE SAVED; for I am God, and there is none else, a Mighty God, and a Savior,
Isa. 45.22. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

This I have written in the Love of God, as a Testimony to the blessed Work
which he has wrought and is daily working more and more in the hearts of his
People in Scorn called Quakers; and as a just Rebuke to this scandalous Author.
And I say, O that he, and all his Brethren, the Apostate, and Enemies of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and his faithful Followers, might seek and find a P^ace of
Repentance. Oh! blessed will they be who turn from their Iniquities while the
Day of their Visitation lasts, even while the Spirit of the Lord God strives
with them, for is will not always strive with man

William Gibson.
London, the 29th of the 9th Month, 16^4

