THE FLORISTS VADE-MECUM. Being a Choice Compendium of whatever worthy Notice
has been Extant FOR THE Propagation, Raising, Planting, Increasing and
Preserving the rarest FLOWERS and PLANTS THAT Our Climate and Skill (in mixing,
making and meliorating apted Soils to each Species,) will persuade to live with
us.

WITH Several NEW EXPERIMENTS for raising NEW VARIETIES, and for their most
advantageous management.

In a more particular Method than ever yet published: Together with the
Gardiners Almanac, remembering and directing him what to do, each Month
throughout the year, in both Orchard and Flower-Garden.

By Samuel Gilbert, Phileremus.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street, 1682.

TO THE Reverend Father in God JAMES Lord Bishop of WORCESTER.
THE slying of this small piece to your Lordships feet for protection (against
this Ages sharp set Hawks, the common terror of Doves that are still preying
upon Truth and Innocence; which has too commonly the weakest defense) has had
encouragement by the honor your Lordship has conferred upon its Author in your
obliging Converse with him upon the subject it treats on; and in some
particulars made him new discoveries, for the more speedy producing new Faces
to some species of Flora's Wardrope: as Apriles pandunt Imbres Mineralia Maij.
Down April drops a moist Key
To open the rich Mines of May.
So Your Lordships skill, like April showers,
Produce the choicest of May Tulips
flowers.
Also

Your Lordships love to, as well as skill in Plants and Flowers, makes me
presume of your favorable construction hereof; and that as your Lordship is
exemplarily charitable to all other suitable objects, this cannot (humbly
begging it) but find that current still free and running in its natural
Channel. And if your Lordship condescend (being the greatest Florist amongst
the chiefest Pillars of cur Church) to water the Flowers in this Book with a
gentle Approbation, or cast a Benign Aspect upon them, I shall not then
question their flourishing, tho not in equality to that rare Collection in your
Palace Garden: nor fear its acceptance by all good men (for only such are
delighted in this Innocent Recreation) over whom your Lordship has a powerful
influence, by your sublime and Florid-parts, dignity of place, noble
disposition, and generous hospitality. I must not here (if being superfluous)
insist on what the most part of the World is so well acquainted with (that the
Sun is a glorious Planet; whose comfortable Beams and Heat, as a secondary
means, gives life and maintains all Creatures as well as Plants and Flowers in
the vigorous process of nature) but implore a pardon for doing any thing to
divert your Lordship from your accustomed diligence in that high Calling God
has placed you; which yet may afford some divertisement from that in this so
innocent employ; when the result thereof (beside's bodily health) is the
admiration of Gods power and providence (tho but) in the Creation, production
and preservation of the many different Plants and Flowers that so chequer the
Universe. But whilst I am begging absolution for a Crime, I am still persisting
in it; therefore with all humility I leave this small Book, where I first laid
it, as knowing none will more favorably, nor can with more ability Correct its
Errors; and by such example abate the rigorous Censures from the less knowing,
that may her rays be reflected on

Your Lordships Most humble obedient and devoted Servant. Samuel Gilbert.

To the most accomplished and excellent Lady MARGARET PACKINGTON, worthy
Consort to the Honored Sir JOHN PACKINGTON of Westwood, near Worcester, Knight
and Baronet.
WIth reverence, like the Indians to their Sun,
These verses humble Feet presume to run,
And lay this Book within your milder Rays,
Whose taking charms so powerfully swayes
The judgments of admiring Mortals, while
You please to Deign the favor of a smile.
Let one unto this flowery tract be shown
It neither cares nor fears a Common-frown.
Your Birth, your breeding, beauty, famous parts,
Do Crown you here, Queen regent of all Hearts,
Thus Qualified, and Goddess of my flowers,
By your Command, let no inferior powers
With their ill Breath infect what is all yours:
That with advanced heads, in transports stand.
Proud, if accepted by so fair a Hand;
All in their Orders rankt, as they appear
In your rich Livery, they yearly wear.
And therefore bound to wait you in your Bowers,
To be divertisement for vacant hours:
And first present themselves (as thinking meet)
Each flower doing penance in a sheet
For thus presuming, with a pride too heady,
To have as Amulets 'gianst censures ready
A Reverend Bishop, and a virtuous Lady.
Thus this Compendium ventures, out it came
TO appear in sunshine of so bright a name;
Let your beams Madam, then propitious be,
How fortunate my book, how proud
S. G.
TO THE READER.
IT IS a piece of Morosness I am seldom guilty of, when a civil stranger is at
the door, not to invite him to partake what entertainment the House affords.
Those of acquaintance stay not for that needless Ceremony, but use the same
freedom they allow their receiver, and such as I presume the Courteous Reader
(being only to such that I now write) affords me; and therefore without
A-la-mode Preambles, he is welcome to enter, that is the least lover of
Flowers; but those that think the Divertisement too easy or effeminate,
preferring a piece of Bacon or Cabbage before natures Choicest dishes,
advantaged by Art; or a Clove July-flower because it is good to make Syrrup off,
before all the rest of its dainty kinds, is welcomer (if possible) to stay out;
and indeed is forbid Reading or Censuring what he understands not, or has no
affection for. The following old Latin, being in all Ages verified, Pauci
intelligunt, multi reprehendant,
Et sicut canes, ignotos semper allatrant,


It Is not for these, but those that have some understanding in or love to
Flowers, that I took this pains in collecting whatever is worth notice on this
subject, being able to Judge what was Legendary, and imposed falsities on the
belief of the ignorant, and what was truth from my own experience; being
informed by my long converse with the best Florist of his time, Mr. John Rea my
Father-in-law, whose skill and collection were alike famous, and since his
death most of each in my possession, newer Flowers and ways of their
management and production, I have since attained: And indeed should condemn
that capacity and ingenuity to be but shallow and dull that having the skill of
another, especially such an one as before mentioned, and not add something to
it If Jackanapes on Giants shoulders be.
He has no Eyes or else can farther see.


I follow not the method, most Authors have, in Writing of all Bulbous rooted
flowers by themselves, and all Tuberous and Grumous rooted flowers so too, etc.
but as more natural, you will find the flowers treated on successively as they
blow one after another, and as they appear in each month, under the Titles of
which, you will find their names, brief discriptions and ways of their
management both for their preservation, increase and procuring new faces to
each kind, the last being the greatest skill as well as satisfaction to a
Florist; wherein I leave out many obsolete and overdated flowers, to make room
for many new ones, that yearly grow into our acquaintance: and also all, or any
Bumbastick words that our last Author in Octavo, declaims against, yet uses,
tho otherwise very ingenious, this Tract being really designed for the benefit
of (...) meanest Florist, that perhaps understands not how, or has not the
convenience of searching a Dictionary to know the meaning of Esculent, Horti
culture, Sterilize, edible, irrigate, etc. when plain English had been as easy
to Write, more useful and less pedantick: avoiding also all useless notions and
Airy fancies, becoming only a Romance, not a book wholly designed for practice,
as this is, to put the best in mind what each Month to do, and instructing
most, how in many particulars not hitherto printed or divulged; each direction
from the beginning to the end being an experimented truth, and the whole fitted
for a pocket companion to all Lovers of Flowers and their propagation.

A divertisement more healthful to our bodies, by often stirring in the earth,
beneficial to our souls by our daily converse with the matter whence we were at
first created, and to what we must return, each flower showing, the Providence
of Almighty God, and that we may read him in these his beautiful handy works,
that so diaper our Gardens. Each Plant's Engravened with a heavenly name,
Like the Hyacinthea stamped with Ajax name.
Whilst Nature sporteth in such variations,
Guided by God, to raise our contemplations.
We Rabbin like, misteriously should spell
Who gives us light, by each dark syllable.
And if to earth such glorious Carpets given,
Hence raise our Admirations up to Heaven.


Being attended with much more (nay all) innocence, fewer (nay no) evil
circumstances, than either that time which is too much lavished away in
Hunting, Hawking, Bowling, Drinking, Drabbing, Dicing, etc. wherein is as much
pain taken, if not more, without refunding pleasure (rather, nay certain evil
effects) remaining, than there is or can be trouble in the other; there being
delight in the management, but much more proceeding the preceded labor in the
enjoyment, in the various increase of those rich ornaments that more than
recompense our industry therein, without putting us to the charge (as many
useless things do) of either meat or drink: these considerations well weighed,
who would not consider his greatest Grand fathers employ, Adams, King Solomon's
study and no doubt practice in this Art? for the pleasure of which, many Kings
have retired themselves and become their own Operators, and not only consider
it, but spend some time and pains in it, for the pleasure and profit of it. But
some Gentlemen say they have found neither in it, and I must answer them, for
the ensuing Reason; few Gentlemen understanding it themselves, either hire ill
Gardiners, or if they light of a good one, but for a year, who not sure of his
stay has no encouragement, does not, or if he endeavored, could not in that
time bring his designs to perfection; so that either by ill ones long stay, or
a good ones too short abode, this Art is abused, and undervalued: Therefore my
advice is to those that understand not this Art in themselves in the hiring of
a Gardener, take Counsel of them that do, and give him assurance of his stay
for five or six years, and then if the success of his labors answer not his
Masters, both pleasure and profit, let me bear the blame; provided he has
allowed him sufficient help and expenses he must be at in his Collections both
for Flowers, Wall-fruit and Standards: I meddle not at present with Fruit
Trees, it being well done by Mr. Langford in a pocket Volumn of easy price: If
what done here about Flowers, be as acceptable, as it may be profitable to
those that love them, I shall be well paid in making this Compendium; and in it
publishing what my own Experience has found out, to the advantage of the
subject now teated on and it is true Lovers, tho to the disadvantage of the
Mercenary Flower Catchers about London, or some that are of the same Stamp
scattered up and down the Country, Fathering new names on Old Flowers to
enhanse their price; and if a Plant of value and a rarity, tho you pay dear for
it, unless you receive it in Flower, you shall to your cost and disappointment
Experience, their unfaithfulness, this I thought a necessary Caution for my
Courteous Reader, e're I Writ to him my

VALE.
The necessary Tools and Instruments for Gardening.
A Skreen for fining A Wire Riddle for sifting earth. Spades two, a bigger and
a less. Shovels two, a bigger and a less. Howes of several sizes Pruning Hook
and Knife. Grifting Knives, Saw, Chissel and Mallet, Penknife, Sizers, Line and
Rule, Trowels, broad, narrow, and hollow, Garden Sheers, a Hammer, Iron Rakes
two, a bigger and longer in the head, a shorter with teeth thicker set. A Rake
with a broad head, without teeth for smoothing the earth in a Bed. Several twig
Baskets or Whiskets, and Birch Besomes, Watering Pots, one with a head full of
small holes: another only with a pipe: another with a small neck, the bottom
full of holes The first is to water Plants in Summer. The second to water pots
with rank water wherein the Dung of Sheep, Poultrey, etc. has been steeped,
that it may be put to the roots without staining the leaves. The third being
put into water, will fill from the bottom, which will stay in so long, a^ you
stop out the air with your Thumb a^ the top; this serves to water young and
tender seedlings of Auricula Gilliflower and such like, without washing the
eart^ from them, for by the motion of you^ thumb, you may cause the water to
fal^ gently upon them, more or less as y^^ shall desire.
THE FLORISTS VADE-MECUM.
A Gardens Situation, Soil, and apted Composts for the same: With Gravel Walks,
Borders, and Plots.
THE Situation of a Garden ought to be in free and open Air to the East and
South, but South East is to be preferred, and the North defended by the House
or tall Trees. The soil ought to be good deep and light, which if dry and warm,
then level is most commodious; if cold and moist, the declining or shelving
toward the Sun is best; a loamy Land the sadder the color the better, and
best with a sandy mixture, but it must be mellow withal.

If your Land be not so naturally, it must be made so by Art,

As for your Claiy Land, make Channels to draw the water from it, which such
Land long contains, and if it continues stiff cold and moist, then dig it
often, throwing it on heaps or ridges, the Sun and Frosts will meliorate it:
Mix with it a great deal of Sea sand, if it be to be had, for want whereof
River or Brook sand, on the sand that the Land floods have left, according to
the quantity of your Ridges, filling the Gutters 'twixt the heaps or rows with
old Thatch either of Straw, Broom, Fern, or Heath, mixing it with the earth in
those Trenches you intend for beds for your flowers. Your Allies or Walks need
not that trouble, for the barrener they are the better. Had you peat or turf
ashes, 'twere excellent for mixing with this kind of soil, in want whereof any
ashes may be used, but in greater quantity. Lime is good also, the bottom of
wood piles sawdust, all sorts of rotten wood, or all these mentioned, if to be
had, often turned over, will make the best improvement, not forgetting a
considerable quantity of old Cow dung.

Chalky Land, being also naturally cold, is to be improved by warm and light
composts, and to be dealt with all as your Claiy ground, but more moderately.

Marly Land, is cold and heavy, yet rich and deep, turning it up; often
exposing it to the Air turns it to good earth, but mix it with warm and light
compositions.

Sandy Land is the best for your use of the four last mentioned, and best
improved, mixing marle, the mud of ponds, lakes or standing waters, a supply of
which it often requires; but mix not with it hot dungs, but make use of the
most cooling.

Toward some of these will you find your ground related, and accordingly must
you use means to improve it, and suitable to the Plants or Flowers you intend to
bestow therein; and because dung is used in all, you must know,

That Horse dung is best for Plants of quick digestion and growth, for Trees or
Plants that shoot much in a year, for it yields a great fume, and they cannot
dispose of it.

Cow dung is excellent for most sorts of rare flowers, if first it be through
rotten, then dried and beaten to dust, and some fine fresh earth mixed with it.

Dears dung, is much of the nature of Cows or Oxen, but more proper for tender
and smallest Plants.

Sheeps dung, of the same nature; which put into water so much that by stirring
may turn it to a pap, and when dissolved, mix with it fine sifted earth four or
five times more in quantity than the Sheeps dung, this is an excellent compost
for most fibrous rooted flowers, the tuberous also affect this mixture; such a
mixture of Neats dung is good for the same uses, and better if you are forced
to transplant a good flower in the Summer out of its season; for planted in it,
the liquid matter so adheres to it so cooling and moist, that it will cause the
plant to thrive as well as if it had been planted in its proper season.

Swines dung by their trampling where they feed, and by their often urining,
which by that means trod into the earth, it is so improved into such a compost,
it allaies that rankness of some light and rich soils that breed Canker worms,
other vermin, and insects that destroy your choicest plants, and is a rich fat
and cooling manure succesfully used in Flower or Kitchen Gardens, but most
excelling for fruit Trees.

Asses dung comes near the nature of Deers or Sheeps dung, etc. but not so rich.

Pigeons, nay of all Corn fed Fowl, is primarily very hot, especially Pigeons,
their dung laid in a heap in the air and moistened till its heat is over, makes
a rich improver of your Gardens.

Mud of ponds, if your ground light, use stiff mud, if your soil stiff or cold
use light or sandy mud: there is no Garden grounds but one of these is good for.

Saw-dust, after it has lain in a moist place till rotten, having its
sharpness abated, has the nature of Rotten wood, or wood pile dust, but the
chiefest is rotten Willow or Willow earth, to make a light soil for fibrous
rooted flowers and chiefly for Auricula's.

Ashes are good, unless they have been buckt withal, then they are hurtful; but
chiefly the Ashes of any vegetables burned are most advantageous, the Ashes of
like vegetables you intend to set in the earth mixed with them.

Rotten straw mixed with earth makes it light and a pleasing bed for best
Anemonies, as well as other flowers with fibrous roots.

Green slime of standing waters dried and beaten small in fine dust, and then
mixed with good fresh earth is very succesfully used in raising several sorts
of flower seeds.

Of these several sorts of compost, as you shall stand in need of, ought you
yearly to make provision, that you may have them ready when occasion to use
them, as you will find in the following tract directed.

Walks.
Thus for the earth in the beds of your Garden, for your Walks therein: First
take away all good soil in them below the roots of any Grass or Weeds: fill
them two or three inches with course Gravel unskreen'd, laying it round and
higher, in the middle, then role it well afterward with skreened Gravel, lay
it two inches more thick upon it, keeping it in the same proportion as
beforementioned, roling it often and well, but the sides next your-beds should
be laid a foot and half or two foot according to the breadth of your Walk, with
good Turf, from whence the heat of the Sun cannot be reflected as from the
Gravel to the prejudice of the neighboring flowers, making them much sooner
lose their beauty and leaves.

Borders and Beds.
If your Borders and beds be set with stone, which is the noblest and most
chargeable, if well workt and molded let it be such that will not moulder pil
and crack, as I have seen many.

If set with bricks, which is next, let them be well burnt.

If with sawed rail, Inch and half thick at least, and five inches broad, if
not well seasoned, or new sawed, throw them in a pit of water for a fortnight,
then take them out and dry them a day or two gently on a Kill, which will make
them ready for planing, and cyphering of the outward upper Edges, which when
every piece fitted to the lengths of work they are intended for, let them be
well drenched in Linseed Oil with a Swines brizle brush, both the in and
outside, if you grind some red Lead with the Oil, it will bind the faster and
the sooner dry, which done you may put them into what color you will, but the
best is a light stone color, by painting them over with white Lead and Umber,
ground together on a Painters stone with Linseed Oil, it will not only look
fine, but very durable when dry set together and firmly placed in the ground by
being fastened to pieces of strong wood, set at such distances in the ground,
that the Sun may not warp them; the rail three inches about the Gravel Walk,
which cannot be quite finished till that done, then fill them up with good
skreened earth or such as has been sifted through a Wire Riddle, laying the
earth round and higher in the middle than the top of the rail: For the forms of
your plots, you have here inserted two new fashioned draughts, the one for a
square, the other a long piece of ground, out of which may you make draughts
either for round, or Oval wall Gardens of what size soever, which will by
degrees come most in fashion, having the Sunbeams cast once a day on each part
of such Walls, either outward or inward side, a great advantage to fruit
planted against them.



A is Gravelwalks. B is Grass. C is railed Borders filled with good earth for
flowers.

This for a square Garden, you may make the middle there of a Circle unbroken,
with a Statue in the middle thereof, if not a fountain, and other Statues, one
at each corner, or as your fancy shall guide you, but then you must cut off the
innermost corners of the square as the prick lines direct you.



A is Grass, the rest gravelwalks, but the narrow borders railed and filled
with good sifted earth for flowers, if the middle be an oval undivided, it will
look as well. This plot serves well for an oblong. Were I employed a Garden to
contrive,
Wherein to plant each beauteous Vegetive;
First then my Wall so fashioned should be,
Each side and part the Sun each day should see:
So that the Fruits within* or outside set
An equal share of's ripening beams should get.
A Fountain in the midst should so be placed,
By which the Plot should not be only graced,
But that one spring should force the water out
In seeming showers of Rain, each part about
Farther or shorter distance, more or less,
Water to big, or smaller drops shall press,
As the enclosed Plants or Flowers require;
Gentle or fiercer rain, to your desire.
Invented shades to keep out Sol's South flames,
And apt reflections to enforce his beams,
As Nature of each Plant shall want his aid,
Or those that by his heat may be dismayed,
Assisting Nature by industrious Art;
To perfect every Plant in everypart,
But not like some, whose crimes do rise so high
Boldly to pull down Heavens Deity
I hate that so sordid ign^rance does dispense
With making Nature God, slight Providence,
But let each Vegetive best ordered prove
Such Letters, so may spel the God above,
That men may read him thence, and make each Clod
Speak God of Nature, make not Nature God:
But Blaz'ner of's wise providence and power,
First made, then so preserves each Plant and Flower.


JANVARY, toward the latter end.
Violets.
LVcoium Bulbosum praecox minus. The lesser early bulbous Violet, comes into
view, on a small stalk about seven or eight inches high, from between two pale
green narrow leaves, being a small pendulous flower, with three pointed milk
white leaves on the out side, with three shorter, edged or tipped with green,
fashioned like a Cup, their inside green, from a bulbous root, round like that
of a Daffadil; a common flower, yet not to be wanted, because when none other
appears that does, though in the Snow, whence called Snow-flower, or Snowdrops,
they increase by roots, indeed too fast, therefore their pods are to be pulled
off when going to seed: So hardy that they may be moved at any time.

Acenite.
Aconitum Hyemale. The Winter Wolfbane rises in this month, having round,
though cut, green leaves, each having a stalk from the root, and on some part
of them the flower, which is but small and yellow, of five leaves, with yellow
threads in the middle, the root thick and tuberous, like the common Anemony, but
round, losing its fibers every year: There is another sort like this in form,
but of a paler yellow, both great increasers, yet fit to be sprinkled here and
there, because so early, and so hardy as to be removed at any time. But this
Plant in any inward use is to be avoided, as poisonous and deadly.

FEBRVARY.
MEzerion. The Dwarf Bay, rising according to its Age from one to two, three or
four foot high, in a bush full of branches, a whitish gray tough bark enclosing
a soft consistence for wood, bearing whitish round pointed green leaves, which
appear not till the flowers past, which are small, consisting of four leaves
growing on clusters, or thirk and close together on the new shoots, one sort of
a deep peech color, near red, another a paler peach color, a third milk
white, each so sweet in savor, as to be sinelt at a distance, but the most
odoriferous is the pale peach colored, but the white the most rare. The
Flowers past are succeeded by many small Berries, when ripe of a delicatered,
but the Berries of the White, of a pure clear amber color, by which they are
raised pleasant and beautiful Plants like the Parents, or else producing
Children of a different complexion, which is the more rare; but these Berries
and Seeds are to be sowed in good light earth in Boxes, as soon as they are
ripe, or else such Earth laid under these fine shrubs, for the Seeds as they
ripen to fall into, and afterward covered with the same mould, but not too
thick.

Crocus.
Crocus, or Saffron of diverse Sorts, that flower in this month, others in
Autumn. The Spring Crocus's, that are most valued, are

Crocus albus major: The great white Crocus, rising up With narrow long green
leaves with a white line in the middle of them; from these comes up, covered
with a white skin, small low white flowers, of six leaves, a long saffron
pointel in the middle, with some Chives about it: Not opening but when the Sun
shines.

Crocus Maesiacus: The white Crocus of Maesia, like the last, but bigger and
more flowers from a root, but not so pure white, one of this kind has the
bottom of the flower, and part of the Stalk of a bright blew.

Crocus plumatus pallidus: The palefeather'd Crocus, somewhat like the last,
but larger and sharper pointed, bottom and stalk blew; the three outward leaves
on the outsides, all white, the insides striped with bigger and lesser streaks
of pale bluish purple, the three minor leaves striped with the same color on
both sides thereof. This is one of the rarest we have: next to these, for the
cold, is the

Bishops Crocus, of bigger roots and leaves than the former; longer and sharper
pointed flowers variable in Colors, sometimes white, striped with blew,
sometimes three leaves white and three blew.

Crocus Imperialis, the Imperial Crocus, many flowers from one root, silver
colored, striped on the backs of the leaves with purple, when opened are seen
through, but increases so fast, it is grown too common.

Crocus Regalis, the Royal Crocus, is like the last but better striped on the
backs of the outward leaves. These are flowers that the white has the Mastery,
the next the purple rides Admiral: As in the

Crocus purpureus minor, the small purple Crocus has narrow green leaves,
small low purple flowers round pointed, dark bottoms, near black

Crocus purpureus major, the greater purple Crocus, sharper pointed, of the
same color, but in leaves and flowers bigger and taller than the former.

Crocus purpureus maximus, the greatest purple Crocus, the largest of all the
Crocus's, bleaker purple and rounder pointed than the former: one of this kind
has leaves edged about with white

Crocus Neapolitanus Caeruleus, the blew Neapolitan Crocus differs only from
the greatest purple in the flowers, are of a deep sky colored, with a darker
bottom: but the

Crocus plumatus purpureus, the purl feathered Crocus like the great purple,
but a little bigger and rounder pointed, the three outward leaves of the flower
of the same color but feathered with white on both sides, the inner leaves
thick striped with white on a paler purple on each side, the best of all other
sorts yet known to us.

Crocus purpureus striatus minor. The lesser and greater purple striped Crocus.
Crocus purpureus striatus major.
The lesser of a Reddish purple color, veined through every leaf on both sides
with a deeper purple. The greater, like the greater purple: with three great
stripes down the backs of the three utmost leaves of a deeper purple, and
something lighter on the inside, as are the three inner-leaves also, but
striped on the backs near the bottom.

Crocus purpureus flammeus major, the great purple flamed Crocus, has fresher
green leaves than the other purples, middle sized flowers, whitest pale purple
on the outside, and deeper on the inside, striped and flamed throughout each
leaf. Keep the seeds of this sort, which gives good seed, and those sown good
varieties: then there is

Crocus Luteus sive Maesiachus: The yellow Crocus common. Crocus Luteus
maximus: The greatest yellow Crocus. Crocus flavius striatus: The yellow
striped Crocus.
Which have been valuable, but not now therefore not worth the description; but

Crocus Luteus versicolor, The Cloth of Gold Crocus is not so common as to be
rejected, it being of a different color from the rest, and fit for mixing with
them, having short whitish green leaves, fair yellow flowers, with three purple
stripes on the backs of the three outmost leaves, the rest are all yellow,
bearing two or three flowers from one root, their roots differing from others
in their being covered with a hard netted peeling or shell, these are to be
planted intermixed on the edges of your borders round your Garden, and make a
pleasant show before other flowers appear: and are the choicest of the spring
Crocus's, for those that blow in Autumnsh all in their season be described;
after these flowers are gone the seeds succeed, being small and round, in a
three square, some more roundish husk, of a yellowish red color, just above
ground, which when found ripe, gather and keep in the husks to sow in September
in light and rich ground, transplanting them the year after into such like soil
as before sowed, but place them not too thick, 'twill encourage their better
marking: their roots are small round and flat, covered with a Russet Coat, all
the aforementioned Crocus's my Garden is plentifully stored with, as well as
with the Mezertons.

MARCH.
Primroses.
PRimula veris, Primrose, viz. the double pale yellow, a pretty flower tho too
common: Double green Primrose, another the outward leaves green, with a small
pale yellow flower in the midst: A single yellow Primrose with the hose divided
into fine long narrow points or spurs, which I but lately had, and find no
where described, only valuable for the rarity of the hose.

The red Primrose of the shape of the field Primrose, of which very many
diversities in colors, some deeper, others lighter, from blood red to pale
Pink color, some of a bluish Rose color sadder and paler; some of a Brick
color, Dove color, Buff and Hair color, which have been raised from seeds;
as also

The fair red Primrose a pleasant flower, of a beautiful rich shining Velvet
red color, with a yellow star in the bottom as all the rest have.

The scarlet Primrose, amongst the single ones the most esteemable, being of a
bright scarlet color.

Red Primrose hose in hose, that is upon every stalk two flowers ingeminated,
or growing one within the other, several sorts, some deeper some paler,
differing either in size fashion or color. The best of these sorts are some
that I have, and never saw elsewhere, large flowers of a deeper and lighter
purple, fine yellow Eye, each Leaf of the lowermost flower having a large
stripe of Cream color through the middle.

Double red Primrose, of which I have only heard the name, but think there is
no such thing: as supposing, some last Winter bestowed on me by a great lover
of Rarities in this kind (Mr. John Wood of Shrewsbury) the Root bearing many
flowers very double, seldom blowing out well, and the color but of a dull
horseflesh hue, which though a rarity, wants the accomplishment of the color
of the fair red Primrose, had it but that addition, and of blowing well,
'twould be the only Flower for esteem expected from these kinds, and give ample
satisfaction for sowing their Seeds.

Cowslips hose in hose many of a stalk of the common color

Double Cowslip is bigger than the common kind, thick and double.

Double green Cowslip, very double, and rarest of the three.

There is the single green one, the tufted one, and Cowslip with jagged hose,
but not valuable.

Red Cowslip, or Oxslip, of several sorts, shaped like those in the Field, but
of several colors, deeper and lighter.

There is the Orange colored Cowslips, the leaves edged with Cinnamon Color,
somewhat redder on the outside

Some of a fine Scarlet color, but the. chiefest of them is the deep Scarlet,
very double, to vie with which is the Red Cowslip hose in hose, and as many
flowers on a stalk as the rest, large flowers, and large yellow starry eyes, of
these several varieties in deeper and lighter colors, some like to velvet.
Many sorts of these were raised lately from seeds, and given me by that
Industrious rare Florist, my truly worthy to be esteemed ingenious. Friend
Peter Egerton, Esquire of Boughton near Chester. These flowers last named must
often change their Earth or they will degenerate and come single, sow your
seeds in September, in a bed of good Earth, they will come up at Spring.

Hepatica's.
Hepatica nobilis, Noble Liverwort, of two sorts, single and double, of each
lighter and darker, blew and white.

Single Hepatica's, as also the double, their flowers come up before their
leaves amongst their old stalks and leaves upon stalk an hand's breadth high,
but small and weak, composed of about seven small pointed leaves of Deeper. i.
e. redder and paler Peach color. Another of the same shape of a light blew
watchet. Another milk white, the leaves rise at first folded, but after opening
themselves are divided at the edges in three parts, each standing on a
particular stalk, as high as the flowers, a black stringy root. The

Double Hepatcia's, these small flowers differ from the single ones, not in
color but only the double blew is of a more lustrous and deeper die. The
double white has fresher and smaller green leaves than the rest, snow white,
and as thick and double as the Peach or blew colored, but more rarely met
withal, and therefore more regarded, yet all of them the prettiest beauties the
Spring at her first approach exposes to our veiw. The single sort of them
valued for the seeds they bear; from which being sown varieties are expected;
they must be planted in rich well dunged Soil, they are increased by parting
their roots, when grown into several heads. Their seeds to be sowed in August
in Cases, or least exposed beds to the cold winds and frosts.

Fail not when the single kinds have near lost their beauty to tie up the
stalks bearing flowers to a small stick thrust in the ground; to prevent the
seed Vessels falling to the ground, and so either rotting the little pods
before the seed ripen, or your loosing the seed out of them when ripe, at least
the best of it before you are aware. These are the prettiest beauties of the
Spring
Clothed in red-white Vltramarine mantling.


MARCH, APRIL.
Hyacinths, are bulbous rooted, with many fat fibers under them, from whence
spring five or six leaves of a light green, tho at first reddish, they are
gutter'd on the upper side: Of these there are the

Hyacinthus Muscari flore flavo, they ellow Muscary or Musk grape flower, with
a long round root, from whence a weakish stalk headed with many flowers like
little bottles, of a fair yellow color, and muskish scent.

Muscari flore Cineritio, like the last, but lesser and paler leaves, the
flowers of a faint Ash color, as sweet if not sweeter than the former.

Muscari flore rubro, the red Muscari with flowers of a pale bleak white, and
of a strong Musky scent.

Hyacinthus comosus ramosus, purpureus elegantior fair hair'd* branched, fair
curled hair'd, the first has broader leaves than any of the former, standing
up but hollow, like the rest, the stalk near half yard high, branched on every
side with many tufts at the ends ends of a dark murry purple.

The second, like the other, only the flower consists of a bush of many
branches, divided into diverse long curled threads or hairs, whence its name, the
flower and top of the stalk of a fine bright murrey purple, a fine strange
flower.

Hyacinthus stellatus major Peruanus, flore albo flore carneo.

The great starry Hyacinth of Peru, like the Muscarini root and leaves, whence
a short stalk, from the middle whereof to the top upon long foot stalks, many
blew flowers star-like with some blew threads hung with yellow pendants,
standing about middle head.

The white, lesser than the former, leaves lighter green. The flowers white
with a show of blush at the bottom.

The blush, like the other, but the flower, of a fine purplish blush color.

Hyacinthus stellatus Lilifolio, and radice cerulea. The blew lilly-leav'd
starry Hyacinth, the root like that of the white Lilly, but smaller and longer,
thence leaves broad and short, the stalk foot high, bearing many star-like
flowers of a light blew color, with six short leaves in the middle, standing
like a Cup: Of this kind two other sorts, differing only from the former in
that the one is white the other blush, but flowers not till May, the others
sooner.

The roots of these lose not their fibers, therefore not endure long out of the
earth, nor to have their fibers broken when removed, and this is to be done in
August, but the most rare is

Hyacinthus Indicus tuberosa radice: The great Indian tuberose rooted Hyacinth,
a thick knobbed root, fashioned into several heads, with many fibers underneath
it, hence rise several strong stalks and tall, set with several fair, long and
broad green leaves, joined at the bottom close to the stalk, where they are
biggest, diminishing even to the top gradually, where stand many flowers fair
and large of six white leaves, spreading open like those of the white Daffodil,
with some short threads in the middle strong, and sweetly scented: there is a
smaller kind and differs only in that, but this Hyacinth is yearly to be taken
up in April, and the roots carefully parted, lest the great fibers be bruised
or broken, and thus replanted, let the bottom of the Pot be rich earth, the
middle natural fresh earth, in which place your Root and distended fibers,
covering them with some of the same earth, then fill up the Pot with the same
rank earth as laid at the bottom to nourish the fibers, sink the Pot into a hot
bed that begins to languish in its heat, let it there abide without watering
till the roots spring, then take it out and place it under a South Wall,
watering it in dry weather, house it in September, and preserve it from wet and
cold, the fresh leaner earth about the root makes it the apter to bear, and
rank earth to of set, plant your Muscari in a warm place and defend it from
Winters cold.

Hyacinthus Botroides caeruleus amaenus flore albo sky white grape-flower
blush branched
flore rubente ramosus

The first of these, the sky colored grape-flower comes up with three green
leaves, sometimes four, and guttur'd like the former, from a round white root,
a stalk about half a foot high, bearing many flowers, set together like a small
bunch of grapes; in form like the Muscary, but lesser, of a fine pale blew or
sky color, of a soft sweet scent.

The white like the former: The blush bigger in all its parts, with flowers of
a pale bleak blush color.

The branched differs in that the flowers grow along the stalk in branches, of
a blew color, and bigger in flowers, stalks, leaves and roots. But I shall next
speak of the more to be preferred Oriental Hyacinths, As first

Zumbul Indi: The great Oriental Hyacinth, that comes up with a spled stalk,
broad long green leaves, bearing on a strong stalk, many fair long bluish
purple flowers opening into six small leaves turning back again, as all the
Orientals do, the root big, round, covered with a reddish purple Coat: Of this
kind one bears double flowers, and many that I shall not insist on, some but
name, chiefly differing in the color of the flowers: Some of a pale deeper
blew with stripes down the backs of the leaves of the flowers: Some wholly
white, others of a fine blush, their roots losing their fibers, may as the
Tulips be taken up and kept dry, causing them to be more respected, having all
a sweetish scent.

The Caelestial Hyacinth of a pale sky or blew color like the Zumbul Indi, but
bigger in all its parts, often coming up with two stalks, each bearing many
large flowers.

Hyacinthus Orientalis brumalis, white early Hyacinth. Hyacinthus Orientalis
flore pleno caeruleo, fair double blew Hyacinth. Hyacinthus Orientalis candidus
flore pleno, pure white double Ori. Hyacinthus stellatus flore cinereo, Ash
color starry Hyacinth. Hyacinthus stellatus vulgaris, common blew starry
Hyacinth. Hyacinthus stellatus flore albo, the white starry Hyacinth.
Hyacinthus stellatus precox, the early blew starry Hyacinth.
There is one of the last kind that bears white flowers, another much rarer
than any of this kind, the flowers being as large as of the first blew, strong
lusty flowers, of a fine blush color, these sorts of flowers in the beginning
of March.

The great Oriental Hyacinth, betimes in March, the purple early Winter
Hyacinths beginning of February, the other Oriental Hyacinths single and double
flower in the end of March or beginning of April, the starry Hyacinth that is
Ash colored or light blew in April, the other starry Hyacinths in the
beginning of March, the Grape Hyacinths flower in April, but all of them
earlier or later as the Winters severities deter or Springs forwardness invite
to show their faces: Most of these flowers are hardy and require but small
attendance, most of them bear seeds, which being sown in September, like as you
will find directions for Tulips, will produce new diversities: The choicest of
these named and that a Florist may not be without, are

The fair double blew, double white Oriental:

The Caelestial, white and blush starry Hyacinths, tho the others are pretty
diversions, not much valued. Apollo's Zephirus's beloved Boy.
Fair Hyacinthus subject of their Toy
By an unlucky-chance Apollo slew
And Zeph'rus breath, into this flower blew,
As loved by many, so many colors have,
Some blew caused by the Crush Apollo gave,
Some white declaring of its innocence,
Some blushing that its change proceeded thence,
Each smelling sweet of Zephirus last kiss:
Nothing against fate sufficient armor is.
Thus moralizing mortals here below.
By Divine strokes we all should sweeter grow.


NARCISSUS.
Next to the Hyacinths appear the Daffodils, some of which deserve
entertainment in your Garden to be placed in your borders next your Walls or
under Pales, and tho in shady places prosper well, being hardy plants, and
great encreasers, most of them blowing early, of great variety, some single
some double, some bearing many flowers on a stalk, some white, some straw
color, some lighter and darker yellow, those fit for a Florist are those that
follow, having round roots enclosed in brown skins (for to yellow faces seldom
better colored appertain) whence rise sometimes two three or four long, but
narrowish leaves of greyish green color with stalks, sometimes one foot and
half, or two foot high at the top, whereof out of a thin husk comes flowers,
all having their heads, either single, double, two, three, four, five or more.

Narcissus non parel, the incomparable Daffodil, with a single flower of six
pale yellow large leaves, roundish points, with a deeper yellow cup in the
middle, its edges indented.

Narcissus non parel flore, sive chalice pleno, with a double flower, or Cup,
the out leaves like the last, but the middle very large thick and double, of
longer pale yellow leaves, the shorter and deeper yellow Cup broken and mixed
amongst them, forming a large and beautiful flower, it being pity it is so
great an encreaser.

Narcissus Gallicus major flore pleno, the great double french Daffodil, has
shorter leaves, and stalks than the former, bearing one fair double flower, of
pointed leaves, crowded so confusedly together and so thin, that rainy weather
makes them stick one to another and never open, but come a fair flower if not
so prejudiced by wet, of a pale yellow color almost white.

Narcissus Gallicus minor flore pleno, the lesser double French Daffodil, bears
on a weak stalk one fine double flower of sharp pointed leaves, lying over one
another shorter by degrees to the middle, like a star with six points, of a
yellower color than the former, yet pale and opens finely.

Narcissus albus flore pleno virginianus, the double white Daffodil of
Virginia, rises from between two small green leaves, a stalk half foot high,
bearing a fair double white flower, formed like the last, but from the middle
comes a small long white fork, and adds to its beauty: This endures not the
Winters severities, but must be set in a warm place.

Narcissus albus multiplex, the double white Daffodil needs no description
being so common.

These are the best kinds of legitimate Daffodils, bearing one flower on a
stalk, flowring in March and April: the next following are those that bear many
flowers on a stalk but the flowers single.

Narcissus Africanus aureus major: the great yellow Daffodil of Africa, the
best of all single ones with many flowers on a stalk, greener and longer leaves
than the others, on a stalk shorter than the leaves (if the root old) ten or
twelve large fair shining yellow colored flowers with large Cups of deeper
yellow, very sweet scented, a noble plant.

Nircissus Sulphureus major, the great Brimstone color Daffodil, narrower
leaves but as long as the last, bearing four or five flowers on a stalk of
bright Lemmon colored, at the first opening a round Saffron colored Cup, but
after blown a while the flower turns to a sulen brimstone color; the Cup
paler, sweet like the former, worth a Florists choice.

Narcissus Narbonensis sive medio Luteus, the French Daffodil white leaves and
yellow Cup, softer scented bearing eight or ten flowers on one stalk.

Narcissus natus albus polianthos, all white Daffodil with many flowers, like
the last but flower and cup all white, of those there is a lesser and a greater,
the greetest of most value.

Next follows the many flowr'd Daffs that are double, as

Narcissus Ciprius flore pleno polianthus. The double yellow Daffodil of Cyprus
with many flowers, bearing four or five small double pale yellower flowers,
strong scented, this is tender, and must be defended from Winter frost.

Narcissus medio luteus corana duplici, the Turkey Daffodils with a double
Crown, bearing four or five small milk white flowers, with a double yellow Cup,
of many small short yellow leaves, exceeding sweet, but not so tender as the
last.

Narcis. Chalcidonicus flore plenopolianthus, the double Daffodil of
Constantinople, with many flowers, like the last in leaf and stalk, bearing
four or five double white flowers their leaves standing disorderly, having many
pieces of a yellow Cups amongst them; there is another whose Cup leaves are
edged with purple, both fine flowers.

The Junquils or rush Daffodil come next in course, being true Daffodils.

Narcissus juncifolius Albus, the white Junquil, has a small round blackish
root, whence springs three or four small long rush-like green leaves, stalk
foot high, bearing three or four little flowers of six white leaves, round Cup
in the middle of the same color: There is another like this but the leaves
turn back again: Another of the same fashion but of gold yellow color: A third
turning back, the flower pale yellow, Cup white: A fourth having the flower
white, the Cup yellow.

Narcissus juncifolius Luteus magno chalice, the Qinquillia or rush Daffodil
with a great Cup, is bigger in all the parts than any of the former, seldom
more flowers than three on a stalk, therefore larger than in any of the rush
Daffs, outer leaves yellow, turning something toward the Cup which is big
proportionable to the leaves of the flower, but of a deeper yellow color.

Narcissus juncifolius Luteus flore pleno, the double Junq. or rush Daffodil,
in all parts like the common one, only the flower of these are thick and
double, of several rows of leaves with the pieces of their Cups betwixt every
row of bigger leaves, all of a fair yellow color.

There are some Indian Daffodils, with many Lilly like reddish flowers on a
stalk, some blush flowers, another scarlet root and flower, others purplish,
but shall be no farther noticed, since not to be courted to abide on too
Northern climate.

I shall next mention the great Sea Daffodil, and then pass to the bastard
Daffodils.

Narcissus Marinus, five tertius Mathiolis the great Sea Daffodil, or Mathiolus
his third Daffodil, has a root far bigger than any of the rest, leaves
generally six, of a whitish green, as thick and broad again as any other, but
not so long as some of them: from their middle and sides comes up one,
sometimes two or three great stalks, foot high at shortest, bearing at the Top
ten or twelve, sometimes more flowers on a stalk, each of six spread white
leaves with a white short Cup or Crown in the middle, lying flat on the leaves,
divided into six corners; thence comes forth white threads, turning up the
ends, and some other white threads in the middle, tipped with yellow pendents,
seldom springing till April flowers, not till May ends, or the beginning of
June, this ought to be planted under a South Wall and needs not removing of
twenty years, if at any time set again presently.

Pseudo Narcissus aureus Hispanicus maximus, the great yellow Spanish bastard
Daffodil, the root affects to be set deep in the ground, whence springs many
thick leaves and stiff, of a grayish green color, stalk three foot high
bearing one large yellow flower standing forth from the stalk, of six short,
yet something broad leaves, and a great trunk in the middle, a little crumpled,
wide open at the mouth turning up the brims.

Pseudo Narcissus Hispanicus flore albo major, the great white Spanish Bastard
Daffodil, less in all its parts than the former yellow one, bearing one Milk
white flower hanging down the head of the fashion of the former, there are two
white Spanish ones of this kind more but are lesser.

Pseudo Narcissus Maximus flore pleno, the greatest double bastard Daffodil, or
Tradeskens double Daffodil, holding the preemince of all of this kind, being
the biggest, doubtless best formed of all the double Daffodils, a great round
root with a brown coat that throws up four or five pretty large leaves, but not
very long, of a whitish green stalk about foot high, bearing a fair great
flower largely spread open, containing a multitude of small pale yellow leaves,
and near as many larger, of a deep yellow color, growing in rows one under
another shorter and shorter by degrees to the middle of the flower.

Pseudo Narcissus Major flore pleno, Tuggees great double bastard Daffodil, in
all parts like the last, but not so well spread open, nor the Cups broken into
such good partings, fashioned like

Pseudo Narcissus Minor flore pleno, the lesser double bastard Daffodil, known
chiefly by the name of Wilmots Daffodil, of a longer shape, tho lesser flower,
seldom opening alike, having a great double trunk, in some unbroken, in others
half broken, and throwing it self among the other leaves, there is

Pseudo Narcissus flore pleno minimus, the least double bastard Daffodil, or
Perkinsons double Daffodil, like the last, but lesser, and of a greenish yellow.

Pseudo Narcissus Anglicus flore pleno, the double English bastard Daffodil,
the flower double, of pale yellow outer leaves, parts of the trunk deeper
yellow, divided in several rows one within another, sometimes the trunk only
double, and some parts or sides of the flower of a greenish yellow.

Pseudo Narcissus angusti folii aureus multiplex, the golden double narrow
leaved Daffodil, bears one double flower, of six yellow outer leaves, and many
smaller of a deeper yellow, thick set together in the middle, pointing forth,
different from all the rest, as rare and prizable as any.

Pseudo Narcissus Junci folii albus, white bastard Junquilia, or rush Daffodil,
from two or three large green leaves not so round as those formerly mentioned,
rises a stalk about a foot high, bearing one small white flower of six small
and short leaves, standing about the trunk which is long, and very wide open at
the brims, the utmost small leaves a little greenish, the great trunks milk
white.

Pseudo Narcissus Luteus Major, the great yellow bastard rush Daffodil differs
only in that it is every way bigger trunk longer and of a yellow color, there
is two or three of this kind but differ only in their bigness, and one flowring
a month later than the rest.

Daffodils in general are hardy, great increasers, tho some of them are tender
as mentioned in their description, and ought to be planted in good earth and
warm place, as much as may be freed from the Winters annoyance, most of them to
be taken up in June, and kept dry till September, and then to be set as Mr.
Wolricks advises, or under out hedges of your Gardens in borders or Banks made
for them: To make new varieties, you must sow the seeds of the best single ones
(for the double bear none) in September, in such places that they may stand two
or three years ere removed, and then in June taken up, but presently set again
in good ground, at convenient distances till they offer to your Eye which
deserve to abide or be thrown away: For if but two or three, may but one
variety, your pains not lost. The Daffodils are by the curious
(Whether Legitimate or spurious)
Accounted beauties in their time,
Deserving notice in our Rhyme.
But since* it is here so poorly done,
They hang their heads, ashamed to own
What so much flats their reputation;
Such Limping-languide commendation:
Lest Honor loose; with yellow Jealousy
Fretting fall to the earth and mourning die.


In this month of March flowers the double Peach of three or more rows of
leaves of a reddish blush color, seldom succeeded by any fruit.

AVRICVLA'S.
Bears ears, flowers so much now in esteem (and well deserve it) for their
diversity of Color and different faces, each adding a new grace to its kind,
nature sporting her self so in their various complexions, that we are at a
loss, to suit names to the several dies they offer to our description, either
in their self colors, stripped or double flowers, some of which are striped
also and declare their worth by the prizes given for them from one to two,
three, four or five pounds, etc. a root, each year producing new faces from the
Seeds sowed of well chosen flowers, the best way of performing thereof, not
till now made public, shall be faithfully showed after the descriptions of
these five plants, as they as flowers offer themselves to our view, dividing
them into these sorts; single, self colors, single striped, double self
colored, and double striped flowers: And first of the

Single self colors, which as the rest have green thick leaves and broad, some
longer some shorter, some of a grass green, others lighter and mealy, some
smooth and plain on the edges, others downy and jagged or purled edges; from
the middle or sides of the leaves spring up the stalks, from four inches to a
shafual in height, round and colored like the leaves, bearing at the top many
flowers shaped as the Cowslips, consisting of five small leaves, parted at the
ends with a white circle or eye in the middle, hallow down to the small caps
they stand in, wherein when the flower's fallen appear small round heads with a
prick in the middle, which contain the seeds, that are small and brown, having
a long, white, stringy root, like that of the Primrose or Cowslip, that
Original of these delicate springs.

Auricula flore. Luteo: The yellow Auricula, of which those only are esteemed,
that bear the biggest Trusses of the deepest yellow, largest and whitest eyes,
the rest not worth a farthing, hence came the leather-coats still esteemed, as
Liver color with a gray eye. Hair color, good truss and eye, several sorts.
Clove color, great truss, indifferent eye, of the last there are larger and
bigger flowers. Willow color, small eye. Mouse color, yellowish eye. Cinnamon
large flower fine white eye. Hair color, lighter edges, good, truss, and eye,
of this sort several lighter and darker. Greenish hair color or like Corn
blossoms, large flower and truss, great white eye. Light Tawney, fine white
eye, many flowers in the Truss, a pretty variety. Albo, the white, of small
esteem, only the Virgins milk with a large truss of white flowers, and whiter
eye.

Auricula flore purpureo: The purple Auricula, of which several sorts, some
deeper, some lighter, some bigger, some lesser, some good white eyes, others
indifferent.

Auricula flore One The fair Downam (raised by a Divine of that Name) bearing
many flowers, of a bright murrey or reddish purple color with a white eye.
Tutor Goods purple, bearing a great Truss of many fair, rich, purple flowers,
with a delicate white eye, that will not wash with rain, but abide so to the
last, which many others will not do. Mrs. Bugs fine purple, like the last, but
that the great head of flowers stand more upright, of a deeper purple and
broader white eye. Mr. Whitmores purple, fair and large great Truss of flowers,
of a lighter purple than the former, with fine white eyes. Mr. Rea's purple,
like in color brighter, bearing more flowers, good eye.

Purple Fransway, a good flower, bearing a great Truss of rich shining purple
Flowers with a larger white eye than any of the rest.

The black Imperial and the black Emperor are such dark purples, that little
difference them from black, with delicate snow white eyes, the only difference
of these two is, that the last is the bigger in all its parts, and of other
purples there is more diversities than I need name, nor should, but that the

Blazing Star just now appears in view the largest leaf Flower of them all by
much, of a very deep murrish liver color, with a snowy white eye, as big as
the whole of another Flower.

Auricula flore Rubro sive coccineo, The red or Scarlet colored Auricula. Mrs.
Austins Scarlet, bears a great Truss of fine Scarlet Flowers, with Snow white
eyes, yet the best of that kind. There are some of Mr. Jacob Roberts raising,
that are good Flowers, who keeps the Physic Garden in Oxford, there are others
that are raised from seeds of a blood red, as Mr. Reo's deep scarlet, or rather
blood red Auricula, bearing a great Truss of Flowers, with fair white eyes.
Some that are Crimson, others Carnation, Rose color and blushes, with several
other colors, the stranger the color, if with good white eyes that will not
wash, are of most value.

Come we now to the more enobled Auricula's, enriched by their stripes, and
begin with the eldest of them.

The Purple striped Auricula, small in all parts, on a weak low stalk, bears a
head of four or five (seldom more) purple Flowers striped with white.

The Purple and Lemmon color, bigger and stronger than the last, on a stiff,
tho low stalk, bears a good Truss of Flowers, but has no good eye, yet well
marked with Purple and Lemmon, but sometimes all yellow.

Deep purple and Straw-colour white eye, fine Flower.

Dull flesh color and Lemmon.

Liver color and yellow broad stripes.

Blood color streakt with yellow good eye.

Dark and Gold color indifferent eye.

Dark and Gold color with the fair eye.

Fine Violet and white.

Sky color and white finely striped, large Truss.

Scarlet and Gold color finely striped, good eye large Truss, pert, upright
dainty Flower.

Buffe and Lemmon colored striped bad eye.

Hair color and Lemmon rarely striped, fine white eye, large truss and
upright, but sometimes come all yellow.

Philomot some stripes of leather color bad eye.

Dark hair color streaked with a lighter.

Needle work pale peach and white in small streaks, weak-stalk, and small head,
there are some more varieties, but let these suffice at present.

Arrive we at last to the richest of these curious flowers the double self
colored, and the double striped, of the double self colors.

The double white bearing but one flower on a stalk.

The double yellow a large flower.

The double Leather-coat.

The double dark hair color.

The double Chestnut color, large flower and leaves well spread.

The double deep Philomot, lightning toward the bottom into Lemmon color to
the white of the eye, large flower and indeed a fine one.

To close with the best last, there are two rare striped Auriculas, their price
bespeaks them, the one at four, the other nearer five pound, and have been
sold for twenty pound, as I have been informed, they may now be cheaper, and
are in the hands of my truly worthy friend Peter Egerton of Boughton near
Chester, Esquire viz.

The double striped, Crimson and white.

The double very large and full of leaves, purple and yellow, the two choicest
rarities in Flora's Cabinet.

These several sorts of Auricula's flower some few the later end of March, the
rest in April, and some of them again in the opposite months to those
mentioned, but the then flowers more weak and not so glorious.

They must be so planted as to be shaded from the midday scorchings of the
Sun, in a rich soil; the best composition is well rootted neats dung,
flood-sands, or brooks-sand, and willow earth, that is the rotten dust of a
mouldered old willow Tree, these mixed and sifted to a fine composition of mold
which they most delight in, and which the choicest of Auricula's may be allowed
for their lodging: Courser beds of Earth may serve the commoner sorts, which
must be set a foot asunder, because of their spreading, and will endure all
weathers, but your best set in pots or boxes, that they may be shifted in the
Summer into the shade, in the Winter into the Sun, and either transplanted into
fresh mould every year, or in August when you divide the roots, take away some
of the old and put new mould to them: When you set them, open a wide hole,
leaving a rising in the middle, place the root thereon, and spread every fibril
round about it as not to crush one another, they will the better draw their
nourishment and flourish accordingly; then cover them with earth and soundly
doust them with water, which will save you much pains afterward, needing no
more unless in a very dry time; preserve them as much as you may from winters
wet, if cold they endure well enough: But house them not, for they are better
pleased with the open air or the raising of new varieties; after the flowers
past, when the stalks begin to turn yellow, the seed at the top will be near
ripe, therefore carfully observe the round seed vessel, if you find in it a
small hole and black, gather it lest the seeds fall out and be lost before you
are aware: As soon as you see it thus ready, cut the stalks gently that you
flirt not out the seed, the best being at the top and will fly away first,
keeping the tops upright for that reason, tie them in that position together,
with a paper loose about them, but fastened with the stalks at the bottom, that
any seeds coming out may be saved therein, an ounce of which being worth a
pound of what is forced out: Set them up against a sunny window; tying them for
security to the bars thereof and what are not, the Sun will there ripen.

About the first day of September, having boxes of eight or ten inches deep,
what square or length you please, proportioned to the quantity of seed you
have, fill them half full of fine fifted rich and light earth, rotted Cow dung
and sandy earth, proportionably mixed, which gently pressed down with a broad
Truel, leaving its surface smooth, on which sift through a fine five willow
earth a finger and half or more thick, as equal as you can, leaving it light
and unpressed, then having separated your seeds from their husks or crumbebs
with a Sive that seeds will but just pass through you may, wait for a drizling
or small rain, sow your seeds in your prepared boxes or cases, or pots, and set
them out in such rain, without covering them with any earth, for the rain will
drive the seeds as far as necessary into the fine sifted light mould, always
observing in what seeds soever, the smaller it is the finer the earth must be
that it is sowed in, and that they may be rather choked or buried by too much
covering than receive prejudice by none at all, which caut on none yet have
published in Auricula's, a fault by which many as well as my self have lost both
our time, seeds, pains and expectations. After you have thus sown your Auricula
seeds let them stand all Winter in a free air and Sun, at the beginning of
April remove them into the shades, for then they will begin to spring and peep,
at which time one hot Glem of the Sun destroys them; let them continue so
posited, give them some gentle waterings till they arrive to some considerable
bigness, then transplant those of them that grow too thick, but dexterously into
a prepared bed for them half a foot a funder or eight inches, where they ought
to remain till they come to bear flowers, the rest may continue in your boxes
till the time you intend to sow more in their places; after the former
directions, some will bear by that time they rest the Spring following; be sure
the ground you transplant them in be rich and good, and that your expectations
may not be frustrated let your seeds sown be gathered from good flowers, such
that have good white eyes that will not wash (let the other colors be what
they will except the yellow) and your hopes may be the higher; if in their
flowring any new faces appear your pains are rewarded, the rest that derogate
are only fit for pleasing small friends or perhaps as good throw away. See how
the Bears Ears in their several dresses,
(That yet no Poets pen to hight expresses.)
Each head adorned with such rich attire,
Which Fools and Clowns may slight, whilst skilled admire.
Their gold, their purples, scarlets, crimson dies,
Their dark and lighter hair'd diversities.
With all their pretty shades and Ornaments,
Their parti-colour'd coats and pleasing scents.
Gold laid on scarlet, silver on the blew
With sparkling eyes to take the eyes of you.
Mixed colors, many more to please that sense,
Other with rich and great magnificence,
In double Ruffs, with gold and silver laced,
On purple crimson and so neatly placed.
Ransack Flora's wardrobes, none sure can bring
More taking Ornaments to adorn the spring.


Dens Caninus Dogs Tooth, or Dogs tooths violet, its spotted roots and leaves
manifest it a kind of Satyrian, but of more beauty and rarity, the stalk half a
foot high, bearing one flower hanging down the head, with six narrow long
leaves, which like the Cyclamen turn up again to the stalks, showing a three
forked style of white colors, beset with six chives, tipped with purple
pendents, rooted long and white like a dogs tooth, whence so named, of which
there is these sorts.

Dens Caninus Flore albo, Dogs tooth with a white flower.

Dens Caninus Flore purpurescente, with a purple flower.

Dens Caninus Flore rubro, Dogs tooth with a red flower.

Dens Caninus Flore luteo, Dogs tooth with a yellow flower and deserves our
entertainment, flowering in the end of Maroh or beginning of April: They affect
not a dunged soil, but good fresh earth, and therein to be planted in August
ere they put forth new fibers, for tho they lose the old they quickly recover
new ones; therefore keep them not long out of the ground, and when set defend
them from rain for a fortnight, for much will rot and moil them; they are very
slow encreasers, and but seldom with us.

APRIL.
Auricula flore coeruleo folio Boraginis.

THe Burrage-leav'd blew Auricula has rough hairy leaves, spread on the ground
like Burrage, but much lesser, and rent in the sides in some places, among
which rises up one, two, or more brown hairy stalks, five or six inches high,
each bearing at the top three or four flowers of five leaves, large, sharp
pointed, of a fair, rich, blew color, some small yellow threads in the middle,
the root long and brownish with many small fibers. It Is a tender Plant,
impatient of Cold, must be planted in a pot, and handled as the Flos Cardinalis
is directed to be ordered in the latter end of what is described under the
Title June.

Cortusa Matthioli, Bears Ear Sanicle springs up with folded leaves, openings
are fair and broad, cut in divisions, nicked about the edges, a little hairy,
dark green on the upper, but whiter on the other side, whence rises one or two
naked stalks five or six inches high, bearing at the tops diverse small flowers
like Auricula's, but hang their heads, of a dark purple with a small white eye
and some threads in the middle, seeding like Auricula's, the root a thick tuft
of small whitish strings fastened to a head, the leaves perish, and renew at
spring, it is raised by feed, set in a pot and ordered in the winter as the last.

Corona-Imperialis, The Crown Imperial, of which tho Mr. Woldridge gives his
opinion in these words, they are but dull flowers.

There is no sound Florist of his Judgment, it being the most stately
majestically graceful of any plant in being. It has a large round yellow root
(scenting like a Fox) from whence springs a strong tall stalk adorned up to the
middle thereof with long shining green leaves, from thence to the top (Scepter
like) is naked, bearing there a tuft of smaller green leaves, under them seven,
eight, nine or ten flowers, according to the age of the root, hanging down
round about the stalk, each flower fashioned like a Lilly, consisting of six
leaves on the dark stalk, of an Orange color, with deeper colored veins on
the outside, on that part next the stalk are eminences or bunches, each leaf
one, containing in the inside of them drops of sweet tasted clear water, pearl
like, each flower in the middle having a style compassed with six white chives
and tipped with yellow pendents, upon a stalk of the same color.

Corona Imperialis. Flore multiplici, The double Crown Imperial differing only
in the doubleness of the flower from the last, having constantly fifteen or
more leaves in a flower, as many flowers in the head and longer lasting than
the single, the tuft on the top bigger, the single one is common, yet no dull
flower; this is of more esteem and a gallant plant deserving it; a good
encreaser. Flore luteo, The yellow Crown Imperial, differing only from the
first described single one, in its flowers, being of a fair yellow color, on a
stalk green as its leaves, by which it is known in its coming up; this is a
tenderer plant than the other and more rare and esteemable, a very slow
encreaser, I have one as double of this kind, as the double Orange colored
one, which must be the rarest of its species.

Tho this year from an old root that bore constantly single Orange colored
flowers, came some of them double and others striped with yellow, from the seed
of which I doubt not but to raise some fine variety.

These flower in the end of March and beginning of April; they are increased by
offsets that yearly come from the old roots, which lose their fibers as often
and may be taken up after the stalks are dried down, which will be in June, and
kept out of the ground till August, at which time they must be set again; the
double Orange colored and the yellow show finely intermixed, and very well
become the middle of a flower-pot.

The double bear seeds, and from the common single one small hopes, the seeds
of the yellow when attainable (for it is a nice plant seldom offsetting and as
seldom seeding) give the greatest expectations when sown of new varieties.

Great stately plant of most Majestic form,
The Gardens of the ingenious do adorn.
That King-like stands superior to the rest,
Esteemed right, by a right knowing breast.
Crowned with thy own worth as well as flowers
Detracting pens nere pierce thy regal Towers.
But their discretion, whilst they are speaking things,
Are mean, of Crowned flowers as well as Kings.
In this month of April appears the double flowered Cherry in blossom, graft
this and the Flanders cluster Cherry on the same block, to which set and spread
against a wall, each mixed will show well, and create wonder in some.

Syringa laciniatis foliis, sive gelsiminum persecum. The blew Syringa with cut
leaves, or Persian Jasmine in this season flowers, it comes up with many small
woody branches, beset with fine green leaves, small, long, cut in and divided
almost to the middle rib, some into three small leaves on a side, and a larger
at the point, others into two, some but one on each side, and the bigger at the
end; at the end of the branches come forth the flowers, many together,
fashioned like those of the ordinary blew Syringa or Lilac, but smaller, and of
a finer purplish blew color and better scented, and is increased by laying
down the branches, or by cuttings apt enough to root and thrive.

Lylac five Syringa Flore caeruleo, The blew Syringa or Pipe tree is too common
to describe it, but there are other kinds of it that are worth our notice and
collection, viz. that which is snow white; another silver color i. e. white
with a light wash of blew; the last with fair purple colored flowers, growing
more upright, bearing more, and fairer flowers on one branch than any of the
former, all flowring in this month, they must yearly be discharged of their
suckers, lest they choke the Tree and kill it, or cause it not to bring forth
flowers; they are all hardy plants except the white which is more tender and
would be planted against a Wall.

Hypericum frutex, Woody Saint John's woort has two hundred and three or more
woody stalks rising about a yard high, beset at certain distances with tufts of
small green leaves, and amongst them in the end of this month many small
flowers, white and a little purple in the middle, a pretty plant, endures the
Winter and is increased by layers.

Laurus Tinus, The wild bay spread on a Wall grows five or six foot high, full
of branches, at every joint two smooth longish dark green colored leaves, at
the top of the branches come forth great tufts of small white flowers with
blush edges, succeeded by small blew berries, wherein the seeds are contained,
there is another called Laurus Tinus Folio glabro, differs only from the other
in that the leaves are larger, of a brighter green, fairer flowers, bigger and
whiter than the former.

Laurus Tinus Lusitanica, The wild Bay of Portugal, has leaves harder, fuller
of veins, of a brown green color, the flowers inclining to purple, the berries
like but smaller than the former, I place these in this Month 'cause now in
their greatest beauty, tho they flower not till winter.

Ornithogalum Luteum, The yellow Starr of Bethlehem, rises at first with one
long round greenish leaf, which openning a little above the ground, yeildeth
another small leaf shorter than the first, whence rises a stalk four or five
inches high, bearing at the top four or five small leaves, and among them four
or five small yellow starlike flowers, a small greenish line down the backs of
the leaves, and some small reddish threads in the middle; small, round, white
and clear root, tho each year loses it fibers, yet will not abide but little
time out of the ground; this may be set amongst other tender roots that require
covering and defense from frosts in winter, but not so tender as the Arabian or
Ethiopian.

Caltha Palustris Flore pleno, The double Marsh Marigold, is that is called
Water-boot, plentiful in wet grounds, only the flowers of this are thick and
double, of an excellent Gold yellow color, stringy roots and prospers well in
Gardens, flowering in this month.

APRIL, MAY.
Tulipa, the Tulip, of which so many diversities that it were an endless piece
of work to recite and describe them all, I shall therefore give you (that I
may come in as small a volume as possible) but the names and descriptions of
some few of the best (having an hundred sorts) beginning with the precoces or
early blowing Tulips, leaving cut the Edgers, which are of least note.

Florisante, Low flower, pale Horseflesh color marked with some crimson and
pale yellow, which at length turns white, the bottom and Tamis blew, every one
knows the shapes of a Tulip which saves me the labor of giving the form.

Blindenburg, middle sized, tops of the leaves of a pease blossom color, the
sides white, yellow Tamis.

General Molswilck, well marked with Coronation and white pale yellow Tamis.

Morillion Cramosine, a delicate flower, of a bright Crimson or rather scarlet
and pure white, rarely striped and well parted, bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Perishot, of a fair shinning bluish red color and often well marked with
white, but inconstant, the bottom white, Tamis pale yellow.

Fair Ann, round pointed leaves of Claret Wine color, marked with great flakes
of white bottoms and Tamis as the Perishot.

Omen, Fair large and well formed flower of pale Rose color, many veins of
Crimson, guarding great stripes of white, bottom and Tamis blew.

Galatea, bright Gredeline and white striped, bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Superintendant, Fair and large flower well marked with violet purple and good
white, pale yellow bottom and Tamis.

Aurora, red and white variably marked, the bottom and Tamis pale yellow, good
flower.

Gilden blooms, pale red marked with some stripes of Gold color through the
leaves, bottom and Tamis yellow.

Alcetus, narrow leaves, good purple, well striped with good white bottom and
Tamis of blew purple.

Medias.
Of the middle flowering Tulips only some of the best, viz.

General Essex, Orange color striped with yellow bottom and Tamis dark purple.

Pluto, Of a sooty Orange color, variably marked with lighter and darker
yellow, bottom, sad green, bluish Tamis.

Agot Robine, Paragon, of a sullen red, well marked with dun color Crimson and
white, bottom whitish black Tamis.

Royal Tudaet, of a sad red color, whipped about the edges with crimson and
striped with pale yellow bottom and Tamis black.

Cardinal Flambiant, pale scarlet, well marked with white, bottom and Tamis
blew.

Morillionde Anvers, pale scarlet and pale yellow.

Bell Brune, dark brown crimson, well marked and striped with white, bottom pale
yellow, and large dusty Tamis.

Susanna, bright Carnation and snow white finely divided, bottom white, pale
greenish Tamis.

Pass Belline, Carnation, some greddeline and much white, well parted and
placed bottom and Tamis blew.

Camusetta, large flower, Carnation, grediline and white, the well marking of
this flower makes the bottom white, tho the Tamis blew.

Paragon black burn, tall flower, broad yet sharp pointed leaves of a light
Carnation color, marked with deeper red, and striped with white bottom and
Tamis blew.

Pass Rosy, pale rose color, well marked with crimson and some veins of
straw color, bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Chimny Sweeper, of a dark blackish red color with a larger round whitish
bottom, from whence it often comes striped, pale yellow Tamis.

The Witch, as near as may be to black, being of so sullen a dark red, the
bottom large, of a perfect black satin color, encompassed with a small circle
of yellow, the Tamis party per pale black and yellow.

Cedonulli, of a deep bluish Carnation, marked with Crimson some gredeline and
white bottom and Tamis blew.

Lanscot Bole, bright Carnation, rarely agotted and striped with gredeline, and
white bottom and Tamis blew.

Parrot, half folded leaves with greenish middles and whitish Edges, yellow
bottom whitish Tamis, this as all the Parrots grow tall and strong.

Rich Parrot, formed like the last, but rent in the sides, and with spurs, the
middle of the leaf of a whitish green, growing by degrees to a dark brown
color, at the edges bottom and Tamis yellow.

The Royal Parrot, the strangest yet in being for form and colors, being in
its leaves half folded, long, rent in the sides with long spurrs, at first
greenish and only tipped on the top of the leaves with rich scarlet, which as it
opens spends it self up and down the leaves in small streaks, the three outmost
leaves seathered up the back with green, the rest not, all hooked or Crumpt
backed and of a deep yellow or gold color, standing in a strange form, the
bottom and Tamis brown, no Tulip having scarlet green and yellow but this.

Agot Rampard, heavy sad Isabella color, with some marks of Crimson, and great
stripes of yellow, dark bottom, large black Tamis.

Royal Shuttlemaker, sharp pointed leaves, a little twining, curiously marked
with bright flesh color, deep scarlet, and pale yellow, bottom and Tamis
black, increased by an offset coming out above the lowermost leaf.

Eagle, a fair flower, peach-colour, pale gredeline, some deep Crimson and pure
white purple bottom and Tamis.

Paragon Florison, Sharp pointed leaves sinely striped and marked with
Isabella, peach color, and Milk white.

Diana, of a bright bluish Carnation, striped and well marked with deep red
and pure white, blew bottom and purple Tamis.

Dianea raised from the seeds of the Diana by Mr. Rea, differing from it in
that the leaves being pure white, are edged and whipped about, and the middle
feathered with a deep brown purple; the Tamis dark blew.

Princess Turgiana, well marked with two purples and much white, bottom blew,
Tamis purple.

Ariana, of my Father-in-law Mr. Rea's raising from the seeds of the last: Of
purer white from the first opening, and well marked with bigger and lesser
stripes, and drops of bright crimson bottom and Tamis as the last.

Brown Duke of Brabant, marked with a brown and lighter purple; and striped
with white blew bottom and purple Tamis.

General Bole, agotted and variably marked with a darker and lighter reddish
purple and good white, blew bottom and purple Tamis.

Dorothea, of a deep brown purple, finely whipped about the edges, and well
striped and marked with a reder and lighter purple and purer white bottom, and
Tamis purple, an excellent flower.

Carolus, curiously marked and striped with shades of murrey purple and pure
white through every leaf thereof, blew bottom, purple Tamis.

Brown purple de marris of a rich shining brown purple, and pure white, marked
with great stripes up the middle of the leaves, blew bottom, and purple Tamis.

Minerva, delicately striped through each leaf with lighter and darker Leather
color, divided with equal stripes of Liver color.

Bacchus Bole, not tall, yet lusty and very large broad leaved Flower, of
sadder and lighter purple and good white, equally divided, the three outmost
leaves only edged with Crimson; bluish bottom dark purple Tamis, these two
last the newest if not the best I have, tho the

Agot Hammer is a beautifuller Flower, of three fine setting off colors pale
gredeline, rich scarlet and pure white, most times well parted, striped and a*
gotted, never running, bottom and Tamis blew.

Agustina Estoil, fine violet and white, Tremontane, flesh, pale yellow, and
Isabella color.

Proteus, deeper and lighter Crimson with pale yellow.

Amidore, pale yellow and Cinnamon.

Brown George, sadder and lighter Cinnamon and pale yellow.

Clitus, dark yellow, Crimson and hair color.

Agot Bezar, deep Orange, light flesh color and pale yellow.

Memorables, of pale tan'd Leather, sad purple, and bright yellow: These seven
last and many others came from Modes or Self colors.

Serotines, or late flow'ring Tulips.

Prince de la More, well marked with a deeper and lighter Cinnamon and pale
yellow blew, bottom as black Tamis.

Serotine Zeabloom, low, weak stalked, Flower deep red, feathered and marked
with some gredeline, at the first pale yellow, which after turns white, bottom
and Tamis dark blew.

Gresound low small flower, dark red, striped and feathered with pale yellow;
bottom dark greenish, Tamis almost black.

Star of Venus, Carnation, marked with pale yellow, which after turns white,
bottom and Tamis blew.

Paragon Mullen, bright Carnation, striped with white, bottom and Tamis blew.

Tenebres, strong Flower, deep red, vein'd with peach color, pale yellow
bottom, Tamis dark brown.

Those that are desirous of more descriptions of Tulips, I refer to Mr. Reas
Flora: wherein he is ample enough and had the largest collection of any man in
England, some of which I lost by being beyond Sea at his death, having added
but three new ones since, though in July Flowers and Auricula's Ratnum culus
and Anemonies: many diversities chiefly by the free Community of Peter Egerton,
Esquire, of Bougbton near Chester: yet have as many more diversities of faces
as here named: but will not promise you as good. The Title of the Book bespeaks
brevity, which I hope I shall use.

The later end of March, April, and May, the times of the flowring of these
beauties, which to continue them the longer over the heads of the best of them
I stick pretty strong hazle Rods into the Allies bended Archwise of such a
height that the Flowers may not reach them, about a foot distance, over which I
lay a Tilt made of Cap Paper, so starched together that it may be wide enough
to reach the middle of each side, not above two yards long, with rods parted
along the sides of this Paper Tilt, as in Maps to role it up, to each rod a
string in the middle to tie to the bows over your Flowers to keep the wind
from raising or blowing it off; rather have many of them than one too long for
it will be be troublesome: the charge is as little as the trouble in placing
and unplacing it is, being so light; and is sufficient a remove for them
against the hot salutes of the Sun, or showers of rain that are both
prejudicial to such their different, yet admirable complections, and will
preserve them in the height of their beauty, which without, their Luster, would
too to soon varnish, and they be forced by the Suns violence to run from their
colors.

But to bring them to this perfection: First, having obtained your roots, make
your beds to lodge them in, of fresh light sandy sifted Earth, foot deep is
sufficient, a yard square will contain thirty roots; distance them in their
setting accordingly, placing them in the Earth about three or four inches deep
(unless such as are designed to seed) sink them two inches lower, lest their
stalks dry before their seed ripe; set not two flowers of the same colors
together, keeping an account of your flowers names in their numbered places, as
in your Bed so in your Book, thus or after this manner

Satin. 10 Peliam. 20 Prince of Waels. 30 Turban. 40 Parot. 50 Pearl. 9
Bienvenu. 19 Susanna. 29 Omen. 39 Marquess. 49 Eagle. 8 Maria. 18 Blackwich.
28. Envis. 38 Pluto. 48 Camuset. 7 Rich parot. 17. Dorothea. 27 Holoferne 37
Perishot. 47 Nosre. 6 Diana. 16 Minerva. 26 Agot St. Dennis. 36 Carolus. 46
Dorile. 5 Prince de la more. 15 Grand purple. 25 Agot Epacat. 35 Aurora. 45
Brabason. 4 Phena. 14 Royal parot. 24 General Bob. 34 Amidore. 44 Gresound. 3
Prelate. 13 Agot hanme. 23 Pallas. 33. Tenebris. 43. Clitus. 2 Pompeza. 12
Cedanole. 22 Artaban. 32 Galatea. 42 Morillon crimsone. 1 Bacchus Bole. 11
Turgiana. 21 Paragon thuson. 31 Areana. 41

Then may you know what flower to expect in such or such a place, and when they
are past flower, know what roots you take up, and dispose them accordingly;
when they put forth their leaves, if any of them appear not, or their leaves
fade, open the earth to the bottom to find its distemper, if the root moist and
squashy it is past hopes of remedy, but if hard, recoverable by applying dry sand
and soot to it, but not to blow that year; and when you take it up, which you
must as soon as the fibers are gone, be sure to keep it in something free from
moisture till the season require it to be set again.

Your Tulip Rocts set, being bulb roots need no watering, as all stringy roots
do, nor any attendance but what before expressed; but when they begin to flower,
on with your Tilts, especially in the night, to keep of the sharpness of the
frosts that may curdle the buds and spoil the beautiful form of the flower,
taking them off in the mornings, you will find the effect worth your pains;
what flowers hang their heads tie them up to small rods stuck under them that
will just reach the flower, and when full blown, keep your paper Tilts on
constantly, but when you would please your own or others eyes with a full sight
of their lustrous glories. When they fall their leaves, break off the pods of
all but what you intend shall seed, and those must be clean and three square
podded (you may correct the word but an apter does not quickly offer it self)
and of such flowers as are strong and lusty, good bottoms and Tamis i. e. blew,
dark, or purple of well and constant marked flowers such that will not run, i.
e. one color slubbering into another, these must stand longer than the rest,
because of the seeds ripening; as soon as the stalks of all your other Tulips
are dried down and withered, the roots will have lost their fibers, and then
they must be taken up yearly, those especially of any value, and every sort put
by themselves, that you may know how again to set them without confusion, which
your account in your book will direct you; lay them upon distinct papers in the
Sun to dry, with their names writ on the papers, that you mistake not in their
lapping up, and by that means abuse your friends or self, put them in boxes in
a dry room, once in a fortnight or three weeks look over them, lest they
moulder, which if not gently whiped and aired in the Sun will spoil the root;
if any of them are rivel'd or crumpled on the outside, and feel soft, it is a
sign of its consumption, and as my Father-in-law directed, wrap it up in wool
dipped in Sallet Oil, and place it where the warmth of the fire may but just
reach it; about the end of August set it in the ground, mixing wood-fire-soot
and sand together and place about it; cover it with a pot that no wet may hurt
it till the fibers are put forth, which will be at the end of September (or not
at all) about which time you must set your other roots in that form and manner
as before directed, taking notice that your earth if any dung be in it, let it
be Neats dung that has lain long enough to be sufficiently rotted and
digested, for want of which many fine flower has been spoiled; the best
composition for them, if your fresh earth be not naturally light enough, (for
they cannot endure a stiff soil) is one part of well rotted Neats dung, two
parts of fresh earth, next under the turf, and two of Sea sand, instead of
which brook sand may serve, and this too should have lain mixed a while before
made into a Bed to lodge your Tulips in, that the rawness of the Earth and Sand
by sometimes stirring it might be by that means taken away.

Now for raising new varieties of Tulips, there is but one sure way, and that
is by seeds sown; you may wait many years before a mode changes, perhaps never,
and off-sets they will quickly bear Flowers, and at the first be better marked,
and like children show prettier faces than their Parents, which youthful beauty
soon decays and too often degenerates, as from their Parents stability so from
their lineaments too, and become not worth the looking on: and therefore not to
be cheated by fair shows is to have natures product by seeds sown with that
advantage, that by years shortens the time which Mr. Woldridge says, is only
sit for a dull Florist (it seems too mercurial a Gentleman to have patience)
and a way that most I am sure have not cused, and sew know, and my self lately
received it from a venerable Prelate, every way ingenious and ingenuous, as
well as an excellent Florist, whose name I have not leave (and therefore with
Reverence forbear) to mention it in such a trifle as this Book. The way then
and secret is this,

After you find that your seed Vessels of your best Flowers (left for that
purpose) are ripe, which may be noticed by the Pods opening at the top, and the
stalks being withered, cut them all off: Keeping their heads upright, (as
directed in Auricula's) which will fall out to be in July, sooner or later, as
the heat and mildness of the season suits, tying the Pods of your best Flowers
by themselves, and up to the Bar of a Sunny Window, which will perfect the
ripeness of the seed; let them so remain till about the end of September; and
then separate the Flat or Parsnip-like seed from the chaff, by gently blowing
it away with your mouth. Still preferring the best by it self, etc. in your
boxes of about six inches deep; fill them four inches full of the finest sifted
Mould you can get; let it be light and rich, not too sandy for this use, or
rather ridled in and not pressed down, but as equally thick as you can, upon
which sow your best seeds not too thick, but that they may be half an inch
asunder; then riddle more of the same earth over them not above half an inch
thick, and you have done as yet with that in Boxes. If you sow in Beds, let
them be thus prepared; empty your Beds four inches deep of their old Earth,
laying Tiles flat all over on the rest, then fill them up again upon the Tiles
with the finest Sifted earth, as in your* Boxes, no higher than before; let the
earth lie light and even, and thereon sow your seeds, and cover them as
directed, when sown in Cases or Boxes; these sown in Beds by reason of the
earth under the Tiles will be apt enough to keep that above moist, but a little
watering now and then, when March approaches, will be convenient for those
seeds sown in Boxes or Cases: But where is this rare secret all this while? any
Florists reason may tell him in the shallowesness of the soil the seeds are
sowed in; for from their first rooting, from each root runs a string of a
considerable length into the ground drawing that little bulb, it proceeds from,
after it, in which it spends it self till it meets with opposition, leaving for
that year a root no bigger than an ordinary big pins head; now were that
stringy substance prevented, which is more than three or four times the
quantity of the root, nature would throw that into the substance of the root,
and by that means leave you a root as big the first year, as otherways in
three, which must necessarily, by so much time hasten the flowring of the seeds
sown, and no way to do that, but by checking its progress by a close
opposition, which the evenness of the soil in Boxes or Cases, and the nearness
of the Tiles in Beds, is available in: Let not the easiness of its performance
make it slighted, for all secrets are so, when once shown; as the way to make
an Egg stand on one end, on a bare Table, that made the Countryman so angry
for loosing his Wager, when afterward, he could have done it himself.

Thus managed seeds, the roots from them each year, till they flower, may be
taken up, as soon as the single leaves they produce are dried down or withered,
and kept choicely free from moisture or too much dryness, till the later end of
August, and then set again at wider distances; three years may make them
produce two leaves, and that year they flower: but after the first year you may
set them in a deeper soil, but not barren; for a rich one to thrive in is best,
tho a barrener and sandish one to flower in, and that not constantly neither,
for a rich one, one year, and a barrener another is the best for trying
experiments on such flowring roots as Tulips: Yet have I tried the richest
earth for one Bed of Tulips several years, and have found them come constantly
well marked: Modes, that is, self colors, I would set them in as barren Earth
one year as would but keep them alive, and in the other extreme the next, to
force to varigate: As for Tulips, so for other flowers, be provided a year
beforehand for apted soils to their natures, making new compositions every
year, that may by concocting and often turned over till you use it: this you
will find no small advantage to other flowers as well as Tulips, of which let
me thus take my fancy in versifying. Of all the plants that Tellus Bosom yields
In Cyprian Gardens or Thessalian Feilds;
None with the Noble Tulip may compare
For numerous distinctions, colors rare.
These are those Lillies such a dress put on,
Excelled the Royal Robes of Solomon.
And Eastern Queens did in their pride confess,
At sight of these their bravery to be less.
Yet there are some, who think themselves as wise,
Their Innocence and beauty both despise.
And rate the Jewels both of Earth and Skies
Just as the Cock the precious stone did prize.
Such are their eyes and such their Judgment too,
They see and know as common Brutes now do.
But wise Natures Servant, more knowing Man,
These rarer objects best distinguish can.
Whose clearer judgment guides his choice in all,
The glories that adorn this Earthly Ball;
And he concludes, who likest is to know,
These are the Flowers that make the richest show.
And that there is nothing offered to our eyes,
That nature shows more or richer dies.
Presuming Painters find their skill outdone
At sight of these, so pensil'd by the Sun.
That Paterzeger, does himself confess,
He colors wants their glories to express.
When Poets strive their braveries to rehearse,
In towering strains, of emulating verse,
The want of words soon makes their Muse despair,
Not reach their worth, or speaking them less fair.
I Will then conclude as reason bids me do;
The Sun's best Poet and best Painter too.
And offer up to him my humble praise,
Who first this Painter made, then gilds his rays.
Raising by influences and kindly glems,
These flowers in prime stand vying with his beams,
Till by his powerful heat are forced to hide,
In earthy Beds (whence sprang) their heads and pride,
Bids him good night, and dares no more to peep,
Till the next year, he rouzes them from sleep.


Frittillaria, the Frittillaries flowring with Tulips, must next be mentioned,
having small round roots and white, made of two pieces, as if joined together
or cleft in the midst, whence springs a stalk foot high or more, with some few
long leaves, here and there dispersed; at the top thereof out from amongst
three or four green, hollow, long sharp pointed leaves, comes the flower,
hanging like the ordinary Crown Imperial, of six leaves of several colors; as

Frittillaria. Vulgaris, the common checkered Frittillary, of a sullen reddish,
purple color, checkered, with a deeper, the inside lighter than either, with
a style, and six chives tipped with yellow pendents, when the roots are old they
will bear two or three flowers on a stalk. Flore duplici albicante: The double
blush Frittillary, fashioned like the former, but double, consisting of twelve
leaves or more, of a pale purple or blush color, spotted as the other. Alba,
the white Frittillary, like the last, but out and inside of a perfect yellow.
Flore Luteo, yellow Frittillary, the dark red Frittillary, dusky red on the
out, and blood red on the inside. Maxima rubra, the great red Frittillary,
bigger than the last in all it parts, and better flower, but as the rest, soon
decaying: These are the sorts with small roots, sharp pointed, green leaves,
and large flowers.

There is another sort, with bigger roots, whiter green leaves and round
pointed, and different fashioned, small flowers, viz.

Frittillaria Flore Luteo major, the great yellow Frittillary, has a bigger
and broader root than any of the former, leaves broader, shorter and round
pointed, stalk above two foot high, of a whiter green, the flower long, small
and of a faint yellow color. Flore luteo punctato, The spotted yellow
Frittilary, leaves like the last flower, bigger and longer, of a pale yellow,
diversely spotted and checkered. Lutea Maxima Italica, The great yellow Italian
Frittillary, has darker green leaves, longer flower, of a dark yellowish
purple, spotted or Checquered with red. Angusti folia exotica viridi albicante
multiplex, The exotic narrow leaved Frittillary, with a whitish green double
flower. Lutea junci folia Lusitanica, The small yellow Frittillary of Portugal,
a small yellow flower, but more Checquered than any of the yellow ones.
Pyrenaea, The black Frittillary, like the yellowish green, but that the stalk
and flowers are shorter, and of a dark sullen blackish green color. Hispanica
umbellifera, The Spanish black Frittillary, differs only from the last, it
being bigger and bearing four or five flowers, hanging round about the stalk,
like those of the Crown Imperial.

These flowers like Tulips lose their fibers as soon as their stalks withered
down, and may then be taken up, or any time before August, but must not be
taken up too soon, or kept too long out of the ground, take them up therefore
not before July, nor keep them up longer than August, lest thereby the roots
perish, or be much weakend by it; the seeds of the best sorts of these flowers,
sown after the manner directed for Tulips give great hopes of new diversities;
these mentioned are considerable ones, and would be more taking, but that they
flower when greater beauties show their faces, viz. Tulips. But why should any
thing int's kind be scornd,
Shall none go plain cause others more adorned?
Those that han't heard the Parrots prattling words,
Think the Jack-daw or Mag-py pretty birds.
Or have not seen the Alamodes of France,
Swear none so gay, as at a Morris dance.
And they that cannot judge rich Tulips worth,
For choicest Flower shall pick the Fools* Coat forth.
Any thing that is Checkered with several dies,
Does soonest take and please the vulgar eyes.
Then Frittillaries raise those heads hang down,
The Skilful knows your worth, tho not the Clown.
Let Tulips vant it in their glittering show
You near akin, called checkered Tulips too.


Lucoium majus Bulbosum serotinum* The great late flowering Bulbous Violet,
this might have been mentioned at the beginning with its lesser kind that
flowers in January, but then I should not have followed my proposed method in
treating of them as they flower, which this does in May, bearing upon a two
foot stalk in height, six or seven flowers hanging their heads, containing six
small white leaves, each end tipped with green, the flowers withered leave a
small pod or seed vessel, when ripe yield many round shining black seeds as big
as small Fetches, which soon may produce varieties; the root like a Daffodil's,
and apt to offset, losing its fibers, may therefore be taken up, and ordered as
others that have the same quality in this Months flowers.

Oleaster exoticus, The strange wild Olive, having woody shoots, of a dark or
yellowish color, set with long narrow whitish green leaves, bearing along the
branches small greenish yellow colored flowers, succeeded by green berries like
small Olives, which when ripe are of a reddish color, the whole plant of a
sweet and pleasant scent, and is increased by layers or cuttings.

MAY,
Lucoium.
THE Stock-Gilliflower, The best sorts thereof being grateful, both to the
smell and sight, as well as affection of every Florist; and as it flowers it
claims the next noticeing; leaving Anemonies and Ranuncula's for the next
Chapter.

Stock-Gilliflowers, are too well known to take up time in describing their
form; the single ones only valuable for their bearing seeds, whence the double
ones are raised, the double are.

Leucojum flore pleno: Diversorum Colorum, Double Stock-Gilliflowers of diverse
colors, of a sadder or lighter purple color, of a paler or deeper reddish
murry, one that is pure white, each having single ones of the same kind, whence
by their seeds the double are raised. Variegatum, The double striped
Stock-Gilliflowers, have the the same diversities of colors, differing only in
this, that the flowers of these are all striped with more or less white, which
raises their beauty to esteem; there are some striped single ones of the same
colors whence they are produced. Alterum, The other double Stock-Gilliflower,
that is not raised from seeds, the flower smaller, but as thick and double, and
sometimes better marked and striped with white, than the other kinds. Luteum,
The yellow Stock-Giliflower, of which there is the single yellow, whose seeds
produce the double yellow kind of a pale yellow, very double and the rarest of
its species.

These plants have many branches on a stalk, and bear many flowers on a branch,
begin to flower in April and flourish in May, and so continue till the nipping
frosts check their pride: To raise them, get good seeds of right kinds, as of
the striped single ones, for the double never yield you any, nor be so curious
to any purpose, as choosing only that seed for bearing double flowers which
comes from the single ones of five leaves, for the expectations of many have
not been answered in this; but sow your well ripened seeds, at the full of the
moon in April, be sure not too thick, in good light earth; when grown three or
four inches high, remove them about the full moon into barren earth, or you may
set them again in the same earth, after you have turned it and and mixed sand
with it to barren it, which must be done speedily upon their taking up, that
they may presently be set again at convenienter distances; after some time to
prevent growing high, so serve them again; let this be about a full moon too;
by this means they will be more hardy, grow low, and spread in branches, have
strength to endure the winter, and be better to remove all spring than such as
run up with long stalks; which seldom escape the winters frost; and you will
have more with double flowers among them than if you follow not this rule; you
may indeed and with good success remove them three times ere winter, but then
let it be the three full moons successively; it will retard their spring and
makes them spread the more, which makes them the more beautiful; in the spring
you may see by the buds which will be double and which single, for the double
flowers will have their buds rounder and bigger than the rest; then remove with
care, not breaking their roots, but taking up a clod of earth with them, and
set them in your flower Garden, where they shall abide all Summer in good
earth, which being shaded and well watered will grow and bear flowers, as well
as if not removed at all; those that are single must stand to bear seed, which
must be yearly sowed, to preserve the kinds; for after they have borne flowers
they are apt to die, but may be preserved by slips or cuttings which will grow
and bear the next Spring following: If this rule be your method in setting
them, viz. In March you must choose such branches as do not bear flowers, which
cut off some distance from the stock, that it be not too long; then slit down
the backs at the ends of the slip about half an inch, in three or four places
equally distant from each other, as the bigness of the slip will allow, which
peel as far as it is slit, and turn up the bark; then cut off the naked woody
stalk close to the rind turned up, which must be so set three inches in the
ground, by making a ^ound hole of that deepness and putting the slip in it,
with the bark spread out on each side or end thereof, which covered up, shaded
and watered for some time, the ground being good, will grow, and bear very
well: thus may you have yearly bearers without the trouble of sowing or two
years patience: Thus may the best Wall-flowers be propagated, or you may lay
them as directed for Gilli-flowers.

KEIRI.
Keiri-flores. Wall-flowers, their form too common to be described, some common
kinds in most Country Gardens, but these following not so: Simplex majus, the
great simple Wall flower like the common ones, but much larger darker shining
green leaves; the flowers many, growing on a long Pike: Of a deep Gold color
yellow. Majus pleno, the great double Wall-flower like the last, but thick and
double. Simplex albo, the single white Wall-flower. Pleno albo, the double
white Wall-flower. Majus pleno ferrugineo, the double red Wall-flower, which
indeed, is double yellow, but that the outer leaves are dashed over with a
darker red color. Luteo pallido, the pale yellow Wall-flower, this is thicker
and doubler, and of more esteem than the common double Wall-flower: All these
flower at the later end of March, in April, part of May.

They are increased or continued by slips set in March, as the stock
Gilli-flowers, and are to be planted against a South Wall, to which they must
be fastened, and defended from frosts and hard weather, especially the double
white, the great single and double yellow: And one vulgarly called the bloody
Wall-flower, each to be increased by layers.

April and May.
ANEMONE.
THE wind flower, or Anemone, marked with two distinctions, as single and
double, so Anemonie Latifolia, the Anemone with broad and hard leaves, or
Anemone Tenuifolia, the Anemony with narrow and soft leaves: I begin with the
first, leaving out the most vulgar ones,

Anemone latifolio flore Pleno Coccineo, the broad leaved Anemone, with a
double scarlet flower, has somewhat broad green leaves, cut in on the sides
and folding the edges, seldom lying smooth and plain; the flowers of these
stand on stalks about a shafnal high, and consist of many round pointed; narrow
long leaves, of a rich scarlet color, thick and double. Pleno Coccineo
variegata, the broad leaved double scarlet variegated Anemony, has small and
something brownish green leaves, a tall stalk, bearing a large double flower,
of a rich scarlet, and every leaf finely striped with white. Pleno Rubro, the
double broad leaved red Anemony, darker leaves, smaller flower, of a blood red.
Pleno purpureo, double purple Anemony, broader leafed than the last, brownish
green, flower larger, its leaves not so many but broader, of a murrey purple
color; there is another of this kind that has every leaf listed about with
white, showing very glorious.

The single ones of this kind, are of diverse sorts and colors, some bigger,
others lesser, consisting of one row of leaves, with a hairy head in the
middle, of a different color from the leaves; these flowers of diverse reds,
purples, scarlets, pinks, peach, white, silver or Ash Color, some siriped; the
best are kept for seed; whence new varieties of single and double are produced,
of the small leaved Anemonies, I will mention, as of the broad a few of the
best, the leaves of which are green, divided into several branches, each leaf
cut and parted, in some flowers like the leaves of Parsley; in others like
Carrets, the roots of all Tuberous.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno, the double narrow leaved Anemony.

Coccineo scarlet.

Coccineo variegata, scarlet variegated with white.

Coma scarlata, the outer broad leaves white, Thrum scarlet.

Sulphureo, outer leaves Brimstonish, Thrum green.

Viridante, outer leaves Orange tawny, Thrum yellowish green.

Albo maxima, the white of Bordeaux, greatest white.

Roseo, lively rose color.

Roseo variegata, like the last, but striped with white.

Rubicante maculato, spotted blush, with red.

Purpureo purple, or a dark sullen Violet color.

Lavendulae color, Lavender colored,

Caeruleo, of a fine bright blew.

Coma purpureo, outer leaves white, purple Thrum.

Coma amarantina, outer leaves red, Thrum dark murrey.

Another sort of this, variegated with white.

Quinque coloris, of five colors, outer leaves red, thrum purple, whence come
leaves half way yellow, the rest to the end light Crimson, the small tuft in
the middle of them silver colored, but this flower is uncertain, and seldom
comes well.

Dicta Bell Lizwaice, of a dark purplish color, finely striped with white, a
noble flower: but very tender and must be dealt with accordingly.

These already named are the best of old, tho not common ones: There are a
newer Fleece of flowers, near a hundred sorts, of fine varieties, of two,
three, and four colors, strangely placed: About twenty whereof, I have now in
my Garden, many of the rest not yet seen in England: Some of them having been
raised at Rome, whose flowers (tho not Religion) are price and praise worthy
with us here.

The single flowers of this sort, viz. narrow leaved or soft Anemonies, are
more valued than the broad or hard leaved ones, being of greater variety, of
diverse colors, whether plain, edged, marked or striped: which on tall stalks
bear fair and long flowers of one row of broad leaves, with a hairy head in the
middle, which after the flowers are past, grows big and long, yielding store of
flat brown seeds, wrapped in down, which must be carefully gathered as the down
rises, else they will be blown away.

The Soil where Anemonies are to be set, is a rich sandy loamy Earth, wherewith
some Neats dung and a little lime, that has lain long together and fully
rotted, shall be mixed: and the whole sifted through a wyre Riddle for that
purpose, and made into a bed foot deep, rather shady, than too much in the face
of the Sun; therein about the end of September, place your broad leaved
Anemonies roots, half a foot asunder and quarter deep, setting that side
uppermost, where you see the small Eminences that put forth leaves, those with
small leaves must beset after the same manner, but not at the same time, for
being tenderer Plants ought not to be lodged in the ground till the end of
October at soonest, lest they rise too early and the Frosts destroy them, from
which they must be defended, by Mats, Tilts, or Pease Straw, which must daily
or once in two days (a fair season permitting) be taken off, for an hour, two
or three, as the weather is, to air them and prevent mouldiness, which will
destroy them: the broad leaves will come up before Winter, the narrow about the
end of February, or as the mildness of the Winter invites, and its severity
forbids: if March and April prove dry seasons, they will require often and
gentle watring, to make them thrive the better and show fairer flowers than if
that pains neglected: if they like the Earth they grow in, having fair flowers,
strong stalks and prosper well, take them not up till July, but if their green
leaves few, small flowers and short stalks, it argues they like not the
quarters, and that they are famished by the soil being too cold and poor, or
surfeited by its over heat and rankness, the last being most dangerous to them;
if these signs of distaste appear, take them up as soon as the green leaves
turn yellow, put them into sand, and in some dry place for a month, and
afterward taken out and kept in Papers in some dry but cool place, till their
time of planting; for should the roots lie in the ground after their fibers be
gone, if the Earth was too barren, they would languish, not having received
sufficient nourishment from it; if too rank, or over hot by undigested muck in
it, they would most of them rot and consume away, especially if a rainy season
follow.

For raising new varieties, experience yearly acquaints us, that some double
Latifolia's bear seeds, as the double Orange Tawney, which sown, yield pretty
varieties, but the purples, reds, or Crimsons, very few, or such as draw too
near their Original, to be called new faces, only a little deeper or lighter,
etc. but the light colors are preferable, as white Ash color, Blush or
Carnation, light Orange, Sky color, and Pink, whether single or double, if
bearing seed; so also in the Tenuifolia's.

The seeds of these flowers will be ready to gather in May earlier or later, as
they flowr'd, which must be done as soon as ripe, and not till then, which is
known by the seed with its woolliness, beginning a little to rise of it self at
the lower end of the head, then must it presently be gathered, lest as before
hinted, the wind carry it all away, which a little will do.

All your seed obtained, lay it to dry for a week or more, then in a Basin or
Earthen Vessel, rub it with a little sand or dry earth gently, to separate the
seed from the wool or down that encompass it: let the Earth be fine and
proportionable to your seed, with which you part it from its down, which must
be stirred or rubbed till there none appears; about the Full Moon in July next
ensuing, let it be sown, (and so gain a year in its growth) on a smooth bed of
fine sifted Earth, or rather in Pots, Boxes or Tubs not too thin, for all will
not come up, then gently sift some fine fresh earth over them, half a finger
thick is full sufficient for this first covering, a month after they are come
up, Riddle over them again fine light earth to the same thickness; in the
interim, should the Season be dry, often gently watering them; thus doing you
shall have them spring up and grow able before Winter, to abide its sharpness
of frosts or cold, if in their nonage, you use some little care to cover them
with Pease Straw or such like, supported by sticks that it lies not too near,
or far from them: The next year in Autumn, they ought to be taken up and set in
fine loose and fresh mould, as rich as may be, but beware of too much muck, at
such distance as bearing roots, which many will prove the year following, all
of them the third year, tho some have affirmed from seeds so sown, they have
had Anemonies in flower within ten months from their time of sowing.

You may do well to put a thin layer of rotten sally Wood or Willow earth,
under your young Anemony roots, at their first transplanting, it will cause
them the sooner to put forth fibers and gain the more strength against Winter,
neither is it amiss (if to be had) to do as much by the old roots of the best
kinds, for their beautiful flowers will very well reward your pains.

On Anemonies.
In vain we greet the Myrtle Grove
Expecting there the Queen of love;
In closer shades, she now does bide
Since that her dear Adonis died.
This was the place, where he was slain;
And this the Earth his blood did stain,
This is the flower which then did rise
From that loved lovely Sacrisice
Hither each morn did Venus come,
And with her Tears bedewed his Tomb,
Till she perceived him still alive
And now a beauteous Vegetive,
Then stooping down to kiss his flower,
Hear breath and beauty had the power
To change that fatal purple quite,
Into more splendid red and white:
The cheering leaves shot from her eye
Soon made this flower to multiply,
And each fair infant that was born
A different tincture to adorn,
Which is the cause we now epsy
Such colors in the Anemony;
Each to declare, should I but strive
'Twould look like dead lines to the life,
And so Adonis once being slain
In's Vegetive be killed again.
APRIL and MAY.
RANUNCULUS.
THe Crow-foot, the best sorts of which carry such a luster and richness in the
color of their flowers, that therein they exceed all others, much resembling
the Anemonies, and in all things are to be ordered alike, only requiring a
richer soil; they come up with leaves something broad, indent about the edges,
some more cut and divided than others, of a pale green, and some deeper, the
stalk rising some under others, above a shafnal in height and have grumous or
kernelly roots.

Ranunculus creticus Albus, the double white Crow-foot, of Candy, the stalk
parted into two or three branches, each bearing a fair white double flower.
Flore argenteo, the cloth of silver Crow-foot, bears lesser flower than the
last, and single, of seven or eight round pointed leaves, of a pale yellowish
blush color on the insides, a little striped, but more on the outside with
Crimson, the root as the former grumous.

Ranunculus Asiaticus Flore pleno luteo, the double yellow Crow-foot or
Ranunculus of Asia, the leaves of this more divided like a Carret, whence rise
many small stalks, each bearing at the Top one small double flower, of a
shining yellow color. Flore pleno rubro, the double red Ranunculus of Asia,
has the lower leaves plain and not cut, but a little indented at the Edges,
the rest of the leaves parted into three or five divisions, and notched about
the stalk foot high, bearing a fair and something large double flower, of a
fair yellow and red.

These have been Flowers noticed in the last Age, this produces more noble
sorts, as

Sang de Beuf, seemingly striped at first with yellow, but full blown, of the
color of Bulls blood, very double.

Monster of Rome, very thick and double, a rich scarlet flower, there is also

The Monster striped, with yellow but a lesser flower.

Puvoin of Rome, a large flower, its leaves round pointed and standing out in
the middle, of a deep scarlet, there is another

Puvoin of Rome, striped, or rather each leaf of the flower listed about with
yellow, the rest deep scarlet.

Marvelia a less flower, but marbled with a deeper and lighter scarlet.

Fericus, has greener leaves and larger than the rest, stalk rising higher,
dividing into several branches, each bearing a large double flower of a rich
scarlet.

Fericus Trashe or striped, is a lesser, Flower and commonly well striped with
yellow.

Ranunculus of Aleppo, a fine Flower Orange tawney colored, very double and
round, well striped with yellow.

There are others under differing names, but so little in the flowers as not
worth paper room in mentioning, but these last named, a Florist's pains are
well bestowed in collecting.

The following single ones will also be acceptable objects in the season:

The Gold yellow striped through the leaves with scarlet. Rosa frize, white
within, rose color without. Roman is shammey, marked with red without.
African, yellow within, scarlet and yellow without. Besanson, yellow within,
pale yellow, and red without. Melidore, pale Isabella within, Crimson bordered
with Isabella without. Parmisan, yellow within, gold color bordered with
Crimson without. Satine, white within, white marked with red without. Didonian
is Shammey color within, and marked with red without.
There are several others that have been, and more may be raised from seeds,
which must be managed, as those of Anemonies.

Their roots must be planted in rich sandy and ranker Earth than Anemonies, and
as them must about Mid-Summer be taken up, and kept dry in Papers, or Boxes,
till they are set again, which must be in December, lest if done earlier they
come up too soon, and frosts destroy them unless prevented by daily attendance
in covering and airing them; in March and April when come up and rise to flower
(as Anemonies) ought to be often and well watered.

Their leaves once snipt or snerpt by the frost, which appears by their brown
color, will soon die down to the root, and that perish too: I had some this
year, thus caught, I clapped drinking Glasses over them, taking them off once a
day, and each day gently watering them, and by that means not only saved their
lives, but brought them to flower, without which I am certain they had been
lost.

That their roots may the better increase, they may be set in such an Earth
that has been made by long lying of old Thatch or straw, but with your other
Earth prepared for them above, and below it, with which lodging, I have found
them to have been very well pleased, by their multiplying and cheerful
countenances. It Is said far Countries they have gilded Crows,
And if each Crow-foot has such glorious show,
It must be true, in Semetry no doubt,
Hercules stature may be known by's foot;
And so Ranuncuius by these weak lines,
In water you may see how the Sun shines.


MAY.
PAeonia, the Peony, is of two Sexes, Male and Female: The Male is single and
known by its leaves coming constantly whole without any division, long roots
and round, the flower of a purplish red, of which there is but one sort: of the
Females many, some bearing single, others double flowers, of the shape of the
common red one, therefore needs no description; the leaves of all of them
divided on the Edges, the roots more tuberous, growing in clogs, with many
round pieces fastened to the head, with smaller strings, I shall only name the
best double ones.

Paeonia faemina flore pleno --

Purpureo, the double purple Peony smaller in all its parts than the common red
one, the leaves of a whiter green, those of the flower of a bright shining
purple, and soon fall.

Rubescente, the double Carnation Peony, of a bright shining Carnation color
at the first opening, but daily waxing paler till almost white, but never falls
the leaves, but wither on the stalk, a great perfection.

Albicante, the double blush or white Peony, large flower, at first opening
tinctured with a light blush, but in few days turns to perfect white, and
continues so long before it decays, and then withers on the stalk, and is the
best yet come to our knowledge.

Variegata, smaller than the last in all its parts, the flower of a fine red,
striped with white, lasts long and falls no leaf.

These all flower in May, and are hardy plants, and endure long in the ground,
without stirring; October the only time of removing them, and none of those
roots will grow but what have Sprouts or Buds at the end, or rather top of
them, except of the double purple each piece thereof will grow: so apt to
increase. Some years the double ones bring seeds to perfection, which sowed
very thin in September, where they may stand unremoved in the ground two years,
may produce new varieties.

I must a little insist on the Honey Suckles, and Columbines now in flower, tho
they are so generally known, as to seem needless:

Of Woodbines the red Italian and the double are the best, the first blows in
June, the double Honey Suckle, in this month of May, both easily increased by
laying their branches in the ground, for if they but fall on the ground of
themselves they are apt to root there,

Aquilegia Columbines, the double are of four colors, blew, white, purple and
red, any of these alone not valued, those that are variegated accepted: also,
the double inverted Columbines, i. e. with the heels inward various in their
colors.

Double Rose Columbines, that have no heels, but stand on their stalks like
little double Roses.

The degenerate Columbine, like the last, but that the leaves which are
outermost are much larger than any of'the rest, commonly of a greenish purple
color.

The Virginian Columbine, has small single flowers, withlong heels of a
yellowish color, shaddowed with red, with deeper red spots in the hollow parts
of the flower: each flow'ring in the end of May, when few other flowers show
themselves, and therefore entertained, all bearing seeds; those flowers that
come of a self color ought to be nipt off, and only variegated ones left for
seed, which sown in April in the Nursery, will bear the second year, the best
whereof remove into your* Garden, the rest throw away before they drop their
seed to incumber your ground with, but self colored or single flowers, which
will last being but such flowers too many years.

In this Month also blows the great Cyanus or blew Bottle, that is lasting;
those Annuals shall find another place with the Annuals for description; it is
like the Corn flower, but much larger and pleasanter, the long blew flowers
many on a head making a pretty show, not so common, as I find some speak it: In
this Month also blows

Os in Thogalum Arabicum, the Starflower of Arabia, leaved like the Oriental
Hyacinth, on a round green stalk, two foot high: on long footstalk grow
diverse.

Orchis, sive Satyrium, the fly Orchis, or Bee-flower-Satyrions, grow wild in
Meadows and other places; yet for their pretty form and beauty, acceptable in
some parts of a Garden, especially the under named.

Mellita, sive apifera, the Bee-flower, growing about six inches high, with
three or four narrow green leaves; the stalk bears three or four flowers one
above another, each contains four leaves, three small and sharp pointed, of a
blush color, turning up toward the top of the stalk; the fourth is round in
form, and color like a Be that were sucking a flower, so as to deceive many
that were ignorant in the flower: the Roots round, two joined together, one of
them perishing when the flowers past, the other remaining hard and sound.

Orches Spegodes, Gnats Satyrion, differs from the last in larger leaves and
higher stalks, and that the lower or fourth leave of the flower is like a Gnat,
or long great fly, rooted like the Bee-flower.

Orchis Myodes, fly Orchis, like the last, but lesser, having the lower leaf
like a fly with legs, a list of Ash-clour crossing the back, and the lower part
black.

There is also the Butter-fly Orchis, the snow-white, the all-red, the yellow,
and diverse spotted, flowring about the middle of May, and found wild in many
places, thence transplanted with a Turf about them into a shady barren place of
the Garden, for they will not live in a hot good Soil: or, take a large Turf
whence they naturally grow, set the herb in your garden shady, cut Roundles
therein, and put in your Orches Roots filled up with the same earth, in June or
July; at Spring clip the grass low with Sizzers, leaving the flowers, which
will thus used prosper well.

Springa, sive Gelsiminum Arabicum, the double white Pipe-tree, or Arabian
Jasmine, in this Month begins to flower, and continues flowering till September
be spent, and is a rare and tender shrub, having many long slender, yet stiff
woody branches, set with fair green leaves, and large, two standing at each
joint against each other; at the end of the branches come forth diverse flowers,
standing on footstalk, each in a hole like the common white Jasmine,
containing fair double flowers of round pointed white leaves, the middle hollow
and yellowish, of a strong sweet scent, like Orangeflowers; it is a nice Plant,
requires housing and observance in the Spring.

Citisus Maranthe, Horned-Trefoil, its fine Blossoms show themselves in this
season: this Tree rises four or five foot high, the body seldom bigger than a
Man's Thumb, covered with a whitish Bark, the branches more white; the leaves
stand three together, being less rounder and whiter than the ordinary Laburnums
its flowers like Broom, of a gold yellowcolour, coming forth three or four
together at the ends of the branches, followed by crooked, flat, and thin Cods,
like half-moons: it is a tender Plant, and so set as to be housed with Greens
in the winter, not to be increased by Seeds or Layers, but by taking off some
new slips in June, setting them in the shade, keeping the earth moist by
frequent and gentle waterings.

Solanum fruticosa, Shrub nightshade, has a woody stock and branches, about a
yard high, of a dark Brown color, set with leaves of a sad green, the flowers
like those of the common nightshade, in one white, in another of a blew
color; one of this kind has the green leaves variegated with white: this is
also increased by Layers and Flowers the end of this Month.

Amomum Plinii, Tree-night-shade rises a yard high, with a woody stem, and many
green branches, with small long green leaves, uneven at the edges, at the
joints of the branches putting forth two or three flowers together of a
starlike form, turning back the leaves; of a white color, with a yellow
pointel in the middle; when fallen away, are succeeded by small green Berries,
that in December will be of a fine red color, like little red Cherries,
wherein are small flat white seeds. For the berries sake is this Plant
respected, abiding in the winter, at which time set amongst Mirtles, or other
greens, are a taking sight. It is raised by sowing the Seeds in March, which
are apt to come up and grow, especially sowed in a pot, and housed in winter.

Spartum Hispanicum, Spanish-broom grows like our common broom, but bigger
and higher; its flowers of the same fashion and color, but bigger, and in my
opinion only worth the naming; but there is one more rare, that bears white
flowers.

Sambucus Rosea, the Gelder Rose, rises two yards high, spreading into many
branches, with broad leaves, divided into three Sections; at the top of the
young branches comes out a round ball of many single white flowers, close set
together: this Plant is hardy, long lasting, and increased by Suckers, which
are too apt to put forth.

Nux Vesicaria, the Bladder-Nut, grows but low, if not pruned up and kept from
suckers; its bark whitish, leaves like Elder-flowers, white and sweet; many in
this Month hanging on a stalk; after them greenish bladders, each containing
one small Nut, and is too apt to send forth Suckers, by which it is increased.

Laurocerasus, the Bay-Cherry, is a stately Ever-green, growing sometimes ten
or twelve foot high, flowring in this Month, succeeded by small Cherries, black
when ripe, but so apt to increase, has made it so common, by the name of the
Laurel, and has made me so short in its description; nor do I at all describe
the Bay Tree.

But there is a Laurel having its leaves delicately variegated, with large
stripes of fine green and white, which I saw in my worthy friends Garden, Peter
Egerton of Boughton near Chester, Esquire.

May and June.
IRis, the Flower-de-luce, of which there are two sorts, Bulbous and Tuberous
rooted ones; of the Bulbous there are two distinctions, Latifolia and
Tenufolia's, broad and narrow leaved; of the last there is more diversities
than in the broad leaves, though many pretty ones of that kind: as,

Iris Bulbosa major flore --

Caeruleo Elegantior: The great Bulbous Iris, with a rich blew flower, is like
the old English blew flower-de-luce, (so common, that it needs no description)
except the color of the flower, which in this is a rich shining blew color,
having that spot which is in the lower leaves of all these flower-de-luces, of
a deep yellow, toward Orange.

Caeruleo Variegata, the blew striped flower-de-luce, being diversely marked
through every leaf with a dark violet purple-colour.

Purpurea, the great purple bulbous flower-de-luce, the whole flower except the
yellow spot, of a reddish murrey purple.

Purpureo versicolor, the great purple variable bulbous flower-de-luce, of a
rich murrey purple, a small yellow spot in the falling leaves, marked with
deeper brown purple, almost black, upon a lighter purple.

Cinereo. The great ash-colored flower-de-luce, has sometimes two flowers on
a stalk, very large, of an Ash or Lavender color, with a yellow spot in their
falling leaves.

Cinereo Striata, The great Ash-colored striped Bulbous Iris, like the last,
only the flower is striped and veined all over with small lines of purple.

Versicolor, The great variable colored bulbous flower-de-luce, has the three
falling leaves of the flower of a pale silver color, with a circle of
Ash Color about the yellow spot; the arches are of the same color, viz.
Silver ridged with Ash Color, the top-leaves striped with blew.

Rubente, The great pale red, or Peach-colour'd bulbous flower-de-luce, is more
rare than any of the former, having a small yellow spot in each of the three
falling leaves.

Albo, The great White; there is this and the greatest white flower-de-luce,
which will come sometimes, the three top leaves striped and spotted with a
faint purple; several diversities the Seed of this flower has produced. There
is another that is of a pure White, finely striped, and marked with veins and
drops of a shining watchet or blew color through every leaf. There is another
that is striped with purple through every leaf, the Seeds of which produce good
varieties.

Luteo, The great yellow bulbous flower-de-luce, of a fine bright gold-colour,
with the spot in the middle of the three falling leaves, of a deeper yellow,
almost Orange.

There are more diversities of this kind in other Countries, and raised in ours
by sowing their Seeds, which must be performed as those of Tulips. They flower
some in May, most in June; the blews first, than whites, and last the purples.

Their Roots yearly loose their Fibers, and must be taken up as soon as they
are dried down, if not a little before; for stay they longer, they will shoot
forth new Fibers, and then not to be stirred; therefore rather before than
after they are withered, take them up and keep them dry till August, at which
time set them again in beds of good fresh sifted earth, not too poor, nor
over-rank or hot, for that will rot and consume them; nor too much in the Sun,
that will scorch and spoil their flowers: choose the East-part of your Garden
for their abode; experience forbids either South or West, as not agreeing with
them. Next comes to be mentioned

JUNE.
IRis bulbosa minor, Flore albo, The lesser white bulbous flower-de-luce,
rising out of the ground before winter. Another white, that is bigger, another
whose falling leaves have a little show of yellowness; as also have the middle
ridges of the arched leaves; another very small, but the yellow spot larger in
the lower leaves, that in this flower stand outright.

There is one called the Spanish yellow, a lower flower, of an excellent deep
gold yellow throughout the whole flower. Another, with pale yellow flowers,
with a deep yellow spot: of this many diversities, some bigger, some lesser;
some paler, some deeper, yellow color, and one with the falling leaves white,
except the yellow spot, common to all the bulbous flower-de-luces.

There is the party-colored Spanish flower-de-luce, whose falling leaves are
white, the arched leaves silver-colour, and the top-leaves of a bluish purple;
another has the falling leaves circled with blew, the arched leaves pale blew,
and top-leaves purple. Some fair bluish purple, others of a reddish purple.
Another has yellow falling leaves, sky-colour'd arches, and top-leaves of a
murrey purple. Another falling leaves yellow, arches and top-leaves of a black
color. Another of a sadder and duller brown color. Another larger than any of
the rest, with falling leaves of a duskie yellow, with veins and borders about
the edges, of a dun color, the arches of a dull purplish yellow, and the
top-leaves of a sullen bluish purple, with many more, which would be but too
tedious here to mention, therefore end I these sorts with two more rare than
the rest.

Iris bulbosa Augusti folia, Elegantissima Persico flore, The most Elegant
narrow-leav'd bulbous Iris, with a Peach-colour'd flower, large and long
falling leaves, with a yellow spot in the midst of them, arched leaves also
large, and the divided ends long and turning up, the top-leaves sutably long
and large, the whole flower except the yellow spot, of a fine reddish
Peach-colour.

Iris bulbosa Augusti folia Serpentariacaule, The narrow-leav'd bulbous Iris,
with a spotted stalk; the flower stands round and neat, and of a reddish
murreypurple, except the spot in the falling leaves, which is of a deep yellow,
round at the head, and with a small list running under the arched leaves; thus
the green leaves coming up before winter, may be known, in that the bottoms of
them for an Inch above ground, are of a reddish color full of dark Purple
Spots.

If any wet falls upon these flowers, presently after shake it off, or the
leaves of the flower will soon be spoiled; their Roots, as the rest, loose
their Fibers, and must be managed after the same manner; the Seeds of the best
sorts become a Florists pains in sowing for producing varieties; the commoner
sorts increase fast enough by off-sets; the two last are the most tender, as
they are the best, and require to be planted in good fresh earth, that is not
hot with dung, and where they may have the benefit of the Morning Sun only.

I forgot to mention the Iris Persica, with a Bulbose root, a fine flower, and
known to most florists; as also Clusius flower-de-luce, both of esteem, though
old flowers; nor shall I give you the Catalogue of Morines (a French Florist)
long since painted, of many strange-colour'd Iris, which you may find in Mr.
Rea's flora, indeed worthy the perusal of the curious.

But come to the flag-leav'd flower-deluce, with Tuberous roots, which also are
of two sorts, Iris Major, and Iris minor, or tall and dwarf, or else broad and
narrow leaved flag or sedg flower-de-luce. Of these, many varieties, but I will
mention but two or three of the best of each.

Iris Chalcedonica major, the great Chalcedonian Iris, or Turkey
flower-de-luce, by some called the Toad-flag; (so dark a marbled flower.) The
form is like the rest of the flower-de-luces, but that the leaves are broad, of
a yellowish green, folded one within the other at the bottom, opening at the
top; out of the middle whereof rises a stiff stalk, near two foot high, bearing
at the top thereof a large and gallant flower, of nine leaves, as the rest do;
the three lower leaves large and broad, of a sad purple-colour, almost black,
diversely spotted, straked and marked with grayish white color, with a great
black freez in the middle of each of them; the three arched leaves that cover
the small part of these, of the same color and making, but a little paler,
especially toward the sides and ends; the three upper leaves also very large,
marbled like the other, but of a brighter color, the roots tuberous, thick and
long, but of a yellower brown color than the other flag flowerde-luces, with
great long fibers.

Iris Chalcedonica minor, The lesser Chalcedonian Iris, or flag-flower, etc.
differs only from the former in being lesser in all its parts, the leaves of a
yellow green, the flower darker, and not so well marked, each flowering in May,
and are the best kinds of flag-flowers; their roots sometimes loose their
fibers, and then the green leaves die to the ground; such as do, must be taken
up and kept out of the ground till October. The best time to transplant them is
in August, or early in September, in fresh soil, mixed with well-rotted
wood-pile earth, but not as some advise, under a south-wall, for in two days
the hot reflection of the Sun from thence will destroy their flowers; but so as
to have the morning, but not the midday scorching Sun. Some take them up in
June, and keep them dry till late in October, which, as they say, makes them
the apter to bear flowers.

There is the flower-de-luce of Asia and of Dalmatia, that bear many flowers on
a head, the first of a deep, the last a lighter blew, both very sweet scented.
Iris Lusitanica biflora, The twiceflowring Portugal flower-de-luce, flowers in
Spring, and commonly the same year in Autumn, and sweeter in scent than any of
the former.

Iris Camerarii purpurea versicolor, The variable purple flower-de-luce of
Camerarius, the three lower leaves of a reddish purple, the arched leaves of a
bleak yellow, shaddowed with purple, the three top-leaves of a dull smoaky
yellowish purple-colour.

Iris caerulea versicolor, The blew parti-colored, falls blew at the edges, the
rest white, arched leaves whitish yellow, top-leaves pale sky with yellow edges.

Iris alba versicolor, the white variable flower-de-luce, rises near yard-high,
bearing four or five flowers one above another, of a silver color, listed with
bluish purple down the backs of the top-leaves, the lower leaves whipped about
the edges with blew; the arched leaves of a pale sky-colour, more blew toward
the ridge.

Iris Aurea angusti folia Tripolitata, The yellow flower-de-luce of Tripoli,
grows about four foot high, bearing two or three long narrow-leav'd gold yellow
flowers.

Clusius narrow-leav'd variable flowerde-luce, bears four or five small
flowers, the lower leaves marked with white and blew, arched leaves of a light
blew.

There is great blew, bearing many flowers on a stalk; also the double
narrow-leav'd flower-de-luce blew and white.

The blush-colour'd dwarf flower-deluce, falling leaves of a reddish purple,
with blew thrums, the arched and top-leaves of a fine pale red, or
blush-colour. Some of these flower in April, others in May, and some bring
forth their flowers not till June; they are hardy Plants, grow and increase in
most places, but the better the soil, the more they will flourish, and are too
roomy for a flower-garden, fitter for the borders of a fruitapartment: the
beginning of September the best time for their Transplanting; part their Roots,
set them neither too thick nor too deep. Iris, like Rainbow, several Colors
show,
With ease persuaded to increase and grow;
Such different faces, and complections too,
None but the matchless Tulip can outdo.
If Rainbow called Juno's Messenger,
Then these her flowers, that of such feature are
To please the Goddess amongst them never fail
To show more Colors than her Peacocks Tail.
As the Rainbow succeeding showers declare,
And Peacocks cries that they are drawing near;
Iris or flower-de-luce the same descry,
By drawing in their leaves, and closer lie.
So Peacock, Rainbow, Iris, Flower-deluce,
As like in Colors, so alike in use.
And by their different Tinctures, colors gay,
From most of Flowers bear the flag away.


ROSA.
THe Rose, the diverse and excellent kinds thereof, are one of the chiefest
ornaments that enrich our Gardens; of which there are the following sorts.

Rosa rubra Anglica, The English redrose; this all persons are so well
acquainted with, that it needs no description; from this came

Rosa Mundi, the Rose of the World for Scent and form like the common red one,
but their colors differ to admiration, were it not by its great increasing
grown too common, and are in this flower for the most part of a pale
blush-colour, diversely spotted, and finely marked, with great flakes of the
same red, as in the common red Rose, making it through the whole double flower,
the loreliest thing to eye of its Species.

Rosa Hungaria, The Hungarian Rose, differs from the common red one in the
green shoots, the flower of a paler red, having faint spots spread over the
leaves of the whole double flower, but of no great value.

Rosa Provincialis, flore rubro, The red Province-rose, is greener and bigger
than the common red, the flowers large and thick, spreading very broad, and
laid open, of a paler red, and sweeter than the red one; there is one of this
kind constantly spotted and marbled, with deeper and paler red.

Rosa Belgica, flore rubro, The red Belgic Rose, the flowers exceeding thick
and double, full of small leaves in the middle, and bigger on the outside of
the flowers, which when full-blown, turn toward the stalk; of a fine deep red
color, as lovely a flower as any Rose of one color.

Rosa rubra humiles, the dwarf red Rose, grows lower, and fewer thorns than the
red one, flower smaller, yet thick and double, standing round and even when
blown, and of a pleasant Carnation, scented like the ordinary red Rose.

Rosa holoserica multiplex, The double Velvet Rose, its young shoots of a sad
reddish green color, few thorns, leaves of a sadder green than the common red,
the flowers of two or three rows of leaves, of a dark red velvet-colour, with
some marks of lighter red in them, seldom bearing many Roses, nor so well
scented as some of the rest.

Rosa Marmorea, The Marbled Rose, like the Velvet Rose in growth, but larger;
very double, and of a light red, marbled with a deeper and lighter bluish
Gray-de-line, well scented, better, though like that of the red Province Rose.

Rosa sine Spinis, The Rose without Thorns, or Virgin-Rose, in shoots and
leaves like the last, but greener and smoother, without any Thorns. The flowers
not so thick, spreading leaves standing forward from each other, of a pale red,
streaked on the faces of the leaves, of a pale blush, the back-sides are all of
a pale or whitish color, blowing most times fair and very sweet.

Rosa Francofurtensis, The Francford-Rose, has the Button under it, bigger
than any other, the flowers thick and double, of a bluish red color, and
sweet scent, but seldom opens fair, but curled and crumpled.

Rosa Cinnamomia, The Cinnamon-Rose, blows in May, bearing many small double
flowers, of a pale red, and faint scent, a little like to Cinnamon, from whence
its name. So far of red Roses, the next are paler colored: As,

Rosa Damscena vulgaris, The common Damask Rose, too well known to need
describing.

Rosa Damascena versicolor, The partycoloured Damask Rose; or, as once commonly
termed; the York and Lancaster, differing only from the last, in that
sometimes half the flowers, sometimes half in some of the leaves, are parted or
marked with a pale blush, almost white upon the Damask rose-colour.

Rosa Crystallina, The Crystal Rose, like the last, only differing in the
making of the flowers, being commonly striped, and marked throughout every
leaf, with pale white upon the Damask Rose color.

Rosa Damascena variegata elegantior, The Elegant variegate Damask Rose, has
leaves smaller, shoots shorter and redder, the flowers more double than the
last, and much better marked than either of those beforementioned, and by many
known by the name of Mrs. Hearts Rose.

Rosa Damascena Provincialis, The Damask Province-Rose, too generally know to
need description, being but too common; were it as scarce as some others, it
would be as valuable as any.

Rosa Mensalis, The Monthly Rose, in all parts like the Damask, but bears in
England but in June, August, and September, though reported in Italy to bear
seven Months in the year.

Rosa Belgica, sive vitrea, flore rubicante, The blush Belgic Rose, has
bigger branches, fuller of Thorns, of a whitish green color, many flowers
growing together on the ends of the branches, about the bigness of an ordinary
Damask Rose, but very thick and double; of a fine pleasant pale blush-colour,
and sweet Scent, the greatest bearer.

So many diversities of the Damask or paler colored Roses have we; and proceed
next to the yellow Roses, and conclude with the white.

Rosa lutea simplex, The single yellow Rose grows as high as the Damask, the
young shoots full of small hairy prickles, of a dark reddish color, small
leaves, single flowers, but five leaves apiece; of a pale yellow color, being
naturally a wild Rose, and entertained for variety.

Rosa Austriaca flore Phoeniciae, The Scarlet Rose of Austria, in all parts
like the last, the chiefest difference in the color of the flowers; the inside
of the leaves of this, of a fine Scarlet, and the outside of a pale Brimstone
color; for which reason worthy esteem.

Rosa Lutea, flore pleno, The double yellow Rose, smaller shoots and leaves, of
a paler yellowish green than the single kind, the flowers very thick and
double, the best kind, like that of the Damask Rose, of a pale yellow; another
that comes with a multitude of small pale yellow leaves, often with a great
thrum in the middle, neither of any considerable Scent; the first coming well
and smooth, of chiefest value, the last of little worth, coming broken and
ragged; the best, its glory consists in its form and color; we have these
mentioned, and know of no other yellow Roses, and therefore come to the
Diversities of white ones; the common ones I shall but mention, and but briefly
insist on the rest.

Rosa alba vulgaris, The common White Rose.

Rosa incarnata, The blush Rose, only differs from the last, in opening at
first, with a fine pleasant blush-colour, which afterward grows whiter.

Rosa moschata, flore pleno, The Double Musk Rose, rises high with many green
branches, and dark green shining leaves, armed with great sharp Thorns; the
flowers many together in a tuft come forth on long-foot stalks at the ends of
the branches, of a whitish or cream color, not very double, the first row of
leaves being much bigger than the rest, which are small, and stand loose. There
is another of this kind that bears single flowers, therefore of less esteem,
both chiefly valued for their Scent, smelling like Musk, whence they had their
name; as also for their use in Physic: they commonly flower in August, after
the rest of Roses, but their usual time September.

Rosa Moschata altera, The other Musk Rose, some call it the Damask-musk-rose,
some the white Cinnamon Rose, in leaves and branches like the other, but grows
not so high, larger leaves, whiter green color, more double than the former,
but not so sweet; flowring before the other, in the end or presently after
other Roses.

Rosa Canina flore pleno, The double Dog-Rose, in leaves and branches like the
lesser white Rose, or wild kind thereof; the flowers double, of a faint whitish
blush-colour, and weak scent, esteemed only cause double.

Rosa semper virens, The ever-green Rose, grows like the wild Eglentine, the
leaves fall not in the winter as other Roses, which occasioned the name, but
stay on till thrust off at spring by new ones: the flowers stand four or five
together at the end of the branches, which are single, but of five leaves, of a
pure white color, and some thing resembling the Musk-Rose in scent.

Rosa Hispanica Moschata, The Spanish Musk-Rose, rises as high as the last,
with greater green branches, and bigger green leaves; the flowers single, of
five large white leaves, with an eye of blush in them, scented like the last.

Rosa Pomifera major, The great Apple-Rose, has a great stock, many reddish
branches, with green sharp Thorns; the leaves like the common White Rose, the
flowers small and single, standing on prickly buttons, bearded like other
Roses, which after the flower fallen, grow great, red, and of the fashion of a
Pear, which are the only ornament of this Kingdom.

Rosa Eglenteria, flore duplici, The double Eglentine, differs only from the
wild one in that the flowers are double, of two sometimes three rows of leaves,
of a pretty reddish color, leaves and flowers scented like the wild and single
kind. All these Roses I have, more or less of a kind, which bring forth their
fair flowers in June, and continue flowring all that Month, and most of July,
except those only expressed in their description; upon the best of these sweet
and profitable flowers you will find this *; and such no florist ought to be
without.

Roses are increased by inoculating the buds of them in other stocks, or by
laying down the branches in the earth; the best stocks to inoculate upon, which
must be done about Midsummer, are the Damask, White, Francford, the wild
Eglentine.

All stocks of budded roses must be kept from suckers, and the buds inoculated
as near the ground as may be, that after one years growth, the budded lance may
be laid in earth to root; first prick about a joint that will lie in the earth
many holes with an awl, and then cover it with good Mould: this done in the
Spring, and so pegged down that it rise not again, if watered now and then in
dry seasons, by Autumn will be so rooted as to be removed, and cut from its
other part behind the roots, and becomes a natural Tree, one whereof is worth
ten others that are only budded or grafted, for that every Sucker that comes
from them will be of the same kind.

But since all Roses are not apt to yield Suckers, therefore the surest way to
increase any, is gently to bend down part of the Tree, or the whole in the
Spring, as before expressed, and lay all the branches as before directed in the
ground, and apply to them old and well-rotted dung, about the places where they
are laid, 'twill make them root the sooner, and you by Autumn have as many
rooted Trees of the same kind as Branches laid in the earth, without prejudice
to the old one, which when the new ones cut off, may be easily brought to its
place again, and the next year bear as plentifully as ever; nor does this
hinder the bearing of flowers, for the branches laid will be as plentifully
stored as if the Tree erect and not laid, so that they loose neither the profit
nor pleasure of that year, and Trees bearing Roses.

The double yellow Rose bears not so well when thus natural as others, nor in
the Sun as other Roses, but must be placed in the shade, and for its better
bearing and fairest flowers, first in the stock of a Francford Rose (as my
Father-inlaw Mr. Rea well advised) put in the Bud of a single yellow Rose near
the ground, which will quickly shoot to a good length: about a foot higher in
that sprout, put into it a bud of the double yellow Rose, the best kind, which
growing, keep Suckers from the root, (as in all other Roses inoculated) and rub
off all buds, but of that kind desired, when big enough to bear: the preceding
winter prune it very near, cutting off all the small shoots, and only leave the
bigger, cutting off the tops of them also as far as they are small; in the
Spring when it buds for leaves, rub off the smallest of them, and when it buds
for flowers, if too many, let the smallest be wiped off, leaving so many of the
fairest as you think the strength of the Tree may bring to perfection, which
should be a standard then up to a wall, and rather shaded than in too much heat
of the Sun, and in dry weather sometimes watered; by which means you may expect
fair and beautiful flowers, such that will recompense your pains in their
propagation.

For the making Roses come earlier then ordinary, as some advise, by placing
them in a declining house against the Sun, and watering with water enriched
with hottest dung dissolved therein, or shavings of Horn and Lime steeped in
it, or watering with warm water, to accelerate their blowing earlier than they
naturally do; I truly think it not worth the while, because other beautiful
flowers would be in being, and diminish somewhat of their glory, which is the
more, blowing in a season when none others to vie with them; and if such means
as before expressed used, I have reason to suspect the killing of Trees thereby,
a deserved loss for following irrational and unexperimented impositions.

But for retarding the blowing of Roses, that is more acceptable, especially
when no more pains than sheering off the buds when they new put forth, and then
when others are quitting their lovely ornaments they will be putting on theirs;
and I suppose a second sheering them off, may cause them to be as much more
later, and so have Roses when no other flowers in being; but then be sure to
serve the whole Tree so, for if you sheer but one part of it, the part
unsheer'd will spend that strength and sap that you expected should put forth
new buds in the places of those cut off, and so frustrate your defign.

As soon as your Roses done blowing, cut them with your shears pretty close to
the old wood; and near the Spring each branch ought to be cut again with a
pruning knife, close to a leaf, bud and all dead parts taken away, or any that
is superfluous, to bring your Tree in handsome form; they are all hardy, and
endure the severest winters well enough; they may be disposed up and down your
Garden in Bushes, or to the walls amongst your Fruit, or set in rows and
hedges, intermixing the several colors so, as to have no two of like colors
together; the well-placing them much advances their prospect to the eye, and
commends the disposer of them.

Let none of your Rose-trees grow high, which is disgraceful, rather lower than
above yard and half, except your Musk-Roses, which bear not well except against
a wall, pale, or house-side, and suffered to grow to their full height, which
usually is eight or nine foot high.

These Dew-empearled, Muskie, fragrant perfuming flowers, deserve the most
principal place among all others whatsoever, being not only esteemed for its
beauty, virtues, and odoriferous scents, but because it is the honor and
ornament of our English Scepter, as by the conjunction in the uniting of those
two most Royal Houses of York and Lancaster appears, and claim the chiefest
places in Crowns and Garlands; witness Anacreon a Greek Poet, whom Henricus
Stephanus thus rendered in Latin verse. Rosa honos decusque florum,
Rosa, cura amorque Veris.
Rosa Caelitum voluptas,
Roseis puer Cithereis.
Caput implicat Coronis,
Charitum Choros frequentans.
The Rose is the Honor and Beauty of flowers,
The Care and Love of the Spring (it devours)
Of (the Poets) Heavenly Powers the pleasure,
Cytherea's Boy (eke Cupid) his Treasure,
Circling with Garland of Roses his Head,
When he to Dances of Graces does tread.


You may mislike my thus Translating them, and perhaps my own following fancy
worse; however, they shall run the venture, though hopping pen-feather'd out of
their nest. Venus upon a Bed of Roses laid,
Dul'd Ascanius, so long with her he played,
Reposing on a soft as sweet a Bed,
As that whereon she cropped his Maidenhead.
They both invited sleep, and there he lay,
Till rest enabled him for farther play.
Thus Sight, Touch, Scent of Roses in their uses,
Refreshes Nature, and new strength infuses.
Who would not then these sweet-leav'd flowers esteem
So rare, when either felt, or smelt, or seen;
And wish this greater, than has yet oretane us,
Double, nay Treble blessing of Ascanius?


JUNE.
IN this Month the Lillies are in their full flower, before the Martagons, and
first to be mentioned; to wit,

Lilium Rubrum, The Red Lilly; the flower so vulgar, every Countrey-woman can
form an Idea of it in a strangers head, by their Rustic descriptions, and
several other sorts thereof which are here regardless. There are three sorts
that are mentionable; the Red, Yellow, and White: as,

Lilium Cruentum bulbi ferum, The fiery red bulby Lily, bearing on a high stalk
many fair flowers, containing six broad thick leaves, of a fiery red at the
tops, declining toward the bottom to an Orange-colour, with small black specks.

Lilium Rubrum flore pleno, The double red Lily, bears many Orange-colour'd
single flowers on a stalk, with small brown specks on the insides, sometimes
but one fair double flower, as if all the rest were there concatenated.

Lilium Luteum, The yellow Lily, of all the kinds most esteemable, like the
other, but taller and bigger, many flowers on a stalk, of a fine gold-colour.

Lilium Album vulgar, The common white, like the common red, needs no farther
noticing.

Lilium album Bizantium, The white Lily of Constantinople, is smaller in all
its parts than the common white, but bears more flowers, twenty or thirty on a
stalk: sometimes the stalk comes flat and broad, with one hundred or more
flowers on it.

Lilium album flore pleno, The double white Lily, in all things like the common
kind, the flowers excepted, which are five or six on a stalk, each constantly
double, the leaves long green ere they turn white and open, seldom opening at
all but in a fair season; more a rarity for the double flowers, than beautiful,
There is

Lilium Persicum, The Persian Lily, rooted like the Crown Imperial, but longer,
smaller, and whiter, from whence springs up a round whitish green stalk,
beset with many long whitish green leaves from the bottom to the middle
thereof, from thence to the top with many small flowers hanging their heads,
containing six leaves apiece, of a dead or over-worn purple-colour, with a
Pointil and Chives in the middle, tipped with yellow Pendents: but this flower is
in May, a flower of small beauty, and only entertained for variety, its heavy
color setting off others that are more brisker.

Next come the Martagons, a rambling flower only fit for flower-pots, or
Chimneys, and to be planted in by-borders or under hedges, but the blossoms of
many and pretty varieties: as,

Martagon Imperiale, The Martagon Imperial, sealy Root of a pale yellow, stalk
above a yard high, brownish color, at some distances beset with single rounds
of broad green leaves, and naked betwixt: at the top of the stalk come forth,
in an old Plant, sometimes one hundred flowers, each on a several foot-stalk,
hanging down their heads, and turning the leaves back again, which are thick
and fleshy, of a pale purple-colour, with brown spots on the inside, a style in
the middle, with six yellow Chives tipped with Vermilion Pendants.

Martagon flore albo, the White Martagon differs from the last in a greener
stalk, fewer flowers; and white flower.

Martagon flore albo maculato, The White Martagon spotted, differs from the
former in the stalk, being brown, flowers inclining to a blush-colour* with
many red spots on the inside.

Martagon Canadense maculatum, The spotted Martagon of Canada, this bears four
or five flowers on long footstalk, in form like a Red Lily, having the head
of a fair yellow, with many black spots on the inside, Chived and Pointil'd
like the rest, the root smaller, and stalk lower.

Martagon Constantinopolitanum, The Martagon of Constantinople, yellowish scaly
root, brownish stalk, large round-pointed green leaves confusedly placed
thereon, on the top whereof come forth four or five more, or fewer flowers on
long footstalk, hanging their head, the leaves turning back again, of a fair
Orange color, with a Pointel and six Chives tipped with yellow Pendants; this is
very common; but those follow are not, as,

Martagon Constantinopolitanum maculatum, The red spotted Martagon of
Constantinople, like the last, but larger flowers, more on a head, of a deeper
Orange-colour, thick speckled on the inside, with small black spots.

Martagon Pannonicum, The Martagon of Hungary, than the last larger leaves,
thinner set, flowers bigger, of a bright pale Orange color, the best and
rarest of all the Martagons.

Martagon Virginianum, The Virginian Martagon, pale yellow scaly root, the
stalk rises yard-high, beset with sharppointed whitish green leaves in rundles,
the head bearing three or four, or more, somewhat large flowers turning back,
of a gold yellow color, with many brown spots about the bottom of the flowers,
the points or ends of the leaves that turn up, of a red or scarlet color,
without spots: a very tender Plant, and must be defended from winters frosts.

Martagon Pomponion, The Martagon of Pompony, yellowish brown scaly root, stalk
yard-high, set promiscuously with many small long green leaves, almost to the
top, where stand many flowers, according to the age of the Plant: some standing
long unremoved, have born a hundred flowers of a yellowish Orange-colour, with
small black specks on the inside, fashioned like the red Martagon of
Constantinople, but smaller.

There is also the yellow Martagon without spots, and the yellow spotted
Martagon, but of no great esteem, and only for variety admitted, as some of
the others are; your choicest is that of Canada and Virginia, and must be
planted in the richest and hottest earth you can get, in boxes or pots, to be
so housed as to be kept from freezing in the winter.

The Lilies, and most of the Martagons flower in June, but the Martagon of
Pompony first, in the end of May; that of Constantinople about the beginning of
July; the Virginian last, in August.

All, except what beforementioned, very hardy Plants, increase but too fast by
the roots; which hold their fibers, and therefore like not often removing, but
when occasion fer it, the best time when their stalks dried down, for then the
roots have fewest fibers; the roots ought to be set five inches deep in the
Earth that should be every year uncovered t^ the bottoms, that without stirring
the fibers of the old roots, the young ones may be parted from them, and they
only remain with new rich earth put to them and covered, which will much
advantage the fairness and number of their flowers; your young roots disposed
in some other place convenient, (considering the height they grow to, and great
increasing) not keeping them out of the ground.

The Moly in this season is in flower, from the beginning to the end of the
Month chiefly.

Moly Homericum, The great Moly of Homer, that rises up with two or three
great thick long hollow leaves* of a whitish green color, like the
Tulip-leaves, from amongst which the stalk rises above a yard-high, naked,
round and smooth, bearing on the top a great Umbel or Tuft, of small star-like
purplishflowers, upon equal-footed stalks, which continue long before the
decay, the root big and white, and of the smell of Garlic.

Moly Indicum, The Indian Moly has shorter, though broader leaves than the
former, the stalk not so high as its leaves, without any flowers, bearing a
cluster of reddish scaly bulbs, each as big as an Acorn, standing on
footstalk, which set, will bring Plants of the same kind, great white Root
covered with a dark-colour'd Coat, little increasing under ground.

Moly Montanum Pannonicum, The Moly of Hungary, of two sorts, the first has
three or four long and broad green leaves, carried up with the stalk, a foot
high one above another, beset at the top with some reddish bulbs, with long
footstalk, with flowers of a pale purple, fashioned like Homers Moly, the
root small and apt to increase; the second like the first, but the green leaves
smaller, the stalk bearing a greater cluster of dark green bulbs, flowers alike
in fashion, color, and in a manner of growing, the root wearing a dark
purple-coat.

Moly Serpentinum, Serpents Moly, like the former, but more beautiful, the
bulbs on the head of a lower stalk, are redder, the small green leaves twine
and crawl like a Serpent, therefore so named; the root small and round,
increasing into many smaller ones, no bigger than pease.

Moly Montanum flore luteo, The yellow Moly when it flowers, has two long and
broad leaves, otherwise but one, near the bigness of a Tulip, between which
comes up a slender stalk, bearing at the top a tuft of yellow star-like
flowers, greenish on the back, with yellow threads in the middle, whitish Root,
apt to increase, smelling strong, as the flowers and leaves do of Garlic.

Moly Montanum latifolium Hispanicum, The Spanish purple Moly, has two long
broad leaves, betwixt which rises the stalk two foot high, bearing at the top
many star-like flowers, of a decayed purple-colour, with threads of the same,
tipped with yellow, yielding near the ground bulbs by which they are increased,
having no scent of Garlic in any part.

Moly Pyxidatum argenteum Hispanicum, The silver-cupped Spanish Moly, with two
or three long rushlike leaves, passing away when the stalk at its height, which
is a yard or more, bearing a great head of flowers, which at length spread much
open, and grow long on footstalk, of a silver-colour, with lines on both
sides the leaves, fashioned small and hollow, like a Cup, white and clear root,
apt to increase, without any ill scent in any part.

Moly Dioscorideum, Dioscorides his Moly, from a transparent root, covered with
a thick yellow skin, springs up three or four narrow grassy leaves, with a
stalk foot and half high, bearing at the top a tuft of milk-white flowers, like
those of Ramsons, with a little scent of Garlic; there is another lesser, the
flower-leaves rounder pointed; these last and the yellow are too common for a
good Florists Collection.

Moly Muscatum Monspeliense, The sweet Moly of Montpelier, has four or five
small leaves no bigger than Bents-stalks, foot high, bearing many star-like
sweet flowers, which if the season hot, smell like Musk; small root and tender,
requiring defense from winter-frosts; this last flower not till September.

They all loose their fibers, and may be taken up when the stalk dried down,
thriving well in any Soil, great increasers, standing long unremoved; they will
last long in flower-pots, if the water renewed, and are preserved more for
variety than for their smell or beauties-sake.

Asphodelus, The Asphodil also bears star-like flowers, as the great white
branched, the white unbranched, the blush-colour'd, the great white striped,
the little hollow white Asphodil, and the small yellow, flowers of small worth,
therefore only named; as another kind called the Lilly Asphodil, having sedgy
leaves and roots, many of which not the least valuable, except the Lilly
Asphodil, with a white flower, and the blush Lilly Asphodil, which may be
entertained: As also

Phalangium, Spider-wort: the Savoy and Italian are only fit for your choice,
which flower about the beginning of June, and are hardy Plants, live and thrive
in any Soil, but best in that which is moist; as the Lilly-Asphodils, their
time of transplanting in August, parting the Roots, and presently setting them
again. More ado about them not worth while.

Gladiolus, Corn-flag, fit for by or outborders, because of their rambling,
with broad, long, stiff, green leaves, full of Ribs coming out by the side of
the other, and joined at the bottom; the Stalk rising from among them, bearing
many Flowers one above another, standing all one way like the Fox-gloves: As,

Gladiolus Bizantius, the Corn-flag of Constantinople, with Flowers of a deep
red, with two white spots within the mouth of every Flower, round and flat Root
netted over; gives many off-sets, if long unremoved.

Gladiolus flore suave rubente, The Corn-flag with a bright red Flower.

Gladiolus flore albo, The Corn-flag with a white Flower. There are several
others; but one that is fit to be retained amongst the beforementioned, because
of its color, and that is the French Ash-colored Corn-flag. These several
colored ones set thick, and intermixed when the blow makes a pretty show,
which is the beginning of July, and loose their fibers as soon as stalks dry,
and may then be taken up and kept out of the ground, freed from their many
off-sets, and in September set again. They prosper in any place, increase too
much.

Lychnis, Champions, the best whereof Lychnis Coronaria rubra multiplex, The
double Red-rose-champion, like the single kind, so well known, needs no
description, only the Flowers of this thick and double, of the same delicate
Velvet red-colour which is in the common single kind.

Lychnis Coronaria alba multiplex, The double White-rose-champion, like the
last, but that the Flowers are more thick and double, and rarer than the Red.
There is

Lychnis Chalcedonica flore simplici, The single Non-such, Flower of
Constantinople, or as more commonly known by the name of the Flower of Bristow,
bearing a great head of many single Scarletflowers: Another differing in the
color of the Flowers, which is at first of a reddish blush-colour, growing
paler by degrees, so that in one head there will be several shades of blushes:
Another with Flowers Snow-white. But the most valuable, is the

Lychnis Chalcedonica flore pleno miniato, The double rich Scarlet Non-such, or
Flower of Bristow, a lusty, strong, great, double-headed Flower, of the richest
Scarlet imaginable.

The Champions flower the end of June, and continues till September; the
several Non-suches, the latter end of the same month also.

The Champions must be planted of slips taken from the old Roots in the end of
August, that they may root before Winter; for if set at Spring, they run up to
flower and die at Winter, as the old Plants are apt to do; therefore set Slips
every year, lest you lose the kind.

The Non-such are more hardy, and prosper worst in a Soil over-hot or too rank;
they continue long, and are increased by taking young Plants from the old
Roots. Do this in the end of March, when they come up with many heads; each
then divided with some share of the Root, will grow, and soon come to bear
Flowers. No doubt but the Seeds of the single kinds, sowed as Auricula-seeds,
being as small, may produce new Varieties.

In this month appears

Hesperis, sive Viola Matronales, Dames Violet, or Queens Gilliflower, by
Country-women called Close Sciences; two sorts of them common in their Gardens,
both single, one pale-blush, the other white; the Flower but of four Leaves.
But the nobler sorts are,

Hesperis flore pleno alba, The double white Queens Gilliflower, like the
single kinds, but that in this there are many Flowers on a branch, and on
stalks many branches standing thick together in a long spike, each Flower thick
and double, of a pure white color and sweet scent, chiefly in the Evening;
therefore called Hesperis.

Hesperis flore pleno purpurascente, The double Purplish Queens Gilliflower
differs only from the last in the color of the Flowers, which are of a fine,
pleasant, light, reddish, purple color; more rare than the double white.

Hesperis flore pleno variegata, The double striped Queens Gilliflower, like
the last, but that the Flowers are finely striped with white, and most
esteemed. There is one that bears single Flowers thus striped, respected for
its bearing Seeds, which sowed, produce Varieties.

They flower the beginning of June, and blow till the end of July, easily
raised from any slip or branch; which set in the ground at Spring, shaded and
watered, will grow: but neglect not to nip off the Buds (of your under-set
Plants) as soon as they appear for Flowers, otherways they will blow, and
assuredly die.

Armerius, Sweet Williams. Of these and Sweet John's, are several sorts; their
form too well known to be here described: and of each, only the double Sweet
John's, and the Velvet Sweet Williams, worthy esteem. Every slip of them set in
the Spring, will grow; they flower in June; and if you keep their Seeds and sow
them, other Varieties may be gained; but let it be done in April: they flower
not till the second year.

Speculum Veneris, or Venus Looking-glass, a pretty Seedling; the branches low
and tender, divided into many parts, commonly lying on the ground; little
leaves slightly nicked on the edges; small flowers of a bright Purple-colour
tending to blueness, with wide mouths, having a white chive in the middle that
adds much to its beauty; the roots very slender, and perish when they have
perfected their small seeds; which sow in April: afterward they will sow
themselves, and yearly pay you tribute for your first pains in sowing them.

Hedysarum clypiatum, The Red Satten-flower, called the French Honeysuckle,
has many stalks, set with winged green leaves; at the joints come out smaller
stalks, set with many flowers of a shining red color, in some white, which is
the rarer. After the Flowers past, the Seeds are contained in flat round Husks,
three or four standing one above another. The second year after their sowing,
they flower this and the next month, and die the Winter following. In the
beginning of April sow their Seeds.

Papaver multiplex, Double Poppies, need no description they are so common,
some red, purple, scarlet, lead-colour, white, blush, etc. Another, each leaf
of the Flower is half scarlet and half white: Another, striped with the same
colors: But the chiefest, and of most esteem, is that of a younger date, of a
fine goldyellow, and double, flowering in June, yield much seed, and either
sowed or falling of themselves, will come up and prosper in any place.

The latter end of this month flowers also Nigella, the Fennel-flower, the
Spanish single of a bleak blue, and a double of the same color; but of like
worth either.

Fraxinella flore rubente, Bastard-Dittany with a reddish flower, grows about
two foot high, with diverse woody brownish stalks, the lower part set with many
winged-leaves like those of a young Ash, seven, nine, or eleven together,
somewhat large and long, purled about the edges, of a sad green color, and
strong resinous scent; on the upper part of the stalks in this month blow many
flowers, growing in a spike at distances one above another, each containing
five long leaves, four whereof stand on the two sides bending upwards, the
fifth hanging down, turning the end up again, of a pale red color, striped
through every leaf with a deeper red, a tassel in the middle of five or six
long purplish threads that bow down with the lower leaf, and turn up the ends
again with a little freeze at the end of each; when these gone, succeed hard
and clammy husks pointed at the ends, wherein is contained round shining black
seeds, the root white, large, and spreading under ground; the whole Plant of a
strong resinous scent, more delighting to the Eye than Nose.

Fraxinella flore rubro, Bastard-Dittany with a red flower, differs from the
other, in that it is bigger in all its parts, leaves dark-green, longer spike
of flowers, and deeper red; another raised from the seeds of this, thicker of
flowers, and of a deep bloody red color.

Fraxinella flore albo, Bastard-Dittany with a white flower; its stalk and
leaves of a fresher green, the flowers white, and not so big as the other.

There is two other sorts, the one Ash Color, the other raised from the seeds
of this, of a bleak blue color, striped with a deeper, less in all its parts
than any of the other; all of them continue in flower from this month till the
end of July; the seed ready to gather the end of August; which will be all
lost, without care taken to prevent it by the spring of the Pods. It Is a hardy
Plant, endures long without removing, yields many new ones, which ought to be
taken from the old root the beginning of March; they are raised with Varieties,
by their seeds sowed in rich Earth as soon as they are ripe, especially of the
deep red, white, and Ash Color.

Cistus Mas, The Male Cistus, a small shrubby Plant about yard high, with many
brittle, slender, woody branches, covered with a whitish bark, on which many
long whitish green leaves, hardish in handling, two at every joint, with
flowers in this month coming forth at the end of the branches, three or four
together upon slender footstalk, each of five small round leaves like a small
single Rose, of a fine reddish purple, with many yellow threads in the middle,
that soon fall away, and are succeeded by round hard hairy heads, containing
small brown seeds.

Cistus Ledon, The Gum Cistus rises higher, spreads more than the former, with
many blackish woody branches, set with long, narrow, dark, green leaves, whiter
on the back-sides, two at each point, the whole dewed with a clammy sweet
moisture, but more in hotter Countries than in ours (which artificially taken
off, is the black sweet Gum called Ladanum); at the top of the branches stand
single white flowers larger than those of the former, like single Roses with
five leaves, having at the bottom a dark purple spot, broad below, and pointed
upwards, with yellow threads in the middle; which past, cornered heads succeed,
containing like the former, small brownish seeds. These Plants continue
flowering from May to September; are raised from seeds: the Plants endure not
cold, but must be housed in winter.

Ficus Indica minor, The Indian Fig consists of leaves springing one out of
another from one leaf put half into the Earth, which takes root and puts out
others; these leaves are a finger thick, flat, and round-pointed, of a pale
green color, which shows at first of brown prickles on the upper side; at the
tops of the leaves in this month break out the flowers set with two rows of
pale yellow leaves, with a yellow thrum tipped with red in the middle: after the
flower's past, the head they stood on grows bigger in form of a Fig, but never
comes with us to perfection. This is planted in pots, and housed in Winter, or
else the frosts will rot and destroy it. There is also

Canna Indica, The Indian flowering Reed, with fair large green leaves, coming
from the joints of the stalks, which is above yard high, bearing at the top one
above another diverse flowers like in shape to the Corn-flag, of a bright
crimson color, succeeded by three square heads, containing seeds which are
round and black, about a Pease bigness; it has a white tuberous root, whereby
it is aptly increased.

There is another of this kind, with flowers yellow with reddish spots.

These Plants must be set in large boxes in good earth, often watered, and
housed in Winter, for one nights frost destroys them.

Helleborus albus, The white Hellebore comes up with a great round head, of a
whitish green color, opening into many beautiful large green leaves, eminently
plaited throughout, and compassing each other at the bottom; out of them the
stalk rises a yard high, with small leaves to the middle thereof, whence
divided into many branches, bearing a multitude of small Star-like, yellowish,
green-colour'd flowers; the roots thick and big at the head, with diverse great
white strings running deep in the ground.

Helleborus albus flore atro rubente, The white Hellebore with a dark red
flower, differs from the last, in that it comes up a month before the other,
larger leaves, smaller and finer plaited, flowers less, of a dark red, and is a
fine Plant; the roots of both these and the black that flowers at Christmas,
are hardy, abide long unremoved, therefore at first ought to be set in good
ground. There is the Ladies Slipper, small, white, and purple Hellebore, but
only the two white and the black worth our collecting.

Trachelium Americanum, sive planta Cardinalis, The Cardinals flower has many
leaves, like Canterbury-bells, but lesser, of a yellowish green color, from
whence rises tall hollow stalks, set with leaves smaller by degrees to the top,
from the bosoms whereof come forth the flowers, made of five long narrow
leaves, three of them standing close together, hanging downright, the other two
are turned up, with an umbone betwixt them, of a paler color than the leaves,
which are of an excellent rich crimson color; the root is compacted of very
many white strings, and well looked to, abides many years. There is another
with blue flowers lately come from Virginia.

This must be planted in a Pot in good rich light Earth; and when Winter begins
to grow sharp, set the Pot in the ground under a South-wall, three inches
deeper than the top, and clothe it about on the top with dry Moss, covered with
a glass, which take off in warm days and gentle showers, to refresh it; which
must be observed in April: at which time you may take out the Pots and expose
them safely.

JVLY.
CAryophyllus hortensis, called July-flowers from the month they blow in, and
are indeed the Summers glory, as Tulips the pride of Spring, deserving a
Flowerists care in their propagation and preservation, especially the nobler
sorts, which are called Dutch July-flowers, or more vulgarly Carnations, raised
from seeds in the Netherlands, and other parts adjoining to the Sea, and thence
conveyed to us. Our inland endeavors to raise them seldom countervail our
trouble, none or very few raising good ones, that have not the neighborhood of
the Sea, which annually produce new mixtures, though seldom new colors; and
though their dies not many, as red, purple, scarlet, tawny, and white, and of
those deeper or paler, yet so recompensing that defect in their delicate
variegations, various mixtures, and pleasing scents, as to vie with any species
whatsoever, considering the usefulness of some of them as the best Cordials,
extremely comforting the noblest part of man, the heart, either in the Conserve
of the Cloves made with Sugar, or in Syrups: the single colors as flowers
little esteemed, in comparison of those striped, flaked, or powdered upon white
or blush, with darker or lighter red, crimson or carnation, sadder or brighter,
purple, deeper or paler scarlet; so that the chief July-flowers may be brought
under these four sorts: Red and White, Crimson and White, Purple and White, and
Scarlet and White; some whereof shall be named, that those unacquainted may the
better know how to collect them, being such sorts as a Flowerist ought not to
want, viz.

Red and White.
Crown of Bohemia. Emperor, the largest flower in being, and well marked with
broad flakes, King Charles the second. Queen Katherine.
Red and Blush.
William the Conqueror, a sullen flower.
Crimson and White.
Empress, the largest but Countess, the rounder and neater flower. Teages
delight. Phisbe.
Purple and White.
King Solomon, a neat flower finely marked on Snow-white. Purple Imperial.
Musidorus. Prince William. Oilinans. Glory of Worcester, little purple and
white. Fair. Hellena, only edged with purple.
Scarlet and White.
Mayor of London, the best. The Giant. Romulus. Florida. Flambosa. Fair
Rosanna. Paramour.
Deep Clove-colour and Black.
Pluto, striped with black through each leaf.
Scarlets.
The Golden Fleece. Golden Grove. Prince of Orange. Princess of Orange.
Blush and White.
Mayor of York.
Blush.
Aurora, a very brisk color. Morning Star.
Purple.
The Wiggon, a Self-colour.
Cloves.
Giant-clove. Astragon. Birtha.
Another intermixed with Purplish Leaves and Stripes.

I have heard but of two kinds that are of three colors; the one is,
Bedford-Tawny, Tawny, Scarlet, and white.

These are the best of each sort now in request, and to be had as my Gardens
furniture may declare; there flowering from the middle (sometimes beginning) of
July, till the same time in August.

A chief thing to be considered, for their producing fair and gallant flowers,
and many Layers, is the Soil wherein they ought to be planted, which must be
neither too stiff, nor over-light; the best course is to provide a quantity of
good fresh earth, that which the Mole casts out of good ground, that is not
stiff nor over-sandy, that has lain long untilled, or taken four or five
inches deep from under the Sward; but I prefer the Mole-hills best, that have
not been long cast up, and mix the same with a third part of Ox, Cow, or
sheep-dung, that has been long made, intermingling a little lime; leave your
heap high and round, that it take not too much wet; let it lie by so long till
well digested, which will be the sooner effected, if often turned over and well
stirred together; and be sure this Earth be well mellowed ere you put it in pots
or beds for planting your Layers in, and your success in flowers will be the
more prosperous, taking off your Layers either in September, or in March, which
I account always best; from your Layers cut off all dead leaves, and the tops
of all that are too long, and then take them up, with earth about the roots,
and set them in your pots, filled with the beforementioned prepared earth,
which set in the shade, and gently watered, will grow well, and then they may
be removed into the morning-sun, which is the only Sun these flowers willingly
admit of; never over-glut any with water, and moisten them not with any out of
Well or Pump, till it has stood two days at least in some vessel sunning, for
raw water too much chills, and rather backs tender Plants, than advantages
their growth and flourishing, nay, often destroys many. In winter till April,
water in the morning, otherways your moistened earth about tender roots, may so
freeze, as to kill them; and after that time, the Sun growing more vigorous in
heat, water in the evening, and your pots as soon as the Sun off them;
otherwise the Suns heat exhales the moisture before it can have time to give
due refreshment to the Plants.

Another sort of earth for July-flowers I was acquainted with by one Mr.
Fidkin, Gardener to the worthy Sir John Packington of Westwood in
Worcestershire, in which I saw his flowers flourish and mark beyond
expectation; it was thus compounded.

Rotten Tan, i. e. the relics or rubbish of a Tanners pit, that by long lying,
is converted to earth, this layn on a heap for a quarter of a year to sweeten,
for in its own nature it is too sour for such uses; to one barrow-full of which,
four of good rotten wood-pile earth, and the rubbish of old-walls, for want of
which a little old decayed lime, a quarter of a peck at most, mixed well
together, and let lie a fortnight ere you put it in your pots for your
July-flower-layers to be transplanted in, is a secret few know.

When your flowers begin to spindle, nip off all but one or two at the most of
the biggest at each root, leaving them only to bear flowers; and when they come
to bud for flowering, nip off all those too, but three or four that are best
placed, by this means will your flowers be the fairer, and more layers gained;
by which your kinds are continued and increased. Remember to be often tying up
their spindles, as they grow in height, to small rods, set by them on purpose
for their support, lest by their bending down they break off, and you loose the
pleasure of their flowers.

From the middle of June, till the same time in July, is the prime time of
laying July-flowers: which is thus performed.

Make choice of such slips as are strongest, having joints sufficient for
laying; prune off the side and end of the top-leaves, cut the undermost part of
the middlemost joint half through, from thence slit the stalk through the
middle upwards to the next joint; open the earth underneath to receive it, then
gently bend it down therein, with a small hook-stick stuck in the earth to keep
it down, keeping up the head of the slip, that the slit may be open, and so
pressed down and earthed up, which as soon as performed, must be sure to be
watered, which must be often reiterated, especially if the season dry, it will
make them root the sooner, and shoot forth fibers sufficient to be removed with
earth about them the beginning of September following, into pots or beds of the
aforementioned prepared Earth, which must be shaded and gently watered; but
take heed of too much moisture, lest it rot their young and tender fibers;
therefore for preventing great rains, shelter them under boards supported by
forks and sticks laid on them, but not too near them, lest on the other hand
they perish for want of Air, in a freedom of which they chiefly delight, many
having been suffocated for want thereof, as too close housing in winter has
showed the experience, and in transplanting your layers, set them not too deep,
for that has rotted and spoiled many.

Some July-flowers in Summer shoot up but with one stem or stalk, without any
layer; if you suffer it to blow, the root dies, therefore if you have no more
of that kind, suffer it not to flower, but timely cut off the spindle that it
may sprout anew, which preserves the root.

When any July-flowers in your pots die, empty it of its old earth, and put in
new before you plant another July-flower in it, otherwise the proper
nourishment being drawn out, and spent by the first flower, will visibly appear
in the ill thriving of this second.

When your roots produce too many layers, if in good flowers, covet not above
three or four to be laid, for they draw so much nourishment from the root, as
not enough to ascend to the flower, so hindering both fairness and bigness; but
in May or June (not too far in the last Month neither) seek out from the stems
such shoots only, as are reasonable strong, that run not up to spindle: cut
these off close to the stem, and throw them in a pail of water for twenty four
hours, then in a bed of rich and fine mould, that has been sifted through a
wire riddle, cutting off your slip close at a joint, trimming away the lower
leaves close to the stalk, and cut off the uppermost even at the top, make a
hole in the earth with a little stick, and put your slip therein so deep, that
the upper leaf may be wholly above ground; then close the ground to the stem of
the Plants; and lastly water them, remembering to do it often, unless rain saves
you that labor, and that this bed be as much as may be in the shade.

Ferrarius, lib. 2. cap. 15. avers, from the month of February to the middle of
March (in the time of their germination) is the best time to slip this flower;
nor will he have the slip, nor twisted in the bottom, nor Barley put under them
to raise adulterous fibers, but only advises that they be cut off at a joint:
Indeed both Spring and Autumn are good Seasons for making out Roots; the latter
requires that the slip be so early set, as that it may have time enough to take
root before the coldness of Winter; the former, that the Plant set in the
Spring may have taken root before the Sun rises to that strength to emit
violent and parching heats. General Rules for Vernal and Autumnal Settings.

As your July-flowers blow, if you observe any to break the pod, with a
Penknife or Lancet open it as much at each division thereof, then bind it about
with a small slang, or narrow list of the thin Film of a Gold-beaters old
Mould, which moistened with your tongue, will stick together; keep pour flower
round, and scarcely be perceived: If any come all of one color, the Layers
from that stem will continue so, and be a new kind.

Keep your first flowers for seeds, letting their pods stand as long as you may
for danger of frosts, kept as much as may be from wet; then cut the stems off
with the pods on them, and dry them so as not to lose the seeds. The dryness of
the cods, and blackness of the seeds, argues their ripeness.

Ferrarius, lib. 3. chap. 15. says, the bottom of every cod or pod brings the
best seeds, and the largest flowers. The seeds producing most varieties, are
the striped tawnies. The most variety of double flowers are raised from the
seeds of double flowers, though many times the seeds of single ones will
produce double. The best time to sow them, is the beginning of April, or full
Moon, near that time before or after, on indifferent good ground, mixed with
the ashes of too old rotted and superfluous slips and stems of July-flowers
burnt, in a place so shaded, as to have only the morning and evening Sun; sow
them not too thick, and sift the same compound over them a quarter of an inch
thick: when the Plant is grown to a considerable strength, which will be in
August or September following, remove them into beds of a very good soil, about
the full Moon, where they must stand till they flower; these seedling come up
sometimes with three, sometimes with four leaves, though they most have but
two, and by some observed that those with but two leaves prove single, those
with more prove double flowers; if you mark such, you will the year after their
sowing find its verity by their flowers, the best of which set in pots, that
they may be so placed each season, as to have the morning Sun only; not up
against a south wall, for they love not intemperate heat. The several sorts of
Primroses appear,
The blustering Virgin Beauties of the year,
Till the Bears Ears with more numerous dies,
Do take the field, but much more take our Eyes,
Or the Ranunculus, Anemonies
So richly died in grain, challenge the prize;
Till Tulips in their glorious dress come forth,
Scorning all Rivals dare compare in worth,
Which Roses offer at, yet sweetly yield,
To July-flowers that next do crown the field,
And will the honor wear, or loose each head,
With looks like fair-skin'd Thisbe when she bled,
Or when a sadder purple-stream had been
Trickling all over her sweet Lilly skin.
Others did seem, and some of kin did show,
Like to the blushes on her face did flow;
Whilst one to steal her breath, to mouth did skip,
So wears the Scent and Scarlet of her lip.
Nay, the deep Clove its darker hue does hold
From her once-brighter blood, congealed and cold
But dead change looks, and similize her thus,
Hanging their heads as she on Pyramus.
Their Pens may write, or Pencils draw their story,
Living the Eyes best witness of their glory.


Clematis peregrina flore rubro, Red Virgins-bower, has many limber weak woody
branches, covered with a thin brown outer bark, and green underneath, winding
about any thing it can take hold of; the leaves stand at the joints, consisting
of three parts, some notched on one side, some on both: the flowers the latter
end of this Month begin to appear from the joints on long footstalk, made of
four leaves, standing like a Cross of sullen dark red, the roots a bundle of
brown strong strings, fastened to a head, running deep in the ground.

Clem. etc. purpureo, Purple Virgins bower, of a sad heavy bluish purple.

Clematis, etc. pleno purpureo, The double purple Virgins bower, like the
former, but bigger and stronger, colored alike in the flower, which is very
thick and double; the outward leaves broad as the others are, but the inward
narrow folded close together, like a big button in the middle of the flower,
which open so slowly, that the outward leaves fall off before the others spread
themselves, and continue flowering the next month; these must be supported
against a wall: the young and small branches that are apt to die in winter,
pruned off in March; the nearer cut, the fairer the flowers.

Geranium nocte olens, This is the only Cranes-bill worth our notice, and so
called, because it smells sweet only in the night; it has a great root like
a Paeony, with large jagged leaves; the flowers come forth in this Month, with
small and round-pointed leaves, of a purple color, listed about with yellow;
these stand on smooth stalks eight or ten on a head, which by night are as
sweet in the night, as beautiful in the day; the Plant is tender, and therefore
set in a pot; and governed in winter as the Cardinals flower, or housed and
kept dry in winter, for any moisture rots the root.

Jucca Indica, The Indian Jucca, has a large Tuberous root and fibers, thence
springs a great round tuft of hard long hollow green leaves, with points as
sharp as thorns, always remaining, but some of the outward ones which are
supplied by those that spring in the middle: from an old Plant well kept
sometimes springs a strong round stalk, divided into several branches, which
bear diverse flowers, something like the Fritilaria's, but narrower at the
bottom, containing six leaves, the three outward veined on the backs, from the
bottom to the middle, with a reddish blush upon white, coming forth in this
Month, and soon fall away without seeding with us. This Plant must be set in a
large square box, wide and deep, filled with good rich earth, housed in winter,
and defended from Frosts; it never here increases, that I yet know of, but are
brought from the West Indies.

Periptoca Virginiana, Virginian silk, rises with one or more round stalks,
near four foot high, at several joints set with two long, broad vein'd, round
pointed green leaves; on the top of the stalk, out of a skinny-hose, a great
tuft of flowers come forth, thirty or forty hanging down on long footstalk,
each consisting of five small hollow leaves, of a purplish color; which past,
come long crooked Cods standing upwards, containing flat brown seeds, wrapped
within a great deal of fine soft whitish brown silk, the root big and white,
running far underground, and springing up in many places; it flowers in July,
brings Seeds and silks in August; it has been raised from seeds brought from
Virginia; the stalks die to the ground every winter, but springs again at
Spring, if the place where it stands be covered with horse-dung in winter to
defend it from frosts.

Jasminum album, White Jasmine: from the bigger boughs that come from the root,
proceed diverse green flexible branches, set with winged leaves of a dark green
color, standing two together at the joints, made of many small pointed leaves,
set on each side of a middle rib, commonly three on a side, one bigger and more
pointed at the end; at the tops of the young branches, diverse flowers come
forth together in a tuft, each on a long foot-stalk, which are small, long, and
hollow, opening into five white pointed leaves, of a strong sweet scent,
falling away here with us without seeding.

Jasminum Catilonicum, the Catilonian or Spanish Jasmine, like the last in
growing, differs only in the flowers, which before open in a blush, after white
with bluish edges, the branch and green leaves larger but shorter, the whole
not rising half so high, the flowers sweeter than the other.

Jasminum Hispanicum mutiplex, the double Spanish Jasmine grows like the last,
the flowers white but bigger and double, containing two rows of leaves, with
some smaller coming forth of the middle of the flowers which are as sweet as
the former.

Jasminum Luteum, the yellow Jasmine, has many long slender branches, set at
distances with three small dark green leaves together, the middle or end leaf
being the biggest; at the joints where the leaves come forth, stand long
stalks, bearing small long hollow flowers, ending in five, sometimes six yellow
leaves: the flowers past, round, black shining berries succeed them, the roots
are tough and white, creeping in the ground, coming up in diverse places, much
increasing.

Jasminum Indicum flore Phaenico, the Indian scarlet Jasmine, comes up from a
large spread root, with one, two or more flexible branches, which must have
somewhat to support them, putting forth at every joint small and short
tendrils, by which it fastens to any woody substance; at the same place comes
forth two winged leaves, large almost as Rose leaves, full of veins and finely
nicked on the edges, standing usually three on a side, and one at the end,
which are reddish at first, after of a fair yellowish green color; at the end
of the branches comes forth the flowers, many together, long like a Fox glove,
at the ends opening into five fair broad leaves, with a style and small threads,
in the middle of a Saffron color, some Plants have on the inside the flowers
small, red leaves, others of a deep scarlet, vein'd with small yellow lines.

These Jasmines flower from July to the middle of August, the first white and
common yellow are hardy and endure our Winter colds, increasing fast enough by
suckers; but the Indian yellow and the Spanish, must be planted in pots or
boxes, that they may be housed in Winter, increased usually, by grafting them
late in the Spring on the common white Jasmine, the approach way, they may also
be increased by layers.

Laurus Rosea, sive Oleander, the Rose Bay Tree is of two sorts, one breaking
red the other white flowers, in nothing else differing, its stem growing to the
bigness of a man's thumb, divided into three branches, at each joint bearing
long, hard, thick, dark green leaves; at the end of the branches come forth the
flowers, of a deep blush in the one and white in the other, consisting of four
narrower long yet round pointed leaves, which here fall away without seed.

Laurus Indica, the Indian Bay thrives with us but slowly, rising not above
four foot high, the branches covered with a yellowish green bark, thick set
with leaves, which are betwixt those of the Cherry-Bay and the common kind, the
flowers grow in a long spike, of a greenish white color, succeeded by Berries
like small Olives; this plant must be defended from frosts in Winter and is
increased by layers.

AUGUST.
CYclamen or Sowbread now appears without leaves on small naked stalks, the
flowers coming up folded in the leaves, hanging down their heads and turning up
their leaves again, which are in all but five, some of a bright shining reddish
purple, as the vernal one, another that flowers in the Spring is of a pale
purple, there are also vernal whites ones single and double.

The small purple Cyclamen, another larger of a reddish purple, both Summer
flowers. But the most are those that in this Month of August begin to flower
and continue so in September, and some in October, viz.

The Ivie-leaved Cyclamen of Autumn, of the palest purple color.

The narrow leaved Cyclamen, whereof one purple, another white.

The double purplish colored Cyclamen having about a dozen leaves in a flower.

There is another as double, that is white.

The spring Cyclamens are preferable before the rest, but the double ones most
of all and hardest to be got. Some few days after the flowers come up, their
leaves fashioned almost like Coltsfoot leaves, but have some indenting on the
edges, some more, other sorts less, some longer some rounder, all of them
strangely variegated, spotted and circled with white green, about the middle of
the leaves on the upper side, but that side underneath is red. These flowers
and leaves spring from a round flat Turnip root; black on the outside not
loosing their fibers, therefore seldom removed, but their time for
Transplanting is a little before they put forth buds or flowers: They seldom
increase by roots; therefore raised by seeds, the head or Vessel that contains
them, after the flowers are past, shrinketh down, winding the stalk in a scroul
about it, and lies on the ground hid under the leaves, where it grows great
and round, containing some small seeds, which must be sown as soon as ripe in
good light earth in Pots or Boxes and covered near a finger thick; after they
are sprung up and the small leaves dried down, put some more of the same earth
upon them, and after the second year, remove them to convenient distances abou
Nine inches asunder, where they may stand and bear flowers, and probably may
yield you some variety, either in flower, shape or marking of their Leaves.

Thlaspi Creticum or Candy Tufts, an Annual, are now in their prime, and begin
to blow in July; they are small plants about a foot high, their stalks set with
long, narrow, notched whitish green leaves; at the top stand many small single
flowers set close together, in some all white, some have a purplish spot in the
middle, others are all of a pale purple color, the seeds are small and reddish
(their roots yearly perishing) and must be yearly sowed in April, almost any
ground will serve their turn.

Lathirus Latifolius, the everlasting Pease now flourishes, bearing many large
Pease like Blossoms of a purplish red color, standing on long foot stalks, the
Haum rises high, and must be so planted as to be born up; it dies to the ground
in Winter, and rises again at Spring; in September its Cods will be ripe,
filled with small Pease which must be sowed or set at Spring, and allowed two
or three years ere they grow strong enough to bear flowers. There is a blew one
that is more rare, and continues as long.

Flos Africanus, the African, and by some called the French Marigold.

There are several varieties thereof, the best whereof are,

Flos Africanus maximus multiplex: The greatest double African, or French
Marigold, having many winged leaves, purled about the edges, of a dark green
color, the stalk rising about a yard high, divided toward the top into many
Branches, each branch bearing one large double flower, of a fair gold yellow
color on the upperside, and paler underneath; there are diversities sometimes
comes from the seeds of the same flower, some paler than others, rising out of
a large Pod, wherein after the flowers past, are contained long narrow black
seeds, from which the several varieties are raised, some coming with large
single flowers with a thrum in the middle, tho they seed from double ones.

Flos Africanus fistuloso flore multiplex, the hollow leaved African Marigold,
the flowers thick and double, composed of many hollow leaves, opening at the
end, in some of a deep in others of a paler yellow color.

Flos Africanus minor flore pleno: The lesser double French Marigold smaller
than either of the former, the stalks not so strong, but twining several ways,
the outward leaves sometimes bigger than the rest, and of a deeper and sadder
color: they flower in August, the roots perishing with the first frosts, and
are yearly renewed by seeds sowed in April in a Hot Bed; but sow not any seeds
fom single flowers, but from the first of the double ones: after they are come
up to some strength remove them into a rich soil that lies to the Sun, where
being watered, they prosper and bear large and stately Flowers; as broad as the
palm of any hand; or as big thick and double and shaped like the red Belgic
Rose.

Nasturtium Indicum, Indian Cresses, or yellow Larks heel, spread into many
long trailing branches, four or five foot long, which unless supported, lie on
the ground and take up a great deal of room, smooth leaves and round, the
Flowers of a fair yellow color, shaped something like a single Larks heel, but
the leaves stand plainer and some of them streaked with red, the seeds rough
and uneven, falling off themselves, and are to be gathered off the ground, the
root dying in Winter; sow them in April, on a hot Bed or otherways, which may
be removed into good Earth, having the advantage of the Sun, and craggy poles
or sticks of a yard and half high to lead up their wiery Branches, which guided
up by your hand to the top, when in flower make a glorious show: The Blossoms
gathered before the Winter, and pickled up with Vinegar and Sugar, is an
excellent and rare Sallet.

Mirabilia Peruviana, the Marvel of Peru, has a big stalk bunched at the
joints, spreading into many branches, set at the joints with fair green leaves,
betwixt which and the stalk, come forth the flowers on short foot stalks,
fashioned like those of the lesser blew Bindweed, narrow at the bottoms, and
wide open at the brims, of which several kinds, white, red, or yellow, but the
rarest are those with variegated Flowers, red and white, or red and yellow; all
but the white kind flowr'd plentifully with me this year: and these (like the
Bindweed) open in the Night, and as soon as the Sun shines upon them, the brims
shrink inward and wither away and seldom thefore seen, but late in the Evenings
or Mornings, for which reason by some called the Flowers of the Night, after
the blossoms are past, they are succeeded each by one seed, about the bigness
and color of a black Pease, the roots long like a Reddish, black on the
outside, commonly perishing in the Winter.

They Flower from the beginning of August, till Winter; Frosts destroy them:
The seeds are set the beginning of April in a Hot Bed, and thence removed into
rich earth, where they may have the benefit of the Sun: if any flower not the
first year, lay Horse Litter or Dung on them before the Frosts, and so covered
all Winter, they will flower the sooner the year following, and the roots of
your best kinds when done Flowering, taken up and dried, and each wrapped in
Woollen rags and kept from moisture all Winter, being set in the earth the
beginning of March will in their due seasons bear Flowers.

Amaranthus, Flower gentle, by some called Princes Feather, of which the
greater and the lesser, and of each diversity.

Amaranthus purpureus major, the great purple Flower Gentle, has a thick and
tall stalk, with many large green leaves, the stalk divided into many branches,
bearing long spikes of round hairy Tufts, of a reddish purple color, divided
into several parts, wherein are contained a great many, when full ripe, of
small white seeds; of this there are many kinds bigger and lesser, some purple
mixed with green, some all whitish green color, etc.

Amaranthus purpureus minor, The lesser purple Flower Gentle, has yellowish
green leaves a little reddish, broad at the stalk, and sharp pointed, set with
these leaves, the stalk rises two foot high, branched at the top, bearing long
soft and gentle tufts of hairs, standing like a Pyramid, of a deep shining
murrey purple, lasting so many months after it is gathered; the seeds are small
black and shining.

Amaranthus diversorun colo^um Flower Gentle of diverse colors, differ little
either in leaves or stalks or seeds, only their flowers are of deeper or
lighter colors, of Purple, Scarlet and Gold color: I have had this year some
Scarlet and Purple, Lemon and Orange, some straw color and crimson, etc. these
mixed in a Pot with African Marigolds show finely.

There are Amaranths of three colors, their beauty consisting not in the
Flowers, but leaves; in hot years are parted into green red and yellow colors,
the seeds of all being black, small and shining, excepting the first, and ought
to be sowed as the Africanus on a hot bed, in April, and when grown to any
strength may be removed, where they may have no interception from the Sun
beams, and this yearly, because the first frosts destroy them: their soil must
be light and rank; if you covet to have good seeds, sow them in a hot Bed in
the middle of March, when grown up to any strength, remove them into another
new hot Bed, taking them up with earth about them, so setting them the
beginning of May, transplant them, where they may stand to bear Flowers, which
this way you will have the sooner, as also their seeds, and better ripened,
which you may reserve for two or three years following, for so long will they
last good.

These four last being the best of seedlings, a Garden ought not to be
unfurnished with, (besides their beauty) to supply their vacancy of other
Flowers in your emptied Beds of Tulips, Ranunculus and Anemonies, till their
time of replanting.

There is your Garden Mallows, double Holy Hocks, Snap Dragons, Toad flax, Fox
Gloves, Thistles, Scabious, Mullen, Fennel Flower, Bindweed, Larks heels,
Canterbury Bells, Thorn Apples, Apples of Love, Garden Lupines, Scarlet Bean,
Snails, Cater-Pillers, Oak of Jerusalem, and of Cappadocia, triflles adored
amongst Country women in their Gardens, but of no esteem to a Florist, who is
taken up with things of more value.

But of little more value is your sensible Plant, your humble Plant, and Noli
me tangere, considering their trouble in the raising, and want of Beauty: the
first, the leaves being touched shrink from you; the second when handled fall
down; the lasts their Pods being taken betwixt your fingers before they are
ripe, fly in pieces with a sudden snap; being all annuals and raised from
seeds, and only propagated for those qualities, and perish with the first
frosts, especially the two first.

Then for your sweet Herbs, Basil, Marjerom, Mastick, Sage, Peny-royal,
Lavender, Time, Rosemary, Gold and Silver, and double flowr'd, the Kitchen-Made
so well understands as to excuse any more but their bear names.

There is also double Pellitory, double Feather-few, double Cammomil, double
Dog Fennel, double Lady Smocks, double Dazy, etc. which most women are
acquainted with and know how to order.

In this month flowers,

Ormithogalum Aethiopicum, the Star Flower of Aethiopia, having green leaves a
foot long, Inch broad, woolly when broken, stalk cubit high, bearing from the
middle to the top many large white Starlike Flowers, with some yellowness in
the bottom of them, with a three square head, compassed with white threads, tipped
with yellow thick root, round and white, as tender as that which blows in May;
the Star Flower of Arabia, and must be used accordingly; these two and that
which blows in April, the yellow one which is less tender, only worth a
Florists collection and care in preserving.

Hyacinthus Indicus tuberosa radice; the great Indian tuberous Hyacinth, the
best and most desired of all its kinds, has a thick tuberous Knobbed Root,
formed into several heads, with many thick fibers at the bottoms of them; from
whence rise up several strong and tall stalks, set with diverse fair, long and
broad green leaves, joined at the bottom close to the stalk, where they are
biggest, growing by degrees smaller to the top, where in this month stand many
fair large Flowers, composed of six white leaves, spread open, like those of a
white Daffodil, with some short threads in the middle, and of so strong a sweet
scent, that a pot of them set in a lower room, the doors open, it shall be
smelt all the house over; there is another in this kind, but lesser in all
parts. This is yearly to be taken up in April (tho you may do it in September
and keep the roots dry in Sand, or when dry in Papers in a warm Closet till
April) and then carefully part the roots, not breaking the great fibers, and to
replant them presently thus, put rich earth in the bottom of the pot up to the
middle, then some natural fresh earth, placing the root therein, but so that
the fibers may have nourishment from that below, then cover the whole root with
the same fresh earth, and fill up the rest of the pot, with the rank rich earth
that you put in the bottom, then plunge your pot in a hot Bed, let it there
remain; if that Bed make it not spring, remove it to a second, till it spring
grass high or two inches, then set it under a South wall, whole in the hot Bed,
not water it, but afterward in dry weather water it gently; in August it will
show its rich and fragrant Flowers; about the middle of September house it, for
it will not endure cold or wet; if you would have it, of-set, then set the root
naked in rich earth, but probably it rises not to flower that year.

Althaea Fruticosa, shrub Mallow, with woody branches, with a whitish bark and
soft woolly whitish green leaves like the Curran trees, large Flowers like
single Holly hock; some deep reddish or purple; others lighter with the bottom
of a deeper purple running into the leaves in small veins: another fresher
green leaves and white Flowers with a large purple spot in the bottom; of this
sort another with its flowers striped with blush lines, these shrubs that grow
to a man's height and sometimes higher are ^ncreased by laying down the branches
in the earth, and sometimes by their seeds which seldom come to maturity here,
or you may graff them by approach one upon another, and on one of these shrubs
have all the varieties.

Balaustium, or double blossomed wild Pomegranate Tree, Flowers the end of this
month, and is the rarest of all the flowering shrubs, if pruned grows up high,
otherwise in a thick bush full of small branches with some Thorns thereon, and
many small shining green leaves, which fall away in Winter, and are renewed in
the Spring; at the sides and ends of the branches come out many hard and coral
colored Cups, and out of them beautiful flowers, as big and double as a
province Rose, of an excellent bright crimson color; there is another that is
less in all its parts, sadder green leaves, the flowers inclining more to
Orange color. I have read of another, with double striped flowers, but have
not seen it nor spoke with any that have: but if you will have the Balaustium
here described bare with you, you must plant it in a Box or Case made of wood,
that it may be housed in the Winter, and in Spring the young sprouts sheer'd
off, that it spend it self not too much in them, and this done two or three
times, this plant is easily increased by its suckers or by laying.

Spirea frutex, the shrub Spirea flowers this month, and rises up more than
yard high, with diverse woody stalks set with leaves, like those of sally, but
lesser, and nicked on the edges; on the top of the stalks come forth many small
pale peach colored flowers, set thick together in a long spike, lessening by
degrees like a Pyramid, the root woody and lasting, endures the Winter and is
increased by layers.

Maracoc* sive Climatis Virginiana, the Virginian Climer, come out of the
ground in May, with long round winding stalks, more or less, and in height
according to the age, liking of the plant; it grows with us five or six foot or
more high; from the joints come forth the leaves, at each one from the middle
to the top, a clasper like a Vine, and a flower also; the leaves broad at the
bottom, about the middle divided into three parts, nickt about the edges, the
bud of the flower before it opens, like the seed Vessel of the common single
Vigella, but longer, having at the top five crooked horns, opening the bud,
divides it self into ten parts, sustaining the leaves of the flower, which are
many, long, sharp pointed, narrow, well spread one by another, some straight
and others crooked; these leaves are of a whitish color, thick spotted with a
peach color, having toward the bottom a ring of a perfect peach color, and
above and beneath it a white Circle, adding much to the beauty of the flower;
but the most strange is the Umbrane, which rises in the middle, parting it
self into four or five crooked spotted horns; from the midst of these rises
another roundish head, which carries three nails or horns, biggest above, and
small at the lower end: but never with us, that I have heard on is this flower
succeeded by any fruit, but in the West Indies, (where it is a native) it
bears fruit like a Pomgranate, containing a whitish pulp, and many cornered
rough black seeds, about the bigness of Pear Kernels, long roots thicker then
the Sarsa Parilla's, which run far in the earth, putting up heads in several
places, by which means increased, its beautiful flowers show themselves in
August, the stalk dying to the ground every Winter, springing again from the
roots in May, which may be covered and defended from hard frosts in Winter, it
ought to be planted in a large pot to hinder the roots running, and for housing
in the Winter, and setting in the hot Sun in Summer, the hottest place that may
be, or it will not bear at all; we set the pots in the spring in hots Beds to
bring them forward.

In this month blossoms that curious pleasant, fragrant, and ever green plant
The Myrtle, of which is,

Mirtus Latifolia, the broad leaved Myrtle; In thick bush, full of branches,
growing four or five foot high, set with bright shining and ever green leaves,
of a sweet scent, somewhat broad and long; at the joints of the branches come
forth the flowers, of five small white leaves, with some white threads in the
middle, and very sweet, the roots consisting of many strings and fibers as all
shrubs do.

Mirtus minore folio, the lesser leaved Myrtle grows like the former, but not
so high, the leaves thicker on the branches, smaller pointed at the ends, of a
deeper green color, in little else differing.

Mirtus Rotundiore folio, the Box leaved Myrtle differs from the last, the
leaves being round, pointed like Box, there is another called the upright
Myrtle, having sharp pointed leaves and branches growing erect; another called
the Birds nest Myrtle, thick set with narrow leaves and close compacted
branches.

Mirtus Latifolia flore pleno, the double flowr'd Myrtle grows like the first,
but being more tender, grows not so large nor high, its flowers being like the
other, white, but very thick and double, of a delicate sweet scent.

Mirtus Boetica Latifolia, the great Spanish, or Laurel leafed Myrtle, in all
parts bigger than the former, rises near two yards high, the leaves are like
those of the Bay, but a whiter green, set in a double row on both sides, the
branches sweet in scent, in flowers and fruits differs little from the first;
all but the last are preserved in Cases, and diligently housed in Winter, but
that is more hardy and with any care will endure the violence of Winter tho
planted at large, about the same time flowers;

Gelsimenum Indicum flavum odoratissimum, the sweet yellow Indian Jasmine, a
beautiful green, and rises about two foot high, dividing into branches, covered
with a purplish colored Bark, decked with many fair shining dark evergreen
leaves, shaped like the Pomegranates, but longer and broader; the flowers like
the common white Jasmine, but bigger and of a fair yellow and sweet scent:
where they grow naturally, they are succeeded by fruits like small Olives, but
flowering so late with us, never come to perfection.

Phillirea variegata, the striped Phillirea, most beautiful of all its kinds,
deserving a Case with the best* greens; this Plant if suffered, rises to the
height of a man, thick set with small branches, and those with small evergreen
leaves, edged and striped with white, yet hardy enough to be planted at large,
if you dedefend it a little from snows and frosts.

Marum Herb Mastick, unless a backward Summer, flowers in this month,
otherwise later, and rises about foot high, with stiff hard stalks divided
into many branches, but thinly set with small green leaves, two at a joint, at
the tops of the stalks and branches come forth small white flowers, among a
tuft of white downy threads; the whole plant is of sweet and pleasant scent;
this is increased by setting slips in April.

Marum Siriacum, Assyrian Mastick, not so tall as the former, smaller leaves,
whiter and thicker set on the branches, like the Myrtle; at the tops of the
stalks stand many green Knaps or Heads, like those of sweet Marjerom, but
bigger and greener; a woody root, the whole plant of a delicate scent, very
tender and impatient of cold, and therefore must be set in a pot, and not
housed in Winter, but ordered as the Flos Cardinalis, and unless defended from
Cats by sharp thorns, 'twill be destroyed by them.

SEPTEMBER.
CRocus verus The true Saffron comes up with many narrow long leaves, and after
them the flowers in form like the former mentioned in the Spring, of a reddish
purple color; in the middle are some unprofitable small yellow chives,
standing upright, as all other kinds have, but in this flower there is also
three or four longer chives, hanging down on or between the leaves, of a fiery
red color, the true blades of Saffron, which picked thence and pressed between
two papers, and so dried is the Saffron, that is Sold in Shops; the roots are
bigger than any other kind and covered with a hairy skin, distinguishing them
from the rest.

Crocus pirenaeus purpureus, the purple mountain Crocus rises like a Colchicum
before the leaves, with one, sometimes two flowers one after the other,
standing on long foot stalks, of a violet purple color, near as large as the
biggest purple of the spring, with yellow chives, and long feathered top,
pointed in the middle; the green leaves succeed the flowers, sometimes before
Winter, but most usually not till the Spring, the Root small and white.

Crocus Byzantinus Argenteus: The Silver colored Autumn Crocus, with the three
outward leaves silver color, the other three more white and lesser.

Crocus Montanus Autumnalis: The Autumn Mountain Crocus of a pale bleak blew
color standing on short foot stalks, scarcely appearing above ground at the
first, but afterward grows a little higher; These two last flower not till the
next month.

Colchicum: The Meadow Saffron, of which there are several sorts worth
collecting.

Colchicum versicolor: The party colored Meadow Saffron, like the Crocus's,
composed of six leaves, some whereof are white, others of a pale purple, some
half white and half purple, with some threads or chieves in the middle like
Spring Crocus. The flowers appear before the leaves that are of a dark brown
color at first, rising about the end of February, but at Spring are large,
long, and green, from the middle of which the seed Vessel appears, containing
round brown seeds, the root like a Tulips, but larger, having a long eminence
at the bottom, whence its fibers shoot into the ground,

Colchicum variegatum: The variegated Meadow Saffron, in every leaf pale blush
and deep purple, another of this kind of a sadder purple and blush.

Colchicum variegatum dictum Aggrippina: A newer flower, white and red striped
like a Tulip.

Colchicum frittillaricum Neapolitanum: Checkered Meadow Saffron of Naples,
deep purplish red flowers, checquered like a frittillary.

Colchicum frittilaricum Chiense: The Checquered Meadow Saffron of Chio, of a
pale purple color, thick spotted and checkered with bluish purple, small but
beautiful flowers, the root small and tender.

Colchicum flore pleno: The double Meadow Saffron, like the common one in
color, but very double, and of a pale purplish color: There is another double
one of a deeper purple.

Colchicum variegatum flore pleno: The double variegated Meadow Saffron, some
of the leaves whereof are striped and guarded with white upon the pale blush.

Colchicum maximum: flore pleno: The greatest double Meadow Saffron of a pale
purplish blush color, spreading open, and transcending any of the double kinds.

These are to be set about the end of August, and will flower some in
September, the rest the month following, and after their green leaves having
appeared and dried down, the roots are to be taken up, and ordered as other
bulbous roots; by sowing their seeds, may you raise other rarities.

OCTOBER.
BEcause I find no Plant in this month begins to flower that is worth our
notice, its room shall be taken up in describing a Plant, that is always in
flower, and how to order that and its nice attendants, viz.

Mala Arantia: The Orange-tree, which in Spain and other hot Countries grow to
tall and fair Trees, but with us the highest to a Man's height, (that I have
seen or heard of.) The bark of the Elder boughs is brown, and the younger
green, with some thorns, large leaves of a fresh shining green color, twining
a little like Ivy, with many small holes in them, of a strong sweet scent, and
never falling till new thrusts them off; the flowers are of a whitish color
and very sweet, followed by small round green fruit, which in time grows to be
somewhat large, and of a yellowish red color, as most know, though not the
Tree.

The Orange Tree being one of the finest greens, and as tender as any: I shall
here name the most tender that must be housed, with care in Winter, and how to
order them, after I have mentioned our common greens that grow without that
care.

With the least care
Yew The Fir Tree of Life Cypress Stone crop Tree Evergreen Oak Holly Laurel
Bays Holy Holly Box, and Gilded Evergreen Hathorn Staff Tree Privet Phillirea
Spanish broom English broom Gosse.
With more Care
Phillirea striped. Laurus Tinus of several sorts. Mirtles of diverse sorts.
Yellow Indian Gessimine. The Rose Bay, or Oleander. The Indian Bay.
With most Care.
Lemons and Oranges.
To save room, we will here name other nice Plants, that must have the like
care: the same directions for some will serve them all, viz.

The bloody double Wall Flower. Amomum plinii. Geranium nocte olens. Tuberose
Hyacinth. Blew Borage leaved Auricula. Bears Ear Sanicle. Marum. Marum
Syriacum, etc.
These plants are set in Cases and with Oranges, and other tender Plants housed
in Winter, and increased by layers; the best time to Transplant the hardier
ones, is about the tenth of March, for the more tender, to be set in Cases the
end of April; the earth fit for them, is the digested Earth of a Melon Bed,
equally mixed with fine loamy earth, lying and often turned the foregoing
Winter, and sifted through a wyre Sieve e're put in your Cases, for want of
which Neats dung rotted and mixed as before filling the bottoms of your pots
and Cases, with any kind of rubbidge, that will ly hollow to draw the wet from
the earth above them, that will else rot their roots, and if ye mix the whole
earth with little sticks to make it lie light and hollow, it will be the
better; then taking your plant, cut the roots a little, especially at the
bottom, spreading the roots, set it not too deep, rather let some of the root
appear; and lastly, settle it with Temperate water (not too much) set them in
the shade for twelve days, and afterward expose them to the Sun.

The last April, I had sent me several sorts of cuttings of Mirtles, I prepared
my Pots to receive them thus, Old Neats dung beaten small and an equal share of
good loamy earth with a little Willow earth and Sun water, mixed to the
consistence of that is called a stir pudding, three parts of the Pots, the
forth the same mixture without water, and with a dipper run them almost to the
top therein; by September following I found most of them had well rooted just
betwixt the moist and dry mixtures, this Experiment I tried, tho never heard of
before, and thought good here to mention it.

The beginning of May, give all your housed Plants fresh earth, taking out of
the tops of your Pots and Cases the old earth three or four fingers deep, and
loosening the rest with a Fork or some fit Instrument, so as not to hurt or
prejudice the roots, then fill them up with your best and richest soil, half
Neats dung well rotted, consumed, and mixed, that has been preserved for such
uses, that the Virtue may be washed down into the rest of the earth to nourish
and comfort your plants: water them as the dryness of the season requires with
discretion: Sprinkling your greens all over with your water Pots of clear
water, 'twill make them have the more delicate luster.

Your Mirtles will show finely intermixed with your Posts of Julie flowers.

About the middle of Agust is your secure season, for removing and laying your
Perennial greens, Oranges, Lemons, Mirtles, Phillireas, Oleanders, Jessemines,
Arbutes, and other rare shrubs, as Pomegranates, best Roses, etc. by taking the
shoots and branches of the last Spring, and pegging them down with a
hook-stick, in very rich earth (but it must be perfectly consumed, watering
them on all occasions in Summer; that time twelve Month, they will be prepared
for a removal, which must be in fit earth, and set in the shade, kept
moderately moist, not over wet, lest ye rot the young fibers; within three
weeks after expose them to some more airy place, and a little of the morning
Sun but not a full Sun till a fortnight after.

About Mihacelmas (according as the season admonishes) in a fair and clear day
your rarest greens and plants being dry, lodge them in their Winter quarters,
your green house; recruiting them with fresh earth (as in May) to nourish them
all Winter, leaving at first your Doors and Windows open, giving them all the
air you can, unless the Winds be sharp, and Foggy weather; enclose them by
degrees, unless the Frosts force you to do it sooner, and enclose them by
shutting up Windows and Doors together; Mirtles are more hardy and will endure
out till the next month after.

When the cold comes on, set such plants that will not endure housing, into
holes made in the earth two or three inches lower than the surface thereof,
under some South wall or pale, covering them with sweet and dry moss, and then
putting Glasses over them, in all warm and Sunshine days or in gentle and
sweet showers, give them air by wholly uncovering them; thus may you preserve
your precious Marum Siriacum, Cistus's, Geranium nocte Olens, Flor Cardinalis,
Maracocs seedling, Arbutus, choicest Ranunculus and Anemonies, etc. Thus
governing them till April, and then about again as before taught, unless you
have or do find out better ways which I should be glad to be informed of; but
remember that in November you so seclude out all cold, you can out of your
green house or conservatory, by close stopping all chinks by laying Straw and
Mats, where cold may enter, for if it freez in your Conservatory (for which you
must set a bole of water on purpose to know) kindle some Charcoal, and put them
in a hole sunk a little into the floor about the middle of it; if the Plants be
exceeding dry, and it do not freez, refresh them sparingly with qualified
water, i. e. mingled with a little Sheeps or Cow dung, but then take heed of
wetting the leaves therewith: at all times when the air is warmed by the beams
of the Sun, in a fine day the Sun darting on the house, open your Windows and
Doors that way, but shut them again before the Sun be off; observe also that it
is better to give housed plants too little water than too much, and that Aloes
or Sedums musthave none at all.

NOVEMBER. In this Month is,
ARbutus, the Strawbury Tree in its greatest glory; the body has a rough but
the branches a smooth Bark, with leaves alternately green like the Bays,
finely purled about the edges, long yet round pointed, the flowers grow on the
ends of the branches, with long stalks and are small little white bottles, like
those of the Lilly of the Valley, which are of little beauty, but succeeded by
red berries like to Straw-berries, harsh in taste, containing small and many
seeds: the whole rises not here to two yards high, its usual height in its
native Country Ireland; the berries are its beauty, ripe in this Month: and
therefore herein placed, which being mixed with its fine green leaves, are very
delightful to the eye; young Plants are raised from seeds, and some by layers,
but long e're they root, and when removed, the earth must be taken up with them
and carefully planted, being nice whilst young, but elder are hardy, and will
prosper under any warm Wall.

DECEMBER.
HElleborus niger verus, the true black Hellebor, from a root of many long
brown strings, running deep in the ground, and fastened to a big head, springs
up many green leaves, standing on big stiff foot stalks, divided into eight or
nine parts, nicked about the edges, the flowers come forth in this month upon
short foot stalks, shaped like single white Roses, at first white, at last turn
to a blush color with a pale yellow thrum, and a green head in the middle; by
many called the Christmas Rose.

Of watering Plants.
Now for the watering all the foregoing Plants and Flowers observe with me.

If you fear dry weather, do not defer too long before you water, but do it
gently before the earth is too dry, consideration had to the depth of your
roots and those that are deepest water most; and when you begin to water
continue it as long as you find occasion.

Use not Well water, for tender Plants, for it is so strained thorough the
earth or rather barren Sands or Rocks, and for want of the Sun so chill and
cold, that having no nourishment, rather the contrary, does more hurt than
good; Rivers that run quick and long on sharp gravel are little better, but if
you are forced to use such, let it stand sometime in Tubs in the Sun mixed with
Dung.

Let the quantity and quality of the Dung mixed with the water, be according to
the nature of your plants; if your Plants be great growers and require heat,
then put Horse-dung in your water: If your water be bad, then put dung into it
to help it; Let it stand in the Sun and open Air uncovered: If your Plants be
fine and tender; then put Sheep or Cowes dung, Deer or Asses dung in to the
water; the worse the ground and more barren, be sure to put in the more Dung.
Take care you water no Plants with standing stinching Ditch water, nor no water
that stinketh; for sweet water, (not too clear) and fresh mould (not musty or
tainted by stinking weeds) is as proper for tender Plants, as sweet and good
food, warm and clean lodging, for tender and fine bred persons.

Rain water is very good if not too long kept, but if your Vessel be large, the
oftener you stir it the longer it will keep sweet.

Large and Navigable Rivers, that receive much soil by washing streets, and the
many sinks that run into it, and which by its own motion does cleanse it self
from that which is noxious, both to man and plants, is an excellent water for
all sorts of plants.

The larger the Ponds be, the better the water is for Plants, the opener to the
Sun the better, the more motion they have, by horses washing in them, or Geese
and Ducks swimming, it is so much the better.

Water all seeds with the smallest or rain-like drops you can, and not too much
at a time or to fiercely, lest you discover them.

For Flowers and Plants whose leaves lie on the ground, water them at some
distance, by making a hollow Circle about the plant and pouring water into it,
by which means you avoid annoying the leaves by discoloring water, or chilling
the roots by too sudden coldness.

Use not any Liquors, for watering either naturally hot as Spirits, or
artificially made so by heating over the Fire.

In Summer time or all warm Seasons, the Evening is best for watring, because
the Water will have time to sink into the Earth, and the Plant attract it,
before the Suns heat exhales it; But in Winter or cold Weather, the Morning is
the most proper time, that the superfluous moisture may be evaporated ere the
cold Night overtake you, and Chill perhaps kill a tender Plant.

A Plant that delights in moisture, or a drooping Plant that you think water
will preserve, may be watered by filtration, i. e. set an earthen, or wooden
Vessel on a Brick full of Water near your Plant, that all the Water may be
higher than the Earth; wet a thick woollen List, put one end with a Stone or
bit of Lead to it into the Water, that it may keep to the bottom; lay the other
end on the Ground near the Root of the Plant, and the Water will distill out of
the Boul or Pot through the List, because that part of it out of the Pot of
Water, hangs lower than that within, etc. All sorts of fibrous Roots are
assured in their growth by convenient watring; but for bulbous and tuberous
Roots, the Gardiners hand ought to be more sparing.

To know the particular Flowers that will alter for the best.
Experience gives us this Truth, that such Flowers as differ in number of
leaves, in shape, in colors; the Seeds of such will produce Flowers much
different from the ordinary kind of Flowers, tho produced all of one Flower but
a year or two before: Nay, a particular Flower among many other of one Plant,
shall bring more double ones, than twenty others that are not qualified as it;
and is, or ought to be known to all that raise Flowers; as for Example, the
Stock-Gilly flower that has five, six or more leaves, the Seed of such a
particular Flower or Flowers, will produce more double ones, than those Plants
that bring forth but four leaves, quantity for quantity of Seed, twenty for
one. This Flower indeed shows it more than any other I know; for having no
Thrum in the middle as many others have, Nature has given it this sign to
inform us, that those that have a leaf or leaves added to it more than its
usual kind, will bring forth those with many leaves, and make a fine double
Flower; which when it has attained to, it then is come to the bounds of
Nature, it neaver bears Seeds more, but by endeavoring, blows it self to
death.

If you be curious, as Florists ought to be, you may observe the same Rule in
several other Flowers that have no Thrum in the middle; as Auricula's,
Primroses, Wall-flowers, Campians, etc. When you find one or more leaves than
your ordinary number, you may conclude, there Nature has set one step forward
in altering from the ordinary kind; There a Lover of Plants should be diligent,
and whenever you see your Mistress Nature, (for Florists are her Servants)
step out of door, (like Gentleman Usher) wait upon her to her journeys end; For
it is on the diligent she bestows her favors. Those Flowers also which bear
Seeds when double, as the Gillyflower, Affrican, etc. sowing the Seeds of such
double Flowers, they will bring you more and better flowers, a hundred to one
than single ones; and in sowing the Seed of such, you shall have several
varieties, but most marked with the color of the Mother-Plant; and some of
these will run as it were beyond the limits of Nature, and then they will
break, or have Pods in the middle, and then never bear seed more. Julyflowers
have also their sign, which will bear Seed and which will not: Those that will
bring seed (if weather and other accidents hinder not) have their Horns in the
middle of the Flower: It is observed also in the marking of flowers, that the
seed of those that be striped, shall bring the most striped ones, and some of
different colors and stripes their seed all alike.

There Is Places of sowing and setting.
Now care must be had in sowing seed, or at least in setting, where you intend
that they shall thrive; that the ground bear the best proportion that may be to
the places, and the particular Minera, Vein or Nature, or quality of the
places, where such Plants in other parts used to grow; not to put mountainous
Plants in low and moist grounds, etc.

For Bogg-Plants require when they be transplanted into Gardens, either a
natural or artificial Bogg, or to be placed near some water by which there is
great improvement of all sorts of Flaggs, and particularly Calamus Aromaticus,
the Aromatical Reed.

The Artificial Bog is made by digging a hole in any stiff clay ground; or
there may be Clay brought in, and laid to bind the Hole or Pit, in the bottom
or floor, and the fides likewise; so thick, that the moisture may not be able
to get through; and filled with such Earth and water, (tho I would have the
Earth richer) as may make a like consistence to the Bogg where the Plants you
set in it did at first and naturally grow.

Requisites for the manner of laying.
1. To laying, it is necessary that in its due season, you cut the thing you
lay, after the manner you cut July flowers, in laying them, unless in some
Plants that take any way as Vines; and it is so much the better, if in Roses
and other Layers of a woody substance, with an Aul you prick the Stock at the
place laid, as it is done by circumposition, that is the Mould is born up to
the Bough, which is to be taken off; which is done in the Spring before the
Saprises, in February, or beginning of March.

2. During the time of Drought, water continually, i. e. every day, otherwise
they will make no exact Roots, only a Knob or Button, full of fresh Sap upon
the Tongue of the Cut in the Branch laid down; yet those Branches cut off, with
watering in the Summer, have grown well enough after their transplantation.

3. The Seasons most fit for this operation are in the beginning of Spring, or
declension of the torrid or greaer heat of Summer, that they may enjoy the
moisture of such Seasons most proper for the enticing forth of Roots, and most
safe from excessive heat or cold.

Of making of Sets by Art.
Nature usually provides this way of propagation, without the Wit or Industry
of Man called to her assistance; but that not generally in all Plants, nor
always in any one; therefore well worth learning of those that delight in
Gardens, to know any means to enlarge this way of propagation beyond the bounds
it is carried to by Nature's course. And it is done by baring the Roots of
Plants of woody substance, and then making a Cut of the same fashion with that
which is made in Layings, not toward but fromwards the Plant: Into this Clift
a Stone must be put, or something that will make the Root gape and the part cut
stand upwards: Then cover the Root over three Inches with light Mould, and the
Lip that was lifted up will sprout into Branches, the Root of the old Tree
nourishing it: When the Branches are grown, cut off this Plant with its Roots
to live of its self; if you can, leave an Eye on the Lip of your Root, which
you after the incision lift up, and the Branches will the more speedily and
certainly issue out of the Root so cut: This is called starting a a Root, In
Bulbous Roots, Ferarius makes Off* sets thus; if (says he) a Bulbous Root is
barren of Offsets, with your Nail lightly cut it upon the bottom in the Crown
of the Root whence the Fibers spring, and sprinkle some dry Dust upon it as
Medicine to the Wound, and the effect he affirms to be this, that so many
Wounds as you shall make, in so many Offsets shall the genital Virtue dispose
it self; but of this have I not yet made any trial, tho one may build upon the
Authors Authority.

To change the Colors of several Flowers whilst in the blosom.
Burn Brimstone under Roses, you shall according to the time you apply this
Fume to them, find the Tips or most of their Leaves change color.

To any Flower of a purple color as Tulips, Crocus, Hyacinth, Iris, etc. If a
Pencil dipped in Spirit of Vitriol, and stroakt along the leaves of such colored
Flowers, or that part where the Flowers are so colored, where the Vitriol
remains shall presently be turned to a delicate and rich Scarlet, to the
admiration of those that understand it not, passing by a Flower, and at their
return, to find it thus richly marked contrary to their first Observation: but
take notice leaves so served next day shall wither.

The only necessary thing, left untaught, that I at present think on, is the
making of your Hot Beds.

Waving the new inventions of Mr. Ev'lins and others, there is none found so
good for all conveniences, as the old way of raising them above ground, and
making them in such a place, that when they grow cold they may be heated again
by fresh muck, thrown up to every side.

Directions for making a hot Bed.
THe Hot-Bed is thus made, in some convenient place in your Nursery, open to
the Sun, and so as that fresh dung may be laid up to every side when grown cold
to heat it again. Let your Horse dung, be thrown up in one Corner of your
stable, till you have a quantity sufficient and proportionable to the length
and bigness of your Bed, intended to be made; which must be suitable to the
quantity of seeds you have to sow on it.

Let stakes be knocked into the ground four foot asunder, at each end in
breadth, the length at your pleasure and occasion, fill up both ends and sides
with stakes a yard above ground, about a foot asunder, and wind them round with
Rods or ropes made of Hay or Straw, then fill it with Horse dung and wet Litter
two foot high sutably, and tread it equally close and hard down, then raise it
two foot higher with the same kind of new Horse dung, which tread as the
former, the whole of an equal hardness; thus do till its yard high at least;
after well trod, let some boards or board Laths be laid round on the top
edgewise, to keep in the rich sifted earth, that is to be laid over your bed
four inches thick, that of an old hot bed well rotted, or the best mould you
can get; put small Poles or Hazel rods, archwise over it, the ends stuck in on
each side, for the supporting of Mats, Haircloth, or Canvas, that must be laid
over it, that will cause it heat the sooner; when the violence thereof is over,
which you may feel with your finger, it being to be little more than bare warm;
then sow and set your seeds: as Amaranths Flos africanus, Nasturtium Indicum;
Mirabilia peruviana, sensible and humble Plants, Melons, Cucumbers, etc. and
when they come up, be sure to give them air, or else they will presently turn
yellow and spoil, your choicest seeds, cover them with glasses from the Sun, a
little from the earth to give them air, and some part of the day take raise
them off to acquaint them with the Sun by degrees, which grown strong, remove
them into rich earth, in your Garden, keeping them from the midday Sun, till
well settled and rooted, by often, but gentle watering.

There ought to be a Summer house so situated in your Garden that the beauties
thereof may be in view. Here may we sit, and each his time purloin,
And see our Art, with Madam Nature join;
And how the Jewels that adorn the skies,
Or what shines brighter, Ladies beateous Eyes
Cannot be compared to Flora's Mantle, that
She throws on earth, and Mortals wonder at;
Embroidered Tellus does her Glory sing
As well as Birds at the approach of Spring,
And we with ravished eyes, see Flora smile,
Whilst chirping Music does our Ears beguile:
Feel sofiest down, in tender buds of Roses,
Arabian smells in her perfumed posies.
To exercise our taste, Pompona she
Sends us the Juicy Offsprings of each Tree:
But when this sensual-banquet we have done,
On winged thoughts sore higher than the Sun;
And then contemplate how the three in One
All mortal actions view from his bright throne:
And thence resolve, our Selves as Gardens keep;
Pluck up the weeds of sin, 'soon as they peep.
His Graces be our flowers; for wat'ring pots
Our Eye, often letting fall repentant drops;
That cause those flowers increase, and give occasion
For our removal to a new Plantation.
Each day concluding, with account made even,
To have no Walks, but those that lead to Heaven;
Such as in Gardens innocence employ,
That virtues raise, so vices must destroy.
Then Gardener of Universe, his powers
Pluck not as weeds, but take us up as Flowers.


AN APPENDIX To the Treatise of Auricula's, partly an Advertisement to the
Reader.
HAving in the forgoing Tract mentioned a rare Florist, and as rarely qualified
with all other acquired and natural parts, becoming a complete gentleman, viz.
Peter Egerton of Boughton near Chester, Esquire: I cannot but let every Lover
of Flowers know his removed abode, to his estate at the Hall of Shaw near
Manchester in Lancashire, where he will keep up (and increase as new faces
appear) his choice Collection of Plants and Flowers. The last April I waited on
him, before he removed from Boughton, and there found many Auricula's, that
were not mentioned in this compendium, and also three or four that I afterward
saw in the Palace Garden at Worcester, belonging to Mr. Thomas Newton,
Gentleman to my very Good Lord, the Right Reverend Father in God James Lord
Bishop of Worcester. So that from Mr. Egertons Collection, who was the best
Florist in Cheshire, and has the same pre-eminence in Lancashire, and Mr.
Newton, who may challenge the same, for skill in Worstershire, and my self in
Shropshire, and consequently from the choicest Collections in these nations, I
desire you accept the ensuing, Catalogue of the best single striped, double,
and double striped Auricula's: Mr. Egerton has them all, except the liver
colored and ^^how double, and my self the same excepting the last mentionin'd,
three double one, and the last double striped one, most by his free and
generous community, yet made him what return I could, being better stockt in
other species than he was.

Single striped Auricula's.
1. Purple and Lemmon color, an old flower well striped small eye and quickly
washes. 2. Fine violet and white. 3. Fine sky and white. 5. Philemot some
stripes of yellow, bad Eye. 5. Hair color with some stripes of a lighter. 6.
Needle work, pale peach and white in small streaks. 7. Hair color and Lemmon,
well marked, good Truss flowers large, and white Eye, but sometimes come all
yellow. 8. Hair color and Lemmon well marked and good eye, but every way less
than the former. 9. Dark murrish Crimson and Gold color, well marked and good
Truss. 10. Deep Crimson and Gold color, rarely marked, with a large sparkling
snow white Eye. 11. Deep purple and straw color, good Eye. 12. Scarlet and
Gold color, large Truss well marked and fine white Eye. 13. Winsor Auricula,
Crimson and Gold color. 14. Brick color and yellow, well marked, large Truss
and good Eye. 15. Crimson and yellow very large flower, and large white Eye,
good Truss, well marked. 16. Dull flesh color and pale Lemmon.
Raised the last Year by himself.
17. Mr. Egertons darling, purple and yellow a large flower. 18. -- -- His
delight, differs only in the purple, being murrish purple and Lemmon. 19. His
flesh and straw color. 20. Buff Lemon and green.
Double Auricula's.
1. Double yellow. 2. Double Buff. 3. Double Crimson. 4. Double hair color. 5.
Double yellowish green. 6. Double reddish liver color. 7. Double Liver color.
8. Double bluish purple, which I saw Mr. Egerton measure by a new half Crown,
without the least pressing the leaves, and it proved near a straw breadth
broader round the half Crown. 9. Double Pease blossom color, but little less
than the former. 10. Double murrish red, a fine flower.
Double striped Auricula's.
1. Double Liver color and yellow, a good flower, large. 2. Double Crimson and
yellow, a delicate flower. 3. Double purple and yellow, the best and dearest.
Let me advise those that can obtain it to mix Sea Sand with their sally earth,
and rotted with Neats dung, in equal proportions for their composition, for to
set their Auricula's in, and put in large Boxes yard and half long, something
above half yard wide and one foot high, they will thrive the better, having
more liberty to draw nourishment than earthen pots, or little square Boxes; and
to set but three in a row for the breadth, and so proportionably for the
length. The scarlet double Cowslip, or Oxslip, Peagle or Polyander, take it by
what name you please, I found with Mr. Newton, and obtained it of him; it is
large, very double, opens well, and of a deep scarlet. Several Oxslips or
Polianthus's I have very large hose in hose, of deeper and lighter reds, one
fine crimson one, the lowermost flower has the leaves striped through with
white, others of lighter colors striped with Cream color, another of the
common color hose in hose edged round each leaf with scarlet, the lowest
flower striped through with white, all these I had of the generous Mr. Egerton,
whose sweet conditioned Lady, I must here remember.

To the incomparable virtuous and discreetly obliging, Madam, Mary Egerton,
worthy Consort to the truly Honored Peter Egerton of Shaw-Hall near Manchester
in Lancashire, Esquire.
As Heliotrope all day turns to the Sun
In gratitude obliged that course to run,
Raised to a stately height, by's influence
Bows head to him shows it is obligement thence;
So this small book of flowers, the choice of which
Your free dispose it is Author did enrich
Who, tho but poor in thanks, yet not inured
To let them lie in Mudwal breast obscured;
Nature in this spring time, throws through the Clay,
Which to some sprouts of gratitude give way:
My Heart as flowers, their Topsails lower to you,
Commandress over both; I therefore Sue,
Before I close, to fix your Name, of power
To raise the heads and beauty of each flower:
And if the only name, such wonders show,
What must the thing, the lovely person do?
So mild, so sweet, that does all virtues share?
Why? Qualify in temperate and harsh Air,
Of those that breath out naught, but scorn and slight
Upon the harmless subject that I write.
You, Madam, laid the Scene, first act your part,
With such pure innocence, such pretty Art,
Though Egerton your head; you lead the way,
His were the other four Acts of the Play;
By such a fair example as was yours,
He rose to his great Mastery in Flowers;
As with pleased Flora, has such favor won
That she adopts you Daughter, he her Son.
And blush not, Madam, that you here are placed,
Nor think your famed repute one jot defaced:
For all men know, at every gentile Feast,
The Last Course is the choicest and the best:
To leave the better taste, I Have boldness ta'n,
As perfumed sweetmeats, to serve in your Name:
Then with raised confidence and doubts suppressed
I bid my Readers welcome to the Feast.
FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
A Conite vide Wolfsbane. African Marigold. Page 209 Alaternus. 207 Althea
fruticosa. 218 Amaranths. 212 Amomum plinii. 231 Anemonies. single self
colors, 100 single striped, 101 double self colors, ibid. double striped. 102
Arbutus. 237 Arbor vitae. 212 Asses dung 5 Asphodils: 172 Auricula's, single
self colors, 43, 44, 57 single striped, 46 double self colors, 49 double
striped. 50

B
Balaustium, vide Pomegranate. Bay Tree. 203 Rose Bay. 205 Rean Trefoil. 26
Bears ears vide Auricula's. Bears ear Sanicle. 57 Be flowers. 131 Bell
flowers* 37 Bindweed. 45 Blew Bottles. 54 Double Virgins Bower. 199 Single
Virgins Bower. ib. Box and Gilded. 130 Flower of Bristow. 174 Brcom Spanish.
230
C
Caceolus Mariae, Ladies Slipper. Campions. 110 Candy Tuffs. 108 Celastrus, the
Cardinals Flower. 184 Chalkie Land to improve. 3 Cherry double blossomed 61
Cistus Mas. 181 Cistus Ledon. ib. Claiy Land to improve. 3 Colchicum vide
Meadow Saffron. Columbines. 120 Corn flag. 173 Convolunlus. 154 Cortusa
Mathiole vide Bears Ear Sanicle. Cowslips, single self colors, 22 hose in hose
self colored, ib. Double several sort. ib.
Indian Cresses. 210 Crocus. 15, 226 Crown Imperial, common 58 common striped,
ib. yellow, 59 double yellow. 60
Cyclamen, vide Sow bread. Cypress. 230 Cytisus, vide Bean Trefoyl. Cytisus
Lunatus. 131
D
Daffodils. 32 Daizies double. 74 Deers dung. 4 Dittany. 179 Dog tooth violet.
55 Dog fennel double. 83
E
Earth to enrich by mixtures. 8 Eugh Tree. 145 Experiments. 158, 232
F
Indian Fig. 182 Fir Tree. 230 Corn Flag. 173 Flower-de-luce. 136 Fraxinella
vide Dittany Frittilary. 88
G
Garden Situation. 1 Form 8 contrivance. 9
Gelder Rose. 135 Gentianella. 123 Geranicum. 200 Gilliflowers. 185 Stock
Gilliflowers. 94 Queen Gilliflowers. 176 Gladicolus vide Cornflag. Gnat
flowerr. 131 Goats dung. 4 Grape flowers. 28
H
Hellebor, 183 black, ibid. white. 184
Hepatica, vide Liverwort. 23 Honey Suckle. 119 Holly. striped with yellow, 230
with white ibid.
Horse dung. 3 Hot Beds. 249 Humble plant. 215 Hyacinths. 25, 216 Tuberous. 216
Hypericum frutex. 62
I
Jasmines. 202 Indian, 223, 231 Spanish. ibid.
Ilex vide Evergreen Oak. Sweet John's. Iris. 139 Chalcedonica. 143
Jucca. 200 Junquils. 36
L
Laburnum vide Bean Trefoil. Ladies Slipper. 130 Lady Smocks. 211 Lark spurs.
210 Laurel. 230 Laurus Tinus. 63 Laurus Indica. 205 Lucoium vide Bulbous Violet
and Stock Gilliflower. Lilac. 62 Lillies. 162 Liverwort vide Hepatica, 23 Loamy
Land. 4
M
Shrub Mallow 96 Maracoc 220 Marly Lands improvement. 3 Martagons. 164 Marsh
Marigold. 64 Marvail of Peru. 211 Marum Syriacum, Or Assyrian Mastick. 225
Mastick Thime. 135 Meadew Flower. 227 Mezereon. 14 Moly. 168 Mud of Ponds. 5
Muscaries, vide Grape flowers. Mirtles. 222
N
Narcissus, vide Daffodils. Nasturtium Indicum, 210 Neats dung. 5 Nigella
Fennel flower. 179 Night shade. 68 Noli me tangere. 215 Non such, flower of
Bristol. 174
O
Oleander, vide Rose Bay. Orange Tree. 229. Ornathogalon, vide Star flower.
P
Paliurus. 157 Peach tree, double blossom. 168 Pease everlasting. 108 Peony.
117 Periploca. 201 Periwinckle gilded. 65 Phyllirea. 224 gilded.
Pigeons dung. 5 Pipe Tree. 132 Platanus. 95 Pomegranates. 219 Poppies. 178
Primroses, 20 single self colored, ibid. hose in hose self colored, 21 hose
in hose striped, ib. double several sorts. 22
Princes feather, vide Amaranth.
R
Ranunculus. 111 Reed Indian. 183 Roses, and their varieties, 147 their
ordering. 150, etc.

S
Saffron Flower or Meadow Saffron. 227 Sandy Land it is improvement. 3 Satin
flower. 46 Sawdust. 5 Satyrious. 131 Scarlet beams. 36 Sensible plant. 215
Sheeps dung. 4 Snow drops, vide Bulbous Violet. Sowbread. 206 Spider wort. 172
Spiraea frutex. 220 Star flower of Arabia. 131, 216 of Ethiopia 216
Stock Gilliflowers. 94 Strawberry Tree 237 Sultans flower, vide Musk Scabious.
Swines Dung. 4 Syringa, vide Lilac.
T
Mastick Thime. 47 Tulips, 65 their several varieties, 10. how to order and
sow. 75

V
Violet Bulbous. 13, 92 Virginian silk. 201
W
Walks of Gravel to make. 6. 10. Wall flowers. 98 Waters, 238, 239 and watering
241 by filtration. ib.
Watering pots. Sweet William, 177 Winter Greens. 230 Rotten wood. 5 Woodbinds,
vide Honisuckles. Wolfs-bane. 14
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for, and sold by Thomas Simmons, at
the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street.
A Synopsis of Heraldry, or the most plain, short and easy way, for the
perfect attaining of that Art; containg all necessary directions, in order
thereunto, there being about 300 Coats of Arms, and about 50 Crests engraven
upon Copper Plates, etc. the Achievements of the Kings of England, since King
Egbart of the Saxon Race. The Paternal Coats of the Nobility of England (with a
list of the Knights of the Garter) the Arms of the Archiepiscopal and Episcopal
Sees, and of the two Universities, and the several Colleges in them; and of
the Inns of Court. and other houses of Law in London; with some hundreds of
Gentlemen's Coats, all truly Blazoned. To which is added an Alphabetical Table,
for the ready finding any name whose Coat is herein Blazoned, in Octavo, price
bound, 3s. 6d.

A Genealogy of the Successions of the Kings of England, from William the
Conqueror unto our King, Charles the Second, Printed upon a large sheet of
Imperial Paper, and adorned with all the Royal Atchivements, Crowns, Arms, etc.
Supporters, all which are truly Blazoned for their sakes, who are Lovers of
Heraldry, a work highly useful for the Reader of our English History, being so
contrived, that by the particular directing lines he will easily see how each
King has laid claim to this Crown; it is curiously Engraven'd; and nothing
omitted that might render it very ornamental; first Collected and then Revised
by Edward Cook of the Middle Temple, Esquire, Price 1s. 6d.

An Historical account of the wonderful Cures wrought by Scarborough Spaw, on
several persons afflicted with Scurvy, Stone, Jaundice, Dropsy, etc. Together
with an account of many Strange Rarities of nature found at Scarborough, Price
1s.

An account of the late Reverend and worthy Doctor George Senior, Fellow of
Trinity College in Cambridge, in remarks on the material passages of his Life
and Death, written by James Fawket, M. A. Price 8d. in Twelves.

Englands improvement by Sea and Land, the second part, containing, first an
account of its Situation and the Growths and Manufactures thereof: Secondly,
the benefit and necessity of a voluntary Register: Thirdly, a method for
improving the Royal Navy, lessening the growing power of France, and obtaining
the fishery: 4. Proposals for fortifying and securing Tangier, so that no Enemy
shall be able to attaque it. 5. Advantageous Proposals for the City of London,
for the preventing of Fires and Massacres therein, and for the lessening the
great charge occasioned by the keeping up of the Trained Band. 6. The way to
make a new Haven in Sussex, fit to receive Ships of Burden. 7. Seasonable
discourses, of the Tin, Iron, Linen and Woollen Trades, with advantageous
proposals for the improving them; all illustrated with several large Copper
Plates, by Andrw Yarran, Price 4s. in Quarto.

Patriarcha non Monarcha, the Patriarch unmonarch'd, being observations on a
late Treatise, and other Miscellanies, Published under the name of Sir Robert
Filmer Baronet, in which the falseness of those opinions, that would prove
Monarchy Jure divino, are laid open: and the true principles of Government, and
property especially in our Kingdom asserted, by a Lover of Truth and of his
Country, Price 2s. 8d. in Octavo.

Memorabilia, or the most remarkable passages and Counsels Collected out of
several declarations and speeches that have been made by the King, his Lord
Chancellors and Keepers, and the Speakers of the Honorable House of Commons in
Parliament, since his Majesty's happy Restoration Anno 1660. till the end of
the last Parliament 1680, Produced under four Heads, viz. 1. of Protestant
Religion, 2. Of Popery, 3. Of Liberty and Property, etc. 4. Of Parliaments, by
Edward Cook Esquire, Price 3s. in Folio

The Samaritan, showing that many and unnecessary Impositions are not the Oil
that must heal the Church, together with the way or means to do it: by a
Country Gentleman who goes to Common Prayer, and not to meetings.

A modest answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Irenicum by a Learned Pen, in Octavo,
Price bound 2s.

A Peaceable Resolution of Conscience touching our present Impositions: wherein
Loyalty and Obedience are proposed and settled, upon their true foundation in
Scripture, Reason, and the Constitution of this Kingdom, against all resistance
of the present powers, and for compliance with the Laws so far as may be in
order, to union, with a draught, or specimen of a Bill for accommodation, in
Octavo, Price bound 2s.

FINIS.
THE GARDENERS ALMANAC For Five Years. Beginning with the year. of our Lord
1683. Ending with the year. of our Lord 1687. SHOWING The Day of the Month and
Week. The Sun and Moons Place each day in the Sign. Break of Day. Sun rise and
set. Length of Day and Night. The Eclipses of the Luminaries every year. The
Moons Quarters, her Change and Full.
With Monthly Directions What ought to be done in either Kitchen or
Flower-Garden for ever, etc.

By Samuel Gilbert, (...).

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Princes Arms on Ludgate Street. 1682.

The REASONS of inserting this ALMANAC, are,
First, THat the Gardener or young Flowerist may do all things in due and fit
Seasons, and the more knowing be each month minded of what he otherwise may
forget, and so be prejudiced in Sowing, Setting, or Removing Plants or Flowers
unseasonably: for the wise Solomon (who was best skilled in all Plants) avers,
That to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
heavens; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted. And as
to Seasons of the year, so,

Secondly, To suitable Aspects and influences of the Planets, the Moon in chief,
as nearest, and under whose influence are the successful growth of most Plants
and Flowers, and their managing to be suited as she is placed in the Signs, or
to her increase, viz. the first quarter, her being in full; her decrease, viz.
the last quarter, new or change; for which reason you are informed of each in
the ensuing Calendar: As for example, in some few particulars following.

1. If you prune your Vines the Moon in full, and posited in Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio, or Sagittary, neither Worms nor Birds will infest your Grapes.

2. Trees are not to be grafted, the Moon wayning or not to be seen.

3. Cut what Trees you would have quickly grow again, when the Moon is above
the Earth, in the first quarter; and if it may be, joined to Jupiter or Venus.

4. Sow or plant when the Moon is in Taurus, Virgo, or Scorpio, and in good
Aspect of Saturn.

5. Set or sow all kind of Pulse the Moon in Cancer.

6. Dress your Gardens, and trim your small Trees and Shrubs, when the Moon is
in Libra or Capricorn.

7. Set or cut any Tree or Shrub that you would have its growth retarded, in
the decrease of the Moon in Cancer.

8. Set, cut, or sow what you would have speedily shoot out again, or spring
and grow, in the increase of the Moon.

9. When you sow to have double Flowers, do it in the full of the Moon; and
when the Plant's grown to a bigness fit to be removed, do it also in a full
Moon, and as often as you transplant them.

10. Neither graft, set, sow, or plant any thing that day whereon there
happens an Eclipse either of Sun or Moon, or when the Moon is afflicted by
either of the Infortunes Saturn or Mars. I might have given you many more; but
these may be sufficient at present. The Explanation of the Calendar, and what
more concerns it, you will find in brief at the end thereof; scarcity of room
forbidding me here any farther demonstrations.

JANUARY has xxxi days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 9 N. 17 Fir. q. 25 New 2 Fir. q. 14 Fu. 22
Last q. 28 Fir. q. 2 Fu 10 La. q. 17 N. 24 Lastq. 7 N. 14 Fir. q 21 Fu 29 N. 3
Fir. q. 10 Fu 18 La. q. 26 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl. set
pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 a 21 8 8 3 52 5 54 8 0 2 b 22 8 6 3 54 3 c 23 8 4 3
56 4 d 24 8 3 3 57 5 e 25 8 2 3 58 6 f 26 8 0 4 0 5 39 8 14 7 g 27 7 59 4 1 8 a
28 7 57 4 3 9 b 29 7 55 4 5 10 c 7 54 4 6 11 d 1 7 52 4 8 5 42 8 20 12 e 2 7 51
4 9 13 f 3 7 49 4 11 14 g 4 7 48 4 14 15 a 5 7 46 4 14 16 b 6 7 45 4 15 5 4 8
42 17 c 7 7 43 4 17 18 d 8 7 41 4 19 19 e 9 7 39 4 21 20 f 10 7 38 4 22 21 g 11
7 36 4 24 5 35 9 0 22 a 12 7 35 4 25 23 b 13 7 33 4 27 24 c 14 7 31 4 29 25 d
15 7 29 4 31 26 e 16 7 27 4 33 5 27 9 16 27 f 17 7 25 4 35 28 g 18 7 24 4 36 29
a 19 7 22 4 38 30 b 20 7 20 4 40 31 c 21 7 18 4 42

In your Orchard and Kitchin-Garden.
Lay bare the roots of your Fruit Trees, and if the weather open, lay
well-digested Muck to them: transplant young Trees, prune the rest, and nail up
your Wall-fruit; cut your Vines close, cleanse your Trees of Moss, by findging
it off with handfuls of bolting Wheat or Rye-straw held flaming to the Bows,
first gathering your Cions for Grafts: turn over your before-mucked ground in
your Kitchin-Garden, also your heaps of mixed Earth and Cow Dung for
Flower-Garden: Set Beans and Pease in open weather to have early; sow Lettice,
Radish, Chervil, Spinach, and other Salating-plants in Hot Beds, which you are
taught to make in the end of the Vade mecum.

In your Flower Garden.
Preserve your best Gilliflowers and Auricula's from too much Wet or Snow, by
laying down the Pots they are planted in; or if in Beds, by supported coverings
at a distance a foot or more: Also what Ranunculus or Anemonies are appearing;
but give them as often as you can in suitable weather, airings, by taking off
their coverings, but when Sun sets, on with them again. Keep your Conservatory
close where the Greens and nice Plants are housed: if it freeze very hard, put
some clear lighted Charcoal in the middle of the Room, a little let into the
ground; and if the Sun shine clear on the windows or doors thereof, open them
to let in his Noon-beams, but be sure to shut them close again as soon as he
declines the door.

FEBRUARY has xxviii or xxix days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 8 N. 16 Fir. q. 24 New 5 Fir. q. 13 Fu. 20
Last q. 27 Fir. q. 1 Fu 9 La. q. 16 N. 23 Last q. 5 N. 12 Fir. q 20 Fu 28 N. 2
Fir. q. 9 Fu 17 La. q. 25 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl. set pl.
Day brek pl. Day long 1 d 22 7 16 4 44 5 15 9 36 2 e 23 7 14 4 46 3 f 24 7 12 4
48 4 g 25 7 10 4 50 5 a 26 7 8 4 52 6 b 27 7 6 4 54 5 8 9 56 7 c 28 7 4 4 56 8
d 29 7 2 4 58 9 e 7 0 5 0 10 f 1 6 58 5 2 11 g 2 6 56 5 4 5 0 10 14 12 a 3 6 54
5 6 13 b 4 6 52 5 8 14 c 5 6 50 5 10 15 d 6 6 48 5 12 16 e 7 6 46 5 14 4 51 10
34 17 f 8 6 44 5 16 18 g 9 6 42 5 18 19 a 10 6 40 5 20 20 b 11 6 38 5 22 21 c
12 6 36 5 24 4 48 10 54 22 d 13 6 34 5 26 23 e 14 6 32 5 28 24 f 15 6 30 5 30
25 g 16 6 28 5 32 26 a 17 6 26 5 34 4 30 11 12 27 b 18 6 24 5 36 28 c 19 6 22 5
38 29

In the Orchard or Kitchin-Garden.
Cover the roots of your Fruit Trees that were before bared, and yet plant
those Trees you could not the last Month; and still be cleansing Trees from
Moss, and the Webs of Caterpillars from the tops of twigs. Begin to graft
Apples, some Pears, Plums, Cherries, etc.

The best way of grafting old Stocks, known by few: Cut the body of the Tree
off four or five foot above the ground; when the head pared, take a small
Gouge, such as Joyners use, with which strike out a small scollop out of the
stake where you intend to place each Graft; then with a suitable Wnimble bore a
hole in every Scollop into the wood of the Stock; then mark your Grafts with
the same Gouge through the Rind, and fit the lower parts of them to the holes,
so as that your Scollops of the Grafts and Stock may join together; then clay
them according to the rule of grafting. Stocks thus grafted shall be covered in
three years, and bear plentifully: the Cions will grow most inward, therefore
prune the inward parts, leaving the outmost sprouts, for spreaders. This way
preserves old moil Trees the longer in being, that otherwise would have
decayed: place Earth a foot length about boughs for circumposition. Sow and set
Beans, Pease, Asparagus, Radish, Parsnips, Carrots, Onions, Garlic. Piant
Cabbage-plants, Potatoes, Parsley, Spinach, and other hardy Pot Herbs.
Transplant your Winter Colliflowers, to have early, into ri^h Soil. Now be
making Hot-beds to sow your Musmellon-seeds, and Cucumbers, at the full Moon in
this Month, which must first be stecped in new Cows-milk twenty four hours;
then placed three in a hole, and the Bed covered, bended or arched Rods over it
to support the covering, which must be Canvas, Hair-cloath, or Mats, etc. till
they peep, which they will in seven days; then uncovered in the Sunshine or
clear Air, but covered again at night. Still keep close your Conservatory,
water Orange Trees, Lemons, etc. with water wherein Sheeps dung has been
steeped two or three days in the Air or Sun, but let it not touch the leaves of
your Plants, for it will destroy them.

In the Flower-garden.
Sow Auricula-seeds in mellow Earth, and but sow the same one thick, place best
Auricula in Pots in the Sun; secure your choice Flowers in Beds with Tiles, if
they appear above ground; and plant some Anemonies the weather open for later
Flowers; place your Boxes, sown with choice Seeds, free from sharp winds, and
secured from too much wet.

MARCH has XXXI days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Full 2 Last q. 9 N. 18 Fir. q. 25 N. 6 Fir. q. 14 Fu
21 La. q. 27 Fir. q. 3 Fu 10 La. q. 17 N. 24 Last q. 7 N. 14 Fir. q. 22 Fu 29
N. 3 Fir. q. 10 Fu 18 La. q. 26 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl. Day on g 1 d 21 ^ 6 19 5 41 5 20 11 21 2 e 22 6 17 5 43 3
f 23 6 15 5 45 4 g 24 6 13 5 47 5 a 25 6 11 5 49 6 b 26 6 9 5 51 5 9 11 44 7 c
27 6 6 5 54 8 d 28 6 4 5 56 9 e 29 6 2 5 58 10 f 6 0 6 0 11 g 1 5 58 6 2 5 59
12 2 12 a 2 5 56 6 4 13 b 3 5 53 6 7 14 c 4 5 51 6 9 15 d 5 5 49 6 11 16 e 6 5
47 6 13 4 54 12 24 17 f 7 5 45 6 15 18 g 8 5 43 6 17 19 a 9 5 41 6 19 20 b 10 5
39 6 21 21 c 11 5 37 6 23 4 34 12 44 22 d 12 5 35 6 25 23 e 13 5 33 6 27 24 f
14 5 31 6 29 25 g 15 5 28 6 32 26 a 16 5 26 6 34 4 21 12 58 27 b 17 5 24 6 36
28 c 18 5 22 6 38 29 d 19 5 20 6 40 30 e 20 5 18 6 42 31 f 21 5 16 6 44

In the Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
Bestir your self now in grafting; and early on good Plum-stocks graft
Apricocks, Nectorines, and Peaches; many may miss, but never all yet with me:
raise up Pots of Earth to convenient branches, which peg down therein, first
slitting the underside where you lay them; they shall by October following,
being often watered, put forth knobs or roots, and both grow when cut off and
well set in rich Earth; and one Tree so taking, is worth ten others, because
each sprout or shoot from the root is the same kind, when those of inoculated
or grafted, are only the Plumbs grafted or inoculated. Stake and bind up weak
Shrubs and Plants; slip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Time (except Mastick,
being too early); sow Endive, Succory, Leeks, Radish, Beets, Parsnips,
Skirrets, Parsley, Sorrel, Buglos, Burrage, Chervils, etc. Sow Lettuce, Onions,
Garlic, Purslain, Turnips, Pease, Carrots, Cabages, Cresses, Fennel, Marjoram,
etc. Transplant Medicinal Plants; string your Strawberry-beds; cover your
Musmelon-plants on your Hot-bed with Beer-glasses till you remove them.

In your Flower-garden.
Sow Auricula-seeds as directed, at Michaelmas; also Sweet Williams,
Wall-flower, Stock- July-flowers, Venus Looking-glass, Candy Tuffs, French
Honisuckles, Primrose and Cowslip-seeds, Larkspurs, Rose-Campions, Lichnis,
Campanula, Indian Scabious, etc. also Pinks, or rather July-flowerseeds; on
your Hot-beds sow flos Africanus or French Marygolds, Amaranths, Narsturtium
Indicum, or Indian Cresses, Mirabilia Peruviana, or Marvail of the World, etc.
Sensible and humble Plants. Transplant July-flowers, Auricula's if occasion,
and all other fibrous rooted Plants, new earthing up your unremoved Auricula's,
July-flowers, etc. pluck up weeds whilst young, after a gentle shower.

APRIL has XXX days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 9 N. 16 Fir. q. 24 Fu 30 N. 4 Fir. q. 12 Fu
19 La. q. 26 Fir. q. 2 Fu 9 La. q. 15 N. 23 Last q. 5 N. 12 Fir. q. 20 Fu 28 N.
2 Fir. q. 9 Fu 17 La. q. 24 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl. set
pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 g 22 5 14 6 46 3 5 13 12 2 a 23 5 12 6 48 3 d 24 5
10 6 50 4 c 25 5 8 6 52 5 d 26 5 6 6 54 6 e 27 5 4 6 56 2 50 13 42 7 f 28 5 2 6
58 8 g 29 5 0 7 0 9 a 30 4 58 7 2 10 b 4 56 7 4 11 c 1 4 54 7 6 2 38 14 0 12 d
2 4 52 7 8 13 e 3 4 50 7 10 14 f 4 4 49 7 11 15 g 5 4 47 7 13 16 a 6 4 45 7 15
2 28 14. 18 17 b 7 4 43 7 17 18 c 8 4 41 7 19 19 d 9 4 39 7 21 20 e 10 4 38 7
22 21 f 11 4 36 7 24 2 2 14 36 22 g 12 4 34 7 26 23 a 13 4 32 7 28 24 b 14 4 30
7 30 25 c 15 4 28 7 32 26 d 16 4 27 7 33 1 50 14 50 27 e 17 4 25 7 35 28 f 18 4
23 7 37 29 g 19 4 22 7 38 30 a 20 4 20 7 40

In the Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
Sow Marjoram, Hysop, Basil, Time, Winter-savory, Scurvigrass, Lettice,
Purslan, Radish, Marigolds, Carnations, etc. Set slips of Artichoaks, Lavender,
Time, Rosemary; set French Beans, remove tender Shrubs, slip them after showets.

In your Flower-garden, or for it.
Continue Hot-beds for Exoticks that arrive not to perfection without them, and
remove them into them, till the Air and common Earth be qualified with
sufficient warmth to preserve them abroad. Take out your Indian Tuberoses,
parting their off-sets (not breaking their fangs) and put them in natural Earth
(not forced) in a Pot; a larger of rich Mould beneath, and about it to nourish
the fibers, but not touch the bulbs: then plunge your Pots in a Hot-bed
temperately warm, giving them no water till they spring, and then put them
under a South-wall; in dry weather water them freely, and expect in August a
rare Flower. Thus treat the Narcissus of Japan, or Garnsey-Lilly for a later
Flower. Put Tilts over your best Tulips, which are commonly set together to be
so served. Begin to open the doors and windows of your Green house, and use the
Inhabitants by degrees to the Air. Shelter your young seedling Auricula's from
hot gleams of the Sun, or expect them all to be killed: What Auricula's that
are striped, that any part of them come of a self-colour, so mark that it may,
if not presently, be parted from the rest: for otherwise 'twill infect the
whole, and after come all of a self-colour, and never return again. Let not
Weeding be forborne.

MAY has XXXI days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 8 N. 16 Fir. q. 23 Fu 30 N. 4 Fir. q. 12 Fu
18 La. q. 26 First q. 1 Fu. 8 La. q. 15 N. 23 Last q. 4 N. 12 Fir. q. 20 Fu 27
N. 1 First q. 9 Fu 17 La. q. 23 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 b 21 4 18 7 42 1 30 15 10 2 c 22 4 17 7 43 3 d
23 4 15 7 45 4 e 24 4 14 7 46 5 f 25 4 12 7 48 6 g 26 4 11 7 49 1 0 15 18 7 a
27 4 10 7 50 8 b 28 4 8 7 52 9 c 29 4 7 7 53 10 d 30 4 6 7 54 11 e 4 4 7 56 0
30 15 36 12 f 1 4 3 7 57 13 g 2 4 2 7 58 14 a 3 4 0 8 0 15 b 4 3 59 8 1 16 c 5
3 58 8 2 15 48 17 d 6 3 57 8 3 18 e 7 3 56 8 4 19 f 8 3 55 8 5 20 g 9 3 53 8 7
21 a 10 3 52 8 8 No Night. 15 58 22 b 11 3 51 8 9 23 c 12 3 50 8 10 24 d 13 3
49 8 11 25 e 14 3 48 8 12 26 f 15 3 47 8 13 16 6 27 g 16 3 46 8 14 28 a 17 3 45
8 15 29 b 18 3 45 8 15 30 c 19 3 44 8 16 31 d 20 3 43 8 17

In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
You may in this month begin to inoculate according as you find your buds
ready, which take off the middle of your sprouts.

In your Flower-garden.
Transplant Amaranths, Flos Africanus, Nasturtium Indicum, Mirabilia Peruviana,
etc. from off your Hot-beds into good and rich soil, as much as may be in the
Sun, where they may stand and bear flowers. Bring out your Oranges, Lemons, and
other greens, out of the Conservatory, and you may now transplant and remove
them into boxes filled with good natural Earth taken from under the Turff in
good Pasture-ground, and mixed with one part of rotted Cow Dung, putting
Sticks, Brickbats, Shells, or any Rubbish that will make the Earth lie light,
and make passage for the water at the bottom; cut the bottom-roots especially a
little; set your Plant therein, but not too deep, rather let some of the roots
appear above ground; then settle them with temperate water, but not too much,
and set them in the shade for ten or twelve days, then expose them to the Sun.
Give all your housed Plants fresh Earth at the top, in place of some of the
old, a hand depth taken away; with a Fork loosen the rest, without hurting or
wounding the roots; let what you add be excellent Soil, well consumed, and
well sifted, that the virtue thereof may wash in and comfort the Plant: when
you unhouse them, cleanse them from their contracted dust. Gather the seeds of
your Anemonies as the dew rises, or you will lose it by the wind: sow Hot and
Aromatic Herbs, and in the full Moon plant Stock-Gilliflowers in beds; pluck
up Weeds before they seed.

JUNE has xxx days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 7 N. 14 Fir. q. 21 Fu 28 N. 3 Fir. q. 10 Fu.
17 La. q. 24 Fu. 6 La. q. 13 N. 21 Fir. q. 25 Last q. 3 N. 10 Fir. q. 18 Fu 25
First q. 8 Fu 15 La. q. 22 N. 29 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 e 21 3 49 8 11 16 10 2 f 22 3 49 8 11 No Night.
3 g 23 3 49 8 11 4 a 24 3 48 8 12 5 b 25 3 48 8 12 Night. 6 26 3 48 8 12 16 20
7 d 27 3 47 8 13 8 e 28 3 47 8 13 9 f 29 3 47 8 13 10 g 3 47 8 13 11 a 1 3 47 8
13 16 24 12 b 2 3 47 8 13 13 c 3 3 47 8 13 14 d 4 3 47 8 13 15 e 5 3 47 8 13 16
f 6 3 48 8 12 16 24 17 g 7 3 48 8 12 No Night, but Twilight. 18 a 8 3 48 8 12
19 b 9 3 49 8 11 20 c 10 3 49 8 11 21 d 11 3 50 8 10 16 18 22 e 12 3 50 8 10 23
f 13 3 51 8 9 24 g 14 3 51 8 9 25 a 15 3 52 8 8 26 b 16 3 52 8 8 16 10 27 c 17
3 53 8 7 28 d 18 3 54 8 6 29 e 19 3 55 8 5 30 f 20 3 56 8 4

In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
Inoculate Apricocks, Peaches, Nectorines, Cherries, Plums, Apples, and Pears.
Gather Herbs to keep, in the full Moon, and dry them in the Sun. Water new
planted Trees, and put Fern half rotted about their stems. Take off exuberant
or needless branches from your Vines, stopping the joint. Sow Lettice, Chervil,
Radish, etc. Distill Aromatic Plants. Let neither Limbeck nor Still lie idle.

In the Flower-garden.
Transplant Autumnal Cyclamens. Gather the ripe seeds of choice Flowers.
Inoculate Jasemines, Roses, and Rose-shrubs. Take up Anemonies, Ranunculus,
Tulip-roots, keeping them so as they do not moldy, till you plant them again.
Lay July-flowers, which will strike root in six weeks, and be ready for
transplanting into a light loamy Earth mixed with excellent rotten soil, and
sifted; plant six or eight in a Pot, to save room in Winter, and keep them well
from too much Rain. What July-flowers are now blown, of good kinds, keep for
seed, letting them have but few Layers to give nourishment to, and but few
Buds; you will find the Seed-pod to be filled with the fairer seed, and to hold
the more certainly. Preserve not any for this purpose that break their pods; be
sure to keep your earliest Flowers for this end, that the seed may have Sun
enough to ripen them, preserving them as much as may be from wet.

JULY has xxxi days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 6 N. 14 Fir. q. 20 Fu 28 N. 2 First q. 9 Fu
16 La. q. 24 Full 5 La. q. 13 N. 21 Fir. q. 28 Last q. 2 N. 10 Fir. q. 18 Fu 25
First q. 7 Fu 14 La. q. 21 N. 29 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 g 19 3 3 57 8 3 10 0 2 a 20 2 3 58 8 2 3 b 21 2
3 59 8 1 4 c 21 1 4 0 8 0 Twilight. 5 d 23 1 4 1 7 59 6 e 24 1 4 3 7 57 15 46
7 f 25 0 4 4 7 56 8 g 26 0 4 5 7 55 9 a 26 9 4 6 7 54 10 b 27 9 4 7 7 53 11 c
28 8 4 9 7 51 0 42 15 40 12 d 29 8 4 10 7 50 13 e 0 7 4 11 7 49 14 f 1 7 4 13 7
47 15 g 2 6 4 14 7 46 16 a 3 6 4 16 7 44 1 0 15 18 17 b 4 6 4 17 7 43 18 c 5 5
4 19 7 41 19 d 6 5 4 20 7 40 20 e 7 4 4 21 7 39 21 f 8 4 4 23 7 37 1 22 15 0 22
g 9 3 4 24 7 36 23 a 10 3 4 26 7 34 24 b 11 3 4 27 7 33 25 c 12 2 4 29 7 31 26
d 13 2 4 30 7 30 1 40 14 44 27 e 14 1 4 32 7 28 28 f 15 1 4 33 7 27 29 g 16 0 4
35 7 25 30 a 17 0 4 36 7 24 31 b 18 0 4 38 7 22

In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
Water young planted Trees and Layers; prune Apricocks and Peaches, leaving the
most likely Shoots well placed; stop the exorbitant Shoots of Vines at the
second joint above the fruit: let Olatory Herbs that you would save, run to
seed; sow Lettice, Radish, Chervil, etc. for young Salleting.

In your Flower-garden.
Slip stocks and other lignous Plants and Flowers; lay Mirtles, Jasemines, and
other greens: make trial of the same by Orange Trees; if they take, they will
certainly be the more hardy. Lay also July-flowers that were not fit to lay
before, and cut off withered stalks of Flowers. Clip Box out of order after
rain. Sow Anemony-seeds in fine sifted rich Earth in Bed or Boxes. Take up
early Autumnal Cyclamens, and transplant them as soon as may be; gather early
Cyclamen-seeds, and sow it in Pots presently. The end of this Month sift your
Beds of Off-sets of Tulips, and for Anemonies, Rarnuculus, etc. it will prepare
it for replanting with such things as you have ready in Pots, or to set in
naked ground till the next Season; as Amaranths, Mirabilia Peruviana,
Nasturtium Indicum, etc. that the Beds may not lie bare and naked, or
unfurnished.

AUGUST has xxxi days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 5 N. 12 Fir. q. 19 Fu 26 First q. 6 Fu 15 La.
q. 23 N. 30 Full 4 La. q. 11 N. 17 Fir. q. 26 N. 9 Fir. q. 16 Fu 23 La. q. 30
First q. 6 Fu 13 La. q. 19 N. 27 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 c 18 9 4 39 7 21 2 0 14 24 2 d 19 9 4 41 7 19 3
e 20 9 4 43 7 17 4 f 21 8 4 45 7 15 5 g 22 8 4 47 7 13 6 a 23 7 4 49 7 11 2 14
14 4 7 b 24 7 4 50 7 10 8 c 25 7 4 52 7 8 9 d 26 6 4 54 7 6 10 e 27 6 4 56 7 4
11 f 28 6 4 58 7 2 2 21 13 46 12 g 29 5 5 0 7 0 13 a 0 5 5 2 6 58 14 b 1 0 5 4
6 56 15 c 2 4 5 5 6 55 16 d 3 4 5 7 6 53 2 49 13 26 17 e 4 4 5 8 6 52 18 f 5 3
5 11 6 49 19 g 6 3 5 13 6 47 20 a 7 3 5 15 6 45 21 b 8 2 5 17 6 43 3 0 13 6 22
c 9 2 5 19 6 41 23 d 10 2 5 21 6 39 24 e 11 1 5 23 6 37 25 f 12 1 5 25 6 35 26
g 13 1 5 27 6 33 3 8 12 48 27 a 14 1 5 28 6 31 28 b 15 0 5 29 6 30 29 c 16 0 5
30 6 28 30 d 17 0 5 34 6 26 31 e 18 0 5 36 6. 24

In your Orchard or Kitchen garden.
Prune off superfluous branches and shoots of the second Spring. Pluck up
suckers. Inoculate early, if at all, in this Month. Sow Colliflowers and
Cabbages for Winter-Plants. Sow Cornsallet, Marygolds, Lettice, Carrets,
Parsnips, Spinach, Onions, curled Endive, Angelica, Scurvigrass, Larks-heel,
Columbines, Iron-colour'd Fox-gloves, Holihocks, and such Plants as endure
Winter. Transplant such Lettice you would have abide all Winter; pull up ripe
Onions, Garlic, etc. gather Olitory-seeds; clip such Herbs before the full
Moon an handful high. Sow Purslain, Chervil, etc. Make Summer-Sydar and Perry.
Gather seeds of Shrubs, being ripe.

In the Flower-garden.
Take up bulb roots of Lillies, etc. Bartholomewtide, the only secure season
for removing and laying Perennial Greens, Oranges, Lemons, Mirtles, Phylareas,
Oleanders, Jesemine, Arbutus, and other rare Shrubs, as Pomegranets, Roses, and
whatever is most obnoxious to Frosts, taking the shoots and branches of the
last Spring, and pegging them down with a hook-stick in very rich Earth and
Soil, perfectly consumed; water them on all occasions in Summer; by this time
twelvemonth they will be ready to remove into good Earth set in the shade, kept
moderately moist; three weeks past, set them in some more airy place, but not
in the Sun till fifteen days more. Now new earth your Pots of Auricula's,
transplant and divide their roots into a light rich Earth: Also your best
Primeroses and Oxlips: Also your Campions, or Lychnis Calcidonices. Transplant
seedling Anemonies; set Colchicums, Spiderworts, Frittilaries, etc.

SEPTEMBER has xxx days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 3 N. 10 Fir. q. 17 Fu 25 First q. 6 Fu 13 La.
q. 21 N. 28 Full 4 La. q. 11 N. 19 Fir. q. 26 N. 7 Fir. q. 14 Fu 21 La. q. 29
First q. 4 Fu 11 La. q. 18 N. 26 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 f 18 9 5 38 6 22 3 30 12 3 2 g 19 9 5 40 6 20 3
a 20 9 5 42 6 18 4 b 21 9 5 44 6 16 5 c 22 8 5 46 6 14 6 d 23 8 5 48 6 12 3 52
12 16 7 e 24 8 5 50 6 10 8 f 25 8 5 51 6 9 9 g 26 7 5 53 6 7 10 a 27 7 5 55 6 5
11 b 28 7 5 57 6 3 3 59 11 58 12 c 29 7 5 59 6 1 13 d 0 7 6 1 5 59 14 e 1 7 6 3
5 57 15 f 2 6 6 5 5 55 16 g 3 6 6 7 5 53 4 7 11 36 17 a 4 6 6 9 5 51 18 b 5 6 6
11 5 49 19 c 6 6 6 13 5 47 20 d 7 6 6 15 5 45 21 e 8 5 6 17 5 43 4 18 11 16 22
f 9 5 6 19 5 41 23 g 10 5 6 21 5 39 24 a 11 5 6 23 5 37 25 b 12 5 6 25 5 35 26
c 13 5 6 26 5 34 4 32 11 2 27 d 14 5 6 28 5 32 28 e 15 5 6 30 5 30 29 f 16 5 6
32 5 28 30 g 17 5 6 34 5 26

In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
Gather your ripe Winter-fruit be sure in dry weather. You may yet sow Lettice,
Radish, Spinach, etc. and Winter-herbs. Transplant most part of eating and
Physical Herbs, Artichoaks, and Sparagrass-roots, and Strawberries, etc.

In the Flower-garden.
As the weather directs, about Michaelmas in fair weather, be sure avoid a
foggy day, retire your choice Greens and rarest Plants (being dry) into the
Conservatory; as Oranges, Lemons, Indian and Spanish Jesmins, Oleanders, Barba
Jovis, Amomum Plinii, Citisus Lunatus, Chamaelea Tricoccos, Cistus Ledan
Clusii, Dates, Aloes, Sedums, etc. ordering them with fresh Mould, as taught in
May, to nourish them all the Winter, leaving as yet the doors and windows open,
giving them much air, so the wind's not sharp, nor weather foggy, till the
weather's more cold and sharp; and as that increases, the more enclose them,
till wholly shut up as the weather gives occasion: Mirtles will endure abroad
near a month longer. The cold coming on, set such Plants as will not endure the
house, into the Earth, the Pots two or three inches lower than the surface of
the Earth, under a Southern exposure, covering them with Glasses clothed with
sweet and dry Moss; but upon all fair days, and in sunny and sweet showers,
take them off. Thus preserve your Marum Syriacum, Cystus's, Geranicum, Nocte
olens, Flos Cardinalis, Maracocs, seedling Arbutus, choice Ranunculus, and
Anemonies; and thus covering them till April. Plant Tulips, and all bulbous
roots; but your choice of each defer till the latter end of the next month. Sow
Auricula's, Crocus, Primrose and Cowstip-seeds, Frittary and Tulip-seeds, etc.

OCTOBER has xxxi days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 3 N. 10 Fir. q. 17 Fu 25 First q. 5 Fu 13 La.
q. 21 N. 28 Full 2 La. q. 10 N. 17 Fir. q. 24 N. 7 Fir. q. 14 Fu 21 La. q. 29
First q. 4 Fu 10 La. q. 18 N. 26 Month-days. Weekdays. pl place pl. rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl. Day long 1 a 18 4 6 36 5 24 4 41 10 38 2 b 19 4 6 38 5 22
3 c 20 4 6 40 5 20 4 d 21 4 6 42 5 18 5 e 22 4 6 44 5 16 6 f 23 4 6 46 5 14 4
55 10 18 7 g 24 4 6 48 5 12 8 a 24 4 6 50 5 10 9 b 26 4 6 52 5 8 10 c 27 4 6 54
5 6 11 d 28 4 6 56 5 4 5 0 10 0 12 e 29 4 6 58 5 2 13 f 0 4 7 0 5 0 14 g 1 4 7
1 4 59 15 a 2 4 7 3 4 57 16 b 3 4 7 5 4 55 5 8 9 42 17 c 4 4 7 7 4 53 18 d 5 4
7 9 4 51 19 e 6 4 7 10 4 50 20 f 7 4 7 12 4 48 21 g 8 4 7 14 4 46 5 18 9 24 22
a 9 4 7 16 4 44 23 b 10 4 7 18 4 42 24 c 11 4 7 20 4 40 25 d 12 4 7 22 4 38 26
e 13 4 7 24 4 36 5 27 9 10 27 f 14 4 7 25 4 35 28 g 15 5 7 27 4 33 29 a 16 5 7
29 4 31 30 b 17 5 7 30 4 30 31 c 18 5 7 32 4 28

In your Orchard or Kitchen-garden.
Trench ground for both; plant or transplant all sorts of Fruit Trees, having
lost their leaves; Wall-trees above a years grafting; lay bare the roots of old
unthriving or overhasty blooming Trees; gather Fruit dry, the Moon decreasing.
Now is the time for setting Fruit-stores; which if the Fruit soon ripe, keep
them in sand till now; set them three inches deep, the sharp end uppermost, and
cover them with Fern or Straw to keep them warm in the Winter; but at Spring
take it off. You may yet sow Lettice, etc. for tender Salating.

In your Flower-garden.
Set your choice Tulips; you may now also sow their seeds. Plant some Anemonies
and Ranunculus's in prepared Earth, as directed in the Vade mecum; but they
must be covered, when they appear, from the Frosts, that will otherwise kill
them all: therefore your best, set not till December: Remove your best and
nicest July-flowers to shelter from much Rain or Wet, and where Snow may not be
apt to fall on them, and brush it off gently, when fallen on those that are not
capable of shelter. And this Month trim them all up with fresh Mould:

NOVEMBER has xxx days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 Last q. 1 N. 8 Fir. q. 15 Fu 24 First q. 4 Fu 12 La.
q. 19 N. 26 Full 1 Last q. 9 N. 16 Fir. q. 22 N. 5 Fir. q. 12 Fu 19 La. q. 28
First q. 2 Full 9 La. q. 16 N. 24 Month-days. Weekdays. pl. place pl. rise pl.
set pl. Day brak pl. Day long 1 d 19 5 7 34 4 26 5 37 8 50 2 e 20 5 7 35 4 25 3
f 21 5 7 37 4 23 4 g 22 5 7 39 4 21 5 a 23 5 7 40 4 20 6 b 24 5 7 42 4 18 5 40
8 42 7 c 25 5 7 43 4 17 8 d 26 6 7 44 4 16 9 e 27 6 7 46 4 14 10 f 28 6 7 47 4
13 11 g 29 6 7 49 4 11 5 43 8 24 12 a 0 6 7 52 4 10 13 b 1 6 7 51 4 9 14 c 2 6
7 53 4 7 15 d 3 7 7 54 4 6 16 e 4 7 7 56 4 4 5 48 8 12 17 f 5 7 7 57 4 3 18 g 6
7 7 59 4 1 19 a 7 7 8 0 4 0 20 b 8 7 8 1 3 59 21 c 9 8 8 2 3 58 5 54 8 2 22 d
10 8 8 3 3 57 23 e 11 8 8 4 3 56 24 f 12 8 8 5 3 55 25 g 13 8 8 6 3 54 26 a 14
8 8 7 3 53 5 58 7 54 27 b 15 9 8 7 3 53 28 c 16 9 8 8 3 52 29 d 17 9 8 9 3 51
30 e 18 9 8 9 3 51

In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
Furnish your Nursery with stocks for gra(...) turn your Melon-ground, and mix
it with (...) richest Earth, that of a last years Hot-bed, and lay it in ridges
for the Spring. Trench and fit ground for Artichoaks. Set and plant Trees that
are standards, or for the wall. Crop Asparagus, and cover it with long Dung,
and make Beds to plant in the Spring. Sow and set for early Beans and Pease.
Lay in Cellars to be transplanted in Spring, for seed, Carrots, Parsnips,
Turnips, Cabages, and Colliflowers.

In the Flower-garden.
Sow Auricula-seeds; cover peeping Ranunculus, etc. Plant fibrous Roots, Roses,
Althea frutex, Lilax, Syringa's, Peonies, etc. If the weather require it, quite
enclose your tender Plants, and Perennial Greens, Shrubs, etc. in your
Conservatory, stopping all entrance of cold, especially sharp winds: if the
Plant's exceeding dry, and it do not freeze, refresh them sparingly with
qualified water (i. e.) mingled with a little Sheeps-dung, or Cow Dung. If it
freeze in your Green-house, which you may know by a dish of water standing
there, kindle some Charcoal, and put them in a hole sunk a little in the floor,
the middle thereof: At all other times, the Air warmed by the Sunbeams, if a
fair day, and darting full on the house, show them the light, but enclose them
again before the Sun be quite gone off. Give not a drop of water to your Sedums
or Aloes all Winter.

DECEMBER has xxxi days.
1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 N. 8 Fir. q. 15 Fu 23 La q. 30 First q. 3 Fu 11 La.
q. 19 N. 26 Full 1 Last q. 9 N. 15 Fir. q. 22 N. 5 Fir. q. 12 Fu 19 La. q. 27
First q. 1 Fu 8 La. q. 16 N. 24 Month-days. Weekdays. pl place pl. rise pl.
set pl. Day brek pl Day long 1 f 21 9 8 10 3 50 5 57 7 42 2 g 21 0 8 10 3 50 3
a 22 0 8 11 3 49 4 b 23 0 8 11 3 49 5 24 0 8 12 3 43 6 d 25 0 8 12 3 48 5 59 7
49 7 e 26 0 8 12 3 48 8 f 27 1 8 13 3 47 9 g 28 1 8 13 3 47 10 a 29 1 8 13 3 47
11 b 0 1 8 13 3 47 6 0 7 36 12 c 1 2 8 13 3 47 13 d 2 2 8 13 3 47 14 e 3 2 8 13
3 47 15 f 4 2 8 12 3 48 16 g 5 2 8 12 3 48 5 59 7 36 17 a 6 3 8 12 3 48 18 b 7
3 8 11 3 49 19 c 8 3 8 11 3 49 20 d 9 3 8 10 3 50 21 e 10 3 8 10 3 50 5 57 7 42
22 f 11 4 8 9 3 51 23 g 12 4 8 8 3 52 24 a 13 4 8 8 3 52 25 b 14 4 8 7 3 53 26
c 15 4 8 6 3 54 5 56 7 50 27 d 16 5 8 6 3 54 28 e 17 5 8 5 3 55 29 f 18 5 8 4 3
56 30 g 19 5 8 3 3 57 31 a 20 5 8 2 3 58

In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden.
Plant Vines and Stocks for grafting. Prune Standard-trees; prune and nail
Wall-fruit. Set early Beans and Pease. Trench ground, and dung it for Borders,
planting Fruit Trees, etc.

In your Flower-garden.
Preserve Anemonies, and Ranunculus, and best July-flowers, from great Rain,
sharp Winds, and Frost. Let the doors and windows of your Green-house be well
matted, and guarded against cold. Now set in open weather, your best
Ranunculus, in a bed of old rotten Thatch or Straw that is near turned to
Earth, with good Mould above and below them: Also your best Anemonies in a
light yet rich loamy Earth, sifted through a wire Riddle: Those now set give
you no other trouble, being out of danger of the Frosts, they being past ere,
they come up. Mr. Evelin gives good advice in this month, viz. Look to your
Fountain-pipes, and cover them with fresh and warm Litter out of the Stable, a
good thickness, lest the Frosts crack them. Do it in time.

THE Preceding Almanac EXPLAINED.
IN the first column on the left hand, the Numerical Figures, numbering the
days of the Month.

In the second Column, the seven Alphabetical Letters for the Days of the
Weeks. And to know which is the Sunday or Dominical Letter, the Golden Number,
Epact, Shrove-Sunday, Easter-Sunday, Whit-Sunday, Advent-Sunday, the following
Table tells you for the Five years.

Year of our LORD. Gold. Nu. Epact. Sunday-Letter. Shrove-Sunday.
Easter-Sunday. Whit-Sunday. Advent Sunday. 1683 12 12 G Feb. 18 April 8 May 27
Dec. 2 1684 13 23 F E 9 Mar. 30 18 Nov. 30 1685 14 4 D Mar. 1 Apr. 19 June 7 29
1686 15 15 E Feb. 14 4 May 23 28 1687 16 26 ^ 6 Mar. 27 15 27

Thus you see looking against your Year, as 1683, on the right hand of it you
find 12 the Golden Number that year, and 12 for the Epact; G the Sunday-letter,
which mark through the Calendar with a dash of your Pen, by which you may know
it to stand for Sunday; and when the year is out, cross it with another Dash.
Do likewise by the next year 1684, which is Leap-year, and therefore F is used
till Matthias-day, and the remaining part of the years E for the Sunday-letter.
In the next Column you find Feb. 18. for Shrove-Sunday; then onwards, April 8.
for Easter Day; and May 27. for Whit-Sunday; and Dec. 2. for Advent-Sunday:
Trinity-Sunday is always next to Whit-Sunday. And thus are all your Movable
Feasts found with much ease.

The days on which the Immovable Feasts are Celebrated, are,

Circumcision of Christ, Jan. 1. Epiphany, or Twelfth-day, Jan. 6. Conversion
of St. Paul, Jan. 25. Martyrdom of King Charles I. Jan. 30. Purification of B.
Virgin Mary, Feb. 2. Valentine's day, Feb. 14. St. Matthias Apostle, Feb. 24.
Annuntiation of Virgin Mary, or Ladyday, March 25. St. George his day, April
23. St. Mark Evangelist, April 25. Philip and Jacob, Apostles, May 1. King
Charles II's Birthday, May 29. St. Barnabas or Barnaby, June 11. St. John
Baptist, June 24. St. Peter and Paul, June 29. St. James Apostle, July 25.
Lammas-day, August 1. St. Bartholomew Apostle, Aug. 24. St. Matthew Apostle,
Sept. 21. St. Michael Archangel, Sept. 29. St. Luke Evangelist, October. 18. St.
Simon and Jude Apostles, October. 28. All Saints, Nov. 1. Gunpowder-Treason, Nov.
5. St. Andrew Apostle, Nov. 30. St. Thomas Apostle, December. 21. Nativity of
Christ, December. 25. St. Stephen Martyr, December. 26. St. John Evangelist, December.
27. Innocents, December. 28.
The Eclipses of both Luminaries, for Five Years.

In 1683. Three.
1. OF the Sun, Jan. 17. near three a clock after noon, in 8 degrees. of Aquarius,
the Suns body obscured near, 9 digits; Visible, if clear Air. 2. Of the Moon,
Feb. 1. about three in the afternoon, in 23 degrees. of Leo; Invisible. 3. Of the
Moon, July 28. at eight a clock beforenoon; Invisible.
In 1684. Four.
1. Of the Sun, Jan. 6. at six at night, in 26 degrees. of Capricorn; Invisible
here. 2. Of the Moon, June 17. at three in the morn, in 6 degrees. of Capricorn;
Visible. 3. Of the Sun, July 2. at three after noon, in 22 degrees. of Cancer;
Visible. 4. Of the Moon, Dec. 11. at eleven at night, in 1 degrees. of Cancer;
Visible.
In 1685. Three.
1. Of the Moon, June 6. at six at night, in 26 degrees. of Sagittary; Invisible.
2. Of the Sun, June 21. at eight at night, in 10 degrees. of Cancer; scarce
Visible. 3. Of the Moon, Nov. 30. at eleven at night, in 19 degrees. of Gemini;
totally Visible.
In 1686. One.
Of the Moon, Nov. 19. at eleven at night, in 8 degrees. of Gemini; near Oculus
Tauri. God bless the City of London.
In 1687. Two.
1. Of the Sun, May 1. past noon, in 21 degrees. of Taurus; Visible. 2. Of the Sun,
Oct. 6. at six in the morning, in 13 degrees. of Scorpio; Invisible.
Of the CALENDAR.
UNder the Number at the top, 1683. you have the Quarters, Change and Full of
the Moon; and under that, the Moons and Suns places in the Signs, for that
year, entitled pl. place.

Under the number 1684. you have the Moons place in the Signs, and time of Sun
rise; and the Moons Quarters, Full, and New, over them, as in the other.

Under 1685. what Sign the Moon is in, and Sun setting.

Under 1686. Moons place and Break of Day, for every fifth day of the month.

And in 1687. Moons place, and the Length of the Day for every fifth day of the
month.

Now for Length of Day and Night, if it be not the same as set down that you
would know, take that of them that is nearest to it: So in that for Break of
Day; or if you will be so exact, you may proportion the time betwixt them. Any
of these in each month, serves the said month in every year. Thus much said,
there needs no more for the rest.

And so have you all that is necessary for a Calendar: And in the Book, all
that is requisite for a Flowerists knowledge, so far as the Experiments
hitherto made, will with verity allow.

It would be a grateful and satisfactory Return, and the most acceptable one,
if any person knows more to the advantage of a Flowerists management, raising,
increasing, or preserving Plants or Flowers, and will inform the Author of the
particulars, by Letter to him,

At his house in Kinlet-Parish, near Bewdly in Worcestershire.
FINIS.

