GIGANTOAIA. OR A Full, and True RELATION Of the Great and Bloody Fight,
BETWEEN Three PAGAN KNIGHTS, AND A CHRISTIAN GIANT.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1682.

GIGANTOAIA.
OF Monsters fell, and wondrous Wights,
Of Towers Enchanted, bloody Fights,
Of ERRANT Knaves, and ERRANT Knights
I shall Compose my Ballad;
How a huge Giant Fierce and Stout,
Three Gentle KNIGHTS at once did Rout;
Of which, if you the Truth do Doubt,
The Record's in my Wallet.
Contrary to Romantic Rules,
By Snatches sweetly Con'd at Schools,
Which always make the biggest Fools,
Truth here takes part with Giant,
For He the Knight's thick Skulls did Crack,
He laid their Honors on the Back,
And did their Ribs full rudely Thwack,
To make their Purses Plyant.
Thou great St. George, and Eglamore,
Thou Pegasus, and Brigliadore,
With all hard Names that Poets Roar,
And for their Gods have taken,
Merlin that made the Dee'l an Ass,
Bladud-ap-creat-Rud-Hudibrass,
That through the Air like Owl could pass,
And Famous Friar Bacon;
Assist, Assist my Mournful Song!
Mingle your powerful Charms Among,
With whispered Numbers, Dark and Strong,
Whilst I the Lists do Enter!
Hence all Profaneness! come not Near
TO Invade the Sacred Rituals Here,
Nor Wine, nor Money, nor good Cheer,
To hinder mine Adventure.
An Isle there is, that Albion Hight,
With Fruits and Flowers, around Bedight,
Where Damsel fair, and gentle Knight,
In every Shade are Playing,
Where Nightingales each Tree Adorn,
Spurring their Breasts with watchful Thorn
Throughout the Year, where every Morn
The Virgins go a Maying.
A Town it has, which Fiends Inchant,
Where Brideled Furies Roar and Rant,
In olden times, hight Troynovant,
But now it is London Styled.
Which By full many a Devilish Spell
And Brands and Balls fetched up from Hell,
In its own Cindars Buried Fell,
Of all its Glory Spoiled.
But when Rome's Thrid-bare Plots were Spied,
Her Charms unravel'd, Knots Untied,
'Twas gloriously Re-edifi'd,
Far Noblier than by the Founder;
Bright Turrets in the Invaded Air,
By Negromantick Art they Rear;
With Stately Domes, and Houses Fair,
Besprinkling all around Her.
Here the Learned Sages every Year,
In Venerable Furs appear,
To choose a CHRISTIAN Officer,
That may provide 'em Juries;
This makes the PAGAN-TORIES Rave,
Because their stakes they cannot Save;
This makes ROGERO Strut and Brave,
With all his Club of Furies.
Some Renegado's style you Can,
Two Knights, but never a Gentleman,
Sometimes on the hot Scent they Ran
A hunting for Promotion,
And now and then for nimble Bounds,
Or treading down their Neighbors Grounds,
Their Dog-lookt Friends amongst the Hounds,
Are Dubd with great Devotion.
Such Recreant Knights, accoutred Fine
With Sword and Mace, their Steps Incline
To a large House, where Sin and Wine
On equal Terms are Vended:
Its name I know not, though it is Sed
And thought by most, 'twas the Pope's Head,
For there like Friends they might be Sped,
And carefully Attended.
The first was of as strong a make,
As ever Lance in Justing Brake,
Or handled Sword for Ladies Sake,
In Turkey or in Persy:
From Top to Toe, from Head to Heel,
He Cased himself in Burnished Steel;
For Yard, a Spear he now does Feel.
And Mail instead of Kersy.
The next that carried on the Fight,
With ponderous Mace of mickle Might,
Was Hangman, Senator, and Knight,
A strange Three-headed Monster;
Whom Scandalizing Whigs in Sport,
When to their Brethren they Resort,
That he is Allied to the French-Court,
By's name's resemblance Conster.
The S -- f cannot the L -- s hide,
The Knightly Spurs must needs be spied,
Tho the Gold-Chain's about 'em tied,
The better to obscure 'um;
The Ass is an Ass, tho Clothed he Be
In the cast Robes of Majesty,
Tho his long Ears Beasts cannot See,
From trembling to secure 'um.
The Third, a proper Man it is true,
But that his Legs did stand askew,
And both like Sampson's Foxes grew,
One this way, that the other;
Naught but their equal Ugliness,
Their equal Shape, and equal Dress,
Could make the amazed Beholder Guess,
That this to that was Brother.
With him I would not enter Strife,
Nor try a Fall to save my Life,
For as a Bone upon a Knife,
My Legs would split on his-'n:
This may without a stretch be Sed;
Upon my Neck should he but Tread,
He Would certainly cut off my Head,
Before my Tail were risen.
Enough of these, too much I fear;
Now of the Giant you shall hear,
That did with Blood their Chaps besmear,
And eke their sides Bumbasted;
How on their Skulls he Blows did Rain,
And kicked 'um down, and up Again;
How with no little Grief and Pain
They from his Clutches Hasted.
His outward Parts were something small;
'Twas the inward Powers that Acted all;
Yet tho a Giant him we call,
Let not the Tories blame us;
For as close Flames more fiercely Roll,
Imprisoned in a narrow Hole;
So 'twas his brave Gygantick SOUL
Made's Pygmee-Body Famous.
All Tory Cloth, and Drapers too,
With Fist, or else with Indigo,
He Is used to die both Black and Blue,
The best in all the Nation;
And lest his Customers be found,
Some do Suppose he has been bound,
By heavy Bagg of Hundred Pound,
To hide his Occupation.
This Dragon-firking Hercules,
This Cadmus, This -- e'ne what you please,
That direful Monsters quelled with Ease,
And Dragged from horrid Cavern;
The matter few Distinguish can,
Whether he freely thither Ran,
Or was Enticed by a Trepan,
And Wheedled to the Tavern.
Who there Behind the Door should Lurk,
But a false-misbelieving-Turk,
Who thus began the Devils Work,
With Glass fast claspt in Clutches.
Ah! Sir-ah! have we got you here?
Come Pledge a Health to the Grand-VISIER,
Or else with speed my Cimiter,
Shall make new room for Crutches.
Sad was the Christian Champion's case;
He had nor Battle-axe, nor Mace,
Yet Stoutly he took Heart-a-grace,
And thus Defies the Pagan:
False Recreant Wretch as 'ere did Wield,
An unbecoming Lance, or Shield!
My head, as soon as Knees I Will Yield,
To your great Bell, and Dragon.
Jack Adams struts about the Rooms,
And swears, and sinks, and cocks and fumes,
That thus one Stubborn Whig presumes,
On three Armed Knights to Venture;
Sirrah you Dog! do you prate, do you prate?
Must Captives then capitulate?
Dispatch; or else I Will break your pate,
And Ramm ye to the Center.
No sooner Said, no sooner Done,
The Fight was instantly Begun;
A blow he Struck enough to Stun,
The Stoutest Knight in London:
Some favoring God, or powerful Charm,
To save a Courteous Knight from harm,
In The nick came underneath his arm,
Or there he had been undone.
The empty Sword slid glancing by;
Not so our Champion, who must try,
Bravely to Conquer, or to Dye,
By hand of miscreant Heathen;
But since he saw the War begin,
He will not for nothing sell his skin,
But if his reach they come within,
He Will give his Foes a breathing.
His Fist he bends, and dings it right,
At's Worship's Face with all his Might,
Down on the floor my gentle Knight,
All in a heap does tumble:
As when one Mungril you attack,
The yelping Cur your steps will track,
And raise the Parish on your back,
His Friends began to grumble.
In our Relation to be brief,
Sir Simon Suck-egg was the chief,
That brought his Brother Fool relief,
Than all his Fellows madder;
He by his quondam HONORS Swore,
By forked Crest the arms he bore,
And by his Mistress, alias W --
To turn him over the LADDER.
But tho his hands were thick, and long,
His Weapon ponderous, and strong,
And he with Mace laid on ding-dong,
Yet still our Champion tight-stood,
And after many a crabbed Jowle,
Putting aside his weighty Pole,
He takes him ore the Jobbernole,
And down he fetched poor Knighthood.
In Triumph over them he goes,
Thinking he had conquered all his Foes,
And under his victorious Toes,
He stamped their battered Faces;
Sir Simon's Beauty went to Pot,
That tho in Love he had been hot,
His Mistress soon restore would not,
Her favors, and good Graces.
Beat Death's Alarm upon the Drums!
Ware Shanks! Ware Shanks! Sir Harry comes;
He bit for Anger both his Thumbs,
And at our Champion yawned;
He like Alcides did provide,
To guard himself on either side,
When Hydra's Coxcombs multiplied,
And two for one were spawned.
With Corpse erect, and Visage grim,
One foot he plants on simple Sim.
Who sadly growled under him;
Sir Bobb supported the other:
With an undaunted Mien, and Air,
His conquering Arms he high does Rear,
And for the third Assault prepare,
To drubb their Friend and Brother.
So have I seen a sprightly Cat,
That purring in a Corner sat,
In Ambuscade for lusty Rat,
Sworn Foe to Cheese and Bacon;
When two young Mice that frisking out,
From a low Port of their Redoubt,
By Governors command to scout,
Were in her Clutches taken.
Their piercing Shrieks the Fort affright;
Out Sallies Ratt, prepared to fight,
As fierce as any TORY Knight,
Upon her madly falling;
Puss in two Paws shuts captive Mice,
To hinder rescue, or surprise;
With the other at her Foe does rife,
And down she Cuffs him sprawling.
Doughty Sir Hall, a tiptoe Stands,
With mighty Fauchion reard in hands,
And Satisfaction demands,
For both his Friends Mischances;
He Winks, and then Pel-mel lets drive,
Aiming his head in twain to rive;
That was the gentlest Knight alive;
But flatlong on it it glances.
Our Champions Head, and Brains ran round,
Down he was sinking in a sound,
But yet as soon's he touched the ground,
Up leapt he like Antaeus Antaeus: a famous Moorfields wrastler, who the
oftener he was foiled the more strength he had.

The Turks arrears he paid him soon,
Tho he for grace did Importune,
And made him see more Stars at Noon,
Than e're did Galiaeus Galilaeus an old Conjurer (kin to Gadbury) that saw the
stars at noon with a spying glass.

In Vain the Wretch for help dos Bawl,
On back, and sides, and face and all,
With Knightly prowess he does fall,
And many a trusty greeting;
He laid on Load on empty Crown,
Until with a most gracious frown,
His honor too came Rattling down,
To give his Friends a meeting.
Stout Whig their Noses gently tweaks,
Their Skuls, tho thick, all over breaks,
And his just Anger on 'em wreaks
For their Affront Notorious:
He rents their Lace, and Linen pure
(Who can so sad a sight endure?)
And Poynt-Crevats, and Garniture
That made 'em look so glorious.
Their empty Crowns rung jangling Peals,
Their Foe Chimes backward, and reveals
The Fire that their warm Ear conceals
Whilst they are in woeful pickle:
Had you but seen 'em how they Sat,
Spoiled of their Cloak, and Band, and Hat,
You would conclude they had been at
A Bristow- Conventicle.
Now on the Floor their Corpse he spreads,
Now on their Neck in Triumph treads,
Then disobliged their LOGGERHEADS,
Jumbling them all together,
And if they once but Cursed, or Frowned,
He rolled em round, and round, and round,
Trayling their Clothes about the Ground
They knew not how nor whether.
Sometimes on their Fat Guts he jumps,
Sometimes their Paunches rudely thumps,
And on their Heads makes Egg-like bumps,
Whilst their poor Pates were addled;
Now he their Jaws accosts with hand,
Now on his Leg prepared did stand,
To give their Tails a REPRIMAND,
And now their sides he swadled.
Still he lets Drive his furious Blows,
Until at last, as most suppose,
The reverent-Sirs affront his Nose,
With PARACELSIAN Civet; A T -- d they did!

So crafty REYNARD now and then,
When outed by intruding men,
Be-s -- the cleanly Badgers Den,
To make its Landlord leave it.
The TORYS their banged sides bemoan,
They sadly yelp O hone! O hone!
And with full many a dolorous Groan,
Hold up their Paws for pity.
Sir Bobb and Hal did deeply yell,
But who his direful Plaints can tell,
That was, while it seemed good to Hell,
A Burden to the City.
Thirteen-Pence-Half-penny he would bestow
With generous Fist on Conquering Foe,
If he would be pleased to let him go
But for one livelong Moment;
But since some wiser are than some,
Our Champion threatens with a Drum
Beating before to kick 'em home;
Although he never so meant.
As soon as they had strength to rise,
For Crick in Neck, in Back, in Thighs,
They looked about to find their Eyes,
Thinking he would beat 'em all out;
So have I seen a maimed Snail,
When by rude Heels its Rampires fail,
Dragging along its slimy Tail,
From thence attempt to crawl out.
The Christian had a Noble Soul,
And when he saw 'em thus condole,
He grants 'em Freedom on Parole,
While Fame his Glory raises;
This Tell-tale Goddess had a Spy
That brought her word immediately;
About the City she does fly,
And Trumpets out his Praises.
Of TORY Champions, fierce and stout,
London and England all throughout,
She the Achievements spreads about,
And of their Valor Tattles;
But with slye Malice chiefly she
Does magnify their COURTESY,
When they to odds must yield or flee,
In such unequal Battles.
For when, by unexpected Chance,
One did against all Three advance,
They yielded out of Complaisance,
And took a Civil Drubbing.
But since, although Cock-sure, they fail,
And Three to One could not prevail,
This did the Hot-spur Courage quail
Of poor Heroic Robin.
Fame's a damned Whig they fret and cry,
(Screwing their Mouths up to their Eye)
If e're we meet her she shall dye;
Kiss and tell! Out upon her!
Fortune we find's a fickle Whore,
We'll never trust the Gypsy more:
(Thus like a Bittern they did roar)
Our Honor! O our Honor!
Their Friends advise 'em to Compound.
If lusty Dyer may be found,
And get him unto silence bound,
Although he hard to win is;
With sense profound they gravely say,
'Twould be the best and safest way,
To lock his Lips with Silver Kay,
Or gag his Mouth with Guinies.
'Twas spoke, and instantly 'twas done;
Whilst they their Pockets rummage, one
To every Coffee-House does run,
To find Victorious DYER;
They reasoned on the point, and he
Because they are Friends will not Disagree,
But out of mere CIVILITIE
He grants 'em their Desire.
Else how is he so changed become?
He answers nothing now but Mum!
To all Enquirers deaf and dumb,
Strangely retired of the sudden.
Ask him about it, ask again,
Tho of his Silence you complain,
Yet still you will ask, and ask in vain;
For, not a word of the Pudding.
There Is your true Spaniels for you, Sirs;
Kick 'em, they will love you never the worse,
But, like Good-Christian-Honest-Curs,
Or Women of Moscovy,
The longer Cudgel one provides,
To exercise their Back and Sides,
The longer their Good Will abides,
And they will the longer love ye.
But, Tories, take a Friend's Advice,
Well-willer to your NOSE and EYES,
That never liked this Enterprise,
To Whig-land so delighting:
Drink for the DUKE while you can stand,
Chase all Phanaticks round the Land,
With Glasses ready charged in Hand;
But pray take heed of Fighting.
FINIS.

