A SERMON Preached before The Honorable House OF COMMONS At their late solemn
Fast Wednesday March 27. 1644. BY GEORGE GILLESPIE Minister at Edinburgh.

Published by Order of the House.

PSALM. 102. 6. When the Lord shall build up Zion he shall appear in his glory.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. Anno 1644.

TO THE READER.
DIvine providence has made it my ^ot, and a Calling has induced me (who am
less then the least of all the servants of Christ) to appear among others in
this Cloud of public Witnesses. The scope of the Sermon is, to endeavor the
removal of the obstructions both of Humiliation and Reformation; two things
which ought to lie very much in our thoughts at this time: Concerning both I
shall preface but little. Reformation has many unfriends, some upon the right
hand, and some upon the left: While others cry up that detestable indifferency
or neutrality, abjured in our solemn Covenant, in so much that Act. 5. 38. 39.
Gamaliel and Act. 18. 14. 15 16. 17.
Gallio, men who regarded alike the Jewish and the Christian Religion, Liberty
of Conscience, page 34. 35.
are highly commended, as examples for all Christians, and as men walking by
the rules not only of Policy, but of Reason and Religion. Now let all those
that are either against us, or not with us, do what they can, the right hand
of the most High, shall perfect the glorious begun Reformation: Can all the
world keep down the Sun of Righteousness from rising or being risen? can
they spread a veil over it? And though they dig deep to hide their counsels;
is not this a time of Gods overreaching and befoolling all plotting wits? they
have conceived iniquity, and they shall b^ing forth vanity: Hos 8. 7.
they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlewind: Wherefore we
Isa. 8 17.
will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and will
look for him: And Job 13. 15.
though he slay us, yet will we trust in him. Isa. 62. 11.
The Lord has commanded to proclaim, and to say to the daughter of Zion,
Behold thy salvation comes: h Rejoice with Jerusalem all ye that mourn for
her; For 2 Cor. 6. 2.
behold now is the accepted Isa. 66. 10.
time; behold now is the day of salvation: But I have more to say: Mourn, O
mourn with ^erusalem all ye that rejoice for her; Isa. 37. 3.
This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke and of blasphemy; for the children
are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth: It is an
interwoven time, warped with mercies, and woofted with judgments; Say not thou
in thine heart, the days of my mourning are at an end: Oh we are to this day
an unhumbled and an unprepared people; and there are among us, both many cursed
Achans, and many sleeping Jonahs, but few wrestling Jacobs, Matthew. 25. 5.
even the wise Virgins are slumbring with the foolish: Surely unless we be
timely awaked, and more deeply humbled, Lev. 26. 18, 21, 2^, 28.
God will punish us yet seven times more for our sins: and if he have
chastised us with whips, he will chastise us with Scorpions: and he will yet
give a further charge to the Sword, Lev. 26. 25.
to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. In such a case I cannot say according
to the now Oxford Divinity, That Preces and Lachrymae Prayers and Tears, must
be our only one shelter and fortress, and that we must cast away defensive
arms as unlawful in any case whatsoever, against the supreme Magistrate;
(that is, by interpretation, they would have us do no more then Pray, to the
end themselves may do no less then Prey:) Wherein they are contradicted not
only by Pareus, and by others that are eager for a Presbytery, (as a 1. Armagh
Sermon. at Oxford March 3. p. 17. 19, 27.
Prelate of chief note has lately taken, I should say mistaken, his mark)
but even by Gr^us de j^re belli ac pacis lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 7. Haec autem
lex de q^a agimus de n^ resistendo supremis potesta^i bus) pendere vi^etur a
volunta^e eo^um qui se primum in soci^tatem civilem ^onsociant. a quibus jus
(...) ad imperantes manat. H^vero si interrogarentur an vel^nt omnibus hoc onus
imponere, ut mori praeoptent, qu^ nullo casu vi^ superiorum armi^ arcere, ne
cio an velle ^e sint responsuri. Ibid sect. 13. Si Rex p^rtem habeat summi
imperii, partem alteram populus au^senatus, regi i^ partem non suam involanti,
vis justa oppont poterit I might add the testimonies of Bilson, Bar^ius, and
others.
those that are eager Royalists: (Pardon me that I give them not their right
name; I am sure when all is well reckoned we are better friends to royal
authority then themselves.) Yet herein I do agree with them, that Prayers and
Tears will prove our strongest weapons, and the only tela divina, the weapons
that fight for us from above. Psalm. 34. (...).
O then fear the Lord ye his Saints; O Isa. 64. 7.
stir up your selves to lay hold on him; Isa. 62, 6, 7.
Keep no silence and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth. O that we could all Psalm. 84. 6.
make Wells in our dry and desertlike hearts, that we may 1 Samuel 7. 6.
draw out water, even buckets full, to quench the wrath of a sin-revenging God,
the fire which still burns against the Lords inheritance. God grant that this
Sermon be not as water spilt on the ground but may Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
drop as the rain, and distill as the dew of heaven upon thy soul.

A SERMON, PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS: At the late solemn
Fast, March 27. 1644.
EZEKIEL. 43. 11. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the
form of the House, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and
the commings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof: and write it in
their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and do them.
IT is not long since I did, upon another day of Englands disease.
humiliation, lay open Englands disease from that Text, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33.
Howbeit the High Places were not taken away, for as yet the people had not
prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers. Though Mal. 4. 1.
the Sun of Righteousness be risen, with healing in his wings, yet the land
is not healed, no not of its worst disease, which is corruption in Religion,
and the iniquity of your holy things. I did then show the symptoms, and the
cause of this evil disease. The symptoms, are your high Places, not yet taken
away, many of your old superstitious ceremonies to this day remaining, which
though not so evil as the High Places of Idolatry, in which Idoll^ were
worshipped, yet are parallel to the Highplaces of Will worship, of which we
read, that the people (thinking it too hard to be tied to go up to Jerusalem
with every sacrifice) did 2 Chro^. 33. 17.
sacrifice still in the High places, yet unto the Lord their God only: pleading
for their so doing, antiquity, custom, and other defenses of that kind, which
have been alleged for your Ceremonies. But albeit these be foul sports in the
Churches face, which offend the eyes of her glorious Bridegroom, Jesus Christ,
yet that which does less appear, is more dangerous, and that is the cause of
all this evil, in the very bowels and heart of the Church; the people of the
land, great and small, have not as yet prepared their hearts unto the Lord
their God: mercy is prepared for the land, but the land is not prepared for
mercy; I shall say no more of the disease at this instant.

But I have now chosen a Text, which holds forth a remedy for this malady, a
cure for this case. That is, that if we will Levit. 26. 41.
humble our A remedy for it.
uncircumcised hearts, and accept of the punishment of our iniquity; If we be
Ezekiel. 36. 32.
ashamed and confounded before the Lord this day for our evil ways, if we
judge our selves as guilty, and put our mouth in the dust, and cloth our
selves with shame, as with a garment; If we repent and abhor our selves in
dust and ashes, then the Lord will not abhor us, but take pleasure in (...),
to dwell among us, to reveal himself unto us, to set before us the right
pattern of his own House, that Revel. 21. 3.
the Tabernacle of God may be with men, and pure Ordinances, where before they
were defiled and mixed; Zech. 13. 2.
He will cut off the names of the Idols out of the land, and cause the false
Prophet, and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land, and Psalm. 85. 9.
the glory of the Lord shall dwell in the land. But withal we must take heed,
Psalm. 85. 8.
that we turn not again to folly, that our hearts start not aside, Psalm. 78.
57.
like a deceitful bow, that we Psalm. 18. 21.
Keep the ways of the Lord, and do not wickedly depart from our God. Thus you
have briefly, the occasion, and the sum of what I am to deliver from this Text.

The particulars whereof, I shall not touch, till I have in the first place
resolved a difficult, yet profitable question.

You may ask, what House, or what Temple does the Prophet Another Temple meant
in this vision then that of Jerusalem.
here speak of: and how can it be made to appear that this Scripture is
applicable to this time?

I answer, I. Baptista Villallpandus expla^. Ezekiel. tom 2. part. 2. lib. 1.
Isag. cap. 9. 12. and 13. Corn. a lapi^e in Ezekiel. 40.
some have taken great pains to demonstrate, that this Temple, which the
Prophet saw in this vision, was no other then the Temple of Solomon, and that
the accomplishment of this vision of the Temple, City, and division of the
Land, was the building of the Temple and City again, after the captivity, and
the restoring of the Leviticall worship, and Jewish Republike, which came to
pass in the days of Nehemiah and Zorobabel. This sense is also most obvious
to every one that reads this Prophecy. But there are very strong reasons
against it, which make other Learned Expositers not to embrace it.

For 1. The Temple of Solomon was 120. cubits high. The Proved by 8. Reasons.
Temple built by Zorobabel, was but 60. cubits high. Ezra 6. 3.

2. The Temple of Zorobabel Ezra 3. 1. 8 and 6. 3. 5. 7.
was built in the same place where the Temple of Solomon was, that is in
Jerusalem, upon mount Moriah. But this Temple of Ezekiel was without the City,
and C. a Lapi^e, himself reckons the City to be 27. miles distant from Temple.
a great way distant from it. Chap. 48. verse 10. compared with verse 15. The
whole portion of the Levites, and a part of the portion of the Priests, was
betwixt the Temple and the City.

3. Moses his greatest Altar, the Altar of Burnt-offerings, was not half so big
as Ezekiells Altar: See also Codex Middoth. cap. 3. sect. 1.
compare Ezekiel 43. 16. with Exodus 27. 1. So is Moses Altar of Incense, much
less then Ezekiells Altar of Incense, Exodus 30. 2. compared with Ezekiel. 41. 22.

4. There are many new ceremonial Laws, (different from the Mosaicall)
delivered in the following part of this vision, Chap. 45. and 46. as Pola^us
and Sanctius.
Interpreters have particularly observed upon these places.

5. The Temple and City were not of that greatness, which is described in this
Vision: for the measuring Reed containing six cubits of the Sanctuary (not
common cubits) Chap. 40. 5. which amount to more then 10. foot; the utter wall
of the Temple being 2000. Reeds in compass, Chap. 42. 20. was by estimation
four miles, and the City, chap. 48. 16. 35. six and thirty miles in compass.

6. The vision of the holy waters, chap. 47. issuing from the Temple, and after
the space of 4000. reeds, growing to a river which could not be passed over,
and healing the waters and the fishes, cannot be literally understood of the
Temple at Jerusalem.

7. The Land is divided among the twelve Tribes, chap. 48. and that in a way
and order different from the division made by Joshua, which cannot be
understood of the restitution after the captivity, because the twelve Tribes
did not return.

8. This New Temple has with it a New Covenant, and that an everlasting one,
Ezekiel. 37. 26, 27. But at the return of the people from Babylon there was no new
Covenant, says Lib. 4. cap. 67.
Irenaeus, only the same that was before continued till Christ's coming.

Wherefore we must needs hold with Lib. 13. i^ Ezekiel.
Hierome, Hom. 13. in Ezekiel. The Church of Christ intended.
Gregory, and other latter Interpreters, that this vision of Ezekiel is to be
expounded of the spiritual Temple, and Church of Christ, made up of Jews and
Gentiles; and that not by way of allegories only (which is the sense of those
whose opinion I have now confuted) but according to the proper and direct
intendment of the vision, which in many material points cannot agree to
Zorobabels Temple.

I am herein very much strengthened while I observe Compare Ezekiel. 37. 27. with
Revel. 21. 3. Ezekiel. 40. 2. with Revel. 21. 10. Ezekiel. 40. 3, 4, 5. with Revel.
11. 1. and 21. 15. Ezekiel. 43. 2. with Revel. 14. 2. Ezekiel. 45. 8, 9. with Revel.
17. 16, 17. and 21. 24. Ezekiel. 38. 2. and 39. 1. with Revel. 20. 8 Ezekiel. 47. 12.
with Rev. 22. 2. Ezekiel. 48. 1. to v. 8. with Revel. 7. 4. to v. 9. Ezekiel 48 31,
32 33, 34. with Revel. 21. 12, 13. 16. Ezekiel. 40. 4 with Revel. 1. 11. and 4. 1.
many parallel passages betwixt the vision of Ezekiel and the Revelation of
John; and while I remember withal that the Prophets do in many places
foretell the institution of the Ordinances, Government and Worship of the New
Testament, under the terms of Temple, Priests, Sacrifices, etc. and do set
forth the deliverance and stability of the Church of Christ, under the notions
of Canaan; of bringing back the captivity, etc. God speaking to his people at
that time, so as they might best understand him.

Now if you ask, how the several particulars in the vision may be
particularly expounded, and applied to the Church of Christ? I answer, the Word
of God, the River that makes glad the City of God, though it have many easy
and known Foords, where any of Christ's Lambs may pass through, yet in this
Vision and other places of this kind, it is a great deep, where the greatest
Elephant (as he said) may swim. I shall not say with the Jews, that one should
not read the last nine Chapters of Ezekiel, before he be thirty years old:
Surely a man may be twice thirty years old, and a good Divine too, and yet not
able to understand this Vision. Some tell us, that no man can understand it
without skill in Geometry, which cannot be denied: but there is greater need of
Ecclesiometry, if I may so speak, to measure the Church in her length or
continuance through many generations; in her breadth or spreading through many
Nations; her depth of humiliation, sorrows, and sufferings: her height of
faith, hope, joy, and comfort, and to measure each part according to this
pattern here set before us.

Wherein, for my part, I must profess (as Socrates in another case) Scio quod
nescio. I know that there is a great mystery here which I cannot reach. Only I
shall let forth unto you that little light which the father of ^ights has
given me.

I conceive that the Holy Ghost in this Vision has pointed at four several
times and conditions of the Church; that we Four things holden forth in the
Vision. 1. The material Temple as a Type.
may take with us the full meaning, without addition or diminution.

Observing this rule, that what agrees not to the Type, must be meant of the
thing typified; and what is not fulfilled at one time, must be fulfilled of the
Church at another time. v Codex Middoth cum Commentariis Constable. l'Emper^ur.
Arias Montanus in his Libarus. I. Baptista Villalpandus explan. Ezekiel Tom. 2.
par. 2. and Tom. 3. Tosta^us in 1. Reg. 6. Lud. Capellus in compendio bist.
Iudaicae. Ribera de Templo lib. 1. and others.


First of all, it cannot be denied, that he points in some sort at the
restitution of the Temple, worship of God, and City of Jerusalem, after the
captivity, as a type of the Church of Christ: for though many things in the
vision do not agree to that time, as has been proved, yet some things do
agree: this as it is least intended in the Vision, so it is not fit for me at
this time to insist upon it. But he that would understand the form of the
Temple of Jerusalem, the several parts, and excellent structure thereof, will
find enough (b) written of that subject.

Secondly, this and other prophecies of building again the Temple, may well be
applied to the building of the Christian Church by the Master Builders the
Apostles, and by other Ministers of the Gospel since their days: Let us hear
but two witnesses of the Apostles themselves applying those prophecies to 2.
The Church of the Gentiles
the calling of the Gentiles; the one is Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 16. For ye are the
Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them and walk in
them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. The other is James,
who applies to the converted Gentiles that prophecy of Amos, After this I
will return and will build again the Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down;
and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up, Act. 15. 16.

But there is a third thing aimed at in this prophecy, and that more
principally then any of the other two, which is the repairing of the 3. A more
glorious Church in the latter days.
breaches and ruins of the Christian Church, and the building up of Zion in
her glory, about the time of the destruction of Antichrist, and the conversion
of the Jews; and this happiness has the Lord reserved to the last times, to
build a more excellent and glorious Temple then former generations have seen. I
mean not of the building of the material. Temple at Jerusalem, which the
Jews do fancy and look for; But I speak of the Church and people of God; and
that I may not seem to expound an obscure Prophecy too conjecturally, which
many in these Proved by five reasons.
days do, I have these Evidences following, for what I say.

1. If Paul and James, in those places which I last cited, do apply the
prophesies of building a new Temple to the first fruits of the Gentiles, and to
their first conversion, then they are much more to be applied to the fullness
of the Gentiles, and most of all to the fullness both of Jews and Gentiles,
which we wait for. Now if the fall of them Romans 11. 12.
(says the Apostle, speaking of the Jews) be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness?
And Ib. verse. 15.
again, If the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world; what shall
the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? Plainly insinuating a greater
increase of the Church, and a larger spread of the Gospel, at the conversion of
the Jews, and so a fairer Temple, yea another world in a manner to be looked
for.

2. The Lord himself in this same chapter, verse. 7. speaking of the Temple
here prophesied of, says, The place of my Throne, and the place of the soles
of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever,
and my holy name shall the house of Israel no more defile, neither they nor
their Kings etc. Which as it cannot be understood of the Jews after the
Captivity, who did again forsake the Lord, and were forsaken of him, as
Hierome notes upon the place; so it can as ill be said, to be already
fulfilled upon the Christian Church, but rather that such a Church is yet to be
expected in which the Lord shall take up his dwelling for ever, and shall not
be provoked by their defilements and whoredoms, again to take away his
Kingdom, and to remove the Candlestick.

3. This last Temple is also prophesied of by Isa. 2. 2.
Isa. 2. 2. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains (even as here
Ezekiel did see this Temple upon a very high mountain, chap 40. 2.) and shall
be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, etc. Ib. v. 4.
And they shall beat their swords into Plough shares, and their spears into
pruning books: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more. Here is the building of such a Temple as shall bring
peaceable and quiet times to the Church, of which that Evangelicall Prophet
speaks in Isa. 11 9. and 60. 17, 18.
other places also. And if we shall read that which follows, Isa. 2. 5. as
the Chaldee Paraphrase does. And the men of the house of Jacob shall say, Come
ye, etc. then the building of the Temple there spoken of, shall appear to be
joined with the Jews conversion; But howsoever, it is joined with a great
peace and calm, such as yet the Church has not seen.

4. We find in this vision, that Polanus in Ezech. 45. Der^formatione Status
civilis agitur, v. 8, 9, 10. In quibus praedic^io est, eti^m principes et
m^gistratus politicos, adducendos ad obedientiam fidei in Chri^m, a^ saltem
coercendos et i^ officio continendos, ne amplius oppri^t populum (...).
when Ezekiels Temple shall be built, Princes shall no more oppress the people
of God, nor defile the name of God, chap. 45. 8. and 43. 7. which are in like
manner joined, Psalm. 102. 15, 16. The heathen shall fear the name of the Lord
and all the Kings of the earth thy glory, when the Lord shall build up Zion, he
shall appear in his glory, verse 22. when the people are gathered together,
and the Kingdoms (understand here also Kings as the Septuagints do) to serve
the Lord. Which Psalm is acknowledged to be a Prophecy of the Kingdom of
Christ, though under the type of bringing back the Captivity of the Jews, and
of the building again of Zion at that time. The like Prophecy of Christ, we
have Psalm. 72. 11. All Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall
serve him. But I ask, have not the Kings of the earth hitherto for the most
part, Psalm. 2. 2.
set themselves against the Lord, and against his Christ? And how then shall
all those Prophesies hold true, except they be co-incident with Revel 17. 16,
17. And that time is yet come, when God shall put it in the hearts of Kings to
hate the whore (of Rome) and they shall make her desolate and naked, and shall
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. It is foretold that God shall do this
great and good work, even by those Kings, who have before subjected themselves
to Antichrist.

5. That which I now draw from Ezekiels vision, is no other but the same which
was showed to John, Rev. 11. 1, 2. a place so like to this of Ezekiel, that we
must take special notice of it, and make that serve for a Commentary to this;
And there was given me (says John) a Reed like unto a Rod, and the Ange^stood,
saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that
worship therein. But the Court which is without the Temple leave out, and
measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they
tread under foot forty and two months. This time of two and forty months,
must be expounded by Revel. 13. 5. where it is said of the Beast, power was
given unto him, to continue forty and two months: which according to the
Computation of Egyptian years (re^koning thirty days to each moves) make
three years and a half, or 1260. days, and that is (e) the time of the
witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, and of the woman's (...) Rev. 11. 3. and 12.
6.
abode in the wilderness. Now lest it should be thought that the treading
down of the holy City by the Gentiles (that is, the treading under foot of the
true Church, the City of God, by the tyranny of Antichrist and the power of his
accomplices) should never have an end in this world, the Angel gives John to
understand that the Church, the house of the living God, shall not lie desolate
for ever, but shall be built again, (for the measuring is in reference to
building) that the Kingdom of Antichrist shall come to an end, and that after
1260 years, counting days for years, as the Prophers do. It is not my
purpose now to search when this time of the power of the beast, and of the
Churches desolation did begin, and when it ends, and so to find out the time of
building this new Temple: only this much I trust I may say, that if we reckon
from the time that the power of the Beast did begin, and withal consider the
great revolution and turning of things upside down in these our days,
certainly the work is upon the wheel: the Lord has plucked his hand out of his
bosom, he has whet his sword, he has bent his bow, he has also prepared the
instruments of death, against Antichrist: so says the Psalmist of all
Persecutors, Psalm. 7. 12, 13. but it will fall most upon that capital enemy.
Whereof there will be occasion to say more afterward.

Let me here only add a word concerning a fourth thing which the holy Ghost
may seem to intend in this Prophecy, and that is the Church triumphant, the
new Jerusalem, which is above, unto which respect is to be had (as
Interpreters judge) in some parts of the vision, which happily cannot be so
well applied to the Church in this world. Even as the new Jerusalem is so
described Rev. 21. 4. Some respect had to the Church Triumphant.
in the Revelation that it may appear to be the Church of Christ, reformed,
beautified, and enlarged in this world, and fully perfected and glorified in
the world to come: and as many things which are said of it, can very hardly be
made to agree to the Church in this world; so other things which are said of
it, c^n as ^dly be applied to the Church glorified in heaven, as Verse 3.
where it is said, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, (having come down
from God out of heaven) and he will dwell with them and they shall be his
people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. Verse 24.
Again, And the nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the light of
it: and the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it.

But now I make haste to the several particulars contained in The Text divided.
my Text, I pray God 1 These. 5. 23. So Phil. 1. 9. 11,
says the Apostle) your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved
blameless. And what he there prays for, this Text rightly understood and
applied may work in us, that is, gracious affections, gracious minds, gracious
actions. In the first place, a change upon our corrupt and wicked affections.
If they be ashamed of all that they have done, says the Lord. Secondly, a
change upon our blind minds, Show them the form of the house, and the fashion
thereof, etc. Thirdly, a change also upon our actions, That they may keep the
whole form thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof and do them.

For the first, It is not (...) bosch. but (...) calam. Which two, some
Hebricians distinguish by referring the former to the Greek (...), and the
Latin Verecundia: the latter to the Greek (...) and the Latin Pudor.
Reformation not enough without humiliation. Proved two ways.
the word here used is not that which signifies blushing through modesty, but
it signifies shame for that which is indeed shameful, filthy, and abominable,
so that it were impenitency, and an aggravation of the fault not to be ashamed
for it.

I shall here build only one Doctrine, which will be of exceeding great use
for such a day as this. If either we would have mercy to our selves, or would
do acceptable service in the public Reformation, we must not only cease to
do evil and learn to do well, but also be ashamed, confounded, and humbled
for our former evil ways. Here is a twofold necessity, which presses upon
us this duty, to loath and abhor our selves for all our abominations, to be
greatly abashed and confounded before our God. First, without this we shall not
find grace and favor to our own souls. Secondly, we shall else miscarry in
the work of Reformation.

First, I say, let us do all the good we can, God is not pleased with us,
unless we be ashamed and humbled for former guiltiness. Be zealous and repent
Rev. 3. 19.
says Christ to the Laodecians, be zealous in time coming, and repent of your
former lukewarmnesse. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof now ye
are ashamed? Romans 6. 21.
says the Apostle to the Saints at Rome, of whom Ib. ver. 19. 22.
he says plainly, that they were servants to righteousness, and had their fruit
unto holiness; but that is not all, they were also ashamed while they looked
back upon their old faults; which is the rather to be observed, because Vid.
Martyr in Romans 6. 21.
it makes against the Antinomian error, now a foot. It has a clear reason
for it, for without this, God is still dishonored, and not restored to his
glory. O Lord (...). 9. ^7.
(says Daniel) righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of
faces. Those two go together. We must be confounded, that God may be glorified.
We must be judged, that God may be justified: our mouths must be stopped,
and laid in the dust, that Psalm. 51. 4.
the Lord may be just when he speaks, and clear when he judges. And as 1
Cor. 11. 31
the Apostle teaches us, that if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged
of God; and by the rule of Contraries, if we judge not our selves, we shall be
judged of God: So say I now, if we give glory to God, and take shame and
confusion of faces to our selves, God shall not confound us, nor put us to
shame. But if we will not be confounded and ashamed in our selves, God shall
confound us, and power shame upon us. If we loath not our selves, God shall
loath us.

Nay let me argue from the manner of men, as Mal. 1. 8.
the Prophet does, offer it now unto the Governuor, will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person? Will thy Governor, nay thy neighbor who is as
thou art, after an injury done to him, be pleased with thee, if thou do but
leave off to do him any more such injuries? Will he not expect an
acknowledgement of the wrong done? Is it not Luke. 17. 4.
Christ's rule, that he who seven times trespasseth against his brother, seven
times turn again, saying, I repent? 2 Samuel 15. 19
Da vid would hardly trust Ittai to go up and down with him, who was but a
stranger; how much more if he had done him some great wrong, and then refused
to confess it? And how shall we think, that it can stand with the honor of
the most high God, that we seem to draw near unto him, and to walk in his
ways, while in the mean time we do not acknowledge our iniquity, and even
accuse, shame, judge and condemn our selves? Nay Gal. 6. 7.
be not deceived, God is not mocked.

This is the first necessity of the duty which this Text holds forth. The
Lord requires of us not only to do his will for the future, but to be
ashamed for what we have done amiss before.

The other necessity of it (which is also in the Text) is this, that As the
affections are, so is the judgment.
except we be thus ashamed and humbled, God has not promised to show us the
pattern of his house, nor to reveal his will unto us. Which agrees well with
that Psalm. 25. 9. The meek will he teach his way: and verse. 12. What man is he
that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose, and
verse. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant. There is sanctification in the affections, and here is
humiliation in the affections, spoken of as necessary means of attaining the
knowledge of the will of God. Let the affections be ordered aright, then light
which is offered, shall be seen and received; but let light be offered, when
disordered affections do overcloud the eye of the mind, then all is in vain.

In this case, a man shall be Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
like the deaf Adder, which will not be taken by the voice of the charmers,
charming never so wisely. Let the helm of reason be stirred, as well as you
can imagine, if there be a contrary wind in the sails of the affections, the
ship will not answer to the helm. It is a good argument: he is a wicked man,
a covetous man, a proud man, a carnal man, an unhumbled man. Ergo, he will
readily miscarry in his judgment. So Divines have argued against the Popes
infallibility. The Pope has been, and may be a profane man. Ergo, he may err
in his judgment and decrees. And what wonder, that they who receive not the
love of the truth, be given over 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10.
to strong delusion, that they should believe a lie? It is as good an argument.
He is a humbled man, and a man that fears God. Ergo (in so far as he acts
and exercises those graces) the Lord shall teach him in the way that he shall
choose. I say, in so far as he acts those graces: because when he grieves
the spirit, and cherishes the flesh, when the child of God is more swayed by
his corruptions, then by his graces, then he is in great danger to be given up
to the counsel of his own heart, and to be deserted by Io. 16. 13.
the holy Ghost, which should lead him into all truth.

But we must take notice of a seeming contradiction here in the An Objection
answered.
Text. God says to the Prophet in the former verse, Show the house to the
house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities. And Jerem. 31.
19. Ephraim is first instructed, then ashamed. And here it is quite turned over
in my Text; If they be ashamed, show them the House.

I shall not here make any digression unto the debates and distinctions of
Schoolmen, what influence and power the affections have upon the understanding
and the will. I will content my self with this plain answer. Those two might
very well stand together: light is a help to humiliation, and humiliation a
help to light. As there must be some work of faith, and some apprehension of
the Love of God, in order before true Evangelicall repentance, yet this
repentance helps us, to believe more firmly, that our sins are forgiven.
The soul in the pains of the new birth, is like G^. 38. 28, 29, 30.
Tamar traveling of her twins, Pharez and Zarah: faith like Zarah, first
putting out his hand, but has no strength to come forth, therefore draws
back the hand again, till repentance like Pharez have broken forth; then can
faith come forth more easily. Which appears in that woman, Luke 7. 47, 48.
she wept much, because she loved much, she loved much, because she believed,
and by faith had her heart enlarged, with apprehending the rich grace, and free
love of Christ to poor sinners: this faith moves her bowels, melts her heart,
stirs her sorrow, kindles her affection. Then, and not till then, she gets a
prop to her faith, and a sure ground to build upon. It is not till she have
wept much, that Christ intimates mercy, and says, Thy sins are forgiven thee.
Just so is the case in this Text. Show them the House, says the Lord, that
they may be ashamed; Give them a view of it, that they may think the worse of
themselves, that they want it, that they may be ashamed for all their
iniquities, whereby they have separate betwixt their God and themselves, so
that they can not Psalm. 27 4.
behold the beauty of the Lord, nor enquire in his Temple. And if, when they
begin to see it, they have such thoughts as these, and humble themselves, and
acknowledge their iniquities, then go to, and show them the whole Fabric, and
Structure, and all the gates thereof, and all the parts thereof, and all things
pertaining thereto.

I suppose I have said enough for confirmation and clearing of the Doctrine
concerning the necessity of our being ashamed and confounded before the Lord.
I have now a fourefold application to draw from it.

The first application shall be to the malignant enemies of the Cause and
People of God at this time, who deserve Jeremiahs First application to the
Enemies.
black mark to be put upon them. Ier. 6. 15. and 8. 12.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush. When he would say the worst of them,
this is it; Ier. 3. 3.
Thou had a whores forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed. There are some
sons of Belial risen up against us, who have done some things, whereof, I
dare say, many Heathens would have been ashamed: yet they are as far from
being ashamed of their outrages, as Caligula was, who said of himself, that he
loved nothing better in his own nature, then that he could not be ashamed;
nay, Phil. 3. 19.
their glory is their shame, and if the Lord do not open their eyes to see
their shame, their end will be destruction. Is it a light matter to swear and
blaspheme, to coin and spread lies, to devise calumnies, to break Treaties, to
contrive treacherous plots, to exercise so many barbarous cruelties, to shed so
much blood, and (as if that were too little) to bury men quick? Is all this no
matter of shame? And when they have so often professed to be for the true
Protestant Religion, shall they not be ashamed to thirst so much after
Protestant blood, and in that cause desire to associate themselves with all the
Papists at home and abroad, whose assistance they can have, and particularly
with those matchless monsters (they call them Subjects) of Ireland, who (if
the computation fail not) have shed the blood of some hundred thousands in that
Kingdom? for our part, it seems, they are resolved to give the worst name to
the best thing, which we can do, and therefore they have not been ashamed to
call a Religious and Loyal Covenant, a traitorous and damnable Covenant. I
have no pleasure to take up these and other dunghills: the Text has put this
in my mouth which I have said. O that they could recover themselves out of Act.
8. 23.
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. O that we could hear that they
begin to be ashamed of their abominations. Isa. 26. 11.
Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see and be
ashamed, for their envy at thy people. Isa. 66. 5.
The Lord shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

But now in the second place let me speak to the Kingdom, and to you whom it
concerns this day, to be humbled, both for your 2 Application to the Kingdom.
own sins, and for the sins of the Kingdom, which you represent. Although your
selves whom God has placed in this honorable station and the Kingdom which
God has blessed with many choice blessings, be much and worthily honored
among the children of men, yet when you have to do with God, and with that
wherein his great Name and his glory is concerned, you must not think of
honoring, but rather abashing your selves, and creeping low in the dust.
Livius Decad. 3. l. 7.
tells us that when M. Claud. Marcellus would have dedicate a Temple to Honor
and Virtue, the Priests hindered it, quod utri Deo res divina fi eret, sciri
non posset; because so it could not be known, to which of the two Gods, he
should offer sacrifice: far be it from any of you, to suffer the will of God,
and your own credit, to come in competition together, or to put back any point
of truth, because it may seem peradventure some way to wound your reputation,
though when all is well examined, it shall be found your glory.

You are now about the casting out of many corruptions, in the In regard of
former defilements.
government of the Church, and worship of God. Remember therefore it is not
enough to cleanse the house of the Lord, but you must be humbled for your
former defilements wherewith it was polluted. It is not enough that England say
with Ephraim in Hos. 14. 8.
one place, What have I to do any more with Idols? England must say also with
Ephraim in Ier. 31. 19.
another place, Surely after that I was turned I repented; and after that I was
instructed I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed and even confounded because I
did bear the reproach of my youth. Let England sit down in the dust, and wallow
it self in ashes, and cry out as Levit. 13. 45.
the Lepers did, Unclean, Unclean, and then rise up and cast away the least
superstitious Ceremony, Isa. 30. 22.
as a menstruous cloth, and say unto it, Get thee hence. I know that those who
are not convinced of the intrinsecall evil and unlawfulness of former
corruptions, may upon other considerations go along and join in this
Reformation. For according to Aug. Epist. 119. c. 19. Omnia itaque talia quae
neque sacrarum Scripturarum auctori atibus continentur nec in Episcoporum (...)
statuta inveniuntur, nec consuetudine universae Ecclesiae robora^a sunt, sed
diversorum locorum diversis moribus innumerabiliter variantur, ita ut vix aut
omnino nunquam inveniri possint c^usae, quas in cis instituendis homines secuti
sunt, ubi facultas tribuetur, sine ulla dubitatione, resecanda existimo.
Augustines rule, men are to let go those ecclesiastical customs, which
neither Scriptures, nor Councels bind upon us, nor yet are universally received
by all Churches. And according to Ambrose his rule to Valentinian, Epist. 31.
Nullus pudor est ad meliora transive; It is no shame to change that which is
not so good, for that which is better. So does Arnob. adv^rsus Gentes, lib. 2.
Cum igitur and vos ipsi modo illos mores, modo alias leges, fueritis secuti,
multaque vel erroribus cognitis, vel animad versione meliorum sint a vobis
repudiata: quid est a nobis sactum, contra sensum judiciumque commune, si
majora and certiora delegimus?
Arnobius answer the Pagans, who objected the novelty of the Christian
Religion; you should not look so much, says he, quid reliquerimus, as quid
secuti simus: be rather satisfied with the good which we follow, then to
quarrel why we have changed our former practice. He gives instance, that when
men found the art of weaving clothes, they did no longer clothe themselves in
skins, and when they learned to build Houses, they left off to dwell in rocks
and caves. All this carries reason with it, for Optimum est eligendum. If all
this do not satisfy, it may be Greg. Nazia. Orat. 28, Primariae sedis
dignitatem nobis eripienti quam prudentum etiam quispiam aliquando admiratus
est: nunc autem came fugere ut mihi quidem videtur prinae et singu^ris est
prudentiae: propter ha^c enim r^s omnes nostrae jactantur ac conc^tiuntur:
propter hanc fines orbis terrae (...) and bello flagrant etc U^inam au em ne
ull^s quidem sedis pri^ipatus esset, nec ulla loci praelatio, and tyra^nica
praerogat^va, (...) exsolae vir^ute cog osceremur. V^e etiam Orat. 27. and 32.
and ^arm. 12. ad Constantinop.
Nazianzens rule move some man; when there was a great stir about his
Archbishoprik of Constantinople, he yielded for peace: because this storm was
raised for his sake, he wished to be cast into the Sea. He often professes,
that he did not affect riches, nor dignities, but rather to be freed of his
Bishopric. We are like to listen long, before we hear such expressions either
from Archbishop or Bishop in England, who seem not to care much who sink, so
that themselves swim above. Yet I shall name one rule more, which I shall take
from the confessions of two English Prelates. ^p Hall, lib. 7. Contempl.
One of them has this Contemplation, upon Hezekiahs taking away the brazen
Serpent, when he perceived it to be superstitiously abused: Superstitious use,
says he, can mar the very institutions of God; how much more the most wise
and well grounded devices of men? ^p. Andrews Sermon on Phil. 2. 10.
Another of them acknowledges, that whatsoever is taken up, at the iniunction
of men, and is not of Gods own prescribing, when it is drawn to superstition,
comes under the case of the Brazen Serpent. You may easily make the
assumption, and then the conclusion concerning those Ceremonies, which are not
Gods institutions, but men's devices, and have been grossly and notorlously
abused by many to Superstition.

Now to return to the point in hand, if upon all or any of these or the like
principles, any of this Kingdom shall join in the removal of corruptions out
of the Church, which yet they do not conceive to be in themselves and
intrinsecally corruptions in Religion; In this case, I say (as Phil. 1. 18.
the Apostle in another place) I therein do rejoice and will rejoyee, because
every way Reformation is set forward. But let such a one look to himself how
the Doctrine drawn from this Text falls upon him, that he who only cease
to do evil, but repents not of the evil, he who applies himself to
reformation, but is not ashamed of former defilements, is in danger both of
Gods displeasure, and of miscarrying in his judgment about Reformation. It is
far from my meaning to discourage any, who are with humble and upright
hearts, seeking after more light then yet they have. I say it only for their
sake, who through the presumption and unhumblednesse of their spirits, will
acknowledge no fault in any thing they have formerly done in Church matters.

I cannot leave this application to the Kingdom, till I enlarge Four
considerations, for Englands humiliation. 1. For the great blessings it has
long wanted.
it a little further. There are four considerations which may make England
ashamed and confounded before the Lord.

1. Because of the great Blessings which it has so long wanted. Your
flourishing estate in the world, could not have countervailed the want of the
purity and liberty of the Ordinances of Christ. That was a heavy 2 Chronicles. 15.
3.
word of the Prophet, Now for a long season Israel has been without the true
God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law. It has not been
altogether so with this Land, where the Lord has had not only a true Church,
but many burning and shining lights, many gracious Preachers and Professors,
many notable defenders of the Protestant cause against Papists, many who have
preached and written worthily of practical Divinity, and of those things which
most concern a man's salvation. Nay, I am persuaded, that all this time past
there have been in this Kingdom many thousands of his secret and sealed ones,
who have been groaning under that burden and bondage which they could not
help, and have been Luke 2. 25.
waiting for the consolation of Israel. Nevertheless, the Reformation of the
Church of England has been exceedingly deficient, in Government, Discipline
and Worship; yea, and many places of the Kingdom, have been without a teaching
Priest, and other places poisoned with false Teachers. It is 1 Samuel 7. 2.
said, that all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord, when they wanted
the Ark twenty years. O let England lament after the Lord, until the Arc be
brought into the own place of it.

2. There is another cause of this great humiliation, and that 2. For its great
sins engraven in the present judgments.
is the point in the Text, to be ashamed of all that you have done. Sin,
Sin is that which blacketh our faces, and covers us with confusion as with
a Mantle: and then most of all when we may read our sin in some judgment of
God which lies upon us. Therefore the Septuagints here in stead of being
ashamed of all that they have done, (a) read accept their punishment for all
that (...)
they have done. Which agrees to L^. 26. 41.
that word in the Law: If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled (The Greek
reads there ashamed) and they then accept of the punishment of their
iniquity. This is now Englands case, whose sin is written in the present
Judgment, and graven in your calamity as for 17. 1.
with a pen of iron, and with a point of a Diamond: to make you say, Da^. 9. 14.
The Lord our God is righteous in all his works, which he does: for we obeyed
not his voice. Did not the land make Idol Gods of the Court, and of the
Prelaticall Clergy, and feared them, and followed them more then God, and
obeyed them rather then God, so that their threshold was set by Gods threshold,
and their posts by Gods posts, as it is said v. 7. (I speak not now of lawful
obedience to Authority.) Is it not a righteous thing with the Lord, to make
these your idols his rods to correct you? Has not England harbored and
entertained Papists, Priests and Jesuits in its bosom? Is it not just, that
now you feel the sting and poison of these vipers? Has there not bin a great
compliance with the Prelates, for peace sake, even to the prejudice of Truth?
Does not the Lord now justly punish that Episcopal peace, with an Episcopal
war? Was not that Prelaticall government first devised, and since continued
to preserve peace and to prevent Schisms in the Church? and was it not Gods
just judgment that such a remedy of man's invention should rather increase then
cure the evil? so that Sects have most multiplied under that Government, which
now you know by sad experience. Has not this Nation for a long time taken the
Name of the Lord in vain, by a formal worship and empty profession? Is it not
a just requital upon Gods part, that your enemies have all this while taken
Gods Name in vain, and taken the Almighty to witness of the integrity of their
intentions for Religion, Law and Liberty, thus persuading the world to believe
a lie? What shall I say of the Book of Sports, and other prophanations of the
Lords day? This licentiousness was most acceptable to the greatest part, and
they Ier. 5. 31.
loved to have it so. Does not the great famine of the Word, almost every where
in the Kingdom, except in this City, make the Land mourn on the Sabbath, and
say, Genesis 41. 9.
I do remember my faults this day? Yea does not the Land now enjoy her
Sabbaths, while men are constrained not only to cease from sports on that day,
but from laboring the ground, and from other works of their calling upon other
days? What should I speak of the lusts and uncleanness, gluttony and
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, prodigality and lavishnesse, excess
of riot, masking and balling and sporting, when Germany and the Palatinate, and
other places were wallowing in blood, yea when there was so much sin and
wrath upon this same Kingdom? Will not you say now, that for this the Lord God
has caused Am^s 8. 9. 10.
your sun to go down at noon, and has turned your feasts into mourning, and
all your songs into lamentation? Or what should I say of the oppressions,
injustice, cousinage in trading and in Merchandise, which your selves know
better then I can do, how much they have abounded in the Kingdom? Does not God
now punish the secret injustice of his people, by the open injustice of their
enemies? Do ye not remember that mischief was framed by a Law? and now when
your enemies execute mischief against Law, will you not say, Righteous art thou
O Lord, and just are thy judgments? One thing I may not forget, and that is,
that the Lord is punishing blood with blood, the blood of the oppressed, the
blood of the persecuted, the blood of those who have dyed in Prisons, or in
strange Countries, suffering for righteousness sake. Isai. 59. 15.
He that departed from evil did even make himself a prey. There was not so
much as one drop of blood spilt upon the Pillory, for the testimony of the
Truth, i Psalm. 7^. 14.
but it cries to Heaven; for precious is the blood of the Saints. Does not all
the blood shed in Queen Mary's days cry? And does not the blood of the
Palatinate and of Rochel cry? And does not the blood of souls cry? which is
the loudest cry of all. God said to Cain, Cen. 4. 10.
The voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from the ground, the Hebrew
has it, thy brothers bloods; which is well expounded both by the Chaldee
Paraphrase, and the Jerusalem Targum, the voice of the blood of all the
generations and the righteous people which thy Brother should have begotten,
cries unto me. I may apply it to the thing in hand, The silencing, deposing,
persecuting, imprisoning, and banishing, of so many of the Lords VVitnesses, of
the most painful and powerful Preachers; and the preferring of so many,
either dumb dogs, or false Teachers, makes the voice of bloods to cry to
heaven, even the blood of many thousands, yea thousands of thousand souls,
which have been lost by the one, or might have been saved by the other. God
will require the blood of the children which those righteous Abels might have
begotten unto him. There is beside all this, more Blood-guiltinesse which is
secret, but shall sometime be brought to light. O Blood, blood; O let the Land
tremble, while the Righteous Judge Psalm. 9. 12.
makes inquisition for blood. O let England cry, Psa. 51. 14.
Deliver me from bloodguiltinesse O God.

But you will say peradventure, Many of these things, whereof I have spoken,
ought not to be charged upon the Kingdom, An objection answered.
they were only the acts of a prevalent Faction for the time.

I Answer, First, God will impute them to the Kingdom, unless the Kingdom
mourn for them. Ezekiel. 9. 4.
God gives not a charge to the destroying Angel, to spare those who have not
been Actors in the public sins and abominations, but to spare those only
who cry and sigh for those abominations.

Secondly, When the Ministers of State, or others, having authority in Church
or Commonwealth, take the boldness to do such acts, the Kingdom is not
blameless; for they durst not have done as they did, had the Land but
disclaimed, discountenanced, and cried out against them. It is marked both Mat.
14 5.
of John Baptist, and Mat. 21. 46.
of Christ, and Act. 4. 2^.
of the Apostles, that so long as the people did magnify them, and esteem
them highly, their enemies durst not do unto them, what else they would have
done.

A third consideration concerning the Kingdom is this. Notwithstanding 3 For
its presumption.
of all the happiness and Gospel blessings which it has wanted in so great a
measure, and notwithstanding of all the sins which have so much abounded in
it: Brightman on Rev. 3. 17. Rogers of faith, chap. 10.
yet the servants of God have charged it with great presumption, that the
Church of England has said Rev. 3. 17.
with the Church of Laodicea, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing. It has bin proud of its Clergy, learning, great revenues, peace,
plenty, wealth, and abundance of all things. And as the Apostle 1 Cor. 5. 2.
charge the Corinthians, ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that
the wicked ones might be taken away from among you. And would God this
presumption had taken an end when God did begin to afflict the Land. It did
even make an Idol of this Parliament, and trusted to its own strength and
Armies; which has provoked God so much, that he has sometimes almost blasted
your hopes that way, and has made you to feel your weakness even where you
thought your selves strongest: God would not have England say, Jude 7. 2.
Mine own hand has saved me. Neither will he have Scotland to say, My hand
has done it: But he will have both to say, His hand has done it, when we were
lost in our own eyes. God grant that your leaning so much upon the arm of
flesh be not the cause of more blows. God must be seen in the work, and he
will have us to give him all the glory, and to say Isa. 26. 12.
Thou have wrought all our works for us. O that all our presumption may be
repented of, and that the land may be yet more deeply humbled. Assuredly God
will arise and subdue our enemies, and command deliverances for Jacob: but it
is as certain, God will not do this, till we be more humbled, and (as the
Text says) ashamed of all that we have done.

Fourthly, there is another Motive more Evangelicall: let England be humbled
even for the mercy, the most admirable mercy 4 Because of Gods goodness.
which God has showed upon so undeserving, and evil deserving a Kingdom. See
it in this same Prophecy: Ezekiel. 16. 62, 63.
I will establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord
That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done, says the Lord God. And Ezekiel. 36. 32.
again: Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it knoun unto
you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways O house of Israel. O my God
Ezra 9. 6.
says Ezra, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee. And what was it
that did so confound him? you may find it in that which follows: God had
showed them mercy, and had left them a remnant to escape, and had given them a
nail in his holy place, and had lightened their eyes. And now, Ib. verse. 10.
says he, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy
Commandments. Let us this day compare (as he did) Gods goodness and our own
guiltiness. England deserved nothing, but to get a bill of divorce, and that
God should have said in his wrath, Away from me, I have no pleasure in you: but
now he has received you into the bond of his Covenant, he rejoices over you
to do you good, and to dwell among you, his Banner over you is love. O let our
hard hearts be overcome and be confounded with so much mercy, and let us be
ashamed of our selves, that after so much mercy, we should be yet in our sins
and trespasses.

There is a third application, which I intend for the Ministry, 3 Application
to the Ministry. Their repentance rare.
who ought to go before the people of God in the example of Repentance and
humiliation. You know the old observation, Raro vidi Clericum poenitentem, I
have seldom seen a Clergy man penitent. As Christ Mark 10. 24, 25.
says of rich men, I may say of learned men, it is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, then for a man that trusts in his Learning to
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. He will needs maintain the lawfulness of
all which he has done, and will not be (as this Text would have him) ashamed
of all that he has done. Yet it is not impossible with God to make such a one
deny himself, and that 2 Cor. 10. 5. Yet examples there be of it
whatsoever in him exalts it self against Christ, should be brought in
captivity to the obedience of Christ. Among all that were converted by the
Ministry of the Apostles, I wonder most at the conversion of a great company
of Priests, Acts 6. 7. I do not suspect (as Casaubon. and Beza.
two learned men have done) that the Text is corrupted in that place, and that
it should be otherwise read. I am the rather satisfied, because there is
nothing there mentioned of the Conversion of the high Priest, or of the chief
Priests, the heads of the four and twenty Orders, which were upon the Council,
and had condemned Christ: the place cannot be understood, but of a multitude of
common or inferior Priests: Even as by proportion in Hezekiah's Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 29. 34.
the Levites were more upright in heart than the Priests.

And now many of the Inferior Clergy (as they were abusively called) are more
upright in heart, unto this present reformation then any of those who had
assumed to themselves high degrees in the Church. The hardest point of all is,
so to embrace and follow reformation, as to be ashamed of former prevarications
and pollutions. But in this also the holy Ghost has set examples before the
Ministers of the Gospel. I read 2 Chronicles. 30. 15. The Priests and the Levites
were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt-offerings
into the House of the Lord. They thought it not enough to be sanctified, but
they were ashamed that they had been before defiled. A great Prophet is not
content to have his Judgment rectified, which had been in an error, but he is
ashamed of the error he had been in. Psa. 7^. 22.
So foolish was I, says he, and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. A
great Apostle must glorify God, and humbly acknowledge his own shame. 1 Cor.
15. 9.
For I am the least of the Apostles, says he, that am not meet to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God. And shall I add the example of
a great father? Confess. lib 4. Per idem tempus annor^n novem, etc. seducebamur
et seducebamus, falsi atque fal^es in varits cupiditatibus, etc. Irrideant me
arrog^tes, and nondum salubriter prostrati et elifi a te Deus men's: ego tamen
confite^r tibi dedecora mea, in laud.
Aug: confesses honestly, that for the space of nine years, he both was
deceived, and did deceive others. Nature will whisper to a man, to look to his
credit: But the Text here calls for another thing, to look to the honor of
God, and to thy own shame, and yet in so doing thou shall be more highly
esteemed both by God, and by his children. Now without this, let a man seem to
turn and reform never so well, all is unsure work, and built upon a sandy
foundation. And whosoever will not acknowledge their iniquity, and be ashamed
for it, God shall make them bear their shame, according to that which is
pronounced in the next Chapter, verse 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. against the
Levites, who had gone astray, when Israel went astray after their Idols: and
according to that Malach. 2, 8, 9. Ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi,
says the Lord of Hosts, Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base
before all the people.

The fourth and last application of this doctrine, is for every Christian. The
Text teaches us a difference betwixt a presumptuous, 4. Application to every
Christian.
and a truly humbled sinner. The one is ashamed of his sins, the other not.
By this mark, let every one of us try himself this day. It is a saving grace
to be truly and really ashamed of sin. It is one of the promises of the
Covenant of grace, Ezekiel. 36. 31.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities, and
for your abominations. Try then, if thou have but thus much of the work of
grace in thy soul, and if thou have, be assured of thy interest in Christ and
in the New Covenant. A reprobate may have somewhat which is very like this
grace; but I shall lay open the difference, betwixt the one and the other, in
these particulars.

1. To be truly ashamed of sin, is to be ashamed of it as an Five marks of
difference betwixt the humiliation of the child of God, and that of the
Hypocrite.
act of filthiness and uncleanness. The child of God, when he comes to the
throne of grace, is ashamed of an unclean heart. though the world cannot see
it. A natural man at his best looks upon sin, as it damneth and destroys
the soul, but he cannot look upon it, as it defiles the soul. Shame arises
properly from a filthy act, though no other evil be to follow upon it.

2. As we are ashamed of acts of filthiness, so of acts of folly. A natural
man may judge himself a fool in regard of the circumstances or consequents of
this sin, but he is not convinced that sin in it self is an act of madness
and folly. When the child of God is humbled 1 Cor. 3. 18.
he becomes a fool in his own eyes, he perceives he has done like a mad
fool; Therefore he is said then to Luke 15. 17.
come to himself.

3. The child of God is ashamed of sin Psalm. 130 4. Romans 2. 4.
as an act of unkindnesse and unthankfulness to a sweet merciful Lord: though
there were no other evil in sin, the conscience of so much mercy and love so
far abused, and so unkindly recompensed, is that which confounds a penitent
sinner. As the wife of a kind husband, if she play the whore (though the world
know it not) and if her husband, when he might divorce her, shall still love
her and receive her into his bosom; such a one, if she have at all any sense
or any bowels of sorrow, must needs be swallowed up of shame and confusion for
her undutifulnesse and treachery to such a husband. But now the Hypocrite is
not at all troubled or afflicted in spirit for sin as it is an act of
unkindnesse to God.

4. Shame, Gellius lib. 19. cap. 6. Pudor est timor justae reprehensionis. Ita
enim Philosophi definiunt, (...).
as Philosophers have defined it, is the fear of a just reproof: not simply,
the fear of a reproof, but the fear of a just reproof; that is servile,
this filial. The child of God is ashamed of the very guiltiness, and of that
which may be justly laid to his charge: the Hypocrite not so. 1 Samuel 15. 15 30.
Saul was not ashamed of his sin, but he was ashamed that Samuel should
reprove him before the Elders of the people. Christ's adversaries were ashamed,
Luke 13. 17. not of their error, but because their mouths were stopped before
the people, and they could not answer him. A hypocrite is ashamed, Ier. 2. 26.
as a thief is ashamed when he is found; mark that, when he is found: a thief
is not ashamed of his sin, but because he is found in it, and so brought to a
shameful end.

5. When the cause of God is in hand, a true penitent is so ashamed of
himself, that he fears the people of God shall be put to shame for his sake,
and that it shall go the worse with them, because of his vileness and
guiltiness. This made Psalm. 69. 5, 6.
David pray, O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid
from thee: let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for
my sake: let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of
Israel. The sorrow and shame of a hypocrite (as all his other seeming graces)
are rooted in selflove, not in the love of God: he has not this in all his
thoughts, that he is a Spot or Blemish in the body or Church of Christ, and
therefore to be humbled, lest for his sake God be displeased with his people;
lest such a vile and abominable sinner as he is bring wrath and confusion upon
others, and make Israel turn their back before the enemy. O happy soul that
has such thoughts as these.

I have now done with the first part of the Text, wherein I Second part of the
Text explained.
have been the larger, because it most fitteth the work of the day.

The second follows, Show them the form of the house, etc.

Before I come to the Doctrines which do here arise, I shall first explain
the particulars mentioned in this part of the Text, so as they may agree to the
spiritual Temple or Church of Christ, which in the beginning I proved to be
here intended.

First, we find here the form and fashion of a house, in which the parts are
very much diversified one from another: The fashion of the house.
there are in a formed and fashioned house, doors, windows, posts, lintels,
etc. There is also a multitude of common stones in the walls of the house. Such
a house is the visible ministerial Church of Christ, the parts whereof are
parts dissimilares, some Ministers, and Rulers, some eminent Lights; others of
the ordinary rank of Christians, that make up the walls. If God has made one
but a small pinning in the wall, he has reason to be content, and must not
say, why am not I a post, or a corner stone, or a beam? Neither yet may any
corner stone despise the stones in the wall, and say, I have no need of you.

Secondly, the Prophet was here to show them the goings out The gates.
of the house, and the commings in thereof. These are not the same, but
different gates; it is plain, chap. 46. 9. When the people of the land shall
come before the Lord in the solemn feasts, he that enters in by the way of
the north-gate to worship, shall go out by the way of the south-gate, etc. he
shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in. And that not only
to teach us order, and the avoiding of confusion (occasioned by the contrary
tides of a multitude) but to tell us further, that Luke 9. 62.
no man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God. We must not go out of the Church the way that we came in,
(that were a door of defection) but hold our faces forward till we go out by
the door of death.

Thirdly, the Text has twice all the forms thereof: which I The forms within
and without.
understand of the outward forms, and of the inward forms; which two I find
very much distinguished by those who have written of the form and structure of
the Temple. The Church is exceedingly beautified, even outwardly, with the
Ordinances of Christ; but the inward forms are the most glorious: Luke 17. 20,
2^
For behold the kingdom of God is within you: and it comes not with
observation. Psalm. 45. 13.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within; yet even her clothing is of wrought
gold. Chap. 42. 15.
When the Angel had made an end of measuring the inner house, then he brought
forth Ezekiel by the eastgate (which was the chief gate by which the people
commonly entered) and measured the utter wall in the last place. Gods method is,
first to try the heart and reins, then to give to a man according to his
works, Ier. 17. 10. So should we measure by the ^eed of the Sanctuary, first,
the inner house of our hearts and minds, and then to measure our utter walls,
and to judge of our profession and external performances.

Lastly, the Prophet is commanded to write in their sight all The laws of it.
the ordinances thereof, and all the laws thereof: for the Church is a house,
not only in an Architectonick but in an Oeconomick sense: It is Christ's Family
governed by his own Laws; and a Rev. 11. 1.
Temple which has in it them that worship, it has the own proper laws of
it, by which it is ordered. Aliae sunt leges Caesarum, aliae Christi, li^
Epitaphio Fabiol^.
says Hierom; Caesar's laws and Christ's laws are not the same, but diverse
one from another. Suarez. de leg. lib. 1. cap. 5. Cospensis curs. Theol tract.
13. disp. 1. sect. 1.
Schoolmen say, that a law, properly so called, is both illuminative, and
impulsive: illuminative, to inform and direct the judgment; impulsive, to
move and apply the will to action. And accordingly there are two names in this
Text given to Christ's laws and institutions: (...) torah. from (...) jarah,
demonstravit, docuit.
one which imports the instruction and information of our minds: (...) chok
from (...) chakak, which is insculpere lapidi vel ligno.
another which signifies a deep imprinting or engraving (and that is made upon
our hearts and affections) such as a pen of iron and other instruments could
make upon a stone. It is not well when either of the two is wanting: for the
light of truth without the engraving of truth, may be extinguished: and the
engraving of truth, without the light of truth, may be obliterate.

All these I shall pass, and only pitch upon two Doctrines which I shall draw
from this second part of the Text: One concerning the will of Gods
commandment, what God requires of Israel to do; Another concerning the will
of Gods decree, what he has purposed himself to do.

The first is this; God will have Israel to build and order his The Church tied
to Gods own pattern
Temple, not as shall seem good in their eyes, but according to his own
pattern only which he sets before them. Which does so evidently appear from
this very Text, that it needs no other proof: for what else means the
showing of such a pattern, to be kept and followed by his people? Other
passages of this kind there are which do more abundantly confirm it.

The Lord Genesis 6. 14, 15 16.
did prescribe to Noah both the matter, and fashion, and measures of the Ark.
To Moses he gave a pattern of the Tabernacle, of the Ark, of the Mercy-seat,
of the Veil, of the Curtains, of the two Altars, of the Table and all the
furniture thereof, of the Candlestick and all the instruments thereof, etc. And
though Moses was the greatest Prophet that ever arose in Israel, yet God would
not leave any part of the work to Moses his arbitrament, but straightly
commands him; Exodus 25. 40.
look that thou make them after their pattern which was showed thee in the
Mount. When it came to the building of the first Temple, Solomon was not in
that left to his own wisdom (as great as it was) but 1 Chro. 28. 11, 12, 13.
David the man of God gave him a perfect pattern of all that he had by the
Spirit. The second Temple was also built Ezra 6. 14.
according to the commandment of the God of Israel, by Haggai and Zachariah.
And for the New Testament, Christ our great Prophet, and only King and Lawgiver
of the Church, has revealed his will to the Apostles, and they to us,
concerning all his holy things: and we must hold us at these unleavened and
unmixed ordinances, which the Apostles from the Lord delivered to the Churches.
Rev. (...), 24, 25.
I will put upon you, says he himself, none other burden; but that which ye
have already, hold fast till I come.

I know the Church must observe rules of order and convenience Common
circumstances and sacred Ceremonies distinguished.
in the common circumstances of Times, Places, and Persons; but these
circumstances are none of our holy things: they are only prudentiall
accommodations, which are alike common to all humane Societies, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; wherein both are directed by the same light of nature, the
common rule to both in all things of that kind; providing always, that the
general rules of the Word be observed. 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Do all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 14. 16.
Let all things be done to edifying. Romans 14. 21.
It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy
brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Rom 14. 5, 14
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. To him that esteems any
thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

The Text gives some clearing to this point. There is here showed to the house
of Israel a pattern of the whole structure, and of the least part thereof, and
all the measures thereof; yet no pattern is given of the kind, or quantity,
or magnificence of the several stones, or of the instruments of building. The
reason; Illa qu^si naturam aedificii substantiamque de^otant, haec accidentia.
Illa si tollas deerit fabrica: haec quamvis desiderentur, manet tamen
aedificium. Illa si invertas aut mu^es, non idem aedificium mane. ^it, s^d
aliud: hec quamvis tollas, idem manner potest aedisicium: hand secus quam de
bomine quaquam, deque ejus vestimentis Philosopheris. Villalpan. tom. 2. part.
2. lib. 1. Isa. cap. 12.
because the former is essential to a house, the latter accidental: the
former, if altered make another building; the latter, though altered, the
building is the same. Therefore where we have in the Text, the forms thereof,
the Septuagints read, (...), the substance thereof.

But to clear it a little further, I put two characters upon those
circumstances which are not determined by the word of God, but left to be
ordered by the Church, as shall be found most convenient. First, they are not
things sacred, nor proper to the Church, as has been said; they are of the
same nature, they serve for the same end and use, both in sacred and civil
things: for order and decency, the avoiding of confusion and the like, are
alike common to Church and Commonwealth.

Secondly, I shall describe them as The Bishop of Down, of the authority of the
Church, page 29.
one of the Prelates has done; who tells us, that the things which the
Scripture has left to the discretion of the Church, are those things, which
neither needed, nor could be particularly express. They needed not, because
they are so obvious; and they could not, both because they are so numerous, and
because so changeable.

I will not insist upon questions of this kind, but will make The Application
to England.
a short application of the Doctrine unto you (Honorable and Beloved) you may
plainly see from what has been said, that neither Kings, nor Parliaments, nor
Synods, nor any power on earth, may impose or continue the least Ceremony upon
the consciences of Gods people, which Christ has not imposed. Therefore let
neither antiquity, nor custom, nor convenience, nor prudentiall
considerations, nor show of holiness, nor any pretext whatsoever, plead for
the reservation of any of your old Ceremonies, which have no ground nor warrant
from the word of God. Much might have been said for the high places among the
Jews, as I hinted in the beginning: and much might have been said Mark 7. 2,
3, (...), 7.
by the Pharisees for their frequent washings, which as they were ancient, and
received by the traditions of the Elders, so they were used to teach men
purity, and to put them in mind of holiness: Neither was their washing
contrary to any Commandment of God, except you understand Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12.
32. Pro. 30. 6
that Commandment of not adding to the word, which does equally strike against
all Ceremonies devised by man.

Gal 5 9.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: and a little leak will endanger the
ship. Thieves will readily dig through a house, how much more will they enter
if any posterne be left open to them? Psalm. 80. 13.
The wild beasts and boares of the forest will attempt to break down the
hedges of the Lords Vineyard, how much more if any breach be left in the
hedges? If therefore you would make a sure Reformation, make a perfect
Reformation; lest Christ have this controversy with England, Nevertheless I
have somewhat against thee, Rev. 2. 4. And so much of our duty.

The second Doctrine concerns Gods decree, and it is this: It is concluded in
the Counsel of heaven, and (...) has it Gods purpose to build such a Temple.
in the thoughts of his heart, to repair the br^ of his house, and to build
such a Temple to himself, as is shadowed forth in this vision of Ezekiel. For
the comparing of this verse with verse. 7. in this same Chapter, and with Chap.
37. 26, 27. will easily make it appear, that this showing of the pattern, and
all this measuring, was not only in reference to Isreal's duty, but to Gods
gracious purpose toward Israel: According to that Zechar. 1. 16. Therefore
thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house shall
be built in it, says the Lord of Hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth
upon Jerusalem. Now this vision cannot be said to be fulfilled in Zorobabels
Temple, as I proved before: Only here take notice, that the second destruction
of the Temple by the Romans, was worse then the first by the Babylonians: That
desolation was repaired; but this could never be repaired, though Wolph.
lection. memor. Cent. 16. page 962.
the Jews did attempt the building again of the Temple; first under Adrian
the Emperor, and afterward under Julian the Apostate; the hand of God was
seen against them most terribly by fire from heaven, and other signs of that
kind. And about the same time (to observe that by the way) the famous Delphick
Temple was without man's hand, by fire and earthquake, utterly destroyed, and
never built again; To tell the world, that neither Judaisme, nor Paganism
should prevail, but the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Where then must we seek for the accomplishment of Ezekiels vision, I mean for
the new Temple, in which the Lord will dwell for ever, and where his holy Name
shall be no more polluted? Surely we must seek for it in the days of the
Gospel, as has been before abundantly proved. But that the thing may be the
better understood, let us take with us, at least, some few general
observations, concerning this Temple of Ezekiel, as it represents what should
come to pass in the Church of Christ.

First of all, there is but one Temple, not many showed to The Churches unity.
him: which is in part, and shall be yet more fulfilled in the Church of the
new Testament; according to that Zech. 8. 9. And it shall be in that day, that
living waters shall go out of Jerusalem. Which is the same that we have Ezech.
47. 1. Then follows; And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that
day shall there be one Lord, and his name one. The like promise we find
elsewhere; Ier. 32. 39. Ezech. 11. 19.
I will give them one heart, and one way. It is observed, that for this very
end of uniformity, the Heathens also did erect Temples, that they might all
worship the same Idol God in the same manner. The plague of the Christian
Church hitherto has been Temple against Temple, and Altar against Altar.
Psalm. 6. 3.
But thou O Lord, how long?

Secondly, Ezekiels Temple and City are very large and capacious, Her increase.
as I showed in the beginning; and Ezech. 48. 31, 32, 33, 34.
the City had three gates looking toward each of the four quarters of the
world. All this to signify the spreading of the Gospel into all the earth.
Which is also signified by Ezech. 47. 1, 5*
the holy waters issuing from the threshold of the Temple, and rising so high,
that they were waters to swim in. God has said to his Church; Isa. 54. 2, 3.
Enlarge the place of thy Tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of
thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes;
for thou shall break forth on the right hand and on the left. Col. 1. 6.
A great increase of the Church there was in the Apostles times: but Romans 11.
12.
a far greater to be yet looked for. Isa. 59. 19.
Though the enemy did come in like a flood, the spirit of the Lord has lift up
a standard against him. Psalm. 114. 3.
The Sea saw it and fled, Jordan was driven back. But when the Gospel comes,
like a noise of many waters (as the Prophet calls it verse. 2. signifying an
irresistible increase) it is in vain to build bulwarks against it. God will
even break open Genesis 7. 11.
the fountains of the great deep, and open the windows of heaven: and the
Gospel will prove a second flood which will overflow the whole earth, though
not to destroy it (as Noah's did) but to make it glad: Hab. 2. 14. Isa. 11. 9.
Her different Courts.
for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as
the waters cover the Sea.

Thirdly, in this Temple, beside the Holy of Holies, Vid. Joseph. antiq l. 15.
c. 14. To stat. in 1. Reg 6. quaest 21. A Montan* de sacr: f^bric. p. 15. (...)
Empereur Ann. in Cod. Middoth. cap. 2. sect. 3.
were three Courts; the Court of the Priests, the Court of the people, commonly
called Atrium Israelis; and without both these Atrium Gentium, the Court of the
Heathen, so called, because the Heathen, as also many of those who were legally
unclean, might not only come unto the mountain of the house of the Lord, but
also enter within the utter wall (mentioned Ezech. 42. 20.) and so worship in
that utter Court, or Intermurale. Unto which did belong (as we learn from
Antiq lib. 20. cap. 8 Suasit (populus) regi ut orientalem instauraret porticum
Ea Temp i^xtima claudebat, profundae valli and anguslae imminens etc. Op^ So
^monis Regis qui primus integrum Tem^m condidit. Compare this with l. 15. c. 14.
Josephus) the great East porch, which kept the name of Solomon's porch, in
which both Christ himself did preach, Io. 10. 23. and the Apostles after him,
Act. 5. 12. by which means the free grace of the Gospel was held sorth even to
Heathens, and Publicans, and unclean persons, who were not admitted into the
Court of Israel there to communicate in all the holy things. ^uke 19. 10.
For the son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost. This utter
Court of the Temple is meant, when Io. 8. 2, 3.
it is said that the Pharisees brought a woman taken in adultery, into the
Temple and set her before Christ. Now all this will hold true answerably of the
spiritual Temple: For first, as Ezech. 44. 9.
the uncircumcised and the unclean were not admitted into the Temple among the
children of Israel; so all that live in the Church of Christ, are not to be
admitted promiscuously to every ordinance of God* especially to the Lords
Table; but only those whose profession, knowledge and conversation, after
trial, shall be found such as may make them capable thereof: yet as Heathens
and unclean persons did enter into the utter Court, and there hear Christ and
his Apostles; so there shall ever be in the Church a door of grace and hope
open to the greatest and vilest ^nners, who shall seek after Christ, and Ier.
50. 5.
ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward. Secondly, there shall be
also somewhat answerable to the Court of the children of Israel. Mat. 3. 9.
God can raise up even of the stones, children to Abraham: he will not want a
people to trade in the Courts of his house, and to enquire in his Temple.
Thirdly, and as in the Typical Temple there was a Court for the Priests, so
has the Lord promised to the Church; Isa. 30. 20.
Thy teachers shall not be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall
see thy Teachers. And again; Ier. 3. 15.
I will give you Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding. Fourthly, and as there was a secret and most holy
place, where the Ark was, and the Mercy-seat, and where the glory of God dwel^
so Christ has his own Psalm. 83. 3.
hidden ones, Mat. 9. 15.
the children of the marriage chamber: 2 Cor. 3. 18.
who with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
There is also a time coming, when God will open the secrets of his Temple, and
make the Ark of his Testament to be seen, otherwise then yet it has been;
which shall be at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, Revel. 11. 15, 19.

The fourth thing wherein Ezekiels Temple represents the Her strength.
Church of Christ, is in regard of the great strength thereof. Chap. 40. 2.
It stood upon a very high mountain. The material Temple also in Jerusalem,
as it is described by Josephus, was a very strong and impregnable place.
Interpreters think, that Cyrus was jealous of the strength of the Temple; and
for that cause gave Ezra. 6. 3.
order that it should not be built above threescore cubits high, whereas
Solomon had built it sixscore cubits high. The Romans afterward when they had
subdued Judea, had a watchful eye upon the Temple, and placed a strong
garrison in the Castle Antonia (which was beside the Temple) the Commander
whereof was called, Act. 4. 1.
the Captain of the Temple: And all this for fear of sedition and rebellion
among the Jews when they came to the Temple. Now the invisible strength of the
spiritual Temple is clearly held forth unto us by him that cannot deceive us.
Upon this rock, Mat. 16. 18.
says he, (meaning himself) will I build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. The Princes and powers of the world are more
jealous then they need of the Churches strength; and yet (which is a secret
judgment of God) they have not been afraid to suffer Babylon to be built in
her full strenth. Psalm. 53. 5.
There were they in great fear where no fear was: for when all shall come to
all, it shall be found, that the Gospel and true Religion is the strongest
bulwark, and chief strength for the safety and stability of Kings and States.

Lastly, the glory of this Temple was very great, insomuch Her glory.
that Vi^p. tom. 2. part. 2. lib. (...). cap. 61. 62. 63.
some have undertaken to demonstrate, that it was a more glorious piece then
any of the seven miracles of the world, which were so much spoken of among the
Ancients. But the greatest glory of this Temple was, that the glory of the God
of Israel came into it, and the earth shined with his glory, verse. 2. Christ
Heb. 1. 3.
the brightness of his fathers glory, walking Rev. 1. 13.
in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, is and shall be more and more
the Churches glory. Therefore it is said to her, Isa. 60. 1.
Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. Surely as it was said of the new material Temple, in reference to
Christ; so it may be said of the new spiritual Temple, which yet we look for.
Hag. 2. 9.
The glory of this latter house shall be greater then of the former, says the
Lord of hosts, and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts.
Christ will keep the (...) 2. 10.
best wine till the end of the feast: and Ezech. 36. 11.
he will bless our latter end more then our beginning.

That which I have said from grounds of Scripture, concerning a more glorious,
yea more peaceable condition of the Church to be yet looked for, is
acknowledged by Walaeus de opi^e Chil^starum, tom. 1. page 558. Haec quidem
((...) ^ab, lonis and deletio hostium) a nobis expectari, and fortassis non
long absunt succedetque laetior aliquis Ecclesiae status, and amplior. Vide
ibid. p. 541. Rivetus Explic. Decal. page 229. Posset etiam dici, and fortasse
non minus apt vaticinia de Regno Christi suam babere latitudinem nec semper
intelligi debere de eo quod vel cont nuo vel omni tempore fieri debet, sed de
aliqua periodo temporis, quae etsi nondum advenerit, adveniet nibilominus.
Fieri enim potest, ut quemadmodum expectatur adhuc Iudaeorum generalis
conversie, ita etiam Ecclesia suo tempore ^a pace fruitura sit, in qua ad
literam imp^ebuntur, quae hujus vaticinii verbis (Isa. 2. 4.) signific^ntur.
Others of this kind might be cited.
some of our sound and learned Writers, who have had occasion to express their
judgment about it. And it has no affinity with the opinion of an earthly or
temporal kingdom of Christ: or of the Jews their building again of
Jerusalem, and the material Temple; and their obtaining a dominion above all
other Nations: or the like

I shall now bring home the point. There are very good grounds of hope, to make
us think that this new Temple is not far off: And (for your part) that Christ
is to make a new face of a Church in this Kingdom, a fair and beautiful
Temple for his glory to dwell in: And he is even now about the work.

For first, the set time to build Zion is come, when the people of God take
pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof, Psalm. 102. 13, 14, 16. The
stones which the builders of Babel refused, are now chosen for corner stones;
and the stones which they choosed, do the builders of Zion now refuse: Ier.
51. 26. They shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for
foundations. Those that have any thing of Christ and of the Image of God in
them, begin to creep out of the dust of contempt, and to appear like stars
of the morning. Nay to go further then that, the old stones the Jews, who have
been for so many ages lying forgotten in the dust, those poor Psalm. 147. 2.
Outcasts of Israel have of ^ate come more into remembrance, and have been
more thought of, and more prayed for then they were in former generations.

Secondly, are there not great preparations and instruments Application to this
time. Six signs that God is to build a new Temple in England.
fitted for the work? Has not God called together for such a time as this, the
present Parliament, and the Assembly of Divines, his Zorobabels, and
Iehoshua's, and Haggaies, and Zachariahs? Are there not also hewers of stones,
and bearers of burdens? much wholesome preaching, much praying and fasting, many
petitions put up both to God and man? the Covenant also going through the
Kingdom as the chief preparation of materials for the work? Is not the old
rubbish of Ceremonies daily more and more shovelled away, that there may be a
clean ground? and is not the Lord by all this affliction humbling you, that
there may be a deep and a sure foundation laid?

Thirdly, the work is begun and shall it not be finished? God has laid the
foundation, and shall he not bring forth the head stone? Zechar. 4. 7. 9.
Christ has put Antichrist from his utterworks in Scotland, and he is now come
to put him from his inner works in England. His work is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
says Moses. I am alpha and omega, Revel. 1. 8.
says Christ, the beginning and the ending. Isa. 66. 9.
Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, says the Lord?
shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb, says thy God?

I may add three other signs whereby to discern the time, from Revel. 11. 1.
the place before cited. First, Is there not now a measuring of the Temple,
Ordinances and worshippers, by a reed like unto a rod? the reed of the
Sanctuary in the Assemblies hand, and the rod of Power and Law in your hand,
are well met together. Secondly, there is a Court which before seemed to belong
to the Temple, left out and not measured: Mat. 25. 29.
from him that has not shall be taken away even that which he has. The
Samaritans of this time, who 2 King. 18. 33. 34.
serve the Lord, and serve their own Gods too, and do after the manners of
Idolaters, have professed (as they of old to the Jews, Ezra 4. 2.) that they
would build with you, that they will be for the true Protestant Religion as
you are, that they will also consent to the reformation of abuses, for the ease
of tender consciences. But God does so alienate and separate betwixt you and
them, by his overruling providence, discovering their designs against you, and
their deep engagements to the Popish party; as if he would say unto them, you
have no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem, Neh. 2. 20. Or as it is
in the Parable concerning those who had refused to come when they were invited;
yea had taken the servants of Christ, and entreated them spitefully, and killed
them; the great King has said in his wrath, that they shall not taste of his
supper, and he sends forth his Armies, to destroy those Murderers, and to
burn up their City, Mat. 22. 6. 7. Luke 14. 24. Surely In exhortu Evangelicae
doctrinae, legatus Hadrian^ Pontificis in Comitiis Nerobergae habitis, public
confessus est, in doctrina and vita Spiritualium, recessum esse a regula verbi
divini: Reformationem Ecclesiae in capitibus and membris esse necessariam: ut
hoc confessione cursum Evangelij impediret. Lavater Hom. 9. in lib. Ezrae.
what they have professed concerning Reformation is scarce so much as the Pope
did acknowledge, when Reformation did begin in Germany. However, as it is our
hearts desire and prayer to God for them that they may be saved, so we are not
out of hopes, that God has many of his own among them, unto whom he will give
Tim. 2. 25.
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.

Lastly, the time seems to answer fitly: The new Temple is built when the 42
Months of the Beasts reign, and of the treading down the holy City, (that is
by the best Interpretation 1260 years) come to an end. This computation (I
conceive) should begin rather before the four hundredth year of Christ, then
after it, both because the Roman Emperor (whose falling was the Popes rising)
was brought very low before that time, by the wars of the Goths and other
barbarous Nations and otherwise, which will appear from History. And further
because Innoc. epist. 2. ad Victricium Rothomag. Majores causae in medium
devolutae, ad sedem Apostolicam, sicut Synodus statuit, and beata consuetudo
exigit po^ Iudicium Episcopale, referantur. Uide myster. Iniq. Edit. Salmur.
1611 page 51.
Pope Innocentius (who succeeded about the year 401) was raised so high that
he drew all appeals from other Bishops to the Apostolical Sea, according to
former Statutes and Customs, as he says. I cannot pitch upon a likelier
time, then the year 383 at which time (according to the common calculation)
(...) general Council at Constantinople (though Baronius and some others
reckon that Council in the year 381) Can. 5.
did acknowledge the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, only reserving to the
Bishop of Constantinople the second place among the Bishops: Did not then the
Beast receive much power, when this much was acknowledged by a Council of 150
Bishops, though setting in the Fast, and moderated by Nectarius Archbishop of
Constantinople: Immediately after this Council, it is aknowledged by Mo^nay.
Myster. ^iq. page 46.
one of our great Antiquaries, that the Bishop of Rome did labor mightily to
draw all causes to his own Consistory, and that he does scarce read of any
Heretic or Schismatic condemned in the Province where he lived, but straight
he had his recourse to the Bishop of Rome Wolphius lection. memorab. Tom. 1.
sag. 113. H^ scilicel tempore jam gliscebat Antichristus Romae.
. Another of our Antiquaries notes not long before that Council, that
Antichrist did then begin to appear at Rome, and to exalt himself over all
other Bishops.

Now if we should reckon the beginning of the Beasts reign about the time of
that Council, the end of it will fall in, at this very time of curs: But I dare
not determine so high a point: Gods work will ere it be long, make a clearer
Commentary upon his word: Only let this be remembered, we must not think it
strange, if after the end of the 1260 years, Antichrist be not immediately and
utterly abolished, for when that time is ended he makes war against the
Witnesses, yea overcommeth and kills them: But that victory of his lasts
only three days and a half, and then God makes as it were a resurrection from
the dead: and a tenth part of the great City falls before the whole fall, See
Revel. 11. 3. 7. 11. 13. Whether this killing of the Witnesses (which seems
to be the last act of Antichrists power) be past, or to come, I can not say;
God knows. But assuredly, the acceptable year of Isreal's Jubilee, and the day
of vengeance upon Antichrist, is coming, and is not far off.

But now is there no other application to be made of this point? Is all this
said to satisfy curious wits, or at the best, to The practical use hereof.
comfort the people of God? Nay, there is more then so: it must be brought home
to a practical use. As the assurance of salvation Ezeth. 16. 63.
does not make the child of God the more presumptuous, but the more humble:
neither does it make him negligent Phil. 3. 13. 14. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
, but deligent in the way of holiness, and in all the acts of his spiritual
warfare; so that Io^. 3. 3.
every man that has this hope in him, purisieth himself: So answerably, the
assurance of the new Temple, and of the sweet days to come, serves for a
twofold practical use; even as David also applies Gods promise of Solomon's
building the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 22. 10. for thus he speaks to the Princes of
Israel, ver. 19. Now set your heart and your soul to seek the Lord your God,
arise therefore and build ye the sanctuary of the Lord God: And this is beside
the charge which he gives to Solomon.

First, then ye must set your heart and your soul to seek God, forasmuch as
you know, it is not in vain to seek him for this thing Dan. 9. 2. 3.
. When Daniel understood by books that the 70 years of Jerusalems desolation
were at an end, and that the time of building the Temple again was at hand:
then he says, I set my face unto the Lord God to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackloth and ashes: O let us do as he did; O
let us Jonah 3. 8.
Cry mightily unto God, and let us with all our soul, and all our might, give
our selves to fasting and prayer; Now if ever, Iam. 5. 16.
the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.

Secondly, and the more actively you must go about the bunesse. 1 Cor. 15. 58.
Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord: What
greater motive to action then to know that you shall prosper in it; 1 Cor. 22.
16.
Arise therefore and be doing.

And so I am led upon the third and last part of the Text, of which I shall
speak but very little.

The Doctrine is this, Reformation ends not in contemplation, We must put in
practice what is revealed concerning the pattern.
but in action: The pattern of the house of God is set before us to the end, it
may be followed; and the ordinances thereof to the end they may be obeyed:
Psalm. 119. 34.
Give me understanding, says David, and I shall keep thy law, yea, I shall
observe it with my whole heart: Ioh. 13. 17.
If ye know these things, says Christ, happy are ye if ye do them: The
point is plain, and needs no proof but application.

Let me therefore (Honorable Worthies) leave in your bosoms this one point
more; Many of the Servants of God who have stood in this place (and could do it
better then I can) have been calling upon you to go on in the work of
Reformation. O be Romans 12. 11.
not slothful in business: and forget not to do as you have been taught. Had
you begun at this work, and gone about the building of the House of God, as
your first and chief business, I dare say, you should have prospered better.
It was one cause (among others) why Iud. 20. 21. 25
the children of Israel (though the greater number, and having the better cause
too) did twice fall before Benjamin; because while they made so great a
business, for the villainy committed upon the Levites Concubine, they had taken
no course with Iud. 18. 30, 31
the graven Image of the children of Dan, a thing which did more immediately
touch God in his honor.

But I am confident errors of this kind will be now amended, Civil affairs
must not hinder Reformation.
and that you will by double diligence redeem the time. I know your trouble is
great, and your cares many in managing the war, and looking to the safety of
the kingdom, yet mark what David did in such a case. Behold, in my trouble ( 1
Chro. 22. 14.
says he) I have prepared for the House of the Lord an hundred thousand
talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver, and of brass and
iron without weight. David did manage 2 Samuel chap. 5. chap. 8. chap. 10. and 11.
great wars with mighty enemies, the Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, and
Syrians; beside the intestine war made first by Abner, and afterward by
Absolon; and after that by Sheba. Notwithstanding c 2 Samuel 2. 8, 9.
of all this in his trouble and poverty (the word d 2 Samuel 15. 10.
signifies both) he made this great preparation for the House of e 2 Samuel 20.
1.
God, and if God had given him leave he had in his trouble built it too; for
you well know, he was not hindered from building the Temple, by the wars or
any other business, but only because God would not permit him.

Set before you also the example of the Jews, when the Prophets of God did
stir them up to the building of the Temple, Ezra 5. 1. 2. they say not we
must first build the walls of Jerusalem to hold out the enemy; but the Text
says, they began to build the house of God. Ezra. 4. 24. with 6. 15.
They were not full four years in building the Temple, and finished it in the
sixth year of Darius; Now all the rest of his reign did pass, and all Xe^xes
rei^re, and much of Artaxerxes Lo^manus his reign before the Walls of
Jerusalem were built, N^. 5 14.
for about that work was N^hemiah, from the twentieth year of Arta^s to the
two and thi^tieth year: And if Uide F^e. ^ron. f^l 51. (...) 5^.
great Chronologers be not very far mistaken, the Temple was finished
fourscore and three years before the Walls of Jerusalem were finished.

It is far from my meaning to cool your affection to the Jaws Liberties
Peace and safety of the Kingdom: I desire only to warm your hearts with the
zeal of Reformation as that, which all along you must carry on in the first
place.

One thing I cannot but mention: The Reverend Assembly of ^ivines may lament
(as Augustine in another case) Heu, heu, quam trade jestino! Alas alas, how
slowly do I make speed!

Put since now by the blessing of God they are thus far Present nece^sity of
O^dination.
ad^nced that they have found in the Word of God a pattern for Presbyreriall
Government over many particular Congregations; and have found also from the
Word that Ordination is an Act belonging to such a Presbytery: I beseech you
improve that, Phil. 3. 16.
whereto we have already att^; till other A ^s of a Presbytery be agreed on
afterward Your selves ^know better then I do that much Prove 29. 18.
people is perishing because there is no Vision; Luke 10. 2.
the harvest is great and the Laborers are few. Give me leave therefore to
quicken you to this part of the Work, ^at with all diligence, and without
delay, some Presbyteries be associated and erected, (in such places as your
selves in your w^edome shall judge fittest) with power to ordaire Ministers
with the con^rt of the Congregations, and a ter trial of the g^ts, foundnesse
and conversation of the men. In o do^, you shall both please God, and bring
upon your selves (...) (...) of many poor souls that are ready to perish: ^ob
19. 13.
and you shall likewise greatly strengthen the hearts and (...) of your
Brethren of Scotland, joined in Covenant and in Arms with you. I say therefore
again, 1 Chro. 22. 16.
arise and be doing, and the Lord be with you; Yea, Hag. 2. 4. 5.
the Lord is with you, according to the Word that he has Covenanted with you,
so his Spirit remains among you: Fear ye not, but Ephesians. 6. 10.
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 27. Martii, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Nicoll
do from this House give thanks unto Mr. Gillespie for the great pains he took
in the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty of the said Commons, at St.
Margarets Westminster, (It being the day of public Humiliation,) And to desire
him to Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered that no man shall presume to Print
his Sermon, but whom he shall authorize under his hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint ROBERT BOSTOCK to Print this Sermon.

GEORGE GILLE^.

Die Mercurii, 27 Martii, 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons, Assembled in Parliament, That Master
BOND, and Master NICOLLS. do from this House give Thanks unto Master BOND, for
his great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at MARGRET
WESTMINSTER at the entreaty of this House (it being the day of Public
Humiliation) And they are to desire him to print his Sermon. And it is Ordered
that none presume to print or reprint his Sermon without being authorized under
the hand wrighting of the said Master BOND.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint Francis Eglesfeild to Print my Sermon.

John Bond.


