A BRIEF RELATION OF THE Life and Death Of the late Famous Mathematician and
Astrologer, Mr. VINCENT WING. TOGETHER With his Nativity, as it was done, many
years before his Death, by his own hand; And now, for general satisfaction,
made public.

By J. G. (...).

Quum Moritur vir, an revicturus est? Job. 14. -- Et Mortuus adhuc per hanc
loquitur. Heb. 11. LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn, 1669.

To the Honorable Edward Deering, of London Esquire His Majesty's Merchant, and
Receiver General of his Majesty's Revenues in the Counties of Kent, Essex,
Surrey etc.
Honored Sir,
NOt only your acquaintance with the Sciences Mathematical, and the many
profitable Labors of the Industrious Person, whose Life I here publish, but
your known affection to all the friends of URANIA, has invited me to this
address: As also to return my humble thanks, for that you were pleased lately
in a Company of Giant-like, yet ignorant opposers, as well Nobly to favor the
Truths of Astrology, as courteously to own me and my meaner Arguments in its
behalf. In which contest, by your prevailing and sinnewey Reasons, you so far
wrought upon their Passion and Prejudice (little than a Miracle;) that at
length those angry Opponents (although some of them were men otherwise learned,
and Elderly too) began ingeniously to acknowledge, that they had never heard so
much discourse of Astrology in all their Lives; and therewithal frankly engaged
to enquire into the grounds of that Science, before they believed any more
reports against it. A good president for all that are Enemies to any truth upon
the bare hearsay of others; or, because the ignorant Multitude (as taught by
the supercilious I mean only the Angry (...) Who of all men most emulates
Astrology; and yet huggs an opinion an 100 times more ridiculous than any one
principle thereof; nay, directly untrue; Viz. that of Praedestination in the
most terrifing sense.
Man in Black) have declaimed, or rather snarl'd against it. Vox Populi is not
always Vox Dei; And Truth is too Coy to be courted by the Rabble-rout; She
has select Favorites to whom she dispenceth her Graces.

In your acceptance of this Dedication, you will help to preserve to posterity
a true Son of Science; One, whose Industry was such that Ages will scarcely
Equal. And yet (Sir) not so much protect him, as that mean Piece, I have in,
the following History drawn of him, scarce to the Life I confess. My numbers
are too immusical to sound forth his worth; And my Colors (now like his Ghost)
too pale and lifeless, to express his great Deservings. Mr. Wing was his own
best Herald; And his Fame will live for ever, in his own works. What I have
done, is only to pay a grateful respect to his Ashes, as he was my friend that
future times may find, he had some who were contemporary with him, that knew
how to value him and his merits. If therefore (Sir) you will vouchsafe me but a
corner of the Mantle of your Nobler Reputation and Favor, for my defense, you
will thereby, at once, keep Mr. Wing warm in his Coffin, and cover the many
imperfections of him, who (thus endeavors to embalm his memory, against the
Flesh-flies of Envy and Detraction; and) esteems it one of his greatest
Felicities, that he has an opportunity to entitle himself,

Honored Sir From my study in Brick-Court by the Deans-Yard Westminster. Your
real Servant and Honourer, J. Gadbury.

SOME REMARKS ON THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. VINCENT WING, Compared with his
NATIVITY.
MR. Vincent Wing was born at North Luffenham in the County of Rutland, in the
Year of our Lord 1619. on the Ninth Day of April, at Five Hours Forty-eight
Minutes P. M. or Afternoon. He was a branch of an honest and virtuous stock: as
proceeding from Parents rather good, than great; who, with their Ancestors have
been long seated in the said Town of Luffenham, enjoying a greater blessing in
their continued and settled condition, Mr Wing's Ancestors 1st came out of
Wales, and settled at great Panton near Grantham in Lincolnshire, and near 100.
Years since Planted themselves in North Luffenhan, and as I have it
ascertained me from an honorable hand, there have bin of them in that place
three Generations successively, with himself.
than many others in the Multitude of Riches: A fixed Habitation, being even
the mightiest Mercy that Fortune can bestow upon Mortality; and so
characterized by GOD Himself to Moses in the Mount. Whereas a wandering or
erratique condition, or course of life, either in Persons or Families, is, not
only a reproach, but a Curse to them that undergo it, and their future
Generations. And this Cain in the beginning of time, and the Jews since the
Death of our Savior, have, by a long and miserable experience, found certain
and true. But Mr. Wing's Family, has been happy above many other Families, in
the inheriting so peculiar a blessing; It frequently happens that far greater
Families oftener change their Seats; and sometimes, (in much shorter space) do
also lose their Names.
and yet not more fortunate therein, than in the bringing forth this their
ingenious and industrious Son: Who, from his own merit and endeavors, (with
God's blessings thereupon) has, not only preserved, but much augmented the
Reputation of his deserving Predecessors; and so firmly planted his Name and
Memory there, leaving to his Posterity, an Estate and Fortune considerable to
support and maintain it, should their after endeavors be wanting thereunto; of
which, I am (credibly) informed, there is at present no just cause to doubt.

Where a large Purse, or ample Fortune to a Father is wanting, the Son, though
never so prompt and meritorious, must be content to miss of a liberal breeding;
and thus it fared with Mr. Wing: whose Lot it was to be of capable years, and
fit for Learning, even in the worst of times; Viz. at the beginning of our late
unhappy Confusions: When Rebellion was opposed to Loyalty; Plundering and
Free Quarter to the providing for, and advancement of Posterity; Mr. Wing
wanted an Academical Education; and the reasons thereof.
The Pistol and Pole-Axe to Terence and Tully, etc. And every well-meaning
Person (though of a Fortune competent) had enough to do to shift and provide
for Himself. In which unhappy, (and perhaps unheard of) Calamity, Mr. Wing's
best Friends and Parents sharing, were the more disabled for pursuing his
promotion and encouragement in Learning. But although it was his luckless
Fortune and unhappiness, to want an Academical Education; yet such was his
Natural Inclination and Propensity to an acquaintance with Letters, that by his
own Industry, Dominus Ascendentis applicatus Domino M. C. existenti in sua
exaltatione, decernit Natum ex se ipso honores cumulaturum.
and study, he had in time, conquered a competent Portion of Learning, Viz. A
perfect acquaintance of the Latin Tongue, and a moderate understanding in the
Greek, etc. By which happy advantages, the greatest and most critical Authors
and Masters of Astrology, Argol. 134 p.
and the Mathematiques, in their own Language, were no strangers unto Him. From
whence we may collect this true and modest Observation. That Mr. Wing was
born a Scholar, although not bred, or made one; and therefore preferrible
before many Thousands that had the gainful advantage of an University Learning,
and yet were not therewith capable of matching Him in Mathematical and
Astrological Performances. So excellent is an Innate worth and glory, that all
the external Paints and Florishes cannot so much as equalize, much less
transcend or surpass it.

Yet let the ingenious Reader know, that I have no dis-respect for the Muses,
or for such, whose happy Fate it is, to suck at the sacred Breasts of Minerva;
as having the Schools of Learning in Adoration, and ever bearing a high honor
and value for all those that derive Science from them: And could heartily wish
that our English Universities were so happy, as to Nurse and Foster And I could
wish also, that such whose inclinations bend to learning, might be but so happy
as not to miss an Academical Education.
only such, whose Genitures render them capable of Learning what they always
prudently teach; those being the most probable of making returns of Gratitude
unto them, and of sounding forth to the World their deserved Honor and Fame.
How many are there that be constantly Educated in Schools of Good Literature,
that for want of a Genious to cope with, and conquer Science, become rather the
Scorn than Honor of Learning? Of every Wood a Mercury Ex quolibet Ligno non
fit Mercurius.
cannot be made. If the Flint have no Fire in it naturally, in vain is the
Steel applied unto it, in hopes of procuring any. Schools of Learning being
like unto skilful Lapidaries, who polish the Diamonds of our minds, and
understandings; and set a radiant luster upon them, although we bring them
thither rugged and misshapen: (and thither we must bring them, or go without our
errand.) And indeed, Men must have peculiar Stars for the attaining such a
peculiar Favor and blessing from the Hand of God and Nature: And being so
furnished, will in time appear, and show themselves, and Dart forth their
Native Splendour, (like our Mr. Wing) although they should want the Embellishes
and Polishes of Education* (yet I say not all out so happily!) And if this our
deceased Friend were so eminently successful and deserving without them, and
shined in his Generation above, and beyond so many, that had the enjoyment of
such adorning acquisitions; What would He have done, and how spreading would
His Fame have been, if His so rare Natural Parts had met in Conjunction with
them?

But because Mr. Wing was an Astrologer and Mathematician, and that perhaps
these Papers, may be mostly inspected by such as are inclined to those curious
Sciences; I shall desire, and expect the Pardon of the ingenious, if I swerve a
little from common Method in the Writing the Life of this my worthy Friend; and
here, before I proceed any further, insert his Nativity, as it was curiously
done by his own hand, and by Himself friendly communicated to me several Years
See my Col. Genit. p. 2. where the S. heme thereof is Printed.
before He dyed: He being of so generous a Mind and Courage, and yet so humble
withal, that, as he did not fear to foresee, or foreknow any evil of
Himself, so He was not elevated or puffed up with the thoughts of any prescient
advantages that were likely to issue to him: but used his Nativity, and what he
understood thereby, (as the great Apostle used the World,) as if he used it
not. Submitting Himself (even in the best or worst of things, by it either
promised or threatened) ever to the guidance and governance of that Universal
Power, that rules all things by the wisdom of his Providence, even God
blessed for ever! Nascitur Vincentius Wing, Anno 1619. April 9d. 5h. 48. P. M.
Elevat. Poli, 52. 40. Luffenhamiae. a ad.

Latit. Planetarum
1. 51. Merid.. 0. 57.. 2. 46. Septent.. 0. 20.. 1. 23. Merid.. 0. 46. Septent.
Antisc. Planetarum.
0 42... 23. 36... 0. 3... 4. 1... 15. 47... 11. 5... 18. 58.. The Fortitudes
and Debilities of the Planets in this Nativity, you may behold in the following
Table.
is strong by 9 Testimonies. strong 20 strong 10 strong 20 weak 2 strong 20
strong 20 TH strong 6

Here are no less than four Planets Competitors for the honor of Almuten in
this Geniture: Viz. The Moon, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus: and truly, if I
understood his Mind and Actions aright, he equally shared in their peculiar
qualities and significations. For he wanted not the public Fame and
multiplicity of business that the Moon gives; nor the Ingenuity that Mercury
bestows; nor the Justice and Goodness that Jupiter affords; nor yet the
harmless and pleasant conversation, (to sweeten the rest, for without that all
business is a burden, and all knowledge a slavery!) that Venus patronizeth:
But of this more anon.

The Sun alone is Hylech, Omar de Nativit. Lib. 2. Cap* 3. etc.
or Propagator vitae, the Geniture being Diurnal, and he in an Aphetical place.
And (being just entering Taurus) we may admit Venus the Alchocoden, Firmic. Lib.
2.
or giver of Years: Fol. 57. ad Mavort.
Or should we (in respect of the Moon's being so powerful in the Figure) admit
her a sharer in the designing of Life, (which is not altogether unreasonable,
but agreeable to the Opinions of Omar and Firmicus,) then will Jupiter be
Alchocoden; which is in effect the same; for both their mean Years are
Forty-five* and more they cannot give of themselves in this Nativity; because
one of them is oppressed by Saturn's Quadrate, and the other by Mars his
Opposition: and although Mr. Wing lived beyond these, Four Years at the least,
that is to be attributed to the strength of his Nativity in general, and not to
his Alchocoden; which could not preserve him above the aforesaid number of
Years for the Reasons before remembered.

Saturn is the Anareta, or the Destroyer of Life in this Geniture; as being,
First, Locally placed in the Eighth House; Secondly, As afflicting the Lady of
the Horoscope; Thirdly, As he is Lord of the Fourth House, which Astrologically
signifies the Grave; Fourthly, As he is a Planet inimical to Nature. And
accordingly when the Sun or Hylech was directed to his Conjunction or Body, Mr.
Wing dyed.

And so I come to consider of the Nativity it self, and to compare it with the
Actions, Dispositions and Inclinations of the deceased Person to whom it
appertained.

Herein you see that Signum Justitiae, Stellae fixae irrationabile is atque
admirabileis faelicitates afferunt, etc.
or the Celestial Balance is ascending the Horoscope, and the Royal fixed
Star, (...), or the Virgins Spike arises therewith: Ptol. Cent.
plainly demonstrating Mr. Wing (according to the Rules of Astrology) to be
born for an honorable end and purpose; Aphor. 29.
and to do great and worthy things in his Generation; which he has not failed
to perform: thereby eminently justifying the influences of those Stars, Spica
Virginis in Ascendente, dignitates altas imp^rtitur, etc. Ptol.
that (Sub Deo) have honored him at his intrat into this World. The benign
Planet Venus is Governess of the Horoscope, and posited in her exaltation,
Parv. p. 131.
in Trine of the Moon, and in a noble reception of Luna and Jupiter: all, of
most admirable import and signification, as every understanding Astrologer
knows. And agreeable hereunto, Mr. Wing, as he was honored equally with many
above his degree, so he merited such respect; being a Man Dominus decimae in
nona, Natus erit honestae vitae.
of a very just and pious frame and temper; Argol. p. 42.
generally even humored: Venus honest posita, ut in suis dignitatibus, cum
Luna, etc. Honestos mores, and laudabiles decernit.
at sometimes he would admit of facetiousness without scandal, affability
without injury; and did a little delight in a free and harmless conversation;
being neither too austere on the one hand, Argol 116. p.
or too vain and fruitless on the other. But (like his Horoscope) was equally
poised between both, and yielded to neither extreme. He was scarcely known to
envy any man, (and do you not see that Mars is the weakest Planet in the
Scheam?) as if he had wanted Choler to awaken Revenge, or to create a passion:
but, on the contrary, was kind, respective and obliging to all men: even to his
enemies, (as the Holy Rule enjoins) if they were not, beyond the line of
reason, malicious and provoking. He was nothing ambitious or insulting, All
Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire, and the Countries round about, give this
general good and commendable Character of him; as any that pleases, may more
particularly inform themselves from any of the Gentry of those Countries, as my
self have done before the writing hereof, because I would publish nothing but
truth concerning him.
but rather meek and humble, and always apt to depreciate himself. He was never
distrustful or suspicious of others, because free from the taint of those
qualities himself, and always virtuous, and true hearted. These are the natural
significations of such happy and Heaven-favouring Positions, together with
their genuine verifications. And the better to enforce and make good all this
that we have said, (and more) it is observable, that the Noble Trine of the
Moon and Venus, etc. before spoken of, is made from those two Planets greatest
dignities, Viz. that of Astrologers called House and Exaltation; which gave Mr.
Wing a more curious frame of Soul, and a better opportunity and means to show
the excellency, integrity, activity, and evenness thereof, than if so glorious
an Aspect had proceeded from weaker parts of the Heavens: I mean, from such
parts or places wherein those Planets had less delighted, or had been more
meanly and poorly dignified. Thus we see by experience, that the Dignities of
the Planets are no vain and idle things; and that we ought to esteem more of
them, than of Chimera's, or Castles in the Air. I could produce a great many
parallel instances, but this is so certain and undoubted a truth, that it needs
not.

From this admirable Trine, Luna in None, Nato religioni addicit.
and it is happening, (not only in the Dignities of the Planets Trining, but) in
the Dignities of the benevolent Planet Jupiter; Argol. p. 140.
(the Patron of things Divine, etc.) Quum and etc. sunt signif. dispositionis
Animae, Natus erit simplex, amans nitiditatem, and magisteriam, at que r^rum
investigationes, -- eritque bonae qualitatis animae, pius, sani cordis, Deum
amabit, and illi serviet, cupiet etiam amore Dei, laboriosus esse, erit
sensatus, and amans, humilis, etc.Ptol Quadrip. lib. 3. cap. 13.
proceeded that great and unfeigned Love, Duty, and Reverence, which Mr. Wing
constantly paid to Religion, and to the service of God: being always known for
a true and zealous frequenter of the Church, and an adorer of the Clergy;
esteeming them the most worthy of Honor and Reverence, that God himself had
been pleased to commit the charge of his most honorable and valuable Jewels in
the World unto; even the Souls of Men. He was indeed so much, and so great a
votary to Religion and Piety, that many of the Almanacks he annually wrote,
were in a manner Sermons, or Expositions, or Applications of some useful Texts
of Scripture; encouraging People by the Word of GOD, as well as by the Works of
God, to follow that which was Religious, ^audable, Good and Profitable. By
which ingenious and pious practice of his, we are made happy in the
acquaintance of this great truth, (against the perverse, wilful, obstinate,
unreasonable and crooked Opinions of the Enemies to all Stary Learning.) That a
Man may be a good Christian, and yet an Astrologer: and, that Divinity and
Astrology, to a sober and unprejudiced understanding, are not incompatible:
there being no such antipathy between the Word, Rue or Herbgrace, delights not
to grow in the Face of the Sun, although he be the Life of all living things:
and this any Gardner will tell you.
and works of God, (or those that study the one, and the other, as Naturalists
tell us, there is between the Sun and Rue, or the Vine and Colewort,) but that
they may well stand and grow together. Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei. Psalm. 19.
verse. 1.

He was a Person of a very ready, ripe, and pregnant wit; and had good judgment
and memory thereunto annexed: [The want of the later of which was a defect,
that the learned Doctor Hammond exceedingly bewailed in himself, saying, that
it was easier for him to Pen twenty Sermons, than to get one by heart.] What
Mr. Wing read was his own; and thence he began to be a Mathematician in domo
Mercurii, dat Scientias. Ptol. parv. p. 34. D^cima septima pars Si in horoscopo
fuerit inventa -- and been posita, ad benevolas plena lumine feratur Litera^os
faciet, etc. Firmicus. Lib. 8. Cap. 21.
in his younger years, being capable of understanding all the parts of
Arithmetique, of the several ways used in Surveying Land, Measuring all sorts
of heights and distances, etc. As also of making all kinds of Dyals, with many
other neat and commendable acquirements, by that time he was but Eighteen Years
of Age; as I have often heard Himself, as well as others report. So that in a
sense, it may be said of him, as it was of the Holy St. Remigius, and the great
Doctor S. Thomas Aquinas, -- That from the time of his first capacity of
Learning, he out stripped those that were much his Superiors in Age, and (I
may justly add) in Education also.

And truly, he had need be naturally ingenious, that attempts such lofty,
crabbed, coy, and difficult studies at any time, much more in his Juvenile
Years: When the Feather of Youth is high and spreading, and principally waves
us to vanities; seldom suffering our inclinations to reach after serious or
weighty things; they being as contrary thereunto, as Blood to Melancholy, Heat
to Cold, Winter to Summer, etc. But this Mr. Wing was born Astrologus nascitur,
non fit.
to prove the Influences of the Stars certain and true; and by an apt
demonstration
in himself to show us, That the God of Stars is not tied to the meaner methods
and observations of Men, or to his own ordinary way of working; but pursues the
Rules of his own good will and pleasure, varying from his common course, how,
and when, and as often as he pleases. Thus he can satisfy the stomach (beyond
Man's reason) without food; matthew. cap. 15. verse 36, 37.
the Thirst without Wine; and feed our intellectuals also (if he vouchsafe it)
without instruction of Books or Letters. 1 Cor c. p. 1. verse. 25, 26.
It Is his Prerogative peculiar, to make strong things of weak; and excellent
things, of things contemptible and despised; an Age in Youth; and contrariwise,
a Childishness in elder years; and by this his foolishness, sometimes to amaze,
othertimes to destroy, the wisdom of Men. Thus, to declare his Omnipotence,
Dominus medii Caeli in suis dignitatibus applicatus domine Ascenden is
Orientalis honores in regno pollicetu^, and Principum familiaritatem Arg. p.
134.
he is pleased to raise Ventidius, (though of a very low and mean extraction)
to the greatest honor and dignity in Rome: And to make Cicero (whose
Parentage, or Original, if story may be credited, was scarce known) Pater
Patriae, the Father of his Country. And thus by God's especial favor and
benignity, is Mr. Wing raised, from an indifferent degree and quality, Sol in
Cusp de septimae tribuit honores, and gloriam post mortem. Ptol. par. p. 133.
to be a Reputation to his Country, and a promoter of the severer Sciences. And
from them, to an equal honor (for indeed He has taken more than equal pains)
with the admirable and ingenious Kepler; with the ever celebrated Alphonsus,
Canis Syrius, sicut Procyon in medio Caeli, (as here) dat honores magnos. etc
Ptol. par. 131
with the renowned Ticho Brahe; with the immortal and ever glorious Julius
Caesar! with all which illustrious and famous Persons, his Name and Memory will
for ever shine in the treasury and bibliotheck of Fame; for his indefatigable
and admired Industry, Gradus medii Caeli exaltatio Jovis (I am sure it is near
it) Celebre nomen diffundit. Argol. p. 132.
Acquisitions and Performances, in all Mathematical, and Astrological Learning.

To fit him with a Soul for these illustrious enquiries (for such they are) he
had, in his Nativity, a noble reception of Mars and Mercury, (and Mercury swift
in motion) and this by the dignity of the House,. Motu velex facit expeditos in
inventionibus and rationibus.
Viz. the greatest that can be: and such that Astrologers generally account
equivalent to a Sextile or Trine Aspect of them: Been dispositi Mercurius, and
Mars faciunt ingenio acutissim^. page 137.
and the Moon (which is the Conveyer of all the other Planets influxes to this
our Terrene Star) is hastening to an Aspect of them both. Which (in an
Astrological sense) forces the imagination, fancy and ingenuity of a Person
(pardon the expression, for it is very true,) that is so born, beyond the
common rate of exertion, and ripens the mind (with all its faculties) in so
celerous and active a manner, that it affords a Harvest of Wit and Judgment
in such Men, before there will be an appearance of a Spring in others, that
shall unfortunately want these forwarding Configurations. And thus it comes to
pass, that some Persons are so prodigiously, and to a Miracle illuminate, and
afford great Crops of Art and Learning, before others of more tenebrous and
Cloudy souls, can put forth either Leaf or Blossom.

Thus it was apparent in the Nativity of that Reverend Prelate, See the History
of his Life.
the late Lord Primate of Ireland, Doctor Usher, (whom Paulus Testardus justly
style, Vide my Collectio G^niturarum. p 2.
Seculi, and Ecclesiae decus eximium, the greatest honor of the Church and
Age) who, having such a Configuration in his Geniture, was so active and
forward in his studies, Where all their Nativities a^e to be found.
that (the History of his Life says) he was created Master of Arts at Twenty
Years of Age. Thus also, the late Reverend Bishop of Durham, Doctor Morton
(from the same Reason in his Nativity) was learned betimes in comparison of
many others, as is recorded in the History of his Life. So also the late
Learned Doctor Hall, Bishop of Norwich (being born when Mars and Mercury were
in Trine Aspect,) was known to be Master of as large and spreading intellectual
abilities, as any learned in the whole World: Witness the several incomparable
Pieces he wrote, and left behind him in Print; especially that learned and
pious Treatise, entitled his Contemplations. Thus likewise, the most learned
and acute Philosophers, Henry Cornelius Agrippa, and John Baptist See his
Nativity, as done by himself in his Astrologia Gallica.
Morine, etc. whose noble Genitures showed the same worthy configurations: and
who more nimble, and fortunately forward in all kind of learning than they?
Infinite numbers more could I instance in, who (as these already mentioned,
with our Mr. Wing, enjoying such excellent and beneficial rays of the Stars,)
have been as Comets in the Ages they lived and flourished in, attracting the
Eyes and Wonder of all Men toward them, for their great and fortunate parts
and performances: but these few are sufficient.

By this we are instructed how God Almighty in his wisdom has suited and
proportioned all inferior actions,
Persons and things, to the motions and configurations of the Heavenly Bodies:
and how much it makes for the honor of his Majesty, that all temporary
productions are ordered and disposed of, by this Celestial Clork-work; as it
has pleased him to appoint and ordain at the first.

From this happy reception of Mars and Mercury, together with the Moon's
configurations with them, (of which before you have heard) It is observable, --
That Mr. Wing was, not only capable of knowledge and understanding, etc. but
was therein very communicative and diffusive. He hated to hide his Talent in a
Napkin; Math. 25. and 25.
or covetously to cloister up that Science which He so happily (above many
thousands of others) had attained unto, and was blessed with all. He was freely
willing and ready to impart any thing (let it be never so curious and choice a
secret) to any ingenious Person or Son of Urania; and has often publicly
professed, that it was his great discontent and trouble, if at any time in his
writings he thought he had not been plain, even to the meanest, or most
ordinary, or costive understanding.

And (to go a little further in this Argument.) these configurations did, not
only give him a great love unto, and a delight in knowledge, but a strength of
mind, and ability of Body for the same. Thus was he fitted for traveling
through the most crooked and crucifying parts of Astronomy, etc. As those, of
the restoring the (most hard to be found) places of the two most Critical
Planets in the Heavens, Mars and See his excellent Tables (in his Astronomia
Instaurata, and Harmonicon Coeleste,) of those Planets motions: As also his
Astronomia Britanica, lately published.
Mercury.

He had (in all respects) an active Geniture: and accordingly hated
slothfulness and idleness with a perfect hatred; accounting it a shame and
error for any Man to foster or cherish such contemptible issue: or to think
that he was created, or brought forth into the World for so despised and
inglorious an end. And was therefore so frugal of his time, (like the Thuscan
Philosophers, that thought the loss of a Day irreparable;) as, not only, not to
mis-employ or mispend any the smallest part or portion thereof, (after he was
of capable and understanding Years,) but very prudently and advantagiously, to
improve every little Minute; making his Books his recreations, and his severer
and wasting studies, his Pleasures.

If he were of any thing covetous, it was of knowledge: being indeed scarcely
ever satisfied therewith; making it his business to frequent the Company And of
this I have had the happiness, of being more than once or twice, a witness.
of the most learned and excellent Men when he came to London at any time, and
so to spend his time; whereas others generally turn such journeys into pleasure
and recreation: And truly so did Mr. Wing too. For such converse was his
soul-satisfying delight; his Mind being principally placed upon such a
felicity. Thus did Mr. Wing constantly (both abroad and at home) labor after
the discovery of the most mysterious things in Astrology, Geometry, Algebra,
Trigonometry, and all other parts of Mathematical Learning.

But Mr. Wing did not labor after this toylsome manner, (Churl-like) only to
satisfy and please himself, but to profit and advantage others. And to this
purpose, after his many years painful labors, and a consuming of himself in
study and business; he has published to the World these several Books
following.

1. His Urania Practica, or Practical Astronomy. 2. Harmonicon Coeleste, or the
Harmony of the Visible World. 3. Astronomia Instaurata, in four parts. 4.
Ephemerides of the Celestial motions for 20. Years; with an excellent
Introduction to the knowledge of all Mundane Alterations. 5. An ingenious
Treatise of Surveying. 6. Examen Astronomiae Carolinae, in his own Defense. 7.
Astronomia Britannica, written in Latin, now in the Press, and almost ready to
be published. 8. Computatio Catholica; an excellent Treatise, now almost (also)
ready to be published: Besides his Annual Labors, which always tended to the
utility of the ingenious Astrologers, and Mathematicians.
In which Pieces of Astronomy, he has most facilely solved, the (not very
easily solved) Phenomenon of the Heavens; and so plainly proved the motion of
the Earth to be an apparent Physical truth, that the very Soul of Copernicus,
(the first Inventer of that Opinion, Mr. Wing the Reviver, and Defender of the
motion of the Earth in these later Times.
as to this later part of the World,) by a happy Metempsychosis, seems to have
enlightened Him to the Demonstration thereof: and this by such unerring Axioms,
and most conspicuous verities, that the (long embraced) contrary Opinions, with
all the insoluble systems thereunto belonging, are quite out of Doors, and
scarce so much as thought of now, (much less with pristine earnestness
defended) by any of the most able Astronomers of this Age. So that, had the
unfortunate Bishop of Ratis bone, but lived in our more transparent and knowing
times, he had never dyed a Martyr for so sure and sound a Truth.
Nay, had Saint Augustine been contemporary with Mr. Wing, his doubt about
Antipodes had been fully resolved. May we not now (without vanity) aver, that
He was the Restorer of Astronomy to this later Age: And not only so, but that
he was so happy in his attempts of that kind, that he did nothing without
success? Nay, I conceive I may (without offense) urge it, since others, (far
more competent Judges of his surpassing abilities than my self) have done it
before me. -- That Mr. Wing has performed more in, and toward the
rectification and perfection of the Celestial Motions, than all the ingenious
Mathematical heads in both Universities have of late Years done; and for the
same was honored, and had in eminent esteem with most of the best learned in
this our British Nation.

Among the many observables in Mr. Wing, this we may not omit in his Praise,
and to his Eternal Honor let it be remembered: -- That He was always a Loyal
Person and good Subject, and in the worst of times, when it was esteemed a
Crime to be obedient to a lawful Prince and Sovereign, Vide his many Almanacks
wrote in the times of our late Rebellion: when he might have sided against his
Sovereign with applause, and gain; as well as some other Almanack-writers; but
you find (by them) he was too Loyal for such degenerous and impious actions, or
practices.
and so much the fashion to be Anarchical and Rebellious; Mr. Wing was so
conscientiously just, as always to own his Allegiance: accounting it far better
to perform a vow made to God on the behalf of his Prince, than nimbly and
unchristianly to swallow Perjury: (a Sin the very Heathen would disdain and
protest against!) and although the times he was necessitated to live in,
afforded him many great and unhappy examples to that unloyal and ungodly
purpose, yet, he still continued his integrity and duty; as well knowing, that
Treason against our Sovereign, is equal to Sacrilege against our Savior.

Indeed, Mr. Wing, had, not only a just and Loyal Heart, but a good and Loyal
Nativity to show and to signify it. There was when he was born, in the Heavens
a happy Trine between the Lady of the Ascendent and Governess of the Medium
Caeli. We know it is as Natural for some Persons to be repugnant and opposite
to Government, and to their Prince or Governor, as for some Children or
Servants, to be disobedient or rebellious to their Parents or Masters. The
reason whereof, is (perhaps) a secret in Astrology, and scarce known to the
best of Artists. It may be worthy thanks to divulge it; and it is this. Nota
been.
-- That, as the gentle and amicable Rays between the Lords of the Medium
Caeli and Horoscope, make loyal and dutiful Persons or Subjects, so their
unfriendly beams to each other, create Rebels, Incendiaries, and unloyal
Persons. The ingenious Genethliacal Astrologer may spare me the trouble of
Instances, he can easily prove the truth hereof himself.

Albeit, Mr. Wing was a Man of such admirable parts as you have heard, yet he
was the least admirer of his own abilities of any Man in the World; but still
industrious to improve them. His desire was so strong after study, that he even
neglected himself for it is sake, and for the great contentment he took therein.
And though his seize were great, yet was he known more to lament and
bemoan his defects and imperfections, than any way to boast of his skill. He
was no way Ostentatious, but on the contrary, very humble; and had nothing of
the Pharisaical temper or humor, but like the Laden Ear in Harvest, still bent
his head downward; and (with the Peacock) more often looked upon his Feet, than
his Plumes: being ever observed in all company, to give unto others the
precedence, or right hand, which perhaps did not inherit the hundredth part of
his understanding and knowledge.

But now, although he was of so self-denying a temper and disposition, and
never apt to begin quarrels or contentions with any Man; yet has it been his
fortune (against his inclination) to be engaged in differences: he having been
(by some ambitious and troublesome Persons) publicly abused in Print: by two
especially, who have, (after their heaping upon him undeserved reproaches,) in
an impudent and shameless manner, made use of his works, to dress and furnish
out their own; and this without crying Peccavi, or seeking of a reconciliation
from him. To signify Dominus septimae in duodecima dissensiones decernit cum
inimicis. Argol.
which hard measure from his (unexpected, as well as undeserved) Antagonists,
he has, in his Nativity, Mars (an angry Planet) Lord of his Seventh House,
posited in Virgo, Retrograde in the Twelfth Angle, which has signification of
scandal and detraction, etc. And the Moon, Cum cauda Draconis; and in Quadrate
of Mercury in the Seventh House; a place denoting public Adversaries, strifes
and contentions, etc. apt and proper Arguments hereof, as any Astrologer must
needs understand and acknowledge. More plain and speaking testimonies of the
Malice of Enemies, cannot in any Nativity be found: as if Mr. Wing had been
born into the World on purpose (in matters of controversy) to encounter Men of
brutish Principles and Conditions.

Howbeit, it is eminently known, that Mr. Wing was of courage sufficient, and
capable for to resent an injury; and would (upon any good occasion) be so just
to himself, (and to the truths that the World was made partaker of, by his
happy Pen and Pains;) as to give his Enemies to understand he did not wear his
Soul without him; (Who ever did,
that had the grand significators of his Nativity strong?) but could easily
vindicate himself from their causless cavils, and scomma's, and their want of
ingenuity and charity toward him. Seneca says that a man has so much wit, as
he has anger. And St. Paul allows of anger; so that it be limited, and not
transported with a desire of revenge.
And when (beyond reason) provoked, he did accordingly, (with a spirit of
soberness) reply unto those his Antagonists; who were so bold and daring to
attempt the lessening of his unblemished Fame and Reputation, to (do that which
was indeed impossible, and therefore I spare their Names;) make way thereby for
the advancement of their own. He also has the Virgins Spike ascending, and the
Moon with the Stars of Apollo: Ephesians. 4.
and could not (from thence) but have a great Spirit, and be readily
apprehensive, though not revengeful of injuries: And would therefore (in cases
of difference) only endeavor to acquit himself, but not calumniate his
adversaries. And therefore we may say of him, as it was of another in a like
case, Non silet, and silet: He might be said to be silent and passive toward
his Enemies in respect of revenge, but not in regard of reproof. And surely
herein he is no more to be ceusured, than the harmless Worm for turning again,
when it is most churlishly and injuriously trod on.

Nor was Mr. Wing singular, or alone, in partaking of the malice of Enemies, or
of being unworthily traduced. Mr. Wing's Savior (who had the same Vide,
Cardan, in Coment. Ptol. Morinu:, in Astrol. Gallica. Gregor:, in Notes on
Scripture. Card. Aliac. etc
Ascendent with him) was so served before him. The brightest Sun attracts the
basest and most envious exhalations. The great Hippocrates had a Thessalus to
oppose him; and Divine Homer met with a Momus and Zoilus. And we know, that
there are as many Nebulous and Cloudy-Starrs in the English Sphere, as there be
Glorious and Shineing ones. No Truth in Heaven or Earth, but has its
Anti-truth. No Day without its Shadow; or Diamond that wants it foyl. Never was
any Person famous for any thing yet, but as he met with Favorites, so he found
Detractors. And what excellency can we name or think of, that has been free
from opposition or interruption? And therefore it is no wonder, that a man so
popular as Mr. Wing, has met with his Share of affronts and abuses: it should
rather have been Recorded a Miracle for him to have missed them. But Mr. Wing
was too great a Philosopher, and too good an Astrologer to be concerned or
troubled at such vanities. It was a satisfaction to him sufficient, to know
that he had justly and fairly demonstrated and advanced the Truth of what he
Studied, and therein discharged a good mind. And he having met with the
approbation and thanks of the most judicious and knowing, for his great pains
and industry, looked upon the ignorant and false attempts of his adversaries to
be too sin^en^less to impare his worth, and their hatred too imbecil and
truthless to torment or discompose him.

He appeared first upon the Theater of the world in the two and twentieth year
current of his Age; When Mr. Wing first appeared upon the Stage of the world.
beginning then to Write and Print his Annual Books or Almanacks; and as a fit
direction for the favoring of such a purpose, the Sun then came ad Sextilem
Veneris in Tauro: She being Governess of his Ascendent, and one of the Almutens
of his Geniture; and the Sun (the Grand Patron of public Fame and Glory)
located in Septima Domo, the great Angle of business and action. And (that
which is as remarkable) together with so favoring a Direction, he had a very
auspicious Revolution for that year; as you may behold by the following Scheam
thereof.

Revolutio Solis ad punctum Radicis. 1640. April 8^. 7h. 58. P. M. a vac. ad
and.



In this Celestial Figure, you see the Lords of the Horoscope and Medium
Coeli, are in their sublimities or exaltations, and in a short quadrate to each
other, equivalent to a Sextile; and the one of them in Trine to the Mid-heaven,
and the other casts the same Aspect to the (...), or eleventh Angle; and Royal
fixed Stars prime Cusps of the Scheam. The Lady of the Ascendent at birth (as
there) is Almuten of this Revolution, and herein returned to her Radical place,
casting a friendly Sextile to Mercury (the Patron of Learning and Books) in the
Seventh House, and a Trine to the Nineth, and Ascendent. It is in all respects
a most admirable position of Heaven; and most properly agrees unto the happy
and immortal effects of this Natives Pen.

Indeed Mr. His writings universally esteemed and embraced.
Wings writings found a most excellent welcome into the World, among all sorts
of ingenious persons: even so great and happy an one, that (at length) in that
year, wherein Fifty Thousand of his Almanacks have not sold or gone off, the
Company of Stationers (as I have been credibly informed) had esteemed it but a
year of an indifferent sale. So universally spreading was this persons Fame, he
beginning to write under so happy and Favorable a Revolution and direction.
And these his Annual Books or Almanacks, he continued twenty eight years
together; thereby making an addition to his former Reputation, but never
growing less,
or loosing of any his once purchased Honor. He still gained ground, but never
lost any; and not only his Almanacks, but his other more laborious writings
also, met with a very happy entertainment and success: So that in Truth, all
persons that have Printed and sold his works, as well as those that have bought
and read them, are Debtors to his memory and pains. And the Bookseller and
Printer as well as the Astronomer must mourn the unhappy loss of Mr. Wing.

But now, Mr. Wing was not only a good man, and singular good Artist, but he
was a kind and loving Neighbor* and for his temperate and sober behavior and
demeanor, was infinitely beloved of all those he lived among: as well of the
more Rustical and unpolished sort of people (which generally look upon
Astrologers as Conjurers, and Mathematicians as Madmen;) as of those of the
best quality and breeding; obliging the latter by his Ingenuity and Industry in
Science; and the former by his Humility, and readiness at all times to do them
good. So that the meaner sort of people were always ready to serve him; and the
better sort of Persons Dominus Ascendentis cum domino Medij Caeli d^t honeres,
and Principum, (aut Magnatum) familiaritates.
to assist and encourage him in any of his Studious attempts. He was a Serious
Cordial Friend, and hard to be removed in affection when once he had settled it
upon any man; and when he was necessitated to be an Enemy, (being naturally so
great a lover of Peace and Friendship) it was as great a trouble to him, Ptol.
par. p. 132.
as the knowledge of Letters was (pretended to be) to a Noble Roman, when he
came to sign the death of any Offender. In his greatest provocations, and from
the very worst of his Enemies, (as I am informed) he would admit of a
Reconcilement upon the easiest terms imaginable: he ever loved to preserve
Amity and Friendship, and to crush or banish Enmity and Hatred.

He was likewise known to be a most careful and loving Husband, and a Kind and
Indulgent Father; as appeared both in the Prudent government of his Family in
his Lifetime, and by his disposeing and ordering of things at his Death, for
the good of his Relict and Children: that they might not (after his Decease)
turn Wolves and Tigers each to other; as in too many very good Families (for
want of such care and foresight) it is, God knows, too frequently seen; and
(when past remedy) too vainly lamented.

Lastly, Mr. Wing was a man so naturally made for Action, and so much
abominating Remisseness and Dullness; that to follow his employments, he often
hazzarded his much to be prized Health: he having for near thirty years
together, been constantly upon business, riding early and late, in all kinds of
weather, ways, and seasons, which (sine Dubio) was the propinquate cause (at
length) of a very great Hoarsness, which began to seize him violently in the
beginning of the forty-nineth year of his Age, it being a year Climacterical:
which Hoarsness was (after some interval of time) attended with a Consumption
and Catarrhe; whereof in the month of September, 1668. and the twentieth day
thereof, when the Moon was in an opposition of Saturn, he ended all his Tedious
Labors and Travels, with this his Terrestrial Pilgrimage: And so, receiving an
exchange to a better Life, is now at Rest with God.

Behold, how the Heavens were posited in the Revolution of the Year of his
Death; as you may see in the following Sceam.

ad Rudicem, pro Anno Mortis, 1668. April 8d. 7h. P. M. a ad.



Herein you see the Lord of the Ascendent, and Lord of the Eighth House are
applying to a Conjunction, and this upon the Cuspe of the Eighth House in the
Radix; and not only so, but they are both of them in a hateful opposition of
Mars, and in Quadrate Aspect of Saturn: and the Lady of the Ascendent in the
Radix, is, in this Figure returned to the place of Saturn and Oculus Tauri, who
were radically placed in the House of Death. Saturn also is by Direction, as
well as Position, promittor of Death in this Nativity. All which are as so many
Trumpetters of this Natives approaching Fate; which he (instead of being
daunted at) welcomed with a great deal of Cheerfulness even to the very last.
And indeed no man that has lived well and uprightly, and done good in his
Generation (as Mr. Wing had done) need be afraid of Death, or of the knowledge
of the time thereof. It was a Blessing that Facut experiar, Jehovah, finem meum
mensura dierum meorum, quid sit; experiar quam d^abilis sum. Psalm.
Holy David prayed for, and that St. Paul desired: And although it may be the
Sinful man's Terror and Torture to know it, it is the Just man's Joy.

The Direction that Cut off Life, was the Sun to the Body of Saturn, viz. the
meeting of the Hylech and Anareta, in an Anaretical place thus proved.

0 1. Longitudo Solis -- -- 29. 18. Descensio Obliqua -- 41. 27. Longit.
Saturni -- -- 6. 24. Latit. Saturni merid: -- 1. 51. Declinatio Supra terram --
19. 38. Ascensio Recta Saturni -- 64. 51. Differentia Ascentionalis 26. 9.
Descensio Obliqua Saturni 91. 0. Arcus Directionis -- 49. 33.

If the Learned Ptolomy may be credited, (as indeed why should he not, if he
speak truth?) when he says, Aphor. 37. That those persons who have Libra or
Aries Ascending at their Birth, shall (not need the envy of others to bring
them to their ends, but) be the unhappy cause of their own Deaths: Quorum autem
ascendens erit Aries aut Libra, hi mortis suae causae erunt. Ptol. Cent. Aphor.
37.
(although I believe, and all the world knows and is satisfied, that Mr. Wing
was not felo de se, as Lawyers speak, being of better principles than to commit
a violence upon or against himself; yet,) I am convinced, that (in a charitable
and just sense,) he made the Aphorism good. For, we know his Soul was so set
upon business (as before you have heard) that he labored, not only beyond his
strength, even till the last, but against the opinions of his Physicians: not
that he conceived in so doing, he any way did hasten or accelerate his Death,
but because he hated Idleness: being a man of so unwearied a fancy, that he was
Active, and working to the last; and had not Strength and Vigor first left him,
he had never left his Employment; for he dyed laboring, even in the midst of
his business, as well as his years.

The worthy Albohali tells us, that if the significators of Death in any
Nativity, shall be in domibus vel exaltationibus suis, a malis liberi, erit
mors ejus in parents et proximos suos. And so true we find his words, (for
they take full place in Mr. Wings Nativity) that, as Mr. Wings Life did not
cross or Contradict the Influences of the Stars, neither did his Death. For he
(as the Holy Patriarch Jacob) dyed among his Relations, and received an
honorable Interment.

On the Death of so many Eminent Astrologers, and Mathematicians; and
particularly on the Expiration of Mr. Vincent Wing.
OUr Mirth and Pleasures leave us for a space,
While Sighs and Tears Usurp upon your place:
Behold the Wounds the Stars do give their Friends!
"The Fates spare none, may bring about their Ends.
First, they force Loyal Neve resign his Breath:
Next, Learned Fisk compel to yield to Death:
Then, the great Oughtred (in a goodly Age,
His part being done) they hurrey off the Stage:
Culpeper follows: [The Physicians Foe!]
All Astrologians surely are not so.
And painful Booker too, they take to's rest.
"Angels themselves subscribe -- Ac Mortuus est.
But Death not satisfied, unless he,
Work a sure Famine in Astrology,
And make the world with his Massacres Ring:
Has last of all, removed Laborious Wing.
Sure Death's turned Courtier, will not be denied
The thing he covets, though the best man Died.
Ah! Cruel Tyrant! what ill have thou done,
To blessed URANIA? her scarce risen Sun
Must set, before it the Meridian Mount:
What shall we now, of Fair Urania Count?
She could have spared thee Quacks and Fools good store;
Turn-coats and Traitors full as many more:
Which Tribe, thy hungry Stomach might suffice;
In taking them, thou would saved VRANIA'S eyes:
But, at her Friends to cast thy envious Dart,
At once strikes Blind and Dead her Eye and Heart.
No more Astrologers, since these are gone,
Trouble your serious skill, or thoughts upon
Poor Mortals Life and Death? Your Period's set;
And the Alchocoden that governs it,
Must veil to the Anareta: All your pain,
Cannot from it the meanest minute gain!
It Is Natures privilege to be severe:
And let her reign Triumphant in her Sphere.
T. F. Astrophil.

Advertisement.
Courteous Reader,
IN the foregoing discourse, you are informed of the Death of the Person of Mr.
Wing, but his Fame, that is still surviveing; and this, not only in his own
Laborious pieces, emitted into the world in his Life time; but in a Son, he
left behind him, who bears his own Name: And is so far inclined to his Fathers
Studies, that he has for this present year 1670. wrote his (...), or Almanac;
and (by Gods blessing) intends the Annual continuance thereof.

FINIS.

