AN USEFUL CASE OF CONSCIENCE DISCVSSED AND RESOLVED, Concerning Associations
and Confederacies with Idolaters, Infidels, Heretics, or any otber known
Enemies of Truth and Godliness.

By Master GEORGE GILLESPIE, late Minister at Edinburgh.

Whereunto is subjoyned a Letter, written by him to the Commissioners of the
General Assembly, in the time of his sickness: Together with his Testimony
unto this Truth, written two days before his Death.

Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heirs of George Anderson, for Andro Wilson, Anno
1649.

The Preface.
THis following Question and case of Conscience, as it was handled and resolved
by Mr. Gillespie in some Sermons delivered by him, about the time of contriving
the late War against the Kingdom of England, being much desired by many who
heard of it, that it might be for public use, and at last yielded to by the
Author before his death. His friends have thought it necessary to publish the
same, together with these Testimonies wherewith he sealed this Truth herein
contained, in the time of his sickness, and immediately before his death.

Ane useful case of Conscience discussed and resolved, concerning associations
and confederacies with Idolaters, Infidels, Heretics, or any other known
Enemies of Truth, and Godliness.
WHile I have occasion to speak of humanne Covenants, it shall not be
unprofitable to speak somewhat to that question so much debated, as well among
Divines, as among Politicians and Lawyers, whether a confederacy and
association with wicked men, or such as are of another Religion, be lawful,
yea, or no. For Answer whereunto shortly, let us distinguish. 1. Civil
Covenants. 2. Ecclesiastical, Z^ppe^us. de Pol, Mos. lib. 6. Cap.
Sacred or Religious Covenants. 3. Mixed Covenants, partly civil, partly
Religious. The last two being made with wicked men, and such as differ in
Religion from us. 4. Pelar^us in Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2, 3.
I hold to be unlawful, and so do the best Writers. When the Israelites are
forbidden a Covenant with the Canaanites, Pareus in Genesis 14.
special mention is made of their gods, al^ars, images, Revetus in Exodus 23.
32 Tarnovius tract. de foederibus.
Exodus 23. 32. and 34. 13, 14. Iud* 2^2. that no such superstitious, unlawful,
worship might be tolerated. As for civil Covenants, if they be for commerce or
peace, which were called (...) they are allowed according to the Scriptures.
Genesis 14 13. Genesis 31. 44. 1 Kings 5* 12. Ier. 29 7. Romans 12 18 Such Covenants
the Vene^^ans have with the Turk, because of vicinity: Such Covenants also
Ch^istian Emperors of old, had sometimes with the Pagans. It was the breach of
a civil Covenant of Peace with the Turk, that God punished so exemplarly in
Vladyslius King of Hungary: See Victor. Srigel. in 7 paralip. 25. 2. Also
Zepperus, Pelargus, Tarnovius, ubi supra.
But if the civil Covenant be such a Covenant as the Grecians called (...), to
join in military expeditions together, Lavater in 2 Paralip. 25. and in Ezekiel.
16. 26. P. Martyr Loc. Com. Clas. 4. cap. 16. (...). 23. and comment. in 1 Reg.
15. 17. etc. The same thing is holdenby Tst^tus in 3. Reg. 15. Quest. 24. Corn.
a Lapide in 3. Reg. 22. 3.
of this is the greatest debate and controversy among Writers; for my part, I
hold it unlawful with diverse good Writers; And I conceive that Exodus 34. God
forbids not only Religious Covenants with the Canaanites, but even civil
Covenants, verse. 12. and conjugall Covenants, verse. 16. Which is also Iunius
his opinion in his Analysis upon that place. The reason for the unlawfulness
of such confederacies are brought. 1. From the Law, Exodus 23. 32. and 34. 12
15. Deuteronomy. 7. 2. Yea God makes this a principal stipulation and condition upon
their part, while he is making a Covenant with them, Exodus 34 10. 12. Iud. 2.
1, 2. and lest it should be thought that this is meant only of these seven
Nations enumerate, Deuteronomy. 7. the same Law is interpret of four other Nations, 1
Kings 11. 1, 2. so that it is to be understood generally against confederacies
with Idolaters and those of a false Religion: And the reason of the Law is
Moral and perpetual, viz. the danger of* ensnaring the people of God;
therefore they were forbidden to Covenant either with their gods, or with
themselves, for a conjunction of Counsels, and familiar conversation (which are
consequents of a Covenant) draws in end to a fellowship in Religion. 2. From
disallowed and condemned examples, as Asa his Covenant with Benhadad, 2. Chron.
16. to verse. 10* And Ahaz, his Covenant with the King of Assyria, 2 Kings 16.
7. 10. 2 Chronicles. 28. 16* to 23. And if it should be objected, these are but
examples of Covenants with Idolatrous heathens, there is not the like reason to
condemn confederacies and associations with wicked men of the same Religion; I
answer. 1. It holds a fortiori against confederacies with such of the seed of
Jacob, as had made defection from true Religion, for as Grotius de jure belli
and pacis lib. 2. Cap. 15. Numb. 9. notes, GOD would have such to be more
abominated then heathens, and to be destroyed from among their people, Deuteronomy.
13. 13. besides this I add, 2. We have in other Scriptures exemples, which
meet with that case also; for Iehosaphats confederacy with Ahab: 2. Chron. 18.
3. with Chron. 19. 2. and after with Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 35. are condemned,
which made Iehosaphat (although once relapsing into that sin) yet afterward
mend his fault, for he would not again join with Ahaziah, when he sought that
association the second time, 1 Kings 22. 49. So Amaziah having associate
himself in an expedition with the Isra^lites, when God was not with them, did
upon the Prophets admonition disjoyne himself from them and take his hazard of
their anger: 2 Chronicles. 25* 7, 8, 9, 10* Lavater upon the place applying that
example, notes this as one of the causes why the Christian Wars with the Turk
had so ill success, why says he, consider what Soldiers were employed, this
is the fruit of associations with the wicked. 3. These confederacies proceed
from an evil heart of unbelief, as is manifest by the reasons which are
brought against Ahaz his League with Benhadad, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8, 9. and by
that which is said against the confederacy with the King of Assyria, Isay 8.
12, 13. for as Calvin upon the place notes, the unbeleevers among the people
considering their own inability for managing so great a War, thought it
necessary to have a con^ederacy with the Assyrians; but this was from
faithless fears, from want of faith to stay and rest upon God as
alsufficient. 4. If we must avoid fellowship and conversation with the sons of
Belial, (except where natu^all bonds or the necessity of a calling tyeth us*
Psalm. 6. 8. Prove. 9. 6. and 24. 1. 2 Cor. 6 14, 15. and if we should account
Gods enemies our enemies, Psalm 139. 21. then how can we join with them, as
con^ederates and associates, for by this means we shall have fellowship with
them, and look on them as friends.

Now as to the Arguments which use to be brought for the contrary opinion.
First it is objected that A^raham had a confederacy with Aner, Eschol, and Mamre,
Genesis 14. 13. Abraham with Abimelech, Genesis 21. 27. 32. and Isaac with
Abimelek, Genesis 26. Jacob with Laban, Genesis 31. 44. Solomon with Hiram. 1 Kings
5. 12. Answ. 1. It cannot be proved that these confederates of Abraham, Isaac,
and Solomon, were either idolaters or wicked: Laban indeed was an idolater: But
there are good interpreters who conceive that Abraham's three confederates
feared God; and that Abimelech also feared God, because he speaks reverently
of God, and ascribes to God the blessing and prosperity of those Patriarchs.

It Is presumed also that Hiram was a pious man, because of his Epistle to
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 2. 11, 12. however, 2. Those confederacies were civil,
either for commerce, or for peace and mutual security that they should not
wrong one another, as that with Laban, Genesis 31. 52. and with Abimelech, Genesis
26. 29. which kind of confederacy is not controverted.

It Is objected also that the Maccabees h^d a Covenant with the Romans and
L^cedemonian^, 1 Macca. 8. and 12. 1, 2, Answ. 1. That Covenant is disallowed
by many good Writers; yea it is observed from the Story that they had not the
better, but the worse success, nor the less but the more trouble following
it. 2. The Story it self, 1 Macc. 1. 12. tells us that the first motion of a
confederacy with the heathen in those times proceeded from the children of
Belial in Israel. Lastly, it may be objected that persons discontented, and of
broken fortunes were gathered to David; and that he received them, and became a
Captain unto them, 1 Samuel 22. 2. Answ. 1. Some think (and it is probable) they
were such as were oppressed and wronged by Saul^ tyranny, and were therefore in
debt and discontented, and that David in receiving them was a type of Christ
who is a refuge for the afflicted, and touched with the feeling of their
infirmities. 2. Whoever they were, David took care that no profane nor wicked
person might be in his company, Psalm 101. yea, Psalm. 34. 11. (which was penned
at that same time when he departed from Achish and became Captain of those 400.
men) he says to them, Come ye children hearken unto me, I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. 3. I shall bring a better Argument from David's example
against the joining with such associates in War as are known to be malignant
and wicked. Psalm. 118. 7. The Lord takes my part with them that help me,
therefore I shall see my desire upon mine enemies, Psalm. 54. 4. The Lord is
with them that uphold my soul. Upon this last place, both Calvin and Gesuerus
observe, that although David's helpers were few and weak, yet God being in them,
and with them, his confidence was that they should prove stronger then all the
wicked: he intimates also, that if he had not known that God was with his
helpers, leading and inspiring them, he had looked for no help by them: 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8. That David's helpers in the War were looked upon as sincere,
cordial, and stirred up of God, may further appear from 1 Chronicles. 12. where
David joyneth with himself fidos homines qui idem cum eo sentirent says
Lavater on the place, faithful men of his own mind: he adds, that they were
such as hated Saul's impiety and injustice, and loved David's virtue. Vict.
Strigelius calls them, fideles amicos, faithful friends. The Text it self
tells u^, that diverse of them joined themselves to David while he was yet in
distress and shut up in Zicklag: verse. 1. (which was an Argument of
sincerity:) also, that some of Benjamin (Saul's own tribe) adjoined themselves
to David, and the spirit came upon Amasa^, who by a special Divine instinct
spoke to assure David of their sincerity, verse. 2. 16. 18. They also who joined
themselves with David after Saul's death, verse. 23. were not of a double heart.
but of a perfect heart. verse. 33. 38. and they all agreed that the first great
business to be undertaken, should be Religion, the bringing back of the Arc:
1 Chronicles. 13. 3, 4.

This point of the unlawfulness of confederacies with men of a false Religion
is strangely misapplyed by Lutherans, against confederacies with us, whom they
call Calvinists: So argues Tarnovius Tract. de Foederib. But we may make a
very good use of it: for as we ought to pray and endeavor that all who are
Christ's may be made one in him, so we ought to pray against and by all means
avoid fellowship, familiarity, marriages, and military confederacies with
known wicked persons, and such as are of a false or heretical Religion. I
shall branch forth this matter in five particulars, which God forebade to his
people in reference to the Canaanites and other heathens which also (partly by
parity of reason, partly by concluding more strongly) will militate against
confederacies and conjunctions with such as under the profession of the
Christian Religion do either maintain Heresies and dangerous Errors, or live a
profane and wicked life.

First, God forbade all Religious Covenants with such, and would not have his
people to tolerate the gods, images, altars, or groves of idolaters: Exodus 23.
32. and 34. 13. Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Iud. 2. 2. And although the letter of the Law
mention this in reference to the Canaanites, yet the best reforming Kings of
Judah applied and executed this Law, in taking away the grows and high places
abused by the Jews in their superstion: And what marvel? If such things were
not to be tolerated in the Canaanites, Socral. hist lib. 5. Cap. 10.
much less in the Jews. Theodosius is commended for his suppressing and
punishing Heretics.

2. God forbade familiar conversation with these heathens, that they should not
dwell together with his people, nay, nor in the land with them, Exodus 23. 33
lest one of them being familiar with an Israelite, might call him to a feast,
and make him eat of things sacrificed to idols, Exodus 3^. 15. Compare this with
Iud. 1. 21. Psalm. 106. 35. Now the Apostle lays much more restraint upon us,
from conversing, eting and drinking wi^h a scandalous Christian, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
then with a Pagan or unbeleever, 1 Cor. 1. 27. There is a conversing and
companying with wicked persons, which is our affliction, not our fault, that is
when we cannot be rid of them, do wh^t we can, 1 Cor. 5. 10. which is an
argument against separating and departing from a true Church, because of
scandalous persons in it. The Apostle gives this check to such, go where they
will, they shall find scandalous persons, all the world over. There is again a
conversing and companying with wicked persons, which natural and civil bonds,
our near relations, or our calling tyeth us unto, as between husband and wife,
parent and child, Pastor and people, Magistrate and those of his charge. But
wittingly and willingly to converse and have fellowship either with heretical
or profane persons, whether it be out of love to them and delight in them, or
for our own interest or some worldly benefit, this is certainly sinful and
inexcusable. If we take care of our bodily safety, by flying the company of
such as have the plague, yea if we take care of the safety of our beasts, and
would not to our knowledge suffer a scabbed or rotten sheep to infect the rest,
shall we not much more take care of our own and neighbors souls, by avoiding
and warning others to avoid the fellowship of the ungodly, whereby spiritual
infection comes. Remember it was but a kind visit of Iehosaphat to A^ab which
was the occasion of ingageing him into a confederacy with that wicked man. 2 Chronicles. 18. 2, 3.

3. God forbade conjugall covenants or marrying with them. Exodus 34. 16. Deuteronomy.
7. 3. The rule is the same against matching with other wicked persons, whether
Idolaters or professing the same religion with us. We read not of idolatry or
any professed doctrinall differences in Religion between the Posterity of S^th
and the Posterity of Cain, yet this was the great thing that corrupted the old
world and brought on the flood, that the children of God joined themselves in
Marriage with the profane, Genesis 6. 1, 2, 3. Iehoram Married not an heathen, but
the daughter of Ahab; but it is marked, he did evil, as did the house of Ahab;
And what is the reason given for this? For the daughter of Ahab was his wife.
2 Kings 8. 18. and by and by, verse. 27. the like is marked of Ahaziah the son
of Iehoram, who did evil in the sight of the Lord as did the house of Ahab,
for he was the son in Law of the house of Ahab The Apostle Peter supposes that
Christians Marry such as are heirs together of the grace of life. 1 Peter 3.
7. see also, Prove. 31. 30.

4. God forbade his people to make with the Canaanites foedus deditionis or
subactionis, or (as others speak) pactum liberatorium, he would have his people
show no mercy to those whom he had destinate to destruction, Deuteronomy. 7. 2. Herein
Ahab sinned, making a brotherly Covenant of friendship with Benhadad, when God
had delivered him into his hand, 1 Kings 20. 32, 33, 34. So in all Christian
common wealths, the Magistrate Gods vicegerent ought to cut off such evil doers
as Gods Word appoints to be cut off, David's sparing of Ioab and Shimei, being
partly necessitate thereto, partly induced by political reasons, (whereof he
repented when he was dying, nor could his conscience be at ease till he left a
charge upon Solomon for executing justice upon both Ioab and Shimei, 1 Kings 2.
5, 6, 8, 9.) are no good presidents or warrands to Christian Magistrates to
neglect the executing of Justice. It Is a better president which David resolves,
upon more deliberatly, Psalm. 101* 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the
land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. Mark this
all, of what degree or quality soever, without respect of persons, and that
early and without delay. Lastly, and even Ioab himself was so far punished by
David, that he was cast out of his place and command, 2 Samuel 19 13. and 20. 4.

5. The Law is also to be applied against civil Covenants, not of Pea^e, or of
commerce, but of War; that is, a League offensive and defensive, wherein we
associate our selves with idolaters, infidels, heretics or any other known
enemies of Truth or Godliness, so as to have the same friends or enemies. A
Covenant of Peace or commerce with such may happen to be unlawful, in respect
of some circumstances, as when Peace is given to those Rebels, Murderers,
Incendiaries in the Kingdom, who by the Law of God ought to be destroyed by
the hand of Justice, or when commerce with idolaters is so abused, as to
furnish them with the things that they are known to make use of in their
idolatry. But as for (...), a confederacy ingageing us into a War with such
associates, it is absolutely and in its own nature unlawful: and I find it
condemned by good Writers, both of the Popish party of the Lutheran party, and
of the orthodoxe party. Some of all these are before cited, what holiness God
required in the Armies of Israel, see Deuteronomy. 23. 9. 11. 12, 13, 14. We may well
argue as Isidorus Pelusiota does, lib. 3. Epist. 14. If the Law was so severe
against such uncleanness as were not voluntary, how much less would God
suffer such as did voluntarily and wickedly defile themselves. It Is marked as a
part of Abimelechs sin, Iud. 9 4* that he hired vain and light persons which
followed him. God would have Amazia^ to dismiss an hundred thousand men of
Israel being already with him in a body, and told him he should fall before the
enemy if these went with him, because God was not with them, 2 Chronicles. 25 7.
etc. If they had not yet been gathered into a body, it had been much to abstain
from gathering them, upon the Prophets admonition, but this is much more, that
he sends them away after they are in a body, and takes his hazard of all the
hurt that so many enraged Soldiers could do to him or his people, and indeed
they did much hurt in going back, verse. 13 yet God rewarded Amaziahs obedience
with a great Victory. In the last age shortly after the begun Reformation in
Germany, this case of conscience concerning the unlawfulness of such
confederacies was much looked at. The City of Strafburg. Anno, 1529. made a
defensive League with Zurik, Sleid. comment. lib. 7 page 106.
Berne, and Basil, Qui and vicini erant, and dogmate magis conveni^bant says
Sleidan, they were not only neighbors, but of the same Faith and Religion,
therefore they made a confederacy with them. About two years after the Elector
of Saxony refused to take into confederacy those Helvetians, Ibid. lib. 8. page
127. de Helvetiis in foedus recipiendis, quod civitates valde cupiebant, Saxo
per Legatos respondet, quoniam de coena Dom. diversum sequantur dogma non sibi
licere societatem cum ipsis ullam coiri: quante sit ipsorum conjunctio, propter
vires atque potentiam, non se quidem latere, sed ^o sibi minime respiciendum
esse, ne tristis inde sequatur exitus, quod iis accidisse Scriptura testetur,
qui muniendi sui causa, cujusque modi praesidiis usi ^uissent. Vide etiam page
133. Quod si Zuingliani faterentur errorem atque desisterent, comprehen di
etiam in hac pace, sin minus, tum desere^dos, nec anxilii quicquam eis
communicandum, neque f^dus ullum cum ipsis faciendum esse. Et infra lib. 9.
page 156. Et recipiendos esse placet in hoc foedus (Smalcaldicum) qui velint
atque cupiant, modo Doctrinam Auguste propositam in Commitiis pro^iteantur, and
sortem communem subeant.
because although they were powerful, and might be very helpful to him, yet
they differing in Religion, concerning the Article of the Lords Supper, he
said, he durst not join with them as confederates, lest such sad things might
befall him, as the Scripture testifies to have befallen those who for their
help or defense took any assistance they could get.

The rule was good in thesi, although in that particular case misapplyed. The
very heathens had a notion of the unlawfulness of confederacies with wicked
men, for as Victorinus Strigelius on 2 Chronicles. 25. notes out of Aschylus his
Tragedy entitled Seven to Thebe, Amphiaraus a wise and virtuous man was
therefore swallowed up in the earth with seven men and seven horses, because he
had associate himself, with Tydeus, Capaneus, and other impious Commanders
marching to the seige of Thebei, Lastly take this reason for further
confirmation, as we must do all to the glory of God, so we must not make Wars
to our selves, but to the Lord; hence the book of the Wars of the Lord. Number.
21. 14. and, the battle is not ours, but the Lords. 1 Samuel 25. 28. 2. Chron.
20. 15. Now how shall we employ them that hate the Lord, to help the Lord? or
how shall the enemies of his glory do for his glory? Shall rebels and traitors
be taken to fight in the Kings Wars? Offer it to thy Governor, as it is said
Mal. 1. see if he would take this well.

As for the Objections from Scripture, they are before answered. There are many
other exceptions of men's corrupt reason, which yet may be easily taken off, if
we will receive Scripture light. That very case of Iehosophats; confederacy
with Ahab, takes off many of them; for although 1. Iehosophat was a good man
and continued so after that association, not drawn away into Idolatry, nor
infected with Ahabs Religion, but only assisting him in a civil business. 2.
Ahab lived in the Church of Isarel which was still a Church, although greatly
corrupted, and he was no professed hater of God (only he had professed to hate
Micajah the man of God) yea lately before this he appeared very penitent, and
some think Iehosaphat now judged charitably of Ahab, because of that great
humilation and repentance of his, which God did accept; so far, as to reward it
with a temporal sparing mercy, 1 Kings 21. at the end: then follows
immediately Chap. 22. Iehosaphats association with him. Although Iehosaphat was
also joined in affinity with Ahab, Ahabs daughter being married to his son. 3.
The enemy was the King of Syria, and Iehosaphat does not join with a wicked
man against any of Gods people, but against the infidel Syrians; even as
Amaziah was beginning to join with those of the ten tribes against the
Edomites. 4. The cause seems to have been good, as Carthusian on 1 Kings 22. 3.
and Lavater upon 2 Chronicles. 19 2. note. For Ramoth^Gilead was a city of Refuge,
pairt^ining to the Levites in the tribe of God, and should have been restored
by the king of Syria to Ahab, Polit. Christ. lib. 7. Cap. 1.
according to their Covenant, 1 Kings 20, 34. Daneus brings that same example
of Ahabs going up against Ramoth Gilead, to prove that it is just to make war
against these who have broken Covenant with us. 5. Iehosaphats manner of
proceeding was pious in this respect, that he said to Ahab, enquire I pray thee
of the word of the Lord to day, and again, is there not here a prophet of the
Lord besides, he enquireth ultr^, and seeks all the light he could there have
in point of conscience from prophets of the Lord, which makes it probable that
those 4^0. prophets did not profess, or were not known to Iehosaphat to be
prophets of Baal; but were looked upon as prophets of the Lord, as Cajetan
thinks. Therefore they answer also in the name of the Lord, the Lord shall
deliver it. It Is not likely that Iehosaphat would desire the prophets of Baal
to be consulted, or that he would hearken to them more then to the Prophet of
the Lord Micajah; yet in this he failed extremly, that he had too far engaged
himself to Ahab, before the enquiring at the word of the Lord. How ever, it
seems, he was by this enquiring seeking a fair way to come off again. 6.
Iehosaphats end was good, Martyr on 1 Kings 22. thinks Iehosaphat entered into
this confederacy with Ahab, for the peace and safety of his kingdom, and to
prevent a new War between Judah and Israel, such as had been between Asa his
father, and Baasha King of Israel, for which end also Carthusian ^bid. thinks
that Iehosaphat took Ahabs daughter to his son. Yet notwithstanding of all this
the prophet Iehu ^aith to him, 2 Chronicles. 19 2 Should thou help the ungodly,
or love them that hate the Lord. The LXX, read hated of the Lord, which comes
all to one thing. And lest it should be thought a venial or light matter, he
adds, therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. So that from this
example we learn, that let us keep our selves unspotted of the false religion
or errors of those with whom we associate, let wicked men seem never so
penitent, and our relations to them be never so near, let the common enemy be
an Infidel, let the cause be never so good, let the manner of proceeding be
never so pious, and the end also good: yet all this cannot excuse nor justify
confederacies and associations with wicked and ungodly men. And if God was so
angry at Iehosaphat, when there were so many things concurring as might seem to
excuse or extenuate his fault, it being also in him a sin of infirmity only,
and not without a reluctation of conscience, and a conflict of the spirit
against the flesh (which Pareus upon 1 Kings 22. does well collect from his
desire of enquiring at the word of the Lord, that he might have occasion to
come off) how much more will God be angry with such as go on with an high hand
in this trespass, casting his word behind them, and hating to be reformed.

If it be further objected, that we are not able without such confederacies and
help to prosecute a great war alone. This also the Holy Ghost has before hand
answered, in the example of Ahaz his confederacy with the King of Assyria; for
he had a great War to manage, both against the Syrians, and against the King of
Israel, 2 Kings 16. 7. also against the Edomites and Philistines, 2 Chronicles. 28.
16, 17, 18. yet although he had so much to do, this could not excuse the
confederacy with the Assyrian: he should have trusted to God, and not used
unlawful means. God can save by few as well as by many; yea sometimes God
thinks not fit to save by many. Iud. 7. It shall not be the strength of battle
to have unlawful confederates, but rather to want them, Exodus 23. 22.

If it be said it is dangerous to provock and incense many wicked men by
casting them off. This is plainly answered from the example of Amaziah and the
100000. men of Israel with him of which before. If furthermore objection be
made, that we must be gentle and patient toward all, and in meekness instruct
those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. Answ. 1. Yet he bids us turn
away from the wicked, Ibid. Chapter 3. 5. We ought in meekness to instruct even
him that is excommunicate, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. yet we are there warned, verse. 14.
to have no company with him. 2. The Angel of the Church at Ephesus, is at once
commended, both for his patience, and that he could not bear them which were
evil.

I shall add five distinctions which will take off all other ojections that I
have yet met with. 1. Distinguish between a confederacy which is more
discretive and discriminative, and a confederacy which is more unitive. And
here is the reason why Covenants of peace and commerce even with infidels and
wicked persons are allowed, yet military associations with such, disallowed:
for the former keeps them and us still divided as two: the latter unites us and
them, as one, and imbodieth us together with them: for Thuc^dides defines (...)
to be such a Covenant as makes us and our confederates to have the same friends
and enemies; Kekerm. de Repub. Spart. disp. 4. lib. 2. Cap. 20.
and it is mentioned by Writers as a further degree of Union then (...) or
Covenants of peace. 2. Distinguish between endeavor of duty and the perfection
of the thing: which answers that exception, O then, we must have an Army all of
Saints, (it should be said, without any known wicked person in it;) Now even
as it is our duty to endeavor a purging of the Church from wicked and
scandalous persons, yet when we have done all we can, the Lords field shall not
be perfectly purged from tares till the end of the world, Matthew. 13. So when
we have done all that ever we can to avoid wicked persons in an expedition, yet
we cannot be rid of them all; but we must use our utmost endeavors, that we
may be able to say, it is our affliction, not our fault. 3 Distinguish between
some particular wicked persons, here and there mixing themselves with us; and
between a wicked faction and malignant party: The former should be avoided as
much as is possible: but much more a conjunction with a wicked faction. David
would by no means meet and consult with the Kabal meregn^m, the Assembly of
Malig^ants; neither did he only shun to meet and consult with vain persons;
who openly show and bewray themselves; but even with dissemblers, or (as the
Chaldee) with those that hide themselves that they may do evil. Psalm. 26. 4,
5. We can know better how to do with a whole field of tares in which is no
wheat, then we can do with tares growing here and there among the wheat. 4.
Distinguish between such a fellowship with some wicked persons, as is necessary
(which is the case of those that are Married, and of Parents and Children) or
unavoidable, which is the case of those, whose lot is to cohabite in one Town,
or in one Family, in a case of necessity traveling or sailing together;
Distinguish, I say, between these and an elective or voluntary fellowship with
wicked men, when love to them, or our own benefit draws us thereunto. We
neither loose natural bonds, nor require impossibilities, but that we keep our
selves pure by not choosing or consenting to such fellowship. 5. Distinguish
between infidels, heretics, wicked persons, repenting and those who go on in
their trespass: what ever men have been, yet as soon as the signs of
repentance and new fruits appear in them, we are ready to receive them into
favor and fellowship: Then indeed the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the
Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together, meaning
such as were Wolves, Leopards, Bears, and now begin to change their nature:
not so with the obstinate, contumacious and impenitent, who still remain
Wolves, etc*

Let us now, 1. Examine our selves, whether there be so much tenderness of
conscience in us, as to close with those Scripture Truths, or whether we are
still in a way of consulting with flesh and blood. 2. Be humbled for former
miscarriages and failings in these particulars, and for not vvalking accurately
according to these Scripture Rules. 3. Bevvare for the future: remember and
apply these Rules when we have to do with the practice of them. And that I
may drive home this nail to the head, I add (beside what was said before)
these Reasons and Motives. First, it is a great judgment when God mingleth a
perverse Spirit in the midst of a people, Isay 19. 14. shall we then make that
a voluntary act of our own, which the Word mentions as a dreadful judgment?
With this spiritual judgment is oftentimes joined a temporal judgment as 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. and 20. 37. and 28. 20. so Hos. 5. 13. 7, 8, compared with Hos.
8. 8, 9. where their judgment, sounds forth their sin as by an Echo: The
Chaldee paraprase in the place last cited says, The house of Israel is
delivered into the hands of the people whom they loved. Secondly, remember what
followed upon Gods peoples mingling themselves with the heathen, Psalm. 106. 35.
They were mingled among the heathen and learned their works. Hos. 7. 8.
E^hraim he has mixed himself among the people, that is, by making
confederacies with the heathen, (as Lu^ther expounds the place) and by seeking
their help and assistance, Hos. 5. 13. But what follows, Ephraim is a cake not
turned, hot and overbaken in the neither side, but cold and raw in the upper
side. This will prove the fruit of such confederacies and associations, to make
us zealous for some earthly or humane thing, but remise and cold in the things
of Christ; to be too hot on our neither side, and too raw on the upper side.
Whereas not mingling our selves with the wicked: we shall through Gods mercy be
like a cake turned, that heat and zeal which was before downward, shall now be
upward, heavenward, Godward, let it be also remembered, how both Ahaz, ^ Kings
16. 10 and Asa himself, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. (though a good man) were drawn into
other great sins upon occasion of these associations with the enemies of God
and his people: this sin will certainly ensnare men in other sins. It Is well
said by Calvin upon Ezekiel. 16. 26. that as we are too prone of our selves to
wickedness, so when we enter into confederacies with wicked men, we are but
seeking new tentations, and as it were a bellows to blow up our own
corruptions, as wine being mixed with water loses of its spirits, and white
being mixed with black, loses much of its vvhitenesse: so the people of God,
if once mixed with wicked enemies, shall certainly loss of their purity and
integrity. Thirdly, as these unlawful confederacies dravv us both into great
judgments and great sins, so into a great security and stupidity under these
great plagues and sins, which will make the estate of such to be yet worse,
Hos. 7. 9. after Ephraims mixing himself among the people, it is added, Strangers
have devoured his strength, and he knows it not, yea, gray hairs are here
and there upon him, yet he knows it not: although his confederates have
distressed him, and not strengthened him, and although there may be observed in
him diverse signs of a decaying dying condition, yet he known it not, nor
takes it to heart; The same thing is insisted upon verse. 11. Ephraim als^^ is
like a silly Dove without heart; They call to Egypt, they go up to Assyria. He
is as void of understanding as a silly Dove, whose nest being spoiled, and her
young ones token from her (which the Chaldee paraphrase adds for
explications cause) yet she still returns to those places where, and among
those people by whom she has been so spoiled; So Israel will still be
meddling with those that have done him great hurt. Fourthly, we find that
such confederacy or association either with idolaters or known impious
persons, is seldom or never recorded in the Book of God, without a reproof,
or some greater mark of Gods displeasure put upon it. If it were like the
Polygamie of the P^triarchs, often mentioned and not reproved, it were the
less marvel to hear it so much debated. But now when God has purposely set
so many Beacons upon those rocks, and Shelves that we may beware of them, O
why shall we be so mad, as still to run upon them. It was reproved in the time
of the Judges, Judge. 2. 1, 2, 3. It was reproved in the time of the Kings;
A^abs Covenant with Benhadad, Asa's Covenant with Benhadad, Ahaz his
confederacy with the Assyrian; Iehosaphats association, first with Ahab, then
with Ahaziab: Amaziahs association with those 100000. men of Ephraim, when God
was not with them, all those are plainly dis^llowed and condemned. Moreover
that reproof, Ier. 2. 18. And now, what have thou to do in the way of Egypt, to
drink the waters of Sihor? Or what have thou to do in the way of Assyria, to
drink the waters of the river? the Chaldee has thus; what have ye to do to
associate with Pharaoh King of Egypt -- And what have ye to do to make a
Covenant with the Assyrian? Again after the captivity, Ezra 9. the Jews
mingling of themselves with the heathen is lamented. Fifthly, the great and
precious promises of God, may encourage us so, as we shall never say to the
wicked, a confederacy: for upon condition of our avoiding all such
confederacies and con^unctions, God promises never to break his Covenant with
us, Judge. 2. 1, 2. and to receive us as his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 14
16, 17, 18. Sixthly, it is one of Gods great mercies which he has Covenanted and
promised, I will purge out from among you the Rebels and them that transgress
against me, Ezekiel. 20. 38. Why should we then forsake our own mercy, and despise
the counsel of God against our own souls? Seventhly, as it was in Asa his
experience, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7^ 8. so it has been in our own, God has done his
greatest works for us, when we were most unmixed with such men.

There is another Objection, which at the writing hereof I have met with: It Is
David's confederacy and association both with Abn^r, 2 Samuel 3. 12, 13. and with
Amasa, 2 Samuel 19. 13. whom according to agreement he made General of of his
Host, 2 Samuel 20. 4. although both of them had been David's enemies, and born
Arms against him, Abner being also scandalous, both for his whoredom, 2 Samuel
3. 7. and his treachery against Ishbosheth in aspyring to the Crown (which is
collected from his going in unto Saules Concubine, as Absalom did unto David's
afterward) yea for that he had born Arms against David, when he knew that God
had swo^n to make David King, and so against the light of his conscience, 2 Samuel
3. 9. 18. Answ. 1. Peter Martyr commenting upon those places, disalloweth
David's practice in both these cases, especially his League with Abner. Should
we follow these two examples, not being allowed or commended in Scripture? or
should we not rather avoid such consederacies, because of many examples
thereof, plainly condemned in the Word of GOD? 2. Whatsoever may be conceived
to be allowable or excusable in these examples of David yet it cannot be
applied, except in like cases. When David ^ovenanted with Abner, he was but
King of Judah, Abner undertaks to bring about all Isarel to him, and that he
should make him reign over all the tribes, whereas otherwise there was no
appearance of David's subduing of all the other t^ibes; but by a long and bloody
War. Again when David cov^nanted and capitulated with Amasa, he was in a manner
sled our of the land for Absolon, 2 Samuel 19. 9. and was forced to abide in the
land of Gilead beyond Jordan, Sanctius and Corn a la^ide in 2 Samuel 19.
fearing also (as interpreters observe) that the men of Judah having
strengthened Jerusalem and kept it with a garrison for Absalom and having done
so much in assisting Absalom against David, should grow desperate in holding
out against him, hoping for no mercy, therefore he is content to make Amasa
General of his Army, upon condition that he would cause the men of Judah to
bring him back to Jerusalem, which Amasa moves the men of Judah to do; 2 Samuel
19. 14. for it was done by his authority, as Josephus also writes, Antiq.
Jud. lib. 7. Cap. 10.
nor could it be done without his authority, for Absalom and Ahitophel being
dead, Amasa had the whole power and sole headship of that Army and of all that
faction that had followed Absalom. Now then let them that will plead for the
lawfulness of confederacies with wicked presons from these examples of David,
first make the case alike, that is, that the wicked one have power of an Army,
and of a great part of the body of a Kingdom, to make them either continue in
Rebellion and enmity or to come in and submit. Next let it be remembered that
both Abner and Amasa did a great service, (which was most meritorious at the
hands of men) for the good, peace, and safety of King and Kingdom, and they did
it at that time also when David was but weak, and they had power enough to have
continued a War against him. Which is a very rare case, and far different from
the case of such as have done and are doing all that they can to pervert and
mislead many thousands of the people of God, instead of reduducing many
thousands to obedience, as Abner and Amasa did. 3. There are some other answers
proper to the one case and the other. There is nothing in the Text to prove,
that David made such a Covenant with Abner, as the Grecians call (...), or that
the Covenanted to make him General of his Army, (as afterward he Covenanted
with Amasa) for at that time he could have no color of reason for casting Ioab
out of his place, as afterward he had; Therefore I understand with Sanctus
that the League which Abner sought from David was Foedus pacis, a Covenant of
peace, Hyerome reads, fac mecum amicitias, make friendship with me, for
before, they had been enemies, So that this League is not of that kind which is
chiefly controverted. As for Amasa, I shall not go about (as some have done) to
excuse or extenuate his fault in joining with Absalom, Tostatus in 2 Reg. 17.
Quaest. 24.
as not being from any malice or wicked intention against David his Uncle; But
there is some probability that Amasa was a penitent and hopeful man. Sure
David had better hopes of him, then of Ioab: And if it be true which Josephus
writes that before David sent Zadok and Abiathar to the men of Judah and to
Amasa, frequent messages came from them to the King, Antiq. lib 7. Cap. 10
desireing to be received into his favor; however Amasa being so willing and
ready to do so much for David, when he might have done so much against him,
David as he could not do his business without him, so he had some ground to hope
well of him; considering withal that Amasa was not set upon this business by
any offense or displeasure at the other party, as Abner was. 4. Even as this
example, so far as concerns the laying aside and casting off of Ioab, and not
preferring his brother Abisha in his room (both of them being guilty of Abners
blood. 2 Samuel 3. 3^. and both of them being too hard for David) helps to
strengthen that which I have been pleading for.

The point being now so fully cleared from Scripture, there is the less reason
to argue contrariwise from humane exemples in Christian States and Common
wealths. See M. Fox acts and monuments vol. 2. page 86. 9. 870. edi^ 1589.
The Word of GOD must not stoop to men's practices, but they to it. Yet even
among those whose exemple is alleged for the contrary opinion, there want not
instances for cautiousnesse and conscientiousnesse in choosing or r^fusing
confederats: As namely among the Helvetians or Su^^zers. They of Zurik and
Berne, when once refo^med renounced, their League made before with the French
King, for assisting him in his Wars, and resolved only to keep peace with him;
but would not continue the League of (...), or joining with him in his Wars.
And whatsoever were the old Leagues about 300 years ago, See the Estates
Principalitis and Empires of the world, translated by Grimstou page 364. to 370.
mutually binding those Cantons each to other, for aid and succor, and for the
Common defense of their Country, and for preservation of their particular
Rights and Liberties, and for a way of decideing controversies and pleas
between men of one canton and of another, (which Leagues are recorded by those
that write of that Common wealth) yet after the Reformation of Religion, there
was so much zeal on both sides, that it grew to a War between the Popish and
the Protestant Cantons, wherein as the Popish side strengthened themselves by a
confederacy with Ferdinand the Emperors brother, Acts and mo^uments nbi supra,
page 872. Slcid. Com. lib. 7. page 106. 119. 120.
so the Protestant side, Zurik, Berne, and Basil entered into a confederacy,
first with the City of Strasburgh, and shortly thereafter with the Lantgrave of
Hesse, that thereby they might be strengthened and aided against the Popish
Cantons. The differences in Religion put them to it to choose other
confederates. Nevertheless, I can easily admit what Lavater judiciously
observes, upon Ezekiel. 16. 26, 27, 28, 29. that Covenants made before true
Religion did shine among a people are not to be rashly broken, even as the
believing husband ought not to put away the unbeleeving wife, whom he married
when himself also was an unbel^ever, if she be willing still to abide with him.
Whatsoever may be said for such Covenants, yet confederacies with enemies of
true Religion, made after the light of Reformation, are altogether unexcusable.

Peradventur some have yet another Objection: this is an hard saying (say
diverse malignants) we are looked upon as enemies, if we come not in and take
the Covenant, yet when we are come in and have taken the Covenant, we are still
esteemed enemies to the Cause of God, and to his servants. Answer, This is just
as if those traitors, Covenant-breakers, and other scandalous persons, from
which the Apostle bids us turn away, 2 Timothy 3. 5. had objected, if we have no
form of Godliness, we are looked upon as aliens, and such as are not to be
numbered among Gods people, yet now when we have taken on a form of Godliness,
we are in no better esteem with Paul, but still he will have Christians to
turn away from us: Yea, it is as if workers of iniquity living in the true
Church, should object against Christ himself, if we pray not, if we hear not
the Word, etc. we are not accepted, but rejected for the neglect of necessary
duties, yet when we have prayed, heard, etc. we are told for all that, Depart
from me ye warkers of iniquity, I never knew you. Men must be judged according
to their fruits, according to their words and works, and course of living; and
if any who have taken the Covenant show themselves in their words and actions
to be still wicked enemies, our eyes must not be put out with their hand at the
Covenant.

If any disaffected shall still insist and say; But why then are we received
both to the Covenant and to the Sacrament, nay, why are we forced and compelled
into the Covenant. Answ. 1. If any known malignaut or complier with the rebels
or with any enemy of this Cause has been received either to the Covenant or
Sacrament, without signs of Repentance for the former malignancy, and scandale
(such signs of Repentance I mean, as men in Charity ought to be satisfied
with) it is more then Ministers and Elderships ^an answer (...) to Go^, or to
the Acts and constitutions of this National Church. I trust all faithful and
conscientious Ministers have labored to keep themselves pure in such things.
Yea the General Assembly h^th ordained that known compliers with the rebels,
and such as did procure protections from the enemy, or keep correspondence and
intelligence with him, shall be suspended from the Lords Supper, till they
manifest their Repentance before the Congregation. Now if any after signs and
declaration of Repentance have turned again to their old ways of malignancy,
their iniquity be upon themselves, not upon us. 2. Men are no otherwise drawn
or forced into the Covenant, then into other necessary duties. Nay it ought
notto be called a forceing or compelling. Are men forced to ^pare their
neighbors life, because murthet is severly punished? or are men compelled to
be loyal, because traitors are exemplarily punish^d^ There may and must be a
willingness and freeness in the doing of the contrary duty; although great
sins must not go away unpunished. Men are not compelled to virtue, because vice
is punished, else virtue were not virtue. Those that refuse the Covenant
reproach it, or rail against it, ought to be looked upon as enemies to it, and
dealt with accordingly: yet if any man were known to take the Covenant against
his will, he were not to be received. 3. These two may well stand together, to
censure the contempt or neglect of a duty, and withal to censure wickedness
in the person that has taken up the practice of the duty. If any Israelite
would not worship the true God, he was to be put to death, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. but
withal, if, worshipping the true God, he was found to be a murderer, an
adulterer, etc. for this also he was to be put to death. The General Assembly
of this Church has appointed that such as after admonition continue in an
usual neglect of Prayer, and the Worship of God in their Families, shall be
suspended from the Lords Supper, till they amend. Yet if any man shall be found
to make Family Worship a cloak to his swearing, drunkenness, adultery or the
like, must these scandalous sins be uncensured, because he has taken upon
him a form of godliness? God forbid. It Is just so here, ref^^sers of the
Covenant and railers against it, are justly censured? but withal if
wickedness and malignancy be found in any that have taken the Covenant, their
offense and censure is not to be extenuated, but to be aggravated.

I had been but very short in the handling of this Question if new objections
coming to my ears had not drawn me forth to this length. And now I find one
objection more. Some say, the arguments before brought from Scripture prove not
the unlawfulness of confederacies and associations with Idolaters. Heretics
or profane persons of the same Kingdom, but only with those of another
Kingdom. Answ. 1. Then by the concession of those that make the objection,
it is at least unlawful to associate ourselves with any of another Kingdom,
who are of a false religion or wicked life. 2. If familiar fellowship even with
the wicked of the same kingdom be unlawful, then is a military association
with them unlawful; for it cannot be without cousulting, conferring,
conversing frequently together. It were a profane abusing and mocknig of
Scripture to say, that we are forbidden to converse familiarly with the ungodly
of another kingdom, but not with the ungodly of the same kingdom, or that we
are forbidden to marry with the ungodly of another kingdom, but not with the
ungodly of the same kingdom; for what is this but to open a wide gate upon the
one hand, while we seem to shut a narrow gate upon the other hand? 3. Were not
those military associations, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. and 25. 7, 8. condemned upon this
reason, because the associats were ungodly, haters of the Lord, and because God
was not with them. Now then a quatenus ad omne. The reason holds equally
against associations with any of whom it can be truly said, they are ungodly,
haters of the Lord, and God is not with them. 4. God would have the Camp of
Israel altogether holy and clean, Deuteronomy. 23. 9. to 14. clean from whom? not so
much from wicked heathens (there was not so much fear of that) as from wicked
Israelites. 5. Says not David, I will early destroy all the wicked of the
land, Psalm. 1 1 8. and, De^ part from me all ye workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6.
9. How can it then be imagined that he would make any of them his associats and
helpers in War?

Amandus Polanus Coment. in Ezekiel. 16, 26, 27, 28.

Qui Ecclesie scortation^^^, bac est, idololatriam vel falsam doctrinam, and
consedrations cum impis reprehendit, non est H^reticus, non est Shismaticus,
nonest ingratus advers^ (...) Ecclesiam^ Ali^qui^ (...) Ezekiel cum Jeremia,
aliisu^^ Prophetis, f^iss^t (...).

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND, The Commission of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
My very Reverend and dear Brethren,
ALthough the LORDS hand detaineth me from attending Your meetings, yet as long
as I can write or speak, I dar not be silent, no^ conceal my thoughts of any
sinful and dangerous course in the public proceedings. Having therefore heard
of some motions and beginnings of compliance with those who have been so deeply
engaged in a War distructive to Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms; I
cannot but discharge my conscience in giving a Testimony against all such
compliance. I know, and am persuaded, that all the faithful Witnesses that
gave Testimony to the Thesis, that the late Engagement was contrary and
distructive to the Covenant, will also give Testimony to the Appendi^: That
compliance with any who have been active in that Engagement is most sinful
and unlawful. I am not able to express all the evils of that compliance, they
are so many; Sure I am, it were a hardening of the malignant Party, a wounding
of the hearts of the Godly; a infinite wronging of those who from their
affection to the Covenant and Cause of GOD, have taken their life in their
hand; A great scandal to our Brethren of England, who as they have been
strengthened and encouraged by the hearing of the zeal and integrity of the
well affected in this Kingdom, and how they opposed the late Engagement: So
they would be as much scandalized to hear of a compliance with malignants now.
Yea, all that hear of it might justly stand amazed at us, and look on us as a
people insatuated, that can take in our besome the fiery Serpents that have
slung us so sore.

But above all, that which would heighten this sin even to the he^vens, is
this, That it were not only a horrible backsliding, but a backsliding into that
very sin which was specially pointed at, and punished by the prevalencie of the
malignant Party: GOD justly making them thorns and scourges who was taken in
as Friends, without any real evidence or fruits of Repentance. Alas, shall we
split twice upon the same Rock, yea, run upon it, when GOD has set a Beacon on
it; Shall we be so demented as to fall back into the same sin, which was
engraven with great letters in our late judgment; Yea, I may say, shall we
thus outface and out-dare the Almighty by protecting his and our enemies, when
he is persecuring them, by making Peace and friendship with them when the anger
of the LORD is burning against them, by setting them on their feet, when GOD
has cast them down; Oh shall neither Judgments nor Deliverances make us wise;
I must here apply to our present condition, the words of Ezra. And after all
this is come upon us for our evil deels, and for our great trespass, seeing
that thou our GOD have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and has
given us such deliverance as this: Should we again break thy Commandments and
join in affinititie with the people of these abominations; Would thou not
be angry with us, till thou bast consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping? O happy Scotland if thou can now improve aright and not
abuse this golden opportunity, but if thou will help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the Lord, wrath upon wrath, and woe upon woe shall be upon thee
from the Lord.

This Testimony of a dying Man, (who expects to stand shortly before the
Tribunal of Christ) I leave with you my Reverend Brethren, being confident of
You through the LORD, that ye will be no otherwise minded but that as Men of
GOD, moved with the zeal of GOD, You will freely discharge Your consciences
against every thing which You see listing up it self against the Kingdom of
the LORD JESUS: This shall be Your Peace and Comfort in Your latter end; Now
the GOD of all Grace establish You, and direct You, and preserve You all
blameless to the end, and bring others out of the snare that hanker after that
compliance. So prays,

Your most affectionate Brother to serve You in what I can to my last. GEORGE
GILLESPIE.
Kirkcaldie, September 8. 1648.
The Testimony of Mr. George Gillespie against Association and Compliance with
malignant enemies of the Truth and Godliness: Written two days before his
death.
Seeing now in all appearance the time of my dissolution is very near, although I
have in my latter Will declared my mind of public affairs, yet I have thought
good to add this further Testimony, that I esteem the malignant Party in these
Kingdoms, the seed of the Serpent, enemies to Piety, and Presbyteriall
Government, (pretend what they will to the contrary) a generation that have not
set GOD before them. With the malignants are to be joined the prefane and
scandalous, from all which, as also from heresies and errors, the Lord I trust
is about to purge his Churches. I have often comforted my self (and still do)
with the hopes of the Lords purging this poluted Land, surely the Lord has
begun and will carry on that great Work of mercy, and will purge out the Rebels:
I know their will be always a mixture of Hypocrites, but that cannot excuse
the conniving at gross and scandalous sinners. This pu^ging Work which the
Lord is about, very many have directly opposed and said by their deeds, we will
not be purged nor resined, but we will be joining and mixing our selves with
these whom the Ministers preach against as malignant enemies to God and his
Cause. But let him that is filthy, be filthy still, and let Wisdom be
justified of her Children. I recommend to them that fear God, sadly and
seriously to consider that the holy Scripture does plainly hold forth. 1. That
the helping of the enemies of God, or joining and mingling with wicked men, is
a sin highly displeasing. 2. That this sin has ordinaryly ensnared Gods People
into diverse other sins. 3. That it has been punished of God with grievous
judgments. 4. That utter destruction is to be feared, when a people after
great mercies and judgments relapse into this sin, This far did the Author
write with His own hand, two days before, his death but finding his weakness
increase, that he was able to writ no more, he dyted that which follows.
Ezra. 9. 13. 14.

Upon these and the like grounds for my own exoneration, that so necessary a
Truth want not the Testimony of a dying Witness of Christ, also the
unworthiest among many thousands: And that Light may be h^ld forth, and warning
given, I cannot be silent at this time; but speak by my pen when I cannot by my
tongue, yea, now also by the pen of another, when I cannot by my own, seriously
and in the name of Jesus Christ, exhorting, and obtesting all that fear God and
make conscience of their ways, to be very tender and circumspect, to Watch and
Pray that they be not ensnared in that great dangerous sin of conjunction or
complyncae with malignant or profane enemies of the Truth, under whatsoever
prudentiall considerations it may be vernished over, which if men will do, and
trust God in his own way, they shall not only not repent it, but to their
greater joy and peace of Gods people, they shall see his work go on and prosper
gloriously. In witness of the premises, I have subscribed the same with my
hand at KIRKCALDY, December. 15. 16^8. Before these witnesses, M. F. Carmichael
Minister at Markings, and M. Alex. Moncrief Minister at Skonie.

Sic subscrib. George Gillespie. F. C. witness. A. M. witness.

Follows that part of Mr. Gillespie his Letter-Will, unto which the former
testimony relates.
BEing through much weakness and sickness in expectation of my last change, I
have thought good by this my Letter-Will under my hand to declare first of all
that the expectation of death which appears not to be far off does not shake
me from the Faith and Truth of Christ which I have pro^essed and preached;
neither do I doubt but this so much opposed Covenant and Reformation of the
three Kingdoms is of God and will have a happy conclusion. It has pleased God
who chooses the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the
things that are not to confound the things that are to employ me (the unfittest
and unworthiest among many thousands) in the advanceing and promoting of that
glorious work; and now I repent no forwardness or zeal that ever I had
therein, and dare promise to as many as will befaithful and zealous in the Cause
of God, it shall be no grief of heart to them afterward, but matter of joy and
peace; as this day I find it, through Gods mercypassing by my many and great
infirmities, and approving my poor endeavors in his cause. But if there be a
falling back to the sin of compliance with malignant ungodly men, then I look
for the breaking out of the wrath of the Lord till there be no remedy. O that
there were such a spirit at least in such of our Nobility as stand for the
Truth that they may take more of Gods counsel, and lean less to their own
reason and understanding. As from dangers on the other hand from Sectaries, I
have been and am of the opinion that they are to be prevented and avoided by
all lawful means; but that the dangers from malignants are nearest and
greatest in this Kingdom.

Kirkcaldie, September 1. 1648.
FINIS.

