A LATE DIALOGUE BETWIXT A CIVILIAN and a Divine, concerning the present
condition of the Church of ENGLAND. In which, among other particulars, these
following are especially spoken of.

1 The sin and danger of delaying Reformation. 2 That there is a certain form
of Church Government Jure Divino. 3 That there was an Ecclesiastical
Excommunication among the Jews. 4 That Excommunication is an Ordinance in the
New Testament. 5 Concerning the Toleration of all Sects and Heresies. 6 Some
Answer to a late Book come from Oxford.
1 These. 5.21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign
of the Kings Head. 1644.

A LATE DIALOGVE Betwixt a Civilian, and a Divine, concerning the present
condition of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, etc.
Divine. GOOD Morrow to you good Sir.


Civilian. I am glad to see you Sir, will you take a walk with me this morning,
and tell me what good news ye have heard, for I have not yet been in
Westminster Hall, the place most infected with the Athenian disease.


Divine. I can tell you no news at this time.


Civilian. You look as you were not well pleased to day, pray you tell me, have
you heard any bad news from the North or from the West.


Divine. None truly, but this I confess, that though I cannot but allow those
who from their affection to the Cause, are inquisitive of news from several
quarters, and labor to make some good use of what they hear; yet for mine own
part, one thing sticks with me, which suffers me not either to be so curious
in seeking, or so joviall in hearing news, as many others are. The truth is, I
am more afraid and apprehensive of our own, then of our enemies victories.


Civilian. This is a most strange paradox, what can you mean by it? I hope you
are not turned malignant.


Divine. If it be Paradoxall, yet I am sure it is Orthodoxall, I remember
judicious Calvin said the same of the German wars in his time. There is more
danger, said he, like to come by our own then by our enemies victory. I desire
his words may be well observed, and applied. I dare say, God is more gracious
to us in continuing this war of ours, then if he should answer our desires in
putting an end to it presently. When God blesses our forces with any great
success, nay when he does but draw back his afflicting hand a little, and
gives us some lightning of our eyes, O how do we by and by forget God, and
slight both Hu^iliation and Reformation. Deuteronomy. 23.15.
Then Iesurum forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his
^alvation. ^^al. 78.34. Caiv. Opuse. de S^andalis gu^s Evang^l^ pro(...) la^^^
in Germanian (...), and ^^^zae adbuc e^sent little (...), qu^ ad tuendam bonam
causam videbantur animati, ha^que f^^ucia susceptum esset luctuosum b^c bellum,
quodque, insel^c^ter^ (...): ^rectis ^ magnas spes, p^rt^s nostrae animis; d^xi
al quando publ^e, plus a nostra, quam hostium victoria, nobis instare pericul^^
^ eque enim tam^ m^tuenda^ esse ullas clades, quam n^m^s triumpha^e, ^t ita
loquar, Evangelium, quod nos adinsolentiam efferret. No^ vero me i^ius voc^s
bod^e quoque paenites. Nisi prophanae licentiae Dominis matu. e obviam ^^sset,
morbus fu^sset temporis successis procemodum incurab^lis. Nulle dollrinae
piisgu^ monitionibus fuisset authoritas, etc.
But, when he slew them, then they sought him, and returned and inquired after
God early. There were never serious and deep thoughts, either in the
Parliament, or in the Kingdom, of fasting and praying, of covenanting with
God, of purging our hearts, our lives, our families, of reforming the Church,
according to the word, of building the Temple according to the pattern, of
caring for the things of Jesus Christ more then for their own things; never but
when we felt Gods hand smart and heavy upon us. And if now the sword of the
Lord should be still, and England a quiet habitation, every man sitting under
his own vine, and under his own figtree: I verily believe our great
StatePhysitians should heal the wound of the daughter of Sion slightly, and
daube the wall with untempered mortar, and the Church of God in this Kingdom
should have dry breasts, and a miscarrying womb, instead of bringing forth the
manchild of Reformation, now sticking in the birth, but having no strength to
come forth, till some new pains and pangs quicken and carry through the work.


Civilian. I must confess the Reformation of our selves and our families has
been, Act. and Monu vol. z. p. 1373. edit. 1583.
and is still, too much neglected. But for National and Church-Reformation, I
do not know what can be more done then is done, considering our intestine
divisions among our selves, which as Mr. Fox observes was the undoing of the
Church and of Religion in King Edwards days, and is like to prove the bane of
Religion and Reformation in our days. Ita dum singuli pugnant universi
vincuntur: In vit. Iul. agri^.
as Tacitus speaks of the ancient British.


Divine. Sir, I desire that first of all this may be laid down as a sure
Principle, that the purity and liberty of the Gospel, and of the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, is to be more esteemed of, and sought after then all or any
thing in this world. That it is said as well to States and Parliaments, as to
particular persons: Matthew. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all
these things shall be added unto you. The settling of Religion is to be looked
upon, as causall, not as consequent to the peace and prosperity of the Kingdom.
M^l 3.10.
Do but prove the Lord now herewith, Isa. 2^.1.1. (...) ^.30.
and see if he will not appoint salvation for walls and b^^^marks, if he will
not honor those that honor him, if he will not be zealous for those that are
zealous for him. The Trojans believed that Troy could not be taken except their
idol Palladium were taken away from them which being once taken away by
Ulysses and Diomedes, (...).
they observed that shortly thereafter their Town was destroyed. Arno^ius tells
us that when the I^age of Jupiter was thrown down in the Capitol, (...) P^^l.
2^^.
and was lying upon the ground, the heathenish So^th-savers did foretell sad
and heavy things which should never be removed till Jupiter were set in his
own place; which i^ it were no done, that they did in vain hope for the
preservation of the laws, or the healing of their homebred divisions. Shall
those Pagans rise up in judgment against us Christians, who do so overly and
slightly go about the building of the house of God, and the erecting of the
throne of Jesus Christ; who care for something else more then for his Church
and Kingdom, his glory and his ordinances, who seek our own things, not the
things which are Jesus Christ's.


Civilian. No man can say against this, that true Religion is the Alpha and
Omega of a Kingdoms happiness, and that it is their surest foundation and
strongest bullwark of Peace, Liberties, and Laws. And I trust the Parliament
will ever be most tender and careful of it, and put it in its own place as
they have frequently professed in their Declarations, and really manifested in
calling and keeping together an Assembly of learned and pious Div^nes, the
results of whose debates and consultations they will take to their
consideration in due time, for settling the government of the Church, and the
worship of God.


Divine. If you would really and carefully endeavor, to do what you profess
to intend, I have no more to say, but that the success is to be committed to
God, you having done your duty. But assuredly the practices do not answer to
the professions, nor the performances to the promises.


Civilian. For that I must tell you a story which I remember that I have read,
in Diodorus Siculus of Pharnabazus who after many slow preparations, did at
last lead forth Artaxerxes his Army against the Egyptians. This man being asked
by Iphi^rates, why he was so nimble and ready in discourse, and so slow in
action, why he did promise so much, and perform so little: answered, because
he was master of his words but King of his actions: meaning that actions were
not so much in his power as words.


Divine. All things are possible to him that believes. Do not say with the
sluggard, There is a Lion in the way. If you would but do your duty in going
about the thing, trust God with the event. Now assuredly it is your duty to
carry on the cause of Religion in the first and principal place, which that I
may the more press upon you, I will add unto that which has been said, the
notable example of Solomon, 1. King. 6.37, 38. and 7.1. In the fourth year was
the foundation of the house of the Lord laid, in the month Zif, and in the
eleventh year in the month Bull (which is the eight month) was the house
finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of
it. So was ^e seven years in building it. But Solomon was building his own
house thirteen years. Neither did he begin to build his own house, till those
seven years were ended, and the house of the Lord fully perfected, as
appears clearly by 2. Chron. 8.1. and it came to pass at the end of twenty
years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the Lord, and his own house.
After all which (as follows in that place) he took care for store-Cities,
and fenced Cities, for tribute, and for his navy. Tostatus and other
Interpreters observe, that Solomon looked first to the Lords matters, and
afterward to his own matters. Antiqd. 8 c. 2.
And Josephus his observation is very much to be taken notice of. The building
of the Temple (says he) which did continue for seven years being finished, he
went about the building of the Palace, which in the thirteenth year, he did
scarcely finish, for he did not take so much care of this work, as of the
building of the Temple, which though both large and more glorious then can be
believed, was through Gods assistance perfected in the foresaid space: but the
Palace though very far inferior to the magnificence of the Temple, yet the
materials thereof not being so long before prepared, and the house being to be
builded for the King, not for God, it was the more slowly brought to perfection.


Civilian. But I beseech you where is the fault with us? and what could be more
done then is done?


Divine. O but my heart bleeds to think how it goes for the present, and how
it is like to go for the future with this distracted unsettled Church, what
fruits have we yet reaped of our many petitions and endeavors for reformation
of Religion, of our solemn Covenant, of the learned debates and long
consultations of the Assembly of Divines, Meethinks that which was said of
Ephraim, Hos. 13.13. agrees too too much to England. The sorrows of a
traveling woman shall come upon him, he is an ^nwise Son, for he should not
stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children. I wish we may beware
of that which some stories have observed to have been a most unhappy error in
the Emperor Frederick 3. who did so far connive at all things, that when he
was put in mind to look to this or that, to prevent this or that danger, he
was wont to answer as Faelix did, the time of amending those things was not yet
come, he would wait for a more convenient season; which season he could never
see? I am persuaded it lies heavy upon the spirits of thousands beside my
self, to know that every man does now in Religion what seems good in his own
eyes, Errors and Schisms do multiply, in most places of the Kingdom; there
is a darkness instead of divination, and people are like sheep that have no
shepherd: and for ought I can see, betwixt our forsaking of the old, and
finding of a new way, we are fallen in a wilderness where there is no way, O
when shall I once see Religion settled?


Civilian. When the war shall be hushed, the State ordered and composed, the
Peace of the Kingdom socured; it is not to be expected till then that the
Parliament can have much leisure to look to Church matters: yet they will no
doubt, do the best that may be for the interim. Marvel not if I say more,
that the Parliament does wisely in moving so slowly. The slow and wary motions
of Fabius did overcome Ha^^db^^, whereas the heat and suddenness of Minutius
did endanger the Commonwealth. Sudden courses (I doubt) shall not so much glad
us in the beginning, as grieve us in the end.


Divine. I have read in some Politicians, that though that of Augustus. --
Festina lent, Hag. 1.2. De Repub. l. ^. c. 12. Quicunque Principes atque
Re^pub. Semet ipsas conservare cup unt, in id unum prae caeteris, incumbere
debeu^, ut verum religionis cul^umrecte instituant and vanerentur. Et infra,
quod si haec tam d^ligens cura divini cultus, a Reipub. Christian^ Princip^bus
observata esset, secundum prima^ institutionem, and praecepta ejus, qui illam
nobis primum tradidit: long majori faelicitate, a^ pace in orb Christi^^^
frueremur. Valerius Maximus l. 1. c. 2. gives us fix instances of examplarie
judgments among the Romans; which were observed to fall upon such as despised
Religion, and the honor of the Gods.
do well agree to calm and peaceable times: yet Alexander his (...) nihil
cunctando, is fitter for times of trouble and war, and so they reconcile the
one with the other* Kekerm. discurs. de consilio quaest. 7. It is not safe to
dispute long, in the time of a present combustion, nor to consult long about
the cure, when the patient lies a dying; But I desire to argue from the
principles of my own profession: God did of old reprove his people, because
they said, The time is not yet come, the time that the Lords house should be
builded. This they said at that time when Judah and Benjamin had powerful
adversaries, when the land was not secured, nor the walls of Jerusalem built.
They might have pleaded for themselves enough of this kind, but all this could
not excuse them at Gods hands: he would have them build the Temple before the
walls of Jerusalem. And in this they harkened to the Prophets of God, and did
so. Thereafter God takes themselves to witness, whether he had not blessed
them from that very day when they laid the foundation of the Temple: Nay I dare
say it is not only good Divinity, but good Policy, that the Parliament should
mind the things of Christ, more then their own things: for if (as I suppose)
you will believe Matchiavell, he teaches you that the setting up of the
ordinances of Christ, is the best way to make a Kingdom flourish in prosperity
and peace. I conclude therefore that procra^tinations in reforming Religion may
prove very pernicious as well to the Commonwealth, as to the Church. And for my
part I must confess, I am afraid that the Parliament has felt, and shall yet
feel Gods hand against them i^ other things, because of their doing the work of
the Lord so negligently, and at the best by halfes. I wish the Honorable House
of Commons may remember what they were about at that instant, when the sad
news of the dispersion of the Army in the West, were brought to them: And if
they shall inquire at God, Job. 10.2.
as Job did, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. I doubt not but they
shall hear the voice of his servants, the voice of his rods, and the voice of
their own Consciences telling them that he has somewhat against them: that
he heals not the breaches of the land, because they heal not the breach of
the daughter of Sion: that he makes the success of the war to halt, because
they halt betwixt two, or rather many opinions.


Civilian. I do fully agree with you if all this be understood of the
fundamentals of Faith and Religion, and the power of godliness. But if so be,
you mean of the government and discipline of the Church, then you make
Mountains of mole-hills, and put Hercules sh^e upon an infants foot, whiles
you hold that God is not pleased, and that the Kingdom cannot be blessed,
unless the order and discipline of the Church be established so and so as you
would have it. I do not acknowledge either the Episcopal way, or the
Presbiteriall, or the C^ngregationall, to be Iure divino, But that all things
of that kind are left in such an indifferency, that they may be molded and
fashioned diversely according to the different forms and constitutions of
Commonwealths, and altered as much and as often, as each State shall find most
convenient for it self. If you can convince me that I am in an error, go to,
let me hear your reasons.


Divine. I shall endeavor by Gods assistance to satisfy you. But first of all
let me use this humble liberty with you, once to put you in mind of the
Apostles premonition, 1. Cor. 3.18.
Let no man deceive himself: if any man among you seem to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool that he may be wise. He that most denies his
own natural judgment in supernatural verities, and is not conformed to this
world, but is transformed by the renewing of his mind; shall best prove what is
that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. Romans 12.2.
Absque te sapere, est desipere. O Lord, faith Augustine, to be wise without
thee, is to be mad. Do not therefore measure Scripturall truths, by Political
principles, but contrariwise, and let your judgment be unbyassed and
unprejudiced, when light is set before you. And whereas it seems to you a
venial thing, if not altogether lawful to take a latitude in all such things
as are not substantial (though Scripturall) truths, and may (you conceive)
admit a variation upon State-considerations. Remember I beseech you that it is
the pleasure of God to take notice of, yea purposely to try our obedience, Luke
16.10.
Etiam in minimis: For he that is faithful in that which is least, is
faithful also in much, and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in
much. How was the Lord offended with Ieroboams setting up of Altars at Dan and
Bethel: yea even with the Kings of Judah, for not taking away the high places,
though Jeroboam migh have pleaded that it was extremely dangerous (in regard of
the war betwixt him and Rehoboam) that his subjects should go up to
Jerusalem to sacrifice unto the Lord there. And the Kings of Judah might plead,
that it was too burdensome for all the people to be tied to go to Jerusalem
with their Sacrifices: that God would have mercy and not sacrifice; especially
considering that they held the foundation, and sacrificed to the Lord only; And
this variation from the law of Moses, being in no substantial thing, but only
in the circumstance of place. In like manner Jeroboam thought not fit to have
the feast of Tabernacles upon the fifteenth day of the seventh month, but upon
the fifteenth day of the eight month, when the fruits of the earth were more
fully gathered in: he would observe the feast according to the law in all the
substantialls, but would not be tied to the circumstance of time. But God does
utterly reject his worship, 1. King. 12.33.
because Jeroboam had devised it of his own heart. If therefore the will of
Jesus Christ can be made to appear from his word, even concerning the form of
Church Government and Discipline, and ceremonies of worship, that thus and thus
he would have us to do, will you then quarrel at these things, because stamped
with a I^ divinum? Will you draw out your neck from this yoke, because it is
Christ's yoke? Will you submit and obey because these things are ordinances of
Parliament, and you will not submit because they are ordinances of Christ.


Civilian. You say right, if you can make it appear that Jesus Christ has
revealed his will and Commandments, not only concerning faith and manners, but
how he would have his Church governed and ordered. Now this is it which you
have yet to prove.


Divine. For that, I shall desire you to consider, that Jesus Christ is the
only Head and King of his Church, that the government of his Church is a part
of his Kingly office: Isa 22.21, 2^.
that the Government is committed into his hand, and the key of the house of
David is laid upon his shoulder; that the Father has set him as a King upon
his holy hill of Zion, Luke 1.33.
to reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be
no end. As therefore he has fully and faithfully executed his Priestly office
in making atonement for our sins by the sacrifice of himself, and still
making intercession in heaven for us. And his Prophetical office in revealing
the whole Counsel of God, and teaching his people by his word and spirit, what
he would have them to do. So he has no less fully and faithfully executed his
Kingly office and Legislative power, in providing by his Statutes and
Ordinances for all the necessities of his Church; and appointing by whom and
after what manner he will have his house governed, what spiritual Courts and
Judicatories he would have erected, how he would have them constituted, by
what rules to proceed, how to censure offenses. It is an old observation, they
are the best laws, which leave least to the power of the Judge to do as he
list. It were a bad administration of the supreme power in any Kingdom, if no
certain kinds of subordinate officers, nor no certain kind of government were
appointed, but all this left to the liberty of every Country or City. Now Jesus
Christ is more wi^e, and provident, and faithful, in the government of his
whole Church, then ever King or Parliament was in the government of an earthly
Kingdom; and has therefore appointed Officers, Courts, Censures, and Laws,
for the right ordering thereof; and has not left these things to be
determined by th^^ or that State at their pleasure. I should wish you and all
that are of your mind, to study better the Kingly office, and prerogative
Royal, of Jesus Christ.


Civilian. I conceive the Kingly office of Christ to consist in this, that he
preserves, strengthens, and delivers the Church invisible, and all the
members of his mystical body from the malice of the Devil, and the wicked
world, and also rules and commands their hearts by his spirit, to walk in
the ways of his obedience. But that the Kingly office of Christ reaches so
far, as to the external government and order of a visible political
ministerial Church, that I still doubt of.


Divine. You observe not that my argument did conclude this very thing, at
which you stick, that Christ has appointed a certain policy and government,
and certain kinds of officers for the Church, because he has fully and
faithfully discharged his Kingly office in providing for all the necessities of
his Church. And that he reigns and rules in his Church, not only mystically,
but politically considered; I suppose you cannot deny, if you observe that
otherwise a visible political Church is a body without a head, and subjects
without a King. Therefore it is the ordinary expression of our Divines against
Papists, that the government of the Church is partly Monarchical in regard of
Christ our King and Lawgiver; partly Aristocraticall in regard of the
Ministers and Officers, and partly Democraticall in regard of certain
Liberties and Privileges belonging to people.


Civilian. I would understand whether the Reformed Churches hold the form of
their Ecclesiastical government to be jure divino, for I have heard, that it
was introduced among them only in a prudentiall way.


Divine. I shall give you some clear instances of their judgment, such as
come to my remembrance. In the Book of the policy of the Church of Scotland, I
read thus.

This power and policy of the Church should lea^e upon the word immediately, as
the only ground thereof, and should be taken from the pure fountains of the
Scriptures, the Church hearing the voice of Christ, the only spiritual King,
and being ruled by his Laws. In the French confession it is said, we believe
that this true Church ought to be governed by that Regiment or Discipline,
which our Lord Jesus Christ has established. ^n the Belgic Confession, I find
words to the same purpose* We believe, say they, That this Church ought to be
ruled and governed by that spiritual Regiment, which God himself has
delivered in his word. See Harm; Confess. Sect. 11. If the question were only
this, whether the Divine right of this or that form of Church Government is to
be mentioned and held forth in the ordinance of Parliament, for my part I
should not contend much for that, the business going right otherwise. But it
belongs at least to the Assembly of Divines to satisfy the consciences of
men by holding forth the institution and ordinance of Jesus Christ: which if it
be not done, our proceedings shall not be conformable to those of other
Churches.


Civilian. Well then, go on; you did bring an argument from the Kingly office
of Jesus Christ. Let me hear what other arguments you have to make it appear
that God has in his word descended so far into paricularities with us, as to
appoint a certain form of Church Government.


Divine. This will appear best, when the particular form of Church Government
with the Scripturall grounds of it, shall be taken into consideration. This
government is Iure divino. Ergo, a government is Iure divi^^. This were too
large a subject for our conference. But I ^^mit you to what is largely written
concerning it. I shall only put you in mind, that in all ages God has by
positive Laws descended into many particularities with man. Take for instance
beside the positive Law before the fall, the Commandment not to eat of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, other positive Law^ before the Law,
such as that of the distinction of clean and unclean beasts, Genesis 7. the Law
not to eat blood, Genesis 9. the Law of circumcision, Genesis 17. Under the Law,
beside moral and forensicall observances, there were many ceremonial
Statutes. And under the Gospel, Christ and his Apostles have left another Law,
which though it lay opon us, neither many nor burdensome performances, yet
binds us to such and such things in Ecclesiastical policy. The particulars
we find in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the Epistles, especially to Timothy
and Titus, and Romans 12. and 1. Cor. 12.


Civilian. Many particulars of that kind there are in the Acts and Epistles of
the Apostles. But that those things were intended as perpetual and binding
ordinances, is a great question. And beside I have heard some learned men make
a distinction betwixt Ius di^inum; and Ius Apostolicum.


Divine. This distinction was used by those that denied the jus divinum of the
Lords day. But surely i^ i^ an i^^ grounded distinction, and those that make
most use of it, are forced also to distinguish betwixt Ius divinum, and Ius
Mosaicum, holding that though God was the Author of the moral Law, yet Moses
(no^ God) was the Author of the judicial and ceremonial Law: as the Apostles
did write some things as Christ's Heralds: other things as Pastors or Bishops
of the Churches; that they were Authors of the latter, Tr^ct. 62. in Acta.
promulgators only of the former, and that therefore the former only were Iure
divino. Thus says Salmeron, but he is in this contradicted by Bellarmine,
Maldonat, Suarez, and others. Lorinus in Psalm. 88.32. notes, that it was one
of the errors of Valentinus and of the Gnostics, that the Decalogue only was
from God; and other Laws from Moses and the Elders of Israel. But what says
the Apostle himself after he has given rules concerning the policy of the
Church, Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge; and the
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Let your women keep
silence in the Churches, etc. Then he adds, 1. Cor. 14.37. If any man think
himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things
that I writ unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. Do we not also find,
the laying on of hands reckoned among those cat^cheticall heads which the
Apostles did deliver as perpetual to all the Churches, Heb. 6.2. Papists
understand the Episcopal confirmation. Dwerse of our writers understand
ordination of Ministers, and the several kinds of Church officers. However it
is agreed on both sides, it is a thing belonging to the policy of the Church,
not to the foundation of faith or piety. I add that the directions given to
Timothy and Titus are standing ordinances for all the Churches, as may be
proved from 1. Tim. 3.15. and 6.14. and 2. Tim. 2.2.


Civilian. But Ratio mutabilis facit praeceptum mutabile. The reason why there
were ruling Elders and Deacons, and Church Censures at that time was, because
there was no Chri^^ian Magistrate. So that under a Christian Magistrate there
is no necessity of such officers, government, or censures in the Church.


Divine. I answer, First there is no ground at all in Scripture for such a
distinction, for the Scripture holds not out one form of Church Government, for
times of persecution, another for times of peace. But rather one form to be
perpetual and continued, till the second coming of Jesus Christ. Rev. 2.24,
25. That which ye^ have already, hold fast till I come. So 1. Tim. 6.14. before
cited, and the like. 2. Chrysostom Hom. 12. in 1. Cor. does show diverse
sins for which the best Lawgivers had appointed no punishment. And where
there are Christian Magistrates, yet there are no Laws nor civil punishments
for somethings which must needs fall within the compass of Church Discipline,
such as ignorance of God, neglect of family worship, living in malice, or envy,
etc. 3. And though the civil or municipall Laws should reach to all offenses
which are supposed to fall under the verge of Church Discipline, yet there is
still a necessary use of both. For instance, a Traitor, or a Murderer being
excommunicated by the Church, is by the blessing of God gained to true
repentance, humiliation, and confession, whereupon he is loosed and remitted,
and again received into the bosom of the Church: nevertheless the civil
sword falls upon him; were he never so penitent, shall such a one either
escape the civil sword because reconciled to the Church, or shall he after God
has given him mercy, and a great measure of repentance, die under the
dreadful sentence of excommunication, because Justice must be done by the
Magistrate. There is no way of avo^ding great inconveniences on both sides, but
by holding the necessary distinct uses both of the sword of the Magistrate, and
censures of the Church. 4. And when they are most coincident, it is but
materially or objectively, not formally: one and the same man must be civilly
punished, because justice and the law of the land so requires, and that the
Common wealth may be kept in Peace and Order; he must also be
Ecclesiastically censured, that his soul may be humbled, that he may be
filled with godly sorrow, and with shame and confusion of face, and drawn to
repentance, (if possible) which the Church, not the Magistrate, drives at.


Civilian. I have heard it asserted by some learned men, that among the Jews,
there was no government nor discipline in the Church distinct from the
government of the State, yea, that there was no such distinction as Church and
State, but that the Jewish Church was the Jewish State, and the Jewish State
the Jewish Church; and if it was so among them (whose forms you take in many
particulars for patterns) I would fain know why it may not be so among us.


Divine. Though the Jewish Church and Common wealth were for the most part not
different materially, the same men being members of both, even as in all
Christian Republickes, yet they were formally different one from another, in
regard of distinct Acts, Laws, Courts, Officers, Censures, and
Administrations. For, 1. The Ceremonial law given was given to them as a
Church, the Judicial law given to them as a State. 2. They did not worship,
do sacrifice, pray, praise, etc. as a State; nor did they kill malefactors
with the sword as a Church. 3. As the Lords matters and the Kings matters were
distinguished, so there were two different Courts for judging of the one and
the other, 2. Chron. 19.8.11. Fourthly, when the Romans took away the Jewish
State and Civil government, yet their Church did remain. 5. The government of
the State and the constitution thereof was not the same under the Judges, under
the Kings, and after the captivity: shall we therefore say that the Church was
altered and new molded, as often as the Civil government was changed. De jure
nature. and Gentium. l^. 2. cap. 4.
6. Learned Master Seldom has rightly observed, that those Proselytes who were
called Prosiliti justitiae, though they were initiated into the Jewish Religion
by Circumcision, Baptism, and Sacrifice; and were free not only to worship God
apart by themselves, but also to come into the Church or Congregation of the
Israelites, Proselytus Iustitiae, utcunque nova^o patriae nom^ne Iudaeus
d^c^^tur, no^ tam quidem ^^vis Iudaicus simpliciter censendus esset quam
peregrinus semper cu^ jur^ quamplirima ^^ter cives. S^lden. loc. citat.
and did get to themselves the name of Jews: yet were restrained and debarted
from Dignities, Magistracies and preferments, as also from some marriages which
were permitted to the Israelites. He adds a simile of strangers initiated and
associated into the Church of Rome, who yet have not the privilege of Roman
Citizens: whence we gather most apparently a distinction of the Jewish Church
and the Jewish State; for as much as those Proselytes were imbodied into the
Jewish Church, and as Church Members did communicate in the holy ordinances of
God, De anno civili Iudaeor cap 18. Neque enima Templo, Sacrificiis, aut Conv
u^ib^s sacris om^ino quis apud cos ex sententia ^liqua Excommunicationis, sive
sivensi, sive alia hum^na arcendus er^^.
yet they were not properly members of the Jewish State, nor admitted to Civil
privileges.


Civilian. But I find no censure nor punishment of offenses in the Jewish
Church, except what the Civil power did inflict, no such censure as
excommunication or separation from the Temple, Synagoue or ordinances. And
since you have cited Master Seldom for you, I will cite him against you, for he
says in his late Book, that he who was separate or excommunicated among the
Jews, was not excluded from the Temple, Sacrifices or holy Assemblies, but
only debarred from the liberty of Civil worship, so that he might not sit
within four cubits of off his companion or neighbor.


Divine. Solden de Ihre nature. and Gent. li. 4. c. 9. Atque (...) plane a
communicatione orationis, and conventus, and omnis sancti commerci^
relegabatur, ^^^madmodum ae hujusmodi an^themate, sub i^itii^ Ecclesiae
Christianae loquitur Tertullianus. Drusius Quast. and Resp. lib. 1. quaest. 9.
Solcbant autem vet^res (Judaei) si qui^ gravius deliquerat, primum eum mavere
caelu Ecclesiastico: si non emendabat se, tum feritbant anathemate: quod si ne
tum quidem redbat ad frugem, ultimo at postremo loco sa^^tizaba^t. Johannes
Coch. annot. in Exc Gemar. Sanedrim. cap. 1. Qui simpliciter excommunicatu^ est
(menud^e) est ille quidem separatus a caetu, it a ut provero membro Ecclesiae
non habeatur. Dr. Buxt^rf. dissert. de literis Hebraeor. th. 49. has observed
a notable passage in Pirke, and in Iela^^^d^un, which makes much for this
po'nt in hand. It is concerning the Samaritans, who being circumcised by two
Elders of Israel sent to them, and having received the book of the Law, were
afterward upon just causes excommunicated by Ezra. Quid secit Esr^^ and
Zerubbabel filius Shealtiel, and Iehosua filius Iehozadek? Convocaverunt totum
caetum in Templum Domini, and ve^^re fecerunt trecentos Sacerdotes, tr^centos
pueros, trecentas buccinas, and trecentos libros legis i^ manu ^orum, qui
elangeba^t, Levitae ^^o canebant and psallebant, and excommunicabant (i^
lelammeden^ (...) that is, they did excommunicate in all the three degrees or
kinds of excommunication) Cutheos per secretum nominis Tetragrammati, and per
Scripturam quae scripta suit in Tabulis, and per anathema domus Iudicii
superioris, and per anathema judicii inferioris; Ne quis unquam ex Israele
comederet panem Cuthaei, unde dixerunt; Quisquis comederit carnem Cuthei,
perinde est ac si comederet carnem perei: it^^ ne quisquam Cuthaeum faceret
proselytum, h. c. in Judah snum reciperet, etc. Whereby it is manifest, that the
Jewish excommunication was a shutting out as well from sacred as from civil
communion, and that by public Authority.
I shall do M. Seldom so much right as to appeal from him to himself, for in
another place where he writes at greater length of the Jewish excommunication,
he describes it to have been a separation, not only from the former civil
commerce and company in regard of that distance of four cubits, but also from
communicating together in prayer and holy Assemblies. And that it was so, it is
not only the most received opinion of Protestant Divines, but even of those who
have devoted themselves to the study of the Jewish Antiquities, such as
Drusius, Johannes Couh, L'Empereur, and others.

Brughton also in his Exposition of the Lords prayer, page 14. etc. tells us
that the Jewish Church and the Apostolic Church, though they differed about
traditions and about the Messiah, yet for government they agreed. He gives
instance in these particulars, the rulers of the Synagogue, the readers of the
Law, and the Prophets, the qualities of a Bishop, or Elder, the providing for
the poor, the manner of excommunication and absolution, the laws to bridle
Elders from Tyranny: All these are the same in both, says he. Now these men
were most exquisitely acquainted with those studies and their Testimonies may
serve instead of many more that may be added. Hereunto that distinction of 3.
kinds of excommunication received from Elias in Thesbyte, Niddui, Herem, and
Sammatha, whether we understand as some do, that Niddui was a separation
according to the ceremonial law, and Herem the devoting of one to death, and
capital punishment; or whether we distinguish betwixt Niddui and Herem (which
two only are mentioned in the law) as we use to do betwixt excommunicatio
minor, and major; which is the opin^on of others.


Civilia^. It may be there was a separation or ejection from the Temple,
Synagogue, and worship, but I deny that this was done judicially or by the
sentence of a Court, De anno civili, cap. 18.
for as M. Seldom observes, the very letter of the law, not any judicial
sentence did exclude the unclean from the Temple.


Divine. I answer, men were excluded from the Temple and worship, either for
ceremonial or moral uncleanes, the former is particularly determined in the
law, the latter not so, but left as a necessary consequence from the law, for
if God would have men kept back for ceremonial uncleanes, it may be for
touching (though casually and unwillingly) a vessel, a seat, a cloth, a body,
or somewhat else that was unclean; surely it was much more his will that such
as are morally unclean by a profane or scandalous life, should not be
admitted. However it was necessary that matters of fact should be examined by
a Court, whether they did fall within the verge of the law or not. But what
will you say, if I give you scripture for excommunication, by a judicial
sentence. Ezra 10.8. we read of a mixed meeting of the Princes, Elders, Priests
and Levites, where it was decreed that whosoever would not come to Jerusalem
within 3. days, should be punished, with the forfeiture of all his substance;
and himself separated from the congregation of those that had been carried
away. A double punishment Civil and Ecclesiastical, forfeiture and
excommunication, according as that extraordinary occasion made a conjuncture
and concurrence of the Civil and the Ecclesiastical Sanedrim at that time,
Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis, Cajetan, and of ours Diodati, and Lavater, all upon the
place (beside others who cite the place occasionally) do agree that the
separation from the congregation ((...) as the 70. read it, it is Kahal in the
Hebrew) is meant of excommunication from the Temple and worship: even as that
casting out mentioned, Isa 66.5. So in the new Testament this iniquity was
established by a law, that whosoever should confess that Jesus was the Christ,
should be cast out of the Synagogue, 10.9.22. and 12.42. and 16.2.


Civilian. But there is not in all the law of Moses any syllable of such an
excommunication as you speak of, except you take that to be it, which is often
repeated in the law, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. Now
that may be expounded either of capital punishment and cutting off by the hand
of the Magistrate; or (as Ainsworth and M. Seldom following the most part of
the Hebrews expound it) of cutting off by the hand of God, that is, th^^ God
would not suffer such a one to live out half his days, but take him away by
an untimous death.


Divine. I know that both Jewish and Christian Interpreters have much differed
among themselves, in expounding that commination of the Law. But I shall only
offer my reasons against these two Glosses which you have mentioned, and then
tell you what I conceive to be the true meaning. To expound all those places of
the Magistrates cutting off men by death, were to make the Laws of God more
bloody then Draco's: I appeal to your self, do you think it at all credible,
that God would have men put to death for eating of the fat, or the blood,
though by chance, for making a perfume like the Preistly perfume to smell, for
touching a dead body, Exodus 30.38 Lev. 7.15.17. Number. 29.13. 20.
or a grave, or a Tent, wherein a man had died, or for touching something which
he that was unclean had touched, and not being sprinkled thereafter with the
water of separation: yet for these and the like ceremomoniall defilements and
tresspasses, men were to be cut off from the Congregation of Israel Now for
that other Exposition, of cutting off by the hand of God, that which they take
for the ground and foundation of it, that is, that the cutting off, mentioned
in the Law, is understood only of private sins, known to God only, and which
could not be proved by witnesses, this I say, if it could be proved, would
indeed make good their Interpretation, but the truth is, it is a mere
conjecture, for which they have no warrant in the Word. Nay, the Word is
against it: for the end of that cutting off, was that the Children of Israel
might fear to do that, which they s^^ so sore punished, Levit. 17 4.5. Which
use they could not make of a divine judgment inflicted for a private sin. I
know they do further object from Levit. 17.10. and 20.5.6. that the cutting
off, was a work of God, not of men; But to that I say, it was not so, except in
extraordinary cases, when men, who should have cut off the wicked; did it not:
and this appears plainly from Levit. 20.4, 5. And if the people of the land
hide their eyes from the man, when he gives of his seed unto Molech, and kill
him not: Then (mark then, and in that case) I will set my face against that
man, and against his family, and will cut him off. Wherefore I conclude, that
the cutting off in the Law, and especially, in the Ceremonial Law, can be
nothing else but Excommunication from the Church, and Communion in the holy
things. Which as it is most received among our Expositors, so the Apostle. 1
Cor. 5. does give us a hint of it: for as it is plain from verse. 6, 7, 8. that
he alludes to the history of the Passover, Exodus 12. so when he says, verse.
13. Put away from among your selves that wicked person, he has respect to,
Exo. 12.19. Where it it is said, Whosoever eats that which is leavened, even
that soul shall be cut off from the Congregation of Israel. All this I conclude
with a Passage of Mr. Williams his bloody Tenent, cap. 121. where though he
does not acknowledge a spiritual excommunication in the Jewish Church, yet he
acknowledges such a coercive power in cutting off, as has for the antitype
and parallel of it Excommunication in the Ghristian Church. Out of that blessed
temporal estate, (says he) to be cast or carried captive, was their
Excommunication or casting out of Gods sight. 2 Kings 17.23. Therefore was the
Blasph^^^^ the false Prophet, the Idolater, to be cast out, or cut off ^^^m
this holy land: which punishment cannot be parrallelld by the punishment of any
State or Kingdom in the world, but only by the excommunicating or out-casting
of person or Church from the fellowship of the Saints and Churches of Christ
Jesus in the Gospel; For this spiritual cutting off, he cites 1. Cor. 5. Gal.
5. Behold he who has pleaded most for the liberty of conscience, is forced to
acknowledge the censure of Excommunication.


Civilian. But can you show any warrant from the New Testament for Church
Censures and Excommunication, as an Institution and Ordinance of Christ. I know
your Magna Charta, which you pretend to, is Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church, and if
he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee, as an Heathen man, and a
Publican. But the sense of that place, I take to be that which was given by
Erastus and Bilson, that is, That in the case of private and civil injuries,
the injured party should first of all seek right and reparation of the wrong,
of the injuring party, which if it take not effect, then to do it before
witnesses, and if that also prevail not, then to tell the Church, that is the
Sanedrim of the Jews, which was a civil Judicature, and if the man that has
done wrong, will not stand to the sentence of the Sanedrim, that then one
should deal with him as with an Heathen, or a Publican, that is, complain of
him to the Roman Emperor or his Deputies. Mr. Prynne, in his late Book called
Independency examined, page 10. following Master Seldens judgment, holds,
that by the Church, Matthew. 18.17. is not meant any Ecclesiastical Judicatory,
but the Civil Court, or Sanedrim of the Jews, Even as Ib. page 11. he holds
the Assembly of the Apostles Elders and Brethren, Act. 15. to be an undeniable
Scripture Authority, for Parliaments as well as for Synods, to come together
upon all like occasions. And as for these words, let him be thee as an Heathen
and a Publicane, he understands the meaning to be, that not the Church, but
the party offended, is to avoid his company: taking the same to be meant, 2
These. 3.14. a place which I have also heard alleged for Church Dicipline, and
Censures.


Divine. Though Mr. Prynne be a man much esteemed by me, both for his
sufferings, and much good service done by him in the Church, yet I must say, he
wrongs both the Truth and himself, in taking upon him to go against the whole
current of Interpreters, ancient and modern, without any evidence of reason:
and he must remember, that in these particulars, he does not so much oppose
the Independents, as all the Reformed Churches, while as he goes about to
throw out of their hands the chief Scriptures upon which they ground Church
Discipline. Now all the circumstances of the Text, make against that
Exposition, and prove, That it is not a Civil, but a Spiritual Court, which
Christ there establishes. For 1. those words, If thy Brother trespass against
thee, are not meant of personal or civil injuries (of which our Savior Christ
would not be Judge, Luke 12.14.) but as Augustine, Tostatus, and others do
rightly expound them, they are to be understood, of all manner of scandalls, by
which we trespass against our Brother, in as much as we trespass against the
law of Charity, which commands us to edify one another, and to promote the
spiritual good one of another: now when a Christian does not only not edify,
but scandalize, which is a deterioration; yea, (so far as lies in him) a
destruction of his brothers soul; this is undeniably a great trespass against
his brother: which kind of trespass, as the King, and head of the Church,
Jesus Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World was to take special notice
of: so the coherence and depend^nce of the Text, gives further evidence, that
this, and no other kind of trespasses is here intended, there being so much
spoken of scandalls in the preceding passages of that Chapter.

2. As the case supposed, so the end proposed is spiritual, that is, that the
offended brother should reprove the offanding brother; and tell him his fault,
and that for the good of his soul: If he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother; that is, thou have rescued his soul by Repentance, from sin, and so
from the wrath of God: wherein Christ had respect to that Law. Lev. 19.17. Thou
shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

3. The persons judging, are not civil but Ecclesiastical, Tell it unto the
Church, now in all the New Testament, the name of the Church is not given to
any Civil Magistrate. Nay Christ himself does immediately give us notice, that
by the Church there he means the Ministers and Rulers of the Church, for thus
he applies it unto the Apostles, and their successors, Whatsoever ye shall
bind, etc. and if two of you shall agree, etc. And here by the way, I must
tell you, that if the Jewish Sanedrim were here mean^ (as it is not) you could
not thence conclude that a civil Court is meant, for there was an
Ecclesiastical Sanedrim, distinct from the civil, as beside many other great
Authors is proved by Constantinus, l' Emp. Annot. in C^^. Middoth, p. 188. and
de Rep. Iud. p. 389. Which Ecclesiastical Sanedrim were the rather to be
understood in this Text, because the other Sanedrim was destroyed by Herod.

4. The way and manner of proceeding, is also Ecclesiastical, not civil; when
Church Governors meet about those things, it must be with Prayer, verse. 19.
and it must be in the Name of Christ, verse. 20. which places, though they well
agree to all holy Assemblies and meetings for Worship, yet the context shows,
that they are principally intended concerning Assemblies for Discipline and
Church censures; and so Tostatus, Hugo Cardinalis, with our own Divines, do
expound the Text.

5. The censure is spiritual, as appears both by the ^llusion to the Jewish
Excommunication (of which I have spoken before) in those words, let him be unto
thee as a Heathen, or a Publican, and by the phrase of binding the soul, or
retaining of sins, verse. 18. which power, our Lord elsewhere gives to his
Apostles, Mat. 16.19. Io. 20.23. forms of speech, which no where the Scripture
uses of any civil power: only it is to be observed, that in these two places
last cited, the Apostles get power to bind and loose by their Doctrine and
Preaching, but here, Mat. 18. to bind and loose by Discipline, as appears by
the use to be made of witnesses, verse. 16. that is, potestas clavium
doctrinalis: this potestas clavium disciplinalis. That is mystical: this
political. And whereas it is objected, that the Text says not, let him be to
the Church, but, let him be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican. I answer, it
is supposed, that he must be such in the judgment of the Church, before he be
such to me. This Pareus upon the place, proves from the words that follow,
Whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. therefore says he, the Church is first to bind
him, that is, Excommunicate him, and then he is to be to me as an Heathen, and
a Publican. Beside, if it were not so, horrible confusion should follow, while
as any private man may Excommunicate and cast off whomsoever he judges to be
disobedient to the Church, though peradventure he has no just cause to judge
so.

6. It was very far from the mind of Jesus Christ, that his Disciples should
for private injuries prosecute one another, before the Roman Emperor or his
Deputy: This being so much blamed by the Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. 6.1. Dare any of
you, having a matter against another, got to law before the unjust, verse. 6, 7.
Brother go^th to law against Brother, and that before the unbeleavers. Now
therefore, there is utterly a fault amongst you.


Civilian. Can you show any example or practice of such an Excommunication in
the New Testament: for that place, 1 Cor. 5.5. I doubt shall not prove, there
being not only great Authors, but great reasons for another Exposition, as
Mo^li^s shows in his V^tes. l. 2. tc. 11. namely that this delivering to
Satan, was for bodily afflictions and torments, which was not in the power of
ordinary Ministers to do, but was a Prerogative of the Apostles.


Divine. If you will, I can debate that with you, both from that very Text, and
from other reasons, that this delivering to Satan, was an act not of the
Apostle alone, but of the Presbytery of Corinth, whereby is meant
Excommunication, which is a cutting off from the Fellowship of the Church, and
so co^sequ^ntly. ^ delivering to Satan, who reigns without the Church, and
holds captive at his pleasure the children of disobedience. Or if you will, I
can take a shorter course with you. For whatsoever may be the meaning of that
phrase, tradere Satana, it is most plain, that Excommunication is in that
Chapter, verse. 6, 7. Know ye not, that a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, purge out therefore the old leaven, verse 11. If any man that is called
a Brother, be a fornicatour, etc. with such an one, no no^ to ^^^e. C^rtum
quid^m e^t, Pa^lum ve^l^ bun^ incestum ^overi c^mmunion^ Ec^lesia: ^ d i^ vu't
fier^ ab i^sa Ecclesia: Cori^t^iaca, dice^s, verse. 13. Tollite ilium s^^leratum
de medio vestrum v^lt ^nim id fieri mi^i^terii ordinarii ^^^h^rit^te M^lia.
uttes, lib. 2. ^ap. 11.
verse. 12. do not ye judge them that are within, verse. 13. Therefore put away
from among your selves that wicked person. 2 Cor. 2.6. Sufficient to such a
man, is this punishment or censure) inflicted by many. But I suppose, I shall
not need to prove Church Censures, and Excommunication in the Church of
C^rin^h: which Moulins himself does fully acknowledge to be held forth in that
same place.


Civilian. I will think further upon these things.


Devine. You may do so, and withal, read what (...) has written against
Erastus, and Wala^^ against Wite^^ogardus.


Civilian. But tell me now your opinion of another matter, and that is
concerning liberty of Conscience, and toleration of Heretics and Se^taries for
which there are so many books written of late, and so few against i^* I do
not know what you will pronounce of it, from the Principles of your Profession,
but I believe, that as in Germany, France, Holland, Poland, yea under the
Turkish Tyranny, contrary religions, and opposite professions and practices,
have been, and are tolerated upon State-principles, so it shall be Englands
unhappiness, though not to chose, yet to be necessitated to grant such a
tolleration, for avoiding a rupture in the Kingdom, and for preserving an
Union against the common Enenmy.


Divine. This Question about the Toleration of those whose way is different
from the common rule which shall be established, must be both stated and
resolved, cum ^rano salis. We must remember to distinguish person^ from
Corporations or Churches, and both these from errors. Again, to distingu sh
persons, whither godly and gracious, or loose and libertin, whether moderate
and peaceable, or ^actious and turbulent; whether such as have deserved well o^
the public, or such as have done either no service or a disservice. To
distinguish Corporation, whether the Qu^stion be of such only as have a
present existence, or of all who shall join to such a way afterward. To
distinguish err^rs, whether Practical or Doctrinall onel^* whether
fundamental, or circafundamentall, or neither of the two. To distinguish
Toleration, whether absolute, or Hypotheticall and conditional, whether any
where, or in some few certain places only, whether indifinite and general,
or limited and bounded, and if bounded, how far and how much: Whether ^uch
Toleration as may stand with the solemn league and Covenant, or such as is
inconsistent therewith; whether such as is profitable for the public peace, or
such as is apparently destructive thereto. These and the like particulars I do
not intend to fall upon at this instant. Only this I say, that to open a wide
door, and to grant an unbounded liberty unto all sort of Heretics and
Sect^ries, (which is the thing that the good Samaritan, and John the Baptist,
the blood, Tenent, and others of that kind do plead for as it is inconsistent
with the solemn league and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, by which we are
obliged to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, Superstition, Heresy
and Schism^, least we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to
receive of their plagues: So it is in the own nature of it, an error so
pernicious, so abominable, so monst^ous, that it makes all learned men to
stand amazed, and taken with horror, in so much that they can not at first
gather their thoughts to put pen to paper against it. I know this liberty and
Toleration was maintained by the Donatists of old and by the Socinians,
Arminians, and Anabaptists of late * but it has been constantly opposed by
all that were sound and orthodoxe, both Ancient and Modern, who have asserted
the lawful use of a coercive power against those things, whereby (though under
pretense of conscience) God is openly dishonored, souls ensnared and
destroyed, faith or piety subverted and overthrown: and further, the
compelling of the outward man, though not to the practice of things indifferent
(which compulsion I do not allow) yet to the practice of necessary duties, and
to the external use of means and ordinances, by which through the blessing of
God, men's hearts and consciences may be savingly affected and wrought upon. And
I beseech you what else means Asa's Covenant, 2 Chro. 15.13.
That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be put to death
whether small or great, 2 Chro 34.32.
whether man or woman. And what else means Iosiahs Covenant, Ezra 10.8.
whereof it is said, he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin,
to stand to it. And what else is that in Ezra, that whosoever would not come to
Jerusalem to make a Covenant, and to put away the strange wives, all his
substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the Congregation of
those that had been carried away, that is, Excommunicated. And what else is
that other act of Josiah in putting down the Priests of the high Places. 2
Kings 23.5.
And what say you to the Law of stoning those who did entice the people to
turn out of the way wherein the Lord commanded them to walk, Deuteronomy. 13.5. 6.
saying, Let us go after other Gods and serve them.


Civilian. I would rather hear some Arguments from the New Testament, for I
doubt these from the Old Testament shall be more subject to exception.


Divine. To me it is plain, that these things do as much concern us now, as
the Jews of old, which whosoever denies, must show, that either we may take
no rules nor patterns from the Old Testament: or that the foresaid Laws and
practices were not intended by the holy Ghost to bind us, (as other things in
the Old Testament do) but were ceremonial and typical, intended to bind the
Jews only. Mr. Williams in his bloody Tenant (though I do not remember that
any where he answers to those particular passages which I have cited, yet)
perceiving that such arguments from the Old Testament can not be taken off
without this answer, that all these were typical and figurative: he therefore
goes much upon that ground, and so devises more types and figures in the Old
Testament then ever any body did before him, and pleases himself with such
fancies and conjectures therein, as I dare say, will satisfy no indifferent
Reader: and in effect making void by his principles all arguments from the Old
Testament, so that we may not from the examples of the godly Kings of Judah,
teach Christian Magistrates what their duty is, nor argue thus, God commanded
that the Kings of Judah should have a copy of the Book of the Law by them, and
read therein, that they should not multiply wives, etc. Therefore Christian
Princes should search the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 17.17, 18, 19.
should not multiply wives, etc. or thus. The Priests and Levites had a
sufficient maintenance. Therefore so should the Ministers of the Gospel: or
thus; The Jews were commanded to rest from all servile labor on the Sabbath
day. Therefore so should Christians on the Lords day: or thus; Wars were
lawful in the old Testament; Therefore they are lawful still. Or the like.
All these shall be cast aside, upon this ground, they were tipicall, therefore
no patterns to us.

But because you desire an Argument from the New Testament: I will convince
your judgment from thence also: Sure I am, I have better grounds in the New
Testament, against the Toleration now in question, then Master John Goodwin
has found for it, in his Text, Act. 5.38.39. He holds that we may build upon
Gamaliels speech, as Authorized by God, there being nothing in all this speech
(excepting only the Historical Instances, the truth of which, it seems was
generally known, and is attested by Josephus their great Historian) but what is
fully consonant with the Word of God, says he. And so he approves the Sceptik
Principles of that Nullifidian, who razeth the very foundation of the Christian
Faith, and makes it a very doubtful case whether the Apostles Doctrine was
from God, or from men. But I proceed to my Arguments. First, you shall do well
to remember what I said concerning Church censutes, from Matthew. 18. under which
scandalous and obstinate delinquents, do fall, the pretense of Conscience,
being no exception for them. The Ministers of the Gospel have in readiness to
revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus is
commended, because of his zeal, in that he could not bear those who called
themselves Apostles and were not. Revel. 2.2. Contrariwise, the Angel of the
Church of Perga^^^ is blamed, for this reason, because then have there them
that teach the doctrine of Balaam, etc. so have thou also them that hold the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans. Revel. 2.14.15. that is, because thou have
tolerated them, and have not cast them out. It is thy fault, that they are
there in the Church. The like challenge is sent to the Angel of the Church of
Thyatira, verse. 20. I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferedst
that woman Iezebell, who calls her self a Prophetess, to teach, and to
seduce my servants, etc. That chapter is so clear for the point, that Master
Williams acknowledges it proves fully, that Christ has endued the Ministers
and Governors of his Church, with power to suppress Heresy and error, and
the spreaders thereof, be who they will be. See the bloody Tenent. c. 57. So
John the Baptist. page 63. confesses that the Church of Thy^^ra was justly
taxed, not only for not controuling and reproving Iexebel, but also, in that
they permitted her to seduce weak Christians, without cutting her off by the
sword of the Spirit, the power of excommunication.


Civilian. I was about to answer the same, that if those places prove any
thing, it is only the suppressing of Heretics and Schismatics by Church
censures, not at all by the civil coercive power of the Magistrate.


Divine. I thought with my self, I should need say no more, having proved
that Heriticks and Shismaticks, though miscarrying with so much opinion of
conscience, as to think themselves Apostles or Prophets, may be censured and
cast out of the Church (which is the case, Revel. 2.) I did never imagine but
where the soul is punished with the greatest punishment which can be inflicted
on earth, that is, Excomunication; much more may the body be punished by the
Magistrate, as the degree of the offense shall require: especially considering
that the Magistrate is a nursing father to the Church, Isay 49.23.
and is to protect and assist her, not to suffer her authority and censures to
be despised and set at naught. But to satisfy you yet more touching the
Magistrates part, consider well that passage Romans 13.4. For he is the Minister
of God to thee for good, but if thou do that which is evil be afraid, for he
bears not the sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil.


Civilian. This place and all that you can say in that kind does not warrant
nor justify persecution, for the cause of conscience, but only the punishment
of all such evil doers as do disturb the peace of the Kingdom, or the
course of civil justice, oppose Magistrates or laws, traitors, rebels,
murderers, felons, and the like. John the Baptist page 57. says, If a breach
of peace, the civil powers ought to redress it. 1. Tim. 2.1.2. But for the
Magistrate to interpose in matters merely Ecclesiastical, otherwise then
spiritually, and as a Minister of the Gospel, I find no warrant for it, in all
the Gospel.


Divine Now you are come to your last refuge wherein I know you put great
confidence: but I am as confident it cannot serve your turn, which I prove
thus, 1. By this Tenent you give a more dangerous wound to the power of the
civil Magistrate then you are aware of, for in stead of m^king him keeper of
both Tables you make him keeper of the second Table only, at least vindex of ^
only, whereas God has made him as well vindex as Custos utriusque Tabula. 2.
In the place I last cited, the Apostle makes no exception nor restriction, but
will have all evil doers (to which category I suppose Heretics and Sedu^ers
do belong to be afraid of vengeance by ^he hand of the Magistrate. 2 Chro.
19.6.
3. The Apostle there does once and again call the Magistrate, The Minister of
God, as it were purposely putting him in mind, that he judges not for man but
for the Lord, and that he is to look most to things pertaining to God. 4.
There may be a coincidencie of those things which you put assunder: for
example, suppose a Jesuit killing a Magistrate* or some other Heretic
killing one who has been most opposite to him; or as sometime the case was)
suppose men causing their children to go through the f^re as a sacrifice to
their God Molech, ^o. 16.^.
all these (though murders) ye^ ^re done for Conscience sake, men being
persuaded in their conscience, that they are doing good service to God, as it
is said of those that killed the Apostles. What say you to that case* shall the
punishment of those be perse ution for the cause of Conscience. 5. I cannot
marvel enough, that it should be heard from the mo^th of any Christian, that
the Magistrate is to pun sh injuries done to the State, but not injuries done
to the Church* that he is to punish those who destroy men's bodies, but not
those that destroy men's souls: that whosoever will draw away people from the
obedience of the Magistrate, and of the law of the Land, must not be suffered:
but they who will draw away people from the truth of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18
and from the ways of God, such as Hymeneus and Philetus, who overthrow the
faith of some, Act. 18.17.
and their word will eat, as does a canker, must escape unpunished. And so
Christian Magistrates and States, shall take up the maxim which Tacitus tells
was holden by Tyberius Caesar, Deorum injurias Diis cura esse: but for their
part, they shall stand by as Gallio did, and care for none of those things. Be
astonished at this, O ye heavens.


Civilian. But in the mean time I can tell you one thing, that it is a mighty
prejudice that lies in the minds of many against the Prysbetery, that tyranny
and rigor do accompany it. And this now brings into my mind some other
prejudices. I have seen a Book come from Oxford, entitled, An Answer by
Letter to a worthy Gentleman, who desired of a Divine some reasons, by which it
might appear how inconsistent Presbyteriall Government is with Monarchy. In
which I find many things which breed an Odium of that Government. Among other
things, it tells me, Page 76.
that this is one of the Articles of the Presbyterian faith. No Minister
preaching in Public, sedition or Treason or railing at King, Council, the
Prince, Judges, is accountable, or punishable by King, Parliament, Council, or
any Indicature whatsoever. But from all he may appeal to the Sanhedrum or
Consistory, Page 26.
as the sole and proper competent Judge. And as if this were a small thing not
to subject to the Magisteate, they will have the Magistrate subject to them,
insomuch that they may excommunicate the Magistrate, even the King himself if
he obey them not: That the Presbytery hinders the liberty of trade and
commerce, Page 13, 14.15.
disgraceth and desameth young women for conversing familiarly with men,
suffers not Landlords to sue for their rents, and the like. That they bring
all cases and causes under their cognition and judgment, sub formalitate
scandali, under the notion of scandal, and for the glory of God. It tells also
a number of Stories and practical examples for confirmation of those
particulars. What say you to that?


Divine. I have seen and read the book, which surely was written by the
special inspiration of the father of lies, that the ^mple people who never yet
saw a Presbytery, may be made afraid of it, as of some hellish monster, as the
French Friars made the people believe, that the Hugonots were ugly monsters
with Swines faces, and Asses ears. But men of understanding will not be taken
with such bold and shameless calumnies as come from the pen of that son of
Belial. I could name both the Author, and the lying Records of a persecuting
Prelate, whence he borrowed his stories, in which there are many known
untruths; and where there is any truth in the matters of fact which he relates,
there is such addition of his own Interpretations of men's actions, such
variation of circumstances, and such concealing of the true grounds, ends, and
circumstances of such actions, as makes them to appear quite another thing
then they were. And if his stories of the speeches, actions, or opinions of
particular men were all true (as they are not) yet how does that prove that
Presbyteriall government is inconsistent with Monarchy. Magistracy, Laws,
Trading, Peace. etc. This must be proved from the principles or necessary
concomitants of Presbyteriall government, not from the actions or speeches of
this or that private man, especially they having so said or done not in any
reference to Presbyteriall Government, but occasionally in reference to such or
such persons or purposes. As now if I should rake up the dunghill of all the
Treasons, Conspiracies, Oppressions, Persecutions, Adulteries, Blasphemies,
Heresies, Atheistical opinions, Superstitions, Prophanities of such or such
Prelates, (of which the Histories of former times and late experience are full)
and thence conclude that Episcopal government is inconsistent with Monarchy,
with the safety of the Kingdom, with the liberty of the Subject, with the
peace of the Church, with piety, and c. Surely that same Author would be ready
to answer me, that this must be proved from their received principles, nor from
particular practices. Now that Ministers preaching Treason, ^^^el. ^^^^aen.,
tom. 1. page 413 Nullus au^em Rex bab^t porestatem constituend. prectium super
aliquem Ecclesiasticum sacris or denibus obligatum, vel super membra, vel
sanguinem, vel Saraed ejus, vel super aliquem de suis, qu^a quisque Ecclesiast:
cus ut praedictus, babet potest^te^ per leg^m Ecclesiasticam orob. and in
Synodo, quodl^be: nocum^atum vel da^mum qued ei l^icus sa^iat, aut Rex aut
alius. Item nu^rtenus tales Ecclesiasticus potest compells ad re^pond^^^^^
ali^^^i extra Synodum, de delict is s^bi oppositis. Du^^nus de sacr. ecci.
minist ^i 1. c. 2. canfesseth that de causes civilibus Clericorum, nan
Sacerdotes elim, sed Praesi^es and mgis Magistratus ^^^ s^^^ant, etc. Verum
Constitutiones Romanorum Pontisicum, hu^e juri uon parum derogevorun^ quibus
ca^cum est n^n so'um ut clevici ad Mag str^t^s tribunal i^^viti non trabantur,
s^d ut ^^ v^lo^tes ^uidem jurisdictioni Magstratus se subj^cere pas^^nl, s^ve
civ^lis sit, sive criminal^s camsa.
or committing any other trespass punishable by the law of the land, is not to
be judged by the Civil Magistrate, nor any Civil Court, but may appeal from
all these to the Ecclesiastical Judicatory, is none of our principles: but it
is a Popish and Prelaticall usurpation, as appears by the British
Ecclesiastical constitutions, collected by Spel^^an. So that the Oxfordian
missed his mark extremely when he charged it upon Presbyterians, who hold that
Ministers are as much subject unto, and as punishable by the Magistrate, as any
other of the Subjects. And as Ministers are subject to every ordinance of man,
so we suppose the Christian Magistrate will not take it ill to be subject to
all the ordinances of Jesus Christ, I shall give you a short but clear account
of our judgment concerning both these, in the words of the second book of the
Discipline of the Church of Scotland, Chap. 1. As Ministers are subject to the
judgment and punishment of the Magistrate in external things, if they offend:
so ought the Magistrates to submit themselves to the Discipline of the Church,
if they transgress in matters of C^^science and Religion. And lest you should
think this proper to the Classical and Synodicall government: M. Cotton will
tell you it is just so in the Congregationall government, of the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, page 53. As the Church (says he) is subject to the sword
of the Magistrate in things which concern the Civil Peace: so the Magistrate
(if Christian) is subject to the keys of the Church, in matters which concern
the peace of his conscience, and the Kingdom of heaven. The latter cannot be
denied in thesi, no more then the former: and when it comes to the Hypothesis,
there is much to be trusted to the prudence and discretion of Pastors and
ruling Elders; and when all comes to all, the failing is more like to be in the
defect, then in the excess. But to say, that a Magistrate, because a
Magistrate, is not bound in conscience to submit himself to the ordinance of
Discipline, though he shed innocent blood, commit adultery, bl^spheame the
name of God, etc. may infer for ought I know, that a Magistrate is not bound
to be subject to any of all the ordinances of Jesus Christ. It is condemned as
an error in Plato, that he held it lawful for a Magistrate to make an
officious lie, for the good of the Commonwealth; but not lawful for a
Subject. The error of our Civilians is greater, who will have Magistrates so to
rule us, that Christ shall not rule them.


Civilian. I suppose it is high time to adjourne, till we (...) another
occasion of amicable and free confe^e^^ which time it is like enough our
opinions ^^y^^ (...) accord. The points of which we have talked a^^ (...) many
and weighty, which therefore I will take to (...) second thoughts. And so much
for this time, Far-(...).


Divine. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understand^^^ in all
things.


FINIS.
Errata.
Page 12. l. 20. country, read County. p. 15. l. 13. op^^r. upon p^ l. 2. 3.
civil worship, r. civil fellowship. Ibid. l. 15. C^^^^, r, (...) Ibid. in
Marg. redbat, r. redibat. p. 21.10. that, r. add that. p. (...) l. 13. care,
r. law. Ibid. ex, r. and. p. 30. l. 17. Witen^ogurdus, r. (...) bogurdus.
Smaller errors and punctations, and the like, the (...) der will pardon.


