THE Rector of Bury's Reply TO THE Minister at Oswestry's Answer; In a Second
Letter to his Friend.
SIR,
I Was in hopes my former Letter might have Charmed the good Man, and laid that
evil Spirit which Torments him. But I am mistaken: Mr. O. is no Changeling, he
chooses still to Scrible for the Diversion rather than the Edification of his
Reader, as himself I am told has confessed, and which is manifest in the
Answer. It is less to be wondered at, seeing this Itch of Writing scurrilously
seems to run in the Blood, as you rightly observed from Eugenius his late
Pamphlet. With much ado he has picked up Four Instances out of my Letter, and by
the help of misrepresentation, would Skreen himself from the Censure of Wise
Men, as if he had only beaten the Rector at his own Weapon. Much good may his
Victory do him. I am not, I own, skilled in that Noble Science of Fencing with
an Adversary, and instead of Answering his Arguments, abusing him with
Contemptuous Language.

He informs you, Title Page.
The Rector has effectually acquitted the Dissenters, etc. And this I Will
warrant you must pass for Truth, without looking into the Letter or the Answer.
Oh, say the Mob, its a plain case, our Oracle has said it, the Rector is
baffled even by his own Confession; whilst the more understanding sort droop,
hang the Head, and are ashamed of their Advocate. But how does he prove this?
Why, he sums up the cause, (you may be sure partially enough) he tells, what
feats he has done, what Havoc he has made in the Rector's Squadrons (i. e.
Arguments,) the most part whereof he has dismounted, trampled under foot, left
sprawling on the ground, and weltring in their Blood, whilst the rest being put
into disorder were forced to fly and retire with Precipitation; the unhappy
General mean while being unable to rally or recruit his broken Forces.

Now the pretense for all this boasting is, The Rector not distrusting the
Judgment of the Intelligent Reader, would not trouble him with impertinent
Repetitions: But left his Squadrons in the Field firm, and in good order, as
they were, and (he believed) able to make good their Ground against all
Opposition. There was then no necessity of increasing his Troops, which had
sustained no considerable loss, that he knows of, nor is he yet sensible there
is need of any new Levies. By this time the Metaphor is sufficiently squeezed.

The Titles are left out of the Liturgy Psalms, because intended to be Sung.
This in good time is agreed upon as a just Defense of the Church of England.
But Mr. O. will needs have the Honor of first starting it. Answ. p. 14.
It Is not worth while to ask why Mr. Delaune's Vindicator should desert and
turn on the Church of England's side. This is no good sign of Victory. Nor is
it tanti, which of us can lay the best claim to the (...), such as it is. But
because they say, there is as much right in a Penny as in a Pound, I Will not
lose it for lack of demanding. See then Rs. Rs. p. 15. l. 34. which were
written before Mr. O's Vindication. So that Mr. Minister is beholden to Mr.
Rector for that Plea, if a trifling Truth may be spoken. Hos ego versiculos
feci, tulit alter Honorem.

I pretend not to a President in Antiquity, or a Rubric in our Church for
repeating the Psalms alternately Yet see Rubricks before Hymns of 5th Nov. 30
Jan. 29 May, and Fire of London.
. But I reckon Custom a good warrant for it, which as it is esteemed a second
Nature in one case, so in another is to be accounted a second sort of Command 1
Cor. 11. 16.
. We cannot transgress it without being Schismatics. Saying the Psalms is a
kind of Singing them, being distinguished from reading them by way of
Instruction: For they are appointed, as part of our Devotion, which the Custom
of our Church has determined unto alternate saying. We have no other Order for
Singing the Psalms in Meter, but Custom.

That Women may speak in the Church is doubtless true, 1 Cor. 11. 5. where by
Prophesying I understand Singing. 1 Chronicles. 25, 1, 2, 3, 6, 7.
St. Paul indeed forbids them to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. but
explains himself, 1 Timothy 2. 12. That they are not to Teach, or Speak
Authoritatively: However they may speak in Prayer and Praise. Is it not lawful
for 'em to say Amen? Do not the Dissenters allow them to Sing? In a word, when
prejudices are laid aside, Noise and Confusion may be objected against Singing
as reasonably, as against saying the Psalms alternatim. The Quakers will deride
the Dissenters Singing David's Psalms, and call it Gibble Gabble, or bouncing
and racketing them (in Eugenius his Language) with as much Reason and Justice,
as the Dissenters can our saying them alternately.

I will be better than my word, and let Mr. O. see, I am able to recruit my
Squadrons, though he has not shattered or diminished them: that the Titles of
the Psalms are not Essential Parts of them, seems to be the Opinion of Mr.
Allix, who Writes, Judgment of the Jewish Church, etc. p. 20.
It is by the help of Tradition, that the Ancient Interpreters have added to
the Psalms such Titles, as express their Design and their Usage in the
Synagogue. One might hope to find shelter under the Wings of this Learned
Person, at least to be acquitted of Blasphemy, if not of all Error or mistake.

I refused the Arbitration of Jerome, for Reasons, which were not to the Honor
of that Father. On the other Hand, Mr. O. has adorned him with wonderful
Encomiums in general. But quid verba audio, cum facta video. If all were true,
his particular Faults are not covered thereby. The Rector was forced to Treat
him in that manner to satisfy the Reader why he declined his Judgment, who was
too Skeptical in the point to be regarded. But Mr. Br. without necessity let
fly, and at once mauld and put to the Sword the whole Squadron of the
Primitives. B. 4th p. 1025.
Nor do I want a very good President for what I did, the Famous Mr. Mede (...)
St. Jerome (says he) is a Man of no Faith with me, when he describes the
Opinion of his Adversary, which he would set forth as odiously as possibly
could be. He was a Man that cared not what he said, Id. B. 3. p. 748.
so it might disparage his Adversaries, as in the case of Vigilantius, and
Jovinian; Again, St. Jerome was a most unequal Relator of the Opinion of his
Adversary. What Credit he may deserve in this may appear in some fragments of
those Authors still remaining, whom he charged with an Opinion directly
contrary to that which they expressly affirmed. And yet when he had stated it
so, as it must needs be Heresy and Blasphemy whosoever held it, he is found to
say he durst not damn it, because Multi virorum Ecclesiasticorum and Martyrum
ista dixerunt.

Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic or a --: unriddle me this, and Phyllida solus
habeto.

That all Ancient versions of Scripture and the Fathers are useful to find the
true Reading of Scripture will easily be granted, if you call to Mind what
account we all make of the Polyglot Bibles and Primitive Writers. That a
Version of less Credit in general may in some particulars be truer than even
the LXX. or the Hebrew seems to be the Opinion of Mr. Mede. B. 5. p. 1095, 1096.
He observed, that in both the Chronology of Genesis 11. 26, 32. chapter 12. 4.
compared with Lu. 7. 4. was mistaken, and Corrected it by the Samaritan
Pentateuch. Now though for my own part I believe the Hebrew and LXX are not
here faulty for Reasons not proper to be adduc'd in this place, yet this shows
what that good Man's Sentiments were in the Case. Of the same mind is the
Learned Dupin. It Is not absolutely necessary (says he) that we should always
follow the Samaritan Pentateuch (which he asserts to be an Original and
Authentic) nor are we always obliged to follow the Hebrew Text. Complete Hist.
of the O. and N. Testam. Part 1. p. 168.


But Mr. O. is angry, that (as the Papists send us to the Fathers for the sense
of Scripture so) the Rector carries us to them for the Scripture it self. Bless
me, thought I when I read this, whither will vain Glory and thirst after
Victory drive a Man, and into what Absurdities betray him? This (...) is very
fatal. Because, forsooth, we ought not without fear or wit depend on the
Fathers only for the sense of Scripture, neither are we beholden to them for
the Scripture it self. Whence (I beseech you) had we the Scripture, but from
our Predecessors in the Faith? The Holy Fathers Principally, whose Writings are
so many everlasting Monuments upon Record of their Divine Authority from whom
we know, what Books were and what were not written by Inspiration. Whence did
we derive this knowledge but from them? It was not brought us by an Angel from
Heaven: We have it not by Inspiration, or from an inspired Prophet: It dropped
not out of the Clouds, neither were we born with an innate Idea, or Notion of
the Divine Scriptures, which are and which are not such.

If the examples already produced do not prove Corruptions in the Hebrew Text
(I am sure as zealous sticklers for the Hebrew verity as Mr. O. can be, Mede b.
4. p. 961, 990, b. 3. 707, 708. 709. b. 5. 1094.
have confessed it) I send you then to the Margin for more. In one of these
places our Author Writes to A. B. Usher thus, I durst show no such Conceits as
these, but to so great an Antiquary, to whom the possibility of Corruption by
Writing is so well known, or rather the impossibility to the contrary. How can
it be proved, that the Church of the Jews had a greater Privilege than we,
especially since Prophesy ceased among them? The Masorethical method was
devised since Christ and applied to one Copy only, the best, written by Hillel:
Supposing this, yet other Copies might in some things be righter than Hill^'s.
He argues else where, the Hebrew is most liable to Corruption; the Letters
differing so very little are easily mistaken one for another. There is no
security against Corruption, unless the Transcribers were inspired: But whether
for these Nineteen Hundred Years past any one Copier has been inspired, who he
was, and which is the Copy, Ib. p. 961.
and where to be seen tell, me, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.

If any Corruption ('it is pleaded) had crept into the Text, the Pen Men of the
N. T. would have Corrected it. And what if they did? But we had rather follow
the Masorites, says Mr. M. He afterward observes several such Emendations,
which you may examine at leisure. Is it not then equally probable, that St.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, restored the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18.
Verses, to the 14th Psalm? But we dote on the Masorites, and had rather stoop
to the Rabbis than to the Apostle.

St. Justin understood the Hebrew, so I argued from his being a Native of
Flavia, Apol. 2. in init.
a City in Palestine. This Squadron Mr. O. meddles not with: It keeps the Field
still as I might say peacebly. But (says he) the Martyr has mistaken the
Etymology of Israel: For it is derived from Sarah; Ish (not Is) signifies vir,
and therefore he will not allow Justin to have been skilled in Hebrew. A.

1. Critics take a great deal of Liberty in Etymologies, they are like
Heretics in Religion, often broaching new Conceits, which though not always
exactly true are not to be ascribed unto their Ignorance, but singularity and a
certain Delight they take ludere Campo Philologiae, and to start Paradoxes in
that kind of Learning, suiting their Etymologies to the Argument before them.
The Martyr doubtless had his Eye upon Genesis 32. 24. where the Person that
Wrestled with Jacob is called (...) vir from whence he fancied Israel was
derived. For the Eternal (...) here appearing in the shape of a Man, and being
therefore (...) gave unto Jacob his own Name (as I shall show) a name suitable
to his own Nature, and Typical of it. Justin's Criticism therefore is not
contemptible, nor is he to be thought a dunce in the Hebrew on this score. But
you will ask perhaps, why then did not Justin write Ish? And how comes it to pass
that we write it not Ishrael, but Israel? A.

2. As for Justin you must note the Greeks have no such Letter as sh which
therefore they always turn into a simple s, as may be seen in the LXX. and
Greek Testament: Ex. Gr. Shimeon in the Hebrew, Genesis 29. 33. is (...) in the
LXX. and in Lu. 2. 25. and Shem, Genesis 5. 33. is (...) in the LXX. and in Lu. 3.
36. So that we need not wonder Justin Martyr Writes Is for vir, though the Hebrew
writes it Ish. And as for us in English, we very frequently turn (...) into
Sin, as if there were no difference between the two Letters. We Write Simeon,
Isaiah, Samuel, Absalom, Ahasuerus, and others, with a Sin in stead of the
Shin, from whence I infer that (...) was Originally but one Letter, though
afterward made two, and destinguish'd by a point on the right Shoulder of
Shin, and on the left of Sin. Buxtorf thinks that Shin was the only Ancient
Letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, Sin being brought into the Room of Samech, happily
after Justin's time. If so then (...) is the same Letter in Israel and in Ish.
Note again, that the Ephraimites, Jud. 12. 6. could not pronounce Shin, but
said Sibboleth instead of Shibboleth: Questionless then they said Is also and
not Ish, and so with them there was no such Letter as (...) nor any use of it:
It Is probable it might be thus about Flavia, which happily occasioned Justin's
Etymology. In this variety and uncertainty about the Letter (...) it is hard
Justin should be taxt for want of skill in the Hebrew Tongue, though he took the
Liberty of Starting an uncommon Etymology: But especially considering it was
offered in confirmation of the human Nature of the (...) and Trypho the Jew had
nothing to object against it, one would be apt to believe it was the true one.
But,

3. Upon a review of that Passage in Justin Martyr, it is very probable the
Father hit upon the true Etymology of Israel, which he tells us signifies (...)
that is, (...) Is-ra-el by Contraction. It Is true presently after he renders
Isra (...) leaving out (...), but it may well be imagined a defect or fault of
the M. S. seeing he had before observed, that Israel signified a Man overcoming
God. At least (I hope) ^t will not be denied but that there is a great deal of
ingenuity in Justin's Criticisms, and that it is likely enough he understood the
Hebrew Language.

4. Granting Justin has given us a wrong Etymology of Israel, it will not
follow he understood not Hebrew. One might by the same Reason affirm Mr. O.
understands neither Greek nor Latin, nor yet English, but Welsh only, because
he has mistaken himself sometime or other in all those Languages. But this is
manifest, the Martyr frequently quotes the Hebrew as well as the LXX. where
there was a different Reading, Dial. p. 360. and gives us the Reason of it,
viz. That his Reasoning thence might not be set at naught by the Jews, that
various Reading being not concerned in his present Argument with Trypho. By the
way then I infer hence, as very probable, that Justin used the same Care and
precaution, when he Challenged the Jews with corrupting the Scriptures, that
is, had his Eye upon both Texts.

But I am surpised that Mr. O. should assert, that in the Word Israel, by
(...) El Justin means no other God, but the God of this World the Devil, which
the blund'ring Rector (elsewhere called blind Bayard) makes to signify the true
God. Is the Man possessed? What? The true God gave the name of the Devil unto the
Holy Patriarch, and that because he Wrestl'd with the true God and prevailed?
It could never enter into any good Man's Noddle that the Divine (...) Blessed
Jacob with the Devil's name, I will at Adventures affirm the Martyr never
thought nor said so. A little after indeed he uses El (...) for the Devil,
whom he describes for distinction sake, the Serpent and Satan, but not with
reference unto Israel. In short, Just. Dial. p. 355. E. P.
he has by good luck cleared himself, in this matter thus, Israel was his name
from above ((...) from Heaven) by which Christ called Jacob Blessing him with
his own name, but not with the Devil's surely.

I am still of the mind, that with Jerome and in his time the Hebrew read Deuteronomy.
32. 8. as the LXX. does at this day. All Nations but Israel were subjected to
the Angels, and governed by them as the Learned believe, which Dr. Scot has
well explained and confirmed. Christian Life Par. 2. p. 935. (...)
He farther shows how probably Angels in that Text was changed into Children of
Israel. Originally it ran thus (...) Sons of God, q. d. Angels, but the
Transcribers suspecting Isra to be left out restored it, and so it became (...)
q. d. Children of Israel. Setting this aside, Jerome holding the Doctrine of
Angelocracy confirmed from (...) Deuteronomy. 32. 8. according to the LXX. says Mr.
O. But this he would never have done contrary to the Hebrew verity, preferring
the LXX. to it. His good Friends and Allies the Jews, would con him no thanks
for this, as I guess.

There is a perfect Agreement (Mr. O. avers it) between the Hebrews and the
LXX. in 1 Samuel 17. he knows it to be so, he has consulted the Chapter, and you
may depend upon it. But blind Bayard's Eyes once more deceive him, or Mr. O. is
taken in the manner once more. What will not some Men say to save their Bacon?
Twenty Four Verses of that 17th Chapter in the Hebrew are missing in the LXX.
a^ that there is a perfect Agreement between them. Mr. O. might as well
acquaint the World that he and I are agreed ^ Besides, let him compare the 16,
17, and 18th Chapters, as I desired him, and then tell me, if the LXX. have not
given us a straight and intelligible Narrative of David's Action, whilst in the
Hebrew the course of the story is intolerably broken, perplexed and transposed
without remedy. Mr. O. sees nothing of this, although I know a Child of twelve
Years Old, who the other day discerning the disorder, asked whether there were
two David's, one Readiness Armor bearer Chap. 16.
, the other that slew Goliath Chap. 17.
, because Saul knew him not, v. 55.

I am content Mr. O. should have the Liberty of explaining himself, when he
says, The not reading the Titles of the Psalms is an innocent Omission; which
(he pleads) was spoken in excuse of the Parochial Assemblies, and not of the
Dissenters (as the Rector mistakes) they do read the Titles. But the matter is
not yet mended: His words are Farther Vind. p. 53.
, Now since the Psalms are read not sung in our Parochial Churches, the Titles
which are Part of the Scripture ought not to be expunged out of the Reading
Psalter -- They may and ought to be read as part of the Word of God and
therefore should not be left out of the Reading Psalms. But this is not the
Controversy between me and the Rector: The not reading of them is an innocent
Omission. In short thus, the Titles ought to be read in Parochial Assemblies
because the Psalms are read there and not sung, but yet the not reading them is
an innocent Omission. Is not this rare stuff? That any thing which ought to be
done can be innocently left undone, to speak softly, is a strange Paradox
beyond my reach to comprehend. I Will not call it vile, impious and profane: But
I cannot Swallow it. At this Rate we may even fling a way our Bibles, renounce
all Religion and Morality. As for the Dissenters reading the Titles, I would
ask how often, and by what Orders. There is no direction for it in the
Reformation of the Liturgy where one ought to expect it. Besides, I have been
frequently at Presbyterian Assemblies, where not so much as the Psalms
themselves were read, and near a thousand times (I believe) where, though the
Psalms were now and then read, yet the Titles were not. Innocent Omission! In
short the Dissenters, if one may guess at their Principles by their Practice,
do not take themselves absolutely obliged to read the Scripture in their stated
Assemblies, but will omit this Ceremony when ever they please to make room for
their own Sermons and Lecturings, which justle out the Word of God. And the
People Love to have it so: They complain not, if Reading the Word be passed by
and neglected: But if there be no Sermon, what outcries will they make, as if
they were starved for lack of Bread? And again, when the Word of God is read,
they sit like so many dull and lifeless Images till the Minister begins his
Harangue: Then they rouse, and listen with wonderful attention, seeming to be
unwilling one Word of his Mouth should drop by the way unobserved. Now is it
fit these Men should reproach us for reading the Apocrypha now and then, or
omitting the Titles of the Psalms? It were to be wished Men would see their own
Faults and amend them in stead of quarrelling at our innocent Omissions and
Appointments.

As to Mr. Baxter's and the Homily's leaving out These in their citation of
Acts 15. 28, and (as Mr. O. argues) their being equally concerned in the
Accusation, so that either both are, or neither of them ought to be acquitted,
I will now in the last place show the contrary, and so conclude.

Mr. Baxter's business in the Petition for Peace was in general to prove the
unlawfulness of imposing any but necessary things in Religious Worship, which
he pretended to make good from Act. 15. 28. quoting it thus -- It seemed good
to the Apostles and Elders to lay upon them no greater burden than necessary
things, and omiting These. Now this Word had it not been suppressed would have
put the Reader upon recollecting or searching what those necessary things were
in particular; indeed it would have obliged Mr. Baxter himself in Reason to
have mentioned them all. But that would have quite spoiled his Argument. For
every one then would have perceived at first sight, that the Text speaks only
of matters belonging to civil Conversation. But expressing the Passage thus,
necessary things indefinitely, the Reader would be apt to run away with the
Bait, and take it for granted, that the Apostles appointed nothing in Religious
Worship, but necessary things, which is not nor can be proved from this Text.
In short, Mr. Baxter's Argument (which indeed is none at all) appeared
plausible by the Omission of These, and he is justly suspected to have designed
to ensnare his Reader. I know an ingenious Person who was thus deceived by him.

But the Author of the Homily cannot justly be taxed with any such fallacious
Design. He was urging the particular Duty of abstaining from Fornication as
necessary, and proved it from the Text, which among other necessary things
forbids Fornication. His Argument is neither better nor worse by his omitting
These. Nay, the Turn of the whole Period, as he contrived it, would not admit
These to be taken in. It would have been Nonsense to say -- These necessary
things: Among others they willed them: This latter Word Other in a New distinct
Sentence required, that These should be left out in the former. But enough and
too much of this trivial Point.

Here then I put an end unto my Notes on Mr. Owens's Answer. If you or any Body
else should think it worth while strictly to examine all that has passed
between him and me throughout this whole Controversy, I again declare I must
send you to our former Writings, being loath to give you or my self any
unnecessary Trouble. And I am pretty well assured the generality of Readers
would not like being teased with the Repetition of the same things over again:
I am sensible it would be to very little purpose. I remain then,

Your Affect. and very Humble Servant. T. G.

FINIS.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
EVery Body almost has taken notice of the strange Confusion that is in the 1 Samuel 16, 17, 18, Chapters. There came to my hands very lately the following
Essay, which pretends to restore them to their Natural Order, and gives a
Conjecture how possibly this Confusion might have happened. In the Absence of
the Author of the foregoing Letter, there being so near an Agreement in the
Argument, I have made bold to add this as an Appendix, the rather because the
said Author seems to believe, the difficulties, wherewith these Chapters are
perplexed, to be insuperable and without Remedy.

That the Course of the History of David, in 1 Samuel 16, 17, 18, Chapters is
disordered, every one sees, and the Septuagint for that Reason (as I fancy) in
their Version, or some Transcriber, has entirely expunged Twenty four Verses
out of the 17. Chapter, and Eight out of the 18. by which means they made the
story very easy and intelligible, and discharged it of all the difficulties,
which appear in our Bibles at this Day. But it is very hard me thinks to imagine
how Four and twenty, and Eight Verses, could have been interpolated in the
sacred Text, seeing they contain a piece of the History, which no where else is
so much as hinted at. I therefore choose of the two, to believe rather that the
parts of the Narrative have been transposed, which therefore I am endeavoring
to restore unto their right Order. But first let us take a view of the
Disorders in these three Chapters, as we now have them in the Hebrew Text and
our English Version.

1. In the 17th Chapter we have an Account of David's Family and Pedigree,
which is to be found immediately before in the 16th Chapter, and without any
necessity repeated here. Whereas on the contrary, if we invert the Order of
these two Chapters, the Repetition of them is necessary, as any one that
considers will confess.

2. In the 17th Chapter David is employed in the meanest Offices by his Father
Jesse, viz. tending the Sheep; and Snub'd by his Eldest Brother Eliab, as too
Ambitious and Aspiring, though Chapter 16. he had been in the presence of his
Father and Brethren Anointed Readiness Successor, and the designed King of Israel.
Neither of which I am persuaded ought nor would have been done after David's
Anointing.

3. In Chapter 17. Saul calls David Youth, unfit to enter the Lists with the
Giant, not knowing what it was to Fight; and especially it is observable, that
the King again after the Fight, calls him Young Man and Stripling, though Chapter
16. David had sometime before been Anointed King, and advanced to be Readiness
Armor-bearer, and was then known to be a Man of War, and prudent in Matters.
All which suppose that he was beyond a Stripling, in the 16th Chapter, and much
more in the 17th.

4. In the 17th Chapter Saul seems not to have known David's Pedigree and
Family, and therefore enquires after it: Probably he knew not his Name, for he
never calls him David, but only Youth, Stripling and Young Man. Whereas all
this was well known unto Saul before, Chapter 16.

5. In the 18th Chapter, the 6, 7, and 8. Verses are manifestly broken off from
the 17th Chapter, which they ought immediately to follow, but are interrupted
with Five Vers^s, the last whereof acquaints us, that Saul employed David in
business of Importance, set him over the Men of War: That David behaved himself
Wisely, and got the Favor of the People and of the Courtiers, which must needs
have happened after Readiness Triumphant Return from the slaughter of the
Philistines, which nevertheless we see is postpon'd to the 6, 7, and 8. Verses.
These things being so I should think yet, with Submission, that the Course of
the story should lie in the following Order, whereby all the forementioned
inconvenience are avoided.

I would then immediately after the 15th Chapter read the 17th, (all but the
15th Verse,) and the 6, 7, and 8. Verses of the 18th Chapter, which make up a
complete account of Readiness Expedition against the Philistines that Year, and
his Triumphant Return home. But whereas in the 8th Verse of that 18th Chapter
it is said, that Saul was displeased, because the People ascribed more unto
David, than unto the King, and says he, What can David have more, but the
Kingdom? Therefore in the next place, I would read Verse the 15th of the 17th
Chapter -- But David (observing that Saul was angry, and himself in all
likelihood, defeated of the Promise of Readiness Daughter) went and returned from
Saul to feed his Fathers Sheep at Bethlehem. Now God among other Reasons, to
punish Readiness breach of Promise unto David, and to recompense David another
way, sent Samuel to Anoint him Readiness Successor: I would in the next place,
then read the 16th Chapter entirely to the end. The latter part whereof is an
Account how David returned to Court, to Play upon his Harp and thereby to
refresh Saul, when the Evil Spirit vexed him, as also how he was made Readiness
Armor-bearer. All this happened unto David, because it was then well known,
that David was a Skilful Player on the Harp (we may suppose he had in the Camp
frequently diverted the Soldiers with his Instrument) and also that he was a
Valiant Man, a Man of War, and prudent in such matters, (for he had given proof
of his Courage and Conduct before in the War with the Philistines) When David
with his Harp, Chapter 16. 23. had refreshed Saul and the Evil Spirit was
departed from him, I cannot but think the King entered into some Discourse with
him, therefore I would here go to the 18th Chapter and first Verse, to the end
of the fifth -- And it came to pass when he had made an end of speaking unto
Saul, etc. -- And David went out whither soever Saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: And Saul set him over the Men of War, and he was accepted in
the sight of all the People and also in the sight of Saul 's Servants. Lastly,
hence I skip to the 9th Verse -- And Saul (being jealous of David who was thus
become popular and perhaps having some secret Intelligence by this time, that
he had been Anointed to succeed in the Throne) Eyed David from that day and
forward. This Jealousy brought again the Evil Spirit upon Saul, so that in the
very next the 10th Verse it is said -- And it came to pass on the Morrow (of
that day when Saul began first to Eye David) that the Evil Spirit from God came
upon Saul, etc. The story afterward is regular.

It will (I foresee well enough) be asked how all this disorder could happen in
the sacred History? Whereunto I Answer, that the matter of Fact seems to me so
evident both from the perplexity of the Narrative, as it lies at present in our
Bible, and from that perfect Agreement which must be confessed to be in the parts
of the story thus put together, that I reekon this not a sufficient Objection.
Besides, if I may be allowed to account for this, as the Learned do for other
smaller Corruptions, I need not despair of guessing at a probable way how this
might come to pass.

Thus. The two greater Sections, which make up the 16th and 17th Chapters as
they now stand in our Bibles, might have been written upon two different Rolls
or loose Parchments, and so easily misplaced or mistaken by the Copier, taking
up one for the other. The Reader afterward observing David, who Chapter 16th
was entered into Readiness Service, was now chap. 17. (no Body knows how, for no
account is given of it) at home again with his Father at Bethlehem, noted in
the Margin from a Neighboring place -- But David went and returned from Saul
to feed his Father's Sheep at Bethlehem, which by degrees slipped from the
Margent into the Text here. Again, a Transcriber observing there was no express
mention of any Discourse between Saul and David, except that in Chapter 17. 32.
and Verse 58. concluded, that the five first Verses of the 18th Chap. should be
placed immediately after the 17th Chapter, as they now stand in our Bibles.
Such kind of Accounts as these Critics are wont to give of other mistakes, why
may not this that I have now offered pass as probable, at least Possible. I
cannot admit of the Prolepsis, which the inspired Penmen of the History would
never have fallen into after such a gross manner as renders the whole story
extremely confused, and impossible to be clearly understood. In a word, the
Thread of the History is so often broken, that it seemed necessary to restore
the parts to their Natural Order, wherein I do believe they were first written.
But supposing the Sacred Historian fell so often into the Prolepsis, yet it may
be be granted (I hope) that we have gained thus much by this Attempt, that the
genuine Order of time, when things successively happened, is here discovered
and rendered easy to be understood, which I am Principally concerned for. But
as for the explanations of several Difficulties in this History, which the
Critics in the Synopsis, who do not insist upon the Prolepsis have furnished
us with, I shall in the last place show, that they are weak, forced, and have
no probability at all in them.

It is said upon Chapter 17. 55, 58. that David was not then sufficiently known
unto Saul, because he frequently went from Court home to feed his Father's
Sheep: Therefore the King inquired of him and of his Family.

A. It is incredible Saul should suffer his Armor-bearer to retire so often to
feed Sheep, or frequently dispense with his Absence, who was to be constantly
at hand to Play upon the Harp, when ever the Evil Spirit came upon Saul.
Besides, if David frequently went home, he frequently returned unto Court, and
so was better known unto the King.

It is said, Saul was taken up with the weighty Affairs of the Kingdom, so that
although he formerly knew David and his Family, chapter 16. 18. yet he had forgot
him, chapter 17. especially being often troubled with the Evil Spirit.

A. Saul was not at that time troubled with the Evil Spirit, it is manifest. If
he had been often troubled with it, yet he lost not his Memory and
Understanding thereby, chapter 18. 10, 11. chapter 19. 9, 10, 11. David at the Combat
with Goliath was but Stripling twenty years old happily, for he was but 30 at
Readiness Death, 2 Samuel 5. 4. so that there could not be sufficient time between
Readiness making him his Armor-bearer and the Combat, for Saul to have forgot
David. In a word, Princes in their Consulations about the Affairs of State, are
wont to confer with their Principal Officers and Ministers, of whom doubtless
David the Armor-bearer was one, at least had frequent Occasions to attend his
Master, and lastly, being often admitted into Readiness Presence to Play upon the
Harp, it is Morally impossible Saul could in a little time forget him and his
Father's House.

It is said Princes are not wont to know their Servants, especially who have
Merited at their Hands; therefore Saul made himself strange unto David, chapter 17.
55, 58. though otherwise he could not choose but know him.

A. Saul had no reason to dissemble his knowledge of David. David had obliged
him by refreshing him with his Harp, and scaring away the Evil Spirit. But then
Saul had rewarded him with the Honorable Office of Armor-bearer. That which
make Princes to forget, or to pretend to forget their Subjects is, when they
cannot, or will not recompense them. But this was not the case. Again David had
slain Goliath, and occasioned thereby the total defeat and overthrow of the
Philistines; this was a noble and deserving exploit. Right! But this was not
the time, nor was it to any purpose at present to hide his former knowledge of
David; For all David's pretense now unto a further reward of his Services, was
his successful Combat and slaughter of the Giant, and preservation of the
Armies of Israel thereby. As to the reward of this Action, it mattered not
whether Saul had or had not been acquainted with David formerly: Still the
reward was due, though Saul had never before seen or known him.

It is said, David's Face was changed and his Beard grown, so that Saul knew
him not again.

A. How could David's Beard be grown, who was as yet but a Youth, a Stripling,
and a Beardless Boy, chapter 17.

It is said, he appeared now before Saul like a Shepherd, and not in his
Courtly Habit, so that Saul knew him not.

A. It Is as easy to say, he appeared at first, chapter 16. before the King in his
Shepherd's Garb, which Saul might easily know again.

It is finally said that Saul only inquired after the Lineage of David; for he
knew his Person well enough.

A. If Saul knew and remembered David's Person, he could not have been ignorant
of his Pedigree, Tribe and Family, which were well known unto Saul when he made
him Armor-bearer, chapter 16. 18, 19, 22.

To conclude, many Incongruities in this story are not at all endeavored to be
accounted for: Those excuses, wherewith some of 'em are palliated, seem so
trivial, weak and ill grounded, that I am hereby farther and more firmly
convinced that the order of the story has been some way or other disturbed and
ought some way or other to be rectified. Whether I have contributed any thing
thereunto, I leave to the Judgment of other Men.

There are two or three Observables more in the Order of the story, as it is
found in our Bibles, which ought not to be forgot. David was Anointed, and then
advanced to be Readiness Armor-bearer, chapter 16. God questionless designing hereby
to make way for his succeeding Saul in the Throne. But David, though there had
happened no disgust between him and the King, returned to keep his Father's
Sheep, Chapter 17. 15.
and Jesse entertained him, which was (as much as in them lay) to defeat the
Purpose of God, and expect another way than what God had appointed for his
attaining the Crown. Chapter 17.
It might also be asked, why did not the Armor-bearer present himself to his
Master, make a tender of his Service according to his Office? Whence was it,
that he needed to be introduced into the King's Presence by some Courtier, and
was received as a mere Stranger. With what Face could Eliab Challenge Readiness
Armor-bearer with Pride and Naughtiness of Heart for attending his Master in
the War. In a word, is it likely the King's Armor-bearer should appear in the
Field with his Shepherd's Habit, chapter 17. As yet then he had been neither
Anointed, nor taken into Readiness Service, but was a mere Shepherd, and by
Consequence the 17th Chapter ought to be before the 16th, at least is before it
in the Order of time, though the 16th by a bold Prolepsis was put first by the
Historian.

THE END.

