Philo and musus.



THE Right Honorable, POVRTRAID. OR, THE VIZARD Taken off PRETENDERS. WITH
Persuasive Reasons to allure the Will, and reduce Men's Actions to obtain the
Title. AS ALSO A set Boundary to the Honor of Saints departed.

By Samuel Gilbert, (...).

London: Printed by F. Clark, for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in
Ludgate Street. 1682.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry, Lord Bishop of London, one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
YOur Lordship, Honorable by Birth, Breeding, Parts and Place, and Right
Honorable by your Piety, Pains and Stability in the Church of England, a
Blessing God has bestowed upon her, as a sound Pillar for her Support, and a
Saint Paul for a Preacher: attended with an experienced magnanimous Courage,
and yet of a most affable, courteous and obliging Demeanor; for all which
famed and beloved by this and other Nations; though envied and maligned by our
Churches Enemies.

To whom should this small Piece, concerning the Right Honorable, Address it
self for Protection, but to your Self that is so, and an Encourager of all
Means to make others deserve that Title. I therefore, without considering the
vast disproportion between the Worthiness of the Person to whom I Write, and
the Meaness of what is Written on this Subject, as well as Obscurity of the
Author; presume (yet with as much Humility as the Attempt can bear) to beg your
Lordships Patronage thereof, against the Villifyings of those Persons that are
only Honorable to the Eyes of the Vulgar. And that here your Lordship would be
pleased to accept the Acknowledgment of Favors formerly extended toward me,
though I believe both those and my self dropped out of your Memory; but must ever
be retained in mine. And whilst I live, make my daily Petitions to Heaven,
(for the whole Nations, as well as your Lordships Interest) that Safety,
Health, Prosperity, and Honor, with length of Days, may be your Portion in
this Life, and Eternal Happiness in the next. And conclude with one to your
Self, that I may be accepted amongst the meanest of your Servants, which Title
is with all humility assumed by

S. G.

TO THE READER.
MAny that Act the parts of Persons of Quality on the present Stage of the
Universe, thinks that Honor consists only in Riches, Height, and strength of
Parts, Worldly Preferments, the Cap and Knee, the Vogue of the Vulgar, etc. all
which may be attained, and yet the Possessors not one Spark of true Honor in
them, 1 Samuel 18 18.
if not attended by Holiness, it is inseparable Companion, to make this and
their mistake perspicuous, to characterize the Right Honorable, and to
persuade those that are oath ways well quallifi'd thereto, is the only Design
of this small priced Pocket Piece, without Refl^ctions on any, but good
Intentions to all, under what scandalous imposed Titles soever, Tories or
Whiggs.

Vale.
THE RIGHT HONORABLE.
HONOR is the World's great Diana, the Idol whereunto it Sacrifices.

There are none of such poor and pusillanimous Spirits, as would not say (at
least) with Saul to Samuel, Honor me before the People. Every Man would have a
good Name that desires not a good Conscience, the Sinner being ashamed to be
accounted what he is not ashamed to be: Absalom having no Virtues to eternize
his Memory, 2 Samuel 18 18.
erects a Pillar, and calls it after his own Name. The Heathens were so drunk
with a giddy desire of Honor, that they would be content to exchange their
Lives for a dead Statue. Empedocles will Sacrifice his Life to the Idol of
Honor, and cast himself into the flames of Aetna; In a word, there is no such
flatness and poverty of Spirit, that has not one spark of Ambition in him, to
aspire to Honor: As there are none but desire it, so few that deserve it;
many, they would be great, they will not be good; Glorious, but not Gracious;
they would be Honorable, but will not be Holy.

Many would rise to Honor, but they quite mistake the Footstool; And seek it
rather any where than in Holiness; nay, some think they cannot be Honorable
enough, unless Godless. Holiness is posted over to Colleges and Hospitals,
etc. and thought by some to be fit only for those, that are little better (as
they think) than mere Posts, It is enough, say they, for dry Divines, Men of
low and poor Spirits (as they erroneously judge such) of grave, subdued,
mortified and retired Minds: it is not for them that stand upon their
Punctilic's and Terms of Honor, height of Place, sublimity of Spirit,
nobleness and generous Disposition: do not most Men glory in their Shame, as
most ashamed of that which is the only Honor of a Christian his Crown and
Garland? It is Reason that makes us Men, but Holiness Christians; and better no
Men, if not Christians. It Is the Badge of Christianity that makes us
Honorable, for that is the Livery of the King of Kings. The Honor the World
bestows is but the Livery the worst sort of People generally give those that
commonly pay dear for its trimming, must seem their Servants, Cui servire est
Regnare.
nay indeed be real slaves to their humors that gets into popular applause or
worldly preferments, which some think the greatest Dignity. But what says the
Psalmist, that Kingly Prophet, inspired from above, This Honor have all his
Saints,

Holiness and Honor God has ever knit together with a Chain of Adamant, Psalm.
149. 9.
a Bond of such inseparable and individual combination, as that the Oracle from
Heaven has pronounced it, Them that honor me I will honor. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
As shame of Sin, so Honor is the natural Offspring of Grace; As the shadow
of the Body to the light of the Sun, so Honor is always an inseparable
attendant of Holiness, like some officious Serviter still at his Masters Elbow.
Holiness and Honor, like a pair of Turtle Doves, where you see the one, the
other cannot be far; or the two Cherubims upon the Mercy-seat, by a reciprocal
and mutual prospect continually interview each other. The true Jacob's Ladder,
or Stair of Ascent to Glory, is no other than Grace, and the high way to
Honor, Holiness: no way to become great but by being good, nor truly
honorable, but by being holy, yea even in God's style, Optimus goes before
Maximus, as if God himself, who is essentially great, could not be great, if
not good, or not so great, if not so good, or not the greatest of all, if not
the best of All.

Only the truly Holy, are the truly Honorable:

1. Because Honor is nothing else but an attestation of the worth and
worthiness that is in any Man; whence Aristotle tells us, Honor est in
honorante, non in honorato.

He means the outward performance of such respective Ceremonies and Complements
of Honor, as the worth and quality of the person honored deserves.

Now the Spirit of God, the best Herald that ever was, and therefore knows best
how to give Names and Titles, never makes mention of the Saints but with Titles
full of Honor and Grace; as Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and God's
Friend; Moses my Servant, Heb. 3. 2.
faithful in all the House of God. 1 Samuel 13. 14.
David a Man after the model of God's own heart. Zachary a holy and just Man.
John Baptist a shining and burning Lamp: none greater than he born amongst
Women. If Achilles were happy, because he had Homer to be the Trumpeter of his
Praises, how much more they, that have God himself to be the Blazoner and
Herald of their Honor.

It is not unworthy observation how regardless God is of Greatness without
Goodness, Honor without Holiness; such an one was Dives in that Historical
Parable in the Gospel shall go nameless; the Spirit of God will not so much as
vouchsafe him a Name; there was a quidam, etc. a certain Man, etc. So Jeconiah
of the Seed-Royal, and the last of the Kings that ever swayed the Scepter of
Judah, God will not do him the honor to give him the length of his Name, but
instead of Jeconiah, he cuts off and curtails a piece of it, and calls him not
Jeconiah, but in disdain, Coniah. But when God would grace and honor Abraham,
Jer. 22. 24, and 28.
as if Abram was not enough, he spins out his Name to the full length, and not
willing to part with it too soon out of his Mouth, and calls him Abraham.
Scripture tells us, that Saul Reigned only two years, and yet it is manifest by
the Story that he Reigned more than two Years: what does the Spirit of Truth
mistake in matters of Chronology and Calculation of Times? No, he takes notice
of Readiness Reign no farther than he Reigned well; and therefore Saul only
Reigned two years, because two years well. The Tribe of Dan, 1 Samuel 13. 1.
both in Chronicles and Apocalypse, is not reckoned: amongst the Tribes: did the
Spirit of God mistake his account therein? No! but Dan was the first of all the
Tribes, that fell to Idolatry, and therefore unworthy to be honored with a
Name in God's Register.

The World indeed is a very unskilful Herald, and then ofttimes graceth when
God dishonors, advances greatness without goodness: But God emblazoning the
Coat of Arms of his honorable ones, only prizeth goodness without greatness,
if they be his Saints they are honorable. All the Honor that comes from the
World, is but like the reflection of a deceitful Looking-Glass, that represents
to the beholders view, nothing less than the true proportion of the Face, yea
happily to a distorted and deformed Countenance, gives Grace and Beauty. But
that is the true Honor indeed, without all stain or taint, that comes down
from him, who alone is the God of honor, and therefore alone can give it; He
that is from Heaven is above all, and therefore his Testimony is so too; not he
who Commends himself is allowed, but he whom God Commends; He is the true worth
whose praise 2 Cor. 10. 18.
is not of Men, Romans 2. 29.
but of God: and therefore Honor si quaeratur, St. Austin.
illic quaeratur, ubi nemo indignus honoratur.

2. Because they only are the most Royally descended, from the noblest Stock,
the honourablest Blood that ever the Sun saw, sc. the Blood of Christ: hence it
is that they have Styles given them so full of Honor by the exactest Herald,
the Spirit of God; for is it not an honorable preferment, only to serve him,
whom to serve is to Reign? Methinks, says St. Jerome, when I hear St. Paul
begin every Epistle with Paulus Apostolus servus Jesu Christi, he is more proud
of this Title, than if he had said, Prefect us pretorii, aut exercitus
Imperiatoris Tiberii; Captain of the Guard, or General of Tiberius his Army.
David, though a King, was ambitious of no greater Preferment in his Service,
Psalm. 84. 10.
than to be a poor Doorkeeper: Here Solomon's Servants happy that stood in his
presence, and not those that stand continually in God's presence? who is a
greater than Solomon? but as if to be a Servant were not honorable enough, he
makes us Friends. Joh. 15. 14.
Thus Abraham is called God's friend. But as if to be a friend were not honor
enough, they are not only admitted to God's Court, but to his Privy Council.
Thus was Abraham God's Privy Counselor. Genesis 18. 17.
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing I mean to do. Amos 3. 7.
Surely the Lord God will do nothing but he reveals his Secrets unto his
Servants the Prophets. Psalm. 25. 14.
And the Secrets of the Lord are revealed to them that fear him. But as if here
were not honor enough, he makes them all Sons and Daughters to himself, and
what is it nothing to be Son and Daughter in Law to a King? but as if to be
Sons and Daughters were not honor enough, he makes them his Heirs, Coheirs
with Christ, to share and divide the Inheritance with the natural Son of God,
yea such an honor it is to be God's heir, that as each Son is an heir, so an
heir to the whole inheritance, the whole Kingdom; but as if all this were not
yet honor enough he has drawn us yet nearer to him by Marriage, he has
Married us to himself, with an everlasting Covenant. And in that day I will
make a Covenant for them, Hosea 2. 18.
etc.

And I will betroth thee unto me for ever, 19.
yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness and in judgment, and in
loving kindness and in mercy.

I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, 20.
and thou shall know the Lord.

And then the Rule is in Civil Law, Mulier fulget radiis mariti.

The Wife shines with the Beams of her Husband, the Wife cannot be base where
the Husband is honorable; by this Marriage Knot he has made them bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, nay parts and members of him, and if one member
be had in honor, does not every member share in it; yea the honor that is
done one, is done to each one, because all the members are but parts of and
make up one body.

Thus we see how full of honor holy men are, and what glorious things are
spoken of them; which made good Theodosius, one of the best of the Roman
Emperors, count it greater honor to be Membrum Ecclesiae quam Caput Imperii, a
Member of the Church than Head of the Empire.

3. Because their Attendance and Guard is honorable, no less than a Royal
Guard of Angels, like so many heavenly Janissaries to keep them in their ways,
that they dash not their feet against stones: so far does God honor them, that
he makes even his Angels themselves those glorious and excellent Spirits, Heb.
1. 7.
to be ministering Spirits for their sakes that shall be heirs of their
salvation.

4. Their Reward is honorable; it is no petty Farm, or minor Cottage, nor
inferior Office, nor vanishing dignity, but a Kingdom, and that a Kingdom of
Glory, so called to kindle in us a more ardent desire after it: Glory being a
thing whereof we are naturally ambitious; what an honorable estate then is
this, which is attended with such a glorious reward. It was an unjust Aspersion
that those Hypocrites in Malachy went about to cast on the the Service of God:
Mal. 3. 14.
It is a vain thing to serve the Lord, and what profit? What profit is there we
can desire, that is not to be had in God's Service? whoever served this Master
and went not always away Royally rewarded! other Masters take Servants, but it
is as well for their own benefit as their Servants, but God takes his merely
for the benefit and honor of those that serve him, to dignifie them with
special Honor. Hence is it we find such glorious things attributed to the
Saints in Scripture; they are called Kings and Priests, and Temples of the
Living God, 1 Cor. 6. 3. Hag. 2. 23 Jer. 22. 24.
Judges of the World, yea Angels too: The Signet upon God's right hand: The
Apple of his Eye: Deuteronomy. 32. 10.
His Crown of Glory, Zech. 2. 8. Isa. 62 3.
and Diadem in God's right hand. Oh what glorious and goodly things are spoken
of the Saints of God? what a happy confluence of Honor attends them at every
turn? Such and such Honor have all his Saints.

What is the most that an Earthly Monarch can bestow upon his Favorite and
Minion, when he sets his Wits on work to honor him, why! to cloth him in
Purple and Royal Apparel, to set a Princely Diadem on his Head, to put a Chain
of Gold about his Neck, a Ring upon his Finger, to set him in a Tryumphant
Chariot, with proclamation of the Kings favor; this is all that earthly
Caesar's can bestow upon their Favorites; But what is this to the Honor of
God's Saints, what is the shadow to the substance? instead of fine Linen and
Royal Apparel, they have the Royal Robes of Grace, the Kings Daughter is all
glorious within. Ps. 45. 13.
They shall not have a fading, but a flourishing; not a mortal, but an immortal
Crown, not of Gold, but of Glory; instead of a Chain of Gold, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6,
7, 8.
St. Peter's Chain of Heavenly Graces; instead of a Ring they are planted as
Rings and Signets on Christ's right hand. And thus shall it be done to the man
whom God honors.

And thus it is apparent that only the Holy ones are truly honorable, the only
men that excel upon the Earth. Ps. 16. 3. Prove. 12. 26.
They are more excellent than their Neighbors. They are the only men, the men
of a thousand; they are as David's Servants told him, Job 33. 23.
worth thousands of others. And it must needs be so, for the Garland of true
Honor is only twisted and woven of the Flowers of Spiritual Graces, that alone
which makes us Holy, makes us Honorable, nothing mends the Name, but what
mends the Conscience. A holy and a gracious Life has a far fairer prospect in
the Field of Honor, than all worldly advantages besides.

A Field of Sincerity, charged with Deeds of Piety, cannot but be accomplished
with a Crest of Glory.

The Heathens themselves, that Lighted all their Divinity at Natures Candle,
whom Saint Peter calls purblind, that cannot see a far off, could say that
Honor was the proper reward of Virtue.

The Egyptians amongst their Mystical and Hierogliphical Emblems, painted
Honor next to Humility, averring what Solomon has since recorded, before
Honor goes Humility. Prove. 15. 33. 18. 12.
And the ancient Romans so contrived their Temple, Honor is like a Palace with
a low Door, into which no man can enter but he must first stoop.
that a Man must unavoidably pass through the Temple of Virtue, before he
touched the Stair of Honor.

Thus it stands good both in God's and Man's account, that Grace is the Highway
to Glory, and Holiness to Honor. And here I dare be bold to Challenge all Ages
and Times, who ever was there, that honored God, and was not honored again.
Yea even whilst the Saints live on earth, they want not honor, they are
honored by God himself, Angel, Good men, nay by Evil men. Holiness strikes an
impression of Reverence, even into the hearts of those that hate it, that those
that have not hearts to love it, are forced to admire it. Herod Reverenced John
Baptist, not because a great or learned, but because a holy and just man;
holiness has such a daz'ling and sparkling Luster, even in the Consciences of
the worst of Men, that they cannot but in their own Bosoms give it an
honorable Testimony.

To what purpose then, does the Wicked Man brag of his House, and Herauldry,
derive his Line of Honor from never so noble Progenitors, since God honors
him not, he has not one drop of honorable Blood in him, his Honor is but
like some Pillar of Smoke, that vanishes and dissolves of it self, it is but
like a blazing Star, the very Matter of it, is nothing else but a gross and
Terrestrial Exhalation, that at last perishes with self-ruin. Well may he while
he lives command the outward Ceremony, but never the honor of the heart: well
may he make a blaze, and shine in the World while he lives, but when his Candle
is out, he ends like a Snuff that causes a Noisome Smell in the Nostrils both of
God and Man; when he dies, all his Honor is interred in the Dust, his Name and
himself is buried together: and at his Funeral has more in Black than in
Mourning; and never till then satisfied the living so well, as by his dying,
they rejoice at his burying, but with this allay of grief, That it was no
sooner; never doing so good a deed to his Country before as to leave it.

Hoc solum fecit nobile, As Ausonius of Otho.
quod periit.
This only he did Nobly, that he died.
At the Birth of such Men we ought to mourn rather than at their Funerals, were
we but Astrologers good enough to Calculate the truth of their ensuing ill
Conditions; but not as the Thracians at the Birth of their Children, because
they are born to misery, but because a misery is born to us, and rejoice at
their death, not because they are taken from evil to come, but because an evil
is taken from us, and those that are to come.

Who then would not endeavor by their holiness to live the peoples wish, and
not by their wickedness their fear, and by their passing Bell to sadden, not
rejoice them as for a deliverance. Nay, Jehoiakim, Jer. 22. 19.
though a King, shall be buried with the burial of an Ass. Joash shall not have
any honorable Sepulture amongst amongst the Kings of Judah, whereas Jehoiada,
though a Priest, shall be buried amongst them, because he had done good to Israel
and God's House, but Joash to neither, he had no care to honor God whilst he
lived, and God will not honor him when he is dead. Not all the Balm of Gilead,
nor the sweetest Arabian Odours, nor the costliest Spices of India, nor the
richest Boxes of Spikenard, nor the most fragrant and delicate Perfumes,
compounded of the rarest Ingredients, with all the Skill and Art of
Apothecaries, or Embalmers, are able to preserve a wicked Man's Name from
rottenness and putrefaction. Those that honor God shall be honored, but those
that despise him shall be despised.

It Is Goodness not Greatness that holds out to the last, and therefore
Goodness more honored than Greatness: When a wealthy Merchant bragged to
Lycon, a wise Philosopher, of the multitude of his great Ships and Furniture
for Sea, being able to trade into all parts; the wise man made this answer, I
esteem not that to be Felicity which hangs upon Ropes and Cables. Thus when a
man is at the last cast, it is Piety and true Godliness, the fear of God, the
pleasant Echo sounding from that Murus Aheneus, Brazen wall of an upright
Conscience: not Plenty and Prosperity, Earthly Honors (which are but
transitory) that shall stand a man in stead. The Smoke of a great Man's
Sacrifice smells never the sweeter before God, because he is clothed in Silk,
or like the Bird of Paradise, adorned with Plumes and fine Feathers. No! it is
the inside that God regards; he looks on Man's Obedience, requires his Service,
loves his Thankfulness, respects his Holiness, and will reward his Faithfulness.

Alas! what is the honor and greatness of worldly men, but empty vanity. It
was told to Agrippina, Nero's Mother, that her Son should be Emperor, and that
he should afterward kill his own Mother, to which Agrippina replied, Occidat
modo imperet. Let my Son be so, and then let him kill me and spare not: so
Thirsty was she of Honor.

Tell me what are swelling Titles, but as so many Rattles to still childish
men's Ambitions? And what is Honor and Greatness in the World! Honor is like
the Meteor that lives in the Air, so does these in the breath of other men; it
is like a Gale of Wind which moves the Ship, sometimes Wind is down, a man has
lost his honor, and lives to see himself intombed; sometimes this Wind is too
high, how often have many been blown to Hell, while they have been sailing with a
brisk wind of Popular Applause! So that Honor is but Magnum nihil, a glorious
fancy, seemingly great, a real nothing, it does not make a man really the
better, but too often the worse: for a man swelled with Honor (wanting Grace)
is like a man in a Dropsy, whose Bigness is his Disease. But Holiness is an
excellent thing, the true Basis of right Honor. Alexander coming with his Army
against Jerusalem, Jaddus the High Priest went out of the City to meet him,
adorned with his Priestly Robes, an upper Garment of Purple embroidered with
Gold, and a golden Plate on the fore side, wherein the Name of God was
writtten; the sight was so grave and solemn, that the Emperor fell to the
ground, as Reverencing the Name that was inscribed thereon. Thus it is that in
holiness there is such a sparkling Luster, that whosoever beholds it, must
needs be astonished at it: holiness is a beautiful thing, it carries a graceful
Majesty along with it, wheresoever, or in whomsoever it is truly and sincerely
professed, so that none but such are truly honorable.

Than surely none shall (or should) be honored, but those whom God honors,
and God honors none but those that honor him, and none honor him but those
that are holy; if a man would be honorable indeed, let him tread the paths of
the Lord, for they lead to lasting, everlasting honor: 2 Chronicles. 1. 12.
In the hands of wisdom is honor as well as wealth.

The wise shall inherit glory, Prove. 3. last verse.
etc. be but so wise as to honor him in all the passages of his Worship, and
you shall have his Word for your preferment; true honor it comes neither from
the East nor West, from South or North, but from above, and there rests where
the God of honor places it; therefore seek to be approved of him: who alone
is able to set the Crown of true and lasting glory round your Temples: be but a
Saint and you shall be honored whilst you live, but when you are dead much
more: Honor is compared to a shadow, which sometimes goes before and
sometimes follows the Body: so the Houour of the Saints, if it go not before
them while they live, it shall be sure to follow them when they are dead. Those
that dye in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13.
their works shall follow them. i. e. To be rewarded with Glory in Heaven, and
with Honor upon Earth, when even the Saints of God remove out of the room of
this World, they leave a sweet perfume of a good Name behind them, that smells
most graciously in the Nostrils both of God and Man: a good Man, though he dye
childless, yet leaves a good Name behind him, as his Heir; a Name better than
that of Son and Daughter. The memory of the just is blessed. Prove. 10. 6.
Solomon says not Benedictio adest Capiti justi, in the Singular Number, a
blessing, as if some single or scattered blessing only did befall him; but
Benedictiones, a Collection and Concurrence of Blessings; and those Adsunt
capiti, they are upon the Head; put indeed by an usual, tho figurative form of
Speech, for the whole Man, yet importing, that these Blessings as they are
manifold and various for Number, so are they for their Nature, Eminent and
Conspicuous. Adsunt, he has these blessings not in hope or reversion only,
jus ad rem, but jus in re, blessings are upon the head of, etc. even in this
life he stands or actually seized, or undoubtedly assured and assertain'd of
them: and one of the blessings that befalls a holy Man, is, that he shall leave
a good Name behind him, and that is rather to be chosen, Prove. 22. 1.
than to leave great Riches behind him: Eccles. 7. 1.
a good Name is better than precious Ointment. The Woman in the Gospel that
poured out the Ointment on our Savior's Head, shall be spoken of where ever
his Gospel is Preached, the smell of the costly Spikenard quickly perished in
the Air, but the perfume of that gracious Action shall smell fresh and
pleasantly for ever, as a good Poet concludes on the like subject: -- the
Actions of the just,
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust.
Not like Flowers which blossom from the Earth for a day or two, till the heat
of the Sun drys up their moisture, (which maintains their beauty) and withers
them again into the lap from whence they sprang, But their memory shall spread
blossoming in sweet perfumes, which shall not lose, but increase their beauty
and scent in open Air, which the Sun shall not wither, but make to smell the
sweeter.

God will never have any to be losers by him, but if they do him the least
honor, he will be sure to requite it; yea, they shall receive in this life an
hundred fold, and in the life to come, an infinite, an ineffable recompense in
Heaven.

We see with what a great deal of eagerness Earthly Honors and Offices, rich
Prizes and great Places, are sought and persued after: Balaam's Ass never
Gallops fast enough to fetch in Profit and Preferment; set but a Wedge of Gold
in sight, and Joshua that could stop the Course of the Sun, Joshua 7. 21.
cannot stay Achan from courting and catching at it. And yet what are Riches
but the Golden Gives, the noble Miseries of this wretched life: and what do
they that are set upon them (with the neglect of holiness, heavenly honors,
and the wealth of a better World) but prefer the Onyons of Egypt, before the
Bread of Angels, paltry Pibbles, before precious Pearls, thick Clay before pure
Gold, counterfeit Coin before true Treasure. O see and bewail this so great a
folly in your selves and others, and for the future learn to covet Spirituals,
to be greedy of Grace, to practice holiness, without which none can be truly
honorable. However, the holy ones of God here in this life receive many hard
measures, yea, when they live best many times hear the worst. Therefore must we
take Virtue with a sweet or sour Breath; it is naturally sweet, sour only
through the corruption of the Air we live in, being putrifi'd by the infected
Lungs of those that are wicked despisers of her, and ignorant of her worth to
take Virtue as she is naturally, with a sweet Breath, is pleasanter, though with
a sour more meritorious: for Regium est male audire cum been feceris: it is
Kingly to be ill spoken of for good Deeds, and whilst we have our Actions
warranted by the great seal of Virtue, we verify the saying of one constant to
such.

Conscia men's Recti, famae Mendacia ridens.
An upright Breast, laughs at the abuses of report.
A well grounded self justification Ovid. 4. fast.
scorns the dispraise of the Vulgar, whose commendation is not authentic
enough to call Persons or Actions good, such infamy has its delight, and we
must be just merely out of love to it, not for Glory by it, and be content to
be ill spoken of for being so; It Is good for a man to have Praise when he
deserves it; but better to deserve Praise when he has it.
few know the pleasure of a well got ill report, but many the pains and pricks
of Conscience for the ill getting a good report: That raising themselves by
over witting, out reaching and fair promising others, never intending
performance, not being set by God as Joseph, but setting themselves over their
elder Brethren. They that place Honor in honorante, honor in the bestower,
exile it as well from our care as power. That passage through good and bad
report, gone through by that great adventurer for Heaven, St. Paul.
leads to a Haven of such inward rest, as fears not the blasts of misprision,
nor the mire and dirt the wicked in their ragings cast up; but can solace
themselves in St. Paul's words, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our conscience; that in simplicity,
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the World. And this music surpasses all the Gingles
of Fame; not that we should slight a good Report, but rather covet it,
especially from the best sort of men, i. e. good men; To contemn Fame, is but a
security of doing ill: He that would not be thought good, cares not for being
so. Tac itus.
Contemptu famae, contemni virtutes: He that contemns a good report,
despises the goodness deserving it; yet if we miss it whilst our Actions are
regulated by the square of Religion and Justice, it is not Arrogance, but well
becoming Confidence, to scorn the injurious World, when it denies Merit its
due: Let us not be good on the salary of its praise, nor suffer their scorn to
spoil good purposes in their conception, by damping our resolutions, or by
frights abortive their execution, or smother our joy at their birth. For when
God has once by the hand of Death drawn a Curtain between good men, and the
eyes of the World, and removed them out of sight, then is every one ready to
bless their Memories, and follow them to Heaven with a loud Peal of gratulatory
Acclamations. After death, martyred Names, as well as Men, are Kalender'd, even
to an unquestionable repute of merit, and that in those faithful Registers of
Impartial History. The Living may be Tenants at will to reputation: but it is
the possession of the dead, and when the Grave dust is flung on our Chronicles,
envy it self cannot blur them.

Animis hominum manet, Tacitus of Agricola.
in Aeternitate Temporum Fama rerum. While some are buried in oblivion, others
in the memory of men survive even Posterity. This is the condition of us all,
evil things we feel them before we fear them, but good things we lose them
before we know them: De bonis judicamus a tergo; It Is the want that commends
the worth of a thing: even those we see by experience, that could not endure
the Saints whilst they lived, yet when once gone, they never speak of them
without a preface of reverence.

Herein do the Saints of God resemble an excellent Picture, or a curious piece,
or Cloth of Arras, that looks well when ye are near it, but fairer and smoother
when farther off. The wicked are compared to Hawks, of great esteem whilst
living, but afterward nothing worth; but the Saints to tamer Fowls, (often
Prey to such Hawks) that are hushed away, and little esteemed whilst living, but
after death, brought to the Lords Table. God will look to their honor when
they are dead, that so much looked to his while they lived. Rather than Moses
should not be honored, God himself will make his Funeral Sermon; Josiah and
Hezekiah, that honorable pair of Kings, how were they honored by all Judah
and Jerusalem at their death; Such honor have all his Saints.

And if they are so honorable, let us know how to prize them and give them
their due; Let us not fear to Imitate the Church in her Ancient Practice
herein, the Celebration of our Annual and standing Festivals in the Honor of
the Saints; A Custom in the Church from time to time Traditionary, of so long a
standing and Antiquity in the Church, that now even by prescription, it is grown
gray headed and venerable. Certainly God must lose a great deal of his Honor,
if we bury the Honor of his Saints: Laudate Dominum, says David, in Sanctis,
if God be to be praised in all the Works of his Hands, from the Cedar to the
Shrub, from the glorious Cherubim to the despicable Worm; is he not to be
honored in the Saints, those whom he raised up to be horoical Instruments for
the propagation of the Gospel.

But as many things are good in the intent, which are not always so in the
event, good in the Institution, not always in the Execution; as there are many
things excellent in their first birth and original, which in tract of time
gather soil and rust, and so degenerate from the purity of their first
Institution; even so it is with the honor of the Saints, for whilst Men out of
too strong a bent and overplus of inordinate affection toward the Saints,
thought they could never honor them enough, at last they became flat
Idolaters, turning Charity into Piety, Affection into Superstition, Veneration
into Adoration. When the People first met together at the Monuments of the
Martyrs, (an Ancient and Yearly Custom of the Eastern Churches) to praise God
for his Martyrs, at last they forgot their Arrand, and turned their Worship of
God into the Worship of the Martyr; at first their Relics were precious, at
last they grew holy; first the Saints were honored, but after worshipped; at
first they but commend, but afterward enshrined; so hard it is to subsist in a
Golden Mediocrity: we either shoot under, or over; not do, or over do; either
not honor the Saints at all, or too much: being right Englishmen, (too many
in this point) never think we mend the matter, till we mar it. God gave the
Israelites an express inhibition, not to take his Name in vain, at last the
Jews, out of a superstitious Reverence, durst not so much as name the (...),
the Name Jehovah; they ought not to name him in vain, therefore afterward they
would not name him at all: the Brazen Serpent at first erected by God's
Institution, for Historical Commemoration, only of their delivery from fiery
Serpents, at last from Historical Commemoration, it was translated to Religious
Adoration; so the Saints were first honored out of Affection, at last
worshipped out of Superstition.

The Persians, in policy, (as Xenophon tells the story) taught their Children
to lie and not to lie, but with this distinction, to lie to their Enemies, but
to tell truth to their Friends: but Xenophon tells us the issue of this Persian
Education, their Children forgot their distinction, and made bold even to lie
to their best Friends. So the Roman Clergy teach the People to Worship the
Saints, and not to Worship them, so long till they forget their distinction,
and entitle the Saints themselves to the same honor that is due to God; but
welfare St. Austin, Sancti sunt honorandi propter immitationem, non adorandi
propter Religionem. That is the truest honoring of the Saints which is a
returning of their honor to God's greater honor. The Saints that are alone to
be honored in Deo, and propter Deum, must be honored without impeachment and
derogation of God's honor, to be a follower of the Saints, as they be (or
were) of Christ, is the truest Worship of the Saints.

It is most certain, that the Blessed Virgin receives not so much Indignity
from her Enemies that deny her, as from such her Friends that Deifie her; it is
a Sin to give the Saints more than their due, as it is to give them less: to
deprive them of all honor, was the Error of Vigilantius, and many of this
last Age; to give them too much, was first the Error of the Collyridians, and
at this day of the Papists, whereby they do not so much honor the Saints, as
dishonor God.

The truth is, we honor the Saints triumphant in Heaven, but we give them only
honor Charitatis, not honor Religionis; we give them Veneration, but not
Adoration; we honor their Memories, but we erect no Idolatrous Shrine; we
honor them as fellow Servants now glorified, but not as demi Gods half
deifi'd; we honor them as Patterns for imitation, not as Patrons for
protection; we know no Relics, but their Graces; we observe their Festivals,
by the Anniversary Revolutions of the Year, but we dedicate no Days to the
Saints, but only to the God of the Saints. What is there no mean in giving
honor to the Saints, but we must deny them, or deifie them? Is it not enough
to Commend, but we must Adore them? Is there no mean, but we must be either
ungrateful or Idolatrous, or that we must make them either less than Saints, or
little less than Gods? Is it not a dangerous thing to obtrude that honor upon
them, which must needs bring them into Emulation with God; with aspiring
Lucifer, to be similes Altissimo? Has not God solemnly protested? Isa. 42. 8.
saying, I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory I will not give to
another, neither my praise to graven Images. He that touches the least spark of
God's Glory, does he not touch the Apple of his Eye? Of all other things, God
and the Throne brook no Corrivals. Is it not the general Voice of the Church,
Non nobis Domine? Not unto us, O Lord. Do not the Saints in the Apocalips, cast
down their Crowns at the feet of the Lamb? And in their Doxology, ascribe all
Honor, Glory, Praise, to him that sits upon the Throne? So Religiously Tender
are they in this Point, that they will not suffer the least of God's Honor to
stick to their fingers, but still shake it off with a non nobis Domine. Let God
have his due above all, and the Saints their due; give unto God the things that
are Gods; and to the Saints the things that belong to them: Let the Saints have
their due honor, but so that by a necessary reflex and resultance it redound
to God's Honor; for else it is no honor to the Saints, to share in their
Maker's honor, whose chiefest honor it is with denying of their own, to bring
Glory to God.

Thus have we discovered the true Dignity of the Saints; and if Saints, though in
Rags, they are rich and honorable, how honorable then are Saints in Silks
that are all glorious within and without too, both to Spiritual and Temporal
Beholders; that are rich in Graces, as well as Garments; in inward worth, as
well as outward wealth; high in God's, as well as the Kings favor; where
goodness and greatness join hands; whose outsides belie not the furniture
within; that are not like rich Cabinets with empty Drawers, or rather filled
with filth, or that which they are ashamed to own, though not to keep; but are
richer within than without, having their Caskets filled with the richest
Rubies, drops of Christ's Blood, to adorn their Souls; Repentance Tears shed
for past Sins, turned into the rarest Pearls; the sparkling Diamonds of Grace
set in the Golden Lockets of pure and refined Hearts, having to their Faith,
Virtue; and to their Virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance, Patience; and to
Patience, Godliness; to Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and to
Brotherly-kindness, Charity; St. Peter's choicest Collection of Heavenly
Jewels, which none but a Saint can possess: those that have such Rarities
within, (which God himself is delighted in the beholding) and encompassed with
outward Riches and Preferments too, are those whom only the Spirit of God can
to the full declare how glorious and honorable they are, the finest Rhetoric
too course to see their Beauty through, and will rather cloud than show their
Luster, which can never be truly inspected by mortal eye.

But what shall we say to many of the Gallants of this Age, whose honor has
no other Basis but the Herald or Tailor, or some Office that gives them
liberty to Rant and Swagger in the newest Terms and Mode, It is a base thing to
erect Trophies of Honor to themselves, upon the ruins of another's Reputation.
who make it their business, if possible, to unsaint others (being such Devils
themselves) and bring Holiness into discredit, by scoffing at and deriding it;
but sure it takes with none but what are as of little credit as themselves, who
race out Holiness and Saint out of the Titles of Honor, and instead thereof
practice Drinking, Whoring, Swearing, Cursing and Scoffing at the Saints, as
Qualities of a Gentile stamp, and think the ascent of a pair of stairs in a
Bawdy House, as necessary and equivolent, as those of Virtue, to arrive at the
Temple of Honor, and as Authentic, being Licensed by the Imprimatur of the
Times. What shall I say? why thus to such, That God has blotted their Names
out of the number of those that shall possess Eternal Honor, and marvel they
are not ashamed to let them remain in the Church-Register, so much to the
disgrace of Christianity; but where shame's laid aside, no wonder they commit
all manner of Sin with Greediness and Glory in their shame, brag of their
Debaucheries, and would as fain stifle the Repute of Holiness, as they have
done the Checks of their own Consciences, scorning that Men of their Parts and
Knowledge should be prescribed Holiness by any, nay, even by God himself, being
spiced with that Pride that was in Lucifer, and his fellow-aspiring Angels,
that made the first Schism and Separation in the purest Church, even in Heaven
it self, among the Angels that were wholly perfect: But let such know, a Dram
of Holiness, is above a Talent of Parts; a Drop of Grace, above a Sea of
Knowledge: Though in Knowledge we are said to be as Angels of God, yet in
Holiness, like God himself. Therefore so much as God is above an Angel, so much
is Holiness above Knowledge, and the more so, because Knowledge may be without
Holiness, but never Holiness without Knowledge: pluck therefore off the Plumes
of your Pride and Self-conceitedness, the deplorable Error of most of our
Seperatists, and really is the Pest of the Church and Bane of Religion, which
is best preserved in Unity and Humility.

Who then is Wife, and would have his Name, Person and Estate flourish, let him
purge himself from Original Corruption, Actual Transgression, by Faith in the
Blood of Christ: Shame is the consequent of Sin, but Honor ever attends on
Holiness; wherefore acquaint your selves with the Ways of Christ, follow his
steps, walk as he walked, stamping your Actions in the Mint of Virtue, He that
Sails by the Star of Virtue, shall in time land himself upon the Shore of
Honor.
your Names shall be writ in Heaven, and your Fame be Current, if not in this
lower, in that upper Court of Honor, and had in everlasting Memory, while
others are buried in Oblivion, yours shall survive even Posterity. If Honor be
your Aim, and Holiness the Path that you tread toward it, you shall then
indeed be right worshipful, right honorable; when such as by their Purses
purchase Titles, not by their Virtues, shall be base and ignoble.

Would we have others that we esteem, that are near and dear to us, our
Relations and Friends truly Honorable, endeavor we by our Example and Advice
to make them truly Holy, doing as Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6.
They were both Righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless, endeavoring to Walk (constantly) in All the
Commandments of God (indifferently,) before God (sincerely,) and as much as in
us lies, before Men, unblameably.

Non sine peccato, sed sine querela.
Teaching our Children the Trade of Holiness betimes, whilst they are Young,
that they may not forget it when they are Old, resolving whatsoever others do,
that we and our Houses will serve the Lord; that they and us living holily
here, may be truly honorable, and eternally happy hereafter.

FINIS.

