A TREATISE AGAINST SVPERSTITIOVS JESV-WORSHIP. Wherein the true Sense of
Phil. 2. 9, 10. is opened, and from thence is plainly showed, and by sundry
Arguments proved, that corporal bowing at the Name Jesus, is neither
commanded, grounded, nor warranted thereupon. With answers to some of the maine
reasons overthrown. And afterward the chiefest reasons and grounds of those
that produce the said Text for that opinion, are examined, and the weakness
and insufficiency of them laid open. Together with a discovery of sundry gross
absurdities, and very dangerous erroneous Consequences, that do necessarily
arise from that opinion. Written especially for the benefit of weak seduced
Persons, that have a zeal toward God, though not according to knowledge. By
MASCALL GILES Minister of Gods Word at Dicheling in SUSSEX.

I hate them that regard lying vanities, but thy Law do I love, Psalm. 31. 6.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men,
Mat. 15. 9. LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Andrew Kembe at St.
Margarets hill in Southwark, 1642.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Mr ANTHONY STAPLEY Esquire, one of the Knights in
PARLIAMENT elected for the County of SUSSEX.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,
WHen through sundry and continued abuses offered me by those whose
superstition I have impugned, I was necessitated to commit this Treatise to the
Press: After some deliberation I took boldness to Dedicate the same to you,
being encouraged hereunto, partly by reason of your favorable Affection to my
poor Self, which I thankfully acknowledge; partly also and especially because
of your known sincere affection to the Truth, and hatred of all superstitious
Vanities; and also because you are a right Worthy Member of that Honorable
Body of the House of Commons, whose endeavor is to cleanse the waters of the
Sanctuary, from that filth and bitterness, whereby they have been defiled by too
many, that they may run pure and clear, to refresh the Souls of Gods People,
I mean to root out those superstitions and innovations, which have so long
pestred the Church, and grieved the well-affected: amongst which this Ceremony
is one, which you have not long since forbidden by your religious Order, though
contrary to the same, Pride and shame makes the Preachers of to keep it up,
and such malignant Principles, by which these men have polluted the Peoples
judgments, makes them still to practice it. This opinion indeed is very
specious, making a show to the ignorant, of great humility, religion, and
holiness, when indeed it is a Monster of many heads; there being not many Points
of Popery, that produce more dangerous Conclusions than it does, (especially in
the sense that some hold it.) The Text which they pretend for this Ceremony
being as contrary to it, as light is to darkness.

The Lord bless you, and the truly virtuous Lady, the Lady Clerk, your
religious Yoke Fellow, and all yours and hers, with his choicest mercies, and
power out his especial blessings upon that Honorable House of Parliament,
whereof you are a Member, that you may be still tendered of him as the Apple of
his eye, and continually preserved from the Plots and fury of the malignant
party, to the glory of God, the safety of Sion, and the perfect Reformation
of this Church and Kingdom, which all true Israelites desire, and pray for,
that future Generations may praise GOD for you, and call you blessed.

Thus prays Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded, MASCALL
GILES.

TO THE IMPARTIAL READER, That has not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of Persons.
CHRISTIAN READER;
MY Antagonists in this Question are of two sorts; The first are they that
ground their opinion upon the Text, and thereupon make bowing at the Name Jesus
a necessary duty. The Second sort do also ground their opinion upon the Text,
and also upon the same reasons, and yet make it but an indifferent Ceremony,
principally grounding it upon the Canon of the Church, professing that as a Law
has established it, so if a Law shall forbid it, they will leave If the Text
may be overthrown by a Law made by the Creature, Then, seeing that Devils and
Reprobates must fulfill the Text by suffering their utter destruction, as I
shall afterward make manifest, then if these be wise they will make a Law to
save themselves from it.
it, but till that time they will use it. There are far more of this sort
than of the former, and they are far more absurd in their opinion than the
former: for the one are true to their own grounds, though they be mistaken,
but the other are false to them, and indeed make but a mock of the Text, yea
of Christ himself. In my Treatise I contest with them both in one: here I will
bend my self to the Second sort.

1. I would know of them, if they stand so much upon a Canon, why did they not
obey the Order of the House of Commons? What was their Order inferior to the
Canon made by the Convocation only without consent of Parliament, without
which no Law can bind the The times altered too suddenly upon them.
Subject?

2. If they did ever mean to leave it, why did they fasten it also upon the
Scripture? Many of them never practiced it, nor found any Text for it, till the
Archbishop had charged the Canon for it, which in former times, as Eccl. Pol.
lib. 5. sect. 30.
Master Hooker says, none was constrained to use. What was not the Text
authentic, till the Canon had made it so? or were they so ignorant, that they
knew not how to worship God till the Canon was charged? or if they were not,
how will they answer it before God, some of them, that having lived long in the
Ministry, yet never before this time made known this part of Gods Counsel to
their People?

3. With what honesty can these men ever leave their practice of it, the Canon
being overthrown, except they renounce their opinion? If they had not meddled
with the Text, they might have come off more fairly, but if the Canon fall,
all the power in the world can never overthrow the Text, but it must stand for
ever inviolable. Therefore whereas it is the manner of these men to call all
those Ministers factious, and schismatic, that observe not the Canon as they
expound it, what manner of Persons will these prove themselves to be, that will
not obey Gods sacred Word? The evasion, which these men make for themselves is
beyond all measure ridiculous. They Master Page says something to this
purpose, Justification of bowing, page 7.
say, the Text does but warrant this Ceremony, and the Church has taken
occasion from the Texts warranting it, to command it, a very learned
distinction. We will view therefore the Text, as they exponnd it, and the Canon
as it stands: Thus they open the Text; When Christ had humbled himself, God
highly exalted him, and gave him the Name Jesus to be above every Name, that at
the mention of it, all should bow their knees to the Glory of the Father. Is
this but a warrant? take the Text any way, can there be a more serious
Ordinance? The duty of the Text is the maine end of Christ's exaltation, and
the honor of his All Expositors hold, that this Text does denote Christ's
Kingdom.
Kingdom. What shall God lay flat this Glorious Name of Christ, and lay down
his own honor at the will of man? Surely not to obey this Text, is to deny
Christ's Resurrection, his Ascension, and his glorious Kingdom, to exclude
themselves from being servants to him, and not to suffer him to reign over
them. Yea in their own sense, it is to deny him the Name Jesus, and so they
overthrow our Salvation; A damnable opinion to make the honor of Christ, as he
is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who by his death overthrew all ceremonies,
to be but a Ceremony, and arbitrary also at man's will.
For if this Name were given him, as they say, because they should bow to it,
if they will not bow, they deny him that Name.

Now let us view the Canon, the words whereof are these; When the Lord Jesus
shall be mentioned in time of Divine Service, due and lowly reverence shall be
done by all Persons present. See now, is the Canon so forcible and plain as
the Text, I know no heresy either old or new, of a more fearful consequence
than this opinion.
though understood in their own sense. Yet these men say, that the Text does
but warrant, but the Canon commands this Ceremony. But the Canon says not the
Name Jesus, but the Lord Jesus, who is mentioned as well by any other of his
Titles, as by the Name Jesus. 2. It specifieth only due and lowly reverence,
which may be done without the corporal bowing of the The Canon makes not
plainly for it, whatsoever the Canon-makers intended.
knee. Grant that there were equality in the words and sense of either, shall
so great a Scripture have no more authority than a Church Canon, yet these men
give it not so much, they make the Text but a servant to the Canon, and to
wait upon it; for so long as the Canon stands, the Text shall stand; but if
the Canon fall, the Text shall fall with it These men deal with the Text as
little Children do with Babies, who when they have done playing with them,
throw them away: So they, when they have done playing with this Text, and may
not be suffered any longer to mock Christ by it, then they will throw it away.
. Was there ever heard of such advancing of men's traditions above Gods sacred
Word, as there has been lately? O error, whether will thou run, if thou
once take footing? o how righteously will these men be clothed with shame? How
justly will they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their
own devises?

The occasion of my publication of this Treatise is this; Sundry men in the
Country wherein I live, especially since this Archbishops time, have grounded
this superstition upon the Text, and that upon the peril of damnation, if it
be refused I have heard of some that have wished that those knees might rot
that would not bow at the Name Jesus. Much like the words of Bish. Andrews on
Phil. 2. 9. who says, that that knee which will not bow at that Name, shall be
smitten with somewhat, that it shall not be able.
: Upon which, multitudes of ignorant men were drawn to it, upon the opinion of
these men's worth: Yea of my own Parish some staggered, and others were tainted
with it; therefore I thought it my duty to labor in the point, and I took
pains to read some Tracts of those of that opinion, and found nothing but
empty stuff, without any ground from Scripture; and being furnished with the
Arguments that follow against it, I delivered sundry of them to my People,
proving that this bowing has no foundation upon the said Text, and in no other
sense I reproved it: This coming to these men's ears, I was presently called
factious, schismatic, and what not. I hearing of it, desired Conference with
some of them, and I found that they had no Scripture for their opinion, but
only such muddy reasons as have been raked out of the kennels of Popish
Authors. I much desired to talk with one of these men of the more corrupt
opinion, who taking it in scorn that I should reprove what he held, railed
against me above measure. This man never practiced or preached for this
Ceremony, till this Archbishops time, and then he began to ground it upon the
Text, and after a while he pressed it again upon a very great danger, if not
done; and the better to win his People to it, he publicly told them, that
he had studied more hours in this Question, than others of a different opinion
had done minutes, and said that he was able to satisfy any one in the
Question. After I had talked with this man, immediately it was noised about in
the Country, that my Arguments were accounted light and If so why would not he
suffer one of his Parish to partake of the Conference, who came to his house in
the midst of it, and earnestly desired it.
weak, and his such as I could not Answer His reasons were only the three
first, noted in the Second part of my Book, and there thou may read my
Answers.
. I having heard this from many credible Persons, and knowing my self to be
wronged, wrote to the said party, to request another Conference before
indifferent Witnesses, for the other was private, and showed reasons why it
could not be unequal on his behalf, and also declared unto him that none of
my Arguments were solved, and to avoid prolixitie, instanced but only in one,
showing him how I stated it, and how he answered it, and how his answer made to
it, Part. 1. Sect. 8. Argu. 1.
sufficed not, meekly desiring him to answer it more fully by Letter, or else
to conceive one against another time. I desired him also to clear unto me this
his opinion, how the Text does but warrant this Ceremony, and not injoyne it,
and how he can ever leave practicing it (as he said he would, if an Act of
Parliament should forbid it) with a safe Conscience, except he renounce his
opinion. I received a Letter from him, in which my Arguments are again
slighted, and he justifies his opinion, making it but an indifferent Ceremony,
and yet grounds it upon the Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. I testify to the world,
that I wrong him not, but can show it from his own hand, which opinion neither
himself nor the wit of any man can ever make good.
and yet refuses to give me his reasons, and utterly denies to satisfy my
demands, and to answer my Arguments, and resolves to meddle no more in the A
strange thing that a Divine so greatly studied in the Point, beyond other
Divines of the other opinion, should refuse to stand up for his opinion when it
is opposed.
Question, and will not admit of another Conference, because it would be a
Conventicle, and yet he cease not continually bitterly to censure those that
differ from him in opinion, though he refuses to bring his opinion to light. I
have also received hard measure from another, (though not of so gross an
opinion in this point as the former) who having obtained some Arguments from
me, promised to answer them, or else to yield. I had from him not one word of
reason, but all railing, and yet he boasts, that he has overthrown all my
Arguments. Thus lying down under great contempts and reproaches, I am
necessitated to publish this Tract (which otherwise I had not thought to do)
to clear my self, and to try the strength and valor of those kind of men;
that the world may judge where the truth is; and also if it be possible, to
help those that stagger, and are misled. Now this is that I entend to prove in
the ensuing Treatise, that bowing at the Name Jesus, has not only no command,
but also not the least warrant from Phil. 2. 9, 10. If any will make answer to
it, I desire them to answer the whole, and not a part, and to ground their
reasons upon the Scriptures, which hitherto they have not done. Thus Christian
Reader, I commit thee to God, and rest

Thine in the Lord Jesus, MASCALL GILES.

A TREATISE AGAINST SVPERSTITIOVS JESV-WORSHIP.
THis Treatise I divide into two parts. In the first part the true sense of the
Text is laid open, and from thence sundry Arguments are raised against bowing
at the Name Jesus.

In the second part are answers to the pretended Reasons for that opinion.

PART I.
Four things are necessary here to be sifted and cleared.

First, What is meant by the high exalted Name of Christ, signified in these
words; Name above.

Secondly, What is meant by the Names subjected to this highest Name, signified
in these words; Every Name.

Thirdly, What is meant by these words; Every knee shall bow, and, Every tongue
shall confess.

Fourthly, What is meant by these words; In the Name of Jesus.

SECTION I. Wherein it is to be considered, what is meant by the exalted Name
of Christ, signified in these words; Name above.
BY Name above every Name, Name above every Name, what it is not.
cannot be meant a bare proper Name, for these reasons.

First, It is no way necessary so to understand it, because (Name) is not
generally, or for the most part so taken in Scripture, but in other senses.

Secondly, Because this phrase (a great Name made or given) is never taken in
Scripture for a bare proper Name.

Thirdly, Because this phrase (Name above another made or given) is never taken
in Scripture for a bare proper Name, above another such Name.

Fourthly, It is not agreeable to the analogy of the Text, so to understand
it: My reason is this; because the subjected Name in the Text, must have of
necessity, a correspondent Relation to Christ's advanced Name, otherwise the
sense cannot be Logical. If then the high advanced Name of Christ in the Text
be a proper Name, it will follow necessarily, that all the subjected Names must
be proper Names also. Yea themselves refer the Name Jesus, to divine Names,
preferring it before the Titles, Christ, Son of God, Jehovah, etc. And if it
be so understood, though the sense be Logical, yet is it not sound, for this
it will be: The Name Jesus is a greater Name than the Name Christ, Jehovah; and
so consequently above the Name Father, or Holy Ghost; above the Names of men,
as John, Thomas, Henry, and so above the Names of all creatures and things,
which will make a most absurd sense, which yet cannot be avoided upon these
men's grounds. Again, seeing it is evident, that all the subjected Names in the
Text, must bow to the Name above every Name. If the said Name be understood of
a proper Name, they not excepting divine Names, the sense will be this: The
names of Angels and Devils, the names of all things and creatures, the names of
men, as Richard, Thomas, William, yea, divine Titles, as Lord, Christ, Jehovah,
must bow to the name Jesus; and how senseless will this be? Seeing then, that
the Names subjected to the Name above every Name, are not the names of
creatures, and things subjected, (for they are referred in the Text to knees,
of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth, not to Names)
but the powers of things and creatures subjected, as I shall hereafter
demonstrate. Then cannot the Name above them all be a proper name; for then the
sense will be this: The name Jesus has dominion over every thing and creature,
and every thing and creature most bow knees to the name Jesus, which will be
ridiculous. Lastly, seeing the names subjected to the Name above every Name,
are meant the powers and virtues of things and creatures, they excepting not
divine Names, they must understand it also of the power of God, then the sense
will be this: The name Jesus is above God, and that God himself must bow knees
to the name Jesus, which sense will be horride and blasphemous.

Secondly, If it were necessary to understand (Name above every Name) for a
Name or Title, yet may it not be understood of the Name or Title Jesus; for
these Reasons.

First, The word (Jesus) does no where in the whole new Testament signify the
bare name Jesus, but only then when it was promised by the Angel at Christ's
Conception, Mat. 1. 21. and given unto him at his Circumcision, Luke 2. 21.
where necessarily it must so signify.

Secondly, This phrase (...), Name of Jesus is never taken in all the New
Testament (where only it is used) for the name Jesus, or any other titles of
Christ, but in other senses. If any shall think, that it is meant of the name
Jesus in this place, making the word (...) to be the Dative case, and to agree
in opposition with the word (...), because there is no Article before it; I
answer, in sundry places of the New Testament the self same phrase is used
without an Article, and is never put in the Dative case, but always in the
Genitive, and does no where denote the bare name Jesus; as in these places
amongst others. Act. 2. 38. Act. 16. 18. Act. 4. 10. Col. 3. 17.

Thirdly, The Name above every Name, is incommunicable to any creature, being
the only prerogative of the Son of God: but the name Jesus was communicated
to others, as to Joshuah, which is the same name with Jesus, Heb. 4. 8. etc.
Therefore it is not sound what Bishop Sermon on Phil. 2. 9, 10.
Andrews, and Mr Justification of vowing, Page 49.
Page from him do affirm, that the name Jesus is incommunicable, which though
it were given by men, yet they say, it was not given of God, who appointed none
this name save Jesus Christ, and therefore they say that it is greater than the
name Christ, because many were called the Lords Christ's by Gods own allowance,
as Kings and Prophets. For to this I answer: The name Jesus was not given to
some at least without a special providence of God, as to Joshuah, who was a
great Savior, and type of Christ. Thus says learned Vrsinus Catechis. Page
196.
Atqui inquis Parentei Ioshuae, etc. But thou will say, says he, that the
Parents of Joshuah when they gave him this name, could not imagine, that God
would deliver Israel by him: He answers, At Deus scruit and voluntatem eorum
direxit: But God knew it and directed their will. And some are no more called
the Lords Christ's, than others are called the Lords Saviors, as Nah. 9. 27.
These Saviors there are called the Lords gifts, which is all one as if it had
been said, the Lords Saviors. And whereas the name Jesus was a common name to
be called by, generally allowed, and never reprehended in any: But for the name
Christ, howsoever some were called the Lords Christ's, as Types of Christ, yet
no man might take the name Christ as an ordinary name to be called by without
horrible blasphemy, Mat. 24. 23, 24.

Fourthly, Because the Name above every Name was given to our Savior at his
exaltation, according to the plain words of the Text. But the name Jesus was
given to him in the beginning of his humiliation. To answer here, that give
signifies to advance, I reply, it is not agreeable to the sense of this word
in other Scriptures, and it marres the phrase and sense of the Text here, as I
shall hereafter demonstrate.

Fifthly, Because Jesus was advanced after his Resurrection to be Lord and
Christ, Act. 2. 36. And it is considerable that the Evangelists do usually
call him by the name Jesus, only in the time of his humiliation. But in the
Epistles of the Apostles, He is most commonly called Christ, not near so often
Jesus: And when he is called Jesus, it is very commonly with the addition of
Lord, or Christ, as Lord Jesus, or Jesus Christ, or both together, the Lord
Jesus Christ. An argument, that Lord, and Christ, be Titles of his honor, and
so cannot be less eminent than the name Jesus.

Sixthly, It is against the Scriptures to prefer the name Jesus above other
divine Titles, because God in subjecting all things to Christ, did yet except
himself, 1 Cor 15. 27. And when the Scriptures do enter into particulars,
Christ's name is specified to be advanced only above created names, as above
Angels, 1 Pet. 3. 21. above Kings, Psalm. 87. 27. above Prophets, Heb. 3. 3.
above Priests, Heb. Chapters 7, 8, 9, 10. above all other creatures and things,
Heb. 2. 8. His name is never preferred above Gods Name.

Seeing then, that the Name above every Name, cannot be the name Jesus, Name
above every Name, what it is.
I understand it of the supereminent Glory and Power of Christ, and that upon
these Reasons:

First, It is no way contrary to the analogy of faith so to understand it; for
Name is used for Glory and eminency familiarly in Scripture, as Genesis 11. 4. and
in common use of speech, as we say, Such a one has a Name for wisdom and
learning, when we note him to be eminent and potent for the same.

Secondly, Name of God, etc. in Scripture does commonly denote the Power,
Majesty, and Glory of God; and that two ways; Either implicitly, or
expressly.

1. Implicitly, when the Person of God, because he is glorious, and full of
Majesty, is only denominated properly and evidently, as Psalm. 5. 11. Let them
that love thy Name be joyful in thee, that is, Let them that love thee. So
Psalm. 9. 2. so Act. 3. 16. even as we say to great men according to their
degrees of honor, Your Majesty, your Grace, your Honor. So accordingly the
Saints of God have usually spoken of God, and to God, and Christ, in, and by
the Title of his Majesty, (thy Name) because Name, Glory, and Kingdom are
properly his.

2. Expressly; when the Power and Glory of God is particularly and evidently
manifested by the word Name; as 1 Samuel 17. 45. I come unto thee in the Name,
that is, in the Power of the Lord of Hosts. So Romans 9. 17. That my Name, that
is, my Glory may be declared: So Act. 4. 7. By what power, or in what name.

Thirdly, It is more agreeable to the Analogy of the Scriptures so to
understand it, than otherwise; for, first, a great Name does every where
signify the great glory and dignity of the Person. Secondly, Name above
another, does every where signify the Glory and Dignity of the Person having
that Name, above others whose names are not so great.

Fourthly, It must be so understood here, and not for the Title Jesus, because
in this sense it fits the words of the Text answerable to other correspondent
Scriptures; for thus I reason:

Whatsoever Name is the gift, which God gave Christ when he exalted him, is the
Name above every Name in the Text: for so the words of the Text are, God highly
exalted him, and gave him a name above every name.

But Power and Glory is the Gift, which God gave Christ when he exalted him,
according to these correspondent Scriptures Mat. 28 18. All power is given me
in heaven and in earth; and 1 Pet. 1. 21. God raised Christ from the dead, and
gave him glory.

Ergo, Power and Glory is the Name in the Text above every Name, Therefore not
the Name Jesus.

Fifthly, It is proved by the scope and coherence of the Text; for there is
opposed the exaltation of Christ's Person to the humiliation of his Person; not
of the name Jesus to the name Jesus, or any one Title to another. The
conjunction (Wherefore) declares a correspondency of Christ's exaltation,
according to the distinct branches of his humiliation. For the sufferings of
Christ in the Text are reducible to two heads: The pain of feeling, and the
pain of loss: The pain of feeling, in these words; He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even unto the death of the Cross: The
correspondent honor follows in these words; Wherefore God highly exalted him.
The pain of loss, that is his departure from his Name and Glory; which is
amplified in two respects. 1. In regard of the excellency of the Person, that
left his Glory: He that was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, he became of no reputation: An extraordinary matter, that
God should become Man, that the Lord of Lords should become a servant, that the
God of Glory should receive shame. 2. It is amplified by the measure of the
Glory which he laid down; for the words are, (...), He emptied himself of his
Name and Dignity, He left as it were no Glory remaining, according to Isa. 53.
3. He became not only man, but a servant, not a servant only, but the most
despised of all servants, for he was reviled from the Prince to the abject. 1
Cor. 2. 8. He was numbered with Thieves and Malefactors, Mat. 27. 38. He had a
name of repute beneath all names and reputes; for Barrabas the murderer was
preferred before him, John. 18. 40. See now, how the Conjunction (...),
Wherefore, answers to this; for it follows, God gave him a name above all
names, that is, Power and dignity above all created powers and dignities
whatsoever. It answers expressly to the name of Power and Glory, not at all to
the name Jesus. Thus then I argue:

In respect of what Name Christ by this Text suffered in the time of his
humiliation, in laying it down, and emptying himself of it: in respect of
that Name God his Father* when he exalted him, gave him a Name above every
Name. But Christ according to this Text, in the time of his humiliation,
suffered in respect of his reputation and glory, in laying it down, and
emptying himself of it. Not so in respect of the name Jesus.

Ergo, God his Father when he exalted him, gave him a name above every Name,
according to this Text, in respect of glory and dignity, not in respect of the
name Jesus.

It will thus therefore follow from the premises, that seeing the Name Jesus is
not the Name above every Name in the Text, it cannot be the Name in which every
knee should bow: and seeing Christ's Name of Power and Glory is that Name, all
knees must bow in his Name of Power and Glory.

SECTION 2. Wherein it is to be considered what is meant by the subjected Name,
signified by (every name) which are referred to things in heaven, things in
earth, and things under the Earth.
SUndry Expositors do refer these Names to rational creatures only, but
upon my poor judgment, yet submitting my self to better information, they
are to be referred to every creature, and thing, both rational, and
irrational, without exception of any. For it seems to me, that the Kingdom
of Christ set forth in this Text, is not only his Kingdom of Mediatorship,
but also his natural Kingdom, which from all Eternity he enjoyed with his
Father, to which Kingdom he is advanced to by his Father, according to his
humane nature: and this seems to agree with many paraled Scriptures; as 1.
with John 17. 4, 5. where Christ prays after this manner; I have glorified
thee on earth, I have finished the work that thou gave me to do: And now O
Father, glorify me with thine own self, with that glory which I had with
thee before the world was. 2. It is proved from Heb. 1. 2. God has in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has made heir of all things,
by whom also he made the worlds, that is, God has advanced his Son,
according to his humane nature, to be partaker of the Glory of his Divine
nature, who made the worlds, and all things therein, now to be inheritour of
all things. Therefore says Mr Calvin on that place; Hic honor jure debetur,
etc. Calvin on Heb. 1. 2.
This honor is rightly due to the Son of God, that he should have power over
all things, because by him all things were made. 3. It is confirmed from that
parallel place of Col. 1. 15, 16. 4. It is evident from 1 Cor. 15. 27. where
God having excepted himself, that did put all things under Christ's feet, it
is plain, has excepted nothing but himself. 5. It is manifest from Heb. 2.
6, 7, 8. in which place the Apostle applies the eight Psalm to Christ, where
is specified the subjection of irrational creatures; yea the Apostle says
expressly there, that God having put all things under Christ's feet, has
excepted nothing that is not put under him. 6. Seeing that it is manifest, that
this Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. shall not be perfectly fulfilled till the day of
Judgment, we shall find that other things besides rational creatures shall
be subject at that day to Christ; for the Apostle shows 1 Cor. 15. 26. that he
shall destroy the last enemy, which is death; and Rev. 20. 13. The Sea shall
give up the dead which are in her, and death and hell shall yield up the dead
which are in them. 7. It may appear from Rev. 5. 13. a place correspondent in
phrase and sense to Phil. 2. 9, 10. where the Holy Ghost having spoken before
of all rational creatures, how they praised Christ, speaks there of
irrational, both sensitive, and insensitive, and referres them to every
creature, in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, and in the Sea, which
creatures groaning now and traveling in pain for the sin of man, do long
for the day of redemption, at which time they shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and now
in their kind they praise and glorify Christ in hope of it, but at that day
shall their fullest praise and subjection be. So that it seems to me, that no
creature, or thing, is excepted, but that all must bow to Christ, yea, indeed
the Text of Phil. 2. 9 seems to me plainly to infer it, for the Apostle
speaking of all knees of things in every part of the whole universe; as Heaven,
Earth, and under the Earth, seems to except nothing from bowing to Christ. And
this appears to be the judgment of Mr Calvin, On Phil. 2. 9, 10.
Omnia a coelis, etc. God has subjected all things from heaven to hell, to the
rule and dominion of Christ: And of this opinion are plainly Origin and
Hierome, In his work. Page 245, 246.
as Bishop Babington cites them: and thus judges Mr Edward Gurnais in his
Vindication of the Second Commandment, Page 72.

SECTION 3. Wherein it is to be examined, what is meant by bowing every knee.
BOwing the knee cannot be here taken plainly and literally for the bowing of
that member of the body, Bowing every knee, what it is not.
which is called the knee; for these Reasons:

First, If it be not so taken, it is not contrary to the Analogy of Faith;
for, 1. Bowing is applied to the souls of men, which properly cannot bow:
Psalm. 44. 25. Our soul is bowed down to the dust: 2. It is applied to
mountains and hills, Hab. 3. 6.

Secondly, Knees are taken figuratively and metaphorically in Scripture, for
strength, power, and ability, as Ezech. 7. 17. where God threatens, that when
he shall arise to destroy Jerusalem, he will make all hands to be feeble, and
all knees to be weak as water, that is, he will turn all their strength into
extreme weakness. So when God promises to give strength and salvation to his
people, He bids them to strengthen the weak hands and confirm the feeble
knees: Isa. 35. 3.
because by the hands and knees the strength is manifested; the knees being as
it were the Basis of the whole body, which being feeble, the body sinks.

Thirdly, Because the most of the Creatures, which here must bow knees, yet
have no proper knees to bow: As Angels, Devils, many sensitive, and all
insensitive creatures. And seeing that the Apostle begins with things in
Heaven, where in the highest Heaven are the Angels, and the souls of just men
made perfect. In the second Heaven, Stars and celestial Orbs. In the
lowest Heaven, mists, dewes, and clouds; it were senseless to imagine, that God
in the first place should command these to bow proper corporal knees, when
they have no such knees to Bow: hence I argue: Whatsoever bowing is expressly
required in the Text, shall be performed by every creature.

But bowing of proper corporal knees, shall not be performed by every
creature; yea, not by most of the Creatures.

Ergo. Bowing of proper corporal knees, is not expressly required in the Text.

The corporal Bowers at the Name Jesus, do give this answer, which indeed
cannot satisfy: They say that those creatures which have not corporal knees,
yet have something correspondent to knees, and therefore do bow after their
kind and manner. I reply. 1. I would feign know how it is, that they bow after
their kind and manner, except it be by their obedience and subjection, will
they nill they to the dominion of the Lord Jesus. 2. However they bow, surely
they do not bow corporal knees, therefore, if such bowing be expressly
commanded in the Text, how shall they fulfill the Text. Seeing then that the
most of the creatures can fulfill the Text without bowing corporal knees; it
is manifest that bowing corporal knees is not expressly required in the Text.
Surely it would argue want of wisdom in God, or great injustice, if he should
command his creatures that duty, which they cannot perform. (To illustrate it
by this simile) If a great King should send out an Edict to tax every one of
his Subjects both great and small, with a tax of twenty pound a man, when he
is not ignorant, that there are thousands in his Dominions, that are not able
to pay twenty shillings a man, would not this argue want of wisdom and
justice. In like manner, this would argue the like imputation in God, if he
should injoyne all creatures and things to bow corporal knees, when the most
of them have no such knees to bow. If it should be said that those Subjects of
such a King cannot pay, where it is not, it is sufficient that they pay what
they are able; but let them that are able, pay the whole sum. I answer, this
had been reasonable; if the Kings command had been so, but how shall this
excuse the King, that against his knowledge shall command all his Subjects to
pay alike, as well those that are not able, as those that are? So to say in
respect of this Bowing, let those that have no knees, pay what they can, but
let those that have knees pay knees; It were fair indeed, if God should leave
it so at liberty. But how can this at quit God of want of wisdom and justice,
if he should command all creatures and things to bow corporal knees, when he
knows that the most of his creatures, and things, have no such knees to bow.

Seeing then that bowing of the knee cannot be taken literally, I understand it
of subjection, and so it is taken, Genesis 27. 29. Thus Isaac blesses Jacob, Let
people serve thee, and Nations bow down to thee, that is, let them be subject
to thee. So Pro. 14. 19. etc So in common use of speech, when one says to
another, that he will make him bow, he means that he will make him yield. The
same subjection is signified, Psalm. 2. 12. by the word, Kiss, where Rulers and
Judges are commanded to kiss Christ, that is, to yield their subjection to
him. If then the word Kiss in that place, cannot be taken properly but
figuratively, why should it be thought unreasonable by any, to have bowing the
knee here to be understood figuratively?

Now that bowing here is meant of subjection, many correspondent places do
evidently prove it, as 1 Cor. 15. 27. H^b. 2. 8. Ephesians. 1. 22. testified by the
most judicious Primitive Fathers that write upon the said Text, as also by our
most eminent modern Divines, as that worthy and famous Confessor of Christ
Master William Prin, largely evidenceth in his learned Appendix against bowing
at the Name Jesus, to which I refer thee.

By bowing every knee of things in Heaven, things in Earth, and things under
the Earth, is understood the subjection of all things and creatures, with all
and every one of their powers, faculties, virtues, and abilities, will they
nill they to the dominion and government of Christ. Vindicationi of the second
Commandment. Page 72.
There is not the least ability in the nature of man, says Master Gurnay, but
must find a knee to bow to Christ; our least muscles, and knuckles,
inclinations and dispositions: The like may be said of every creature, they
must bow the strength they have in every part of them, to the power and
dominion of Christ. And in this general sense, the knee of the body properly
so called, is not excluded; but in a proper and literal sense it is not
enjoined.

Secondly, It is to be considered what is meant by the confession of every
tongue.

By the confession of every tongue, is not meant properly and literally the
vocal confession of that member which we call the tongue, because every Name
under Christ's Name, which must bow the knee, must also confess with the
tongue, which for the most part want tongues as well as knees.

By the confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, is meant the
expression and yielding forth of the several parts, functions, gifts, powers,
and abilities of every creature, both rational and irrational, to the glory
and praise of Christ the highest Lord. 1. That it is understood of all kinds of
creatures, it is evident from the forequoted place of Rev. 5. verse. 10. where
the four Beasts, and the four and twenty Elders, by whom are understood
rational creatures, as Angels and men are said to extol and glorify Christ.
And it follows verse 13. that John heard all the creatures in Heaven and Earth,
and under the Earth, and in the Sea; and all that are in them, to say, Praise,
glory, and honor be to the Lamb, etc. which creatures there, are all
irrational creatures, which have no proper tongues to speak, and yet are said
to speak the praise of Christ. Even as the Heavens and the Earth are said Psalm.
19. 1, 2, 3. to speak in all languages the praise of God their Creator. So
now they shall praise Christ the great Lord and Redeemer. And secondly, that
every part and parcel of the creature shall praise the Lord, it appears from
Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3. where the Prophet David calls upon his Soul, and all that
is within him, that is, all the vigours and powers that are in every part of
him, to praise the Lord. As David in every part of him praised God, and the
Messiah to come, so shall every part of every creature either willingly or
unwillingly praise and extol the great Name of the Lord Jesus being come and
advanced; and in this general sense the proper tongue of man is not excluded.
And thus at the last day the Friends of Christ with their wills, and his
enemies against their wills, shall call Christ Lord. Mat. 7. 22. Mat. 25. 37.
44.

SECTION IV. Wherein it is to be considered what is meant by this phrase, In
the Name of Jesus.
THe Bowers at the Name Jesus, to make their opinion and practice good, do
thus understand in the Name of Jesus to be at the mention of the Name Jesus.
But I infer, that this interpretation is sensles and absurd, having for it no
ground or warrant from Scripture For 1. as I said before, this phrase, Name of
Jesus, is never taken for the Name Jesus, or for any other Titles of our
Savior. 2. Therefore, In the Name of Jesus, can never be taken for at the
mention of the Name Jesus any where. 3. This phrase, in the Name, prefixed
before any of the Titles of the Deity, as in the Name of Christ, Lord, God,
etc. is never taken for at the Naming of any of these Names in any part of the
Old and new Testament, but if any shall fasten such a sense upon it any where,
it will mar and murder the sense, as indeed it does the sense of this Text by
that exposition. To instance but in two places amongst many. Psalm. 118. 10. All
Nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them;
would not it be a wild sense to say, At the Naming of the Lord I will destroy
them. So Act. 9. 29. Saul spoke boldly in the Name of the Lord Jesus, were it
not infinitely absurd to say, that he spoke boldly at the Naming of the Lord
Jesus. Thus ridiculous will the sense be made every where, where this phrase is
used according to this exposition, try it who will.

This exposition which they make of the Text is one of the maine pillars of
their cause, which did they not make, they should loose a maine and principal
ground for this their opinion and practice, and therefore this failing them all
fails them. I know they are not able to bring any one Scripture for to warrant
this exposition. They have no vision for it, therefore they are naked; It is
built upon the loose Sand of vain opinion, and not upon the Scriptures,
therefore it falls to the ground. All the warrant they have for this
exposition is this, that (in) does often signify (at) or (to) I answer, this
is nothing, except they can bring any Scripture for the whole phrase, viz. that
in the Name does signify (at the mention of the Name) which they cannot do:
For my part, I refuse not to take the Preposition ((...)) as they would have it
taken, and so it shall make for me, and not for them: Let (in) be as much, as
(to) or (at) and so, for as much as I have showed before, that Name of God or
Christ, does denote the Power and glory of Christ, either expressly or
implicitly, I take it, this phrase In the Name of Jesus, may be indifferently
referred either to the Power and glory of Christ expressly, so the sense will
be this: Every knee or Power shall bow at, or to the Power and Glory of Christ,
or rather to the Person of Christ, implicitly enfolding his Power and Dominion;
and then the sense will be this; Every knee shall bow at, or to Christ. And
thus it agrees to this phrase in Psalm. 63. 4. Thee will I bless while I live,
I will lift up my hands in thy Name, that is, I will lift up mine hands to
thee, or I will worship and adore thee; and agrees fitly also with Isa. 45. 23.
which is applied to Christ, Romans 14. 11. As I live, says the Lord, every knee
shall bow to me. So that according to the meaning of the Preposition (in) in
their own sense, the whole phrase being expounded according to the Analogy of
Faith, makes against them, and not as all for them.

SECTION V.
THus having opened the Text, I will briefly gather the sense together,
according as it has been opened, and show the meaning of the Text, and compare
it to the exposition, which they make of it, and then let judgment pass upon
it.

The sense then will be this: Our Lord Jesus Christ being in the form of God,
equal with God, made himself of no reputation, (that is) laid down his Name,
and Dignity, and received a Name beneath all Names, and being made like unto
Man, and taking upon him the form of a Servant, humbled himself to death,
even to the death of the Cross: Wherefore God highly exalted him, and gave him
a Name above every Name, that is, Glory, Renown, Dominion, and Dignity, above
all things, and creatures, created Powers, Dignities, Dominions, that all
things, creatures, powers in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, should
subject themselves, and all their strength, virtues, and abilities, either
willingly or unwillingly to Jesus Christ, thus glorified, and advanced, and
that they should express, and show forth, that Jesus Christ is Lord in the
glory of God the Father, for so I take it that (...) must be understood, (...)
being often used for ((...)) and thus this branch of Christ's exaltation will
fully answer to that branch of his humiliation, mentioned verse 7. where it is
said, that he took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of Man, but now being exalted, he shall be manifested to be Lord in
the Glory of God the Father. Which shall be fully declared in the great Day of
Judgment, when he shall appear in his Glorious Name of Power and Glory: And
of this opinion are Ambrose, and Hierome, and other Fathers, and Calvin, and
Zanchius, and Piscator, besides sundry other modern Expositors do allow of
it: Though the other expositions be sound, viz. To the Glory of God the Father,
because the honor of the Son is the honor of the Father.

Now this exposition is full and easy, making the sense clear, but the other
exposition, which they make, makes the sense rugged, and is not agreeable to
the scope of the Text, nor sense of other correspondent Scriptures. For thus
they reason; Jesus Christ being in the form of God, though it no robbery to be
equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, etc. Wherefore God highly
advanced him, and gave him a proper Name, or Title above every Name, that when
the Name Jesus shall be sounded out in the Church, in the time of prayer or
preaching, for there and then, say they, is the place and time of this duty,
all things in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth, should bow corporal
knees: A most absurd and sensles exposition. I will note here a few
absurdities, which they make in the sense by this their interpretation, in
comparison of the cleernesse of the former exposition, leaving the most
material absurdities to be considered of hereafter.

First then, To understand Name above every Name, for Glory and Power above
all, hereby is evidently set down, what Name it is, that God gave to Christ,
viz. the Name of Power, and Glory. But to understand Name for a proper Name to
be called by, it is not manifested what Name it is: they say, it is the Name
Jesus, but the Text does not say so in that phrase as they understand it. And
expounding it of the Name Jesus, what absurdity is this to say, that God gave
his Son that Name at his exaltation, when he received it at his Circumcision?
This is to make God to dally with his Son: To give, and take, and to give
again; For it is plain, that if now he had it given him, it was not then in
his possession.

Secondly, When we understand Name, for the Power, and Glory of Christ, and
bowing of subjection to the Power of Christ, or to Christ himself advanced, it
is showed to whom this bowing shall be performed, viz. to Christ. But by
understanding Name for the Name Jesus, and the bowing to be done at the sound
thereof, they only set down a time, when the bowing shall be done, but they
declare not to whom it shall be done: This they say, At the sound of the Name
Jesus, every knee shall bow, but they do not manifest the Person to whom these
knees shall bow.

Thirdly, In taking (in the Name of Jesus) to be at the mention of the Name
Jesus, as they do not plainly apply any honor to the Person, so neither to
the Name; but it must stand but for a cipher, or watchword, to give notice
when the bowing shall be performed; but according to this their exposition they
cannot give it any honor; and it is absurd to have this Name to be so highly
advanced above all Names, and yet not to give it honor. But they will have
honor to be given it, therefore they will have (in the Name) to be understood
to the Name at the mention of it. And so Bishop Andrews the Oracle of that
opinion understands it, yet hereby is not the Person of Christ properly
denominated, because so the exposition referres the whole bowing to the Name,
none at all to the Person, and themselves confess, that to bow to the Name,
and not to the Person, is Idolatry.

But they say, it is done to the Person, by bowing to the Name. I reply. (to
pass by the censure of such a kind of worship; for so says Bishop In his
Works Page 245.
Babington, an Idolater may excuse his Idolatry by this distinction of
concomitancy) What they say is one thing, and how they expound the Text is
another, according to their exposition of the Text, they cannot make that sense
of it, except they add to the Text, so that according to their own grounds,
they must make the worship either vain or Idolatrous.

No marvel therefore that that judicious and learned Dr Whitakers reckoning
up sundry absurd interpretations, In his Answer to Sanders demonstration
concerning Antichrist.
which the Papists make of the Scriptures, concludes with this their
interpretation of this Text, from whom our superstitious-Jesu-worshippers had
it, as the most absurd and grossest of all; and no marvel that famous Bishop
In his Works Page 245.
Babington, censures such to be justly given up of God to delusions, to believe
lies, because they will not search for truth. Now I come to handle sundry
Arguments against bowing at the Name Jesus.

SECTION VI.
EVery true interpretation of a Text, especially an obscure Text, must be
warranted by Scripture, speaking of the same matter, or in the same phrases.

But to affirm that the Name Jesus in the Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. is the Name
above every Name, not only created but divine, and that therefore we must bow
at the sound of that Name, is not warranted by any correspondent Scriptures,
speaking often of the same matter: Or to expound these phrases, Name above
Names, made or given, to be the advancement of a naked proper Name above such
Names, or (...) the Name of Jesus, to be the Name Jesus, or (...), in the Name,
to be at the sound of the Name. None of these expositions are warranted by
Scripture, speaking often in the same phrases.

Ergo. Not one of these expositions which these superstitious Jesu-worshippers
make the ground of their opinion and practice, is a trve exposition.

Let the Minor be disproved if it can.

The Major is proved from Romans 12. 6. If any Prophecy, let him prophecy
according to the proportion of faith. So 2 Pet. 1. 20. No Scripture has any
private interpretation. It is an infallible rule set down by Divines for the
understanding of the Scriptures. Thus says learned Zanchius; Zanchius de
Scriptura, Page 422.
Altera interpretandi Scripturas regula est, etc. Another Rule, says he, of
interpreting the Scriptures, is a diligent and accurate comparing of the
Scriptures, which are of the same thing one with another, that is, that we
expound the more obscure Scriptures by those that are more evident and clear;
for the Scripture is an interpreter of it self, than which a better cannot be
found. Aug. de Doctrina Christiana.
And this says Austine, Non ita esse interpretandum unum locum, ut cum multis
alijs pugnet, sed ut cum multis alijs consentiat, We must not so understand one
place that it disagree with many others, but that it agree with many others.
This then their interpretation above mentioned, agrees with no place, but
disagrees with all; it is therefore none of Gods Truths.

SECTION VII.
Whatsoever Bowing is required by the Text, shall be necessarily performed by
every creature in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth.

But Bowing at the Name Jesus, shall not be performed by every Creature in
Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth.

Therefore Bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text.

The Minor is plain, for to omit now to speak of Angels, Devils, and dumb
creatures, Bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed by the most men, for
many Nations know not Christ, therefore cannot so bow all their life; famous
Churches do not so bow. If this then be the true bowing, I would feign know,
how, and at what time they shall perform it, that in this life perform it not.

To deny the Major is absurd; for the Text is plain, that Christ is advanced
to so high a Name, that every creature should bow to him in that name. 2. It is
such a bowing, as there is also a demonstration that Christ is Lord, therefore
if any creature shall be exempted from the bowing in the Text, Christ should
not be their Lord, which would be derogatory to Christ's honor, and contrary to
evident Scriptures; as, Mat. 28. 19. where all Power is given Christ, in
Heaven, and Earth. And Heb. 1. 2. where Christ is called Heir, that is, Lord
of all things. Whereas then some answer that though every one shall not bow at
the Name Jesus, yet every one is bound to do it, they ought to perform it. I
reply, if that bowing be the duty of the Text, every one of necessity must and
shall do it. To affirm then, that the duty of the Text should be done of
all, though it shall not, is all one as to affirm that Christ should be Lord
of every creature, and it behooves him so to be, though he shall not. If then
bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed of all, it is manifest, it is
not required by the Text; for all Expositors hold generally, that the Text
shall willingly or unwillingly be fulfilled of all.

SECTION VIII.
Whatsoever Bowing is required by the Text, shall be performed by every
creature at the day of Judgment.

But bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed by every creature at the
day of Judgment.

Therefore bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text.

The Major is confirmed by evident parallel Scriptures, as, Romans 14. 10, 11.
Why do thou judge and condemn thy brother. We shall all appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ: As it is written, Every knee shall bow to me, and
every tongue shall confess to me. So Heb. 2. 8. The Apostle affirming there,
That all things are put in subjection to Christ, yet says, We do not yet see
all things put under him, that is, perfectly, which perfection shall not be
till the last day. The Jews shall then fully be subject to him, that now scorn
him. Infidels shall then perfectly be subdued to him, that now know him not.
Devils and Reprobates, shall then feel their fullest destruction. 1 Cor. 15.
26.
Death shall then fully bow, being overcome in regard of the Saints, and it
being in its fullest vigor in regard of Christ's enemies. The Saints shall then
wholly bow, yielding themselves perfectly to the honor of Christ, which now
they cannot do by reason of corruption Rev. 20. 13.
Hell and the Grave, shall then bow by yielding up their dead. But what need I
further illustrate this Truth, it is generally acknowledged by the most and
best Expositours, both ancient and modern. Confessed also by the Champions for
bowing at the Name Jesus, as Sermon. on Phil. 2. 9, 10.
Bishop Andrews, and Page 48.
Mr Page, who in his Treatise of Justification of Bowing, understands the Text
of the general subjection of all Creatures to Christ at the great day of
Judgment, and is forward to allege many Authors for it, as Theophilact,
Anselme, Aquinas, Illyricus, Hunnius, and Hyperius, Salmeron, Zanchius, and
Estius, and tells us that he could cite twice as many more, if he pleased. The
Major therefore is undeniable.

For the Minor, I never read any yet in Print to affirm, that we shall all bow
at the Name Jesus at the day of Judgment. Master Page indeed coasteth toward
it, but speaks not out plainly. For thus he answers the Argument taken from
the day of Judgment: Justification of Bowing, Page 95. and alibi.
Though all shall be subject to Christ then, yet shall not we be subject before
we needs must? and declare our subjection by our bowing at the Name of Jesus;
for subjection does not exclude but include bowing. It shall be true of all
knees then, but it must be verified of some knees now.

I agree with him in this, that there is a present equity of the Text: I
consent to Mr Calvin, who says, that though the Kingdom of Christ be not
prefect till the day of Judgment, yet it is begun already, and increases
daily Regnii Christi crescit in dies, perfectio vero non constabit ante ultimum
diem. Calv. in Phil. 2. 9, 10.
. Christ has now all things under his feet, and all Creatures are at his Rule
and beck, and must and shall fulfill, not their own will, but the will of
Christ, though they shall not be perfectly subdued till the last day. But yet
Master Pages inference is not to the purpose, for to affirm that because we
must be all subject to Christ at the day of Judgment, therefore we must
declare our subjection by bowing at the Name Jesus; is all one as to affirm,
because servants must be subject to their Masters, that they must show their
subjection by bowing at their Masters Name; or because wives must be subject to
their husbands, therefore they must make a cursie at the Name of their
Husbands. But if Master Page will speak to the purpose, he must say thus;
Because all creatures shall declare their subjection by bowing at the Name
Jesus at the last day, accordingly we must now witness our subjection. This
inference is right, if he can prove his ground; but that lies upon the proof:
Of necessity our present bowing must be according to the future; the parts
must be according to the whole; the prefect bowing must regulate the imperfect;
therefore if bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed at that day, it
concerns none so to bow now.

Some to whom I have put this Argument, and finding it too hot for them, stand
to it to affirm that bowing at the Name Jesus shall be fulfilled at the day of
Judgment, but they cannot prove it otherwise than by seeking shelter at this
Text. Affirmanti incumbit probatio.
If any such assertion shall ever come in Print, I am confident that every
judicious Reader will smile at it, if not grieve to see the wilfulnes of such
men, that rather than they will yield to the truth, will justify such
dangerous Paradoxes. I will therefore by Gods assistance encounter with it, and
I think I shall upon better reasons disprove it, than they can ever prove it.

First, There is no Scripture for it, and it is in no wise to be imagined, that
so many clear Scriptures speaking so fully and plainly of the Judgement-day,
and of the deportment of those that shall then appear, should say nothing of
this ceremony of bowing at the name Jesus, if it were then to be done.

Secondly, To what end shall the Name Jesus be sounded out at that day, that
all shall bow at the sound of it? When he shall then appear in his most
glorious Name of Power, and Glory; when he shall not come as a Jesus to the
most that shall then bow, but a Lord to all, and so shall all call him. Mat.
25. 37. 44.

Thirdly, It is absurd to imagine that the Holy Ghost would describe the
perfection of Christ's Kingdom, only by such a gesture as a child can
perform at the mention of his Father.

Fourthly, On Phil. 2. 9, 10.
Bishop Andrews the late Father of the corporal bowing at the Name Jesus,
will confute it by a saying of his. He is exalted, to whose Person knees do
bow; His Person is taken out of our sight, all that we can do, will not reach
to it, but his Name he has left behind him to us, that we may show by our
reverence and respect to it, how much we esteem him. If then we must now bow
to the Name, because the Person of Christ is out of our sight; then it follows
that when Christ shall manifest his Person, there will be no time, or place,
for bowing at the Name. (But by the Bishops reason, seeing he acknowledges the
fulfilling of the Text at the day of Judgment, it will follow that Christ
shall send out his Name at that day, to have it sounded out, that all should
bow at it, and not come himself in Person, or else if then he come in Person,
he must leave his Name behind him, and so the duty of the Text shall not be
fulfilled. Again, It is very absurd to affirm that our worship will reach to
the Name, but not to the Person of Christ; for shall veneration and honor
reach to a bare Name as it is sounded out by the breath of man, who is less
than nothing? Isa. 40. 17. And can no worship reach to the Person, who besides
that he is in the glory of the Father in the heavens as man, also is every
where present by his infinite Deity, and especially present in and among his
Saints by his Spirit?)

Names be signs, and a kind of images of things or Persons represented by
them. An Idolater bows to an image, which he does see, because he deemes that
it represents unto him the Person, whom he adores, which he cannot see; whereas
if the Person were present before him, he would never bow to the Image. The
Name Jesus is as it were the sign or image of our Savior, it would be
therefore worse than Idolatry it self to bow to Christ's image efore his own
face.

If any shall yet infer, that though all other Scriptures say nothing for the
bowing at the Name Jesus at the Judgment day, yet it is enough that it be
specified in one Text, as (viz.) in this present Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. I
answer, It is utterly against reason to imagine, that if bowing at the Name
Jesus were to be done at the Judgment day, that the Holy Ghost would omit to
specify it in so many clear places, treating of the Judgment day, and would
set it down in an obscure Text (that treats not plainly of the Judgment day,
but as it must be enlightened by other clear Scriptures) and that in such
words, and phrases, that are different in sense to all those words and phrases
in other Scriptures, though often therein used.

Oh! It highly concerns us in season to provide Oil in our Lamps, that we may
meet Christ with comfort at that great day, and not to be like children, Bish
Babington in his Works, Page 246.
(as Bishop Babington well notes) playing with letters, and syllables, and
adoring Titles with that honor, which is due to the Person. It is Satan's
Policy to exercise men with trifles, that he may steal away their hearts from
that which is necessary, as woeful experience proves too true in such as are
addicted to this will worship. To this I will subjoyne two other Arguments.

Whatsoever bowing is required by the Text, shall not be fully perfected till
the day of Judgment.

But bowing at the Name Jesus may be fully perfected before, for many can now
make a perfect low courtesy at the sound of that Name, even almost to the
ground.

Ergo. Bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text. The bowing which
the Saints shall perform at the day of Judgment, is their perfection, for
then the image of God shall be perfectly restored to them. Hence it will
follow, that if bowing at the Name Jesus be that bowing, seeing the Saints in
this life must strive toward perfection, that all their striving must be, how
to make the fairest Cursies at the Name Jesus.


Whatsoever bowing is required in the Text, is already begun by every creature,
as I have proved before.

But corporal bowing at the Name Jesus, is not practiced in the least degree
by the most of the creatures.

Ergo. This bowing is not required in the Text.

SECTION IX.
Whatsoever exposition of a Text will infer an inequality of worship
between the three Persons of the Trinity is false.

But so to expound the Text, as beforementioned, will infer an inequality
of worship between the three Persons of the Trinity.

Ergo. It is a false Exposition.

The Major is plain, because the three Persons being coequall, ought to have a
coequall worship, agreeable to John 5. 23. Every one must honor the Son as
they honor the Father.

The Minor is plain, for they by their exposition of the said Text of Phil. 2.
9, 10. do infer a bowing at one of the Titles of the Son, which they do
not practice at the Titles of any other Person.

The answer given to this reason is twofold. First they affirm, that they
worship all alike in Spirit and Truth, and that the word (...), translated
(even as) in John 5. 23. does intend only a truenes of worship, not every way
an equal correspondency. I reply, that the Persons being equal, must have an
equal worship; and the word (...), must be there taken for the selfsame
worship in likeness and kind, because praise and glory and honor is due to
God, Romans 11. last. If to God, then to every Person in Trinity, because every
Person is God. We are to serve God with our bodies, as well as with our souls;
outward honor is true honor as well as that which is inward. If then all
honor both outward and inward be to be done to God, not any honor must be
performed to one Person, that must not be performed to another; therefore if we
be bound to honor the Son by bowing at his Name, we are also bound to honor
the Father by bowing to his, but if we be not bound so to honor the Father,
neither are we so bound to honor the Son. For the exposition of the word
(...), (even as) in John 5. (...) inquam i. ^. pari eodem plane honor, quo and
omnes patrem honorant, and paulo ante.
Zanchius says thus; Even as they honor the Father, that is, (I say) says
he, with the like selfsame honor plainly, wherewith all honor the Father:
and a little before* To whom, says he, an equal, Quibus aequalis imo modis
omnibus idem, debetur honor. Zanchius de tribus Elohim part priore. l. 4. c.
2. p. 93.
yea every way the selfsame honor is due.

Secondly, They answer, that they do not put a difference between the Three
Persons, for by bowing at the Name Jesus, they worship all the three Persons in
one, because they cannot be divided. I reply: Though they cannot be divided,
yet they may be distinguished, and that in their worship too; else that place
of John were to no purpose. Saint Steven calls upon Christ personally, and
distinctly, Act. 7. 59. So does St Paul upon the Father, Ephesians. 3. 14. And the
distinct Names of each Person, do not personally denote the other Persons; as
when I say, I believe in God the Father, I do not in that Article say, I
believe in God the Son. If then these men say, that they honor every Person
alike personally at the Name Jesus, which they must say, if they say any thing,
they confound the Persons: For the Person of the Father is not in the Person of
the Son, nor the Person of the Son in the Person of the Father, etc. but
the Persons are distinguished: Every Person is in one Divine Essence, and the
whole Essence in every Person: Therefore the Name Jesus being a proper Name to
the Second Person, and not the Name of the first, or Third Person, cannot
denominate, but only the Second Person. And it is plain, that the Name above
every Name in the Text, is only proper to the Second Person, because the
Second Person only was humbled, therefore the Second Person only received
this Name. From whence I agrue, look as the Son is personally honored, so
must the Father be.

But the Son is Personally honored by bowing at his Name. Ergo. So must the
Father be. Or the Father is not Personally honored by bowing at his Name.
Therefore the Son must not be so honored.

I grant that the honor of the Son, is essentially the honor of all the
three Persons, because every Person is the selfsame God; according to Joh. 5.
24. But here the Question is of the Persons, not of the Essence: But let us
reason from the Essence it makes against them.

They that honor the Son, as they honor the Father, must so honor the
Son in the Father, as they honor the Father in the Son.

But when they honor the Son in the Father, they do not bow at the Name of
the Father. Therefore when they honor the Father in the Son, they must not
bow at the Name of the Son; for if they do, how do they honor the Son,
as they honor the Father.

SECTION X.
GOD will not require that duty of any of his creatures, to whom he has not
created Power of performance: I say created, to prevent an Objection.

But if corporal bowing at the Name Jesus, be enjoined of God to all the
creatures, he should require that of the most of his creatures, to whom he has
not created power of performance.

Therefore it is none of Gods injunctions.

The first part of the Argument cannot be denied without blasphemy, by imputing
cruelty to Almighty God.

The second part is also very plain. For what power have mere sensitive and
insensitive creatures, to bow at the Name Jesus, as sheep, and oxen, stones,
and minerals, trees, and plants; which neither have knees to bow, ears to
hear, hearts to understand when Jesus is named. What, shall not these be
subject to Christ, till Jesus be named? or shall it be greater then, than at
another time? how sensles will this be? The true bowing, which is the bowing of
subjection, as I have showed, is already performed in some degree, by all the
creatures together at once. But bowing at the Name Jesus, cannot be done by all
at once; suppose we understand it only of rational creatures; For how can the
Angels, and glorified Saints, understand when Jesus is named on Earth? How can
we on Earth hear, when Jesus is named in Heaven? How can those under the Earth
know, when Jesus is named in Heaven or Earth? How can those in Heaven and Earth
know, when Jesus is named in Hell; or could it be known, were it fit then to
bow? Yea, how can we hear, when Jesus is named in another Congregation? But
grant it be referred to one particular place, how can it be done? How shall
things in Heaven bow at the Name Jesus, when they have the Person of Christ
with them, which by Bishop Andrews assertion, before specified, would be
unseasonable to be then performed.

How shall deaf men bow at the Name Jesus, who cannot hear it pronounced?
What, shall not they fulfill the Text as well as others? Seeing no creature is
excepted. Is not Christ Lord of them as well as of others? How shall young
Infants bow at the Name Jesus, to whom Gods Kingdom belongs as to others?

How shall things in hell bow at the Name Jesus? To speak first of Devils,
which come into our Congregations, how if they had knees, shall they bow at the
Name Jesus? These Devils tremble, say some, because of Jesus, but trembling is
not bowing. 2. Shall they tremble more at the Name Jesus, than Christ, or
Jehovah? It were sensles to imagine it. How shall the damned Souls in Hell bow
at the Name Jesus? After what manner shall Jesus be named in hell? There is no
Church there, no divine service there, which is the place and season, these men
say, of this bowing. There is nothing in hell, but blaspheming, what shall they
blaspheme, and then bow, if they had bodies? most ridiculous; What shall they
not fulfill the Text in hell, and be under Christ's power, until Jesus be
named? then they might ease their torment by forbearing the mention of that
Name; Seeing in hell they can do nothing but blaspheme, how shall they Bow?

The Bowers at the Name Jesus do maintain, Page Justification of bowing
that when men swear by Jesus, it is no time and place for bowing; yet the
worst manner of naming Jesus on earth, is better than the best in hell;
therefore there is no time and place for it in hell; yet must things in hell
fulfill the Text; therefore it cannot be the meaning of the Text, to bow at the
Name Jesus.

SECTION XI.
THe aforesaid exposition of the said Text, will make us serve God in bondage.
Therefore it is an untrue and false Exposition.

The Consequent is plain, for Christ has brought us to liberty, and made us
free, Gal. 5. 1. in which freedom we are commanded to stand fast.

That it will bring us again into bondage it is plain, for it will tie the
service of God to every man's will, be they never so vile, for whenever Jesus
is named by whomsoever, if this exposition be true, we must bow; yea therefore
it will bring guilt of sin upon the souls of every one, that shall at any time
hear this Name Jesus named, and not bow. By this means Christ shall bring us
into greater bondage, than the bondage of the Ceremonial Law, from which he
delivered his Church. To this I will subjoyne another Argument. It will bring
the Spirt of God into bondage. Therefore it is a wicked opinion. I prove it
from John 3. 8. The wind blows where it lists, i. e. The Spirit of God
works when and where he pleases, and not at our pleasure. All the holy
actions of a Christian are wrought by the Holy Ghost, therefore by this
exposition, the work of the Holy Ghost will be enthralled to the will of every
man, yea of vile men also.

The answer which they give to this, has no weight in it; they make use here
of this Rule; Praecepta affirmativa, etc. Affirmative Precepts do always
bind, but not to all times. Therefore say they, we are not bound to do it but
when the Church orders it, viz. In time of Divine Service and Sermons. I reply,
this rule holds in those Precepts, the time of performance whereof is not
determined in the Word, but it cannot hold in this place; For as these men
expound the Text, the time is appointed when this bowing shall be performed,
viz. At the mention of the Name Jesus. Therefore it is a sin at any time to
name it, or hear it named, and not to bow. Gods unlimited Commands cannot be
limited, therefore the Church limiting it to a time, could not ground it on
Gods Command. The Name Jesus is the same Name at one time, or place, as at
another. It cannot be proved in the whole book of God, but when God determined
a time of doing any thing, but that it bound ordinarily at that time. When a
Master shall say to his servant, At my calls you shall answer, and give
attendance. When his Master shall call, and he give no attendance, is not he
disobedient? Would it be a good excuse for him to tell his Master, That he is
not bound to wait upon him, but only at the Table? So if God shall say; At
the sound of the Name Jesus you shall bow; when they hear it often mentioned,
and will not bow, do they not break Gods command? Will it be a tolerable
excuse to plead, that they are not bound to do it, but only at Church.

When Nebuchadnezzar made a Decree, Dan. 3 that at the sound of the Cornet,
Sackbutt, etc. all should fall down and worship, did not he intend, that this
command should bind at all times, when these Instruments should be sounded
out? And did not the people of the Land judge Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
to be transgressors of the Kings Commandment, when having heard the sound
they did not bow: So if God should say, At the sound of the Name Jesus, you
shall all bow. It is a manifest breach of the Commandment, when at any time it
is heard, and no bowing performed. Therefore when Gods commandment is plain,
and unlimited, and they say, the Church must limit it, they give the Church
authority over Gods Word. They cannot deny but they must be always internally
reverent at the Name Jesus, according to the third Commandment, which injoynes
inward reverence at all times, when we mention any of Gods Titles, or else Gods
Name shall be taken in vain. If then expression of outward reverence at the
Name Jesus, be also Gods command, it must be performed at all times when it is
mentioned, or else the Name Jesus will be profaned, unless they will have the
Precepts of the Gospel less obligatory and binding, than the Precepts of the
Law. They may therefore with as good reason affirm, that we are not bound to
be internally reverent at all times, when we mention the Name Jesus, or any
other divine Titles, but only in the Church, as not to express outward
reverence at all times when the same Name is mentioned, but only there.

Secondly, I reply. If we are not bound to perform the duty of the Text, but
by direction and command from the Church. By what authority shall the damned
in hell do it, who must yet fulfill the Text as well as we? there is no
Church Government in hell, or will they have them do it by direction from the
Canon; into what unspeakeable snares do these men run into by this opinion?
Surely Devils and reprobates will be beholding to these men, if they can make
their opinion good, for unless they should fulfill the Text they should not be
damned, and they have no canon to make them to do it, and they are very fools
if they will make a Canon t^ damn th^^^selves.


Again, they make the Church a perpetual Person, and the duty never to be
ended by this their exposition; For these two clauses, of bowing the knee, and
confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, are coupled together
by a conjunction copulative, as duties to be done together, both must be done
in the Name of Jesus; Therefore as they understand (at the Name Jesus) and
understanding bowing the knee plainly, and properly, they must of necessity
understand confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is Lord plainly also,
and literally. See then what work they will make of it.

The Naming of Jesus, will call for a bowing of the knee at the sound of it,
and also at that time a vocal confession with the tongue, that Jesus is the
Lord. In which confession, Jesus being again named, will call for a new bowing
and confession, and so it will come over and over again, never to be ended:
this snare they cannot possibly avoid by their so expounding the Text.

SECTION XII.
Whatsoever Exposition of a Text shall diminish, weaken, and Eclipse the Glory
and Majesty of Christ's Kingdom is false, blasphemous, and abominable.

But the aforesaid Exposition does so. I will prove that it does in sundry
respects.

First, When we understand Name above every Name, for the Power and Dominion of
Christ over all creatures, and things; by this Exposition the high Dignity of
Christ, specified in these words; God highly exalted him; is amplified, and
enlarged; and thus it answers other Scriptures, as Ephesians. 1. 20, 21. where in
the twenty verse, the high honor of Christ is set down in these words; He
raised him from the dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenly places;
which words answers to these words in Phil. 2. 9. God highly exalted him. Then
it follows, verse. 21. Far above all principalities and powers, and every name
that is named; which is a farther amplification of Christ's Honor: and fitly
answers this phrase in Ephesians. 1. 21. God gave him a Name above every Name.

Again, This answers patly to Daniels advancement, who was a type of Christ,
Dan. 2. 48. Where it is said, that the King made Daniel a great Man, and gave
him great gifts; which is as much as if he had said according to the words of
Phil. 2. 9. He highly exalted him. Then it follows, that he made him Ruler over
the whole Province of Babylon, and chief of the Governors of all the wise men
in Babylon; which is an amplification of Daniels honor, and it is as much, as
if it had been said, he gave him a Name above all the Names of the wise men in
Babylon.

On the other side: By understanding Name above every Name, for the title
Jesus, the honor of Christ is rather diminished; for they give him in effect
no Dominion and Power at all; for his proper Name Jesus, which others had as
well as he, does not properly denote Power and Authority; but his Power
consists in his command and dominion over all, as he is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, Rev. 19. 16.

Secondly, The Text according to the true meaning thereof, makes Christ Lord of
every creature, from whose government and dominion, none can be exempted. The
other Exposition robs Christ of the honor and duty of the most of his
creatures, which cannot possibly perform their duty to Christ, as they
understand it; as I have proved; so that it makes Christ Lord but of a few of
the Creatures, who is Lord of all.

Thirdly, The Text truly understood gives to Christ the honor of every knee.
Christ will have all the abilities of every part and parcel of every creature
to bow to him: every knee of every faculty of the soul, and part of the body
must bow: he will be honored with all our strength. Now whereas Christ will
have all knees, they give him only by this exposition, the knee of the body
properly so called, or a low courtesy, and no more. A mighty purchase indeed
Christ shall have obtained by this exposition, after his extreme humiliation
and suffering, to have nothing but a ceremony done him at the mention of his
Name, as these men call it, and distinguish it from a substantial and
necessary duty. Page Justification of bowing. page 6. 7. If it be a ceremony to
us, it is also a ceremony to all the creatures: no marvel then if these men
affect ceremonies so much, seeing they by their doctrine do make every
creature, yea all Angels and glorified Saints, to be altogether in practicing a
Ceremony.


Fourthly, The Text in the true meaning thereof injoynes the bowing therein at
all times and places: every creature will they nill they are subject to Christ,
and we are bound to bow continually all our strength, all our gifts and
endowments, all our natural and spiritual abilities, as faithful servants to
the will, dominion, and pleasure of Christ our highest Lord. The other
exposition ties this duty not to every place, but to one place, viz. The
Temple; and not at all times, but only one day in a week ordinarily, The
Lords day, and not at all times in the said day, but only then when Jesus is
named, which amounts in all but to a few minutes in a week; So that they will
make Christ Lord but for a few minutes in one day of a week: It is a poor
honor that they will allow to Christ from this Text, and indeed, it is all
that the most of them can afford him, or are willing to give him, allow him two
or three curtefies once in a week, and all their time else dishonor him by
their scandalous lives.

Fifthly, Whereas Christ is Lord and King, especially of his Church, which
amongst men are only his true and faithful subjects, for whose sake he will
bring down all adversary Power; this their exposition robs Christ of his true
Subjects, and thrusts upon him, for the most part, the members of Antichrist.
For the most famous Divines of all times, and of all Churches, are against the
said exposition. The best Churches and Christians, because they understand Gods
Word, practice it not, and who do practice it as a duty of the Text, (a few
simply mislead only excepted) but a sort of ignorant, superstitious, lewd
scandalous persons, or mere men-pleasers, and servers of the times; which are
enemies to Christ, yet this opinion forces these on Christ, to be his true
subjects, and thrusts going his own people, purchased with his blood; and
what an unspeakeable indignity is this to Christ? If a ceremony be the sole
honor due to Christ by this Text, and done him only generally by such as
these, surely then God has highly advanced his Son to a very great purpose.


Sixthly and lastly, The opinion of these men deprives Christ of his honor and
glory at the great day of Judgment. For. 1. It puts no difference between his
kingdom now begun, and his kingdom made perfect; for by their exposition of
the Text, they cannot avoid it, but that they must make the bowing at the Name
Jesus, to be the true bowing at the great day of Judgment, as I showed before.

And 2. What an abasement will this be of Christ's honor at that great day: For
whereas he shall then appear in his great and glorious Name of Power and
Glory, accompanied with his Mighty Angels in flaming fire, 2 These. 1. 7.
who shall then yield unto him their fullest service and subjection, which is
the bowing, that they shall willingly perform unto him at that day; To the end
that he may make all his enemies to tremble, that they shall lick the dust,
and become his footstool, give them a full and final overthrow; thrust them
into the bottomless pit, which is the bowing in the Text, which they shall
perform to Christ against their wills; and that he may wholly free his Saints
from the corruption of their natures, and renew them perfectly, according to
his image, and reward them with everlasting bliss and happiness, which is the
bowing that they shall willingly yield unto him; Romans 8. 22.
and that he may renew the creature, which now groans, and travaileth in pain
by reason of man's sin. This their exposition makes it to be nothing else but a
Seeing these men hold it not necessary to obey the Text, but by direction of a
Canon. I wonder what they will do for a Canon to command the Ceremony at the
day of Judgment.
Ceremony, a corporal bowing at the title Jesus, which will be a poor honor
to Christ, a poor affrightment to his enemies, a poor advancement to his
Friends. It will make this glorious day of the Lord, to have no glory in it;
yea, it will make Christ's kingdom in the height and perfection of it, to be
but a ridiculous mock-kingdome; such a kingdom in effect as his enemies
ascribed to him, Mat. 27. 29. Who platted a crown of thorns, and put it on
his head, and bowed the knee before him, and mocked him. Yea these in some sort
deal worse with him than they, for they dealt thus with him in his extreme
humiliation; but these do it in the greatest height and perfection of his
Kingdom. This opinion therefore darkneth, diminishes, yea overthrows the
kingdom of Christ, therefore it is a blasphemous opinion, not to be endured.

SECTION XIII.
THe bowing at the Name Jesus, is neither typified nor prophesied of in the old
Testament, therefore it is no way probable, that it is a due honor to Christ
in the new Testament.

The Consequent is proved by these places, Act. 10. 43. Act. 3. 24. What is
there any thing material concerning Christ, but it was fore-shewed?

Yea, Mat. 5. 18.
the Law has jots and Titles concerning Christ; small matters of him were
foretold; Hos. 11. 1.
as his flying into Egypt; his bringing up at Nazareth; Mat. 2. 23.
his birth at the Town of Bethlehem; the Soldiers casting Lots for his
Garments; Mich. 5. 2.
the not breaking of his bones. But this honor in the Text, Psalm. 22. 18.
is the honor of Christ's kingdom, which indeed is foretold according to the
true meaning of the Text, Number. 9. 12.
as Psalm. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Is. 45. 23. But whereas all other honors
concerning Christ, both external and internal, are foretold, corporal bowing
at his Name is not foretold: and seeing jots and titles concerning Christ are
foreshewed, and bowing at the Name Jesus (if it were the Evangelicall honor of
Christ) not foretold, it would lay an high imputation on the Majesty of God,
and impute that crime to Gods charge, that our Savior justly laid to the
charge of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 23. Who tithed Mint and Cummin, and neglected
the weightier matters of the Law.

SECTION XIV.
THere is no example for bowing at the Name Jesus in the whole New Testament,
therefore it is not probable, that it is a commanded duty. The consequent is
plain; for what necessary duty is there, but there is sufficient light in
Scripture, that it was practiced. We read of the often meeting of the Church
together in the New Testament, of their Prophesyings and Prayers, with the
several gestures of them; but there is not the least intimation in the
Scripture, that ever bowing at the Name Jesus was practiced. As there must be
offenses for the hardening of the wicked, so God will have Examples for the
benefiting of his people, Mat. 18. 7.
and for the leaving the wicked without excuse. The Apostle says 1 Cor. 6. 2.
That the Saints shall judge the world, that is one way of their judging of them
by their virtuous examples. God was ever mindful, that there should be
examples, John 13. 15. Phil. 2. 5. 1 These. 1. 7. 2 These. 3. 9. 1 Timothy 4. 12.
The Apostle having spoken Heb. 11. of the faith of Gods Worthies, and of the
singular fruits thereof, concludes Heb. 12. 1. Seeing there is such a cloud of
witnesses, let us run with patience the race that is set before us. There are a
cloud of witnesses for other duties, not one witness for this bowing; What, will
God have us run in other duties, and stand still in this, it is impossible, if
it were of his appointment? Seeing then there is neither example, nor show of
example in the whole Book of God, for bowing at the Name Jesus, it is a strong
convincing Argument, that it is none of Gods appointment.

SECTION XV.
THis opinion and practice was not known in the purest of ancient times, yea
it was not known within seven hundred years after Christ. I might go yet a
great way further, as some do. It is the usual wont of these men, to boast,
that generally all the Fathers are on their side, whereby they deceive poor
simple souls. But they must not think to carry it away with big words of
ostentation, but they must prove what they say, and not bring halting proofs,
On Phil. 2. 9, 10.
but full to the purpose. Generally, says Zanchy, the Fathers do understand
the Name above every Name, either of the Name of God, or the Name of the only
begotten Son of God, and some of Christ's Glory; how then could they expound
the Text, as these men do: If three or four Fathers may be brought to make the
Name Jesus the Principal Name; which are either not the most ancient, or most
orthodox; they are nothing to the general stream of the other, more ancient,
or more orthodoxe, that do not make the Name Jesus the principal Name: Yet
these three or four as Master Page confesses, do not say that adoration must
be done at the sound of the Name Jesus; yea he affirms, that there is no full
authority for bowing at the Name Jesus from the Fathers. Some Divines do
conjecture, that this custom was brought up first to testify Christ's
divinity against Arrius, but they neither prove it, neither can they; and if
it were so, it overthrowes these men's grounding it upon the Text. The best
instance, which these Bowers bring from the Fathers, is that of S. Hierome,
whom yet they do pitifully wrest. This Father commenting on Isa. 45. 23.
shows that this Text is now fulfilled in Christ. For, says he, Moris est
Ecclesiastici Christo genu flectere, It is an Ecclesiastical custom to
kneel, or bow the knee to Christ. But Hierome speaks of Christ, not Jesus. He
does not say, that this kneeling or bowing should be done at the name Jesus. It
is also the manner of Christians to bow to God, do they therefore bow at the
Name God. And indeed what Hierome says is now verified by every true
Christian, who humbly pray to God in the name of Christ, and is not this to bow
to Christ? Now that Hierome consents not unto them it is plain; for when he
entreats on Phil. 2. 9, 10. the place in controversy, he says there no more
but this, according to the judgment of other Authors, that all Creatures
should adore Christ: An evident Argument that Hierome was not of these men's
opinion.

The truth is, the Fathers are wrested, not one is for them. If any one in
answer to this Argument will produce Fathers, I pray them to produce them to
say, not only that the Name Jesus, is the Name above every Name, but also to
say, that by bowing in the Name of Jesus, is meant bowing at the mention of the
Name Jesus; If they bring none to speak thus full, let them spare their
labor, for otherwise their Testimonies will halt, and not be worth a rush.

SECTION XVI.
THe Visitors at their Visitations in the late crazy days, though then they
grounded the bowing at the Name Jesus, not only upon the Canon, but also upon
the Text of Scripture; yet did at that time give leave to some Ministers, that
scrupled the sole bowing at the Name Jesus, (though it was very unwillingly
granted) to bow at other Divine Names, so they would bow at that, and not only
so, but at that time they used veneration, and suffered it to be done at humane
Names. For at the Metropoliticall Visitation at the Cliffe by Jews in Sussex,
in the beginning of July 1635. The Visitor entering into speech of the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, as soon as ever he named William, he put off his
hatt, and the greater part of the Ministers then present made low obeisance:
This is true, and thereof there be many witnesses. I contend now, that this
toleration, and this practice, does contradict this opinion of bowing at the
Name Jesus. As for the second instance, if any now shall distinguish between
divine and civil worship, and affirm that this was but civil worship. 1. I
reply, I could question the distinction See Master Gurnay Vindication of the
second Commandment, from Page 54. to 107.
, but though I should grant that this distinction may be admitted elsewhere,
yet cannot it be admitted here; for if the Name Jesus, be the Name above every
Name in the Text, it must have proper relation to Names and Titles; then if the
honor of the knee be the advancement of the Name Jesus above other Names, no
honor of the knee whatsoever, may be performed to any other name; for then how
shall the advancement of the Name Jesus above other Names appear. Again,
Though it should be granted that the civil worship of the knee may be given to
the Names of men, which yet is not to be granted upon these men's grounds, yet
no divine worship of the knee, upon the said grounds can be given to any name
whatsoever. Therefore no Names of God, besides the Name Jesus, can be adored
with the worship of the knee. For whatsoever is divine, is only capable of
divine worship. Then, if any other Divine Names may be indifferently bowed
unto, they giving the pre-eminence above them all to the Name Jesus, it is a
plain contradiction, for then they make them as high, and as honorable, as
the Name Jesus. But if other Names of God besides the Name Jesus, shall not be
bowed to; as these superstitious Jesu-worshippers never do, by their bowing at
or to the Names of men, it cannot be avoided but they give the pre-eminence to
the Names of men above the Names of God, which shall have some honor done
them, all the honor that they are capable of, but the Names of God shall have
none at at; for bowing the knee in the Text, does denote pre-eminence. To
conclude, if all Divine Names may have divine honor done to them, when they
are named, and humane Names have civil honor done to them, call it what you
will; Jam sumus ergo Pares, what prerogative or super-eminency of honor shall
the Name Jesus have above other Names. Then the Text of Phil. 2. 9, 10. as
these men understand it, shall stand but for a cipher; For if all Titles both
divine and humane, be of themselves capable of the honor of the knee, then was
the Name Jesus capable of this honor, if it had never been advanced. To what
purpose then did God so highly advance it to receive this honor.

If any shall yet object, that though God have advanced the name Jesus above
every Name, that every knee should bow to it, yet other Names may be bowed
unto, because the bowing of the knee, which is due to God, who is Lord of all,
and so to every Person of the Trinity, is also allowed to be done to men. I
answer, 1. No Text puts difference between the Persons of the Trinity, but they
say that the Text of Phil. 2. 9. puts difference between Names, in preferring
the Name Jesus above other Divine Names. Therefore upon their grounds, Divine
Names must not be honored alike, (though the Persons of the Trinity must)
because, say they, the Name Jesus is above them all. Genesis 41. 43.
2. God has commanded the bowing of the knee to be done to men, Genesis 33. 3. 2 Samuel 18. 28. 1 King. 1. 16.
and there be examples for it in Scripture. But he has no where commanded
bowing of the knee to be done to Names, either divine or humane; neither be
there any examples in Scripture, that either the one or the other was ever
practiced: Therefore if it be true, as these men say, that bowing at the Name
Jesus is Gods command to be done to it upon so special a reason, that it is
the Name above every Name, there being no command, or example of bowing at any
other Name besides, nothing can be more certain, but that the Name Jesus is
selected and culled out among all other Names, to have the honor of the knee
peculiarly to be done to it. Therefore to give this bowing to Divine Names is
evil, but intolerable presumption to give it to the Names of men; for this
cannot be done without horrible profanation of the Name Jesus. This will
necessarily follow, if bowing at the Name Jesus be grounded upon the said Text.

SECTION XVII.
THis exposition of the said Text, will bring a scandal upon the Church of
England; for though an injunction passed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, to
authorize this Ceremony, and a Canon was made for it in the beginning of King
James his Reign, (though the words of the Canon are not plain for it) yet was
the execution of it generally neglected. No man was urged, or compelled to it.
The learned Worthies of our Church were suffered to confute this exposition of
the Text as a Popish error, as Bishop Alley, Bishop Babington, Doctor Airy,
Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Fulke, Doctor Willet, with sundry others. Yea, those
Ministers that were suspended for Ceremonies, were never called into question
for this. Yea Master Eccl. Polit. li. 5. sect. 30.
Hooker, pleading for our Ceremonies, calls bowing at the Name Jesus, an
innocent harmless Ceremony, which none, says he, is constrained to use: It
appears that by his judgment none ought to be compelled to it. But the
Governors of the Church have constrained Ministers all along for the most part
to use the rest of the Ceremonies; but the other was generally neglected, and
not urged, till the days of this late Archbishop. Therefore if this be a duty
of the Text, it will accuse the Church of England of gross hypocrisy, in
urging mere Ceremonies, and neglecting to urge a necessary duty: It would be
a preferring of her own traditions above Gods Commandments: It would make
then, that the Church failed in sincerity, till this late Archbishop came.

SECTION XVIII.
LAst of all, I may bring this as a reason against them; the most of them, and
some also of the chiefest of them, that ground it on the Text, yet hold their
opinion very uncertainly: they pass to and fro betwixt the Text and the Canon:
When they think that the Authority of the Canon is not altogether sufficient
to make the people to practice it, they flee to the Text, and when they are
afraid that the Text will not bear it, they flee to the Canon. And if this be
not halting between two opinions, for my part, I know not what is. I will
instance but in one; Master Page in his Treatise of justification of bowing at
the Name Jesus, does confess, that when he first went about that Treatise, he
did not think that it could be so directly proved from the Text; a plain
evidence that he went about it doubtfully; for he was to encounter with an
Antagonist, that held it no duty of the Text; and would he go about to
contradict him, when himself was fearful that the Text would not bear it;
but he affirms that when he had read Bishop Andrews on Phil. 2. he could not
but condescend to his Page justification of bowing, P. 4.
opinion; yea though he brings many Arguments, such as they are, to prove it a
duty, yet thus he closes with his Antagonist; Though I am not so peremptory,
says he, that it is a duty of the Text, as you are it is not; Nevertheless,
if the Text fail me, I will ground it upon the Authority of the Church. Yea
throughout the whole Treatise, he is content with any testimony or proof from
any Author, that may give the least signification that it is but a thing
indifferent, yea which is to be noted, that those Authors, that are evidently
against him, and understand bowing the knee in the Text, of subjection; because
they say that this subjection is signified by bowing the knee, he takes to be
for him; he may as well affirm, that because Kings and Rulers are commanded to
be subject to Christ, Psalm. 2. 12. which subjection is signified by the word
Kiss, therefore they are bidden in an express and literal way, directly and
plainly to kiss Christ. A strange thing, that a man should write so largely as
he does, and yet not be sure of his own grounds; what is this but to ensnare
the Consciences of his Readers, to make them practice a duty, yet they shall
not know upon what ground they practice it; they shall not know whether they
obey Gods Commandment, or Man's only. To state and preach this opinion so
uncertainly, as many Ministers have done, what is this but to bring upon the
consciences of their people a necessity of sinning, and so great peril of
damnation; for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. I say to all
these men, as Eliah said to the worshippers of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 21. Why do
ye halt between two opinions? If God be God, follow him, but if Baal be he
follow him: So I say, If you will ground this bowing upon the Text, follow
that, or if upon the Canon, follow Though they have no fast footing upon either.
that; you cannot ground it upon both, and yet make it a thing indifferent; for
if you ground it on the Text, you must make it necessary, and always, and at
all times, and places, continually to bind.

PART II. Wherein are Answers to Reasons pretended for bowing at the Name
Jesus, from Phil. 2. 9, 10.
SECTION I.
OF all the Reasons that I have hither to met with, I profess, I have not
found any one that is truly grounded upon the Text, or any other correspondent
Scriptures, but merely upon the fantasy of the brain. Only there is a show
of a proof by reason that In the Name, is translated at the Name, which they
press upon their People in this wise; The Text, say they, is as clear as the
Sun for this practice, does it not say expressly, At the Name of Jesus every
knee shall bow? Can there be any thing more plain? There is a great difference
between these 2 phrases, In the name of Jesus, which is the Power of Jesus, and
at the Name, or appellation Jesus, as there is between these two, In the Name
of the King, that is, the Kings authority, and at the Name King.
I have already answered this, therefore I will be silent now; only here I
seriously admonish these men, to unteach such vain doctrines. I answer them,
there is nothing more obscure and sensles, than such an Interpretation; making
In the name of Jesus, to be meant at the mention of the Name Jesus; for I have
proved before, no Scripture can warrant this Exposition. But if they will needs
have it so meant here, I will produce a Text that may make as much for
adoration at Gods Name, as this Text for the Name Jesus, Psalm. 63. 4. Thee will
I bless while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name: What Name this is
the first Verse shows, it is Gods Name; If then In the name of Jesus be meant
at the naming of Jesus, what reason can be given why In the name of God, may
not as well be meant At the naming of God. If then by this exposition we be
bound in the one place, to bow the knee at the naming of Jesus, we are as well
bound by the other place, to lift up our hands at the naming of God, But if it
be not meet so to understand the Psalmist in the one place, it is not meet so
to understand the Apostle in the other place.

For the translation, though I do not question it, yet in my poor judgment,
if it had been translated In the Name, as it is in the Original, the same
phrase being never translated at the Name in any other place of Scripture, but
in this place only, (though in as hard places as this) it would have prevented
that great offense which ignorant men have taken by it for the practice of this
will worship, and much restrained superstitious Teachers from pressing it upon
the consciences of their people, by reason of this translation. But certainly
such Teachers have much to answer for, for teaching such doctrine, when they
cannot but know, that no Scripture will bear them out in such an Exposition.

SECTION II.
Another Reason is this.

THe Name Jesus, Zanchius on Phil. 2. 9.
say they, was the most despised and contemptible Name. Page Justification of
bowing, page 42.
Therefore God will have it honored, when it is mentioned, above other Names.
I answer; Jesus Christ the great Rabbi and Doctor of his Church, has no where
taught them to reason so: The Text cannot with any sense bear this Reason; for
as I have showed before, the Apostle argues from the humiliation of Christ's
Person to the advancement of his Person; not from a Name to a Name. The Apostle
does not say, that the Name Jesus was humbled, therefore he does not mean that
the said Name was exalted. Therefore because it has no light from Gods Word,
this answer might be sufficient: but because it is a reason much relied upon,
and ignorant men that know little else, have learned it exactly from their
Teachers, I will encounter with it, and make it manifest, that there is no
strength or soundness in the said reason.

First then I deny the Antecedent; The Name Jesus did not suffer above other
Names; It cannot be well proved, that this Name suffered at all; For no man
denied Christ this Name, but both enemies and friends gave it him; It was the
Person, not the Name that suffered; neither did Christ suffer for this Names
sake. When Joseph and Daniel, Types of Christ, were abused and persecuted, can
any say, that their proper Names suffered, neither can it be truly said, that
the Name Jesus properly suffered, when Christ himself suffered.

Their maine proof of this Reason they produce from John 19. 19. Where Pilate
set up Christ's title over his head upon the Cross, Jesus of Nazareth the King
of the Jews: This, they say, was done to him in scorn; so that his Name Jesus
was made an execration say they. I answer, It cannot be proved that this Title
was set up at all in scorn. Judicious Mr Calvin on that place, is of another
mind. For thus he says; Pilati consilium fuit, etc. It was Pilates policy
says he, that he might revenge himself of the Jews, who by their obstinate
importunity had forced him to punish an innocent Person, to condemn the whole
Nation in the Person of Christ. So by his judgment this title was a reproach
to the Jewish Nation, rather than to Christ. He adds yet further, Atqui in
Christo hoc extraordinarium fuit, quod sine ignominia titulus apponitur, This
was extraordinary in Christ, that without any reproach his title is set up.

2. The offense that the Chief Priests of the Jews took at this Title,
proves it not to be scornful to Christ, who were displeased with Pilate for
it; which if it had been reproachful, they burning in malice against our
Savior, would have liked it well enough. 3. Had it been set up in scorn, it
was not in any quarrel to the Name, but to the Person. 4 Had it been to a
Name, yet was it not to the Name Jesus, but the Title King of the Jews.

But the truth is, the most Glorious Names of our Savior; as God, Son of
God, Christ, Jehovah, suffered rather in him than the Name Jesus. Page
Justification of bowing Page 42. and alibi.
The reason that Mr Page gives to prefer the Name Jesus above these Names,
does not satisfy; for, says he, these Names are glorious and lofty Names in
themselves, and therefore need no advancement; but the Name Jesus was an humble
and lowly Name, therefore God advanced it. I say, this Reason is not
satisfactory; for the Question is not, what these Names are simply considered
in themselves, but what they were in Christ in the time of his humiliation; As
the Question is not, whether we are to bow at the Name Jesus simply considered,
but at that Name in Jesus Christ. I contend then, that these aforesaid Glorious
Names were more humbled Names in Christ than the Name Jesus; For Jesus was his
proper Name given him at his Circumcision, but these Names are Titles of his
honor: As Henry and King; so is Jesus and Christ, says learned Bishop
Babington. Works, Page 245.
Christ in respect of these Glorious Names suffered exceedingly; For (...), He
emptied himself of the Glory of these Names. The Jews generally would not
give them, nor suffer them to be given unto him. Whosoever did but once open
his mouth to ascribe any of these Titles of honor to our Savior, presently he
suffered for it; for whosoever did but confess him to be the Christ, was put
out of the Synagogue, Joh 9. 22. When at any time he did but take the due
honor of any of these Names to himself, they immediately intended mischief
against him. Ioh. 5. 18. The Jews sought to kill him, because he said God was
his Father, making himself equal with God: So Joh. 10. 33. For thy good
works, say they, we stone thee not, but that thou being a man make thy self
God. So Mat. 26. 65. As soon as he had confessed that he was the Christ, The
high Priest cried out against him, that he blasphemed. So that it is evident,
that our Savior suffered the pain of loss, in respect of these glorious
Names, not having the honor of them, and not only so, but he suffered also
the pain of feeling in himself and his members, when at any time, he or they
did but ascribe the honor of these Names unto him. Now that these Names, and
not the Name Jesus, are suffering Names, I will illustrate it by this Simile.
Suppose the Subjects of some King, whose proper Name is John, or Henry,
suppose, I say, his own Subjects should hate him, rise up against him, and at
length kill him, not because he is called John, or Henry, but because he will
be their King, as indeed he is. I would feign know in respect of what Name this
King suffers, his name John, or Henry, or his Title King; no man can say it
is for his proper Name, but for his Kingly Title, which they will not give unto
him: In like manner our Savior, whose proper Name is Jesus, which Name others
had as well as he, he is God, he is Christ, he is King. The Jews never
question him for his proper Name, but they will not give him his Titles of
honor, they will not suffer him to reign over them, Luke 19. 27. but because
he takes this due honor to himself, they reproach him, and kill him; in all
reason therefore, these Glorious Names are suffering Names, and not the Name
Jesus.

Answ. 2. I deny the Consequent; We are not bound to bow the knee at the sound
of that Name, which is the most suffering Name. Neither can this Text, or any
other Scripture make good this reason; there is nothing in the Text spoken of a
bare Title, but only of the Person of our Savior.

2. The reason will be more evident (if it were lawful to reason without
book,) for bowing at the Names, God, Christ, or King, etc. than the Name
Jesus; for thus I reason:

Look what Names Christ in the time of his humiliation laid down, and at the
mention of which received disdain and reproach, it is meet, that in the time
of his exaltation he should receive honor at the mention of those Names,
rather than at the mention of that Name, which he laid not down, and at the
mention of which, he received no disdain and reproach.

But Christ in the time of his humiliation laid not down his Name Jesus, but he
laid down his Glorious Names, as Lord, God, Christ, King, and at the mention
of these he suffered disdain and reproach, not at the mention of the Name
Jesus. Therefore it is meet, that Christ now in the time of his exaltation
should be honored at the mention of his Glorious Names, Lord, God, Christ,
King, etc. rather than at the mention of the Name Jesus. So we see plainly,
that if there were a reason in the Consequent, it makes not so much for the
Name Jesus, as for the Names above-spoken. If it be replied, that Christ having
been humbled in his Name Jesus, it is therefore necessary, that he should
receive honor in that Name, being exalted. I answer, If their meaning be this,
that because Christ was called by the Name Jesus being humbled, therefore he
ought to be bowed to at the sound of that Name being exalted, it is a sensles
reason without any proof, consequent, or ground, therefore let them prove it,
or cease ever to mention it. If this were necessary, why were not those
Worthies Joseph and Daniel, Types of Christ's humiliation as of his exaltation
by a special appointment of God bowed to, when they were advanced at their
distinct Names of Joseph and Daniel, being so called when they were humbled. In
another sense it is true in Christ (though it be not an ever-binding rule) for
he shall be always honored by the Church in that Name, which shall not be
laid down.

SECTION III.
THirdly, Thus they reason; We receive more benefit by the Name Jesus, than by
any other Name; for it signifies our Savior: And in this sense they prefer
it above other Names, yea above Jehovah it self. Some have openly taught this
stuff, Jesus is more excellent than Jehovah, because Jehovah delivered the
people from the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, but Jesus delivers
us from the wrath to come. Justification of bowing, p. 47.
Yea Mr Page himself speaks very meanly (in comparison) of the name Lord,
which is the same with Jehovah, (for every where, where the Septuagints find
the name Jehovah, they translate it by the word (...), Lord.) Yea though he do
acknowledge, that the name Lord does betoken the Deity. For thus he says;
What tell you me of Lord, give me a Samaritan, that may bind up my wounds. And
in other places he preferres the name Jesus, before Christ and Lord.

Answ. 1. I desire to know, what they mean by this reasoning. If this be their
meaning, that the title Jesus did more for us than the titles, Christ, Jehovah,
or Lord, it is most ridiculous; yea it is Idolatry to attribute our Salvation
to bare names, or titles, which our Savior himself wrought for us. But if
this be their meaning, that the Person Jesus, is greater, and did more for us,
than the Person Christ, Jehovah, or Lord; this is as sensles as the other; for
1. this will divide Jesus from Christ, and make Jesus and Christ two Persons.
2. It will separate Jesus from Jehovah, so making Christ not God, or above God;
and so in effect deny him to be a Savior; for if he had not been Jehovah, he
could not have saved us.

2. It is an absurd kind of reasoning to attribute temporal deliverance to
Jehovah, and Salvation to Jesus, only for as much as Jehovah is the Author of
all good, temporal, spiritual, and eternal; yea our Salvation in Scripture
is specially ascribed to Jehovah, or Lord, as Isa. 43. 11. I even I am Jehovah,
and besides me there is no Savior. So Verse. 14. This says Jehovah your
Redeemer. So Isa. 12. 2. The Church shall say, Behold, God is my Salvation, I
will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my
song, he is also become my salvation. So Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Psalm. 84. 11 Isa. 26. 4.
And in very many places besides. It is therefore beyond measure absurd, to
prefer Jesus above Jehovah, and to ascribe Salvation to Jesus only; for if
he name Jesus be above Jehovah, of necessity it must be above the names God
the Father, and God the Holy Ghost; and so either way the second Person will be
made greater than the first, or third Person.

For thus I reason:

Whosoever has a Name greater than others, is therefore more excellent than
those whose Names are not so great.

Therefore, If the name Jesus, which is a name peculiar to the second Person,
be a greater Name than Jehovah, which he has common to him with the other
Persons, or greater than the name God the Father, or God the Holy Ghost, it
will follow expressly, that the second Person is greater than the first or
third Person.

The first part of the Argument is proved from Heb. 1. 4. where the Apostle
proves that Christ was better than the Angels, viz. because he had obtained a
more excellent Name than they. This is also confirmed by the Analogy of the
Scriptures; for I have showed before, that Name above another, does always
denote the excellency of the Person above another, that has not so great a
Name; as Deuteronomy. 26. 19. The Lord promises his people that will keep his
Commandments, that He will make them high above all Nations, in praise, in
name, and in honor. So Isa. 56. 5. The Lord promises to the Eunuchs that
will keep his Sabbaths, a Name better than of sons and daughters, that is,
he will bestow upon them a greater excellency and honor, than those that have
sons and daughters, viz. in that respect, or they shall be more excellent by
that name that he would give them, than they should have been by having sons
and daughters.

Therefore to affirm that Jesus is abave Jehovah, does expressly fight
against this Text of 1 Cor. 15. 27. where God having subjected all things under
Christ's feet, has yet excepted himself that did put all things under him.
Seeing therefore he has excepted himself, and has not subjected himself to
Christ: by the selfsame reason he has not subjected his Name to Christ's
name, for if he had, by the reason above-specified, he had also preferred his
Son above himself.

The Answers which I have received to this Argument, are these three, yet none
of them sufficient in my judgment.

First, it is said, that the ground and rule above-specified, holds between
Christ and the Angels, and so it will hold between Christ and all the rest of
the creatures, where there is a manifest difference, but it will not hold
between the Persons of the Trinity, because they are equal, and cannot be
made unequal. This answer is very frivolous; For the Apostle gives this reason
why Christ is better than the Angels, viz. because he had obtained a better
Name than they, which argument had been weak and uncertain, and he could
never have made good what he affirmed, if his ground and rule could ever have
failed. A true rule is a perfect rule, or no rule at all.

2. True it is, that it is indeed impossible, that the three Persons should be
made unequal, yet may one be preferred before, or undervalued beneath another
by some men's opinion, or practice. For as Arrius undervalued the Son beneath
the Father, in that he attributed unto him a Name below the Name of the Father:
And as we prove against Arrius, that Christ is God equal with the Father,
because of the identitie and samenes, and equality of his names and attributes
with the Father, being called Jehovah, Son of God; called omniscient,
eternal, etc. So it will be evidently proved by necessary consequence, against
these men that hold that opinion, howsoever they positively deny it, that they
are in some degree in an extreme with Arrius, preferring Christ above the
Father, because they attribute unto him a Name greater than the name of the
Father. Secondly, They answer, that the second Person, though of himself he be
equal with the Father, yet in respect of us he is greater, because of the
work of redemption which he has wrought for us. I reply. This is a strange
answer, and very unsound: for 1. the Scriptures do every where as much extol
the love of God in giving his Son, as the love of Christ in giving himself. 2.
This answer does not agree with the Text, for the Text injoyneth the bowing
therein, not only to us men, but generally to all creatures, over whom Christ's
Name is advanced, for therefore is every knee of every thing to bow to Christ,
because he having a Name above every Name, has also a Name above their Names.
Therefore if the Son have a Name above his Fathers Name, by the same reason the
Father must bow to the Son.

3. By this answer they contradict themselves, for when they be challenged that
in bowing at the name Jesus only, they honor the Son above the Father, they
deny it, and affirm, that they honor all alike at the name Jesus, which
indeed they cannot affirm, if the second Person be greater to us than the
other Persons, then we to whom he is greater, must honor him more than the
other, that to us are not so great. Even as to the supreme Magistrate in a
Kingdom, we give a greater honor than to those that to us are not so great as
he.

Thirdly, Thus it is answered, that the name Jesus is a common name to every
Person in Trinity, and therefore though it be above other Divine Names, yet it
does not make inequality between the Persons, and in bowing at that only,
they honor all alike. Now thus they go about to prove their Assertion. God
say they, was called Savior before Christ was incarnate, and Jesus and Savior
is all one, therefore the name Jesus denominates every Person of the Trinity.
1. I reply, If Savior and Jesus be all one, why then do they not bow as well
at the sound of Savior, as Jesus, for their reason is the same for both. 2. I
affirm, that they are not all one: the word Savior indeed, before Christ was
incarnate, showed what God would do in the fullness of time, viz. send his Son
to be our Redeemer; but it is no proper Name; Jesus is a proper name, never
appropriated to the second Person till Christ was incarnate: and some good
Authors affirm, that it is the name of his humanity only, because given him
upon his incarnation, and he being called generally by that name in the days
of his flesh; and sundry men being so called as Types of Christ, Sermon on
Phil. 2.
though (if it be so) it do denominate unto us his whole Person, God and Man,
because of the inseparable union of the two natures. But Bishop Andrews
assertion here is very strange, who affirms that the name Jesus, is the proper
and chief Name of God; but how can it be so, when it is not the proper name of
Gods eternity? but was given unto the second Person in time by reason of man's
fall. But the name Jehovah, denotes Gods eternal Being, and therefore is the
proper and chief name of God indeed. And, how does the Bishop agree with
himself in that place? For thus he says; The Person is taken out of our
sight; all that we can do, cannot reach unto it, but his Name he has left
behind to us, that we may show by our reverence, and respect to it, how much
we esteem him. For if the name Jesus do denominate the Person of Christ, as
taken out of our sight, then it denominates only his humanity, which only
was in our sight, for the Deity was never in our sight: But if it be true, as
he says, that Jesus is the proper name of Christ's Deity, then in this sense
he is not gone from us, but is with us always unto the end of the world, Mat.
28. 20. and lives and dwelles in the hearts of his Saints, Ephesians. 3. 17.

Secondly, It is absurd to affirm, that nothing we can do can reach to
Christ's Person, because it is out of our sight: by the same reason, nothing
that we do can reach to God the Father, or the Holy Ghost, because they are
invisible, then farewell all Religion. If nothing that we can do can reach to
Christ's Person, then the whole bowing can reach but to the Name, none to the
Person; and to worship the Name without the Person, is gross Idolatry by their
own confession. And how can these men affirm, that they honor the Three
Persons alike at the name Jesus, when nothing they do can reach to the Person
of Christ.

Thirdly, By the Bishops reason, if we must bow at the Name of our Savior,
because he is not present, then we must not bow at the name Jesus, which name,
says he, signifies the Deity, which is always present, but at the name
Christ, which says he, though without ground, is the name of the humanity
only, which is gone from us.

Secondly, If Jesus be the proper and chief name of God, then should all those
that were called ordinarily by that name (besides Christ) be called by the
proper and chief name of God, which without horrible blasphemy could not be
yielded unto. It is Antichrists impiety to call himself God, 2 These. 2. 9.
Yet worthy men were called Jesus, and never took any offense at it, and were
never blamed for it. Seeing then the name Jesus was given to the Second Person
only upon his Incarnation, it cannot be the proper and chief name of God, or
of every Person in Trinity; and it no where denominates any other Person, but
the Second Person only, therefore it is a name peculiar to the Second Person
only.

Lastly, This answer overthrowes their own ground from the Text, for if the
name Jesus, be the name of the Three Persons, then cannot it be the name above
every name in the Text, for that Name is proper only to the Son, For 1. God
gave him this Name, and that after his humiliation, therefore was it not a name
naturally inherent in him as a Person of the Trinity, because he had it not
before. Secondly, the Person only in the Text that suffered, received this
Name, but neither the Person of the Father, nor the Holy Ghost suffered, but
the Son only. Therefore neither the Father, nor Holy Ghost received the Name
above every Name, but the Son only.

SECTION IV.
BUt the reason is naught, why they prefer the name Jesus above other Divine
names, for signification sake, because it signifies our Salvation. For who
taught them to reason thus, have they received it from the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles? If they have, they must show where* It is abominable to
teach for a doctrine the fantasy of the brain; but there is no show nor
shadow for this reason punctually in this Text, or any other Scripture: This
is answer sufficient, but by Gods grace I will further encounter with it, and
shall prove it a reason without reason indeed, and to be of a very fearful
and dangerous consequence.

1. If we must bow at the name Jesus, because it signifies our salvation, then
we must rather bow at the name Christ, because this Name does more fully and
expressly signify our Salvation, than the name Jesus, (now these
Jesu-worshippers do not bow at the name Christ.) Catechis. P. 202.
Thus says learned Vrsinus; Jesus est proprium nomen Mediatoris, etc. Jesus
says he, is the proper name of our Mediator; Christ as it were the Surname.
For so is he Jesus, that so he is also Christ, i. e. a promised Savior and
Messiah: By both names his Office is designed, but by the Name more summarily
than expressly; by the Surname more clearly and expressly; for the Surname
Christ, does denote the three certain parts of his Office, as namely,
Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly.

I will illustrate this further by this Similie.

If we should hear of some Potent King, that he is become a great Conqueror,
has achieved a noble Victory, and has made a great conquest of his enemies,
and has wrought a great deliverance to his Subjects: this News indeed is
something; but yet this general relation does not so much satisfy, we desire
further to hear of particulars; therefore if it shall be declared unto us, how
the Battle was ordered, how he disposed his Army, and how the Victory was
wrought; when particular Circumstances of the Conquest shall be fully related,
by this means the Victory is more clearly manifested, and we rest better
satisfied, and contented a great deal more this way, than before, by the
general signification of it.

Thus it is concerning the Names Jesus, and Christ; The name Jesus does but in
general show Christ to be a Savior; But the name Christ does in particular
make known, how he wrought Salvation for us; For it denotes him to be a Priest
to have offered up himself a Sacrifice for us, and to make intercession for us
It denotes him a King to subdue and conquer the enemies of our Salvation, and
to rule and reign in our hearts by his Spirit. It denotes him a Prophet, to
teach and instruct us, and to make known Gods will unto us, whereby he does
apply his purchased Redemption unto us. In all reason therefore the Name Christ
does more fully and clearly express our Salvation than the Name Jesus; and by
this their reason is rather to be bowed to than the Name Jesus. Secondly, if we
must bow at the name Jesus, because it signifies our Salvation, why then do
not they bow at the word Savior, (which they make all one with Jesus,) which
does as plainly, yea more plainly denote our Salvation than the Name Jesus,
being better understood of all.

SECTION V.
TO hold that we must bow by the Text at the Name Jesus, because it signifies
our Salvation, will admit this dangerous consequence, for either it will
overthrow the bowing in the Text to Angels, Devils, Reprobates, for they cannot
bow at the name Jesus in this sense as they say we must bow; for the name Jesus
cannot signify to them, that he is their Savior, seeing the Angels never
sinned: To the Devils Christ was never promised; and if they must bow, and
fulfill the Text, as certainly they shall, they must bow also upon the self
same reason as we must, for the reason in the Text is the same for all: then
they must bow also in this sense, that Jesus signifies their Salvation also,
which is an unspeakeable absurdity. Yea it will overthrow Christ's conquest of
sin, death, and the grave, whose destruction is their bowing to Christ in the
Text, and it will make Christ their Savior in stead of their destroyer.

It satisfies not to answer that the very Devils could call Christ by the name
Jesus; Page justification of bowing, page 48.
for so they might call him, because it was his proper Name, by which he was
commonly called, but if they bring their reason right, they must prove that
Angels and Devils bow to Christ as he is their Savior, (which they can never
do) for so they say we must bow, and the reason of the Text is the same for
all. It is plain then the Name Jesus cannot be the Name in the Text in which
every knee must bow, because it concerns elect men only, but that Name must
concern all things and creatures alike, which is the Name of Power and Glory,
as is above specified.

SECTION VI.
THe bowing at the Name Jesus, because it signifies a Savior, and not at
Jehovah, is a preferring our Salvation above Gods Glory: Now to do so is
abominable, therefore it is a false opinion, and an unlawful practice.

The Consequent is very plain; for the Glory of God is the end of all his
works, Pro. 16. 4. So it must be the maine end of our works, 1 Cor. 10. 33.
Moses and St Paul preferred Gods Glory above their own Salvation, Exodus 32.
32. Romans 9. 2, 3. He that loves not or serves not God for Gods own self, but
for his own benefit, is but a false and mercenary worshipper of God, and shall
surely miss what he seeks for. Now that this practice will make that we
prefer our Salvation above Gods Glory, it is evident, for Jehovah is the
express Name of Gods Glory, Isa. 42. 8. I am Jehovah (says God) that is my
Name, and my Glory I will not give to another. This Name is called Gods
glorious and fearful Name, which whosoever will not fear, God will make his
plagues wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.. But the name Jesus is the Name that
signifies our Salvation, therefore it will plainly follow, if it be necessary
to bow at any Name, if we will bow only at that Name, that signifies our
Salvation, and not at that Name that signifies Gods Glory, we love our selves
above God, and regard our own benefit more than his Glory.

It availes not to answer, (as some do) that Jehovah is comprehended in the
Name Jesus; and therefore in bowing to Jesus, they also bow to Jehovah, and so
glorify God. For it is absurd to say, that the Name Jesus does generally
include the name Jehovah; for Jehovah is of far larger extent than the Name
Jesus. The name Jehovah is the name of Gods eternity, it signifies God to have
life within himself, to be an everlasting being, and was before the name
Jesus: The Name Jehovah, betokens Gods incomprehensiblenes, his omnipotency,
his omniscience, his wisdom, his goodness, and all his holy Attributes, and
that essentially in himself: It betokens all Gods works, his work of
Predestination, not only of Election, but Reprobation, by which he will be
also glorified, Pro. 16. 4. It betokens not only his work of Redemption, but
also his works of Creation and Providence, for which works sake, the heavens
and earth do praise him, and speak his praise in all languages, Psalm. 19. 1,
2, 3. And for which works sake, we must also praise him, Psalm. 100. 2, 3. Psalm.
147. It signifies not only his mercy, but also his justice; for which also we
must rejoice, and praise the Lord, Psalm. 58. 11, 12. True it is, God shows his
Glory abundantly in becoming a Savior to his people, yet the Name Jehovah
goes beyond the Name Jesus in the extent of his Glory: It denotes Gods Glory
essentially in himself, and generally in respect of all his mighty works. The
name Jesus denotes his Glory only particularly in respect of the work of
Redemption, and only by way of relation to us, whom he has redeemed.
Therefore the reason aforesaid remains inviolable, that if we will bow only
at that Name, that denotes Gods Glory particularly only, and that does only
respect our own benefit in the work of Redemption wrought for us; and not at
that Name that betokens his Glory essentially in himself, and that which has
relation to all his Attributes, and to all his mighty works, or if we will bow
only at Gods saving name, and not at all at any of his commanding Names; I
say, the reason stands firm, we love our selves above God, and regard our own
benefit and salvation, more than his Glory or Soveraigntie over us. As if a
Subject will not bow to the King, but only in regard of some great
extraordinary benefit bestowed upon him, it is evident, that he regards
himself more than his Majesty.

2. The Angels, which by the Text must bow as well as we, upon the same reason
of the Text, cannot have respect to the benefit of Salvation. They serve Christ
for his Glory sake, and as he is their Lord.

3. And lastly Seeing Devils and Reprobates must fulfill the Text as well as
we, and that also upon the same reason, by these men's grounds, they shall be
more sincere in their service than we for they must bow to him gratis, and as
he is their Lord, but we must not bow, but upon a particular benefit, that
Christ is become our Savior.

I do ingenuously confess, that this reason that Christ is our Savior, is a
very strong reason to move us to glorify God to the utmost, with our bodies
and souls, being redeemed by so great a price, 2 Cor. 6. 20. And seeing now
that Christ for suffering death is crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2. 9.
and is now glorified God and man with that glory which he had with his Father
before the world began, Ioh. 17. 3. It highly concerns us to glorify him now
God and Man, with the glory and honor wherewith we now glorify the Father;
yet it is no reason to prove, that we should honor the Son more than the
Father, or the Title Jesus above other Titles of the Deity.

SECTION VII.
MAster Page gives this reason, why the name Jesus has the preferment above
other Names to be bowed to, Answer to a Reply, P. 157.
viz. because above all other Names it signifies Christ's dying and suffering I
cannot say Jesus, says he, but presently I am put in mind of dying.

Answ. 1. I deny that the name Jesus is a Name, that above all other Names puts
us in mind of Christ's sufferings; For this Name in the plain signification of
it, does not directly signify dying. Many called God their Savior in the old
Testament, yet few did suppose that God should dye. Many were called by the
Name Jesus, and many Saviors God stirred up, and yet dyed not as Saviors.
Christ's Disciples knew him all along by the Name Jesus, yet thought he had
raved, when he once put them in mind of his death, Mat. 16. 21. But indeed the
name Christ does more fully put us in mind of Christ's sufferings, than the
Name Jesus; for Jesus signifies a Savior, but Christ signifies Anointed; it
denotes him not only a Prophet and King, but also a Priest, whose office was
to shed blood, therefore it directly signifies dying. God if he had pleased
could have showed his mercy without his justice, but he would not. He could
have been a Jesus without becoming a Priest, but he could never have been a
Priest, unless he had been a Jesus.

2. The Consequent is to be denied, for if the Name Jesus should above all
other Names signify Christ's death, it will not follow, that therefore it is
the principal name to be bowed to, 1. Because they have no ground of Scripture
for it. 2. Because it contradicts the Text; for the Name above every Name is
the Name that leads us to Christ's exaltation, and not to his suffering; For God
exalted him, and then gave him that name, yea he is become a perfect Savior by
his Glorification. What profit had it been to us, if he had not overcome death?
therefore it is said, We seee Jesus crowned with glory and honor, etc. Heb. 2.
9.

3. Quicquid convenit tali, quatenus tali, convenit omni tali.
If this reason be good, then we must bow at the Name Jesus written upon a
wall, or in a Book, or when it is thought of; for so it will put us in mind
of dying as well as when it is heard. Then also we must bow at the name Christ,
heard, seen, or thought of; because this Name does better put us in mind of
dying, than the name Jesus: yea we must bow also more especially when we read
in a Chapter, or hear the sufferings of Christ preached to us; yea at every
breaking of the bread in the Sacrament, or pouring out of the wine, we must
bow, because Christ's death and sufferings are better so notified to us than by
the Name Jesus. So that there is no weight in this reason.

SECTION VIII.
SOme reason thus; The fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, Col. 2.
9. Ergo we must bow at the Name Jesus.

Answ. I deny the Consequent, for if the fulness of the Godhead should so dwell
in Christ, as that the rest of the Persons were stripped of the Godhead, which
is blasphemy once to imagine, there might be some show for this reason, but the
whole fulness of the Godhead dwells in every Person, in the First and Third as
well as in the Second Person, Ioh. 14. 11. But only here is the difference,
that the fulness of the Godhead dwells in Christ only bodily, because he only
had a body ordained for him, that he might be a perfect Savior, Heb. 10. 5.
And because he is now glorified in that body. So that there is no reason for
that opinion from this place, but if there were a reason in this place, it
makes as much for bowing at other titles of Christ, as Jesus, yea rather at the
name Christ, which is only named in the Text; for the whole fullness of the
Godhead dwells no more in Jesus than in Christ.

But they press it farther, thus; Christ man brings us to the Father, and we
could never have conceived rightly of the Deity, but by the humanity of
Christ. I answer. Christ man only did not bring us to the Father; but Christ
Mediator, God and Man; and though by Christ we are brought to the right
conceiving and true knowledge of God, it is sensles to infer hence, if the
consequent were good, that therefore we must bow solely at the Name Jesus,
except they can prove that Jesus brought us to the Father, and not Christ. Some
say, that Jesus signifies Christ's Person, but Christ his Office, therefore we
must bow rather at the Name Jesus than Christ. I answer, I have proved already,
that Jesus signifies the Office of our Savior as well as Christ, though more
summarily, and I affirm again, that the Name Christ does every where denote
Christ's Person, as well as the Name Jesus, and if this distinction abovesaid
could be proved true, that Jesus signifies our Saviors Person, Christ his
Office, yet it will be an ill Consequent to affirm, (if it were necessary to
bow at Names,) that we should bow only at that Name that signifies Christ
Person, and not at that name that signifies his Office, seeing by his Office he
brings us to God, and makes known unto us the Father. Therefore this reason is
without ground, and without any light from Scripture. The only consequent that
the Scripture gives signification of upon this ground is this: Because Christ
brings us to God, and reveals to us the knowledge of the Father, therefore we
must pray to the Father in the Name of Christ, but it does not say, that
therefore we must bow at the Name Jesus; and upon this their ground, it may be
as well inferred, that we must pray to the Father by mentioning of the Name
Jesus only, as bow to the Father at the mentioning of this Name only.

CONCLUSION. I will shut up all with this Argument drawn from the Premises.
EVery Exposition of a Text, which does advance the Glory of God, and of
Christ, and does clear the Truth, without any ambiguitie, and absurdity, is
to be preferred before such an exposition, which derogateth from the Glory of
God, and of Christ, and produces many ambiguities, and dangerous absurdities.
But this exposition of Phil. 2. 9, 10. To understand Name above every Name
given to Christ, of the Power, Glory, and Dominion of Christ above all
creatures, and things, created Powers, Dignities, and Dominions, Gods Name and
Power only excepted, and to understand bowing of every knee in the Name of
Jesus, of the subjection of every creature, thing, dominion, and power, to the
Glory, Power, and Dominion of the Lord Jesus, advances the Glory of God, and
of Christ, and cleeres the Truth, without any ambiguitie and absurdity.

But on the other side, To expound Name above every Name in the Text, of the
advancement of the Name or Title Jesus, either absolutely or relatively, above
not only all created Names, but also above all Divine Names, and Titles; and
secondly, to understand, bowing every knee, of things in heaven, things in
earth, and things under the earth, in the Name of Jesus, of bowing of express
corporal knees, when the Name Jesus is sounded out. These expositions do
obscure the Text, do deface the Glory of God, and of Christ, and produce many
dangerous consequences and absurdities.

Therefore the former interpretation of the said Text, is to be preferred
before the other, yea is true, when the other is false.

The dangerous Consequences, which the second opinion does produce, are noted
in the Premises to be these.
1. In respect of the whole Trinity. 1. Part 1. Sect. 9.
IT confounds the Persons of the Trinity. 2. Part. 1. Sect. 1.
It will make all Names and Titles of the Trinity and Deity, as Lord, God,
Christ, Jehovah, Father, Holy Ghost, to bow knees to the Name Jesus.
2. In respect of God the Father. 1. Part 2. Sect. 3.
It makes him inferior to his Son, and to bow to his Son. 2. Part 1. Sect.
10.
It accuses him of cruelty and injustice, in appointing such a worship to
most of his Creatures, in whom he has not created Power of performance. 3.
Part 1. Sect. 13.
It makes him to regard things of less importance, and to neglect the
weightier.
3. In respect of God the Son. 1. Part 1. Sect. 12.
It attributes unto him a Name, which they say; is above every Name, yet
without power and authority, making it only the proper Name Jesus, which
others had as well as he. 2. Part 2. Sect. 5.
It overthrows the duty of the Text, to Angels, Devils, and Reprobates, or
else it will make Christ a Savior to them, yea it will make Christ a Savior
to Hell, sin, death, and the Grave, which must bow as well as other things,
as appears by the Premises. 3. Part 1. Sect. 12
It deprives Christ of the honor of the most of his creatures, which cannot
possibly perform the Text, as they understand it, so that it makes Christ Lord
but of a few of the Creatures, who is Lord of all. 4. Part 1. Sect. 12
For those that can perform it, it gives to Christ the honor only of one
part of the body, when he will be honored with the whole body and soul, so
that it makes him Lord but of the knee only. 5. Part 1. Sect. 12.
It gives him this honor but one day in the week ordinarily, and that but now
and then in that day, and but in one place ordinarily, when he will be served
at all times and places. So that it makes Christ Lord but for the space of a
few minutes in one day of the week, and that but in one place. 6. Part 1 Sect.
12.
It depriveth Christ of his true Subjects, and forces upon him the members of
Antichrist. 7. Part 1. Sect. 12
It depriveth Christ of his honor and glory at the great day of Judgment, and
makes his Kingdom in the height of it to be extremely ridiculous. 8. Part 2.
Sect. 3.
It advances the Son above the Father. 9. Part 1 Sect 9.
It gives greater honor to the Son, than to the Father, and so makes
inequality between the Persons of the Trinity. 10. Part 2. Sect. 3.
It attributes our salvation either to the bare Name Jesus, and so it is flat
Idolatry, or else it divides Christ from himself, making Jesus and Christ two
Persons, and from Jehovah making him not God, or above God, and so it is flat
blasphemy.
4. In respect of God the Holy Ghost. 1. Part 2. Sect. 3.
It makes him inferior to the Second Person. 2. Part 1 Sect. 11
It brings his work into bondage at the will of man, yea sometimes of vile men.
5. Concerning the Church. It gives her authority over Gods Word. Part 1.
Sect. 11.

6. Concerning our selves. 1. Part 1. Sect. 11.
It brings us into bondage, by making us to perform Gods worship at every man's
pleasure, and so it enthralls Gods worship to every man's will. 2. Part 1. Sect.
11.
It makes the Church a perpetual prison, and the bowing of the knee never to
be ended. 3. Part. 2. Sect. 6.
It makes us to respect our own benefit more than Gods Glory. 4. Part 1. Sect.
8,
It makes us to serve Christ more corruptly than Devils and Reprobates. 5. Part
2. Sect, 6.
It will make the Saints at the day of Judgment worse than Idolaters.

These dangerous, and for the most part, blasphemous Consequences, besides many
other sensles absurdities do necessarily arise from this opinion, therefore it
is insufferable and not to be endured.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 22. read Names. page 2. li. 10. read Names. page 3. li. 17. read
apposition. lin. 37. read parents. lin. 40. read scivit. page 7. lin. 7.
read Names. lin. 17. read to the Glory of which Kingdom. lin. 28. read in
the inheriting. page 16. lin. 32. read (...).

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

