AN ASSERTION OF The Government of the Church OF SCOTLAND, IN The points of
Ruling-Elders, and of the Authority of Presbyteries and Synods.

With a Postscript in answer to a Treatise lately published against
Presbyteriall Government.

Gesta Purgat. Caecil. and felic. Adhibete Conclericos and Seniores plebis
Ecclesiasticos viros, and inquirant diligenter que sint istae dissensiones.

August. epist. 118. Quorum (conciliorum) est in Ecclesia saluberima authoritas.

Edinburgh, Printed for James Bryson, 1641.

TO THE READER.
IT is high time for those who have been long praying for the peace of
Jerusalem, and with bleeding hearts have beheld the sorrows of Sion, now to
bestirre themselves with an extraordinary diligence, and to contribute their
most serious and uncessant endeavors, for the settling of these present
commotions about Church affairs, in such a manner, that the sacred twins, Truth
and Peace, may both cohabit under own roof* and that this great and good work
of Reformation may not be blasted in the bird, nor fade in the flourish, but
may be brought forward to that full maturity, which shall afford a harvest of
joy to us, and to all the Churches of God.

One controversy there is about the government of the Church, and it is of
such consequence, that were it well resolved upon, and rightly agreed, it
should facilitate a right resolution in other matters which are in question.
Now because longum iter per praecepta, breve per exempla, the way is long by
precepts, short by platforms; therefore I have carefully observed the policy
and government of other reformed Churches. And because the nearness of
relation swayeth my affection at least half a thought more unto that which is
Scotlands (caeteris paribus) then unto that which is more remote from us,
therefore I was most solicitous to see a delineation of the government of that
famously reformed neighbor Church; which when I had read, and read over again, I
did conclude with my self, that if these two points at which most exception is
taken, I mean the office of ruling Elders, and the authority of Presbyters and
Synodes, which also are things common to the other reformed Churches) could be
upon good grounds maintained, there is no other thing of any moment to be
objected against it.

And with these thoughts I was so tossed, that I could not rest satisfied with
the Quid without the Quare, but did conceive as great languor and desire for a
demonstration of that form of Church government, as before I had for a
declaration of the same. Whereupon I have purchased to my self from Scotland
this ensuing Treatise which having fully satisfied my own mind in the
asserting of those most controverted points, I have resolved to communicate and
publish the same unto others, for the reasons following.

First, for the satisfaction of such as do through ignorance or mistaking
stumble at such a form of Ecclesiastical government: I do not much marvel to
see those that a^e of a simple understanding, so far conquered, as to scruple
the office of ruling Elders, Bishop Hall his assertion of Episcopacie by Divine
right.
having heard the big words and lavish expressions of some opposites against
the same; yet a poor piece it is which one of them would usher in with a
tinckling Epistle, in which Projicit ampullas and sesquipedalia verba. He
makes offer to forfeit his life to justice, and his reputation to shame; if
any living man can show that ever there was a ruling Elder in the Christian
world, till F^rell, and Viret first created them. I shall not desire to take
him at his word for his life, but if he be not able to give a satisfactory
answer unto that which is here said both from Scripture, and from antiquity for
ruling Elders, then has he given sentence against his own reputation for ever.
And so much the more, that having in that assertion of Episcopacie boldly
averred, ^ag. 208.209.2^1.
that the name of the Elders of the Church, in all antiquity comprehends none
but Preachers and Divines; and that therefore none but they may be called
Seniores Ecclesiae, though some others happily may have the title of Seniores
populi, because of their civil authority; notwithstanding the reading of the
observations of Iustellus, and of both the Cassaubons, Page 146.
has now so far changed his tone, that in his late answer to ^mectymnuus, he
acknowledges that beside Pastors and Doctors, and beside the Magistrates or
Elders of the Cities, there are to be found in antiquity, Seniores
Ecclesiastici, Ecclesiastical Elders also; only he alleges they were but as
our Churchwardens, or rather as our Vestry-men: whereas indeed they were
Judges in Ecclesiastical controversies, and (in some sort) instructors of the
people, as shall be made to appear* Mean while we do observe what trust is to
be given to this bold Speaker, who has been forc^d to yield, what he had
before with high swelling words denied.

Another Instance of the same kind is to be noted in his Remonstrance, when he
speaks of the prescript forms of prayer, which the Jewish Church had ever
from the days of Moses, wherewith also Peter, and John when they went up into
the Temple at the ninth hour of Prayer did join; Page 11.
to make good his allegiance, he adds, the forms whereof are yet extant and
ready to be produced. Yet this he handsomely eats up in his defense; Page
17.18.
where he gives us to understand, that those set forms of prayer are indeed
specified by Capellus, a writer of our own Age; but that the book it self
which contained these prayers, is perished a thousand years ago. Well, he is
now content to say that once those forms were extant; and this (forsooth) he
will prove from a certain Samaritan Chronicle in the custody of his faithful
friend the Primate of A^mach; wherein he has found a story which transporteth
him as much as the invention of the demonstration did Archimedes, when he cried
(...), I have found it, I have found it. Yet -- cred^t Iudaeus apella, Non ego
-- But this lies not now in my way. Only (till a full answer be ready, I
thought it not amiss to give some taste of the man's vain arrogant humor,
whose best weapons are great words. As for his last record which he fetches
from Abrahamus Scultetus, against ruling Elders; all that and much more has
been, and here shall be abundantly confuted.

Others there be who call in question the power and authority of
Ecclesiastical Presbyteries, and of Synods, against which also some few Pens
have been put to paper and have passed a censure no less hard then
unseasonable, which (me thinks) might well have been spared, unless: there had
been stronger and more convincing reasons for it. These I shall beseech, that
with minds void of prejudice, they take into consideration the second part of
this Treatise, written with no heat nor sharpness of words, but with
plainness, and strength of reason: And withal I shall expect that they will
not think the worse of the Author, for being ready to answer him that asks a
reason of him, or for writing a justification of the government of the Church
of Scotland, to such as did desire to be more thoroughly resolved concerning the
same; but that rather they will make use hereof, as a key by divine Providence
put into their hands, to open a door unto further light.

Secondly, there is so much the more reason for asserting those two points, by
how much they have been mainly opposed by Satan; for he it was whose cunning
conveyance of old, made the office of ruling Elders to come into dessuetude,
through the sloth, or rather the pride of the Teachers, as Ambrose complains;
and yet time has not so obliterate that ancient order, In 1 Timothy 5.
but that the footsteps of the same are yet to be seen in our Officialls,
Chancellors, Commissaries, Churchwardens, and High Commission men, yea at Rome
it self, in the Cardinals. The same old Serpent it was whose instigation made
Licinius whiles he did intend the total ruin of the Church, to fall upon this
as the most effectual means for his purpose, that he should straightly inhibit
all counsels, meetings, and con^erencies concerning the affairs of the Church.
By which means the Christians of his time were drawn into one of two snares.
Aut enim legem, etc. for says Eusebius, De vit^ Constable. ^ lib. 1. cap. 44.
either it behoved us to be obnoxious to punishment by violating the Law, or to
overthrow the Rites and Ordinances of the Church, by giving obedience in that
which the Law did command: for great and weighty deliberations undertaken about
things controverted, cannot proceed in any other manner or way, but by the
right managing of Councels. The Arminians in the Netherlands, found out another
of Satan's wiles; they were not able to hinder the assembling of a free and
lawful Synod, but for their next best, they required of the Synod of Dort
twelve conditions, Vide actae Syno. Dord. Sess. 25.
and the ninth was; that there should not be in that Synod any determination or
decree concerning the matters in controversy, but only an accommodation or
conference, and that still it should be free to the particular Churches, to
accept, or to reject the judgment of the Synod: this was a way of endless
controversy, and justly cried down in the Synod.

Moreover, Satan ever wise in his own principles, finding the Church of
Scotland, like an invincible Sampson, by reason of such a constitution and
government, as being preserved in integrity, could neither admit heresy, nor
schism, did make use of the Prelacie as his traitorous Dalilah, to betray that
Sampson, into the hands of the now adverse P^ilistines the Papists, by stealing
away both their ruling Elders, and the authority of their Presbyteries, and
Synods: for he had well observed, that in these two things did their great
strength lie, and that without these two, the Ministers of the Word being like
so many scopae dissolut^, both sparsed, and by themselves alone might easily be
brought under the yoke. When thus the Romish-affected Dalilah had taken away
their strength from them, she was bold to u^t^r her insulting voice in the
Service Book, and book of Canons, The Philistines be upon thee Sampson, The
Papists be upon thee Scotland. In this case they did not (as Sampson then)
presume that the Lord was with them as at other times; they knew he was
departed from them: Psalm. 80 14 15.
They cried out, Return we beseech thee O God of Hosts, look down from Heaven,
behold and visit this Vine, and the Vineyard which thine own right hand has
planted. ^er. 50.5.
They did again ask the way to Sion with their faces thitherward, saying come,
and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not
be forgotten. And now (glory be to the great Name of God, in the Church
throughout all generations) they have by his healing hand quickly recovered
their strength. Whittak contr. 3. de council. quaest 1.
Strength I may well call it, for says a learned Divine, as in things which
are done by bodily strength, so in things which are managed by counsels, vis
unita fortior, power being put together is the stronger: and in this he does
agree with Bellarm.; that though God by his absolute power can preserve his
Church without Synods; yet according to ordinary providence, they are necessary
for the right government of the Church. The interweaving and combining of
strength, by joining the ruling Elders of every Congregation, with the Pastor,
or Pastors thereof into a particular Eldership, by joining also Commissioners,
Pastors, and E^ders, from many particular Elderships, ordinarily into a
classical Presbytery, and more solemnly provincial Synod. Cant. 6.4*
Finally, by joyn^ng Commissioners, Pastors, and Elders* from many classical
PPresbyteries, into a National Assembly; this does indeed make a Church
beautiful as Tirza, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an Army with Banners.

It is not to be expected, but this form of Church government, shall still be
disliked by some (whose dislike shall notwithstanding the more commend it to
all pious minds) I mean by profane men, who escape not without censure under
Presbyteries, and Synods, as they did under the Prelacie; by heretics, who
cannot find favor with a National Synod of many learned and godly* men, as
they did with a few Popish Prelates: by Matchavellians also, who do foresee that
Presbyteriall Synodicall government, being conformed not to the Lesbian rule of
humane authority, but to the inflexible rule of Divine Institution, will not
admit of any Innovations in Religion, Psalm. 64 3.
be they never so conduceable to political intentions.

Some there be who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to
shoot their arrows, even bitter words. They would wound both the office of
ruling Elders, and the authority of Presbyteries and Synods, Math. 22.21.
with this hateful imputation, that they are in consistent with the honor and
Prerogative of Princes. Sure I am, when our Savior says, Render unto C^esar
the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods; he does
plainly insinuate, that the things which are Gods, need not to hinder the
things which are Caesar's. And why shall it be forgotten, that the Prelates did
assume to themselves all that power of determining controversies; making
Canons, ordaining, suspending, deposing, and excommunicating, which now
Presbyteries and Synods do claim as theirs by right. To me it appears a
grand mystery, and worthy of deliberation in the wise Consistory of Rome: That
the power of Presbyteries and Synods being merely Ecclesiastical, being
rightly used, and nothing incroaching upon the civil power, is notwithstanding
an intolerable prejudice to Kings and Princes. But the very same power in
Prelates, though both abused, and mixed with civil power, is not (for a^l that
prejudicial to Sovereignty.

Yet if the fear of God cannot moli^ie the tongues of th^se men, one would
think that they should be brideled with respect to the Kings most excellent
Majesty, who has been gra^iously pleased to approve and ratify the present
government of the Church of Scotland, perceiving (^ tru^^) that Gods honor,
and his honor, Gods Laws, and his Laws may well subsist together.

Lastly, as in publishing this assertion I intend to satisfy the scrupulous,
Romans 14 23.
and to put to silence the malicious; so also to confirm the consciences of
such as are friends and savourers to the right way of Church government.
Whatsoever is not of faith i^ sin, says the Apostle, yea though it be in a
matter otherwise indifferent: how much more is it necessary that we halt not in
our judgment concerning the government of the Church, but walk straight, in
the plerophory and full assurance of the same, from the warrants of the word of
God; I say again from the warrants of the word of God, for as it is not my
meaning to commend this form because it is Scotlands, Phil. 1.9.
so I hope assuredly that my Countrymen will not despise Gods Ordinance,
because it is Scotlands practice, but rather follow them in so far as they
follow Christ and the Scripture. This therefore I pray, ^. Tim. 2.7.
that thy love may abound yet more and more, in knowledge and in all judgment,
that thou may approve the things that are excellent. Consider what I say,
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things, Amen.

THE CONTENTS OF the first part of this Treatise.
CHAP. I. Of the words Elder, Lay-Elder, Ruling-Elder.
Four significations of the word Elder in Scripture. Of the nickname of
Lay Elders. That the Popish distinction of the Clergy, and the Laity ought to
be banished. Of the name of Ruling-Elders, and the reason thereof.

CHAP. II. Of the function of Ruling-Elders, and what s^re of officers they be.
OF the distinction of Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons. Of the behavior
and conversation of Ruling-Elders. Of the distinction of the power of Order and
of jurisdiction. That the Ruling-Elder his power of jurisdiction, is to sit and
voice in all the Consistories and Assemblies of the Church. That his power of
order, is to do by way of authority those duties of edification, which every
Christian is bound to do by way of charity.

CHAP. III. The first argument for Ruling-Elders taken from the Iewish-Church.
THat we ought to follow the Jewish Church in such things as they had not for
any special reason proper to them, but as they were an Ecclesiastical
Republike. That the Elders among the Jews did sit among the Priests and voice
in their Ecclesiastical Courts, according to Baravias own confession, but were
not their^ will Magistrates as he alleges. Bilsons objections answered.

CHAP. IV. The second Argument taken from Math. 18.17.
WHat is the meaning of these words, Tell the Church? Why the Presbytery may be
called the Church. Our argument from this place for Ruling-Elders.

CHAP. V. The third Argument taken from Romans 12.8.
THe words Romans 12.8. expounded. That by him that ru^eth, is meant the
Ruling-Elder. The objections to the contrary answered.

CHAP. VI. The fourth Argument taken from 1 Cor. 12.28.
That by governments the Apostle means ruling-Elders. Two glosses given by
our opposites confuted.

CHAP. VII. The first Argument taken from 1 Timothy 5.17.
OUr Argument from this place vindicated against ^en false glosses devised by
our opposites.

CHAP. VIII. The testimony of Ambrose for Ruling-Elders vindicated.
NO certain ground alleged against the authority of those Commentaries upon
the Epistles ascribed to Ambrose. Other answers made by our opposites to the
place upon 1 Timothy 5. confuted.

CHAP. IX. Other Testimonies of Antiquity.
TEstimonies for Ruling-Elders out of Tertullion, Cyprian, Epiphanius, B^sil,
Chrysostom, Hierome, Eus^bius, Augustine, Origin, Isidore, the first counsel
of T^lido. Other testimo^ies observed by Iustellus, and Voetius. Bilsons answer
confuted.

CHAP. X. The consent of Protestant Writers, and the confession of our
opposites for Ruling-Elders.
CItat^ons of sundry Protestant writers to this purpose. This truth has
extorted a confession from W^itgist, Saravia, Sultiffe, Camero, and M. Io.
Wemys of Craigtown.

CHAP. XI. Dr. Fields five arguments against ruling-Elders, answered.
HIs first reason, that no foot-step of Ruling-Elders for many hundredth years
could be found in any Christian Church, answered five ways. Footsteps of
Ruling-Elders in the Church of England. His second reason answered. That we
ought to judge of the Officers of the Church, not from 1 Timothy 3. only, but from
that and other places compared together. His third reason answered by the
c^rtain bounds of the power of Ruling-Elders. His fourth reason answered by the
distinction of the Ecclesiastica^l Sanedrim of the Jews, from their civil
Sanedrim. His last reason concerning the names holds not.

CHAP. XII. The extravagancies of Whitegift, and Saravia, in the matter of
ruling-Elders.
THe one allows of Ruling-Elders under an Infidel Magistrate, but not under
a Christian Magistrate. The other allows of them under a Christian
Magistrate, but not under an Infidel. That Ruling-Elders do not prejudge the
power of the civil Magistrate, but the Prelacie does, which confuteth
Whitegift. That Christian Magistrates are not come in place of the Jewish
Seniors, which confuteth Saravia.

CHAP. XIII. Whether ruling-Elders have the power of decisive voices when they
they sit in Presbyteries and Synods.
THe affirmative proved by nine reasons. Two objections to the contrary
answered. The place 1 Cor. 14.32. explained.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Ordination of ruling-Elders. Of the continuance of their
Office, and of their maintenance.
THat the want of the Imposition of hands in Ordination, the want of
maintenance, and the not continuing always in the ^xercise of the Office,
cannot be prejudicial to the Office it self of Ruling-Elders.

The Contents of the second Part.
CHAP. I. Of Popular government in the Church.
THat this question is necessary to be cl^^red, before the question of the
authority of Assemblies. That Jurisdiction ought not to be (...) by all the
Members of a Congrega^ion, proved by (...) reasons. Objections answered. The
controversy (...).

CHAP. II. Of the independencie of the Elderships of particular Congregations.
Dr. Fields question, whither the power of Jurisdiction belongs to the
Eldership of every Congregation, or to a common Presbytery made up out of many
Congregations, answered by an eig^^fold distinction. A thr^^fold conformity of
those Parishionall Elderships to the primitive pattern.

CHAP. III. Of great Presbyteries which some call Classes.
THree false gloss^s on 1 Timothy 4.14. confuted. That the Apostle (...) by the
Presbytery a^ Assembly of Presbyters. whereof also Fathers and Councels do
speak. The warrant and authority of our Classical Presbyteries declared both
by good reasons, and by the Apostolical pattern: for assertion of the latter it
is proved, 1. That in many of those Cities wherein the Apostles planted
Christian religion, there was a greater number of christians then did or could
ordinarily assemble into one place. 2. That in these Cities there was a
plurality of Pastors. 3. That yet the whole within the City was one Church. 4.
That the whole was governed by one common Presbytery. From all which a
Corollary is drawn for these our Classical Presbyteries.

CHAP. IV. Of the authority of Sy^^ds provincial, and National.
THat the power of Jurisdiction in the Synod, differs from the power of
jurisdiction in the Presbytery. The power of Jurisdiction in Synods is
threefold, dogmatick, diataktick, and critic; Whether the decrees of a Synod
may be pressed upon such as profess scruple of conscience there anent.

CHAP. V. The first argument for the authority of Synods, and the subordination
of Presbyteries ^^erto, taken from the light of nature.
THat the Church is a certain kind of Republike, and in things which are
common to her with other societies, is guided by the same light of nature which
guides them, Of this kind are her assemblies.

CHAP. VI. The second argument taken from Christ's Institution.
THe will of Christ for the authority of Synods is showed two ways. 1. Because
else he has not sufficiently provided for all the necessities of his Church.
2. He has committed spiritual power and authority to the Assemblies and
Courts of the Church in general, yet has not determined in Scripture all the
particular kinds, degrees, and bounds thereof, and that for three reasons. The
particular kinds of Synods appointed by the Church according to the light of
nature, and general warrant and rules of the word, are mixed, though not mere
divine ordinances.

CHAP. VII. The third argument taken from the Jewish Church.
THat there were among the Jews a^ least two Ecclesiastical Courts, the
Synagogue, and the Sanedrim. That the power of the Synagogical con^istory was
not civil, but spiritual, proved against Sutliffe. That the Jews had a
supreme Ecclesiastical Sanedrim, distinct from the civil Sanedrim, proved
against the same Sutliffe, both from the institution thereof, Deu^. 17. and from
the restitution, 2 Chronicles. 19. and from the practice, Ier. 26. The consequence
of our argument, proved against such as deny it. That we ought to follow the
Jewish Church in those things which it had, not as it was Jewish, but under the
common respect and account of a political Church.

CHAP. VIII. The fourth argument taken from Acts 15.
THat we find Acts 15. a Synod of the Apostles and Elders, with authority
imposing their decrees upon many particular Congregations. Four answers made
to this argument found not to be satisfactory.

CHAP. IX. The sixth argument token from the Geometrical proportion.
THis argument from proportion does hold, whether we compare the collectives of
Churches among themselves, or the representatives among themselves, or the
representatives and collectives together.

CHAP. X. The sixth argument taken from necessity.
THat without the authority of Synods, it is impossible to preserve unity, or
to make an end of controversy. Other remedies declared to be ineffectuall.

CHAP. XI. Objections made against the authority of Synods answered.
THe place Math. 18.17. discussed. That one visible political Church may
comprehend many Congregations, proved. That the authority of Presbyteries and
Synods does not rob the Congregations of their liberties, as the Prelacie did.
A visible Church may be considered either metaphysically, or politically: This
distinction explained, serves to obviat sundry arguments alledge^ for the
independent power of Congregations. Other two objections answered, which have
been lately made.

The first part, CONCERNING RVLING ELDERS.
CHAP. I. Of the words Elder, Lay Elder, Ruling Elder.
THE word Elder answers to Zaken in the Hebrew, and (...) in the Greek. It
has four different significations, 1. It notes Age. 2* Antiquity. 3.
Venerability. 4. An office. In the first signification, Elder is opposed to
younger, as 1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a father, and
the younger men as brethren, 1 Pet. 5.5. Likewise ye younger submit your selves
unto the Elder. In this sense was the Apostle John called the Elder, because
he outlived the other Apostles, 2 John 1. and 3. verse. 1. In the second
signification Elder is opposed to Modern, Mat. 15.2. Why do thy Disciples
transgress the tradition of the Elders. That is, of them of old time, Mat.
5.21. In the third signification we find the word, Isa. 3. where the Lord
says, that he would take away from Israel the prudent and the ancient,
vezaken; that is, the worthies among them, and such as were respected for
wisdom. The same word, (and peradverture in the same sense) is turned Elder,
Exodus 2.16. Eth-zikne Israel, the Elders of Israel. So the Spanish Seijor, the
French Seigneur, the Italian Signore, all coming from the Latin Senior,
signify a man of respect, or one venerable for dignity, gifts, prudence, or
piety. Contrariwise, men of no worth, nor wisdom, men despicable for lack of
gifts and understanding, are called Children, Isa. 3.4.12. Ephesians. 4.14. But it
is the fourth signification which we have now to do withal, and so an Elder is
a spiritual officer, appointed by God, and called to the government of the
Church, Acts 14.23. When they had by voices made them Elders in every Church.
They have the name of Elders, because of the maturity of knowledge, wisdom,
gifts and gravity, which ought to be in them: for which reason also the name of
Senators was borrowed from Senes.

Before we come to speak particularly of those Elders of which our purpose is
to treat, it is fit we should know them by their right name, lest we nickname
and mis-call them. Some reproachfully and others ignorantly call them Lay
Elders. But the distinction of the Clergy and Laity, is Popish and
Antichristian; and they who have narrowly considered the records of ancient
times, have noted this distinction as one of the grounds whence the mystery of
iniquity had the beginning of it. Catal. test. verit. lib. 2. col. 98. O^iand.
cent. 1. p. 8.
The name of Clergy appropriate to Ministers, is full of pride and
vainglory, and has made the holy people of God to be despised, as if they
were profane and unclean in comparison of their Ministers. Loc. theol. ^.6.
n. 37.
Gerard likeneth those who take to themselves the name of the Clergy, to the
Pharisees, who called themselves by that name: for that their holiness did
separate them from the rest of the Jews: for this Etymology of the name
Pharisee, he cites Tertullian, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose, and confirms it
from Luke 18.10. Hence was it that some Councels discharged the Laity from
presuming to enter within the Quire, Synod. Turon. 2. Can. 3. Syn. Constant. 6.
can. 69.
or to stand among the Clergy near the Altar. Two reasons are alleged why
the Ministers of the Church should be called (...). First, because the Lord is
their Inheritance: secondly, because they are the Lords inheritance. Now both
these reasons do agree to all the faithful people of God: For there is none
of the faithful, who may not say with David, Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the
portion of my inheritance; and of whom also it may not be said, that they are
the Lords inheritance, or lot: for Peter gives this name to the whole Church,
Of Episcop. by divine right, page 2.12.
1 Pet. 5.3. Where (if it were needful) we might challenge Bishop Hall, who
borrows a gloss from Bellarmine and Gregorius de Valentia, telling us, that
Peter charge his fellow Bishops not to dominier over their Clergy; so
shutting out of the Text, both the duty of Pastors, because the Bishops only
are meant by Elders; and the benefit of the people, because the inferior
Pastors are the Bishops flock, according to this gloss: for Peter opposes
the Lording over the (...), to being ensamples to the Flock. Surely, if this
Popish Gloss be true, Protestants in their Commentaries and Sermons, have
gone wide from that Text. But Matthias the Apostle was chosen by lot. Act. i.26.
What then? By what reason does the Canon law draw from hence a name common to
all the Ministers of the Gospel? d. 21. ca. cleros
Let (...) then banish from us such Popish names, and send them home to Rome.
D^ clerie. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Bellarmin thought we had done so long ere now: for he makes this one of his
controverted heads: Whether we may rightly call some Christians the Clergy,
and others the Laity, or not, ascribing the negative to Protestants, the
affirmative to the Church of Rome.

Yet beside the Clergy and the Laity, B^ll. prae fat. ante lib. de clerie.
Papists hold that there is a third sort in the Church distinct from both, whom
they call Regulares. These are such of their religious orders, as are not taken
up with contemplation alone (like the Monks) but with action; Bell. lib. 2. de
mon. cap. 1.
such as the Dominicans, Franciscans, etc. Who help and assist the Clergy in
their Ecclesiastical employments, though they themselves be not admitted into
any particular charge in the Church. Now he who will needs side with the
Papists in the distinction of Clergy and Laity, may also with them admit a
third member of the distinction* and make ruling Elders of that sort;
especially since the reason why the regular Chanoins are assumed as helpers to
Parish Priests, In 2.2.4.88. ^^t. 4.
is propter multitudinem fidelis populi, and difficultatem inven^endi curatos
sufficientes and idoneos, says Cardinal Cajetan, adding further, male
consultum populo Christiano invenitur sine hujusmodi supplemento. Which reasons
agree well to ruling Elders. For 1. Parishes contain so many, that the
Minister cannot oversee all, and every one without help. 2. Sufficient and fit
Ministers shall hardly be every where found. 3. It is found by experience,
that sin and scandal are never well taken need to, and redressed, where
ruling Elders are not. To let all this pass, if any man will needs retain the
name of Lay Elders, De gub. ec^l. page 28.
yet says Gersomus Bucerus, What aspersion is that to our Churches? is it any
other thing then that which Papists object to us for admitting Lay men into
Councels? They who have place in the highest and most supreme assemblies of
the Church, wherein the weightiest matters are determined, ought much more to
be admitted into inferior meetings, such as Presbyteries are.

But if we will speak with Scripture, we shall call them Ruling Elders, Romans
12.8. he that rules, 1 Timothy 5.17. Elders that rule well. They are called
ruling Elders, non quia soli sed quia solum praesunt. Pastors rule the Church
even as they do; but Pastors do something more, from which they may be
designed. Whereas the Elders of which we are to speak, have no other
employment, which can give them a designation, except the ruling of the Church
only. That wicked railer Lisim^chus Nicanor, who assumed the name, but forgot
to put on the vizorne of a Jesuit, in his congratulatory (I should say
calumniatory) Epistle page 61. alleges that they are called ruling Elders,
because the Ministers are their ruled Elders. If he were a Jesuit, he may
remember that in their own society, besides their Priests, Doctors, Preachers,
Confessionaries, etc. They have also Rectores, M. Elias Hasen mullerus. Hist.
ordin. Je^. page 68.
or Regentes; whose office it is to see the rules of their order kept, to
observe the behavior of every one, and when they perceive any seeds of
Heresy, to signify the same to the Provincial, and he to the General. Yet
are these Rectores among the lowest ranks of their officers, so that Jesuits
need not stumble when we call our Eldersruling Elders.

CHAP. II. Of the function of Ruling Elders, and what sort of Officers they be.
Lib. 4. did. 4.
NOtwithstanding, of all the multiplicity of Popish orders, yet Peter Lombard
treading the vestiges of the primitive simplicity, did observe that the
Apostles left only two sacred orders to be perpetual in the Church, the order
of Deacons, and the order of Elders. The administration of Deacons is exercised
about things bodily. The administration of Elders about things spiritual. The
former about the goods: the latter about the government of the Church. Now
Elders are of three sorts. 1. Preaching Elders, or Pastors. 2. Teaching Elders
or Doctors. 3. Ruling Elders. All these are Elders, because they have voice in
Presbyteries, and all assemblies of the Church, and the government of the
Church is incumbent to them all: nor only to the Pastor and Elder, but to the
Doctor also. The Bishop of Dune in his examen conjurationis Scoticae, p. 35.
alleges, that our Church of Scotland did never yet determine whether Doctors
and Deacons have right of voycing in the Consistories and Assemblies of the
Church. But had he read our book of Policy, he might have found, that it
excludes Deacons from being members of Presbyteries and Assemblies, Cap. 8.
but admits Doctors into the same, Cap. 5. The Doctor being an Elder, as said
is, should assist the Pastor in the government of the Kirk; and concur with
the Elders, his brethren, in all Assemblies, by reason the Interpretation of
the Word, which is only Judge in Ecclesiastical matters, is committed to his
charge. But they differ, in that the Pastor labors in the word of
exhortation, that is, by the gift of wisdom applies the word to the manners
of his flock, and that in season and out of season, as he knows their
particular cases to require. The Doctor labors in the word of Doctrine, that
is, without such applications as the Pastor uses, by simple teaching he
preserves the truth and sound interpretation of the Scriptures, against all
heresy and error. The ruling Elder does neither of these, but labors in the
government and policy of the Church only. The Apostle has distinguished
these three sorts of Elders, 1. Tim. 5.17. Let Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.
Where, as Beza notes, he distinguishes the Word, which is the Pastors part,
from Doctrine, which is the Doctors part. Even as Romans 12.7.8. he
distinguishes teaching from exhortation: and 1 Cor. 12.8. puts the word of
wisdom, and the word of knowledge for two different things. Now beside those
Elders which labor in the Word, and those which labor in Doctrine, Paul
speaks to Timothy of a third sort of Elders, which labor neither in the Word
nor Doctrine, but in ruling well. Hence it appears, how truly the Book of
Policy, Cap. 2. says, That there are four ordinary, perpetual, and
necessary Offices in the Church, the office of the Pastor, the Doctor, the
Elder, and the Deacon: and that no other office, which is not one of these
four, ought to be received, or suffered in the Church.

But when we speak of Elders, Non personatos, etc. we will not have disguised
and histrionicall men, puffed up with titles, or idols dead in sins, to be
meant, but holy men, who being endued with faith in God, and walking in his
obedience, God authorizing them, and the Church his Spouse choosing and calling
them, undertake the government thereof, that they may labor to the
conservation and edification of the same in Christ, Eccles. l. ^. c. 3.
says Iunius. A ruling Elder should pray for the Spirit and gifts of his
calling, that he may do the duties of his calling, and not be like him that
played the Souldan, but a Souter; he must do his office neither (...) and pro
forma, he himself being Parcus Deorum caltor and infrequens; nor (...), doing
all through contention and strife about particulars. Meum and tuum.
Si duo de nostras tollas pro nomina rebus, praelia (I may say Iurgia)
cessarent, pax sine lite foret: Nor (...), Empiring and Lording among his
brethren and fellow Elders; Matthew. 20.26.27.
Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your servant, says the only Lord and
Head of the Church: Nor yet (...), setting himself only to do a pleasure, or
to get preferment to such as he favors; Nay, nor (...), only by
establishing good orders, and wholesome laws in the Church, but he must carry
himself (...), serviceably and ministerially: for as his Function is Officium
and Iurisdictio, so it is Munus, a burdensome service and charge laid upon him.

That a ruling Elder may be such a one as he ought to be, two sorts of
duties are requisite, viz. duties of his Conversation, and duties of his
Calling. The duties of his conversation are the same which the Apostle Paul
requires in the conversation of the Minister of the Word, 1. Tim.
3.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc. 6.11. Tit. 1.6.7.8.
That he be blameless, having a good report, not accused of riot, or unruly,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, a lover of good men,
just, holy, temperate, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy
lucre, not selfe-willed, not soon angry, but patient, not a brawler, not
covetous, one that rules well his own house, having his children in
subjection, with all gravity, one that follows after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness, etc. These and such like parts of
a Christian and exemplary conversation, being required of Pastors, as they are
Elders, belong unto ruling Elders also. This being plain, let us proceed to
the duties of their calling.

For the better understanding whereof, we will distinguish with the
Schoolmen, a twofold power, the power of Order, and the power of
Jurisdiction; which are different in sundry respects. 1. The power of Order
comprehends such things as a Minister by virtue of his ordination, may do
without a commission from any Presbytery, or Assembly of the Church, as to
preach the Word, to minister the Sacraments, to celebrate marriage, to visit
the sick, to catechize, to admonish, etc. The power of Jurisdiction
comprehends such things as a Minister cannot do by himself, nor by virtue
of his ordination; but they are done by a Session, Presbytery, or Synod; and
sometimes by a Minister, or Ministers, having Commission, and authority from
the same, such as ordination and admission, suspension, deprivation and
communication, and receiving again into the Church, and making of Laws and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical and such like; whereof we boldly maintain, that
there is no part of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in the power of one man, but
of many met together in the name of Christ. 2. The power of Order is the
radical and fundamental power, and makes a Minister susceptive, and capable
of the power of Jurisdiction. 3. The power of Order goes no further then the
Court of Conscience; the power of Jurisdiction is exercised in External and
Ecclesiastical Courts. Fourthly, the power of Order is sometime unlawful in
the use, yet not void in it self. The power of Jurisdiction when it is
unlawful in the use, it is also void in it self. If a Minister do any act
of Jurisdiction, as to excommunicate, or absolve without his own parish,
wanting also the consent of the Ministry and Elders of the bounds where he
does the same, such acts are void in themselves, and of no effect. But if
without his own charge, and without the consent aforesaid, he baptize an
infant, or do any such thing belonging to the power of Order, though his act
be unlawful, yet is the thing it self of force, and the Sacrament remains a
true Sacrament.

Now to our purpose. We aver that this twofold power of Order and of
Jurisdiction belongeh to ruling Elders as well as to Pastors. The power of
Jurisdiction is the same in both; for the power and authority of all
Jurisdiction belongs to the Assemblies, and representative meetings of the
Church, whereof the ruling Elders are necessary constituent members and have
the power of decisive voycing no less then Pastors. Howbeit the execution of
some decrees enacted by the power of Jurisdiction belongs to Ministers alone,
for Pastors alone exercise some acts of Jurisdiction, as imposition of hands,
the pronouncing of the sentence of excommunication, the receiving of a
penitent, etc. Are not these things done in the name and authority of some
Assembly of the Church, higher or lower? Or are they any other then the
executions of the decrees and sentences of such an Assembly wherein ruling
Elders voyced. The power of Order alone shall, make the difference betwixt the
Pastor and the ruling Elder; for by the power of Order, the Pastor does preach
the Word, minister the Sacraments, pray in public, bless the Congregation,
celebrate marriage, which the ruling Elder cannot. Therefore it is falsely said
by that railing Rabshakeh (whom before I spoke of) Ep. page 7. That the ruling
Elders want nothing of the power of the Minister, but that they preach not, nor
baptize in public congregations: yet other things which the Pastor does by his
power of Order, the ruling Elder ought also to do by his own power of Order.
And if we would know how much of this power of Order is common to both, let us
note that Pastors do some things by their power of Order, which all Christians
ought to do by the law of Charity. Things of this sort a ruling Elder may and
ought to do by his power of Order, and by virtue of his election and
ordination to such an office. For example, every Christian is bound in Charity
to admonish and reprove his brother that offends; first, privately, then
before witnesses; and if he hear not, to tell it to the Church, Levit. 19.17.
Matthew. 18.15.16.17. This a ruling Elder ought to do by virtue of his calling,
and with authority, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Private Christians ought in Charity to
instruct the ignorant, Joh. 4.29. Act. 18.26. to exhort the negligent, Heb.
3.15. and 10.24 25. to comfort the afflicted, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. to support the
weak, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. To restore him that falls, Galat. 6.1. to visit the
sick, Matthew. 25.36.40. to reconcile those who are at variance, Matthew. 5.9. to
contend for the truth, and to answer for it, Jude v. 3. 1 Pet. 3.15. All which
are incumbent to the ruling Elder by the authority of his calling. To conclude
then, the calling of ruling Elders consists in these two things. 1. To assist
and voice in all Assemblies of the Church, which is their power of
jurisdiction. 2. To watch diligently over the whole flock all these ways which
have been mentioned, and to do by authority that which other Christians ought
to do in charity, which is their power of order. And the Elder which
neglects any one of these two whereunto his calling leads him, shall make
answer to God for it. For the Word of God, the Discipline of this Kirk, the
bonds of his own calling and covenant, do all bind sin upon his soul, if
either he give not diligence in private, by admonishing all men of their duty
as the case requires; or if he neglect to keep either the Ecclesiastical
Court and Consistory within the Congregation where his charge is, or the
Classical Presbytery, and other Assemblies of the Church, which he is no
less bound to keep then his Pastor, when he is called and dessigned thereunto.

CHAP. III. The first Argument for ruling Elders, taken from the Jewish Church.
HAving showed what ruling Elders are, it follows to show Scripture and
Divine right for them. Our first Argument is taken from the government and
policy of the Jewish Church thus: Whatsoever kind of office-bearers the
Jewish Church had; not as it was Jewish, but as it was a Church, such ought the
Christian Church to have also. But the Jewish Church, not as it was Jewish, but
as it was a Church, had Elders of the people, who assisted in their
Ecclesiastical government, and were members of their Ecclesiastical
Consistories. Therefore such ought the Christian Church to have also. The
Proposition will no man call in question; for, quod competit alicui qua tali
competit omni tali. That which agrees to any Church as it is a Church, agrees
to every Church. I speak of the Church as it is a political body, and settled
Ecclesiastical Republike. Let us see then to the Assumption. The Jewish
Church, not as it was a Church, but as it was Jewish, had an high Priest,
typisying our great high Priest Jesus Christ. As it was Jewish, it had
Musicians to play upon Harpes, Psalteries, Cymbals, and other Musical
Instruments in the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 25.1. concerning which, hear Bellarmines
confession, de bon. oper. lib. 1. cap. 17. Justinius says, that the use of
instruments was granted to the Jews for their imperfection: and that therefore
such instruments have no place in the Church. We confess indeed that the use
of musical instruments agrees not alike with the perfect, and with the
imperfect, and that therefore they began but of late to be admitted in the
Church. But as it was a Church, and not as Jewish, it had four sorts of
ordinary office-bearers, Priests, Levites, Doctors, and Elders, and we
conformablie have Pastors, Deacons, Doctors, and Elders. Lib. 1. Ep. 9.
To their Priests and Levits, Cyprian does rightly liken our Pastors and
Deacons, for howsoever sundry things were done by the Priests and Levites,
which were typical and Jewish only; yet may we well parallel our Pastors
with their Priests, in respect of a perpetual Ecclesiastical office common to
both, viz. the Teaching and governing of the people of God, Mal. 2.7. 2 Chronicles.
19.8. and our Deacons with their Levits, in respect of the cure of
Ecclesiastical goods, and of the work of the service of the house of God in
the materials and appurtenances thereof, a function likewise common to both, 1
Chro. 26.20. and 23.24.28. Iun. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 5. Mos. and Aaron. ii. 2.
c. 2. Alsted. Thesau. Chro. page 265. Ferneius. Theol. lib. 7. page 151.152.
Mar^yr. loc. com. class. 4. cap. 1. p. 745.
The Jewish Church had also Doctors and Schools, or Colleges for the
preservation of true Divinity among them, and of tongues, arts, and sciences,
necessary thereto, 1 Chronicles. 15.22.27. 2 King. 22.14. 1 Samuel 19.20. 2 Kings
2.3.5. Act. 19.9. These office-bearers they had for no typical use, but we
have them for the same use and end for which they had them. And all these sorts
of office-bearers among us we do as rightly warrant from the like sorts among
them as other whiles we warrant our baptizing of Infants from their
circumcising of them, our Churches by their Synagogues, etc.

Now that the Jewish Church had also such Elders as we plead for, it is
manifest: for besides the Elders of the Priests, there were also Elders of the
people joined with them in the hearing and handling of Ecclesiastical matters,
Jer. 19.1. Take of the ancients of the people* and of the ancients of the
Priests. The Lord sending a message by the Prophet, would have a representative
body of all Judah to be gathered together for receiving it, as Tremellius
notes. So 2 Kings 6.32. Elisha sat in his house, and the Elders sat with
him. We read, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. That with the Priests were joined some of the
chief of the Fathers of Israel, to judge Ecclesiastical causes and
controversies. And howsoever many things among the Jews in the latter times,
after the captivity, did wear to confusion and misorder, yet we find even in
the days of Christ, and the Apostles, that the Elders of the people still sat
and voyced in Council with the Priests, according to the ancient form, as is
clear from sundry places of the new Testament, Matthew. 16.21. and 21.23. and
26.57.59. and 27.1.12. Mark 14 43. Luke 22.66. Acts 4.5. Anno 58. n. 10.
This is also acknowledged by the Roman Annalist Baronius, who confesses
further, That as this was the form among the Jews, so by the Apostles was the
same form observed in their times, and Seniors then admitted into Councels.
Saravia himself, who disputes so much against ruling Elders, acknowledges
what has been said of the Elders of the Jews, Seniores quidem invenio in
Consessu Sacerdotum veteris Synagoga, De diverse. grad. minist. Evang. cap. ^ 1.
p. 108.
qui Sacerdotes non erant. I find indeed (says he) Elders in the Assembly of
the Priests of the old Synagogue, which were not Priests. Et quamvis paria
little essent suffragia and authoritas in omnibus sufragiis sacerdotum, Ibid. p.
118.
cum suffragiis Sacerdotum, etc. And although (says he) their suffrages and
authority in all judgments were equal with the suffrages of the Priests, etc.
But what then, think ye, he has to say against us? He says, Ibid. p.
10^.118.
that the Elders of the Jews were their Magistrates, which in things
pertaining to the external government of the Church, ought not to have been
debarred from the Council of the Priests, more then the Christian Magistrate
ought now to be debarred from the Synods of the Church. Now to prove that
their Elders were their civil Magistrates, he has no better argument then
this, That the Hebrew word Zaken, which is turned Elder, imports a chief
man, or a Ruler. We answer, First, this is a bold conjecture which he has
neither warranted by divine nor by humane testimonies. Secondly, Zaken does not
ever signify a Ruler, or a man in authority, as we have showed before.
Thirdly, let us grant Zaken to be a name of dignity, and to import a chief
man; yet a chief man is not ever a Magistrate, nor a Ruler. It would only
follow that they were of the chief of the fathers of Israel that were joined
with the Priests in the Sanedrim, and so it was, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. Non hercle de
plebe hominum lecti sed nobilissimi omnes, De repub. Jud. lib. 1. c. 12.
says P. Cunaeus. They were, says Loc. Theol. to. 6.. 28. Proceres tribuum
qui allegabantur una cum sacerdotibus and scribis in sacrum synedrium.
Fourthly, they who were so joined in Council with the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 19.8.
are plainly distinguished from the Judges and Magistrates, verse. 11. And so
are the Princes and Rulers distinguished from the Elders, Act. 4.5. Judge. 8.14.
Deuteronomy. 5.23. Jos. 8.33. Fifthly, we would know whether he thought that all the
Magistrates of the Jews sat in Council with the Priests, or some of them
only: if some only, we desire either proof or probability who they were, and
how many; if all, then should we by the like reason admit not the supreme
Magistrate alone (which he seems to say) into the Synods of the Church, but
all Magistrates whatsoever, and what a confusion should that be? Sixthly those
Elders that sat in the civil Sanedrim, were Rulers by their sitting there; but
the Elders which sat in the Ecclesiastical Sanedrim, either were not civil
Magistrates, or at least sat not there as Magistrates. So do our Magistrates
sometimes sit with us, as members of our Assemblies, not as Magistrates, but as
Elders. Of the distinction of those two Courts, which every one observes not,
we shall speak more afterward.

We have said enough against Saravia, but Bilson does better deserve an answer,
who alleges more specious reasons to prove, that the Elders of the Jews were
their civil Magistrates. He says, There was no Senate nor Seniors among the
Jews, but such as had power of life and death, of imprisonment, confiscation,
banishment, etc. which he makes to appear thus: In the days of Ezra the
punishment of contemners was forfeiture of their substance, and separation from
the congregation, Ezra 10.8. The trial of secret murder was committed to the
Elders of every City, Deuteronomy. 21.3.4. They delivered the wilful murderer unto
the Avenger of blood, to be put to death, Deuteronomy. 19.12. They condemned a
stubborn son to death, Deuteronomy. 21.19. They chastened a man who had spoken
falsely of his wife, that he found her not a virgin, Deuteronomy. 22.15.16.18. Ans.
First, if it should be granted, that the Elders spoken of in these places,
were civil Magistrates, this proves not that there were no Ecclesiastical
Elders among the Jews. Bertram de Pol. Jud. cap. 16. says, that these Elders
did continue among the ten Tribes, even after the defection of Jeroboam.
Seniores erant qui in mores and vitam piorum virorum, etc. Inquirebam and
reprehensionibus censur sque Ecclesiasticis animad ^ertebant. Ho^um Seniorum
and reliquae Ecclesiae coetus and actiones moderab^ntur Prophetae: (...) ut ad
Prophetae d^mum al quando seniores convenirent, 2 Reg. 6.32.
Iustellus in his Annotations upon the Book of the Canons of the African
Church, distinguishes betwixt the civil Elders mentioned, Can. 91. who were
called Seniores locorum, or Vrbium: and the Ecclesiastical Elders mentioned,
Can. 100. who were called, Seniores Ecclesiae, and Seniores Plebis: the former
name distinguishing them from the civil Elders, the latter distinguishing them
from Preaching Elders. So there might be the same two sorts of Elders among the
Jews. And what then? It is enough for us that we find in the Jewish Church,
some Elders joined with the Priests, and employed in things Ecclesiastical.
The Elders and Priests are joined together both in the new Testament, as Matthew.
26.59. the chief Priests and Elders; so in other places before cited: And
likewise in the old Testament, Exodus 24.1. Come up unto the Lord, thou and
Aaron, Nadab and ^bihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel, Deuteronomy. 27.1. Moses
with the Elders, compared with verse. 9. Moses and the Priests. Ezech. 7.26. The
Law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from the ancients, Jer. 19 1.
Take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the Priests. We
find also the Commandments of God first delivered to the Elders, and by them
to the people, Exodus 12.21.28. and 19.7.8. It is said, Deuteronomy. 27.1. Moses with
the Elders of Israel commanded the people. Upon which place Hugo Cardinalis
says: Argumentum, etc. Here is an argument that a Prelat ought not to command
any thing without the counsel of the Elders.

Secondly, but it cannot be proved, that these Elders in the places objected,
were Judges or Magistrates: nay, the contrary appears from other places,
which we have before alleged for the distinction of Elders from Magistrates
or Judges: whereunto we may add, 2 Kings 10.1. Unto the Rulers of Iezreel, to
the Elders, and to them that brought up Ahabs children. And verse 5. He that
was over the house, and he that was over the City, the Elders also, and the
bringers up of the children, Ezra 10.14. The Elders of every City, and the
Judges thereof.

Fourthly, we read of threescore and seventeen Elders in Succoth, Judge. 8.14.
whereas the greatest number of Judges in one City among the Jews was three
for smaller matters, and three and twenty for greater matters. This objection
Bilson himself moves, but answers it not.

Fifthly, as for the places which he objecteth against us, the first two of
them make against himself. In Ezra 10.8. we find not only the civil
punishment of forfeiture, but also as Pellicanus on that place, and Zepperus de
pol. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 7. do observe the Ecclesiastical punishment of
excommunication, or separation from the Congregation: the former answering to
the council of the Princes, the latter to the council of the Elders. The
place Deuter. 21.3.4. makes against him in three respects. First, the Elders
of the City did but wash their hands over the beheaded Heifer, and purge
themselves before the Lord from the bloodshed, which was a matter rather
Ecclesiastical then civil, neque enim, etc. For there was no need of a Judge
here who should be present formally as Judge, says Bonfrerius, the Jesuit,
upon that place. Secondly, the controversy was decided by the word of the
Priests, verse. 5. Thirdly, Tostatus thinks that the Elders and the Judges are
plainly distinguished, verse. 2. Thy Elders and thy Judges shall come forth.
Quaeras hic, etc. Thou may here ask, says Pelargus, why the Elders of the
people and the Judges were both together called out? I answer, because God will
have both the Magistrate and the subjects to be innocent, etc. As for the other
places, that which seems to prove most for the civil power of the Jewish
Elders, is Deuter. 22. yet hear what that famous Commentator, Tostatus
Abulensis, says on that place, Quando talis, etc. When such a cause was to be
judged, because it was very weighty, the Elders of the City did meet together
with the Judges thereof, for in such facts there is some place for conjecture,
and the Elders who are the wiser sort, can herein be more attentive then
others. So he notes upon Ruth 4.2. that the Elders sat in the gate about the
controversy betwixt Boaz and the other Kinsman, not as Judges, but as
witnesses and beholders, that the matter might be done with the more gravity
and respect. Which does further appear from verse. 9.11. In like manner we
answer to Deuteronomy. 21.19. the Judges decided that cause with advice and counsel
of the Elders: and so the name of Elders in those places may be a name not of
office, but of dignity, signifying men of chief note, for wisdom, gravity,
and experience. In which sense the word Elders is taken, Genesis 50.7. as Tostatus
and Rivetus expound that place. In the same manner we say of Deuter. 19.12. and
in that case it is further to be remembered that the Cities of refuge had a
kind of a sacred designation and use, for the Altar it self was sometimes a
place of refuge, Exodus 21.14. and when the six Cities of refuge were
appointed, they were of the Cities of the Levits Numb. 35.6. that by the
judgment and counsel of the Levits who should best understand the Law of God,
such controversies might be determined, as Pellicanus on that place says well;
for this cause some read Josh. 20.7. They sanctified Kedesh, etc. Besides, if
it be true that these causes were judged, not in the City where the murder was
committed, but in the City of refuge, In Jos. 20. quaest. 3.
as Serrarius holds with Masius and Montanus, and alleges for it some very
considerable reasons, then does Bilsons Argument from Deuteronomy. 19.12. fail also
in this respect, for the Elders there mentioned are the Elders of the City
where the murder was committed.

CHAP. IV. The second Argument taken from Matthew. 18.17.
OUR second argument we take from Matthew. 18.17. Tell the Church. Let an
obstinate offender, whom no admonition does amend, be brought and judged by
the Church. Where first of all, it is to be condescended upon, That though he
speaks by allusion to the Jewish Church, as is evident by these words, Let
him be unto thee as an heathen man and a Publican; Yet he means of the
Christian Church, when he says, Tell the Church, as may appear by the words
following, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, etc. which is meant of the Apostles and
Ministers of ^he Gospel, Joh. 20.23. so that he did not send them to the
Synedrium of the Jews, when he bade them tell the Church: nor, 2. does he
mean of the Church universal; for then we should have none of our wrongs
redressed, because we cannot assemble the Church universal; nay, nor the
representative of it, which is an Oecumenicke Council: Nor 3. can we
underderstand it of the collective body, of a particular Church or
Congregation; for he who is the God of order, not of confusion, has committed
the exercise of no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to a promiscuous multitude. Nor
4. can it be taken of a Prelate, who being but one, can no more be called the
Church, nor one can be called many, or a member be called a body. Non enim una
persona potest dici Ecclesia, says Bell. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 17. Cum Ecclesia
sit populus and regnum Dei. It is plain, that the Church there spoken of, is a
certain number met together, Where two or three are gathered together. D^
guber. Eccles. cap. ^. p. 70.71.
etc. Nor 5. can we with Erastus and Bilson expound it of the Christian
Magistrate; which exposition, beside that in a newfangled language, it calls
the Magistrate the Church, and goes about to overthrow all Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. It is also utterly contrary to the purpose of Christ, and to the
aim of that discipline which he recommendeth to be used, which is the good of
our brother, and the gaining of him from his offense, whereas the exercise of
civil jurisdiction of the Magistrate is not intended for te^ good of the
offender, and for the winning of him to repentance; but for the public good of
the Commonwealth, and for the preservation of peace, order, and justice,
therein according to the laws. Wherefore by the Church whereof our master
speaks, we must needs understand such a representative meeting of the Church,
wherein a scandalous and obstinate person may, and ought to be judged.
Praelect. tom 1. p. 23.
And what is that? Collegium Presbyterorum, says Camero. The Presbytery
whereof mention is made, 1 Timothy 4.14. Tell the Church, that is, (...) says
Chrysostom, expounding the place: he means the Presbytery made up of
Pastors and ruling Elders. In 4. praecept. col. 741. Contr. 3. l. 2. c. 6.
And so Zanchius and Iunius expound him. The Pastors were (...), because of
their presiding in the Consistories of the Church. The ruling Elders were
(...), because of their ruling the flock. D. of Tract. 17. ^. 2. Div. 4.
Whitgift says, Truth it is, that the place of Matthew may be understood of
Seniors, but it may be as well understood of any other, that by the order of
the Church, have authority in the Church. His confession in behalf of Seniors
we accept, but that he makes this Scripture like a nose of wax, and the
government of the Church like the French fashion, that we utterly abhor. But
how is the Presbytery called the Church, and why? First, even as the body is
said to see when as the eyes alone do see; Ubi supra, page 26.
so says Camero. The Church is said to hear that which they alone do hear,
who are as the eyes of the Church. Secondly, it is a common form of speech to
give the name of that which is represented to that which represents it. So
we commonly say that this or that is done by the States of Holland, which is
done by the Senate at Hague. Now though Bishops or Pastors alone cannot
represent the Church, because hearers also belong to the definition of the
Church; yet the Presbytery can well represent the Church, because it
contains, beside those who labor in the word, ruling Elders put in authority
by the Church for the government thereof, as Gerard rightly resolves. Loc.
Theol. tom. 6. p. 137.
. Our Divines prove against Papists that some of these whom they call Laickes
ought to have place in the Assemblies of the Church by this Argument among the
rest; because otherwise the whole Church could not be thereby represented.
Thirdly, Number. 8 9.10.
the Lord commanded that the children of Israel should lay their hands upon the
Levits at their consecration, and that the whole congregation should be
brought together for that effect. This, as some have observed out of Aben-Ezra,
(...) of Eccl^s. discip. page 87.
cannot be so understood as if the many thousands which were then in the Host
of Israel had all laid their hands upon them, but the Elders of Israel only
representing them. So the Lord says, Exo^. 12.3. verse ^1.
speak to all the Congregattion of Israel, etc. But the execution of this
command is expressed thus, Then Moses called for all the Elders of Israel, and
said unto them etc. 2 Cor. 4.5.
So Josh. 20.6. Fourthly, Pastors and Elders, as they are the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, so are they the Ministers and servants of his Spouse the Church.
From that which has been said we may draw our Argument in this form.

Whatsoever Courts do represent the Church, these are made up of ruling as well
as teaching Elders.

But Presbyteries and all Assemblies of the Church are Courts which represent
the Church. Ergo. The proposition is proved thus: Whatsoever Courts represent
hearers as well as teachers, and the people as well as the Ministry, these are
made up of ruling as well as teaching Elders.

But whatsoever Courts do represent the Church, these represent hearers as well
as teachers, etc. It is plain enough that the Church cannot be represented
except the hearers of the word, which are the far greatest part of the Church
be represented. By the Ministers of the word they cannot be represented more
then the Burghes can be represented in Parliament by the Noblemen or by the
Commissioners of Shires* therefore by some of their own kind must they be
represented, that is by such as are hearers and not preachers. Now some hearers
cannot represent all the rest, except they have a calling and commission
thereto, and who can those be but ruling Elders?

CHAP. V. Our third Argument taken from Romans 12.8.
OUR third Argument is grounded upon Romans 12.8. The Apostle has declared
before that, as there are many members in one body, and all the members have
not the same office, for the office of the eye is to see, of the ear to hear,
etc. So are their gifts given to the several office-bearers of the Church,
wherewith every one in his own office may glorify God and edify the Church,
verse. 4. with verse. 5.6. These gifts he says are differing, according to the
grace given to us; that is, according to the holy charge and office given unto
us by the grace and favor of God: so verse. 3. Through the grace given unto me,
says Paul: that is through the authority of my Apostleship, which by grace I
have obtained. Now whiles he exhorts every one to the faithful and humble
use of his gift which he has received for the discharge of his office, he
illustrateth his exhortation by the enumeration of the ordinary Ecclesiastical
offices verse. 6.7.8. And as Beza, In illum locum. Eccles. l. 2. c. 1.
Piscator, and Iunius do well resolve the text. First, he makes a general
division of functions in the Church, making two sorts of the same Prophecy,
whereby is meant the faculty of expounding Scripture: and Ministry
comprehending all other employments in the Church. Prophesying the Apostle
sudivideth into Teaching, which is the Doctors part, and Exhortation which is
the Pastors. Ministry he subdivideth in Giving, which is the Deacons part.
Ruling which is the ruling Elders part, and Showing mercy, which pertained to
them who had care of the sick. Against this commentary which we have made upon
the Apostles words. De Presbyt. p. 87.
Sutcliffe objecteth a double injury which we do to Pastors. First, if these
our Elders be the Rulers here spoken of, then Pastors ought not to rule: as if
(forsooth) Elders could not rule except they rule alone. Next he says we
make these Elders as necessary to the Church as Pastors; so that a Church
cannot be where there are not ruling Elders, even as there is not a Church
where there are not Word and Sacraments. Surely, a Church may happen to want
Pastors, and so to want both the preaching of the Word, and the use of the
Sacraments for that time: And so may it want Elders, and still remain a
Church, but defective and maimed. Howbeit the Pastors are more necessary then
the Elders, because they do not only rule, but preach beside.

But to pass this, there are other things which better deserve an answer: for
one might object, 1. That the Apostle seems to speak of several gifts
only, not of several offices. 2. If he speak of Offices, by what reason
make we Prophecy and Ministry general kinds, and all the rest particular
offices. 3. Why would the Apostle put the Deacon before the Elder. 4. Bishop
Andrews in his Sermon of the worshipping of Imaginations, makes a fourth
objection, that by our interpretation of this place, we make Qui miseretur to
be Latin for a widow.

To the first of these we answer, The Apostles Protasis speaks of several
offices, not in the same, but in several members: how then should we make his
Apodosis to speak of several gifts in the same, and not in several
office-bearers of the Church: wherefore, as seeing, hearing, tasting, etc. do
differ subjectively in respect of the members, which do see, hear, etc. So
speaks the Apostle of teaching, exhorting, ruling, etc. as they are in
different office-bearers. It is least of all credible which Bilson says de
Eccles. gubern. c. 10. p. 186.187. that the Apostle speaks not of the gifts of
office-bearers, but of gifts distributed unto all the members of Christ's
mystical body, even unto women. He had showed us a great secret, if he could
have made it appear, that all who are in the Church, women and all, may both
prophecy and rule. In this he shall have the praise of out-stripping the
Separatists. We know that private Christians may teach and exhort one another;
but they do not so devote themselves thereto, as altogether to wait upon
teaching and exhorting, which is the case the Apostle speaks of.

To the second we say, that Prophecy and Ministry are put in abstracto, and
^oyned with a plural (...); but teaching, exhorting, giving, ruling, and
sh^wing mercy, are put in c^ncreto, and to each of them the single article pre
fixed; which is a sufficien^ warrant to expound Prophecy and Ministry, as
Genera, and the rest as Species, Chrysostom considering the word Ministry,
says, Rem hic generalem ponit.

To the third we answer, He which is first named, has not always some
prerogative or dignity above him which is last named* else do the Papists
rightly argue, that Peter was the chief of all the Apostles, because they
find him named before all the rest, Matthew. 10.2. Act. 1.13. The Apostle
intended to reckon out all ordinary offices in the Church; but he intended not
the precise order. Chrysostom upon this same place says: Vide quomodo ista
indifferenter ponat quod minutum est primo: quod magnum est posteriore loco.
Ephesians. 4.11. he puts Pastors before Teachers: here to the Romans he puts
Teachers before Pastors.

To the fourth we answer, That though it be ordinarily most convenient, that
the office of attending the sick be committed to women, yet it is not
essentially necessary to the offifice: And as Aretius notes upon the place,
we may under (...) comprehend not only widows appointed to attend the sick,
but old men appointed to receive and entertain strangers: ^oc. com. class. 4.
cap 1. p. 746.
Which is also judiciously observed by Martyr. Besides, when the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. teaches what is required in widows, who should be made Diaconesses;
this he requires among other things, that they be not such as live in
pleasures and idleness, and take not care to provide for their own houses,
verse 6.8. (...); which though Erasmus and Beza turn in the feminine, quod si
qua, yet our English Translators, and many good Interpreters, turn it in the
masculine. And surely it shall have more weight if it agree to men as well as
women, says Calvin upon that place. Now they who read in the masculine, that
which the Apostle says there of widows, will not, we suppose, blame us for
reading, Romans 12.8. in the masculine also, He that shows mercy. We conclude
our third Argument thus:

Whatsoever office-bearer in the Church is different from Pastors and Teachers,
and yet rules the Church, he must needs be a ruling Elder.

But (...) mentioned, Romans 12.8. is different from Pastors and Teachers, and
yet rules the Church. Ergo.

CHAP. VI. Argument 4. from 1 Cor. 12.28.
OUR fourth Argument is drawn from 1 Cor. 12.28. where we find again an
enumeration of sundry offices in the Church (though not so perfect as that Romans
12.) and amongst others, Helps, that is, Deacons, and Governments, that is,
Ruling El^ers. Where we cannot enough admire how the Authors of the new
English translation were bold to turn it thus, Helps in Governments, so to
make one of two, and to elude our Argument. The original has them clearly
distinguished, (...). And I find some late editions of the English translation
to have it as it is in the Greek, Helps, Governments. How this change has been
made in the English Bibles, I know not. Chrysostom expounding, this place does
not take Helps and Governements to be all one, as Bilson has boldly, De gub.
Eccl. cap. 10. p. 204
but falsely averred. Nay Chrysostom makes the meaning of (...), to be ut
pauperes suscipiamus: and the meaning of (...), he expounded to be praeesse ac
curam gerere and res administrare spirituales. The former belongs to Deacons,
the later to ruling Elders. Two answers are made to this place.

First, Of the Church lib 5. cap. 26.
D. Field answers, that both here and Romans 12.8. we reason a genere ad
speciem affirmative; because the Apostle mentions Governors whom he
requires to rule with diligence, therefore they were such Elders as we plead
for. Answer to the Admon. p. 114.115
Whitgift says, the word Governors, 1. Cor. 12.28. and Rulers, Romans 12.8. is
general, and may either signify Christian Magistrates, or Ecclesiastical, as
Archbishops, Bishops, or whatsoever other by lawful authority are appointed in
the Church.

We reply, Temporis illius conditiono^ de qu buslibet praefectis Paulum loqui
oftendit quia tuncnulli erant pii Magistratus: sed de Senioribus qui morum
erant Censores says Calvine upon Romans 12.8.
first, if the Apostle had mentioned Rulers or Governors alone, then might we
have indeed guessed, that he meant a general kind only, and no particular
Species: But since he has enumerate so many Species, as Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, gifts of miracles, gifts of tongues, etc. Surely they did either most
ignorantly, or most maliciously err who tell us, that the Apostle puts a
Genus in the midst of so many Species. Secondly, the Apostle speaks only of
Ecclesiastical Officers, God has set some in the Church, etc. What meant
Whitgift to extend his words to the civil Magistrate. T. C. answered him, that
he could not distinguish betwixt the Church and Common-wealh, and so betwixt
the Church Officers, and the Officers of the Commonwealth. He replied, that he
could not put any such difference betwixt them, that the one may not be
comprehended under the Apostles word, as well as the other. For I utterly
renounce, says he, that distinction invented by Papists, and maintained by
you, which is, that Christian Magistrates govern not in the respect they be
Christians but in the respect they be men; and that they govern Christians,
not in that they be Christians, but in that they be men: which is to give no
more authority to the Christian Magistrate in the Church of Christ, then to the
great Turk. Let our opposites here go by the ears among themselves: for M.
Io. Wemys holds, De Reg. prim. p. 123.
that all Kings have alike jurisdiction in the Church, Infidels as well as
Christian Kings. We hold that Christian Magistrates govern their subjects,
neither as Christians, nor as men, but as Magistrates; and they govern
Christian subjects as Christian Magistrates. In like manner, Christians are
governed by Magistrates, neither as they are Christians, nor as they are men,
but as they are subjects, and they are governed by Christian Magistrates, as
they are Christian subjects. And we all maintain, that a Christian Magistrate
has great authority over Christian subjects, in things pertaining to the
conservation and purgation of religion, which the great Turk, nor no Infidel
Magistrate has, or can have, except he become Christian. But what do I
digressing after the impertinencies of a roving disputer? for what of all this?
Let Christian Magistrates govern as you will, will any man say that his office
is Ecclesiastical, or to be reckoned among Apostles, Prophets Teachers? etc.
Wherefore

Let us proceed to the other answer, which is made by Saravia: De diver. grad,
minist. Evang. c. 11. p. 115.
He says, that though the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.28. reckon out different gifts,
we need not for that understand different persons, nor make different orders
and offices in the Church, of the gifts of miracles, healing, tongues, and
prophecies, which might be, and were in one man. Whereupon he resolves the
Text thus: that first, Paul sets down three distinct orders, Apostles,
Prophets, and Teachers; then he reckons forth these common gifts of the holy
Ghost (and the gift of governing amongst the rest) which were common to all the
three. De Presbyt. p. 87.

De perpet. Eccles. gubet. cap. 10. p. 190, 191.


The Apostle says not Governors, but Governments, says Sutcliffe, to show
that he means of faculties not of persons. So says Bilson in like manner.

For confutation of all this, it is to be remembered: First, that the gifts
spoken of by the Apostle, are given of God for the common good and edification
of the Church, And God has set some in the Church, etc. Secondly, these gifts
the Apostle considers not, abstract^^e a subjectis; but as they are in men
endued with them, as is plain; for he had before reckoned forth the gifts
themselves, verse. 8.9.10. and if here he did no more but reckon them over
again, this were actum agere. He is now upon the use and exercise of these
gifts by the office-bearers of the Church, verse. 27.29. And though the Apostle,
verse. 28. speaks concretively only of these three, Apostles, Prophets, and
Teachers, yet the rest must be understood in the same manner, per metoxymiam
adjuncti; as when we speak of Magistracy and Ministry, for Magistrates and
Ministers* yea, the Apostle, verse. 29.30. so expounds himself where he
speaks concretive of the same things whereof he seemed before to speak
abstractive. He speaks of them as they are in different subjects, which is
most evident both by his protasis wherein he did again press the same simile
of the several offices, not of the same but of several members of the body;
and likewise by the words immediately subjoyned, Are all Apostles, are all
Prophets? are all Teachers? He would have stood here and said no more, if he
had meant to distinguish these three orders only as Saravia expounds him. But
now to make it plainly appear that he spoke of the other gifts also, as they
are in different persons, he adds, are all workers of miracles? have all the
gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? where we
may supply, are all for helps? are all for governements? But can it be for
naught that the Apostle ommitteth these two, when he does over again enumerate
all the rest? verse. 29.30. It is as if he had said, there are some who have
none of those special, and (for the most part) extraordinary gifts. All are
not Apostles, all are not Prophets, etc. for some have but common and ordinary
gifts, to be Deacons or Elders for government.

There is a great controversy betwixt the Jesuits and the Doctors of Sarbon,
about the meaning of this place which we have now expounded. C. 5. Sect. 50.
The Jesuits in their Spongia, written against the censure of the University of
Paris, contend, that by Helps the Apostle means, the regular Chanoins, who
help the Bishops and the Priests in preaching, ministering the Sacraments, and
hearing confessions. By governments they say he means secular Priests, whom
they call parochi. And because he puts helps before governments, they
infer that Regular Chanoins are of an higher degree ^in the Hierarchy of the
Church, then Secular Priests. This they maintain (good men) for the credit of
their own Polypragmaticke order, and not for the credit of other regular
Chanoins, you may be sure. The Doctors of Sorbon in their Vindicia Censura,
written by Aurelius, Page 378.380.
considered that they could not maintain the meaning of the Apostle to be
only of different gifts (which no doubt they had answered, if they had thought
it to carry any probability) therefore they acknowledge that under these gifts
are contained also the degrees of the Hierarchy. And that the Apostles words
do partly belong to the common gifts of the Spirit, as powers and
interpretation of tongues, partly to the Hierarchy: of this later sort, Page
362. etc.
they make helps and governments. And by the helps they seem to understand
Archdeacons and Curates.

But now to conclude this Argument also, thus it is: They who have the gift and
office of governing the Church, and are different from them, who have other
gifts and offices in the Church, can be no other then the ruling Elders, which
we plead for.

But these (...) spoken of, 1 Cor. 12.28. are such. Ergo.

CHAP. VII. Argument 5. from 1 Timothy 5.17.
OUR fifth Argument is taken from a clear place, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders
that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor
in the word and doctrine. Hence we reason after this manner.

These Churches which had some Elders that labored not in the Word and
Doctrine, yet were worthy of double honor for ruling well, had the very same
ruling Elders we plead for.

But the Apostolic Churches had some Elders that labored not in the Word and
Doctrine, yet were worthy of double honor for ruling well. Ergo.

The Argument rises from the plain Text, then which what can be cleerer? But
there are some who would darken light, and lighten darkness.

Doctor Field propounds three glosses upon this place for the frustration of
our Argument. Of the Church. l. 5. c. 26.
First, that the guides of the Church are worthy of double honor, both in
respect of governing and teaching, but especially for their pains in teaching;
so that the Apostle notes two parts or duties of Presbyteriall offices, not
two sorts of Presbyters. This is manifestly against the Text, which speaks of
officers, not of offices, of persons, not of duties, for it is not said,
especially for laboring, etc. But especially they that labor, etc.

Secondly, he says, among Elders some labored principally in governing and
ministering the Sacraments, some in preaching. So Paul shows that he preached
and labored more then all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.10. and 1.14. Act. 14.12.
but baptized few or none. And when Paul and Barnabas were companions, and
their travells equal; yet Paul was the chief speaker; so that though both
were worthy of double honor, yet Paul especially. But for answer to this.
First, we would gladly know what warrant had he for expounding Paul's more
abundant laboring then all the Apostles, of his preaching alone? Secondly,
what warrant for such a distinction of Elders, that some labored principally
in governing, some in preaching? Because Paul preached and did not baptize, and
because he was the chief speaker when he and Barnabas traveled together:
therefore some Elders labored in governing, some in preaching; good Logic
forsooth. Thirdly, thought he that the Apostle did ever account such Ministers
as do not mainly labor in preaching to be worthy of double honor: nay, it
was never the Apostles mind to allow any honor, far less double honor,
either to non-preaching or to seldom preaching Ministers. Hom. 15. in 1 Timothy
Vt quid enim doctor appellatur nisi ut doc^at? says Chrysostom. 4. Tell me
whether is preaching a duty belonging to all the Ministers of the Gospel or
not? if it be not the duty of all, then it is the duty of none, but a work of
supererogation or some such thing; for if some be not bound to preach by their
Presbyteriall order and vocation, what is there that should bind others to
preach? The order and calling of a Presbyter is alike common to all. Now if all
be bound to preach (which Field himself seems to say in his first gloss,
when he calls pains in teaching, a part or duty of the Presbyteriall
office, no less then governing) how shall those Presbyters be worthy of
double honor, who do not the duties of their Presbyteriall office, but leave
the one half of them undone?

Thirdly, says Field, there were some that remained in certain places for
governing of those who were already won by the preaching of the Gospel:
others traveled with great labor, from place to place, to preach Christ to
such as had never heard of him. Both these were worthy of double honor, but
especially the later, who did not build upon another foundation, nor govern
those whom others had gained. The Poet would here answer: Non minor est virtus
quam quaerere parta tueri.


A Physician would happily say, that to prevent the recidivation, is as much
worth as the cure. But I answer, 1. There is no such opposition in the Text,
but a subordination rather: for Elders who labor in the word and doctrine, are
not contra-distinguished from Elders that rule well, but are declared to be
one kind of Elders that rule well. 2. Though the Apostles and Evangelists
traveled from one Country to another, to preach Christ to such as never heard
of him; yet where has he read that some of these who were mere* Presbyters
(for of such speaks the Text in hand) did so likewise? It rather appears
from Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5. that Elders were ordained in every City, there to
remain at their particular charges, and no Elders find we ordained by the
Apostles ordinatione vaga.

We have heard D. Fields three glosses upon this place in question. Sutcliffe
has given us other three which are no better. De Presbyt. cap. 12.
First, he says, that if there be here any distinction of ruling Elders, it
is betwixt those that labor more abundantly and painfully, and betwixt those
that labor not so much. De diver. grad. minis. Evang. c. 13.

Paren. cap. 11. page 38.

Episcop. by div. right. page 219.


This gloss is also received by Saravia, by Titen, by Bishop Hall in his
Assertion of Episcopacie by divine right. They tell us, it is one thing to
preach, another thing to labor in the word and doctrine, Answ. 1. It is not
the ministry of the word, but the ministry of ruling which here the Apostle
makes common to both. 2. This exposition allows not only honor, but double
honor; yea, a high degree of double honor to such as take no pains in
preaching, but are sparing therein. 3. It makes the Apostles speech not to
grow, but to fall: for (...) when they have stretched it to the full, notes
only great labor, whereas to rule well imports both great labor and great
prudence, dexterity, faithfulness and charity beside. 4. It makes the last
part of the speech, In the Word and Doctrine, to be superfluous: for they hold
that all the difference here, is in the measure or manner of labor, and no
difrence in re subjecta. 5. All who have any charge in the Ministry, are
called (...) 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. If they be at all faithful, and worthy of honor,
then do they labor, 1 Cor. 3.8. yea, in laboring, watch, as they that must
give account, Heb. 13.27. 6. The Rhemists do interpret the Apostle in the same
manner. But Cartwright answers them; If he had meant any extraordinary
labor, he would rather have said, 2 Cor. 11.27. 1 Thessalonians* 2.9.
(...), then (...): for other where he uses (...), as a degree of painful
travel above (...), which is put for common labor, Rom, 16.12.

But it may be the next Commentary shall be better. The words, says Sutcliffe,
are to be rendered thus: Let Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor, laboring greatly in the Word and Doctrine: so that the later part of
the speech is added exegetically, to show who they be that rule well, to wit,
these who labor greatly in the word and doctrine. That the words are so to be
understood, he undertaketh to prove from the text it self: For, says he, one
who purposes to say in Greek, especially they who labor, will not say,
(...), but (...). Thus changing the Participle into a Verb, and the prepositive
article (...), which is written with an aspiration alone, into the subjunctive
(...) cum accentu gravi, for this answers to the relative who, which the
prepositive article does never. Moreover, says he, if the Apostle would have
distinguished Elders into these that preach, and these that preach not, he
would have added the adversative particle (...) after (...): for (...)
signifies indeed especially, but (...) alone without ^ signifies greatly, or
much, as here it does. Answ. 1. This reading of his is very harsh, and had need
to sound better before it contradict both the English Translators, and the
common current of Protestant Interpreters. 2. He is not so very well skilled
in the Greek, as he boasts to be, unless he make the Apostle Paul a great
Ignoramus in that language. For he puts a Participle with the Prepositive
Article for a Verb and a Relative, Philip. 4.7. (...), and the peace of God
which passes all understanding. So Ephesians. 4.22. (...). The old man which is
corrupt, and v. 24. (...). The new man which after God is created. 1 Thessalonians.
5.12. (...). To know them which labor among you. If S^tcliffs rule hold, we
may not read it so, but thus, To know them laboring among you. So Apoc. 7.14.
(...), These are they who come out of great tribulation. Many places of this
kind there are, which I need not cite. 3. An Ellipsis of the particle ^, is no
error, no not in members of an opposition, as Col. 2.23. much less in the
distinction of a Species from the Genus. 4. (...) without ^, is put for
especially, as well as when it has ^, 1 Timothy 4.10. who is the Savior of all
men, especially of these that believe. (...). This skilled Grecian would have
us to conceive it thus: God is the Savior of all men who believe much: and so
it shall be a comfortless text for those of little faith.

Surely this man had need to be more happy in his third exposition; and now let
us know what it is? He says, that though we could evince, that the Apostle
here speaks of some other Elders besides the Ministers of the word; yet we
shall have no advantage for our ruling Elders: for the Apostle being to prove
that the Ministers of the word ought to be maintained, why might he not, says
he, use this general proposition, That all Rulers, whether public or
domestic, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, are to be honored? When the
Apostle speaks of the choosing of Deacons, he will have them to be such as
have ruled their own houses well. This is his last refuge, and how weak, let
any man judge. We have heard of many sorts of Rulers, but who did ever hear
(before Sutliffe told it) of Domesticke or Civil Elders that rule well. Had
not the word Elders been in the Text, but the word (...) alone, he might have
been the bolder to have given this sense. But since the Apostle speaks not
generally of them that rule well, but of Elders in the Church that rule well,
this marreth his gloss altogether.

Bilson gives yet another sense, De perpet. Eccl. gub. c. 10.
That there were two sorts of Elders, some who labored in the word and
doctrine, some who had the care of the poor: both were worthy of double
honor; but especially they who labored in the word. Answ. Deacons are
distinguished from Elders, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 3. and by all antiquity.
If we make Deacons to be Elders, and the care of the poor to be an act of
ruling, then let us make what you will of the plainest Scriptures.

I find in Didoclavius three other interpretations beside the former: Altar
Damasc. cap. 12.
First, Bridges says, That by Elders who labor not in the word and doctrine,
are meant rulers or inferior Magistrates, chosen for compounding of civil
controversies. Answ. 1. This is a strange language to call civil Magistrates
by the name of Elders. 2. The Apostle is speaking of Ecclesiastical not of
Civil office-bearers. 3. This exposition makes Pastors who labor in the word
and doctrine, to be a sort of civil Magistrates, because they are a kind of
Elders that rule well.

Next, Bishop King expounds this place of old and infirm Bishops, who cannot
labor in the word and doctrine. Answ. 1. The Apostle speaks of Presbyters,
not of Prelates. 2. To rule well imports as great labor as preaching, and
somewhat more, as I showed before, so that they who cannot labor in preaching,
cannot labor in ruling neither. 3. They who have eviscerate and spent
themselves in the work of the Ministry, who have been (as long as they could
stand upon their feet) valiant Champions for the truth, against the enemies
thereof, who have served their time according to the will of God, without the
stain of Heresy, Schism, Apostasy, or unfaithfulness, when they become old
and infirm, they ought not to be the less honored (as the impious verdict of
this Prelate would have it) but so much the more honor ought to be given to
their hoare head found in the way of righteousness.

Another Gloss is given by the same King, namely, that the Apostle would have
Ministers, not only to live well, but to feed also by the word and doctrine.
Answ. 1. The rising of the Apostles words does not concern duties, but persons,
as we have said before. 2. To live well is not to rule well, unless we will
make all who live godly, to rule well. 3. Thirdly, this gloss does still leave
a double honor to Ministers that live well, though they do not preach.

We see now, our opposites have been trying all winds to fetch upon us: but
here we leave them betwixt wind and wave: ^or this our last argument carries
us away with full sail.

CHAP. VIII. The testimony of Ambrose for ruling Elders vindicated.
IF we look back beyond the times of declining unto the first and purest
times of the Church, we shall find ruling Elders to be no new fangled device
at Geneva; but that the primitive government and policy of the Church has
been in them restored. There is one place of Ambrose which cleereth it
sufficiently. He writing on 1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, says, Vnde and
Synagoga, etc. Wherefore both the Jewish Synagogue, and after the Church had
Senior or Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church: which
by what negligence it grew out of use, I know not, except perhaps by the sloth,
or rather by the pride of the teachers, whi^es they alone will seem to be
something. This sentence is also cited in Glossa ordinar. And it shows
plainly that as the Jewish, so the Christian Church had some Elders, who
though they were not Teachers of the Word, yet had a part of the government of
the Church upon their shoulders. But that this came into desuetude, partly
through the sloth of the teachers and Ministers of the Word, whiles they were
not careful to preserve the ordinances of God, and the right way of governing
the Church; and partly through their pride whilst they would do all by
themselves, and have no consorts, Vtinam modo nostra redirent
In mores tempora priscos.


But let us hear a triple divination which the non-friends of ruling Elders
give forth upon this testimony. Episcop. by div. r^ght. p. 226.
First, Bishop Hall tells us that it is not Ambrose, but a counterfeit who
wrote that Commentary upon the Epistles, and for this he alleges our own
Parker against us. The truth is, Bella^mine and Scultingius taught him this
answer: The place of Parker he cites no^ in the Margin; but I believe the
place he means of is de polit. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 13. where he holds
indeed, that the author of these Commentaries was not Ambrose, Bishop of
Millaine; but shows withal, that he nothing doubts of the Catholic
authority of the Commentaries themselves; Hoc vero, etc. This says he, may
befall the best Author whosoever he be, that some may ascribe his works to
another. But that he lived before the Council of Nice, this adds weight to
his testimony of the Seniors. These Commentaries are commonly cited by our
Divines, as Ambrose's. I find them in Erasmus his edition, both at Collen,
1532. and at Paris, 1551. acknowledged to be the genuine works of Ambrose,
only the Prefaces before the Epistles are called in question. They are also
acknowledged in the edition of Costerius at Basile, 1555. Sixtu^ Senensis
ascribes them to Ambrose in like manner. The edition of Collen, 1616. has an
observation prefixed, which repudiateth many of his works, and these
Commentaries among the rest. Yet the last edition at Paris, 1632. has expunged
that observation, which they had not done if they had approved the same:
Howsoever that same observation makes those Commentaries to be as old as 372.
or 373. Perkins in his preparative before his demonstration of the problem,
calls in question the Commentary upon the Hebrews, Critic. sacr. l. 3 c. 18.
but no more. Rivet shows that these who reject them, do neither give good
reasons for their opinion; neither yet do agree among themselves. Bellarmine
ascribing them to Hilarious Diaconus, Maldonat to Remigius Lugdunensis, the
Censors of Lovaine to the Author of the questions of the old and new Testament.
I believe that Cook in his Censura Scriptorum veterum, P. 134.
has touched the true cause why these Commentaries are so much called in
question, which is the perfidiousnesse of Papists, who when they find any
thing therein which they imagine to be for their advantage, then they cry,
Saint Ambrose says thus, but when they find any thing therein which makes
against them, then they say as Hall does, It is not Ambrose, but a counterseit;
I must confess that Hall is wiser in disclaiming the same, then his fellows
in acknowledging them: yet because he found that the Testimony may be of
force, though not Ambrose's, and beside had no proof for this alledgeance, he
durst not trust to it, but thought upon another answer.

De gub. Eccl. cap. 11. p. 210. De Presby^. c. 13. Of the Church. lib. 5. cap.
26.
To proceed then to their next conjecture. Bilson, Sutcliffe, and Doctor Field,
tell us that Ambrose meant of Bishops, who excluded other Clergy men from their
consultations, and that by the name of Teachers he might fitly understand the
Bishops, seeing none but they have power to preach in their own right, and
others but only by permission from them. This is a most desperate shift for a
bad cause. For first, there is no warrant neither from Scripture nor Antiquity
to distinguish Bishops from other Ministers of the Word by the name of
Teachers. Secondly, as for that reason alleged that none but Bishops have
power to preach in their own right, it is contrary to that which Field
himself says in the very next Chapter, where he holds that Presbyters are
equal with Bishops in the power of order, and that they may preach and
minister the Sacraments by virtue of their order, as well as Bishops. Thirdly,
neither did the advising of Bishops with Presbyters cease in Ambrose his time.
C. 27.
For as Field himself notes out of the fourth Council of Carthage (which was
holden shortly after Ambrose his writing hereof) all sentences of Bishops were
declared to be void, which were not confirmed by the presence of their Clergy.
Let us also hear Hierome and Chrysostom, (who lived both in the same age with
Ambrose) what does a Bishop, Epist. ad Evag.
says Hierome, ordination excepted, which a Presbyter may not do? By
ordination alone, says Chrysostom, In 1 Timothy hom. 10.
are the Bishops higher, and this only they seem to have more then Prebyters.
Which were not true if Bishops had then governed the Churches by themselves,
excluding the counsel and advice of Presbyters: Yea, though ordination was the
only one thing which made the difference* In Eph^s. 4.
Ambrose himself shows that Presbyters in Egypt did also ordain when the
Bishop was not present.

We have heard Sutcliffe and Doctor Field, but Saravia, De diverse. gra. minist.
Evang. c. 12. Parae^. c. ^^. p 42. Episc. by div. ^^g^t. p. 227.
and after him Tilen, and after them both Hall, has forged another gloss upon
the place of Ambrose. They boldly aver that the Elders without whose counsel
Ambrose says nothing was done in the Church, were Elders by age and not by
office. We reply. First, falsehood cannot keep its feet. Before we heard
Saravia maintain that the Seniors among the Jews, who sat in Ecclesiastical
Assemblies with the Priests, and had equal suffrages therein with the Priests,
were their Rulers and their Magistrates, now he tells us they were old men,
Elders by age only, not by office. Secondly, in his defense of that same
twelveth Chapter against Beza, he acknowledges that the Christian Church had
other Elders by office, besides the Ministers of the Word. The Church says
he, has had Elders some by divine institution, as the Pastors of Churches,
and Ministers of the Word of God. Others by condition of age or office* or
estimation, or learning and experience. How could he then astrict the words of
Ambrose to Elders by age only? 3. Where was it ever read or heard, that old
men, who had no Ecclesiastical office, were taken into the assemblies of the
Church, so that nothing was done without their counsel? 4. The Elders of whom
Ambrose speaks, are opposed to the Teachers, therefore they are not Elders by
age: for such are some of the Teachers themselves. 5. Ambrose indeed in his
preceding words had expounded the place of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.1. of Elders
by age: but thereupon he took occasion to speak of Elders by office also. 6.
That the Elders which we read to have been in the Jewish Church, were not
Elders by age* Basil shows plainly, whose testimony we shall hear by and by.

CHAP. IX. Other Testimonies of Antiquity.
THus having cleared the place of Ambrose, come we now to other testimonies of
the Ancients. Tertullian in his Apologeticke against the nations, Cap. 39.
speaking of the Meetings and Assemblies of Christians, shows, that besides
other things done therein, they had also corrections, censures, and
excommunication, and that in the exercise of this discipline. Praesident
probati quique Seniores, honorem ^stum non pretio sed testimonio adepti: with
us do sit all the approved Seniors, as presidents or rulers, having obtained
this honor not by price, but by a good testimony. Cyprian in his Epistles does
often protest, L. 1. ^p. 8. l. 2. ^p. 5. l. 3. ^p. 10. ibid. ^p. 11.
that from the beginning of his Bishopric he did all things by common consent
and advice both of his Clergy and people. Will any man think, that in
ordination, excommunication, reconciliation of penitents, and such like things
whereof Cyprian speaks in these places, he sought the counsel and advice of
the whole Congregation, and of all and every one therein? or rather that the
people gave their counsel and consent by the Eldership representing them?
Surely, this doing of all things with the advice and counsel of the whole,
both Clergy and People* he otherwhere shows to have been nothing else, but
the doing of all things by the advice and counsel of the Presbytery; which had
not been so, if there had not been in the Presbytery some of all sorts to
represent the rest. Omni actu, Lib. 3. ^p. 11.
says he, adme perlato placuit contrahi Presbyterium, etc. ut firmato consilio
quid observari deberet consensu omnium statueretur.

Epiphanius writing to John, Bishop of Jerusalem, concerning the tearing of a
veil which he had seen in the Church of a village called Anablatha, with the
image of Christ, or some Saint, upon it, and concerning another veil which he
had sent for it, entreats him to give order to the Elders of that place to
receive the veil from the bearer. It is not to be thought there were many
preaching Elders in a small village, he speaks in the plural, Precor ut
jubeas Presbyteros ejusdem loci etc.

Basilius M^gnus in his Commentary upon Isa. 3.2. where the Lord threatens to
take away from Israel the Ancient, or the Elder, shows from Numb. 11.16. how
warily such Elders were to be chosen, and that their gifts, not their age, made
them Elders, he proves from Dan. 13.50. (which is the history of Susanna)
where the Jewish Elders at Babylon say to young Daniel, Come sit down among
us, and show it us, seeing God has given thee the honor of an Elder. Then he
adds, Ad hunc, etc. After this m^nner sometimes it happens, that youths are
found in honor to be preferred to these Elders who slothfully and negligently
lead their life. These Elders then among the Jews were falsely so c^lled: for
God took away as the man of war and the Prophet, so the Elder from the
people of the Jews. Therefore let the Church pray, that the Elder (worthy to
be so called, be not taken away from her self. The whole tenor of his discourse
imports, that the Christian Churches had such Elders as we read to have been
in the Jewish Church, whereof Daniel was one. And of them he seemed to mean a
little before, Habet etc. The Church also has Judges, who can agree brother
and brother.

In 1 Timothy hom. 10.
Chrysostom compares the Church to a house, because as in a house there are
wife, children and servants, and the care or government of all is incumbent to
the master of the family: So is it in the Church, wherein, beside the ruler of
the same, nothing is to be seen, but as it were wife, children, and servants,
(...). But if the Governor of the Church, says he, has fellows or consorts
in the government thereof, so has the man also the wife to be his consort in
the government of his house. If it be said, that by the Ruler of the Church, he
means the Bishop, and by his consorts preaching Presbyters, who are the
Bishops helpers in the government of the Church; I answer, If we understand by
(...) the Bishop, Hom. 11.
then we make Chrysostom contradict himself: for in his next Homily he
shows plainly, that Presbyters have (...), the ruling of the Church as well
as Bishops, and that the whole purpose of his former Homily agreed to
Presbyters no less then Bishops. Now then, who were the consorts which Pastors
of Churches, or preaching Elders had in the government of the Church? Could
they be any other then Ruling Elders?

Hierome upon that place of Isaiah, says: Et nos habemus in Ecclesia Senatum
nostrum, coetum Presbyterorum: cum ergo inter caetera etiam senes ^udea
perdiderit, quomodo poterit habere concilium quod proprie Seniorum est. And
what sense shall we give to these words, unless we say it is imported that
both the Jewish and the Christian Church had such an Eldership as we plead for.
Else why did both he, and Basil make such a parallel betwixt the Jewish and
the Christian Church in the point of Elders? Surely, if we understand by the
Elders of the Christian Church whereof they speak, the Ministers of the Word
alone, we must also understand by the Elders of the Jewish Church, whereof
they speak, the Priests, which no man will imagine.

L. 7. c. 23.
Eusebius in his History cites Dionysiu^ Alexandrinus, relating his disputes
with the Chiliasts after this manner: When I was at Arsenoi^a where thou
know this doctrine first sprung, etc. I called together the Elders and
Teachers inhabiting those villages, there being present also as many of the
brethren as were willing to come, and I ex^orted them publicly to the search
of this doctrine, etc. By the Teachers here are meant the Pastors or Ministers
of the Word, who are most frequently called by the Fathers Teachers, or
Doctors: neither can it be supposed that there were any Teachers besides the
Pastors in these rural villages, which notwithstanding we see had beside their
Pastors or Teachers, Elders also.

Augustine writes his 137. Epistle to those of his own Church at Hippon, whom
he designeth thus: Dilectissimis ^ratribus, clero, senioribus and universae
plebi Ecclesiae Hipponen^is cui servio in dilectione Christ's. To my welbeloved
brethren the Clergy, the Elders, and the whole people of the Church at Hippon
whom I serve in the love of Christ. He puts Elders, or Seniors in the
middle betwixt the Clergy and the people as distinct from both, and yet
somewhat participant of both.

Isidorus Hispalensis speaking of the prudence and discretion, Sent. l. 3. c.
43.
which Pastors should observe in teaching of the Word, gives them this advise
among others: Prius doc^ndi sunt Seniores plebis ut per ^os infra
pos^tifacilius doceantur. The Elders of the people are to be first taught,
that by them such as are placed under them may be taught the more easily.

Origin speaking of the trial of such as were to be admitted members of the
Church, Contr^. Cells. lib. 3.
says, Nonnulli praepositi sunt, etc. There are some Rulers appointed who may
enquire concerning the conversation and manners of these that are admitted,
that they may debar from the Congregation such as commit filthiness.

In the acts of the 5. Council of Toledo according to the late editions, C. 1.
we read that Cinthila (whom others call Chintillanus) came into that Council,
cum optimatibus and Senioribus palatii sui. But Lorinus has found in some
ancient copy, In Act. 4.5.
Cum optimatibus and Senioribus populi sui, with the Nobles and the Elders of
his people. I would know who were these Elders of the people distinguished from
the Nobles.

The Council of Carthage held An. 407. Can. 6. makes mention of Seniors, who
were expected from new Germany to come to the Council, and unto whom the
Council remitted the election of a part of the Judges, who should decide the
cause of Maure^ius. In actis purgationis Caeciliam and Faelicis, we read,
Episco^i, Presbyteri, Diacones, Seniores. Again, Cleri^^ and Seniores
Cirthensium. Sundry letters were produced and read in that con^erence; One
directed Clero and S^^i^ibus: another Clericis and Seni^bus. The letter of
Purpurius to ylvanus, sp^aketh thus, Adhibe^e ^^nderices and Senior^s plebis
Ecclesiasticus vir^s and inquirant diligenter quae sint istae dissensi^n^^.
August. ^^b. 3. contr* Crescon. c. 56. Pe^^grinus p^e^^yter and Seniore Ecclep^
Must ca^ae regi^nis. Again, Sermon. 19. de verb. D^m. Cum ob eriorem aliq^em a
Senioribus ^rguuntu^ and imput^tur alicui de ^lis cur Ebrius fuerit, etc. Ep
(...) Concil^ Carbarsussi^ani apud eundem August. ^^ar. in Psalm. 36. Necesse
nos fuerat Primi^ i caus^m, quem plebs sanct^ Cartha^mensis Ecclesiae ^piscopum
fuerat in ovile Dei sortita, Seniorum ^ire^is ^ jusdem Ecclesiae postulant^bus
audire atque discutere. Optat. lib. 1. adv P^men. er^nt Ecclesiae ex auro and
argento quam plurima ornamenta, etc. qua^i (others read quas) ^idelibus
Senioribus commendavit. And after, Convocantur supra memora^^ Seniores, etc.
Gregor. M. lib. 11. Ep. 19. Si quid de quoc^nque Clerico and aures tuas
pervenerit, quod te just poslit offendere, facile non cred^s, sed praesentibus
Ecclesiae tuae Seniorib^s diligenter est perserutanda veritas, and tanc ^
qualnas rei poposcerit, Canonica districtio culpam feriat delinguentis. Epist.
Synodalis Council. Pictavien. apud Gregor. T^ron. l. 10. c. 16. de sponsilibus
quoque ai^ coram Pontifice Clero vel Senioribus pro nepte sua orphanula ar^as
accepisse.
These things may suffice from antiquity to give some evidence that the office
of ruling Elders is not Calvin's new fangled devise at Geneva, as our
adversaries are pleased to call it: but for further confirmation of this point,
Voetius disp. 2. de Senio. and before him Iustellus in annot. and notis in cod.
Can. Eccles. Afric. Can. 100. has observed sundry other pregnant testimonies
from antiquity for ruling Elders, especially out of these notable records Gesta
pu^gationis Caeciliani and Faelicis, to be seen in the Anna's of Baronius, An.
103. and in Albaspinaeus his edition of Optatus. These testimonies I have here
set down in the Margin.

From which passages it is apparent, that in the days of Ambrose these Seniors
were neither in all places, nor altogether grown out of use; but that both in
the Eastern and Western Churches, manifest footsteps of the same remained:
neither is his testimony before alleged, repugnant hereunto: for we may
understand his meaning to be either that in some places, or that in some sort,
they were grown out of use, because peradventure the Teachers began to do
somethings without their counsel and advice which in former times was not so.
De gubern. Eccles c. 11. p. 215.
Bilson answers two ways to the testimony from the 137. Epist. of August.
and belike he would have answered in the same manner to these other
testimonies, he says we may understand by these Seniors either the better part
of the Clergy, or the Senators and Rulers of the City. That they were neither
Bishops nor preaching Presbyters, nor Deacons, it is manifest, for they are
distinguished from all these, In act. purgat. Cacil. and Fall. and they are
called by Isi^ore and P^rpurius, Seniores plebis. Besides, it were strange if
August. Bishop of Hippo writing to his Clergy, should distinguish either the
Deacons from the Presbyters by the name of the Clergy which was common to both,
or some preaching Presbyters from other preaching Presbyters, by the name of
Seniors. On the other part, that they were not Magistrates of Cities, it is no
less plain: for they are called Seniores* Ecclesiae and Ecclesiastici viri,
they instructed the people, and had place in judging of causes Ecclesiastical.

Ibid. page 253.
But elsewhere Bilson takes upon him to prove, that those of the Clergy who
were by their proper name called Presbyters, were also called Seniores, as
those who came nearest to the Bishop in degree, wisdom, and age. And this he
proves by a testimony of Ambrose. Offic. l. 1. c. 20.
Viduarum ac virginum domos nisi ^isitandi gratia Iuniores ad re non est opus
and hoc cum Senioribus hoc est cum Episcopo, vel sigravior est causa cum
Presbyteris. Answ. 1. Here the Seniors are the Bishop, which is neither good
sense, nor any thing to his purpose. 2. He has left out a word, without which
the sentence cannot be understood, and that is vel: Ambrose says, Hoc est vel
^um Episcopo, etc. and so the words may suffer a threefold sense: for either
Seniores is here a name of age or of office. If it be a name of age, as may
be presumed by the opposition thereof to Iuniores, then the meaning of Ambrose
is, that young men should not go into the houses of virgins or widows, except
it be with some men of age, and these to be the Bishop or the Presbyters. If
^t be a name of office the^ may we either understand, that by the Presbyters
he means ruling Elders, and by the Bishop the Pastor of any particular
Church, Cont^^ ^. de Con. i^. (...)
(for if Whitaker be not deceived, Past^rs have the name of Bishops, not only
in S^^^pru^e, but in the ancient* Church also:) Or that he comprehends under
the order of Elders, not only the Preaching Presbyters, but the Bishop also,
who was chief among them. By the first sense Bilson does gain nothing, by the
other two he has worse then nothing* for any of them destroys his chief
grounds.

CHAP. X. The consent of Protestant Writers, and the con^es^ion of our
opposites for ruling Elders.
THE office of Ruling Elders is not only maintained by (...)* Cart^right,
A^^rs^, Bucer^^, and others whom our opposites will call partial Writers, let
him who pleases read the commentaries of Martyr, (...), Gualther, Hemmingius,
Piscator, Paraus upon Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. Aretius on Act. 14.23. Zepper.
de Polit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 1. and 12. Bullinger on 1 Timothy 5.17. Arcul^rius on
Act. 14.23. Catal. Test* verit. col 103. Os^and. cent 1 l. 4. c. 11. Chemn^t
exam part 2. p^g 2^8 Gerard. lo^. Theol. tom. 6 p^g. 363 ^64. Muscul. loc. com.
de Eccles. c. 5 Bucan. loc com. ^oc 42. Suetanus de Discipl. Eccles. part. 4 c.
3. Polanus Synt. l. 7. c 11. Zanchius in 4 praecep col. 727. Iunius animad. in
Bell^r cont 5. l 1. c 2 Danaeus de Polit. Christ. l. 6 p 452. Alsted. Theol.
cas. page 518.520. Soping^us ad bonam fidem Sibrandi* page 253. etc. The
Professors of Leyden, Synt. pur. Theol. Disp. 42. and sundry others, whose
testimonies I omit for brevities cause, it is enough to note the places. The
Author of the Assertion for true and Christian Church policy, page 196.197.
cites for ruling Elders, the testimony the Commissioners of King Edward the
sixth, authorized to compile a book for the reformation of Laws
Ecclesiastical; among whom were the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop
of Ely. They say, Let the Minister going apart with some of the Elders, take
counsel, etc. Voet^us cites to the same purpose, Marlorat, Hyperius, Fulke,
Whittaker, Fenner, Bunnius, Willet, Sadeel, Lubbertus, Trelcatius (both the one
and the other) yea Socinus and the Remonstrants.

Besides we have for us the practice of al well reformed Churches, and the
Confessions of the French, the Belgicke, and the Helveticke Churches to be
seen in the harmony of Confessions.

But what will you say if the adversaries of ruling Elders be forced to say
somewhat for them? Def. tract* 17* cap. 1.
Whitgift confesses not only that our division of Elders, into preaching
Elders and ruling Elders, has learned patrons; but also that the Christian
Church when there was no Christian Magistrate had governing Seniors: Answer to
the Admonit. p. 114.
and elsewhere he says, I know that in the Primitive Church, they had in every
Church Seniors, to whom the government of the Congregation was committed.
Saravia lends them his word likewise, Ubi supra cap. 9. p. 104.
Quod a me, etc. Which is not disputed by me in that meaning that the Belgicke
Churches, or any other which do with edification use the service of these
Elders, should rashly change any thing, before that which is better be
substitute. Again, speaking of the government of ruling Elders; ^b. cap. ^1.
p. ^ 118.
he says, Quod ut, etc. Which as I judge profitable and good to be constitute
in a Christian Church and Commonwealth, so I affirm no Church, no
Commonwealth to be bound thereto by Divine Law: except perhaps necessity
compel, or great utility allure, and the edification of the Church require it.
Lo here the force of truth struggling with one contrary minded. He judges
the office of ruling Elders, profitable and good, yet not of divine right; yet
h^e ^cknowledgeth that necessity, utility, and the edification of the Church,
makes us tied to it even by divine right. But if it be profitable and good,
why did he call in question the necessity, at least the utility and the
edification of it? can one call in question the utility of that which is
profitable? he would have said the truth, but it stuck in his teeth, and could
not come forth. Sael^vius de council. lib. I cap. 8. says that among the Jews,
Seniores tribuum, the Elders of the Tribes did sit with the Priests in judging
controversies of the Law of God. Hence he argues against Bellarmine, that so
it ought to be in the Christian Church also, because the privilege of
Christians is no less^ th^n the privilege of the Jews. C^mero tells us, ^
that when the Apostle, 1 Co^. 6. reproves the Corinthians, for that when one
of (...) had ^ matter against anoth^^ they (...) the Saints to be ^udges (...)
no^ by the (...) the (...) m^ltitude, sedeos qui in Ecclesia constituti cra^t,
De regis primatu lib. ^ p. 68.
ut vacarent gubernationi Ecclesiae: that is, those who were ordained in the
Church, to give themselves to the government of the Church. My Lord Craigtanne
finding the strength of that Argument, that if beside the Ministers of the
Word, other grave and wise Christians may be present in the greatest Assemblies
and Councels of the Church, why not in Presbyteries also? answers, that
indeed it is not amiss that the wiser sor^ among the people be joined as
helpers and assistants to the Pastors, providing that this their auxiliary
function be not obtruded as necessary. This is somewhat for us; but we say
further, if it be necessary in Oecumenicke Counsels (for no less do the
Arguments of our Divines in that question with the Papists conclude) then is it
necessary in Presbyteries also.

CHAP. XI Doctor Fields five Arguments against ruling (...).
HIS first Reason that showed (...) to think^ there were (...) any (...)
Church, is because Bishops, Presbyters, that preach and minister the
Sacraments, and Deacons, howsoever they much degenerated in later times, yet
all still remained in all Christian Churches throughout the World, both Greek
and Latin, in their names and offices also in some sort. But of these ruling
Elders, there are no footsteps to be found in any Christian Church in the
World, nor were not for many hundred years; whereas there would have been
some remains of these as well as the other, had they ever had any institution
from Christ or his Apostles, as the other had. To this we answer. 1. If the
Christian Churches throughout the World had wanted ruling Elders longer then
they did, yet prescription can be no prejudice to the ordinance of God. 2.
After that the golden age of the Apostles was spent and gone, exact diligence
was not taken, to have the Church provided with well qualified Ministers, but
many unfit men, yea, sundry heretics entered into that sacred vocation,
whereby it came to pass that corruption and error overflowed the Churches,
Eccles. hist. lib. 3. c. 32.35. Col. 103.
as both Eusebius proves from Aegesippus and catalogus testium veritatis from
Irenaus. Might not this be the cause of changing the office-bearers and
government of the Church. 3. In the Roman, yea in Prelaticall Churches there
are scarce any footsteps at all of the offices of preaching Presbyters, and
Deacons, as they were instituted by the Apostles. The Apostles ordained
Presbyters to preach the Word, to minister the Sacraments, to govern the
Church, and to make use of the keys. But the Popish and Prelaticall Presbyters
have not the power of the keys, nor the power of Church government, for it is
proper to their Prelates; as for the other two they are common to their
Deacons, for they also do preach and baptize. The office of the Popish Priest
stands in two things, to consecrate and offer up the body of Christ, and to
absolve the faithful from their sins: See Conci. Triden. de sacr. Ordin.
cap. 1. Hier. Savanarola. Triumph. cruc. lib. 3. cap. 16. And the same two make
up the proper office of the Priest by the order of the English Service Book.
As touching Deacons, they were ordained by the Apostles for collecting
receiving, keeping, and distributing of Ecclesiastical goods, for maintaining
of Ministers, schools, Churches, the sick, stranger, and poor. The Popish
and Prelaticall Deacons have no such office, but an office which the Apostles
never appointed to them; for they had no preaching nor baptising Deacons.
Philip preached and baptized, not as a Deacon, but as an Evangelist, Acts 21.8.
Besides at the time of his preaching and baptising, he could not have
exercised the office of his Deaconship, by reason of the persecution, which
scattered rich and poor and all, Acts 8.1. that which Steven did, Acts 7. was
no more then every believer was bound to do, when he is called to give a
testimony to the truth, and to give a reason of his faith and practice. 4.
Others of the faithful, besides the Ministers of the Word, have been admitted
unto Counsels and Synods by many Christian Churches throughout the World, as
is well known; and this is a manifest foot-step of the government of ruling
Elders. 5. Nay in the Church of England it self, at this day, there are
footsteps of ruling Elders, else what means the joining of Laymen with the
Clergy in the high Commission to judge of matters Ecclesiastical? S^ravia
says, ^
the Churchwardens which are in every Parish of England, have some resemblance
of ruling Elders, whose change appointed by law, he says, is to collect,
keep, and deburse the goods and revenues of the Church, to preserve the
fabric of the Church* and all things pertaining thereto sure and safe, to
keep account of baptismes, marriages, and burials, to admonish delinquents and
other inordinate livers, to delate to the Bishop or his substitutes, such as
are incorrigible, and scandalous, being sworn thereto: also to observe who are
absent from the prayers in the Church upon the Lords days, and upon the holy
days, and to exact from them the penalty appointed by law, and finally to see
to quietness and decency in time of divine service.

Doctor Fields second reason is for that Paul, 1 Timothy 3. showing who should be
Bishops and Ministers, who Deacons, yea, who Widows; passes immediately from
describing the quality of such as were to be Bishops and Ministers of the Word
and Sacraments, to the Deacons, omitting these ruling Elders that are supposed
to lie in the midst between them, which he neither might nor would have
omitted, if there had been any such. To this the answer is easy. 1. As we
collect the actions and sufferings of Jesus Christ, and the institution of the
last supper, not from any one of the Evangelists, but from all of them compared
together, for that one touches what another omitteth; so do we judge of the
office-bearers of the Church not from 2 Timothy 3. only, but from the collation of
that and other places of Scripture of that kind. Ruling Elders are found in
other places, and in the fifth Chapter of that same Epistle, though not in the
third. 2 Neither were there any absurdity to hold, that the Apostle in that
third Chapter comprehends all the ordinary office-bearers in the Church under
these two Bishops and Deacons, and that under the name of Bishops, he
comprehends both Pastors, Doctors, and ruling Elders: for as al these three
are overseers, so to them all agree the qualities of a Bishop here mentioned,
whereof there is only one, which seems not to agree to the ruling Elder, viz.
that he should be apt to teach, De div. gra. minist. cap. 9.
verse. 2. Yet Beza maintains against Saravia, that the ruling Elder teaches
as well as the Pastor, only the Pastor does it publicly to the whole
congregation; the ruling Elder does it privately, as he finds every one to
have need. And we have showed before that as a private Christian is bound in
charity to teach the ignorant, so the ruling Elder is bound to do it ex
off^cio.

The third reason, which Doctor Field brings against us, is, for that neither
Scripture nor practice of the Church, bounding the government of such
governors, nor giving any direction how far they may go in the same, and
where they must stay, lest they meddle with that they have nothing to do with,
men should be left to a most dangerous uncertainety in an office of so great
consequence. Our answer to this is: 1. We have showed already the certain
bounds of the power and vocation of ruling Elders. 2. It was not necessary that
the Apostle should severally set down Canons and directions: first, touching
Pastors, then Doctors; lastly, ruling Elders, since they are all Elders, and
all members of the Eldership or Presbytery; it was enough to deliver canons and
directions common to them all, especially since the duties of ruling Elders are
the same which are the duties of Pastors, only the Pastors power is cumulative
to theirs, and over reaches the same in the public ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, and so does Paul difference them, 1 Timothy 5.17.

His fourth reason is, because we fetch the pattern of the government of ruling
Elders, from the Sanedrim of the Jews, the platform whereof we suppose
Christ meant to bring into his Church, when he said, Tell the Church; whereas,
says he, it is most clear that the court was a civil court, and had a power
to banish, to imprison, yea and to take away life, till by the Romans the Jews
were restrained. We answer that Beza de Presbyteri^. I. B. A. C. De polit.
civil. and Eccl. lib. 2. De poli. Eccl. lib. 3 cap. 7. I^. Deuteronomy. 17. ibid. In
a. Reg. 23.

Moses and Aaron. lib. 5. cap. 1.

De gu^er. Ec. page 62. Harm. de pass. cap. 8.


Also Zepperus, Iunius, Piscator, Wolphius, Godwin, Bucerus, Gerard, And sundry
others have rightly observed that the Ecclesiastical Sanedrim among the Jews
was distinct from the civil, yet both called by the name of Sanedrim. We
grant with Beza that sometimes civil causes were debated and determined in the
Ecclesiastical Sanedrim, but this was done (...), non (...), as he says, the
fact which was merely civil was judged in the ^ivill Sanedrim, but when the
civil^ Judges could not agree de jure, even in civil causes, in that case
resolution was given by the other Sanedrim; as in like cases by the
juris-consults among the Romans, for the conservation and interpretation of the
law did belong to the Leviticall Tribe. Hence it is that we read 2 Chronicles.
19.8.11. Iehosaphat set in Jerusalem of the Levits, and of the chief Priests,
and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, some for the Lords matters, among
whom presided Amariah the chief Priest, and some for the Kings matters, among
whom presided Z^badiah the Ruler of the house of Judah. ^bi sup. ca. 1^. page
119.
Saravia says this place proves not that there were two distinct
consistories, one for civil, another for Ecclesiastical things; because,
says he, by the Kings matters are meant matters of peace, and war by the
Lords matters, the matters of law and judgment which are called the Lords
matters, because the Lord was the author of their civil laws; Deuteronomy. 20. and
21. and 24.
what a crazie device is this? did not matters of peace and war come under
the civil laws, which God had delivered to the Jews, as well as any matter
of judgment betwixt man and man? and what can be more plain then that the
Lords matters or things pertaining to God, Heb. 5.1.
when they are differenced from other matters, are ever understood to be
matters spiritual and Ecclesiastical? In Deuteronomy. 17.
Quapropter, wherefore says Iunius, the Readers are to be warned whosoever
they be that consult the histories of ancient times, that where they read the
name Syned^tum, they wisely observe whether the civil Assembly or the
Ecclesiastical be meant of, because that name was confused, and indistinct,
after the times of Antiochus.

But notwithstanding that in these latter times all good order had much
degenerate and grown to confusion, yet it seems to me, that even in the
days of our Savior Christ, the Civil and Ecclesiastical courts remained
distinct, let me say my opinion with all men's leave, and under correction of
the more learned, that night that our Lord was betrayed, he was led to the Hall
of Cajaphas, where there was holden an Ecclesiastical Sanedrim, which asked
Jesus of his Disciples, and of his doctrine, received witness against him, and
pronounced him guilty of blasphemy, Mat. 27.57. Mark 14.53.55. Ioh. 18.19.
Nothing I find in this Council why we should think it civil: for as touching
the smiting and buffeting of Christ, Mat. 26.67. Luk 22.63. some think it was
by the servants of the high Priests and Elders after that they themselves had
gone home, and left the Council; howsoever, it was done tumultuously, not
judicially, and tumults may fall forth in any Judicatory whether civil or
Ecclesiastical As for the sentence which they gave, Mat. 26.66. He is guilty of
death, it proves not that this was a civil Court: for just so, if an
incestuous person should be convict before an Assembly of our Church, the
Moderator might ask the Assembly, what think ye? and they might well answer,
He is guilty of death, away with him to the Magistrate. Shortly then the matter
debated in this nocturnall Council, was merely Ecclesiastical, and the
accusation of sedition and making himself a King, were not spoken of till he
was brought before P^^at But there was another Sanedrim convocat in the
morning* Mat 27 1. Mark 15.1 Luk 22 66. and this seems to have been not
Ecclesiastical but Civil, 1. because they meddle not with the trial of his
doctrine, nor any examination of witnesses thereanent: only they desire to
hear out of his own mouth, that which he had confessed in the other Council,
viz. that he was the Christ the Son of God; whereupon they take counsel how
they might deliver him to Pilate, which was the end of their meeting 2. M^^k
says, They bound him, and carried him aw^y to Pilate. 3. The Ecclesiastical
Council had already done that which they thought pertained to them: for what
should they have convened again? Some say, that a^l the high Priests, Scribes
and Elders, were not present at that nocturnall council, and that therefore
they convened more fully in the morning. But that the nocturnall Council was
fully convened, it is manifest from Mat. 26.59. Mark 14.53.55. 4. This last
Council led Jesus away to Pil^te, and went themselves with him to accuse him
before Pilate of sedition, and of making himself a King, Luke 23.1.2. Mat.
27.12. 5. They complain that the power of capital punishment was taken from
them by the Romans, importing that otherwise they might have put him to death
by their law, Ioh. 18.31.

Now D. Fields last reason is, For that all Fathers or Councels mentioning
Elders, place them betwixt Bishops and Deacons, and make them to be Clergy men,
and that in the Acts where the Apostles are said to have constitute Elders in
every Church, Pastors are meant, is strongly confirmed from Act. 20.17.28.
where the Elders of the Church of Ephesus are commanded to feed the flock of
Christ over which they were appointed overseers, whence it follows
inevitably, that they were Pastors. Cont. Sarav. Ubi sup. c. 12. Com. in act. 14
We answer, 1. Ambrose speaks of Elders which were not Pastors. 2. Beza and
Gualther expound the place Act. 14.23. where the Apostles are said to have
ordained Elders through every Church, of ruling as well as preaching Elders. 3.
As for that which he alleges from Act. 20. Beza, Ubi sup. cap. 9. Eccles.
lib. 2. cap. 1.

Cens. in confess. cap. 21. page 275.


Iunius, and the Professors of Leyden, hold, that the names of Bishops and
Pastors are common both to ruling and preaching Elders, and that the Scripture
gives these names to both, howsoever in Ecclesiastical use for distinctio^s
cause, they are appropriate to teaching Elders. Surely the ruling Elder both
overseeth the flock and feeds the same, both by discipline, and by private
admonition; and for these respects may be truly called both Bishop and Pastor.
4. How small reason he has to boast of the Fathers, we have already made it
to appear. 5. It is a begging of the question to reason from the appropriation
of the name of Elders to the Pastors.

CHAP. XII. The extravagancies of Whitgift and Saravia in the matter of ruling
Elders.
THese two Disputers, do not (as D. Field) altogether oppose ye government of
ruling Elders, but with certain restrictions; about which notwithstanding they
differ betwixt themselves* ^hitgift allows of ruling Elders under a Tyrant,
but not under a Christian Magistrate, but ^ayeth they cannot be under an
Infidel Magistrate. Me thinks J see here Sampsons Foxes, with their tails
knit together, and a firebrand betwixt them, yet their heads looking sundry
wa^es. Answ. to the admon. page 114.
To begin with Whitgift, he says in one place. I know that in the primitive
church, they had in every church seniors, to whom the Government of the
Congregation was committed, but that was before there was any Christian Prince
or Magistrate etc. In another place. My reason, why it (the Church) may not be
governed under a Christian Magistrate, is it may under a Tyrant is this: God
has given the chief authority in the government of the Church to the
Christian Magistrate, which could not be so, if your Seigniory might as well
retain their authority under a Christian Prince, and in the time of peace, is
under a Tyrant, and in the time of persecution; for tell me, I pray you, what
authority Ecclesiastical remains to the civil Magistrate, where this
Seigniory is established?

He who pleases may find this op^^ion largely consuted by Beza de Presbyterio
contra Erasmum, and by I. B. A. C. polit. civil. and Eccles. Reply p. 140
Jn the mean while I answer. First, T. C. had made a sufficient Reply hereunto
(which Whitgift here in his defense should have confuted, but has not) viz.
That if the Seniors under a Tyrant had meddled with any Office of a Magistrate,
then there had been some cause why a godly Magistrate being in the Church, the
Office of a Senior, or at least so much as he exercised of the Office of a
Magistrate should have ceased.

But since they did only assist the Pastor in matters Ecclesiastical, it
follows, that as touching the Office of Elders, there is no distinction
betwixt times of Peace and Persecution. Secondly, There were Seniors among the
Jews under Godly Kings, and in times of Peace: Why not likewise amongst us?
Thirdly, The Ecclesiastical power is distinct from the civil, both in the
subject, object, and end; so that the one does not hinder the other: The
Magistrates power is to punish the outward man with an outward punishment,
which the Presbytery cannot hinder, for he may civilly bind whom the Presbytery
spiritually loses, and civilly loose, whom the Presbytery spiritually
binds, and that because the Magistrate seeks not the repentance and
salvation of the delinquent by his punishment (as the Presbytery does) but
only the maintenance of the authority of his laws, together with the
quietness and preservation of the Commonwealth.

Whence it comes, that the delinquent serapeth not free of the Magistrate,
though he be penitent and not obstinate. 4. How thought Whitgift, that the
christian Magistrate can do those things which the Seigniory did under a
Tyrant? Can the Magistrate by himself determine questions of Faith? Can he
know what order and decency in circumstances is fitte^t for each Congregation?
Can he excommunicate offenders, etc. 5. When Bishops exercise Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction (yea and the civil too) this is thought no wrong to Princes: Is
it a wrong in the Presbytery, yet not in this Prelacy? Good Lord what a
Mystery is this! 6. When Presbyters are established in their full power, there
remains much power to the Prince even in things Ecclesiastical, as to take
diligent heed to the whole estate of the Church within his dominions, to indict
Synods, and civilly to proceed in the same, to ratify the constitutions
thereof, and to add unto them the strength of a civil sanction, to punish
Heretics, and all that disobey the assemblies of the Church, to see that no
matter Ecclesiastical be carried factiously or rashly, but that such things
be determined in free assemblies, to provide for Scholars, Colleges, and
Kirkes, that all corrupt ways of entering into the Ministry, by Simony,
bribing patrons etc. be repressed, and finally to compel all men to do their
duty according to the Word of God, and Laws of the Church. 7. Whatsoever be the
power of the supreme Magistrate, Ecclesiae tamen, Pol. Christ. l, 6 page 452,
etc. Yet let him leave to the Church and to the Ecclesiastical Rulers (such
as are the Ministers of the Gospel, Elders and Deacons) their own power in
handling Ecclesiastical things, untouched and whole says Danaeus. For the
Ecclesiastical power does no more hinder the civil administration, then the
Art of singing hinders it, says the Augustan confession. 8. We may answer by
a just recrimination, Act. de potest. Eccl.
that the Prelacy (not the Presbytery) is prejudicial to the power of Princes,
and has often incroached upon the same. The Bishops assembled in the eight
Council of Constantinople; Can 14.
ord^ined that Bishop* should not light from their horses, when they chance to
meet Princes, nor basely bow before them, and that if any Prince should cause a
Bishop to disparage himself by doing otherwise, he should be excommunicated
for two years. Can 17.
They also discharged Princes from being present in any Synod, except the
O^cumenicke. Can ^7
The 1. Council of Toledo ordains that Quoties Episcoporum Hispanorum
Synodus convenerit, toties universalis Concilii decretum propter salutem
Principum factum, peractis omnibus in Synodo recitetur, ut iniquorum men's
territa corrigatur. From which canon Osiander collecteth, that some of the
Bishops were not faithful and loyal to the Kings of Spain. The inquisition
of Spain Anno 1568. presented to King Philip twelve Articles against the
Netherlands, Hist. of the Netherlands lib. 9. page 309.
one whereof was, That the King write unto and command the Clergy of the
Netherlands, that with the Inquisition they should accept of 15. new Bishops,
the which should be free from all secular jurisdiction, yea in cases of
Treason. Now as touching the contrary conceit of Saravia, no div. grad. minist.
eva^g. cap. 11. p. 110.114.116.
he allows such Elders as the Jewish Church had to be joined now with Pastors
under a Christian Magistrate, but under an Infidel Magistrate, he says they
could have no place; for he takes the Jewish Elders to have bin their
Magistrates, and that in like manner, none but Christian Magistrates should sit
with the Ministers of the Word in Ecclesiastical Courts, Princes and Nobles in
general or National Councills, and Magistrates of cities in particular
consistories. This is as foul an error, as that of Whitgift; for 1. His
opinion of the Jewish Elders, that they were their Magistrates we have confuted
before. 2. Though it were so, that no Ruling Elders ought to be admitted, now
except Christian Magistrates, yet might they have place under an Infidel
Prince: as Joseph under Pharaoh, Daniell under Nebuchadnezar. There have been
both Christian Churches, and Christian Magistra^es under Heretical, yea
Infidel Princes 3. If Christian Magistrates be come in place of the Jewish
Seniors, and ought to be joined with the Ministers of the Word in the
consistories of the church. We demand quo nomine, quo jure? whither do they
sit as Christian Magistrates, or as men of singular gifts chosen for that
effect? Jf as Magistrates then shall we make a mixture and confusion of civil
and Ecclesiastical function, else how shall men by virtue of civil places sit
in spiritual Courts? Jf as men of singular gifts chosen to sit, then may
others as well as they having the like gifts and election be admitted to sit
also. 4. Saravia contradicts himself, Ibid. p. ^20
for a little after he admits grave and godly men in the judicatories of the
Church, whither they be Magistrates or private men, sive illi magistratu
fungantur sive in rep. vivant privati.

CHAP. XIII. Whether Ruling Elders have the power of decisive voices, when they
sit in Prebyteries and Synods.
THere are sundry questions propounded by D. Field and other adversaries of
Ruling Elders, whereinto they think we are not able to satisfy them, as 1.
Whether Ruling Elders ought to have decisive voices, even in questions of Faith
and Doctrine, and in the trial and approbation of Ministers? 2. Whether these
Elders must be in every Congregation with power of ordination, deprivation,
suspension, excommunication, and absolution, or whether this power be only in
Ministers and Elders of diverse Churches concurring? 3. Jf they be
Ecclesiastical persons, where is their ordination? 4. Whether these (...) be
perpetual or annual, and but for a certain time?

Whether they ought to serve freely or to have a stipend? Touching the first of
these; since the reformation which Luther began, it was ever maintained by the
Protestant writers, that not the Ministers of the word alone, but some of all
sorts among Christians ought to have decisive voices in Councils. But Dr. Field
will admit none to teach and define in Counc^ls, Lib. 5. ^. 4^
but the Ministers of the word only: others he permits only to consent unto
that which is done by them. Saravia allows grave and learned men to sit with
the Ministers of the word, Vbi supra c. 9. p. 93, 94. Paren. c. 11.
yet not as Judges, but as Counselors and Assessors only. Tilen will not say
that the Bishops and Pastors of the Church ought to call any into their
Council, but that they may do it when there is need. Against whom and all who
are of their mind we object. 1. The example of Apostolic Synods. Matthias the
Apostle after Gods own designation of him, by the lot which fell upon him, was
chosen by the voices, not only of the Apostles, but the other Disciples, who
were met with them Act, 1.26. (...) i. e. Simul suffragiis electus est, as
Arias Montanus turns it. In Act. 1.26.
For the proper and native signification of (...), as Lorinus shows out of
Gagveius, is to choose by voices. The Professors of Leyden have noted this
consensus Ecclesiae per (...) in the election of Matthias Cens. in Confess.
cap. 21. Jn the Council of Jerusalem Act. 15. we find that beside the
Apostles the Elders were present, and voiced definitively, for they by whom the
Decree of the Synod was given forth, and who sent chosen men to Antioch, were
the Apostles and Elders, Gerard, Loc. Theol. com. 6. n. 28. and the Profess. of
Leyden, cens. in conf. c. 21. understand that the Elders spoken of v. 5. and 6.
were the ruling Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, joined with the Apostles,
who labored in the word. Other Protestant writers understand by the name of
Elders there, both preaching and ruling Elders. The Brethrent, hat is the whole
Church, heard the disputes, and consented to the Decrees, v. 21, 22, 23 Ruling
Elders behoved to do more then the whole Church, that is voice definitively.
Lorinus the Jesuit says, that by the name of Elders there, we may understand
not only Priests, but others besides them. Viz. antiquiores and anctoritate
praecellentes discipulos, Disciples of greatest age and note. And this he says
is the reason why the vulgar Latin has not retained in that place the Greek
word Presbyteri, but reads Seniores. 2. We have for us the example of
Ecclesiastical Courts among the Jews, wherein the Jewish Elders had equal
power of voicing with the Priests, and for this we have heard before, Saravia's
plain confession. 3. The example of ancient Councils in the Christian Church.
Constantine in his Epistle which he wrote to the Churches, concerning the
Nicene Council says; I my self as one of your number was present with them
(the Bishops) which imports that others of the Laity voiced there with the
Bishops as well as he, and he as a chief one of their number. Euagrius lib.
2. cap. 4. says, that the chief Senators sat with the Bishops in the
Council of Chalcedon. And after he says, The Senators decreed as follows.
The fourth Council of Carthag^, c. 27. speaking of the transportation of a
Bishop or of any other Clergy man, Caranza in summa council. p* 357.
says, sane si id Ecclesiae vtilitas fiendum poposecrit, decret^ Pro eo
clericorum and laicorum Episcopis porrecto, in praese^tia Synodi transferatur.
The Decrees of the Synod of France holden by Charlemain^ about the year 743.
are said to have been made by the King, the Bishops, the Presbyters, and
Nobles. Many such examples might we show, but the matter is so clear that it
needs not. L^b. 1. cap. 8.
4. The Revieu of the Council of Trent written by a Papist, among other causes
of the Nobility of that Council makes this one, that Laymen were not called
nor admitted into it, as was the form of both the Apostolic and other
ancient Councils, showing also from sundry Histories and examples, that both in
France, Spain, and England, Laymen used to voice and to judge of all matters
that were handled in Councils: alleging further the examples of Popes
themselves. That Adrian did summon many Laymen to the Lateran Council, as
members thereof, that in imitation of him Pope Leo did the like in another
Council at the Lateran under Otho the first, and that Pope Nicholas in Epist.
ad Michael Imperat. acknowledges the right of Laymen to voice in Councils,
wherein matters of faith are treated of, because faith is common to all. ^bid.
The same writer shows also from the Histories* that in the Council of
Constance, were 24. Dukes, 140 Earls, diverse Delegates from Cities and
Corporations, diverse learned Lawyers, and Burgesses of Universities, 5. The
Protestants of Germany, did ever refuse to acknowledge any such Council
wherein none but Bishops and Ministers of the word did judge. Vide fosciculum
rerum expetendarum.
When the Council of Trent was first spoken of in the Diet at Norimberg, Anno
1522. all the estates of Germany desired of Pope Adrian the 6. That admittance
might be granted as well to Laymen as to Clergymen, and that not only as
witnesses and spectators, but to be judges there. This they could not obtain,
therefore they would not come to the Council, and published a book which they
entitled, Causa cur Electores and caeteri confessioni Augustanae addicti ad
Co^cilium Tridentinum non accedant. Where they allege this for one cause of
their not coming to Trent, because none had voice there but Cardinals,
Bishops, Abbots, Generals, or superiors of orders, whereas laickes also ought to
have a decisive voice in Councils, 6. If none but the Ministers of the word
should sit and voice in a Synod, then it could not be a Church representative,
because the most part of the Church (who are the hearer^ and not the teachers
of the word) are not represented in it. 7. A common cause ought to be concluded
by common voices. But that which is treated of in Councils is a common cause
pertaining to many particular Churches. Our Divines when they prove against
Papists that the election of Ministers and the excommunication of obstinate
sinners ought to be done by the suffrages of the whole Church they make use of
this same argument; That which concerns all ought to be treated of and judged
by all. 8. Some of all estates in the commonwealth, voice in Parliament,
therefore some of all sorts in the Church ought to voice in Councils and
Synods; for de paribus idem judicium, A National Synod is that same to the
Church, which. A Parliament is to the Commonwealth. 9. Those Elders whose
right we plead, are called by the Apostle rulers, Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. and
Governors, 1 Cor. 12.28. therefore needs must they voice and judge in those
assemblies, without which the Church cannot be ruled nor governed. Jf this be
denied them they have no other function behind, to make them Rulers or
Governors of the Church. Rome was ruled by the Senate, not by the Censors; and
Athens was governed by the Ar^opagus, not by the inferior Office-bearers, who
did only take heed, how the Laws were observed. But let us now see what is
objected against this power of Ruling Elders, to voice in Council, and to
Judge of all things, even matters of faith treated therein. First it is
alleged that laymen have not such abilities, of gifts and learning, as to
judge aright of such matters. But I dare say there are Ruling Elders in
Scotland, who in a theological dispute, should powerfully spoil many of those
who make this objection. 2. Antonius Sadeel, Johannes a Lasco, Morney, and such
like show plainly to the world, that gifts and singular learning, are not tied
to Bishops and Doctors of the Church. 3. Neither do men of subtle wits and
deepest learning, prove always fittest to dispute and determine questions of
faith. It is marked in ye history of the Council of Nice, that there was a
Layman therein, of a simple and sincere mind, who put to silence a subtle
Philosopher, whom all the Bishops could not compes^e. 4. There are many both in
Parliament and secret Counsel without all controversy able to give their
suffrages, and to judge of matters in hand, who notwithstanding, are not of
such learning and Eloquence as to enter into the lists of a public dispute.
5. And if the gifts and abilities, of the most part of ruling Elders, were as
small as their adversaries will be pleased to call them, yet this concludes
nothing against their right power of voicing, but only against their aptitude
and fitness unto that, whereto their right would carry them. And we doubt that
every Pastor be well gifted, for all which comes within the compass of his
vocation, or does well every thing, which he has power to do. Another
objection is made from 1. Cor. 14.32. The spirits of the Prophets, ar^ subject
to the Prophets: whence they collect, that prophets, and preachers of the word,
ought to be judged by such as themselves are, that is by Prophets and
Preachers, and by none other. Praelect^ c^m. 3^ p 1176, ^61.
To this we say, 1. There own Camero gives us another commentary upon that
place, rightly observing, that the Apostle there speaks nothing of trying or
judging the spirits, but only of the order, which is to be kept in the Church:
for whereas in the Church of Corinth, the Prophets did prophecy tumultuously,
many or all of them at once, and would not give place one to another, this the
Apostle condemns, and will have the Prophets so far subject to the
Prophets, as that when one rises up to prophecy, the rest may hold their
peace. 2. That this is the sense it is clear, from the order and dependence of
the Text, for v. 30. he commands him that prophecieth in the Church to hold
his peace, when any thing is revealed to another Prophet that sits by, now
this he enforces by four reasons. 1. Because so they might all prophecy one
by one, and they were mistaken, who thought that all could not prophecy, except
many spoke at once. 2. All that were in the Church might learn and all be
comforted, by every Prophet, which could not be, except they prophesied
severally one by one. 3. The Spirits of the Prophets are not arrogant, but
humbly subject one to another, each giving place to other. 4. God is not the
Author of confusion, but of peace and order.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Ordination of Ruling Elders, of the continuance of their
Office, and of their maintenance.
TOuching the first of these, it cannot be denied, but as Election to the
Office, so ordination to the exercise thereof, is a thing common both to
Preaching and Ruling Elders. Howbeit in Scotland imposition of hands is not
used in the Ordination of Ruling Elders, as it is in the Ordination of
Preaching Elders, yet this is not to be thought a defect in their Ordination;
In 1. Tim. 4.14. Exam: part 2. p. 221 loc. theol. de minist. eccl. sect. 159.
Loc. 42. Animad. in Bellarm. co^t. 5. lib. 1. c. 3. de guber, eccles. lib, 2.
cap. 3. N. 54 etc. cap. 4. N. 13.19.
for imposition of hands is not an Act but a sign of Ordination, neither is it
a necessary sign but is le^t free: it is not therefore without reason, that
Calvin, Chemnitius, Gerard, Buca^, Ia^i^, Bucerus, and many other of our
learned Writers, yea the Archbishop of Spalato do all make a distinction,
betwixt the essential act of ordination, and the external rite thereof,
holding that ordination may be full, valid and complete, not only without the
unction used in the Roman Church, but even without the laying on of hands, used
in the Reformed Churches. After the Election of Ruling Elders, with the notice
and consent of the whole Church, there follows with us a public designation
of the persons so elected, and an authoritative or potestative Mission,
Ordination, or Deputation of them unto their Presbyteriall functions, together
with public exhortation unto them, and prayer in the Church for them, which
we conceive to be all that b^longeth either to the essence, or integrity of
Ordina^ion. I mean not to condemn Imposition of hands, nor any other
convenient sign, in the Ordination of Ruling Elders, only J intend to
justify our own form, as sufficient.

As for the maintenance and the continuance of the Office of Ruling Elders, we
love not unnecessary Multiplication of questions, let every Church do herein
what they find most convenient. The manner of our Church, in these things, is
such, as best be fitteth the condition of the same, and such as cannot be in
reason condemned; Neither is a stipend, nor continuance in the Function till
Death, essential to the Ministry of the Church, but separable from the same.
The Levites of old served not at all times, but by course, and when they were
50. years old, they were wholly liberat, from the burden and labor (though
not from the attendance) of the Leviticall service, and Ministers, may still
upon the Churches permission, for lawful Reasons, and urgent Necessities, be
absent a whole year, and longer too, from their particular charges. The
Apostles, when they were first sent through Judea, took no stipend, Mat. 10.8,
9. Neither did Paul take any at Corinth, 1 Cor. 9.18. The Ministers among the
Waldenses, work with their hands for their maintenance. The old Patriarchs
were Priests and Preachers, to their families, and maintained themselves by the
work of their hands, feeding of Flocks, tilling the Ground, etc, These things
I do not mention as Rules, to be followed by us, but to show, that the
intermission of the exercise of the Ministry, the want of maintenance and
laboring with the hands, are not altogether repugnant, nor inconsistent, with
the Nature of the vocation, of the Ministers of the word, but in some cases hic
and nunc, may be most approveable in them, much more in Ruling Elders. The
Revenues of our Church are so small, that they cannot spare, stipends to Ruling
Elders, which makes them willing to serve without stipends, and lest they
should be overburdened, with this their service, though they be chosen and
called to be Ruling Elders as long as they live, at least till they m^rit, to
be deposed, yet our book of policy allows them, that ease of intermission
and serving by course, which was allowed to the Levits of old in the Temple.
The double honor which the Apostle commands to give unto Elders that rule
well, 1. Tim. 5.17.
needs not to be expounded of maintenance and obedience; for by double
honor we may either simply understand, much honor, or by way of comparison
double honor, in respect of the Widows, whom he had before commanded to
honor, Ibid. v. 3.
as Calvin expounds the place. Both these Interpretations does Oecumenius
give upon the same place.

The other question propounded by D. Field concerning Ruling Elders, shall have
a resolution in that which follows, and so J will proceed, conceiving that
which has been said for Ruling Elders, shall satisfy such as desire to
understand, though nothing can satisfy the malicious, nor them who are
willingly ignorant.

Here ends the first Book.
THE Second Part, concerning the Assemblies of the Church of SCOTLAND, and
Authority thereof.
CHAP. I. Of popular Government in the Church.
THere be some that call in question the Warrant and Authority of classical
Presbyteries, of provincial Synods and National Assemblies, as they are used
and maintained in the Church of Scotland. I mean not the Praelaticall faction,
whom we set aside, but even some who are as Antiepiscopall as we are. The
Scrupulosity of such (at least of many such) herein does (we conceive) proceed
not from any perverseness of mind, but only from certain mistakings, which
better information may remove.

But first of all we require those, whom we now labor to satisfy, to
condescend upon another point, viz. that the exercise of Ecclesiastical power
and jurisdiction in a particular Congregation, ought not to be committed to
the whole collective body thereof, but is peculiar to the Eldership
representing the same; for in vain do we debate the other point concerning
Presbyteries and Assemblies, if this latent prejudice still occupy their minds,
that the Government of the Church must needs be popular, exercised by the
collective body, which happily may in some sort be done within the bounds of a
well limited Congregation, but is manifestly inconsistent with classical
Presbyteries and Synods, because the collective Bodies of all particular
Congregations within the bounds of a shire, of a Province, of a Nation, cannot
be ordinarily, nor at all ordinatly, assembled together, and if they could, I
believe that the Separatists themselves would in that case allow a dependencie
or subordination of particular Congregations unto the more general
Congregation. So that the point of popular government being once cleared, it
shall facilitate the other question concerning the Subordination of particular
Elderships to class^icall Presbyteries and Synods. Now there are good reasons
why this popular government or exercise by jurisdiction by all can not be
admitted into a Congregation.

First, in every Christian Congregation, there are some Rulers, some ruled,
some Governors, some governed, some that command, some that obey, as is
manifest from Hebr. 13.17. 1. These. 5.12. 1. Tim. 5.17. But if the whole
Congregation have the Rule and Government, who then shall be ruled and
governed? It will be answered, that in the exercise of jurisdiction, every
Member is to act according to it is own condition, the head as the head, the
eye as the eye, etc. that the Rulers and Governors of a Congregation are to
have the principal condu^ of business, and to be Heads, Ears, Mouths, etc.
to the Congregation.

But this simile makes rather for us then against us, for though every member
be useful and steadable in the body according to it is own condition, yet
every member neither can nor does exercise those principal actions of seeing,
hearing, tasting, etc. I say not that other members cannot see, hear, taste,
as the eyes, ears, and mouth do, but they cannot at all see, hear, nor
taste. So if the Rulers of a Congregation be as the eyes, ears, mouth, etc.
then other members of the Congregation cannot at all act those actions of
government which they act. Hence it is that some, who make the whole
Congregation the first subject of the power of spiritual Jurisdiction, do
notwithstanding hold that the whole Church does exercise the said jurisdiction
as Principium quod, the Eldership alone, as Principium quo, even as the whole
man sees, as Principium quod, the eye alone, as Principium quo, and so of all
the rest. Thus do they put a difference betwixt the power it self, Suecan. de
discip. Eccles. part 4. c. 2*
and the exercise of it, ascribing the former to the collective body of the
Church, the latter to the representative: knowing that otherwise they could not
preserve the distinction of Rulers and ruled in the Church.

Secondly, it is well known that in Congregations the greater part are not fit
to exercise Jurisdiction, for they can not examine the Doctrine and abilities
of Ministers, how should they ordain them? They can not judge of questions and
controversies of faith, how shall they determine the same? They can not find
out and discover Heretics, how shall they excommunicate them? It is answered
that this evil proceeds from another, viz. That there is too much sloth and
oversight in the admission of such as are to be members of a Congregation, Mos
est scripturae ita loquide part tanquam de ^ to, sicut Corinthios in primis
suae Epistolae partibus ita laudat Apostolus, tanquam omnes tales essent, cum
essent laudabiles quidam eorum, says Augustine writing to Paulinus.
, and that they would be fit enough to do their duty, if they were all Saints,
they mean appearantly, and in the judgment of charity such, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor.
1, 2. Ephesians. 1, 1. But say we again, 1. Why may we not hold that when the
Apostle writes to the Saints at Rome, at Corinth, etc. he means not, that
all who were in those Churches, were either truly or appearantly Saints (for
some wicked ones there were among them, and manifestly vicious, Romans 16, 17,
18. 1 Cor. 5.9.11.) But that his meaning is, to direct his Epistles to so many
as were Saints at Rome, Corinth, etc. mentioning them alone; because to them,
and to none but them, did God send his word for a blessing, it being sent to
others that they may go and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and
taken, as the Prophet speaks. 2. If it should be granted that the Apostle
gives the name of Saints to all and every one that were in the Churches of
Rome, Corinth, and Ephesus, yet Mr. Ainsworth himself answering Mr. Bernard
holds that they are called Saints by external calling only, wherewith many
are called who are not chosen, and who have no appearant marks of election.
Others say that they were called Saints, in respect of their baptism, wherein
they were all consecrated and devoted to God. Some say that they were all
Saints, in respect of their profession. 3. Howsoever it was that they were all
called Saints, yea put the case they had been all truly Saints, surely their
sanctification can not import their fitness to exercise jurisdiction in the
Church. The former is a special grace of the holy Spirit given to one for his
own Salvation: The other is a common gift of the Spirit, given for the benefit
of the Church.

Thirdly, it were not possible to exercise jurisdiction by a whole Congregation
without great confusion and disorder: therefore this way cannot be from God,
who is not the author of confusion but of order. If it be answered, that order
may be kept in a Congregation exercising Jurisdiction as well as in a
National, at least in a Oecumenicall Synod, where there will be as great a
multitude, and peradventure greater, then there is in a well-bounded
Congregation. We reply it is not so much the multitude, which should make
disorder in the exercise of Jurisdiction by a whole Congregation (though indeed
in many Congregations the multitude alone would hinder order) as the rudeness
of the vulgar sort, who if they should all speak their judgment, what a
monstrous and unavoidable confusion should there be? The members of National
and Oecumenicall Councils, are supposed to be men of knowledge and discretion,
and so may be kept in good order, much more easily then a rude multitude in the
Congregation.

They who are of another judgment object to us: First, our Saviors precept,
Matthew. 18.17. Where he bids us not ^ell the Eldershish, but tell the
Church. Ans. By the Church he means the representative body of the Church,
even as that which was spoken to the Elders of Israel, Exodus 12.21. was said to
be spoken by all the Congregation of Israel, Supra part 1. cap 4 e. (...) c. 11.
Ib. verse 3. and he who was judged by the Elders, was said to be judged by
the Congregation, Ios. 20.6. More of this place we say elsewhere. Next they
object the example of excommunication by the whole Congregation of Corinth, for
the Apostle shows that it was the duty of the whole Congregation, to cast out
that incestuous man. 1 Cor. 5.13.4.9.13. In like manner he writes to them
all, to receive him again, when he had repented, 2 Cor. 2.6.8, 9. Answer.
Whether the power of excommunication in actu primo seu quo ad esse, did belong
to the collective body of the Church of Corinth or not, is a question
controverted, and to this day sub judice lis est, yet even those who hold the
affirmative part of the question, do notwithstanding say, that i^ (...)
secundo seu quo ad operari, the power pertained only to the (...) body of that
Church which (...) P^esbytery: which is also confirmed by 2. Cor. 2.6. where
the Apostle speaking of the censure of that incestuous man, says not, that it
was inflicted, (...), but (...) not by all, but by many. He was judged and
sentenced by those (...), that is by the Pastors and Elders of Corinth, howbeit
the execution and final act of that high censure, was to be with the consent
and in the presence of the Congregation.

Thirdly, it is objected, that Matthias was chosen by the whole number of the
Disciples, Act. 1. and so were the Deacons chosen, Act. 6. and Elders in every
City were made per (...), the Congregation signifying their suffrages by the
lifting up or stretching forth of their hands, Act. 14.23. Therefore
Jurisdiction ought to be exercised by whole Congregations. Answ. This Argument
fails two ways, 1. Though ordination of Office-bearers in the Church be an
act of Jurisdiction, it does not appear that the election of them is an act of
jurisdiction likewise. Though the solemnizing of marriage be an act of
authority, yet the choice and desire of the parties is not an act of authority.
2. Or (if you will) election of Ministers is one of the Rights and Privileges
of the Church, yet no act of jurisdiction. 3. And if election were an act of
authority and jurisdiction, yet the alleged examples prove no more but that
this act of jurisdiction is to be exercised by the whole body, in Ecclesia
constituenda, non constituta. It may be so indeed in Churches at their first
erection, but being once erected, and all necessary Office-bearers therein
planted, from thenceforth the election of Elders pertains to the Presbytery,
De pol. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 12*
to the Pastor and Elders, as Zepperus writes, though still with the consent
of the Church.

Fourthly, it is objected, that what concerns all ought to be done with the
consent of all. Answ. We hold the same, but the consent of all is one thing,
the exercise of jurisdiction by all, another thing. Ainsworth in one of his
Epistles to Paget, condemns the Elderships sitting and judging matters apart
from the Congregation. Arrone, page 23.
Paget answers, that though the Eldership sit apart to judge, yet before any
sentence be given for the cutting off of any offender, or for any other thing
which concerns all, matters are first propounded to the whole Church, and
their prayers and consent required.

And surely this form of proceeding shines forth to us in that Apostolical
Synod at Jerusalem, for the Apostles and Elders, met, sat, and voiced apart
from the whole Church, as Calvin notes from Act. 15, 6. and they alone judged
and decreed Act. 16.4. In the mean while were matters made known to the whole
Church, and done with the consent of all, Act. 15.22.

If it be objected from verse 12: that the whole multitu^e was present in the
Synod: I answer, we may understand with Piscator the multitude there spoken of
to be the multitude of the Apostles and Elders, V. 6. or if we should
understand by the multitude the whole Church, this proves only that the whole
Church heard the question disputed, not that they were all present at the
judging and determining of it. If it be further objected that the Synodall
Epistle came not only from the Apostles and Elders, but from the brethren,
that is, the whole Church. The answer is easy. The Brethren are mentioned,
because it was done with their knowledge, consent, and applause.

To say no more, we would gladly bury this controversy about popular
government, in eternal silence and oblivion, and to this end we are content it
be packt up, in the words which the Separatists themselves (doubtless
perpending the Reasons abovementioned) have set down in the 14. Article of
the Confession of their Faith published, Anno 1616* for this they say. We
judge each proper Pastor, may and ought to be trusted by the Congregation,
with the managing of all points of their Ecclesiastical affairs and
Government, so far, that he with his assistants do execute and administer
the same: yet so that in matters of weight, the whole Congregation do first
understand thereof, before any thing be finished, and the final act be done
in the presence of the whole Congregation, and also that they (the said
Congregation) do ^ot manifestly dissent therefrom. We are heartily content,
that Congregations do fully enjoy all the Christian liberty, which here is
pleaded for in their behalf, yea and much more also; for the assistants spoken
of in these words of the Confession, are other Pastors and Colleagues, if any
there be, in the same Congregation, as will be evident to any that reads
that Article. But we are content that the Assistants spoken of be understood
to be Ruling Elders. Now if the Authors of that Confession thought the
Christian liberty of a Congregation sufficiently preserved, when the Pastor or
Pastors thereof do manage the weighty Ecclesiastical affairs and government,
with the kno^ledge, and (at least tacit) consent of the Congregation it self,
then do we not only sufficiently and abundantly preserve the liberty of the
Congregation, while as not the Pastor or Pastors thereof alone, but sundry
Ruling Elders; also, representing the Congregation, do manage the affairs
aforesaid, the Congregation withal understanding thereof, and consenting
thereto, Tacit if not Express. I do not think but those of the Separation
at this time, will easily assent to this resolution and reconcilement of the
controversy, and so much the rather, because (I believe) they themselves do
seclude from the exercise of jurisdiction in the Congregation, both children
under age, because of their defect of Judgment, and women, because they are
forbidden to speak in the Church, and whether they seclude any other, I know
^ot, but since according to their own Tenets, some must be secluded, and the
power given to the Church, In Mat. 18.17.
must in the exercise of it be restrained to some in the Church, it is better
to say with Aegidius Hunnius, that when Christ remitteth us to the Church. Mat.
18.17. He means the prime and chief Members which represent the Church, that
is Pastors and Elders, then to say that he sends us to the whole body of the
Church.

One scruple more may peradventure remain. They will say, it is well that we
require the churches consent, before any weighty matter which concerns all be
finished: but what if this consent be not had? Whether may the Eldership cut
off an offender renitente Ecclesia? de pol. eccl. lib. 1, cap. 19.
For their satisfaction is this, also we say with Zepperus, Quod si Ecclesia
etc. But if the Church, says he, will not approve the sentence of
Excommunication, nor hold it valid, and they see many disagreeing among
themselves, and schisms and greater evils in the Church to follow this
sentence of Excommunication: the Elders shall not proceed to Excommunication,
but shall patiently suffer what cannot with the good leave of the church be
amended. In the mean while they shall publicly and privately admonish and
exhort In 4 p^a^col. 75 6 de rep* ec lib. 5, 6* 12. ^ 67, lib. 3, contra Epist.
Parmen.
So says Zanchius, that without the consent of the church no man ought to be
excommunicated.

The B. of Spalato, and before him, Augustine has given the reason hereof,
because the end of excommunication cannot be attained, if the Church do not
consent thereto; for the end is, that the offender may be taken with fear and
shame, when he finds himself abhorred and accursed by the whole Church, so
that it shall be in vain to excommunicate him, from whom the Multitude in the
Church refuse to abstract their communion. I conclude, that in such cases;
though the Pastors and Elders have the power of jurisdiction, it is not to
exercise the same.

CHAP. II. Of the independencies of the Elderships of particular Congregations.
WE have now rolled away one stone of offense, but there is another in our
way. It were most strange, if the collective body of a Congregation, consisting
it may be of 10, 20, 30, or 40 persons, according to the grounds of these with
whom we deal, should be permitted to exercise independently all
Eccleasisticall Jurisdiction: but it is almost as great a Paradox, to say, that
the representative of every Congregation, which is the Eldership thereof,
consisting it may be of a Pastor, and two or three Ruling Elders, ought
independently to exercise the foresaid jurisdiction in all points.

I am debtor to D. Field, for answering one of those questions before
propounded, concerning Ruling Elders, and here it falls in my hand. He asks
whether the power of Church Government and jurisdiction, does belong to the
Pastor and Elders of every Congregation, or to the Pastors and Elders of many
Congregations joined together in a Common Presbytery. I believe his expectation
was, that while as we would sail through betwixt the Caribdis of Episcopal
tyranny, and the Scylla of popular Anarchy, we should not know ho^ to direct
our course, but should certainly either be swallowed up in the waves of mighty
difficulties, or split our selves upon hid Rocks of division. Our danger, I
hope, is not so great as he did imagine; for we hold that the particular
Elderships of several Congregations have their own power and authority of
Church Government, but with a subordination unto the common or greater
Presbytery, whose power is superior and of a larger extent.

First, then we shall take into consideration, the bounds of the power of
particular Elderships, and how the same may be said to be independent, and how
not, for this purpose, I shall give four distinctions out of Parker, and to
these I shall add other four of my own. de pol. eccl: lib, 3. cap. 20,


The first distinction is, betwixt things which are proper and peculiar to one
Congregation, The Elders and Deacons of Ro^e writing to Cyprian concerning some
public offenders. s^y Per. quam (...) his and i^ vidus^m and on^rosum
videtur, (...) p^r multos examin^e quod per multos ^omm^ssum videatur fu^sse,
and un (...) d^cere, c^nt^m grande ^imen per multos dis fusum (...) exisse
quont^m nec fi^mum decret^m potest esse quod non plur^m^rum vide bit^rh^bu^sse
(...) Cypr Epist 31. (...).
and things which are common to many: the former pertains to the particular
Eldership, the latter to the common Eldership: Whence it comes that in
Scotland the cases of ordination, suspension, deposition, and Excommunication,
are determined in the greater Presbyteries, because it does not concern one
Congregation alone, but many, who be taken into the common Presbytery, and who
be put out of the sam^, neither does the Excommunication of a sinner concern
only one Congregation, but the Neighboring Congregations also, among whom (
as is to be commonly supposed* the sinner does often haunt and converse.
Cyprian speaking of the admission of some who had fallen, and who had no
recommendation from the Martyrs to be received again, refers the matter to
a common meeting, and his reason is, because it was a common cause, and did not
concern a few, nor one church only. See lib. 2. Ep. 14.

The second distinction is betwixt Congregations, which have a competent and
well-qualified Eldership, and small Congregations, who have but few
office-bearers, and those (it may be) not sufficiently able for
Church Government. In this case of insufficiency, a Congregation may not
independently, by it self, exercise jurisdiction, and not in re propria, says
Parker.

3. He distinguishes betwixt the case of right administration, and the case of
aberration: whatsoever liberty, a Congregation has in the former case, surely
in the latter it must needs be subject and subordinate. If particular
Elderships do rightly manage their own matters of Church Government, the
greater Presbytery shall not need for a long time (it may be for some years)
to intermeddle in any of their matters, which we know by experience in our
own Churches.

4. He makes a distinction betwixt the case of appellation and the case, de
nulla administratione mala praesumpta. Though the particular Eldership has
proceeded aright, though it consist of able and sufficient men, and though it
be in re propria, yet if one think himself wronged, and so appeal, then is
it made obnoxious to a higher consistory, for says Parker, as the Council of
Sardis ordains audience must, not be denied to him who entreats for it.

de pol. eccl. lib. 3. cap. 2.
So says Zepperus, speaking of the same purpose, cuivis integrum quoque sit ad
superiores gradus provocare, si in inferioris gradus sententia aut decreto
aliquid desideret.

5. Add unto these a distinction betwixt a Congregation, lying alone in an
Island, Province, or Nation, and a Congregation bordering with sister Churches.
If either there be but one Congregation in a Kingdom or Province, or if there
be many far distant one from another, so that their Pastors and Elders cannot
ordinarily meet together, then may a particular Congregation do many things
by it self alone, which it ought not to do, where there are adjacent
neighboring Congregations, together with which, it may, and should have a
common Presbytery.

6. Let us put a difference betwixt the subordination of one Congregation to
another, or of ore Eldership to another, and the subordination of any
Congregation, and of the Eldership thereof to a superior, Presbytery or Synod
made out of many Congregations, as one provincial Synod is not subject to
another Provincial Synod, yet all the Provincial Synods in the Nation are
subje^t (...) the National Synod, so it is also with the ordinary
consistories, one particular Eldership is not subject to another, yet all the
particular Elderships within the bounds of the common Presbytery are subject to
the same. So that there is a vast difference betwixt this subordination which
we maintain, and the subordination of all the Parishes in a Diocese to the
Praelate and his Cathedral. Where Douname does object that all the Parishes of
Geneva are Hierarchically subject to the Presbytery in the city, Parker denies
this, nisi quis etc. unless says he, De pol. Ec. lib. 3. c. 23.
peradve^ture one may be subject to himself, for the Parishes, each for their
own part, and that alihe, are this same Presbytery. And after, Consistorium
etc. for the Consistory of the Cathedral Church is an external meeting,
diverse distinct and separate from the rural Churches, which are no part
thereof, this cannot be said of the Presbytery of Geneva.

7. We must distinguish betwixt a dependence absolute, and, in some respect, a
Congregation does absolutely depend upon the holy Scriptures alone, as the
perfect rule of faith and manners, of worship and of Church Government, for we
accurse the tyranny of Prelates, who claimed to themselves an autocratoricke
power over Congregations, Spotswood Sermon. at Perth. assemb.
to whom they gave their naked will for a Law. One of themselves told a whole
Synod that they ought to esteem that best which seems so to Superiors, and
that this is a sufficient ground to the conscience for obeying, though the
thing be inconvenient. We say, that Congregations ought indeed to be subject to
Presbyteries and Synods, yet not absolutely, but in the Lord, and in things
lawful, and to this purpose the constitutions of Presbyteries and Synods are
to be examined by the judgment of Christian discretion, for a Synod is Iudex
Iudicandus, and Regula regulata, so that it ought not to be blindly obeyed,
whether the ordinance be convenient or inconvenient.

Last of all we are to distinguish betwixt the condition of the Primitive
Churches, before the division of Parishes, and the state of our Churches now
after such division. At the first when the multitude of Christians in those
great cities of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. was not divided into several
Parishes, the common Presbytery in the city did suffice for the government of
the whole, and there was no need of a particular consistory of Elders, for
every assembly and Congregation of Christians within the city, except perhaps
to admonish, rebuke, exhort, or to take notice of such things as were to be
brought into the common Presbytery. But after that Parishes were divided, and
Christian Congregations planted in the rural villages, as well as in the
cities, from henceforth it was necessary that every Congregation should have at
hand within it self, a certain Consistory for some acts of Church Government,
though still those of greater importance were reserved to the greater
Presbytery. And thus have J, out of desire to avoid unnecessary questions, set
down my conceptions concerning the Elderships of particular Congregations, and
the power of the same.

If it be said, that I seem to deny the divine right of the same, or that they
have any warrant from the pattern of the Apostolic Church. I answer. I
acknowledge the conformity of the same with the pattern thus far. 1. It is
to be suposed that in some small cities (especially the same not being wholly
converted to the Christian faith) there was but one Christian Congregation, the
Eldership whereof did manage matters of jurisdictio^ proper thereto. 2. Even in
the great cities, at the first there was but one Congregation of Christians,
and so but one particular Eldership. 3. After that the Gospel had spread, and
Christians were multiplied in those great cities, it is true, they were all
governed by a common Presbytery, but that Presbytery was not remote, but ready
at hand among themselves. Now in this we keep our selves as closse to the
pattern, as the alteration of the Churches condition by the division of
Parishes will suffer us, that is to say, we have a common Presbytery for
governing the Congregations within a convenient circuit, but withal our
Congregations have, ad manum, among themselves, an inferior Eldership for
lesser acts of Government; though in respect of the distance of the seat of
the common Presbytery from sundry of our Parishes, they can not have that ease
and benefit of nearenesse, which the Apostolic Churches had, yet by the
particular Elderships they have as great ease of this kind as conveniently can
be.

CHAP. III. Of greater Presbyteries which some call classes.
THe word (...) Presbytery we find thrice in the New Testament, twice of the
Jewish Presbytery at Jerusalem, Luke 22.66. Act. 22.5. and once of the
Christian Presbytery. 1. Tim. 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which
(...) given thee by prophecy, De presb, c. 12. p. 75.81.

Sermon. in apoc. 1.20.


with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Sutlivius and Douname have
borrowed, from Bellarmine, two false glosses upon this place.

They say by (...) here, we may understand either an assembly of Bishops, or
the Office of a Presbyter, which was given to Timothy. Iren, lib* 2. c. 11. p.
161.
To these absurdities let one of their own side answer. Whereas says D.
Forbesse, some have expounded the Presbytery in this place to be a company of
Bishops, unless by Bishops thou would understand simple Presbyters, it is a
violent interpretation, and an insolent meaning. And whereas others have
understood the degree it self of Eldership, this can not stand, De presb^^. 1.
for the degree has not hands, but hands are men's. J find in Sutlivius, a
third gloss. He says, that the word Presbytery in this place signifies the
Ministers of the word, non juris vinculo sed ut cunque collectos, inter quos
etiam Apostoli erant. Ans. 1. If so, then the occasional meeting of Ministers,
be it in a journey, or at a wedding, or a burial, etc. shall all be
Presbyteries, for then they are ut cunque collecti. 2. The Apostles did put the
Churches (...) better order, then to leave imposition of hands, or any thing of
that kind to the uncertainty of an occasional meeting. 3, The Apostles were
freely present in any Presbytery, where they were for the time, because the
oversight and care of all the Churches was laid upon them: Pastors and Elders
were necessarily present therein, and did by virtue of their particular
vocation meet together Presbyterially, whether an Apostle were with them, or
not.

No other sense can the Text suffer but that by Presbytery we should
understand consessus Presbyterorum, a meeting of Elders, and so do Camero and
Forbesse themselves expound it. Sutlivius objecteth to the contrary, that the
Apostle Paul did lay on hands upon Timothy, which he proves both from 2. Tim.
1. and, because extraordinary gifts were given by that laying on of hands. Ans.
There is an express difference made betwixt Paul's laying on of his hands, and
the Presbyteries laying on of their hands. Of the former it is said, that
Timothy received the gift, which was in him, (...) by the laying on of Paul's
hands; but he received the gift (...) with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, as Didoclavius notes. But says Sutlivius, Timothy being an
Evangelist (as you hold) how could he be ordained by the Presbytery? Ans. 1.
Though the Presbytery did neither give him ordination to be an Evangelist,
nor yet confer by the laying on of their hands extraordinary gifts upon him,
yet did they lay on their hands, as setting to the the Seal and Testimony, and
commending him to the grace of God, even as certain Prophets and Teachers laid
hands on Paul and Barnabas, and Ananias also before that time had laid his
hands upon Paul. 2. The Presbytery might ordain Timothy to be an Elder. If so
be he was ordained an Elder before he was ordained an Evangelist. 3. If the
testimony of the Presbytery, by the laying on of their hands, together, with
the Apostles hands, in the extraordinary mission of Timothy, was required: much
more may it be put out of question, that the Apostles committed to the
Presbyt^ry the full power of ordaining ordinary Ministers.

But it is further objected by Sutlivius that this could not be such a
Presbytery as is among us, because ordination and imposition of hands pertain
to none, but the Ministers of the word. Number. 8.10.
Ans. 1. The children of Israel laid their hands upon the Levites, and we would
know his reason why he denies the like power to ruling Elders now, especially
since this imposition of hands is but a gesture of one praying, and a moral
sign declaring the person prayed for. 2. Howsoever our practice (which is also
approved by good Divines) is, Iun. cont. 5. lib. 1. cap. 3. Synod. pur. theol.
dyp. 42. these. 37.
to put a difference betwixt the act of ordination and the external right
thereof, which is imposition of hands, ascribing the former to the whole
Presbytery both Pastors and Elders, and reserving the latter to the Ministers
of the word, yet to be done in the name of all.

Thus have we evinced the Apostles meaning, when he speaks of a Presbytery,
and this Consistory we find to have continued in the Christian Church in the
ages after the Apostles. It is certain that the ancient Bishops had no power
to judge any cause without the presence, advice and counsel of their
Presbyters Conc. Carth. 4. can. 23. Field, Forbesse, Saravia, and Douname, do
all acknowledge that it was so, and so does Bellarmine de Pont. Romans l. 1. c.
8. Of this Presbytery speaks Cyprian. Omni actu ad me perlato, placuit
contrahi Presbyterium, etc.

Of the Presbytery speaks the same Cyprian, lib. 2. Ep. 8. and lib. 4. Ep. 5.
Ignatius ad Trall. and Hierom in Esa. 3. We find it also in conc. Ancyr. can
18 and in conc. Carthag. 4. can. 35.40. Iren. lib. 2. p. 254.255.
Doctor Forbesse alleges that the word Presbytery for fifteen hundred years
after Christ, did signify no other thing in the Church, then a Diocesan Synod.
But herein (if he had understood himself) he spoke not so much against
Presbyteries, as against Prelates; for a Diocese of old was bounded within one
City. Lib. 4. ep. 2.
Tumque jampridem per omnes provincias and per urbes singulas ordinati sint
Episcopi, etc. says Cyprian. It was necessary to ordain Bishops, (...), In 1 Timothy hom. 10.
says Chrysostom, speaking of the primitive times; yea, in Country Villages
also were Bishops, who were called (...), that is, (...), rural Bishops, whose
Episcopal office though limited, yet) was allowed in the Council of Ancyra,
can. 13. and the Council of Antioch can 8. and 10. Hist. tripart. l. 6. cap. 4.
Sozomen records that the Village Majuma, which was sometime a suburb of the
City Gaza, was not subject to the Bishop of Gaza, but had its own proper
Bishop, and that by the decree of a Synod in Palestina. The Council of Sardis,
can. 6. and the Council of Laodicea, can. 57. though they discharged the
ordaining of Bishops in villages, lest the name of a Bishop should grow
contemptible, did nevertheless allow every City to have a Bishop of its own.
What has Doctor Forbesse now gained by maintaining that the bounds of a
Presbytery, and of a Diocese were all one? They in the Netherl^nds sometime
call their Presbyteries Diocaeses: G. Bucer. de gub. Eccl. page 100.101.
and many of our Presbyteries are greater then were Diocesses of old. We
conclude there was anciently a Presbytery in every City which did indeed
choose one of their number to preside among them, and to lay on hands in name
of the rest, and he was called the Bishop; wherein they did more trust the
deceiveable goodness of their own intentions, then advert to the rule of the
Word of God.

These things premitted, I come now to that which is principally intended, viz.
by what warrant and qu^ jure, the Classical Presbytery among us, made up out
of many neighboring congregations, should be the ordinary Court of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, at least in all matters of highest importance,
which do concern either all or any of those congregations.

For resolution hereof we must understand 1. That causes common to many
congregations, ought not to be judged by any one of them, but by the greater
Presbytery common to them all. 2. It is to be supposed that particular
congregations (at least the far greatest part of them) have not in their
proper Elderships so many men of sufficient abilities, as are requisite in
judging and determining the cases of the examination of Ministers, of
ordination, deposition, excommunication, and the like. 3. When one appealeth
from a particular Eldership, out of persuasion that he is wronged by the
sentence thereof, or when that Eldership finding its own insufficiency for
determining some difficult causes, resolves to refer the same into a higher
Court: reason would that there should be an ordinary Court of a Classical
Presbytery to receive such appellations or references. 4. Congregations which
lie near together, ought all as one to keep unity and conformity in Church
policy and government, neither ought one of them be permitted to do an injury,
or to give an offense unto another: and for these ends, it is most necessary
that they be governed by one common Presbytery. 5. There may be a competition
or a controversy not only betwixt one congregation and another, but in the
same congregation betwixt the one half and the other; yea, the Eldership it
self of that congregation, may be, (and sometimes is) divided in it self. And
how shall things of this kind be determined, but by the common Presbytery? 6.
But (which is caput rei) these our Classical Presbyteries have a certain
warrant from the pattern of the Apostolical Churches: For proof whereof, it
shall be made to appear, 1. That in those Cities, (at least in many of them)
where Christian religion was planted by the Apostles, there were a great number
of Christians, then either did, or conveniently could meet together into one
place for the worship of God. 2. that in those Cities there was a plurality not
only of ruling Elders, but of the Ministers of the word. 3. That
notwithstanding hereof, the whole number of Christians within the City, was
one Church. 4. That the whole number, and several companies of Christians
within one City, were all governed by one common Presbytery. The second of
these does follow upon the first, and the fourth upon the third.

The first proposition may be made good by induction of particulars; and
first, it is more then evident of Jerusalem, where we find unto 120
Disciples, Act. 1.15. added 8000. by Peter's two Sermons, Act. 2.41. and 4.4.
Besides whom, there were yet more multitudes added. Act. 5.14. And after that
also, we read of a further multiplication of the Disciples, Act. 6.1. by
occasion whereof the seven Deacons were chosen and ordained: which makes some
to conjecture, that there were seven congregations, a Deacon for every one.
Certainly there were rather more then fewer, though we cannot determine how
many. It is written of Samaria, that the people with one accord gave heed unto
Philip, Act. 8.6. even all of them both men and women, from the least to the
greatest, who had before given heed to Simon: of these all it is said, that
they believed Philip, and were baptized, verse. 10.12. which made the Apostles
that were at Jerusalem* when they heard that the great City Samaria had
received the word of God, to send unto them Peter and John, the harvest being
so great, that Philip was not sufficient for it, v. 14. Of Ioppa it is said,
Act. 9.42.
that many believed in the Lord. Of Ant^och w^ read, that a great number
believed, and turned to the Lord, Act. 11.21. Of Iconium that a great multitude
both of the Jews, and also of the Greeks, believed, Act. 14.1 Of Lidda, that
all who dwelt therein, turned to the Lord, Act. 9.35. Of Ber^a, that many of
them believed: also of the honorable women, and the men not a few, Act. 17.12.
Of Corinth the Lord says, I have much people in this City, Act. 18.10* O^
Ephesus we find, that ^eare fell on all the Jews and Greeks which dwelt
there, and many believed; yea, many of the Magicians themselves, whose books
that were burned, amou^t^d to fif^y thousand pieces of silver, so mightily grew
the Word of God and prevailed, Act. 19.17.18.19.20. Unto the multitude of
Christians in those Cities, let us add another consideration, viz. that they
had no Temples (as now we have) but private places ^or their holy Assemblies,
such as the house of Mary, Act. 12.12. the School of Tyrannus, Act 19.9. an
upper chamber at Tr^^s, Act. ^0.8. Paul's lodging at Rome, Act. 28.^3. Neither
do I see any reason why the Church which was in the house of Aquila and
Priscilla, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. should not be understood to be a
congregation, as Erasmus reads it, that is, such a-number of Christians as
met together in their house. So we read of the Church in the house of Nymphas,
Col. 4.15. And of the Church (...) house of Archippus* Philem. v. 2. (...), i^
is certain, that Christians met together, (...), house by house, Domatius,
Act. 2.46. both these considerations, viz. the multitude of Christians in one
City, and their assembling together for worship in private houses, have also
place in the next ages after the Apostles. Hist. Eccl. lib, 8. cap. 1.
Let Eusebius speak for them both. Who can describe, says he, those
innumerable heaps and flocking multitudes, throughout all Cities and famous
Assemblies, frequenting the places ded^c^ted to prayer? Thereafter he
proceeds to show how in aftertimes by the favor of Emperors, Christians had
throughout all Cities, ample Churches built for them, they not being contented
with the old Or^toria, which were but private houses. Now these two, the
multitude of Christians, and the want of Temples, shall abundantly give light
to my first proposition.

But it may be objected to the contrary, that all the Disciples at Jerusalem
did meet together (...), into one place, Act. 2.44. And the same is said of the
Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.20. Ans. The disciples at Jerusalem, Verse. 46.
being at that time above 3000. it cannot be co^ceived how any private house
could cotain them. Beside, it is said, that they brake bread that is, did
celebrate the Lords Supper from house to house. Therefore many good
interpreters understand by (...), that all the Disciples were linked together
into one by amity and love, an evidence whereof is given in the next words, and
had all things common. To the other place we answer: 1. That Epistle, whether
it were written from Philippi, or from Ephesus, was undoubtedly written very
lately after the plantation of the Gospel in Corinth, while as that Church was
yet in her infancy. And if it should be granted, that at that time the whole
Church of Corinth might and did meet together into one place, this proves not
that it was so afterward: for the Churches increased in number daily, Act.
16.5. But, 2. the place of the Apostle proves not that which is alleged: for
his words may be understood in sensu distributivo. It was no solecisme for one
that was writing to diverse congregations, to say, When ye come together into
one place, meaning distributively of every congregation, not collectively of
them all together.

My second proposition concerning the plurality of the Ministers of the Word in
those great Cities, wherein the Apostles did erect Christian Churches, arises
from these grounds, 1. The multiplicity of Christians. 2. The want of Temples,
of which two I have already spoken. 3. The daily increase of the Churches to a
greater number, Acts 16.5.4. There was need of preachers, not only for those
who were already converted in the City, but also for laboring to win the
unbelievers who were therein. These reasons may make us conclude that there
were as many Pastors in one City as there were sacred meetings therein, and
some more also for the respects foresaid. And what will you say if we find
examples of this plurality of Pastors in Scripture? Of the Bishops or Pastors
of the Church of Ephesus, it i^ said, that Paul kneeled down, and prayed with
them all, and they all wept sore, Acts 20.36.37. compared with verse 28. Here
is some good number imported. To the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, that is,
to the Pastors thereof collectively taken, Christ says, The Devil shall cast
some of you into prison, Revel. 2.10. which (if not only yet) principally is
spoken to the Pastors, though for the benefit of that whole Church. This is
more plain of the Church of Thyatira, verse 24. (...), Unto you I say, and to
the rest in Thyatira: as if he would say, says Pareus, Tibi ^spicopo cum
collegis and reliquo coetui dico. Paul writes to the Bishop at Philippi, Phil.
1.1. and notwithstanding that there was already a certain number of Bishops or
Pastors in that City, yet the Apostle thought it necessary to send unto them
Epaphroditus also, Phil. 2.25. being shortly thereafter to send unto them
Timotheus, verse 19. yea to come himself, verse 24. so that there was no
scarcity of laborers in that harvest. Epaphras and Archippus were Pastors to
the Church at Colosse, and who besides we cannot tell, but Paul sent unto them
also Tychicus, and Onesimu^, Col. 4.7.9.

Now touching the third proposition, no man who understands, will imagine
that the multitude of Christians within one of those great Cities was divided
into as many parishes as there were meeting places for worship. It is a point
of controversy, who did begin the division of parishes; but whosoever it
was, whether Evaristus, or Higinus, or Dionysius, certain it is, that it was
not so from the beginning, I mean in the days of the Apostles, for then it
was all one to say, in every City, or to say, in every Church. That which is
(...), Tit. 1.5. is (...) Acts 14.22. This is acknowledged by all
Anti-prelaticall writers so far as I know, and by the Prelaticall writers
also.

The last proposition, as it has not been denied by any, so it is
sufficiently proved by the former, for that which made the multitude of
Christians within one City to be one Church, was their union under and their
subjection unto the same Church government and governors. A multitude may be
one Church, though they do not meet together into one place for the worship
of God: for example, it may fall forth, that a congregation cannot meet
together into one, but into diverse places, and this may continue so for some
years together, either by reason of persecution, or by means of the plague,
or because they have not such a large Parish Church as may contain them all,
so that a part of them must meet in some other place: but a multitude cannot
be one Church, unless they communicate in the same Church government, and
under the same Governors, (by one Church I mean one Ecclesiastical
Republike;) even as the like union under civil government and governors
makes one corporation: when the Apostle speaks to all the Bishops of the
Church of Ephesus, Acts 20.28.
he exhorts them all to take heed to all the flock, (...), over which the
holy Ghost had made them overseers, so that the whole was governed by the
common counsel and advice of the Elders, as Hierome speaks: for the same
reason we say not the Churches, but the Church of Amsterdam, because all the
Pastors and Elders have the charge* and government of the whole.

From all which has been said, I infer this Corollary, That in the times of
the Apostles, the Presbytery which was the ordinary Court of Jurisdiction,
which did ordain, depose, excommunicate, etc. did consist of so many Pastors
and Elders, as could with convenience meet ordinarily together, which is a
pattern and warrant for our Classical Presbyteries. I confess there might be
in some towns no greater number of Christians then did meet together in one
place, notwithstanding whereof the Pastor or Pastors and Elders of that
congregation, might and did manage the government of the same, and exercise
jurisdiction therein. I confess also that in those Cities wherein there was a
greater number of Christians then could meet together into one place for the
worship of God, the Presbytery did consist of the Pastors and Elders within
such a City: for it cannot be proved that there were at that time any Christian
congregations in Landward Villages (the persecution forcing Christians to
choose the shelter of Cities, for which reason many are of opinion that the
Infidells in those days were called Pagani, because they alone dwelt in Pagis)
and if there had been any such adjacent to Cities, we must think the same
should have been subject to the common Presbytery, their own Pastors and
Elders being a part thereof. Howsoever it cannot be called in question that the
Presbytery in the Apostolical Churches, was made up of as many as could
conveniently meet together, for managing the ordinary matters of Jurisdiction
and Church Government. The Pastors and Elders of diverse Cities could not
conveniently have such ordinary meetings, especially in the time of
persecution; only the Pastors and Elders within one City had such convenience.
And so to conclude, we do not forsake, but follow the pattern, when we join
together a number of Pastors and Elders out of the congregations in a
convenient circuit, to make up a common Presbytery, which has power and
authority to govern those congregations; for if the Presbytery which we find
in those Cities wherein the Apostles planted Churches, be a sure pattern for
our Classical Presbyteries (as we have proved it to be) then it follows
undeniably that the authority of Church Government, of excommunication,
ordination, etc. which did belong to that Primitive Presbytery, does also
belong to those our Classical or greater Presbyteries.

CHAP. IV. Of the authority of Synods Provincial and National.
TOuching Synods, I shall first show what their power is, and thereafter give
arguments for the same. The power of Jurisdiction which we ascribe unto
Synods, is the same in nature and kind with that which belongs to
Presbyteries, but with this difference, that Presbyteries do exercise it in an
ordinary way, and in matters proper to the congregations within their circuit.
Synods do exercise this power in matters which are common to a whole province,
or nation; or if in matters proper to the bounds of one Presbytery, it is in an
extraordinary way; that is to say, when either Presbytery has erred in the
managing of their own matters, or when such things are transferred to the
Synod from the Presbytery, whether it be by appellation or by reference.

The power of Jurisdiction, whereof I speak is threefold, (...), and (...). So
it is distinguished by our writers, and all these three do in manner foresaid
belong unto Synods. In respect of Articles of faith or worship, a Synod is
Iudex or Testis: In respect of external order and policy in circumstances, a
contriver of a Canon, or (...) In respect of heresy, schism, obstinacy,
contempt and scandal, Vindex: not by any external coactive power (which is
peculiar to the Magistrate) but by spiritual censures.

The dogmaticke power of a Synod, is not a power to make new Articles of faith,
nor new duties and parts of divine worship, but a power to apply and interpret
those Articles of faith, and duties of worship which God has set before us in
his written Word, and to declare the same to be inconsistent with emergent
heresies and errors. To this purpose it is that the Apostle calls the Church
the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.
(...), not (...), which may be expounded either in sensu forensi, the Church
is the public witness, notifier and keeper of truth; even as in Courts and
places of judgment, there are pillars to which the Edicts of Magistrates are
affixed, that people may have notice thereof: or in sensu architectonico* as
the Church by her faith is built upon Christ, or (which is all one) upon the
doctrine and truth of Christ, contained in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and leans thereto: so by her Ministry she upholdeth,
under-propeth, and conserveth this same truth, lest, as the Prophet speaks,
Truth fall in the streets, and perish among men. Truth stands fast in the
Church, and is kept firm, while it is professed, preached, propugned and
maintained against all contrary error and heresy. In the same sense says the
Apostle, that unto the Jewish Church were committed the Oracles of God, Romans
3.2.
by them to be kept, interpreted, propagated, etc.

By the Diatakticke power a Synod may institute, restore, or change, according
to the condition and exigence of the Church, the external circumstances in the
worship of God, and Ecclesiastical discipline: I mean those circumstances
which are common both to civil and sacred Societies, the conveniencie whereof
is determinable by the light of Nature, always observing the general rules of
the Word, which commands that all be done to the glory of God, that all be
done to edifying, that all be done in order and decency, that we give none
offense, that we support the weak, that we give no place to the enemies of
the truth, nor symbolize with Idolaters, etc. Now for avoiding disorder and
disconformity in a Nation professing one Religion, it is fit that National
Synods give certain directions and rules even concerning these rites and
circumstances, not having therein an Arbitrary or Autocratorke power, but being
always tied to follow the rules foresaid.

The Critic power of a Synod, is not a Lordly imperious dominiering over the
flock of Christ, which is not to be ruled with force and cruelty; but it is
the power of spiritual censures, as excommunication, deposition, and the like,
most necessary for the repressing of heresy, error, obstinacy in
wickedness, and scandals, otherwise incorrigible. Without this power, schisms
and offenses could not be cured, but should the more increase; whileas liberty
is left to heretics, schismatickes, and obstinate persons, without any
censure to pester and disturb a whole Nation, without any regard to the
constitutions of a National Synod.

But may one say, if the Decrees of a Synod concerning matters of Faith or
Worship, may and ought to be examined by the sure rule of the word of God, and
only to be received when they do agree therewith; and if also the
constitutions of a Synod in external circumstances, do not bind, except ex
aquo and bono, and propter justas mandandi causas: or, as Divines speak, in
casu scandali and contemptus, and not for the mere will or authority of a
Synod; and if therefore all Christians are by the private judgment of
Christian discretion, following the light of Gods Word and Spirit, to try and
examine all decrees and constitutions of any Synod whatsoever, to know whether
they may lawfully receive the same, as our Divines maintain and prove against
Papists. If these things be so, it may seem contrary to Christian liberty, and
to the Doctrine of Protestant Writers, that Synods should exercise the foresaid
Critic power, or inflict any spiritual censures, at least upon those who
profess, that after examination of the decrees or constitutions, they cannot
be persuaded of the lawfulness of the same.

Ans. 1. Our Divines by those their tenants, mean not to open a door to
disobedience and contempt of the ordinances of a Synod, but only to oppugn
the Popish error concerning the binding power of Ecclesiastical laws, by the
sole will and naked authority of the lawmakers, and that Christian people ought
not to seek any further reason or motive of obedience. 2. A Synod must ever put
a difference betwixt those who out of a real scruple of conscience, do in a
modest and peaceable way, refuse obedience to their ordinances, still using the
means of their beter information, and those who contemptuously or factiously
disobey the same, laboring with all their might to strengthen themselves in
their error, and to persuade others to be of their mind. 3. This objection
does militate no less against Ecclesiastical censures in a particular
congregation, then in a National Synod. And they who do at all approve of
Church censures to be inflicted upon the contemptuous and obstinate, shall put
in our mouths an answer to objections of this kind.

CHAP. V. The first Argument for the authority of Synods, and the subordination
of Presbyteries thereto, taken from the light of nature.
HAving now described the power of particular Elderships (which we call
Sessions) of Classical Presbyteries, and of Synods, Provincial and National,
it remains to confirm by Arguments the subordination and subjection of the
particular Elderships, to the Classical or common Presbytery, of both to the
Provincial Synod, and of all these to the National Assembly: So that every
one may perceive what reason the Church of Scotland has to give unto the
higher Ecclesiastical Courts authority over the lower.

I might insist long enough both in the Testimonies of Protestant Writers, and
in the examples of the reformed Churches abroad, as also in the examples of all
the ancient Churches, all speaking for this authority of Synods. But these I
shall pass, because I know Arguments from Scripture, and reason, are required,
and such we have to give.

First of all I argue from the very light and law of nature. That same light of
nature which has taught our Commonwealth, beside the Magistrates and
Counsels of particular Burghs, to constitute higher Courts, for whole Shires,
Baliveries, Stuartries, Regalities; and above all these, the supreme Court of
Parliament to govern the whole Nation, has also taught our Church to
constitute Synods Provincial and National, with power and authority above
Presbyteries. We are far from their mind who would make Policy the
Mistress, and Religion the Handmaid, and would have the government of the
Church conformed to the government of the State as the fittest pattern. But
this we say, in all such things as are alike common to the Church and to the
Commonwealth, and have the same use in both, whatsoever natures light
directs the one, it cannot but direct the other also; for as the Church is a
company of Christians subject to the ^aw of God, so is it a company of men and
women who are not the outlawes of nature, but followers of the same. It is well
said by one, Hoc certissimum est etc. ^.B.A.C. de Polit. civil. and Eccles.
p^g. 43.
This is most certain, that the Church is a certain kind of Republike* for
it has all those things which all Republikes must need, have, but t^h^th them
in a different way, because it is not a Civil* but an Ecclesiastic^ll
Republike. And again, Est ergo, etc. ^o that this Republike is much more
perfect then all others, and therefore cannot but have the things which they
have that are in dignity far inferi^ur to it. So says Robinson in his
justif. of separ. page 113. The visible Church, says he, being a polity
Ecclesiastical and the perfect on of all polities, does comprehend in it
whatsoever is excellent in all other bodies political. Now so it is, that
while as some hold the government of the Church to be Monarchical, others
Aristocraticall, others Democraticall, others mixed of all these; they all
acknowledge that the Church is a Republike, and ought to be governed even as a
Civil Republike, in things which are alike common to both: of this kind are
Courts and Judicatories, which do alike belong to both, and have the same use
in both, viz. for rule and government; therefore as natures light does
undeniably enforce diversity of Courts in the Commonwealth, some particular,
some general, some lower, some higher, and the latter to have authority over
the former, it does no less undeniably enforce the like in the Church, for de
paribus idem judicium. It cannot be denied that the Church is led by natures
light in such things as are not proper to religious holy uses, but alike common
to civil societies, at least in so far as they are common to sacred and
civil uses. The Assemblies of the Church in so far as they treat of things
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, after a spiritual manner, for a spiritual
end, and do consist of spiritual Office-bearers as the members constituent,
in as far they are sacred, and the Church is therein directed by the Word of
God alone; yet the having of Assemblies and Consistories, and diverse sorts of
them, and the lower subordinat to the higher, all this is not sacred nor proper
to the Church, but common with her to the Commonwealth, nature commending
therein to the one, what it commends to the other.

CHAP. VI. The second Argument, taken from Christ's Institution.
AS we have Nature, so have we Christ's Institution for us, and this shall
appear two ways. First, the fidelity of Christ, both in his Prophetical and
in his Regal or Nomotheticall power, was such, that he has sufficiently
provided for all the necessities and exigences whatsoever of his Churches, to
the end of the world. Therefore the Apostle calls him as faithful in all the
house of God, Heb. 3.2.
as ever Moses was, who delivered laws serving for the government of the
Church of the Jews in all cases. Whence we collect, that the authority of
Classical Presbyteries over the Elderships of particular congregations, and
the authority of Synods over both, must needs have a warrant from Christ's own
Institution, because without this authority, there are very important
necessities of the Churches, that cannot be helped. For example, in most
congregations, especially in Dorps and Villages, when a Pastor is to be
ordained, the particular Eldership within the congregation can neither examine
and try his gifts, and his, soundness in the faith, (which examination must
necessarily precede his ordination;) nor can they discover him, in case he be a
subtle and learned heretic; nor yet can they pray in the congregation over
him which is to be ordained, and give him public exhortation and admonition
of his duty, God having neither given to the Elders of every congregation, nor
yet required of them such abilities. What shall be done in this case? Against
Paget Chap. 5.
Ainsworth would have the work stayed, and the Church to want a Minister, till
she be able to do her works, and her duties which are proper to her. Alas!
bad Christ no greater care of the Churches then so? shall they be destitute of
a Pastor, ever till they be able to try his gifts and soundness, and to exhort
and pray at his ordination? and how shall they ever attain to such abilities
except they be taught? and how shall they be taught without a Teacher? Now
the power and authority of Classical Presbyteries, to o^d^in Pastors in
particular congregations, shall cut off all this deduction of absurdities, and
shall supply the Churches need. I may add another instance concerning the
Classical Presbytery it self. What if the one half thereof turn to be
heretical, or it may be the major part? They shall either have most voices,
or at least the half of the voices for them, and there shall be no remedy,
unless the authoritative determination of a Synod be interposed.

Secondly, the will of Christ for Provincial and National Assemblies to be
over Presbyteries, even as they are over the Elderships of particular
congregations, appears also in this. He has given us in the new Testament,
express warrant for Ecclesiastical Courts and Assemblies in general, that
such there ought to be, for the right government of the Church, Matthew. 18.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of
them. Act. 15.6. And the Apostles and Elders came together for to consider of
this matter. From these and the like places, it is plain, that Christ wills
jurisdiction to be exercised, and controversies to be determined by certain
Consistories and Assemblies. Of the exercise of jurisdiction is the first
place, which I have cited to be understood, as the cohesion thereof with the
purpose which went before, shows. Of determining questions of faith, and
enacting laws concerning things in their own nature indifferent, is the other
place to be understood, as we shall hear afterward. So then, we truly
affirm of Ecclesiastical Assemblies in general, that power is committed by
Christ unto them, to exercise jurisdiction, to determine questions of faith,
and to make constitutions about things indifferent, in the case of scandal.
Now the several sorts of these Assemblies are not particularly determined in
Scripture, but left to be particularly determined by the Church, conform to
the light of Nature, and to the general rules of the Word of God. And the
particular kinds of Assemblies appointed by the Church, conform to the light
and rules foresaid, do fall within the compass of those precepts which are
Divine-Ecclesiastica: they are mixed (though not mere) divine ordinances. Even
as the Scripture warranteth times of fasting, and times of thankesgiving,
showing also the causes and occasions of the same, and the right manner of
performance; but leaves the particular days of fasting and thankesgiving to
be determined by the Church, according to the rules of the Word. In like
manner, the Scripture commends the renewing of the covenant of God in a
Nation that has broken it, but leaves the day and place for such an action to
be determined by the Church, according to the rules foresaid. Now if the Church
following the general warrant and rules of the Word, command to fast such a
day, to give thanks such a day, to renew the covenant of God such a day; these
things are divine ordinances mixedly, though not merely; and he who
disobeyeth, disobeyeth the commandment of God. The like may be said of
catechizing, and of celebrating the Lords Supper, (which are not things
occasional, as the former, but ordinary in the Church:) they are commended by
the warrants of Scripture, but the particular times and seasons not determined.
The like we say of the order to be kept in baptism, and in excommunication,
which is not determined in the Word, though the things themselves be. The
removing of scandals, by putting wicked persons to public shame, and open
confession of their faults in the Church, has certain warrant from Scripture,
yet the degrees of that public shame and punishment, are left to be determined
by the Church, according to the quality of the scandal, and the rules of the
Word. Now the Church appoints some scandalous persons to be put to a greater
shame, some to a lesser, some to ^ee o^e Sabbath in the place of public
repentance, some three, some nine, some twenty five, etc. And if the offender
refuse that degree of public shame which the Church, following the rules
foresaid appoints for him, he may be truly said, to refuse the removing and
taking away of the scandal, which the Word of God injoyneth him, and so to
disobey not the Church only, but God also. Just so the Scripture having
commended unto us the governing of the Church, the making of Laws, the
exercise of Jurisdiction, the deciding of controversies, by Consistories and
Assemblies Ecclesiastical, having also showed the necessity of the same, their
power, their rule of proceeding and judging, who should sit and voice in the
same, etc. But leaving the particular kinds, degrees, times, bounds, and
places of the same to be resolved upon by the Church, according to the light of
natural reason, and general rules of the Word: The Church for her part,
following the general warrant and rules foresaid, together with the light of
nature, has determined and appointed Assemblies, Provincial and National,
and to exercise respectively that power which the Word gives to Assemblies in
general. The case thus standing, we may boldly maintain that those particular
kinds and degrees of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, are Gods own ordinances
mixedly, though not merely.

But what can be the reason, may some man say, why the Scripture has not it
self determined these kinds of Assemblies particularly. I answer, three
reasons may be given for it: 1. because it was not necessary, the general
rules of the word together with natures light which directs Commonwealths in
things of the same kind, being sufficient to direct the Church therein. 2. As
sesons and times for the meeting of Assemblies, so the just bounds thereof in
so many different places of the world, are things of that kind which were not
determinable in Scripture, unless the world had been filled with volumes
thereof; for, Individua sunt Infinita. 3. Because this constitution of Synods
Provincial and National, is not universal for all times and places: for
example, there may be in a remote Island 10. or 12. Christian congregations,
which beside their particular Elderships have a common Presbytery, but are not
capable of Synods either Provincial or National. Again, let there be an
Island containing forty or fifty Christian congregations, there shall be
therein, beside Presbyteries, one kind of a Synod, but not two kinds.
Besides, the reformed congregations within a great Nation, may happly be either
so few, or so dispersed and distant, or so persecuted, that they can neither
have Provincial nor National Assemblies.

CHAP. VII. The third Argument, taken from the Jewish Church.
IN the third place we take an Argument from the example of the Jewish Church;
for as in their Commonwealth there was a subordination of civil Courts, every
City having its proper Court, which did consist of seven Magistrates, if we
believe Josephus: the Thalmudicall tradition makes two Courts to have been in
each City, the lesser of the Triumvirat, and the greater of twenty three
Judges. Beside these, they had their supreme Consistory, the civil Sanedrim,
which governed the whole Nation, and had authority over the inferior Courts.
So was there also a subordination of Ecclesiastical Courts among them: they
had a Consistory in every Synagogue, for their Synagogues were appointed not
only for prayer and praising of God, and for the reading and expounding of the
Scriptures, but also for public correction of offenses, Acts 26.11. They had
besides, a supreme Ecclesiastical Court, whereunto the whole nation, and all
the Synagogicall Consistories were subject. This Court having decayed, was
restored by Ichoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. and it had the name of Sanedrim, common
to it with the supreme civil Court. From this Court did the reformation of
that National Church proceed, Nehem. 6.13. On the second day were gathered
together the chief of the fathers of all the people, the Priests and the
Levits, unto Ezra the Scribe, even to understand the words of the Law. And they
found written in the Law, etc. Whether there was yet another Ecclesiastical
Court, in the middle betwixt the Synagogue and the Sanedrim, called (...), a
Presbytery, Luke 22.66. Acts 22.5. and made up possibly out of the particular
Synagogues within the Cities, I leave it to learned men to judge: howsoever, it
is plain from Scripture, that there was at least a twofold Ecclesiastical
Court among the Jews the Synagogue and the Sanedrim, the latter having
authority above the former.

Sutlivius denies both these, and so would have us believe that the Jewish
Church had no Ecc^esiasticall Court at all. De Presbyt. page 25.
As for the Synagogues, he says, they treated of things civil, and inflicted
civil punishments, and a civil excommunication. That they inflicted civil
punishment, he proves from Mat. 10. and 23. and Luke 21. where Christ
foretells that his Disciples should be beaten in the Synagogues. That their
excomunication was civil, he proves by this reason, that Christ and his
Disciples when they were cast out of the Synagogues, had notwithstanding a free
entry into the Temple, and access to the sacrifices. Answ. This is a gross
mistake; for 1. the civil Court was in the gate of the City, not in the
Synagogue. 2. He who presided in the Synagogue was called the chief Ruler of
the Synagogue, Acts 18.8.17. the rest who sat and voiced therein, were called
the Rulers of the Synagogue, Acts 13.15. They who sat in the civil Court had
no such names, but were called Judges. 3. Our Savior distinguishes the
Synagogicall Courts from the civil Courts of judgment in Cities, calling the
one Counsels, the other Synagogues, Matthew. 10.17. 4. The beating and scourging
in the Synagogues was an error and abuse of the later times, the corrective
power of those Consistories being properly spiritual, and ending in
excommunication, Jo. 16.2. Isai. 66.5. the liberty of which spiritual censures
the Romans did permit to the Jews, together with the liberty of their
religion, after they had taken away their civil Jurisdiction. 5. Civil
excommunication is an unknown word, and his reason for it is no less
unknown; for where he has read that Christ or any of his Disciples were
excommunicate out of the Synagogues, and yet had free access to the Temple, I
cannot understand, if it be not in the Gospel of Nicodemus. I read, Luke
4.28.28. that Christ was in a great tumult cast out of the City of Nazareth*
but this I hope no man will call excommunication. The blind man, Joh. 9.34.
was indeed excommunicated out of the Synagogue, but we no where read that he
was thereafter found in the Temple: we read of Christ's walking in Solomon's
porch, Jo. 10.23. but that the blind man was then with him, it can never be
proved, and if it could, it should not import any permission or leave given to
excommunicate persons to enter into the Temple, but that some were bold to take
this liberty. 6. The casting out of the Synagogue cannot be called civil
excommunication, because the communion and fellowship of the Jews in the
Synagogue was not civil, but sacred: they met for the worship of God, and not
for civil affairs. 7. If by civil excommunication he mean banishment, or
casting out of the City (for I conceive not what other thing this strange word
can import) then how does he suppose that they had still free access to the
Temple, who were so excommunicated, for this imports that they were still in
the City.

We have now evinced an Inferior Ecclesiastical Court among the Jews. Come
we next to the supreme Court. That there was an high Ecclesiastical Sanedrim,
distinct from the Civil Sanedrim, is observed by Pelargus on Deuteronomy. 17. and
S^pingius ad bonam fidem Sibrandi. page 261. and seq. Beside many others cited
before, part. 1. chap. 11. And that it was so, we prove from three places of
the old Testament, to pass other places, from which certain collections may
be had to the same purpose.

First, we find Deuteronomy. 17. a distinction of two supreme Judicatories, to be
set in the place which the Lord should choose to put his name there, the one of
the Priests and Levi^s, the other of the Judges: and unto these two supreme
Courts, the Lord appointed all matters which were too hard for the inferior
Judges in the Cities of the Land, to be brought and determined by their
authority, and the sentence of the Priests or of the Judges to be obeyed both
by the parties and by the inferior Judges, under pain of death, v.
8.9.10.11.12. De Presbyt* page 16.
To this Sutlivius answers, that there is only one Sanedrim in that place,
which was civil, as appears by their judging of the causes of blood, and
their receiving of appellations from the civil Judges mentioned in the
preceding Chapter. As for the Judge which is spoken of v. 9. and 12. he says,
we must understand that it was the high Priest. Ans. 1. The disjunctive Or does
distinguish the Judges from the Priests, verse 12. as Iunius and Ainsworth do
rightly note upon that place: The man that will do presumptuously, and will
not hearken unto the Priest (that stands to minister there before the Lord
thy God) or unto the Judge. Here a distinction betwixt the Court of the Priests
and the Court of the Judges, which Lyranus also acknowledges. 2. The Chaldee
reads Judges in the plural. By the Judge, says Ainsworth, is understood the
high Council or Senate of Judges, even as they who are called Priests, verse 9.
are called the Priest, verse 12. and 1 Chronicles. 4.42. many Captains are in the
Hebrew called an head. 3. The high Priest cannot be understood to be the Judge
there spoken of, both because there were many Judges, as has been said, and
because we find not in Scripture that ever the high Priest was called by the
name of the Judge. 4. Whereas he objecteth that the causes of blood, and other
civil causes were judged in this Sanedrim. We answer, there were two several
things in those civil causes, De gub. Eccl. cap. 2. p. 43.
the Ius and the factum. The Ius was judged in the Court of the Priests,
because as B^lson teaches, the civil Law of the Jews was Gods judicial Law,
Mal. 2.7.
and it was to be sought at the Priests mouth. But the fact being merely
civil, was judged by the civil Court. Sutl^vius objecteth, that many
inconveniences shall follow this distinction. 1. Judges are hereby made
ignorant of the Law. 2. That two Courts of judgment are appointed in one
sentence. 3. That a Judge (the Priest) may give out a sentence which he cannot
execute. 4. That the civil Judges do in vain inquire concerning the fact
which was before certain by the Law, nam ex facto jus oritur. 5. That the
civil Judges are dumb Images, which must pronounce according to the sentence
of others. To the 1. we say that our distinction does not import that the
Judges were ignorant of the Law, but that it pertained not to them to judge the
meaning of the Law, when the same was controverted among the Infeferiour civil
Judges: this pertained to the Court of the Priests. 2. It is no absurdity to
expound a disjunctive sentence of two several Courts. 3. He who answers
merely, de jure, has nothing to do with execution of persons more then
theory has to do with practice, or abstracts with concrets. 4. The fact can
never be certain by the sentence, de jure. It is not the probation, but the
supposition of the fact whereupon the exposition of the sense of the Law is
grounded. 5. The cognition of the fact, not of the law, does belong to an
Inquest in Scotland, they are Iudic^s fact^, non Iuris. Yet no dumb Im^^es I
suppose. 6. He has followed the Popish Interpreters, in making the Judge to
be the High Priest forso they expound it for the Popes cause; yet they
themselves acknowledge the distinction of Ius and factum. See Corn. a lapide.
in Deuteronomy. 17.7. If error had not blinded this man's eyes with whom I deal, I
should believe he had been flumbring when these things fell from his pen.

But to proceed, as these two Sanedrims were instituted in the Law of Moses, so
were they after decay or desuetude restored by Iehoshaphat, U^i supra p. 20.
, 2 Chro. 19.8. Sutlivius answers, that we have here only one Sanedrim which
judged both the Lords matters, and the Kings matters, and that it was not an
Ecclesiastical Court, because it judged causes of blood, and other civil
causes wherein appellation was made from the Judges of the Cities. By the Lords
matters, he says, are meant criminal and civil causes, which were to be
judged according to the Law of the Lord; and by the Kings matters are meant,
his patrimony and domesticke affairs. Answer 1. The Text distinguishes two
Courts, one which meddled with the Lords matters, whose president was Amariah,
the chief Priest: another which meddled with the Kings matters, whose president
was Zebadiah. This is so plain, that Bonfierius the Jesuit on Deuteronomy. 17. though
he makes the Priests to have been the Judges, yet acknowledges two distinct
Courts, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. The words verse. 8. must be understood respectively,
Alt. dam. p. 24.
as Didoclavius has observed, which we explain thus, Moreover in Jerusalem
did Iehshoaphat set of the Levits, and of the Priests, and of the chief of the
Fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, (that is for causes
Ecclesiastical) and (repeat, of the Levits, of the Priests, and of the chief
of the Fathers of Israel) for controversies (about civil matters, says
Piscator.) So that some of them were appointed to judge the one, and some of
them to judge the other, which proves not either that the Courts were one, or
that the same men sat in both, but only that some of the Priests and some of
the Fathers of Israel were in both. 3. The Lords matters Lavater and Piscator
expound to be matters Ecclesiastical, the Kings matters to be things civil;
and this exposition comprehends all things which did fall within the power of
those Courts. But Sutlivius gloss does not so, for there were sundry things to
be judged which were neither the Kings domesticke affairs, not yet causes
criminal or civil, such as were questions about vows, questions about the
meaning of the Law, and judging betwixt the holy and the profane, betwixt that
which was clean and that which was unclean. These and such like
Ecclesiastical causes he leaves out, and they are indeed left out of the
power of the civil Sanedrim, and reserved to the other, for in such
controversies the Priests were to stand in judgment, Ezech. 44.23.24. Lastly,
it is not to be thought, that the high Sanedrim should need to be troubled
with the Kings domesticke affairs, far less that this should be made the
one half of their commission.

Now as we have the institution of these two supreme Courts, Deuter. 17. and
the restitution of them both, 2 Chronicles. 19. so have we an example of both,
Jerem. 26. For first, Jeremiah was condemned, as worthy of death, because he
had spoken against the Temple and the holy place, verse 8.11. and herein says,
Oecolampadius on that place, he was a Type of Christ, against whom it was
pronounced in the Council of the chief Priests and Elders, Matthew. 26.66.
He is guilty of death. So did this Ecclesiastical Court conclude ag^i^st
Jeremy, He is worthy of Death: yet the c^n^rary was concluded in the civil
Sanedrim, verse 10.16. This man, say they, is not worthy to dye, for he has
spoken to us in the Name of the Lord our God. As much as to say, you Priests
have given sentence de jure against Jeremiah, but we find he is not guilty of
the fact whereof he is accused, for he has spoken nothing but the truth which
the Lord sent him to speak; therefore as you pronounced him worthy of death,
upon supposition of the fact, we now pronounce that he is not worthy of death,
because we find him blameless of the fact. Sutclivius denies that the
Priests were Iudices Iuris, Ubi supra page 28.
and the Princes Iudices facti; only the Princes did against the will of the
Priests set Jeremiah free, whom they had destinated to death: But say I, he
must either deny that Jeremiah was judged in two several Courts, or not, if he
deny it, the Text is against him: for that he was judged in the Court of the
Princes, it is plain from verse 10.16. and that he was judged in the Court of
the Priests, is plain also from verse 8.9. Where we find the Priests coming
together, neither to reason with Jeremiah (for they had no such purpose as to
give him leave to speak for himself) nor yet to accuse him; for that they do
before the Princes, v. 11. Therefore it was to give sentence for their part
against him, which they did; but if he grant that sentence was given in two
Courts, I would gladly know what difference could be made betwixt the one
sentence and the other, except that difference, de jure, and de facto,
especially the same suting the Text so well as has been said.

Of the vestigies of those two supreme Courts still remaining in some sort
distinct, in the days of Christ, I have spoken before. And now to proceed.
Bertram. de polit. Jud. cap. 11. ex 18.
We have proved the Antecedent of this our present Argument, concerning
distinct Ecclesiastical Courts among the Jews, and the subjection of the
lower unto the higher of the Synagogue unto the Sanedrim.

Sutliv. de Pres. cap. 2.
But we have yet more to do, for the consequence of our Argument is also denied
both by the Prelaticall faction, and by others (whom we are more sorry to
contradict) holding that reasons fetched from the Jewish Church, Robinson Just.
of separ. p. 163.
do better fat the Prelates, then the Consistorians; howsoever now to fetch the
form of Government for the Church, from the Church of the Jews, were, say
they, to revive the old Testament. To me it seems strange, that both the one
side, and the other, do when they please, reason from the forms of the Jewish
Church, and yet they will not permit us to reason in like manner. The former
go about to prove the Prelacy by the high Priesthood, and the lawful use of
Organs in the Church, from the like in the Temple of Solomon. The latter do
argue, that a Congregation has right not only to elect Ministers, See apolog.
against the Oxford D.D. p. 47.48.59.62. Robinson Justis. p. 122.123.
but to ordain them, and lay hands on them, because the people of Israel laid
hands on the Levits. That the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel,
ought to be voluntary, because under the Law, God would not have the Priests
and Levits, to have any part or inheritance in the Land of Canaan, but to be
sustained by the Offerings and Altars of the Lord. That the power of
excommunication is in the body of the Church, because the Lord laid upon all
Israel the duty of removing the unclean, and of putting away leaven out of
their houses at the feast of Passover. Is it right dealing now, to forbid us to
reason from the form of the Jews. I will not use any further expostulation,
but let the Reader judge. The truth is this, even as that which is in a child,
as he is a child, agrees not to a man, yet that which is in a child, as he
is animal rationale, agrees also to a man: so what we find in the Jewish
Church, as it was Jewish, or in infancy and under the pedagogy of the Law,
agrees not indeed to the Christian Church. But whatsoever the Jewish Church
had, as it was a political Church, or Ecclesiastical Republike (of which sort
of things, the diversity and subordination of Ecclesiastical Courts was one)
does belong by the same reason to the Christian Church. I say further, though
the Commonwealth and civil Policy of the Jews, be not in all points a
pattern to our civil Policy, yet I am sure it is no error to imitate the
civil policy of the Jews, in such things, as they had, not for any special
reason proper to them, but are common to all well constituted Commonwealths,
and so we may argue from their Commonwealth, that it is a good policy to have
diverse civil Courts, and the higher to receive appellations from the
Inferior, as it was among them. Shall we not by the very like reason fetch
from their Ecclesiastical Republike, diversity of Spiritual Courts, and the
supreme to receive appellations from the Inferior, because so was the
constitution of the Jewish Church, and that under the common respect and
account of a political Church, and not for any special reason, which does not
concern us.

CHAP. VIII. The fourth Argument, taken from Acts 15.
THE example of the Apostolical Churches, Acts 15. makes for us. The Churches
of Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, being troubled with the question about the
Jewish Ceremonies, the matter was debated and disputed at Antioch, the chief
town of Coelosyria, where Paul and Barnabas were for the time. It is very
probable, that some out of the other Churches in that Province, as also out of
the Churches of Cilicia, were present in that meeting and conference, for they
were troubled with the very same question, no less then the Church of Antioch.
Howsoever the matter could not be agreed upon in that meeting, but a reference
thereof, was made to a more general assembly at Jerusalem, and for that
effect Paul and Barnabas, and others with them, were sent thither. All this is
clear by comparing verse 2. with 23. Hereupon the Apostles and Elders did
synodically come together at Jerusalem, and decided the question, giving forth
decrees to be observed by the particular Churches, Acts 15.6.28. and 16.4. We
will not dispute what sort of Synod this was, only that it was a Synod with
authority over many particular Churches and Congregations, and whereunto the
meeting at Antioch (whether it was provincial, or Presbyteriall only) did
refer the determination of the question about Jewish ceremonies.

It is answered by some. 1. That the reason of sending Paul and Barnabas to
Jerusalem, was to know whether these teachers who pressed the observation of
the ceremonial Law had any such commission from the Apostles and Elders, as
they pretended. 2. That there is here no Synod, nor assembly of the
Commissioners of diverse Churches, for there were no Commissioners from the rest
of the Churches in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, mentioned Acts 9.31. nor from
the Churches of the Gentiles mentioned Act. 14.23. neither were Paul and
Barnabas, and the rest who went with them, Commissioners to represent the
Church of Antioch, but messengers only to make narration of the case. 3. Not
only the Apostles and Elders, but the whole Church at Jerusalem met together.
4. If the resolution which was given, be considered, as the judgment of the
Church at Jerusalem, it was only her advice to her sister Churches, if
otherwise considered, it was a decree absolutely Apostolical, and divine
Scripture by infallible direction from the holy Ghost, and for that reason
imposed upon all the Churches of the Gentiles, though they had no Commissioners
there.

These answers had need to be stronger, before that so many Fathers, Counsels,
and Protestant Writers, who have understood the matter otherwise should all be
put in an error.

To the first we reply, that the reason of sending Paul and Barnabas to
Jerusalem, was not so much to know, whether these teachers had commission from
the Apostles and Elders, to press the keeping of the Law of Moses, as to get a
resolution of the question it self, verse 2. about this question. Now the
question was not what commission the Apostles had given to those teachers, but
whether they should be circumcised, after the manner of Moses, verse 1.

To the second, we say, that if Paul and Barnabas, were messengers to make
narration of the case, certainly they were more then sufficient messengers,
and there was no need of others to be joined in message with them, so that it
appears the rest who were sent with them were Commissioners to represent the
Churches which sent them. Neither is it credible, but that all the Churches of
Syria and Cilicia, which were in the same case, with the Church of Antioch, did
send their Commissioners also to Jerusalem, for otherwise, how could the
Apostles and Elders have so certain and perfect intelligence of the case of
those Churches, verse 23. Beside it had been a great neglect in those
Churches, if they had not sent some to Jerusalem, as the Church of Antioch
did, for if it was expedient which Antioch did, they ought no less to have
done it, their case being the same. Moreover it may be collected from verse 3.
that the other Churches through which Paul and Barnabas passed in their
journey, did send some companions along with them, to join with them in their
errand, and to give their consent in the meeting at Jerusalem, unto that which
was to be concluded. This is the observation of Cajetan, Mentzerus, Calvin,
Gualther, and other Interpreters upon that place.

Lastly, it is no way probable, that the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem,
together with those who were sent from the Churches of Antioch, Syria, and
Cilicia, and the other Churches through which Paul and Barnabas did travel,
would come together without acquainting the rest of the Churches of Judea,
which were so near at hand, and might so easily send their Commissioners to
Jerusalem.

To the third we reply, that it cannot be proved from the Text that the body
of the Church of Jerusalem was present, but rather it appears from verse 6.
that they were not present, Chap. 1.
as has been said before. And though it were granted that they were present,
yet Master Robinson says, Justif. p. 266.
that they did no more then consent to the decree.

To the last answer, it is contain that the conclusion of that meeting at
Jerusalem, was not a naked counsel and advice, but a decree imposed with
authority upon the Churches, Acts 15.28. and 16.4. and 21.25. Robinson ib
And whereas it is affirmed, that the decree was merely Apostolical, and that
the Elders did no more then consent thereto, even as the brethren did, this is
manifestly against the Text, for Acts 16.4. It is said of Paul and Silas as
they went through the Cities they delivered them the decrees for to keep, that
were ordained of the Apostles and Elders that were at Jerusalem. And Act.
21.25. all the Elders speaking to Paul, say, as touching the Gentiles which
believe, we have written and concluded that they observe no such thing. That
this was spoken by all the Elders, is plain from v. 18.19.20. So then the Elders
did decreee, ordain, and conclude these things to be imposed upon the
Churches of the Gentiles, Whittak. controv. 3. de conquaest. 3. Sed ut totam
istam controversiam dirimamus inspiciamus (quaeso) Act. 16.4. Ubi legimus
Paulum civitatibus illis per quas transibat tradidisse (...), etc. Quis nunc
negare audet Presbyteros quoque habuisse suffragium, decisivum, etc. Nam
vocabulum (...) ad utrosque ex aequo accommodatur, Haectam aperta sunt ut nemo
refragari possit.
and not the Apostles only. Now the Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, had no
authority to impose their decrees upon all the Churches of the Gentiles, with
whom they had nothing to do, as Mr. Robinson says truly. Since therefore
these things were imposed upon the Churches of the Gentiles, as the decrees
ordained by the Apostles and Elders, at Jerusalem, this does necessarily
import that there were in that meeting, delegates and commissioners from the
Churches of the Gentiles, which did represent the same.

CHAP. IX. The fifth Argument, taken from Geometrical proportion.
AS is the proportion of 3. to 9. so is the proportion of 9. to 27. of 21. to
81. etc. This rule of Giometricall proportion affoordeth us a fifth Argument
for the point in hand. If we should grant the government of the Church to be
popular, then by what proportion, one or two are subject to a whole
congregation, by the same proportion is that congregation subject to a
provincial* or a national congregation. I mean, if all the congregations in
a province or a nation were assembled into one collective body (as all the
males of the Jews did assemble thrice in the year at Jerusalem, and as in
the days of the Judges, Jud. 20.1.
the whole congregation of the children of Israel was assembled together in
Mizpeh, as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, four hundred thousand men, to
try the cause of the Levite, and to resolve what to do there-anent, which
meeting of the Nation, was ordered by Tribes, the Tribes by families, the
families by persons) in that case any one particular congregation behoved to be
subject to the general congregation, by the same reason whereby one man is
subject to the particular congregation, whereof he is a member, because the
whole is greater then a part, and the body more then a member. Now the same
rule holds in the representatives of Churches, whether we compare them with
the collectives, or among themselves. If we compare the representatives with
the collectives, then as one congregation is governed by the particular
Eldership representing the ^ame, by the like proportion are 14. or 16.
congregations governed by a Classical Presbytery representing them all: by the
same proportion are all the congregations in a province subject to a
Provincial Synod: by the same ought all the congregations in a nation to be
subject to a national Assembly, all of them being either mediatly or
immediately represented in the same; De pol. Eccl. p. 331.332.
for as Parker says well, many Churches are combined into one, in the very
same manner, as many members are combined into one Church.

If we compare the representatives among themselves, then by what proportion, a
particular Eldership representing only one congregation, is less in power and
authority, then a Classical Presbytery which represents many congregations?
by the same proportion is a Classical Presbytery less in power and authority
then a Provincial Synod, and it less in authority then a National Synod. So
that the authority of Presbyteries whether Parochial or Classical being once
granted, this shall by the rule of proportion infer the authority of Synods.
I know that Synods are not ordinary Courts, as Presbyteries are; but this and
other differences betwixt them I pass: the argument holds for the point of
authority, that Synods when they are, have authority over all the Churches in a
Province or a nation, even as Presbyteries have over the congregations within
their bounds.

CHAP. X. The sixth Argument, taken from necessity.
WE have another reason to add, and it is borrowed from lawless necessity,
for without a subordination among Ecclesiastical Courts, and the authority of
the higher above the inferior, it were utterly impossible to preserve unity,
or to make an end of controversy in a Nation. A particular congregation might
happily end questions and controversies betwixt the members thereof, and so
keep unity within it self (and not so neither, if the one half of the
congregation be against the other) but how shall controversies betwixt several
congregations be determined, if both of them be independent? how shall
plurality of religions be avoided? how shall an apostatizing congregation be
amended?

It is answered: 1. If a particular congregation neglect their duty, or do
wrong to another, the civil sword may proceed against them to make them do
their duty. 2. A particular congregation ought in difficult cases to consult
with her sister Churches, for so much reason dictats, that in difficult cases,
counsel should be taken of a greater number. 3. Sister Churches when they see
a particular congregation doing amiss out of that relation which they have to
her, being all in the same body, under the same head, may and ought to admonish
her, and in case of general apostasy, they may withdraw that communion from
her, which they hold with the true Churches of Christ.

But these answers are not satisfactory. The first of them agrees not to all
times, for in times of persecution, the Church has not the help of the civil
sword: a persecuting Magistrate will be glad to see either division or
apostasy in a congregation; but so it is, that Christ has povided a remedy,
both for all the evils and diseases of his Church, and at all times. The
Church (as was said before) is a Republike, and has her laws, Courts, and
spiritual censures within her self, whether there be a Christian Magistrate,
or not.

The second answer leaves the rectifying of an erring congregation to the
uncertainty of their own discretion, in seeking counsel from a greater
number. And moreover, if this be a dictate of reason to ask counsel of a
greater number, when the counsel of a few cannot resolve us, then reason being
ever like it self, will dictate so much to a congregation, that they ought to
submit to the authority of a greater number, when their own authority is not
sufficient to end a controversy among them.

To the third answer we say, that every private Christian may and ought to
withdraw himself from the fellowship and communion, either of one man, or of a
whole congregation, in the case of general apostasy. And shall an
apostatizing congregation be suffered to run to hell, rather then any other
remedy should be used, beside that (commonly ineffectuall) remedy which any
private Christian may use? God forbid.

What I have said of congregations, I say also of Classical Presbyteries. How
shall sentence be given betwixt two Presbyteries at varience? How shall a
divided Presbytery be reunited in it self? How shall an Heretical Presbytery
be reclaimed? How shall a negligent Presbytery be made to do their duty? How
shall a despised Presbytery have their wounded authority healed again? In
these and such like contingent cases, what remedy can be had, beside the
authority of Synods?

CHAP. XI. Objections made against the authority of Synods, answered.
THey who dislike the subordination of particular congregations unto higher
Ecclesiastical Courts, object against us, Matthew. 18.17.
our Saviors precept, Tell the Church. Wheresoever we read in Scripture of a
visible political Church, and not of the invisible Catholic Church, it is
ever meant, say they, of a particular congregation, used to assemble in one
place for the exercise of Gods public worship; and when the Scripture speaks
of a whole Province or Nation, the plural number is used, as the Churches of
Galatia, the Churches of Macedonia, the Churches of Asia, etc. Wherefore our
Savior in those words did deliver the power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
neither to Classical Presbyteries, nor to Synods, but to particular
congregations only.

Answ. 1. This place proves indeed that particular Churches have their own
power of Jurisdiction, but not that they alone have it. 2. Yea, it proves that
they alone have it not, for Christ has a respect to the form of the Jews, as
is evident by these words, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen or a Publican.
Now we have proved that there was among the Jews an high Ecclesiastical
Sanedrim, beside the particular Synagogicall Courts: So that by pointing out
the form of the Jewish Church, he recommendeth a subordination, and not an
independency of particular Churches. 3. By the Church in that place is meant
the competent Consistory of the Church, and so it agrees to all
Ecclesiastical Courts respectively. This sense is given by Parker, D^ pol
Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 20. p. 318.
though he be most tender in the vindication of the liberty of congregations.
Nam cum* etc. For, says he, since Christ would have every man to be judged by
his own Church, Matthew. 18. or if the judgment of his own Church should
displease him, yet ever it must be by the Church, that is, by a Synod of many
Churches 4. As for the reason alleged for proof of the contrary exposition, I
oppugn it both by reason, and by their own Tenants, and by Scripture. By
reason, because the rule of Geometrical proportion (whereof we have before
spoken) proves a congregation to be a part of a National Church, even as one
man is a part of a congregation; for as five is the hundredth part of five
hundredth, so is five hundred the hundredth part of fifty thousand. By their own
grounds, because they hold the form of a visible Church, to consist in the
uniting of a number of visible Christians into one, by the bond of a holy
covenant to walk in all the ways of God. Then say I, we may say the Church of
Scotland, as well as the Churches of Scotland, because all the particular
Churches in Scotland, are united together into one, by the bond of a National
oath and covenant, to walk in all the ways and ordinances of God. By
Scripture also, because Acts 8.1. we read of the Church at Jerusalem, not the
Churches: Howbeit there were at that instant above eight thousand Christians at
Jerusalem, and all these still in the City (for the first scattering of them
follows thereafter in that Chapter.) This great number, neither did, nor
could usually assemble into one place for the worship of God, but they met
(...) house by house, Acts 2.46. And whereas objection is made to the contrary
from Acts 2.44. and 5.12. and 6.2. We have before answered to the first of
these places, for it is to be expounded by Acts 4.32. they were in one; that
is, they were of one heart, and of one soul. The second place may be expounded
of the Apostles, and the preceding words favor this exposition; but though it
should be taken of the multitude, it prove^h not their meeting together into
one place for the worship, of God, for it was an extraordinary confluence, upon
an extraordinary occasion of that which had befallen to Ananias and Saphira.
The last place proves no more, but an extraordinary and occasional meeting,
and it is also to be understood that they met turmatim, as four hundred
thousand men did assemble together, Jud. 20.1.

Another Scripturall instance we give from 1 Pet. 1.1. with 5.2. the Apostle
writing to the dispersed Jews in several Provinces, calls them all one
flock. We read that Laban had many flocks, Genes. 30.36.38. yet are they all
called one flock, verse 31.32. so were all the flocks of Jacob called one
flock, Genes. 32.7. and 33.13. In like manner every one of the particular
Churches among those dispersed Jews was a flock, but compared with the whole,
it was but a part of the flock. It is no more absurd to say that a
congregation is both a body, in respect of its own members, and a member in
respect of a National Church, then it is to say, that every believer
considered by himself, is a tree of righteousness, and a Temple of God, yet
compared with others, he is a branch of the Vine, and a stone of the Temple,
for all those ways is he called in Scripture.

Sundry particular flocks may be called one flock, three ways: 1. Respectu
pastorum, when the same shepherds oversee and take care of the whole. See an
example both of the one kind of shepherds, Luke 2.8. and of the other, Acts
20.28. 2. Respectu pabuli: So Paul Baynes speaking of the Low Countries,
Dioces. trial. page 21.
where sundry congregations in one City make but one Church, says, that the
sheep feed together into one common pasture, though they bite not on the same
individual grass. 3. Respectu pedi, when many congregations are governed by
the same Pastoral staff of Ecclesiastical Laws and Discipline.

It is further objected, that Presbyteriall government and the authority of
Synods, do rob the congregations of their rights and liberties, no less then
the Prelacy did; so that the Churches of Christ in the removal of Episcopacy,
have changed Dominum only, not Dominium. Answer. There is a vaste difference;
for 1. Episcopal government is Monarchical, and Christ has left no
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to be exercised by one man. Presbyteriall and
Synodicall government is partly democraticall, in respect of the election of
Ministers and Elders, and the doing of matters of chiefest importance, with the
knowledge and consent of congregations: partly aristocratical in respect of the
parity of Presbyters and their consistorial proceedings and decrees. The
Monarchical part is Christ's peculiarly. 2. The Prelacy permits not to
congregations any act of their own Church government, but robs them of
their particular Elderships, De pol. Eccl. page 358.
which (as Parker well notes) the Classical Presbyteries do not. 3. It is
one thing, says Baynes, for Churches to subject themselves to a Bishop and
Consistory, Ubi supra.
wherein they shall have no power of suffrage: Another thing to communicate
with such a Presbytery, wherein themselves are members and Judges with others.
4. The congregations did not agree not consent to Episcopal government, but
were sufferers in respect of the same, but they do heartily agree to the
government of Presbyteries and Synods, in witness whereof they send their
Commissioners thither to concur, assist, and voice. 5. Special respect is had
in Presbyteries and Synods, to the consent of congregations, in all matters of
importance, which are proper unto the same. This the Prelacy did not regard. 6.
Presbyteries and Synods do not (which the Prelates did) imperiously and by
their sole arbitrament domineer over congregations, for their power is
directive only, ministerial, and limited by the Laws of God and Nature, and
the lawdable Ecclesiastical Laws received and acknowledged by the
congregations themselves. 7. Experience has showed us Presbyteriall and
Synodicall government to be, not only compatible with, but most conduceable
for the supportment and comfort of congregations: whereas Episcopal government
draws ever after it m^lam ca^d^m, and a general grievance of the Churches.

Some other objections there are, for obviating whereof I shall permit and
explane a distinction which shall serve to answer them all. We may consider a
visible Church, either metaphysically or politically. It is one thing to
consider men as living creatures endued with reason; another thing to consider
them as Magistrates, masters, fathers, children, servants, etc. So is it one
thing to consider a visible Church as a society of men and women separated from
the blind world by divine vocation, and professing together the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. Another thing to consider it as a political body, in which the
power of Spiritual government and Jurisdiction is exercised, some governing
and some governed.

These are very different considerations; for first, a visible Church being
taken entitatively or metaphysically, her members do ordinarily communicate
together in those holy things which fall under the power of order, which I may
call sacra mistica; but being taken politically, her members communicate
together in such holy things as fall within the compass of the power of
Jurisdiction, which I may call sacra politica. Secondly, Infants under age
being initiated in Baptism, are actually members of the Church in the former
consideration, but potentially only in the latter, for they neither govern,
nor yet have the use of reason to be subject and obedient to those that do
govern. Thirdly, one must necessarily be a member of the Church
metaphysically before he can be a member of the Church politically, but not
contrariwise. Fourthly, many visible Churches have sometimes been, and may be
without Officers, and so without Ecclesiastical government and exercise of
Jurisdiction for that time, yet still retaining the Essence of true visible
Churches: whereas a Church which never yet had any Officers ordained therein
(of which kind there have been many at the first conversion of a Nation to
the Gospel) or which has losed all her Officers by death or persecution, is
not for that time an Ecclesiastical Republicke, nor can be such till she have
Officers. This if they had observed who have taken so great pains to prove
that there has been, and may be a Church without Officers, it should happily
have made them think their labor l^st. It might also have taught Henry Jacob
to distinguish between a Church visible and a Church ministerial or
political, and not to understand these three terms to be all one, as he does
in his L^tter, bearing date the 4. of September 1611. page 9. Fifthly, my being
a member of any one visible Church metaphysically, gives me right and title to
communicate with another visible Church (where for the time I am) in sacris
misticis, such as the word, prayer, etc. But my being a member of any one
visible Church politically does not give me right and title to communicate with
another visible Church (where for the time I am) in sacris politicis* such as
ordination, deposition, excommunication, etc. Hereunto does Master Robinson
assent in these words, As a man once baptized is always baptized, Justifi^. p.
317.
so is he in all places and Chur^hes where he comes (as a baptized person) to
enjoy the common benefits of his baptism, and to discharge the common duties
which depend upon it. But a Pastor is not a Pastor in every Church where he
comes upon occ^sion, neither can he require in any other Church, saving that
one over which the holy Ghost has set him, that obedience, maintenance, and
other respects which is due from the officers to the people; neither stands he
charged with that ministry and service, which is due to the people from the
officers. The like he would have said of an Elder or a Deacon.

Now this distinction shall serve to answer the objections following.

Object. Justif. of Separ. page* 112.
Every Christian congregation is a complete body Ecclesiastical, having all
the parts and members, and all Church officers which Christ has instituted:
therefore every congrgation has the full and absolute power of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

Answ. Every Christian congregation is a complete Church or body of Christ
metaphysically; that is, has the complete Essence of a true visible Church;
yet every such congregation is not a complete Ecclesiastical Republicke,
except in some certain cases whereof we have spoken, Chap. 2. And further, we
answer, that this objection is alleged to prove, that 2 or 3 gathered together
in the name of Christ, have immediately under Christ the full power of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; but sure I am, that two or three gathered
together in the name of Christ, are not a complete Ecclesiastical body,
having all the members and officers which Christ has instituted, for they
themselves hold that in every Christian congregation by Christ's institution
there ought to be at least five Officers, and when those five shall be had,
there must be also a certain number of Christian people to be governed and
served by them. So that their Argument does not conclude that which they
propose to prove.

Ibid.
Object. They who have received Christ, have received with him power and right
to enjoy him (though all the world be against it) in all the means and
ordinances by which he does communicate himself unto the Church. But every
company of faithful people, if they be but two or three have received Christ;
therefore every such company, etc.

Answ. If by the receiving of Christ, they mean the receiving of Christ on his
throne, or the receiving of him in his ordinance of Church government, then we
deny their Assumption, for every company of faithful people is not a Church
politically, as we have showed already. Indeed every company of faithful
people who have received Christ in this manner, has right and title to enjoy
him in all his political ordinances, yet not independently, but by a certain
order and subordination. But if by the receiving of Christ, they mean
receiving of him to salvation, or receiving of him by his Word and Spirit, we
grant, that not only every company of faithful people, but every particular
Christian has right and title to enjoy him in the mystical ordinances of the
Word, Prayer, etc. as often as the same can be had; yea further, has right and
title to the fruit and benefit of Ecclesiastical jurisdicton, the exercise
whereof is committed by Christ to the officers of the Church, Intuitu Ecclesiae
tanquam finis. But that every company of faithful people, who have received
Christ to salvation, has right and title to enjoy him in his political
ordinances, by their own exercising of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and
that independently, this is more then either has been, or can be proved.

Object. Ibid.
The union betwixt Christ and his Church is as strait and immediate, as the
union betwixt the Vine and the Branches, betwixt the Head and the Body, betwixt
the Husband and the Wife. Therefore every true Church of Christ has direct and
immediate interest in, and title to Christ himself, and the whole new
Testament, and every ordinance of it.

Answ. The strait union betwixt Christ and the Church, expressed by these
comparisons, cannot be understood of the Church taken politically: for then
the union betwixt Christ and the Church might be dissolved as often as the
Church cease to be ordered and governed as an Ecclesiastical Republic. It
is therefore to be understood either of the invisible Church, or at most of the
visible Church taken metaphysically or entitatively. But I add withal, it is
to be likewise understood of every faithful Christian: so that not only every
true Church, but every true member thereof, by virtue of this union, has
direct and immediate title to Christ, and to the benefit of all his ordinances
for his edification and salvation. This is all which the Argument can conclude,
and it makes nothing against us.

Ibid.
Object. If all things be the Churches, even the Ministers themselves; yea,
though they be Paul, Cephas, and Apollos, then may every Church use and enjoy
all things immediately under Christ. But the first is true, 1 Cor. 3.24.
Therefore, etc.

Answ. Neither can this prove any thing against us: for when the Apostle says,
All things are yours, whether Paul, etc. He is to be understood not only
collectively of the Church, but distributively of every believer, who has
right to the comfortable enjoyment and benefit of these things, so far as
they concern his salvation. And in like manner I may say to the members of any
particular congregation, All things are yours, whether Sessions or Presbyteris,
or Provincial or General Assemblies. And what wonder? God is our Father,
Christ our elder brother, the holy Ghost our Comforter, the Angels our keepers,
heaven our inheritance. It is therefore no strange thing to hear, that as the
supreme civil power, so the supreme Ecclesiastical power is appointed of
God in order to our good and benefit, Romans 13.4. 2 Cor. 13.8.10
that it be not a tyranny for hurt, but a ministry for help.

These are the objections alleged for the independent and absolute power of
congregations. But this is not all: Some seem to make use of our own weapons
against us, making objection from the form of the Jewish Church, which we
take for a plat-forme. They say, Ibid. Page 344.
that the Synagogues of the Jews were not as the particular Churches are now:
for they were not entire Churches of themselves, but members of the national
Church, neither could they have the use of the most solemn parts of Gods
worship, as were then the sacrifices. Page 161.
That the whole nation of the Jews was one Church, having reference to one
Temple, one high Priest, one Altar; and it being impossible that the whole body
of a Nation should in the entire and personal parts meet and communicate
together in the holy things of God, the Lord so disposed and ordered, that that
communion should be had after a manner, and in a sort, and that was by way of
representation: for in the Temple was daily sacrifice offered for the whole
national Church. So the names of the twelve Tribes upon the shoulders of the
Ephod, and upon the Breast Plate, and the twelve loaves of Show bread, were for
Israel signs of remembrance before the Lord. Page 162.
That now the Church consists not (as then) of a Nation, but of particular
Assemblies, ordinarily communicating together in all the Churches holy things:
whence it comes, that there are no representative Churches now, the
foundation thereof, which is the necessary absence of the Church which is
represented, being taken away in the new Testament. Page 163.191.
That besides all this, if we take the representative Church at Jerusalem for
a pattern, then as there not only hard causes were opened, and declared
according to the Law, but also the sacrifices daily offered, and the most
solemn service performed without the presence of the body of the Church: so
now in the representative Churches, (such as Presbyteries and Synods)
consisting of Officers alone, there must be not only the use of jurisdiction,
but the Word and Sacraments, whether people be present or not: for how can
there be a power in the Church of Officers for the use of one solemn ordinance
out of the communion of the body, and not of another?

Answ. 1. To set aside the sacrifices, and other ceremonial worship performed
at Jerusalem, the Synagogues among the Jews had Gods moral worship ordinarily
therein, as Prayer, and the reading and expounding of the Scriptures. 2.
Whatsoever the Synagogues had, or whatsoever they wanted of the worship of God,
they had an Ecclesiastical Consistory, and a certain order of Church
government: else how shall we understand the excommunication, or casting out of
the Synagogue, the Rulers of the Synagogue, and the chief Ruler of the
Synagogue? (of which things we have before spoken.)

I will not here dispute whether every sin among the Jews was either appointed
to be punished capitally, or else to be expiated by sacrifices; but put the
case it were so, this proves that no excommunication or Ecclesiastical
censure was not then necessary: for beside the detriment of the Commonwealth
by the violation of the Law, which was punishable by death; and beside the
(...) and guiltiness before God, the expiation whereof by the death of Christ
was prefigured in the sacrifices, there was a third thing in public sins,
which was punishable by spiritual censures, and that was the scandal of the
Church, which could not be taken away by the oblations of the delinquent, but
rather made worse thereby, even as now a public offender does not take away,
but rather increase the scandal of the Church by his joining in the acts of
Gods worship, so long as there is no Ecclesiastical censure imposed upon him;
neither yet (to speak properly) was the scandal of public offenses
punishable by bodily punishments, but the Church being a political body had
her own Laws, and her own censures, no less then the Commonwealth. 3. As
the Synagogues were particular Churches politically, so all of them
collectively were one National Church politically, governed by one supreme
Ecclesiastical Sanedrim, which is the representative we meant of in our
Argument. 4. But if we take the National Church of the Jews metaphysically,
there was no representative thereof, unless it were all the males who came
thrice in the year to Jerusalem. The daily offering of Sacrifices was not by a
representative Church, but by the Priests: and though there were twelve loaves
of Shewbread before the Lord, and the names of the twelve Tribes upon the
brestplate, this proves not a Church representative, but signs
representative. 5. The body of the Church is now (as then) necessarily absent
from the Consistorial actions of debating and deciding matters of Church
government, and of Jurisdiction; and so that which was called the foundation of
a representative Church does still remain.

Now before I make an end, I must answer yet other two objections which have
been lately made. Christ on his Throne. page 57.58.
There is one who objecteth that the Assembly of the Apostles, Acts 15. can be
no president nor pattern for succeeding ages: First, because the Apostles were
inspired with the holy Ghost, which wholly guided them in all matters of the
Church; so as in that their determination, they say expressly, Act. 15.28.
It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us to lay upon you no greater burden.
Now, what Synod in any age after the Apostles could ever say that they were
infallibly inspired and assisted by the holy Ghost? Secondly, that injunction
of the holy Ghost and of the Apostles was but (...), for that present time, for
the avoiding of offenses between Jews and Gentiles. But the like we read not
afterward in all the writings of the Apostles.

Ans. 1. I say with Whittaker, Posse alia, etc. That other lawful counsels
may in like manner affirm their Decrees to be the Decrees of the holy Ghost,
Contr. 3. de conc. quest. 6.
if they be like unto this council, and if they keep the same rule which the
Apostles did keep and follow in this council, for if they decree and determine
nothing but from the Scriptures, which was done in this council; and if they
examine all questions according to the Scriptures, and in all their Decrees
follow the voice of the Scripture, then may they affirm that the holy Ghost
has so decreed. 2. If the Doctrine or exhortation of a Pastor well grounded
upon the Scriptures be the Word of God, then much more is the Decree of a
Synod well grounded upon the Scriptures, the Decree of the holy Ghost. 3. That
Assembly was not of the Apostles alone, but of the Apostles and Elders, neither
did the Decrees proceed from the Apostles alone, but from the Apostles and
Elders, Acts 16.4. and 21.25. and in the place which is now objected, Acts
15.28. not the Apostles alone, but the Elders with them, say, It seemed good to
the holy Ghost and to us. What the Elders did then, the Elders may do now, for
time has not diminished their authority. 4. Nay, what the Apostles did in that
Synod, the Elders may do in a Synod now; for the Apostles then did nothing but
in the ordinary and common way of disputing and debating, comparing reason with
reason, and sentence with sentence, and thereafter framing the Decree according
to the light which they had by reasoning and by searching the Scriptures. But
(which is most observable) the sentence of the Apostle Peter in that Synod was
very imperfect and defective; for he only disswadeth from imposing the yoke of
the ceremonial law upon the Churches of the Gentiles, but makes no mention of
any overture for avoiding the offense betwixt the Jews and the converted
Gentiles at that time, which I may suppose he would have done, if his light and
judgment had carried him that far: In this the Apostle James supplieth the
defect of Peter's sentence, Apud Whittak. ubi supra.
and propounds an overture which pleased the whole council, and according to
which the decree was given sorth. This made Luther to say that James did change
the sentence of Peter. And all this it pleased God so to dispose, that we might
understand that Synod to be indeed a president and pattern for ordinary Synods
in succeding ages. 5. Henry Jacob in his third argument for the Divine
Institution of the Church, says: It is absurd and impossible, that the Text
Matthew. 18. was never understood for 1500 years after Christ. Sure this Text,
Act. 15. was never understood for that whole space, if the Assembly there
mentioned, be not a president to succeeding ages. 6. It makes nothing against
us, that he says, the decree of the Apostles and Elders, was for that present
time only; nay, it makes for us: for in this also that Synod was a pattern to
succeeding ages, forasmuch as Synods now have no power to make a perpetual
restraint from the practice of any indifferent thing, (such as was then the
eating of blood, and things strangled) but only during the case of scandal.
And moreover, the decree of the Apostles and Elders in that Synod, is also
perpetual, in so far as it is conceived against the pressing of circumcision
as necessary to salvation.

(...) and modera^e discourse concerning Church as^^res. page 25.26.
One objection more I find in another late Piece, which strikes not at the
authority alone, but at the very reputation of Synods. This Author alleges,
that the ordinary government by Synods, is a thing of great confusion, by
reason of the parity and equality, the voices being numbered, not weighed.
Equidem (says a wise Father) at vere, etc. To say the truth, I am utterly
determined never to come to any Council of Bishops: for I never yet saw good
end of any Council: for Councels abate not ill things, but rather increase
them. Answ. 1. If the parity and equality make a great confusion in the
ordinary government by Synods, it shall make no less, but rather greater
confusion in an extraordinary Synod: so that there is no ground for his
restriction to that which is ordinary. 2. If the numbering of voices, and the
parity of those that do voice, make a confusion in Synods, why not in
Parliaments also, and in other civil Courts? 3. That testimony does only
strike at the Councels of Bishops, and so makes not against parity, but
against imparity in Councels: And, to say the truth, we have found in our own
experience, that Prelaticall Synods have not abated, but rather increased evils
in the Church. 4. The words of Nazianzen (for he is the Father here meant of)
are not to be understood against Synods, but against the abuse of Synods at
that time. Ubi supra, quaest. 1.
And in this we must pardon him (says Whittaker) that he shunned all Synods in
those evil times of the Church, when the Emperor Valens was opposite to the
Catholic faith, and when the faction of heretics did most prevail: in that
case indeed Synods should have produced greater evils. But we trust it shall be
now seen that well constituted and free Synods of Pastors and Elders, shall not
increase, but abate evil things.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT, In answer to a Treatise very lately published, which is
entitled, The Presbyteriall Government examined.
WHen the Printer had done all except two sheets of my former Treatise, there
came to my hands a piece against Presbyteriall Government, which promises
much, but performs little. Though my time be very short, yet I trust to make
an answer to it, as full as it deserves.

It has a magisteriall and high sounding title, undertaking the examination of
Presbyteriall Government. But Presbyteriall Government secretly smileth,
because while she was ready to say much more for her self, he did not put her
to to it, lest himself should have been put ad metam non probandi. But he
particularizeth himself, and tells us he has unfolded the weakness of our
grounds, and disproved our pretended proofs. The truth is, that the best of
them and the most of them he has not touched. He adds that he has proved
out of the Word of God the liberty of the people in choosing their own
officers. This may be added ^aute, but cast, I am sure it is not. He would
make the world believe that Presbyterians are against the peoples election of
their officers, which is a calumny. He says, he has annexed certain
arguments, proving Presbyteriall Government to be contrary to the pattern
which Christ has left in the New Testament. These arguments shall be answered
with no great difficulty. In this place I shall only say a word of them in
general. The man has a notable faculty of proving that wherein the
Presbyterians do agree with him, and passing that wherein they disagree from
him. Many humane testimonies and citations of writers he mustreth together, to
make a simple reader believe that many are of his judgemen^* But I find none of
them all except two or three to affirm any thing which we deny. But why has
he taken all this pains? He will present it (forsooth) to the Kings most
excellent Majesty, and to the right honorable Lords, and the honorable house
of Commons now assembled in Parliament. As if it were to be expected that a
popular and independent form of Church government in every Congregation, which
should most certainly open a door to a thousand remediless confusions, may
obtain his Majesty's royal assent, or the acceptance of the High Court of
Parliament. Nay, brother, seek some other friends to your cause, for, if wise
men be not too too much deceived* the King and the Parliament in their great
wisdom do foresee, that whenever Episcopal government shall be removed,
another form of Provincial and national Church government must needs succeed
unto it.

Now to come to the substance of his discourse; first he makes a quarrel
against the Presbyteries of particular Churches (which are in Scotland called
Sessions*) then against all higher Consistories in the Church. Page 1.
As for the Presbyteries of particular Churches, he judges them three ways
defective. First he requires that all who are admitted into the company of
Elders, even the governing or ruling Elders should be apt to teach and able to
exhort with sound doctrine and convince gainesayers, 1 Timothy 3.1. (...). 1.5.^.9.
and that not only privately, or in the Consistory, but in the public assembly
also, if not exactly, yet competently.

Answ. 1. Though ruling Elders ought to teach, exhort, rebuke, etc. both in the
Consistory, and privately from house to house, as the case of every family and
person does require (which is all that can be drawn from those alleged places
to Timothy and Titus, if so be they ought at all to be extended to ruling
Elders) yet there is no place of Scripture to prove that they ought to teach
publikly in the Congregation. 2. That expression if not exactly, yet
competently is somewhat mysterious. 3. Ruling Elders are expressly distinguished
from those that labor in the word and doctrine. 1 Timothy 5.17. and from these
that teach or exhort, Romans 12.7, 8. 4. If ruling Elders shall ^each publikly in
the congregation ex officio, and with cure of souls (as they speak) why shall
they not also minister the Sacraments, which are pendicles and seals of the
word, and therefore committed to those, who are sent to the public preaching
of the Gospel, Matthew. 28.19. 5. Though he speak here only of ruling Elders,
yet I doubt he requires of, at least will permit to all men that are members
of the Church the same public teaching and prophesying in the Congregation.

The second defect which he wishes supplied, Page 2, 3.
is, that the temporary ruling Elders may be made perpetual and for life,
which he enforces by four reasons. This I assent unto providing he admit a
distinction betwixt the office it self, and the exercise of the same. The
office of a ruling Elder ought to be for his life no less then the Pastors;
yet must we not condemn those Churches which dispense with the intermission of
their actual attendance for a certain space, and permit them to exercise
their office by course, as the Levits did of old, whose example himself here
takes for a pattern.

The third thing he says is of most moment. Page 4.
He does complain that the Elders do not administer their publik office
publikly as they should, but only in their private Consistory. He does permit
them indeed to meet apart for deliberation (whereof we shall here afterward)
but he will have their Church-office which in the Lord they have received, to
be executed publicly in the face of the Congregation. 1. Because an office
public in the nature, ought also to be public in the administration. 2.
Because the reformed Churches cannot know their Elders whether they be good or
bad, except by hearsay. 3. Because otherwise the Elders can not ministerially
take heed to the whole flock as they are warned to do, Acts 20.28. Ans. 1.
Ruling Elders do execute their office not only in the Consistory, but from
house to house throughout all the bounds of the Congregation; which may easily
make the^ known to that Church where they serve, whether they be good or bad.
2. Their Consistoriall sentences in all matters of importance, such as
ordination, Church censures, excommunication, etc. are made known to the whole
Church. 3. He passes a short censure upon the reformed Churches. The reformed
Churches is a great word, but this man makes a moat of it. 4. The place Acts
20.28. cannot help him, for ruling Elders do feed and oversee the whole flock,
both by discipline in the Consistory, and by taking heed to all the sheep
severally, as every one has need, and in that respect may be called both
Pastors and Bishops. Beside I doubt he can prove that place to be meant of
ruling Elders. He He goes on to make plain what he has said, Page 5.
by descending to some particulars in which the Elders office s^emeth
especially to consist, and these are says he, The admitting of members into
the Church, upon profession of faith made, and the reproving and censuring of
obstina^e offenders. These are the most frequent public administrations of the
office of Ruling Elders. And what of them? he says, as they leave the
execution of these things, to the Elders alone in the settled and well ordered
state of the Church, so do they deny, that they can be rightly and orderly
done, but with the peoples privity and consent. His restriction to the settled
and well ordered estate of the Church, I cannot understand. He had done well
to have explained what he means by that not settled, nor well ordered state
of the Church, in which he thinks it belongs not to the Elders alone, to
admit or cut off members. His other ambiguous expression I understand better,
for by the peoples privity he means, that the people should hear the voices
and suffrages of the Elders, and by the peoples consent, he means the
peoples voting with the Elders, as we shall hear afterward. That the
admission of members, Page 6.
ought to be with the peoples privity and consent, Page 6.
he will prove by two reasons. 1. Because we find in the acts of the
Apostles, that men were received into the fellowship of the Church, and
baptized publicly, and in the face of the congregation. 2. Because the whole
communalty, being nearly to join with these that are admitted, ought to take
knowledge of the profession of their faith. These reasons can neither conclude
the peoples right of suffrage in this matter, nor so much are the peoples
hearing of the suffrages of the Elders: But only that the matter might not be
ended without the peoples knowledge and tacit consent. Beside there is no
small difference to be put betwixt the admission of Jews, Infidells, and
Heretics, upon their profession of the true Christian faith, and the admission
of such as have transported themselves from another Christian congregation,
bringing with them a sufficient testimony of their holy profession of faith,
and good conversation. In the mean while, Let the Reader note, that this
disputer has here in a parenthesis interlaced gross anabaptistry, holding it
a kind of unorderly anticipation to baptize infants, who cannot give a
confession of their faith. And within a few lines, he lets another thing fall
from his pen, which smells strongly of the Anabaptisticall tenent, concerning
having all things common, even bodily goods.

But I proceed with him to the second head, Page 7.
concerning excommunication, and Church censures by the Elders, with the
peoples privity and consent. This he proves by three arguments. 1* Tim. 5.20.
1. Because Paul says, These who sin, rebuke publicly, that others also may
fear a brave argument indeed. This charge is not given to ruling Elders; and
if it had, it can neither prove the suffrage of the people, nor their hearing
of the suffrage of the Elders, but only the execution of the sentence of the
Elders, in the presence and audience of the congregation. 2. He argues from
these words, Mat. 18.17.
Tell the Church, where he would make it appear, that by the Church is not
meant the Senate of Elders excluding the people; Page 8.
yea he says, that in this circumstance now in consideration, it comes nearer
the truth to expound the Church to be the Bishop, since neither Bishops nor
their Court-keepers, do exclude the people from their consistories. Sure I am,
in Scotland, (let others speak for themselves) The Bishops in their
visitations, high Commissions, Privie-conferences at Synod^ (in which they
passed their decrees) did exclude both the people, and the most part of the
ministers. He thinks it a course unheard of either among Jews, Gentiles, or
Christians, before this last age, that public judgments should be privately
exercised, and without the peoples privity. This (if at all to the point) must
be understood, not of the final execution, but of the judicial sentence or
decree. What then shall we think that the Senators at Rome or the Areopagites
at Athens, did never conclude or degree any thing, concerning a public
judgment, except in the audience and presence of the people. The Judges in
Israel did sit in the gates of of the City, that all persons both poor and
rich, great and small might have access unto them with their complaints, and
that the sentence of judgment, might be the more notorious and exemplary*
being given forth and promulgat in the gates: This proves not that the Judges
did debate, voice, and conclude all matters in the public audience of the
people. Page 9.
It appears rather that they were so accomodate, that they might do these
things apart from the multitude. It is too much for him, to affirm either that
the Synagogues were places of civil conventions and judgments, Page 9.
or that nothing was in the Synagogues decreed without the peoples privity,
while as he has given no proof nor evidence at all for it.

You need not, my Masters be so curious in the notation of the name (...),
which every smatterer in Divinity knows. But what of it? you say, the Elders
(as such) are called, to wit, to their office of Eldership, but called out they
are not, being themselves to call out the Church. It is true that the word
(...) notes not only a calling, or a gathering together, by virtue of verb
(...), but also a separation by virtue of the particle (...). But I hope it is
no paradox to say, that the Elders are both called or gathered together unto
the Eldership, and called out or separate from the rest of the Church to that
office. And it is as far from a Paradox to say that they who are called out
cannot call out others, especially the one calling out being to an office, and
the other calling out being from nature to grace.

He cannot think that the name, Ecclesia, Church, has been used by any Greek
Author before the Apostles times, or in their days, or in the age after them,
for the assembly of sole Governors in the act of their government. I shall
first give Instances against him in the verb, because, he said, the Elders (as
such) cannot be said to be called out. The Septuagint read, Deu. 31.28. (...),
Gather unto me all the Elders. The like you may find, 1 King. 8.1. 1 Chronicles.
28.1. I shall next put him in mind that the Septuagint sometime turn Kahal by
(...), as Prove. 26.26. His wickedness shall be showed before the whole
Congregation, (...). And it is plain that the name of the Congregation, or
Church, is given to the Elders, for that which is said of the Elders, Deuteronomy.
19.12. Ios. 20.4. is said of the Congregation, Number. 35.24. Ios. 20.6. So Exodus
12.3. compared with verse 21. This if he will not take well from us, with
verse 21. This if he will not take well from us, let him take it from an
Anti-presbyterian, who observes from 1 Chronicles. 13.1, 2, 4. and 2. Chron. 1.3.
that both Kahal and (...) are used for the Elders and Governors. Guide unto
Sion, page 5. The place Deuteronomy. 23.1, 2, 3. is well worthy of observation. It is
ordained that he who is wounded in the stones, or has his privy member cut
off, or is a Bastard, or an Ammonite, or a Moabite, shall not enter into the
Congregation the of Lord to the tenth generation. The word is Kahal in the
Hebrew, and (...) in the version of the 70. yet Iunius, Piscator, and Pelicanus
on that place, and Martyr on Iud. 11.1. hold that by the Church or Congregation
in that place is meant Consessus I^dicum, the Court of Judges and Rulers, which
is called The Congregation of the mighty, Psalm. 80.2. So that the true sense of
the place, is the secluding of those persons from bearing any office or rule in
the Commonwealth of Israel, whereby they might be members of those Courts
which did represent Israel. The same sense is given by Lyranus, Cajetan,
Oleaster, Tostatus, and Lorinus. And which is more to be thought of, Ainsworth
himself expounds it so, and further shows that it cannot be meant of
joining to the faith and religion of Israel, or entering into the Church in
that respect, because Exodus 12.48, 49. Number. 15.14, 15. All strangers were upon
their circumcision admitted into the Congregation of Israel, to offer
sacrifices, and by consequence to enter into the court of the Tabernacle, which
also appears from Levit. 22.18. Number 9.14. The point being now cleared from
the holy Scriptures, we shall the less need to trouble our selves in the search
of profane Authors; yet Pasor finds Demosthenes using the word (...) pro
concione magnatum.

As for that common expression of Divines, Page 10. Polan. Synt. lib. 7. cap.
11. page 539.
that the Elders are the Church representative, we desire not to wrangle about
names, so that the thing it self (which is the power and authority of the
Officers sitting and judging apart from the people) be condescended upon. Yet
let us see upon what grounds the name of a representative Church is by this man
so superciliously rejected. First, he says that no godly, no nor reasonable
man will affirm, that this representation is to be extended to any other acts
of religion, than these which are exercised in the governing of the Church. But
quo warrant^? shall a man be both ungodly and unreasonable, for affirming that
the Elders may and ought to represent the Church where they serve, in
preferring a petition to the King and the Parliament, for a Reformation, or in
bearing witness of the desolate condition of the Parish through the want of a
ministry, or in giving counsel to a Sister Church, though these be not acts
of governing the Church. Well: be it, as he says, what great absurdity shall
fellow? then (forsooth) it appertains to the people primarily and originally
(under Christ) to rule and govern the Church, that is, themselves. But who
says he will so say of a government not personal, but public, and
instituted as the Churches is. Surely, they who think the power to be
originally in the people, might here easily reply that this is no more strange
than to say, that the power which is primarily and originally in the body of a
Kingdom, is exercised by the Parliament, which is the representative thereof.
But because many learned men deny the power of Church government to be
originally in the people, though others, (and those very learned too) do
affirm it: therefore to pass that, I shall serve him with another answer. For
as we can defend the authority of Presbyteries and Synods without wrangling
about the name of a representative Church, so can we defend the name of a
representative Church, without debating the question, whether the people have
the power originally or not. May he therefore be pleased to take notice of
other grounds and reasons for the name of a representative Church, as namely,
First, what the Elders, with the knowledge and tacit consent of the Church,
do approve or dislike, that is supposed to be approved or disliked by the
whole Church, which imports, that the Church is in some sort represented by
the Senate of Elders. Secondly, as we say we have seen a man, when happily we
have seen nothing but his head, or his face which makes him known unto us,
(whence it is that Painters represent men unto us oft-times only from their
shoulders upward) so do we discern and know a visible political Church, when
we see in the Senate, as it were, the head and face thereof, the officers being
as eyes, ears, nose, mouth, etc. to the Church, that is, being the most noble
and chief members whereby the body is governed. Thirdly, the Senate of Elders
is said to represent the Church, because of the affinity and likeness betwixt
it and the Senate, which represents a City, or some inferior civil
Corporation, affinity, I mean, not every way, but in this, that the government
is not in the hands of all, but a few, and that those few were chosen with the
consent of the whole Corporation. Fourthly, and if for these reasons the
Eldership of a particular Church may be called a representative Church, there
is much more reason for giving this name to a classical Presbytery, or to a
Synod provincial, or national, for these do result out of many particular
Churches being made up of their Commissioners.

His second reason he takes from the nature of representations, alleging that
if the Elders in their Consistory represent the Church, then whatsoever they
either decree or do agreeing to the Word of God, that also the Church decrees
and does, though absent, though ignorant, both what the thing is, and upon what
grounds it is done by the Elders: and this how consonant it is to Papists
implicit faith, he leaves it to wise men to consider. This argument is as much
against the representations of Kings and States by their Ambassadors and
Commissioners, it is against the representation of Churches by the Consistory
of Elders, and so all the wisdom of Princes and States in their Embassages
shall turn to implicit faith, because according to this ground, what the
representing does within the bounds of his Commission, that the represented
does implicit. And now I shall leave to be considered by wise men these vast
differences betwixt the Papists implicit faith, and the case of our Churches
governed by Elderships. 1. The Church assenteth not to that which the
Consistory of Elders decrees or does, except it be agreeing to the Word of
God, as the Reasoner himself says: but there is no such limitation in the
Papists implicit faith. 2. The Consistory of Elders does not press any thing
upon the Church, imperiously, or by naked will and authority without any reason,
as the Church of Rome does with those from whom she requires implicit faith.
3. The Papists know not what those things be which they believe by implicit
faith: so that such a faith is rightly called mera articulorum fidei
ignorantia, Ger. loc. theol. ^om. 3. de Iusti^. ^* 114.
a mere ignorance of the articles of faith: but the decrees of our Elderships
whereunto our Churches do consent, are made known unto them. 4. Our Churches
are by the judgment of Christian discretion to examine all things propounded
unto them, even the decrees of the Elders, whereas Papists may not examine what
the Church propounds or commands. 5. Papists by their implicit faith
believe whatsoever the Church believes, because they think the Church can not
err, but our Churches conceive not only their particular Elderships, but
oecumenicall councels to be subject to error.

Page 11.
Come we now to his third general reason: whereby he labors to prove that
the consistorian course is contrary to the practice of the Apostolic Churches,
because the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. writes to the whole Church of Corinth to
excommunicate the incestuous man. And that by these words ( when you are come
together) the whole Church is to be understood, Page 12.
he proves by three reasons: the strength of them all, we shall take together
in one argument thus. They among whom the fornicatour was, who were puffed up
when they should have sorrowed, and out of the midst of whom he was to be put,
who had done that thing, to whom it appertained to purge out the old leven, and
to whom the Apostle wrote not to be commingled with fornicators or covetous
persons, they were to be gathered together into one, and to judge and
excommunicate that incestuous person.

But they among whom the fornicator was, etc. were not the Elders alone, but
the whole Church, Ergo, etc.

And now what shall this disputer say, if I cleave this his strong argument
with a wedge of his own timber, thus, etc.

If they among whom the fornicator was, who were puffed up, when they should
have sorrowed, and out of the midst of whom, etc. were to judge and
excommunicate that incestuous person, then women were to judge and
excommunicate him, and not men only. But the latter is absurd, therefore so is
the former. My proposition he must either grant, or else say that the
incestuous man was not to be put out of the midst of women, and that the
Apostle did not forbid women to be commingled with fornicators. My assumption
is his own, Page 24. where he tells us from 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.12. that
women are debarred from liberty or right of voting in public ecclesiastical
matters. Then let him see to the conclusion. Another proof of the same point
he adds from 2 Cor. 2. Page 1^.
where he writes to these same Corinthians to receive pardon, and comfort the
penitent: which I might repel in the same manner. But there is a word in that
same Chapter which may clear the thing, Verse. 6. Sufficient to such a man is
this punishment (or censure) which was inflicted of many. Which many, if (as he
says in the next page) the Apostle had opposed to himself alone, and not to
all, then he said but the half of that which he meant to say. He would have
the Corinthians to think it enough that the man had been publicly censured by
so many as were in their Presbytery. Now if he had been censured by the whole
Church, it had been more fit and emphaticall to have said censured by all. But
there is another sense which well fitteth the place. E^^r^. sacr. in ^llum
locum.
Heinsius observes that (...) is one thing, (...) another thing: the former
noting those that exceed in number: the latter those that are chief in
dignity, and that therefore the Apostle when he says (...), means the rulers
and Elders of that Church, so that the reading shall be this, Sufficient to
such a man, is this censure inflicted of the chie^e. In the same sense Pi^^rtor
takes the words: which also he does illustrate from Mat. 12.41.42. (...) a
greater then Jonah, (...), a greater then Solomon.

To conclude this case, the Apostle as in other Epistles, so in this, does
sometime point at common duties belonging to the whole Church, sometime at the
duties of officers. That the whole Church of Corinth should have sorrowed for
the incestuous man, and that it was a common duty to them, not to be commingled
with fornicators, Ephesians. 5.11.
and to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
to reprove them: In like manner it concerned them all to comfort him being
penitent. But as for the judging, and excommunicating of him, that did belong
only to the Presbytery of Corinth, and so Calvin, Piscator, Paraeus, and many
others expound the Apostles words.

His digression to prove that the Apostle alone, Page 13.14.
did not give forth sentence judiciary upon the offender, is not against us,
but against the prelaticall party, therefore I pass it.

What he alleges from Act. 1. Page 15.16.17.19
and 6. and 14. For the Churche^ right of suffrage in the election of Officers,
we do most heartily assent unto it, with this distinction, that when the case
is such, as it was in the examples alleged, that is, when visible political
Churches are to be erected, not having been before, then the right of suffrage
in elections, does indeed belong to the whole body: And though this way of
election were ordinary, it cannot prove that the people have the power of that
authority in them, to which they elect the officers: no more then the Electors
of the Emperor have in them power of the imperial dignity, says Baynes. But
now it is not ordinary, for when there is already a settled Ecclesiastical
republike, or a Church with officers, the officers for the time being ought by
their suffrages to elect the officers that are wanting, with the knowledge and
consent of the Church.

Page 17.18.
Somewhat he demurreth upon Act. 15. for the vindication of which place, I refer
my reader to the second part of the former Treatise, Chap. 1. and 8. Neither
shall I stay to examine, by what Method either this discourse or the other
about elections, falls into the proof of his proposition, concerning that
part of the Elders office, which stands in the censuring of offenders.

Page 21.
He falls at last into his own channel, concluding it to be a thing most
equal, that the whole Church, should clearly and undoubtedly take knowledge
of the contumacy of the person, that is to be excommunicated, and of the crime
for which, and this we also say with him.

One word I desire to have cleared before we proceed. Page 20.
One of his grounds in his discourse about elections, is that the Church
officers, as they are the servants of Christ Jesus, so also her servants for
Jesus sake, Synops. did. 49. Th. 1.
2. Cor. 4.5. The professors of Leyden say well, that they are not properly the
servants of the Church, but of God, and of Christ: They are not Lords of the
Church neither, but Rulers, Guides, Bishops, and Pastors of the Church: yet not
servants of the Church except, objective, that is, the servants of God in the
Church, or for the Churches good. If this be his meaning, it is well. But I
doubt he has another meaning, and that is, that the Church does give the power
(which is hers) unto her officers, as her servants to exercise it in her name.
If this be the matter, then let us mark with Baynes, Diocese. trial page 88.
that the Church does not virtually and out of power make an officer, but she
does it in Stewardlike manner, ministering to the sole Lord and master of the
house, so that he who is taken in does not his office in her name, but in his
masters name: as a Butler taken in by the Steward of the house, does not
execute his office in the stewards name, but in his masters, who only out of
power did confer it on him.

Page 22.
But now lest any should conceive of him and those of his side, that they either
exercise amongst themselves, or would thrust upon others any popular or
democraticall Church government: therefore he desires the Reader to make
estimate, both of their judgment and practice in this point, according to
these three declarations.

First he says they believe, that the external Church government under
Christ, is plainly aristocraticall and to be administered by some choice men,
although the state be after a fort popular and democraticall. Page 23.
In respect of the latter, he says it appertains to the people freely, to
vote in elections and judgments of the Church; in respect of the former, that
the Elders ought to govern the people, even in their voting in just liberty,
by propounding and ordering all things, and (after the voting of the Church)
solemnly executing, either ordination or excommunication. Behold how he runs
upon the rock of popular government, even whiles he pretends to have his
course another way: God send us better pilots. I remember I have read in sundry
places of Bodin de repub. that the state is often times different from the
government. But sure I am, this anti-consistorian makes not only the state,
but the government of the Church to be democraticall, and that in the
superlative degree, for the government is democraticall, at least composed of
a mixture of aristocracy, and democracy (which is the most that he dare say of
the Church government) where the people have the liberty of electing their
own officers and rulers, and where the Senate so far observes the people,
that they may not pass the final act, in any matter of importance, without
the knowledge and tacit consent o the people, though the people do not vote
in the Senate, nay though the Senate do not vote in the hearing of the people.
Now this seems not enough to those with whom we have now to do. They will
have the people freely to vote in all judgments of the Church. And what is
that, but the very exercise of jurisdiction by the people, de pol. eccle. lib.
3. cap. 7.
which is the democracy of Movell^s condemned by Parker himself, who makes
the exercise of ecclesiastical power proper to the Rulers of the Church,
though he places the power it self originally in the whole Church. Let it
further be observed, what difference these men make betwixt the Elders and the
people in the government of the Church: That which they make proper to the
Elders is only the propounding and ordering of matters, and the excuting of
some solemn act in name of the Church. This is no more then belongs to the
moderator or Praeses in any consistory, But they will have the matter to be
determined according to the most voices of the people. And so the new form of
Church government which is here laid before us, is a mere democracy with many
moderators, which is the most monstrous government that ever was heard of.

His second declaration is, that the Elders may and ought at times to meet
apart from the body of the Church, for deliberation. This if he mean only of
that which he specifi^th, the preparing of things so as publik^ly, and before
the people, they may be prosecuted with most convenience. It is no more then
what many require in moderators of Synods, to whom they think fit, that some
Assessors, or Coadjutors be adjoined for deliberating in private, upon the most
orderly and convenient prosecuting of purposes in public: which as it
hinders not the government of Synods to be aristocraticall; so neither does
the deliberation of the Elders in private, hinder the government now in
question to be democraticall. But if he mean generally, that the Elders may
deliberate apart upon everything whatsoever, which is to be voyced by the
people, then I ask by what reason does he seclude from the deliberations those
who are to voice? for to give being and force to an Ecclesiastical decree by
voycing, is more than to deliberate upon it, whence it is that Papists give to
Presbyters a deliberative voice in Councels, but not a decisive voice, and we
also permit any understanding godly man to propound a matter to a Synod, or to
reason upon it, though none have power of suffrage but the Commissioners of
Churches; So that he had greater reason to seclude the people from the voices,
than from the deliberations.

His third declaration comes last, Page 24.
and that is that by the people whose right in voting they thus stand for, they
understand not women and children, but only men, and them grown, and of
discretion. Before he did object to us that neither in Scripture nor in Greek
Authors, the name Church is used for the assembly of sole Governors: and to
this I suppose I did give a satisfactory answer. But good Sir be pleased
mutually to resolve us where you have read in Scripture, or in Greek Authors
the name Church (setting aside all representatives of Churches and Assemblies
of sole Governors) used for men alone, and them grown and of discretion,
secluding women and children: for now I see your reserved Gloss upon those
words Tell the Church: Tell all the men in the Parish that are grown and of
discretion, you must not take so much upon you, as to expound that Text by a
Synecdoche, which none that ever wrote upon it before your selves did imagine,
and yet challenge us for expounding it by another Synecdoche, following
Chrysostom, Euthymius, Faber Stapulensis, and many late Interpreters, who
understand by Church in that place, the Rulers of the Church, which are the
noblest part of the Church. I shall shut up this point with the words of
Hyperius, Comment. in 1 Cor. 5.4.
who says that we must not understand by the Church the whole multitude, Sed
potius delectos etc. But rather certain choice Elders, noted for their
learning and godliness, in whose power the Church will have to be the
judgment in such like causes, which is proved from that, that Matthew. 18 after
it was said, ^ell the Church, it is added; where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And 2 Cor. 2. he says,
Sufficient is this censure inflicted by many.

We have now done with the Elderships of particular Churches, Page 24, 14.
but there is another blow which I perceive is intended against classical
Presbyteries and Synods provincial and national, for the due power by which my
opposite would have the Church to be governed, he lays before us in this
Assertion, that every particular visible Church has from Christ absolute and
entire power to exercise in and of her self, every ordinance of God, and so is
an independent body, not standing under any other Ecclesiastical authority out
of it self. And this he will prove by ten Arguments: but I shall not need to
multiply answers, as he does arguments, because many of them are coincident.
The first, third, fourth, and sixth, do all hit upon the same string. Page 26.
The first is thus: If those Churches, planted by the Apostolic institution,
had power fully in themselves immediately from Christ to practice all his
ordinances: Then have all Churches the like power now. Page 28.
But the first is true. Ergo. The third thus; Whatsoever was commanded by the
seven Churches to be practiced by each of them, apart, in and for themselves,
that no Church of God must now omit. But Ecclesiastical government was
commanded to the seven Churches to be practiced by each of them, etc. The
fourth thus; Page 28, 29.
If the Church of Corinth had power and authority within her self to exercise
Ecclesiastical Government; then ought not particular Congregations now to
stand under any other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. But the first
is true, Page 30.
Ergo. The sixth thus. If the Apostle gave commandment unto the Eldership of
Ephesus for the whole administration of all ordinances in that Church: then may
the Eldership of every particular congregation, administer among themselves all
Gods ordinances. But the first is true, Ergo.

Now for answer to these: First, I simply deny the connection of the proposition
of the fourth argument, because it argues a genere ad speciem affirmative,
from the exercising of ecclesiastical Government, to the exercising of it
independently. Neither has he said any thing for proof hereof. Next, the
Reader will easily perceive, that both in the first and sixth Argument his
citations in proof both of the propositions and assumptions, have not so much
as the least color of pertinency, and far less of proof. In both these
arguments, when he would prove the proposition, he speaks to the assumptio^,
and contrariwise. But these things I delight not to insist upon: only I shall
give two Distinctions, any one of which, much more both of them shall make
these arguments wholly improfitable unto him* First, I distinguish his
propositions. That power and authority which the Church of Corinth, the seven
Churches of Asia, and other Apostolical Churches had to exercise
Ecclesiastical government in and for themselves, the like have all Churches now
which are of the like frame and condition: but the most part of particular
Churches now are of a different frame and condition from the Apostolic
Churches, and so have not such fullness of power as they had. Put the case that
the Apostolic Churches were no greater then might and did ordinarily assemble
together into one place for the worship of God, yet since by reason of the
trouble^ of those times (which suffered not the Christians to spread themselves
abroad all the country over, but confined them within Cities and safe places)
those Churches were not planted so thick and near together, as that they might
have the convenience of Synodical consociation: hence it appears that they
might do many things in and by themselves, which particular Congregations now
having the convenience of consociation with neighbor Churches, ought not to do
in and by themselves. But this I have said gratis, having in my former Treatise
at length declared that the Apostolic Churches (at least the most and
principal of them) were greater then could assemble ordinarily in one place of
worship, and that they were served with sundry both Pastors and Elders, and
that therefore our Parochial Churches ought not to be (in respect of the
points in question) compared with their Churches, nor our Parochial
Presbyteries with their Presbyteries.

The second distinction which I have to propound is concerning the assumptions
of the arguments now in hand. The Apostolic Churches did indeed ordinarily
exercise Ecclesiastical government and all the ordinances of Christ, in and
for themselves, yet so that when the occasion of a Synod did occur for
determining a question which was too hard for particular Churches, and was also
common to many Churches, in that case they did submit themselves to the
authority of he Synod. Which has also before been made plain from Act. 15.
To practice all the ordinances of God in a Church is one thing, and to practice
them independantly so as nev^r to be subject to the authority of a Synod, is
another thing. My antagonist does after take it for granted and says, that all
learned men have granted that the Churches of the Apostolic constitution were
independent bodies. Page 32.
But whence are you Sir that would make your Reader believe there are no
learned men in the Churches of Scotland, France, the low countries, and the
other reformed Churches which have the government of Presbyteries and Synods,
conceiving it to be most agreeable to the Apostolical pattern? Have you put
out of the category of learned men all Protestant writers who in the
controversies about Councels dispute against Papists from Acts 15.2. Why did
you not among all your imeprtinent allegations, cite some few of those learned
men who grant the Apostolic Churches to have been independent bodies? But we
must hear what more you have to say.

Your first eight and ten arguments are in like manner coincident. Page 29.
The first you frame thus. Such actions the Church may lawfully do wherein no
law of God is broken. But there is no law of God broken, when particular
Churches do in and among themselves exercise all Gods ordinances. Ergo. The
eight thus. Whatsoever government cannot be found commanded in the written
Word o^ God, ought not to have any place in the Church of God. But the
Government of Presbyteries and Synods over many particular congregations cannot
be found commanded, Page 34.
etc. The tenth thus. It is a sin against God to add any thing to that form
and manner of ordering Churches which Christ has set forth in the new
Testament. But to subject particular congregations under any other
Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves, is to add, etc.

Now the word independantly must be added to the assumption of the first
argument, else it cannot conclude what he affirms and we deny: for there is no
question but particular Churches may exercise in and among them selves all Gods
ordinances in those cases and with those distinctions which I have spoken of
before, part 2. chap. 2. This being cleared I deny the assumption in all these
three arguments. I expected proof for it, but he has given none, except that
it cannot for shame be denied. I had thought it rather a shameful thing for a
writer to trouble his Reader with arguments which he cannot make good. Synops.
dyp. 49: Th. 10. ex. dyp. 42. These. 62.
But what says he to the professors of Leyden who hold the institution of
Synods not to be humane, but divine, which they prove from Mat. 18. and Act. 15.
Nay what is more ordinary in Protestant writers then the applying of those
words, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them, unto Synods and Councels; and hence they condemn the popish
Councels, in so much that Bellarmin, Salmeron, and other Jesuits have in this
contradicted all our writers, telling us (as these men do) that our Savior
means not of Councels in these words. Moreover that commandment whereby we
stand obliged to follow the example both of the Jewish Church in the Old
Testament, and of the Apostolical Churches in the New Testament, in such
things as they had not for any special reason which does not concern us, is
transgressed by the withdrawing of Congregations from subjection unto Synods.
Of which things I have said enough before. It is now but a poor begging of
that which is in question, to object that the government of Presbyteries and
Synods has no warrant from the Word of God.

Come we then to examine his other Arguments. His second he composeth thus.
Page 27.
If Christ in Mat. 18.17. where he says, Tell the Church, does mean a
particular Congregation: then has every particular Congregation an entire
power in and of it self to exercise Eclesiasticall government, and all other
Gods spiritual ordinances. But the first is true. Ergo, for the proposition he
cites some Writers who do not speak of such a connection as he had to prove.
The assumption he proves thus. That Church which Christ intends in Matthew.
18. has absolute power in and of it self to perform all Gods ordinances. But
Christ intends in Mat. 18. a particular Congregation. Therefore every
particular Congregation has absolute power, etc. How bravely does he conclude
the point? Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici* We will not examine our
examinators logic: we know what he would say: and we would have him to know
again that Christ in Mat. 18. means indeed some sort of a particular
Congregation, but neither only nor independantly. Nay he means all the
Consistories of the Church higher and lower respectively, as Parker conceives,
whose words I have before set down: and to this sense the thread of the text
does lead us, for as in the preceding words there is a gradation from one to
two or three more, then to the Church, so is there a gradation (by the like
order and reason) in the Consistories of the Church. Tostatus upon this place
acknowledges that Diae Ecclesiae reaches as far as to an oecumenicall
Council, when particular Churches err in their determinations, or when the
cause is common to all the Churches, for example, when the Pope is to be
condemned.

His seventh argument follows in my order, Page 31.
and it runs after this manner. Such offices and callings without which the
Church of God is co^pleat and perfect for government, are superfluous and
humane. But the Church of God may be complete and perfect for government,
without Presbyteriall and Synodicall offices and callings. Ergo. I answer by a
distinction. Such offices and callings without which the Church of God are
according to the course of Gods ordinary providence, or at all times and in all
cases, perfect and complete for government, are indeed superfluous and humane.
But that such offices and callings without which the Church by the absolute
power of God or at some times and in some cases is perfect and complete, are
superfluous and humane, we utterly deny. Now for the point of Synods I shall
produce no other witnesses then those which this Disputer here takes to be for
him. De Conc. q 1. p 29.
Whittaker acknowledges of Councels that Secundum ordinariam providentiam
necessaria sunt ad bonam ecclesiae gubernationem: De Pol. Eccle. lib. 3. page
131.
according to ordinary providence they are necessary for the well governing of
the Church. Parker acknowledges Synods to be sometime necessary in the Church,
and he gives example of the Council of Nice, without which the evils of the
Church in the days of Constantine could not have bin remedied.

The ninth Argument remains, Page 33.
which is this. That government which merely tends unto the taking away from
particular Congregations, their due power is unlawful. But the government of
Presbyteries and Synods (as they now are) does merely tend unto the taking away
from particular Congregations their due power. Ergo. I did expect some strong
proof for the assumption of this argument, but we must take it as it is. He
tells us out of Master Barlow* that no man under the degree of a Prophet or an
Apostle may prescribe Gods Church and children patterns. Our Synods are
further from prescribing patterns either of worship or Church government than
himself is. The pattern and whole manner of Church government is set down in
the Scripture, those circumstances excepted which are common to the Church with
the Commonwealth, and are therefore determinable by natures light. Synods may
not prescribe new patterns, no more may particular Churches: but Synods may in
common causes, and extraordinarily prescribe unto particular churches, such
things as particular churches may in particular causes and ordinarily prescribe
to their own members. If he will believe Parker (whom he thinks his own) the
authority which particular Churches have severally is not lost, de pol. eccl.
lib. 3. c 13. p. 124.
but augmented when they are joined together in Synods. But we have before
abundantly declared how Presbyteriall and Synodical government does not at all
prejudge the rights of congregations. Supra, cap. ult.
As for that which here he adds by way of supposition, putting the case that
Presbyteries and Synods will not permit a congregation to reject some co^victed
heretics, nor to choose any, except unfit Ministers, this is just as if one
should object against Parliaments, that (as they are now) they do merely tend
to the taking away of the right and liberty of the subject, and then for proof
should put the case, that Parliaments will protect and maintain Monopolists,
Projectorers, etc.

Now in this drove of arguments, Page 35.
the drover has set some like the weak of the flock to follow up behind. The
first two are blind, and see not where they are going: for it makes nothing
against us, either that the Eldership of one congregation, has not authority
over the Eldership of another congregation, or that a minister should not
undertake the care of more Churches then one.

His third, Ib. p. 124.
that presbyteriall power is never mentioned in the Scripture, is a begging of
the thing in question, and is answered before; yet I must put him again in mind
of Parker, who speaking of churches says: Legitur in Scripturis de conjunct a
earu^ auct oritate, quando in Synodis congregantur. We read in their Scriptures
of their joint authority, when they are gathered together into Synods. But
there is a speech of Zuinglius against representative Churches, which he may
not omit. Zuing^ius does indeed justly ask of the antichristian prelates, who
had given them the name of a representative Church, and who had given them
power to make Canons etc. yet he adds, Act. 8. expla.
de his duntaxat etc. I speak of them only that are such, others who put
themselves under not above the Scriptures, my writings shall nothing prejudge.

In the fourth place he objecteth, Page 36.
that whosoever shall deny their assertion, must hold two distinct forms of
Church government to be lawful, one where particular congregations do in and
of themselves exercise all Gods ordinances; Sup^^. cap. 2.
the other where they stand under another ecclesiastical authority out of
themselves. I answer it is most lawful for particular congregations in and of
themselves to exercise all Gods ordinances, according to the distinctions and
rules above mentioned: but this is not repugnant to their standing, under the
authority of presbyteries and Synods, for which let us again hear a tender
friend of congregations. Major quidem potestas est Synodi quam unius alicujus
Ecclesiae primea, Parker ubi supra.
and parochialis; But go we along.

Page 129.
His first argument is, that for this reason, among others the learned say the
Pope is Antichrist, viz. because he will have men to appeal from their own
Churches unto him, and to stand unto his sentence and decree: and do not the
presbyteriall assemblies and Synods, take upon them an authority much like to
it. Soft my master, Soft. Canno less serve you, then to match our Church
governeme^t with the papal usurpations. 2. I shall beseech you to remember, 1.
The Pope is one and receives appellations monarchinally: a Synod consists of
many, and receives appellations aristocratically: 2. The Pope receives
appellations from other nations beyond Sea: presbiteries and Synods not so. 3.
The Pope will have his sentence received as infallible: presbyteries and synods
acknowledge themselves subject to error. 4. The Pope acknowledges neither the
Elders, nor the Elderships of congregations: which Presbyteries and Synods do.
5. The Pope acknowledeth no power ecclesiastical on earth, except what is
subject to him, yea derived from him: and who will say so of Presbyteries and
Synods. 6. The Pope receives appellations in other causes then
ecclesiastical: Presbyteries and Synods not so. 7. Synods are made up of the
Commissioners of Churches: The Pope neither has any commission himself from
the Churches, nor will admit the Commissioners of Churches, to sit in judgment
with him. 8. Synods when they receive appellations, are tied to certain rules
of proceeding and judging, especially the Scripture. The Pope makes his power
boundless, and exalts himself, above the very Scripture. There shall be no
end* except I stop in time. And what need I to make so many differences betwixt
light and darkness.

A sixth argument we shall now have, what more meet and reasonable says he,
then that every man's case be there heard and determined, where the fault was
committed. If this rule hold the^ the Parliament or privy Council, ought to go
to every remote county and corner of the kingdom, to judge of such faults
there committed, as are proper for the^ to judge. His 7.8.10.11. arguments must
be gone with silence, Page 37.38
for they run upon the robbing of congregations of their right, the exercising
of ecclesiastical government, in all the apostolic Churches, and our
accoring with Papists and the Hierarchy. All which objections have been before
repelled; and it is somewhat strange, that the disput^r does so often repeat
the same arguments, to make up the greater number. A pretty art indeed: like
that of the young logician who would needs prove, that the four eggs upon the
table were five, because two and three make five.

In this second clause of arguments there is only one behind, and that is, that
by the titles given to all particular co^gregations, viz. a kingdom, a family,
a body, a Queen etc. it appears that all ecclesiastical auctority, ought to
be in every one of the^ distinctly, wholly, entirely. Where let the reader
observe, that he makes the meaning of that place Mat. 3.2. the kingdom of God
is at hand, to be this, a particular congregation is at hand; also that he
expounds Ephesians. 2.19. and Ps. 45. of a particular congregation, which are meant
of the holy Catholic Church. But say that every particular congregation is a
kingdom, a family, a body, a Queen, how proves he that these names do agree
to every congregation in respect of her external policy, or ecclesiastical
government. Nay say they, do agree in this respect, yet in a thousand examples
it is to be seen, that one and the same thing is both totum and pars, the
whole, and the part, in different respects. Whereof we have also spoken in the
former treatise.

He concludes, that by this time he does suppose the reader perceives, that
the Scriptures are every way for them, and against the Presbyteriall
government, you shall do well Sir to think better upon it; you have it yet
to prove: Therefore go to your second thoughts, and examine with me your not
unexaminable examination. Farewell.

FINIS.

