A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the House of LORDS, In the Abbey
Church at Westminster, upon the 27th. of August. 1645. Being the day appointed
for solemn and public Humiliation. Whereunto is added A BROTHERLY
EXAMINATION Of some Passages of Mr. Colemans late Printed Sermon upon Job.
11.20. In which he has endeavored to strike at the root of all
Church Government. By George Gillespie Minister at Edinburgh.

Hieron, in Epitaphio Fabiolae. Alie sunt leges Caesarum, aliae Christi: aliud
Papinianus, aliud Paulus noster praecipit. LONDON: Printed by F. Neile for
Robert Bostock dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Kings Head.
1646.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Have in this Sermon applied my thoughts toward these three things; 1 The
soul-ensnaring Error of the greatest part of men, who choose to themselves
such a way to the kingdom of Heaven as is broad, and smooth, and easy, and but
little or nothing at all displeasing to flesh and blood; like him that tumbled
down upon the grass and said, utinam hoc esset laborare. 2 The grumbling and
unwillingnesse which appears in very many, when they should submit to that
Reformation of the Church which is according to the mind of Jesus Christ; Isa.
30.10. Psalm. 2.3.
like them that said to the Seers, See not; Psalm. 2.3.
and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth
things; and again, Let us break their lands asunder, and cast away their cords
from us. 3 The sad and desolate Condition of the Kingdom of Scotland, then
calling for our prayers and tears, and saying, Ruth 1.20.
Call me not Naomi (pleasant) call me Morah (bitter) for the Almighty has
dealt very bitterly with me. We were pressed out of measure, Cor. 1.8, 9, 10,
11.
above strength, and had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should
not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead; who delivered us
from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us; Our Brethren also helping together by prayer for us, that for the
mercy bestowed on us by means of the prayers of many, Psalm. 18.46.
thanks may be given by many on our behalf. The Lord lives, and blessed be our
rock, Exodus 15.2.
and let the God of our salvation be exalted. He is our God, and we will
prepare for him an habitation; our Fathers God, Psalm. 72, 18, 19
and we will exalt him. Blessed be the Lord God the God of Israel, who only
does wondrous things: and blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the
whole earth befilled with his glory. Isa. 62.3, 4.
Scotland shall yet be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, Ezekiel. 16.63.
and a royal Diadem in the hand of our God, and shall be called Hephzi-hah
and Beulah. Only let us remember our evil ways, and be confounded, and never
open our mouth any more because of our shame, when the Lord our God is pacified
toward us. Now are both Kingdoms put to a trial, whether their Humiliations
be siliall, and whether they can mourn for sin more then for Judgment. And let
us now hear what the Spirit speaks to the Churhes, and not turn again to
folly. New provocations, or the old unrepented, will create new woes; therefore
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto us.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the House of PEERS, at a late
Solemn Fast..
MALACHI 3.2. But who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when
he appears? For he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers Soap.
IF you ask, Act. 8.34.
Of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself or of some other man? It is
answered, both by Christian and Jewish Interpreters: The Prophet speaks this
of Christ, the Messenger of the Covenant, then much longed and looked for by
the people of God, as is manifest by the preceding Verse: And as it was fit
that Malachi the last of the Prophets should shut up the old Testament with
clear promises of the coming of Christ (which you find in this, and in the
following Chapter) so he takes the rather occasion from the corrupt and
degenerate estate of the Priests at that time (which he had mentioned in the
former Chapter) to hold forth unto the Church the promised Messiah; who was to
come unto them to purify the sons of Levi.

But if you ask again, of what coming or appearing of Christ, The meaning of
the Text searched.
does the Prophet speak this? Whether of the first, or of the last, or of any
other? The answer of Expositors is not so unanimous. Some understand the last
coming of Christ in the glory of his Father, and holy Angels, to judge the
quick and the dead. This cannot stand with ver. 34. He shall purify the sons
of Levi, and purge them, etc. But at the last judgment it will be too late for
the sons of Levi to be purified and purged; or for Juda and Jerusalem to bring
offerings unto the Lord, as in the days of old.

Others understand the first coming of Christ; and of these, some understand
his Incarnation, or appearing in the flesh: others take the meaning to be of
his coming into the Temple of Jerusalem, Matthew. 21.10, 11, 12.
to drive out the buyers and sellers, at which time all the City was moved at
his coming. This Exposition has better grounds then the other, because the
coming of Christ (here spoken of) did not precede, but soon follow after the
Ministry of John Baptist; and therefore cannot be meant of our Saviors
Incarnation, but rather of his appearing with power and authority in the
Temple. But this also falls short, and neither expresses the whole, nor the
principal part of what is meant in this Text: For how can it be said, that the
Prophecy which follows, Verse. 3, 4. (which is all of a piece with Verse. 2.)
was fulfilled during Christ's appearing and sitting in the Temple of Jerusalem?
Or how can it be conceived, that the offerings of Juda and Jerusalem were
pleasant to the Lord at that time, when the Gentiles were not, and the Jews
would not be brought in,to offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness?
So that whether we understand by Juda and Jerusalem, the Jewish Church, or the
Christian; this thing could not be said to be accomplished, while Christ was
yet upon earth. And in like manner, whether we understand by the sons of Levi,
the Priests, and Levites of the Jews, or, the Ministers of the Gospel, it
cannot be said that Christ did in the days of his flesh purify the sons of
Levi, as Gold and Silver.

I deny not, but the Lord Jesus did then begin to set about this work. But that
which is more principally here intended, is Christ's coming and appearing in a
spiritual, but yet most powerful and glorious manner, to erect his Kingdom,
and to gather and govern his Churches, by the Ministry of his Apostles and
other Ministers, whom he sent forth after his Ascension.

Of this coming he himself speaks, Matthew. 16.28. Verily I say unto you, There
be some standing here which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of
Man coming in his Kingdom. Mark 9.1.
Mark adds with power. Neither was that all. He did not so come at that time,
as to put forth all his power, or to do his whole work. He has at diverse times
come, and manifested himself to his Churches. And this present time is a time
of the revelation of the Son of God, and a day of his coming. Isa. 59.20. Romans
11 26.
We look also for a more glorious coming of Jesus Christ, before the end be;
For the Redeemer shall come unt^ Sion, and turn a way ungodliness from Jacob.
And he shall destroy Antichrist with the brightness of his coming, 2 These.
2.8. In which place the Apostle has respect to Isai. 11.4. where it is said of
Christ, The rod of Jesse, with the breath of his lips shall be slay the wicked.
There withal, you have the Churches tranquillity, the filling of the earth with
the knowledge of the Lord, and the restoring of the dispersed Jews, Brought on
Revel 9.
as you may read in that Chapter. Some have observed (which ought not pass
without observation) that the Chaldee Paraphrase had there added, the word
Romilus: He shall slay the wicked Romilus: Whereupon, they challenge Arias
Montainus for leaving out that word to wipe off the reproach from the Pope.
However, the Scriptures teach us, that the Lord Jesus will be revealed
mightily, and will make bare his holy Arm, as well in the confusion of
Antichrist, as in the conversion of the Jews, before the last judgment, and
the end of all things.

By this time you may understand what is meant in the Text, by the day of
Christ's coming, (...)
or coming in, as the Septuagints read, meaning his coming or entering into his
Temple, mentioned in the first Verse: By which Temple, Jerome upon the place,
rightly understands the Church, or spiritual Temple.

When this Temple is built Christ comes into it, to fill the house with the
cloud of his glory, and to walk in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks.
The same thing is meant by his appearing, When he appears, says our
Translation: When he shall be revealed, (...)
says the Chaldee: Others read, When he shall be seen, or in seeing of him.
The original word I find used to express more remarkable, divine, and
glorious sights, as Genesis 16.13. Have I also here looked after him that sees
me? Genesis 22.14. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. From this word had
the Prophets the name of Seers, 1 S^m. 9.9. And from the same word came the
name of Visions, 2 Chronicles. 26.5. Zechariah who had understanding in the visions
of God.

Now but what of all this, might some think? It Christ come, its well: He is
the desire of all Nations. O but when Christ thus comes into his Kingdom among
men with power, and is seen appearing with some beams of his glory; Who may
abide, and who shall stand, says the Text? How shall sinners stand before the
Holy One? How shall dust and ashes have any fellowship with the God of glory?
How shall our weak eyes behold the Sun of Righteousness, coming forth like a
Bridegroom out of his Chamber? Did not Ezekiel fall upon his face at the
appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord? Ezekiel. 1 28, Isa. 6.5.
Did not Isaiah cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone, for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of hosts?

But why is it so hard a thing to abide the day of Christ's coming, or to stand
before him when he appears in his Temple? If you ask of him as Joshua did,
Josh. 5.13, 14.
Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? He will answer you, Nay, but as a
Captain of the Host of the Lord, am I now come. 1 Samuel 16.4, 5.
If you ask of him, as the Elders of Bethlehem asked of Samuel (while they were
trembling at his coming) Come thou peaceably? He will answer you as Samuel
did, Peaceably. What is there here then to trouble us? Does he not come to
save, and not to destroy? Yes, to save the Spirit, but to destroy the flesh. He
will have the heart blood of sin, that the soul may live for ever. This is set
forth by a double metaphor: One taken from the Refiners fire, which purifieth
metals from the dross. The other, from the Fullers soap; others read, the
Fullers grass, or the Fullers herb. Some have thought it so hard to determine,
that they have kept into the Translation, In Ier. 2.2.
the very Hebrew word Borith. Jerome tells us, that the Fullers herb which grew
in the marish places of Palestina, had the same virtue for washing and making
white, which nitre has. Yet I suppose, the Fullers soap has more of that
virtue in it, (...)
then the herb could have. However, it is certain that Borith comes from a
word which signifies to make clean, according to that, Mark 9.3. His raiment
became shining, exceeding white as snow: So as no Fuller on earth can white
them.

But to whom will Christ thus reveal himself? And who are they whom he will
resine from their dross, and wash from their filthiness? Ier. 6.30.
That we may know from the two following verses. He is not a Resiners fire to
those that are reprobate silver,and can never be refined: Deuteronomy. 32.5
Neither is he as Fullers soap to those whose spot is not the spot of his
children. Nay, Christ does not thus lose his labor: But he refineth and makes
clean the sons of Levi, also Judah and Jerusalem. This (I doubt not to aver)
does principally belong to the Jews, Romans 9.4.
for to them pertain the promises, says the Apostle, Romans 11.24.
and the natural branches shall be grafted into their own Olive Tree. But it
belongs also to us Gentiles, who are cut out of the wild Olive Tree, and are
grafted into the good Olive Tree, God has persuaded Japhet to dwell in the
Tents of Sem. And so we are now the Judah and Jerusalem, and our Ministers, the
sons of Levi. Gods own Church and people, even the best of them have need of
this Refiners fire, and of this Fullers soap.

And so much for the scope, sense, and coherence of the Text. The general
Doctrine which offers it self to us from the words, is this:

Doctrine 1.
The way of Christ, and fellowship with him, is very difficult and displeasing
to our sinful nature: And is not so easy a matter as most men imagine

First of all, Proved first from the Text Josh. 24.16. Josh 6.19.
this does clearly arise out of the Text. As when the people said to Joshua,
God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, to serve other gods. Joshua
answered, Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is a jealous God.
Just so does the Prophet here answer the Jews, when they were very much
desiring and longing for the Messiah, promising to themselves comfort, and
peace, and prosperity, and the restoring of all things according to their
hearts desire, if Christ were once come. Nay, says the Prophet, not so: Who
may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears?

Secondly, 2. From other Scriptures.
Other Scriptures do abundantly confirm it. The Doctrine of Jesus Christ was
such as made many of his Disciples say, This is a hard saying, who can hear it?
And from that time many of them went back, Ioh 6.60.
and walked no more with him. A young man, a ruler, Mar 10.21.22
who came to him with great affection, was so cooled and discouraged at hearing
of the cross, and selling of all he had, Mat. 19.24, 25.
that he went away sad and sorrowful. The Apostles themselves having heard him
say, that, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God; They were exceedingly amazed at
this Doctrine, saying, Who then can be saved? As for his life and actions, they
were such, Matthew 8.34.
not only did the Gadarens beseech him to depart out of their coasts; Mark
3.21.
but his own friends and kinsfolks were about to lay hold on him; for they
said, He is beside himself. His sufferings were such, that all his Disciples
did forsake him, and went away every man to his own home again. And what shall
be the condition of those that will follow him? Luke 14.28.
If we will indeed be his disciples, he has forewarned us to sit down first,
Ioh. v. 26, 2, 33.
and count our cost. He has told us, It will cost us no less then the bearing
of the cross, the forsaking of all, yea, (which is hardest of all) the denying
of our selves: Matthew. 16, 24.
We must even cease to be our selves, and cannot be his, except we leave off to
be our own. And what shall the world think of us, James 44.
all this while? Know ye not, (says James) that the friendship of this world
is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, 1 Cor.
3.18.
is the enemy of God. Let no man deceive himself, says Paul: If any man among
you seem to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.
What do ye think now? Are not all these hard sayings for flesh and blood to
hear? I might add much more of this kind. But

3. From the excellency of Christ. 1 Samuel 24.24.
Thirdly, Thus it must be, to set the higher value upon Christ, and upon the
lot of Gods children. Will I offer burnt-offerings to the Lord my God, says
David, of that which does cost me nothing? And shall our lines fall to us in
pleasant places? Or shall we have a goodly heritage, which does cost us
nothing? How should the preciousnesse of the Saints portion be known, if we
lose nothing that is dear to us, to come by it? Phil. 3.7. What things were
gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46. The kingdom
of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field, the which when a man has
found, he hides, and for joy thereof, goes, and sells all that he has, and
buyeth that field. Again, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant-man
seeking goodly pearls, who when he had found one pearl of great price, he went
and sold all that he had, and bought it. Genesis 35.4.
Jacobs family must give away all the strange gods, and all their earrings
also, before they get leave to build an Altar unto the Lord at Bethel. Abraham
must get him out of his country, and from his kindred, if he will come unto the
land which the Lord will show him. Moses must forsake the Court of Egypt, if he
will take him to the heritage of Jacob his father. The disciples must leave
ships, nets, fathers, and all, if they will follow Christ. And as they who come
in sight of the South-pole, lose fight of the North Pole: So when we
follow-Christ, we must resolve to forsake somewhat else, yea, even that which
is dearest to us.

4. From the nature of the Covenant.
Fourthly, If it were not so, there should be no sure evidence of our closing
in covenant with Christ: For then (and never till then) does the soul give it
self up to Christ to be his, and closes with him in a covenant, when it
renounceth all other lovers, that it may be his only. Shall a woman be married
to a husband, with the reservation of another lover, or upon condition that she
shall ever stay in her fathers house? So the soul cannot be married to Christ,
except it not only renounce its bosome-sins, lusts, and idols; but be content
also to part with the most lawful creature comforts for his sake. Forget thine
own people, and thy fathers house, says the Psalm. 45.10. The repudiating of
creature comforts, and a covenant with Christ, go hand in hand together, Isa.
55.2, 3. Nahash would not make a covenant with the men of Jabesh-Gilead,
unless they would pluck out their right eyes, intending (as Josephus gives the
reason) to disable them from fighting, or making war: For the buckler or shield
did cover their left eye when they fought, so that they had been hard put to
it, to fight without the right eye. This was a cruel mercy in him: But it is a
merciful severity in Christ, that he will make no covenant with us, except the
right eye of the old man of sin in us be put out.

O then let us learn from all this, The Use.
how miserably many a poor soul is deluded, imagining as the Jews did, that
Christ shall even satisfy their carnal and earthly desires, and that the way
of salvation is broad, and easy enough. If the way of Christ be such as you
have now heard, then surely they are far from it; 1 King. 1.6. Eccles. 2.10.
who give loose reins to the flesh, as David did to Adonijah, who have not
displeased their flesh at any time, nor said, Why have thou done so? Who do not
withhold their heart from any joy, and whatsoever their eyes desire, they keep
it not from them: Ier. 2.23, 24.
Who are like the wiide Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the
wind at her pleasure; and like the swift Dromedary, traversing her ways: Who
cannot endure to be enclosed into so narrow a lane, as Ministers describe the
way to Heaven to be. These are like fed oxen, which have room enough in the
Meadows, but they are appointed for slaughter; when the laboring oxen which
are kept under the yoke, shall be brought home to the stall and fed there. Luke
16.^5.
Was it not so with the rich man and Lazarus? Nay, and many of the children of
God fall into this same error, of making the way of Christ broader and easier
then ever Christ made it, and taking more liberty then ever he allowed.
Therefore mark ye well our Saviors words, Matthew. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the
strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Because strait is the gate,
and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it.
There be but few that seek it, and yet fewer that find it, An Objection
answered four ways.
but fewest of all that enter in at it.

But how does all this agree with Matthew. 11.30. My yoke is easy, and my
burden is light: and 1 John 5.3. His Commandments are not grievous?

I answer.

1. That is spoken to poor souls that are laboring, and heavy laden; a
metaphor taken from Beasts drawing a full Cart, which both labor in drawing,
and are weary in bearing. But my Text speaks to those that are like
undantoned Heifers, and like Bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke: The same Christ
is a sweet and meek Christ to some; but a sour and severe Christ to others. 2.
Christ's yoke is easy in comparison of the yoke of the law, which neither we,
nor our Fathers were able to bear. 3. As wisdom is easy to him that
understands, so is Christ's yoke easy, and his burden light to those that
are well acquainted with it, and have good experience of it, Prove. 4.12. When
thou g^est, thy steps shall not be straightened, and when thou runnest, thou shall
not stumble: This is spoken of the way of Wisdom; but he says, When thou
go, not, when thou beginnest, or, when thou enterest. If thou art but once
upon thy progress, going and running, thou shall find the way still the
easier, and still the sweeter. 4. Mark Christ's own words. Its a yoke though an
easy one; and a burden, though a light-one. A yoke to the flesh, but easy to
the Spirit: A burden to the old man; but light to the new man. He pours in
Wine and Oil into our wounds. Oil to cherish them, and Wine to cleanse them. He
can both plant us as Trees of righteousness, and at the same time lay the Ax
to the root of the old Tree. He will have mercy upon the sinner, but no mercy
upon the sin. He will save the soul, but yet so as by fire.
And thus much in general of the difficulty and hardship of the way of Christ;
the great point held forth in this Text, which I have the rather insisted upon,
as a necessary foundation for those particulars, which I am to speak of. Were
this principle but rightly apprehended, it were easy to persuade you, when we
come to particulars.

Some Papists have alleged this Text for their purgatory. Here is indeed a
Purgatory, and a fire of purgatory; and such a purgatory, that we must needs go
through it, before we can come to Heaven: But this purgatory is in this world,
not in the world to come. The flesh must go through it, and not the soul
separated: And it must purge us from mortal, not from venial sins: And by a
spiritual, not a material fire.

I will now come to the particulars. Christ is to us as a Refiners fire, and as
Fullers Soap, three ways: In respect of 1. Reformation. 2. Tribulation. 3.
Mortification.


Which make not three different senses, but three harmonious parts of one and
the same sense.

I begin with Reformation, concerning which I draw this Doctrine from the Text.

2 Doctrine. Cleared in four branches thereof. Gualt. hom. 8. In Malach. Vult
enim docere propheta, venturum quidem Christum, sed Reformatorem fore, and
accrrimum divini cultum vindicum.
The right Reformation of the Church, which is according to the mind of Jesus
Christ, is not without much molestation, and displeasure to men's corrupt
nature. It is a very purgatory upon earth: Its like the fire to drossy silver:
And like Fullers Soap to slovenly persons, who would rather keep the spots in
their garments, then take pains to wash them out.

Look but upon one piece of the accomplishment of this prophecy, and by it,
judge of the rest. When Christ comes to Jerusalem meek, and sitting upon an
Ass (as the Prophet said) all the City is troubled at his coming, Matthew. 21.5,
10. When he had but cast out the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, the
Priests and Scribes begin to plot his death, Luke 19.45, 47. Nay, where Christ
and the Gospel comes, there is a shaking of Heaven and Earth, Hag. 2.6. The
less wonder, if I call Reformation like a Refiners fire. The dross of a
Church is not purged away without this violence of fire.

This is the manner of Reformation held forth in Scripture, and that in
reference. 1. To Magistrates and States men. 2. To Ministers. 3. To a people
reformed. 4. To a people not reformed.

In reference to Magistrates and Statesmen, Reformation is a fire that purges
away the dross, Isa. 1.25, ^6. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely
purge away the dross, and take away all thy tin. Here Is the Refiners fire: And
the Chaldee paraphrase adds the Fullers Borith. Then follows, And I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning:
Afterward, thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City.
Interpreters note upon that place, that no effectual Reformation can be looked
for, till Rulers and Magistrates be reformed; and that therefore the Lord
promises to purge away the dross and tin of corrupt Rulers and Judges, and to
give his people such Judges and Rulers as they had of old, Moses, Joshua, the
Judges, David, Solomon, and the like.

In reference to Ministers, the Doctrine is most clear. The next words after my
Text, tell you; that this refining fire is specially intended for purifying the
sons of Levi. The same thing we have move largely, though more obscurely, in 1
Cor. 3.12. to ver. 15. I do not say, that the Apostles there means only of
times of Reformation: But this I say, that it holds true, and most manifestly
too, of times of Reformation; and that this is not to be excluded, but to be
taken in as a principal part of the Holy Ghosts intendment in that Scripture.
Gualther on the place. Martyr on the place.
He is speaking of the Ministers of the Gospel and their Ministry, supposing
always that they build upon Christ, and hold to that true foundation: Upon
this foundation Some build gold, Accessione temporis declarantur. Experimur
body retegico^plura quae a multis annis la^uer unt. Gualther.
silv er, precious stones, that is, such Preaching of the Word, such
administration of the Sacraments, such a Church Discipline, and such a life as
is according to the Word, and favors of Christ: Others build wood, hay,
stubble, whereby is meant whatsoever in their Ministry is improfitable,
unedifying, vain, curious, unbeseeming the Gospel; for the Ministers of Christ
must be purified, not only from Heresy, Orietur dies, id est, clarior lux
veritatis, quae omnia protrabet. Tossanus. Mundus tande^ agnoscet vanitatem
traditionum humanaru^
Idolatry, Profaneness, and the like, but even from that which is frothy and
unedifying, which favors not of Gods Spirit, but of man's. Now says the
Apostle, Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of
what sort it is. The Church shall not always be deluded and abused with
vanities that cannot profit. A time of Light and Reformation discovers the
unprofitablenesse of those things wherewith men did formerly please and
satisfy themselves. There is a fire which will prove every man's work, even an
accurate trial and strict examination thereof, according to the rule of Christ:
Chamier-Panst. Tom. 3. lib. 26. cap. 13, 14.
A narrow enquiry into, and exact discovery of every man's work (for so do our
Divines understand the fire there spoken of) whether this fiery trial be made
by the searching and discovering light of the Word in a time of Reformation, or
by Afflictions, or in a man's own Conscience at the hour of death. If by some or
all of these trials, a Ministers work be found to be what it ought to be, he
shall receive a special reward and praise; But if he have built wood, hay, and
stubble, he shall be like a man whose house is set on fire about his ears, that
is, He shall suffer loss, and his work shall be burnt, yet himself shall
escape, and get his life for a prey, so as by fire, that is, So that he can
abide that trial and examination, whereby God distinguishes between sincere
ones and Hypocrites; or, so that he be found to have been otherwise a faithful
Minister, and to have built upon a right foundation.

In the third place, you shall find Reformation to be a refining fire, in
reference to a people or Church reformed. He that is left in Zion shall be
called holy, says the Prophet, when the Lord shall have washed away the filth
of the Daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the
midst thereof, by the spirit of Judgment, Bullinger on the place.
and by the spirit of burning, Isa. 4.3, 4. Where you may understand by the
filth of the daughters of Zion, their former Idolatries, and such like
abominations against the first Table (which the Prophets call often by the name
of filth and pollution) and by the blood of Jerusalem, the sins against the
second Table. These the Lord promises to purge away by the Spirit of Judgment,
that is, by a Spirit of Reformation (according to that, Joh. 12.3. Now is the
judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out:)
Matthew. 3.12.
Which Spirit of Reformation is also a Spirit of burning; even as the Holy
Ghost is elsewhere called fire, Act. 2.3.
and did come down upon the Apostles in the likeness of cloven tongues of
fire. The spirit of Reformation may be the rather called the Spirit of burning,
because ordinarily Reformation is not without tribulation (as we shall hear)
and by the voice of the rod does the Spirit speak to men's consciences. When the
Lord has thus washed away the filthy spots, and burnt away the filthy dross
of his Church, then ( Isa. 4.5.) she becomes a glory or a praise in the earth,
and the promise is, That upon all the glory shall be a defense: But you see she
is not brought to that condition, till she go through the Refiners fire. It is
no easy matter to cast Satan out of a person; How much less to cast his
kingdom out of a Land? Another place for the same purpose we find, Zech. 13.9.
When two parts of the Land are cut off, the remnant whichescape, the third part
which is written to life in Jerusalem, even they must be brought through the
fire I will bring the third part through the fire, says the Lord, and will
refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried. This is
the fiery trial of affliction, but the fruit of it is a blessed Reformation to
make the Church, as most pure refined gold. They shall call on my Name, Ribera
upon the place.
and I will hear them, that is, they shall no longer worship Idols, but me
only, and they shall offer to the Lord an offering in righteousness, which
shall be accepted; And what more? I will say, It is my people; and they shall
say, The Lord is my God: Behold, a reforming people, and a covenanting people:
But he that has his fire in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem, does first
refine them, and purify them. We are not reformed in Gods account, till the
refining sire have purged away our dross, till we be refined as silver is
refined, and tried as gold is tried.

Lastly, In reference to a people not reformed, hear what the Prophet says,
Jer. 6.28, 29, 30. They are brass and iron, they are all corrupters: The
bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed off the fire, the founder melts in
vain; for the wicked are not plucked away. Reprobate silver shall men call
them, because the Lord has rejected them. The Chaldee Paraphrase expounds it
of the Prophets who labored in vain, and spent their strength for naught,
speaking to the people in the Name of the Lord, to turn to the Law and to the
Testimony; but they would not turn.

I might draw many Uses from this Doctrine: but I shall content my self with
these few.

First of all, First, application to the opposers of Reformation. Revel. 14.2.
it reproves that contrary Principle which carnal reason suggesteth:
Reformation must not grieve, but please it must not break nor bruise, but heal
and bind up; it must be an acceptable thing, not displeasing: it must be as
the voice of harpers harping with their harps, but not as the voice of many
waters, or as the voice of great thunders. Thus would many heal the wound of
the daughter of Zion slightly, and daub the wall with untempered mortar; and so
far comply with the sinful humors and inclinations of men, as in effect to
harden them in evil, and to strengthen their hands in their wickedness; or at
least, if men be moralized, then to trouble them no further. Says not the
Apostle, If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ? And
again, The carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law
of God, neither indeed can be. So that either we must have a Reformation,
displeasing to God, or displeasing to men. It is not thright Reformation, which
is not displeasing to a Tobijah, to a Sanballat, to a Demetrius, to the
earthly-minded, to the self-seeking Politicians, to the carnal and profane. Its
but the old enmity between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent.
Genesis 3.11.
Nay, what if Reformation be displeasing to good men, in so far as they are
unregenerate, carnal, earthly, proud, unmortified? Prove. 20.7. Number. 11 28, 29.
and 12.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 16.10 2 Samuel 19.29.
(For who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?) What if
a Joshua envy Eldad and Medad? What if an Aaron and a Miriam speak against
Moses? What if a religious Asa be wroth with the Seer? What if a David will not
alter his former judgment, though very erroneous, and will not (no, not after
better information) have it thought that he was in an error? Jonah 1.3.
What if a Jonah refuse to go to Nineveh, when he is called? Mark 9.33, 34, 35.
Gal. 2.11. Col. 4.17. Revel. 2. and 3.
What if the disciples of Christ must be taught to be more humble? What if
Peter must be reproved by Paul for his dissimulation? What if Archippus must be
admonished to attend better upon his Ministry? What if Christ must tell the
Angels of the Churches, that he has somewhat against them? If Reformation
displease both evil men, and (in some respect) good men; this makes it no worse
then a refiners fire; and so it must be, if it be according to the mind of
Christ.

My second and chief Application shall be unto you, my Noble Lords. 2.
Application to the Parliament, in 4, particulars. Luke 16.2.
If you be willing to admit such a Reformation as is according to the mind of
Christ, as is like the Refiners fire and Fullers Soap; then, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, (who will say, ere long, to every one of you, Give an
account of the Stewardship; for thou may be no longer Steward) I recommend
these three things unto you; I mean, that you should make use of this refining
fire in reference to three sorts of dross.

1. The dross of Malignancy. 2. The dross of Heresy and Corruption in
Religion. 3. The dross of Profaneness.
Touching the first of these, take the wise counsel of the wise man, 1
Touching connivence a^ or correspondence with Malignants.
Prove. 24.4, 5. Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come
forth a vessel for the finer. Take away the wicked from before the King, and
his throne shall be established in Righteousness. Remember also the fourth
Article of your solemn League and Covenant, by which you have obliged your
selves, with your hands lifted up to the most high God, to endeavor the
discovery, trial, and condign punishment of all such as have been or shall be
Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the reformation of
Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from
another, or making any Faction or Parties among the people contrary to this
Covenant. There was once a compliance between the Nobles of Judah and the
Samaritanes, which I hope you do not read of, without abominating the thing:
You find it, Nehem. 6.17.19. In those days, the nobles of Judah sent many
letters to Tobijah, and the letters of Tobijah came unto them. Also (says
Nehemiah) they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered by words to him.
But you have also the error of a godly man set before you as a rock to be
avoided, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate
the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. I am not to dwell
upon this Point: I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say.

In the second place, 2 Touching Liberty of Conscience.
think of the extirpation of Heresy, and of unsound dangerous Doctrine, such
as now springs up apace, and subverteth the faith of many. There is no
Heretic nor false Teacher, which has not some one fair pretext or another:
But bring him once to be tried by this refining fire, he is found to be like a
potsheard covered with silver dross. Prove. 26 23. Ier. 3.28.
What is the chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? and what is the dross to the
silver? If this be the way of Christ which my text speaks of, then (sure)
that which now passes under the name of Liberty of Conscience, is not the way
of Christ. Much has been written of this Question. For my part, I shall for
the present only offer this one Argument: If Liberty of conscience ought to be
granted in matters of Religion, it ought also to be granted in matters Civil or
Military. But Liberty of Conscience ought not to be granted in matters Civil or
Military, as is acknowledged: Therefore neither ought it to be granted in
matters of Religion. Put the case now there be some well-meaning men (otherways
void of offense) who from the erroneous persuasion of their consciences, think
it utterly sinful, and contrary to the Word of God, to take Arms in the
Parliaments Service, or to contribute to this present War, or to obey any
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, which tends to the resisting of the Kings
Forces: Now compare this case with the case of a Socinian, Arminian,
Antinomian, or the like: They both plead for Liberty of Conscience: They both
say, Our conscience ought not to be compelled; and if we do against our
Conscience, we sin. I beseech you, how can you give Liberty of Conscience to
the Heretic, and yet refuse Liberty of Conscience to him that is the
conscientious Recusant in point of the War? I am sure there can be no answer
given to this Argument, which will not be resolved into this Principle. Men's
Consciences may be compelled for the good of the State, but not for the glory
of God. We must not suffer the State to sink; but if Religion sink, we cannot
help it. This is the plain English of it.

When I speak against liberty of conscience, it is far from my meaning to
advise any rigorous or violent course against such as being sound in the faith
and holy in life, and not of a turbulent factious carriage, do differ in smaller
matters from the common rule. Job 3.4.
Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the
light shine upon it, in which it shall be said that the Children of God in
Britain are Enemies and persecutors of each other. He is no good Christian who
will not say Amen to the prayer of Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17.2^.
that all who are his may be one in him. If this be heartily wished, let it be
effectually endeavored. And let those who will choose a dividing way, rather
then an Uniting way, bear the blame.

The third part of my Application shall be to stir you up (Right Honorable) to
a willing condescending to the settling of Church Government in such a manner, 3
Touching the restraint of scandalous persons from the sacrament
as that neither ignorant nor scandalous persons may be admitted to the holy
Table of the Lord. Let there be in the house of God Fullers soap to take off
those who are spots in your feasts, and a resining fire to take away the dross
from the silver. Psalm. 119.119.
Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross, says David. Take
away therefore the wicked from before the King of glory; Psalm. 5.5.
for they shall not stand before him who hates all workers of Iniquity. You
see God puts all profane ones in one Categorie, and so should you. There is a
like reason against seven, and against seventy scandals. Or, if you please to
make a Catalogue of seven, you may, provided itbe such as God himself makes in
the fifth verse of this Chapter, where seven sorts are reckoned forth (as some
Interpreters compute) but the last of the seven, is general and comprehensive,
(...), Grotius annot. in Malac: 3.
as the Septuagints have it, and those that fear not me: those, says one, who
are called in the New Testament (...) ungodly. Jerome notes upon the place,
that though men shall not be guilty of the aforementioned particulars, yet God
makes this crime enough, that they are ungodly. Nay I dare undertake to draw
out of Erastus himself (the great adversary) a Catalogue of seven sorts of
persons to be kept off from the Lords Table, and such a Catalogue as Godly
Ministers can be content with. But of this elsewhere.

Most horribly has the Lords Table been profaned formerly in this kingdom, by
the admission of scandalous persons, God will wink at it no longer: now is the
opportunity of Reformation. The Parliament of England (if any State in the
world) owes much to Jesus Christ; and he will take it very ill at your hands
if ye do him not right in this. I say do him right, for, alas, what is it to
Ministers, it were more for their ease, and for pleasing of the people, to
admit all: but a necessity is laid upon us that we dare not do it, and woe unto
us, if we do it. And for your part, should you not establish such a rule as
many put a difference between the precious and the vile, the clean and the
unclean; you shall in so far make the Churches of Christ in a worse condition,
and more disabled to keep themselves pure, then either they were of old under
Pagan Emperors, See Mr. Robinsons Apology, cap. 12. Faustus Socinus wrote a
Book to prove that all those in the Reformed Churches of Poland who desire ^o
be truly godly, ought to separate themselves and oyn with the Assemblies who
(faith h^) are falsely called Arrians and Abioniles. One of his arguments is
this, because in those reformed Churches there is a great neglect of Church
Discipline, whereby it comes to pass that scandalous persons are admitted to
the Lords Table The same argument is pressed against some Lutheran Churches by
Schlichringius Disput pro Socino contra Ms Sacrum. p^. 484 L^et (...) dolendum
sit ta^a promissed passimque fieri, and abiiss^ in ^orem: pejus tamen adhue est
quodmalis is^ is, praeter concienes interdum aliquas, quibusdam in locis, nulla
adh^beatur medcina, ne^ rectores Ecelesiarum haec cura tangat, ut vitia tam
late grassantia, disciplina and censura Ecclesiastica, ab ipso Christo and
Apostolis institutacoercean^ur. Vnde sactum est ut non solum ista peccata, qu^
lev^ ora videntur, sed c^iam alia graviora, put a comessati ones,
compotationes, ebrietrates, scorrationes, libidines, ira, in (...), nine,
obtrectationes, caedes ac bella, di^ uvio quodam Ecclesiastico nundarins.
or now are under Popish Princes. You shall also strengthen instead if
silencing the Objections both of Separatists and Socinians, who have with more
then a color of advantage opened their mouths wide against some Reformed
Churches, for their not exercising of Discipline against scandalous and
profane persons, and particularly for not suspending them from the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. Nay which is yet more, if you should refuse that which I
speak of, you shall come short of that which Heathen^ themselves in their way
did make conscience of: for they did interdict and keep-off from their holy
things all such as they esteemed profane and scandalous, whom therefore they
called (...), that is, accused or delated persons: In this manner was
Alcibiades excommunicate at Athens, and Virginia at Rome: the former recorded
by Plutarch, the latter by Livius. I trust God shall never so far desert this
Parliament, as that in this particular, Pagan and Popish Princes, Separatills,
Socinians and Heathens shall rise up in judgment against you. I am persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany salvation: and, namely, that
you will not suffer the Name and Truth of God to be through you blasphemed and
reproached.

Do ye not remember the sad sentence against Eli and his house, Because his
sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3.13. The Apostle
tells us, that the Judgment of God abides not only those that commit sin, but
those also who consent with them: Roms. 1.32. Aquinas upon that place says we
may consent to the sins of others two ways. 1. Directly by counselling,
approving, etc. 2. Indirectly, by not hindering when we can. And so did Eli
consent to the vileness of his sons, because though he reproved them he did
not restrain them.

There is a Law, Exodus 21.29. If an ox were wont to push with his horn in time
past, and it has been testified to his owner, and he has not kept him in, but
that he has killed a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned, and his owner
also shall be put to death. It could be no excuse to say, I intended no such
thing, and it is a grief of heart to me, that such mischief is done. That which
I aim at, is this. The Directory which you have lately established says, The
ignorant and the sca^d^lous are not fi^ to receive this Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: and therefore Ministers are appointed to warn all such in the name of
Christ, that they presume not to come to that holy Table. It is now desired,
that this (which you have already acknowledged to be according to the Word of
God and nature of that holy Ordinance) may be made effectuall^ and for that end
that the power of Discipline be added to the power of Doctrine: otherwise you
are guilty in Gods sight of not restraining those that make themselves vile.

In the third and last place, 3 application to Ministers.
I shall apply my Doctrine to the sons of Levi, and that in a twofold
consideration. 1 Actively. 2 Passively.

Actively, because, if we be like our Master, even followers of Jesus Christ,
or partakers of his unction, then our Ministry will have not only light, but
fire in it, we must be burning as well as shining lights; not only shining
with the light of knowledge, and of the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, Ioh. 5.35.
but burning also with zeal for reforming abuses, and purging of the Church
from the dross thereof. Enar, in Psalm. 104. Cum audis, ignis ^st minister Dei,
incensurum illam putas? incendat licet sed foenn^^ tuum, id est, car. nalia
omnia tua desideria. Act. 17. 6.
Which made Ang^s^ine to apply propologically to Ministers that which is said
of the Angels of heaven, Psalm. 104.4. Who makes his Angels spirits, and his
Ministers a flaming fire. Satan has many Incendiaries against the Kingdom of
Christ. O that we were Christ's Incendiaries against the kingdom of Satan. If
we will indeed appear zealous for the Lord, let it not seem strange if the
Adversaries of Reformation say of us as they said of the Apostles themselves.
These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither also. Yet it
shall be no grief of heart to us afterward, but peace and joy unspeakable, that
we have endeavored to do our duty faithfully.

Passively also the Application must be made, because the sons of Levi must in
the first place go through this refining fire themselves, and they most of all
other men have need to be and must be refined from their dross. I find in
Scripture that these three things had a beginning among the Priests and
Prophets. I Sin, error, and scandal begins at them. Jer. 50.6. Their
Shepherds have caused them to go astray. And Jer. 23.15. From the Prophets of
Jerusalem is profaneness gone out into all the Land. 2 Judgment begins at
them. Ezekiel. 9.6. Slay utterly old and young, and begin at my sanctuary. 3. The
refining work of Reformation begins or ought to begin at the purging and
refining of the sons of Levi, So you have it in the next words after my Text,
and 2 Chronicles. 29. 4, 5. etc. where Hezekiah begins his Reformation at the
sa^ctifying of the Priests and Levites. ^ C^ron. 29.34.
But as it was then in Judah, its now in England, some of the sons of Levi are
more upright to sanctify themselves then others. The fire that I spoke of
before will prove every man and his work.

I am sorry I have occasion to add a third Application But come on and I will
show you greater things than these. What will you say, if any be found among
the sons of Levi, that will neither be active nor passive in the establishing
of the Churchrefining and sin-censuring Government of Jesus Christ, but will
needs appear upon the Stage against it. This was done in a late Sermon now come
abroad, which has given no small scandal, and offense. I am confident every
other godly Minister will say, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth,
before I do the like.

I have done with that which the Text holds forth concerning Reformation. The
second way how Christ is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap, is in
respect of tribulation which either follows, or accompanies his coming into
his Temple. Affliction is indeed a refining fire, Psalm. 66.10. For thou O God
have proved us: thou have tried us as silver is tried, verse. 12. We went
through fire and through water, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Ye are in heaviness through
manifold temptations, that the trial of your faith being much more precious
then of gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto
praise, etc. Affliction is also the fullers soap to purify and make white,
Dan. 11.35. and 12.10. Many shall be purified and made white, and tried: where
the same word is used from which I said before, the fullers soap has its name.

The Doctrine shall be this. 3 Doctrine*
Tribulation does either accompany or follow after the work of Reformation, or
purging of the house of God. So it was when Christ himself came into his
Temple. Luke 12.49. I am come to send fire on the earth, verse. 51. Suppose ye
that I am come to send peace on earth, I tell you nay; but rather divis^^on. So
it was when the Apostles were sent forth into the world. Peter applies to that
time the words of Joel. And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs in
earth beneath, blood and fire, and vapor of smoke, the Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood. Acts 2.19, 20. The meaning is, such
tribulation shall follow the Gospel, which shall be like the darkening of the
great lights of the world, and as it were a putting of heaven and earth out of
their course, so great a change and calamity shall come. The experience both of
the ancient and now-reformed Churches does also abundantly confirm this
Doctrine. Neither must we think that all the calamities of the Church are now
overpast. Who can be assured that that hour of greatest darkness, the killing
of the witnesses is past, and all that sad prophecy, Brightman and Alstod. in
Dan. 1^.^.
Rev. 11. fulfilled. And if some be not much mistaken, it is told, Dan. 12.1.
that there shall be greater tribulation about the time of the Jews conversion,
then any we have yet seen. At that time, says the Angel to Daniel, there shall
be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation, even to that
same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every (...) that
shall be found written in the book.

I make haste to the Uses, and first, let me give unto God the glory of his
truth, if we have been deceived, surely he has not deceived us, for he has
given us plain warning in his word, and has not kept up from us, the worst
things which ever have or ever shall come upon his Church. And now when the
sword of the Lord has gotten a charge against these three covenanting and
reforming Kingdoms, is this any other then the word of the Lord, that when
Christ comes into his Temple, who may abide the day of his coming, and who
shall stand, when he appears? so he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers
soap.

And for the invasion of Scotland by such an enemy after a reformation, is it
any new thing? May we not say that which is, has been? Did not Senacherib
invade Judah, after Hezekiahs reformation. 2 Chro^. 32.1. And though after the
reformation of Asa, ^ Chron. 14.9. and 20.1.
and after the reformation of Jehosaphat also, the land had a short rest and a
breathing time, yet not long after a foreign invasion followed both upon the
one reformation and the other. Nay, look what is the worst thing which has
befallen to Scotland as yet, as much, yea worse has formerly befallen to the
Church and people of God toward whom the Lord had thoughts of peace, and not of
evil; to give them an expected end. I say it not for diminishing any thing
either from the sin or shame of Scotland; the Lord forbid, we will bear the
indignation of the Lord because we have sinned against him, we will lay our
hand upon our mouth, and accept the punishment of our iniquity, we will bear
our shame for ever, because our Father has spit in our face, our Rock has
sold us, and our strength has departed from us. But I say it by way of
answering him, that reproacheth in the gates, and by way of pleading for the
truth of God. Some have objected to our reproach, that when the Lord required
the Israelites to appear before him in Jerusalem thrice a year, he promised
that no man should invade their habitations in their absence, An^wer to Mr.
Prynnes 12 Questions.
Exodus 34.23.24. which gracious providence of his, no doubt, says one,
continues still protecting all such as are employed by his command; yet thath
not been so with Scotland, during the time of their armies being in England. I
answer, besides that which has been said already, even in this, the word and
work of God do well agree, Cajetan in Exodus 34.24. non obligabat (praeceptum
apparendi ^er in anno^) usque ad' di^tatos terminos terrae promissae, qu^do
secura unive saregio sutura erat D Riv. ^. comme^t in illum loc. tum quia Deus
^jecturus ^rat hos^es ex little terminus: tum quia di^atatus ernt fines populi
sui, ut vicinosnon tam haberent hosts. quam subditos and tributarios. 2 Use.
Job 10.1, 2.
and that Scripture ought not to be so applied to us, except the Canaanites,
and the Am^rites, and the Jebusites of our time had been all cast out of our
borders, (we find this day too many of them lurking there, and waiting their
opportunity) for the Septuagints, and many of the interpreters read that Text
thus, For when I shall cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy
borders, no man shall desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before
the Lord thy God thrice in the year. And this is the true sense, read it as you
will. For the promise is limited to the time of casting out the Nations and
enlarging their borders, (which came not to pass till the days of Solomon) it
is certain that from the time of making that promise, the people had not ever
liberty and protection for keeping the three solemn Feasts in the place of
the Sanctuary: as might be proved from diverse foreign invasions and spoylings
of that Land for some years together, whereof we read in the book of the
Judges. But I go on.

In the second place, let God have the glory of his just and righteous
dealings. Let us say with Job, I will leave my comp^aint upon my self, and say
unto God, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. But by all means take heed
you conceive not an ill opinion of the Covenant and cause of God, or the
reformation of Religion, because of the tribulation which follows thereupon.
Say not, it was a good old world when we burnt incense to the Queen of heaven,
for then we were well, and saw no evil. But (said the people to Jeremiah) Since
we left off to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings to her, we have been consumed by the sword, and by the famine,
Jer. 44.17, 18. Eccl. ^.10.
To such I answer in the words of Solomon, Say not thou, what it is the cause
that the former times were better then these, for thou die not enquire wisely
concerning this. Was the peoples coming out of Egypt, the cause why their
carcasses did fall in the windernesse? or was it their murmuring and rebelling
against the Lord, which brought that wrath upon them. If thou will enquire
wisely concerning this thing, read Zephaniah, cap. 1. In the days of I siah,
even in the days of Judahs best reformation, the Lord sent this message by the
Prophet, I will utterly consume all things from off the Land. v. 2. And I will
bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, and their blood
shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as dung, verse. 17. What was the
reason of it? It is plainly told them, (and let us take it all home to our
selves) because notwithstanding of that public reformation, there was a
remnant of Baal in the land, and the Chemarins, and those who halt between two
opinions, who swear by the Lord (or to the Lord which is expounded of the
taking of the Covenant in Josiahs time) but they swear by Malcham also v. 4.5.
There are others who do not seek the Lord nor enquire after him, and many that
turn back from the Lord in a course of backsliding, v. 6. other clothed with
strange apparel, verse. 8. others exercising violence and deceit, verse 9. a
number of Atheists also living among Gods people, ver. 12. For these and the
like causes does the land mourn. It is not the Covenant but the broken
Covenant, it is not the Reformation, but the want of a real and personal
Reformation, that has drawn on the Judgment. Blessed are they who shall keep
their garments clean, and shall be able to say, Psalm. 44.17.
All this is come up on us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely
in thy Covenant.

Thirdly, 3 Use. Psalm. 89.46.
give God the glory of his wisdom, many are now crying, how long Lord will thou
hide thy self for ever? Shall thy wrath burn like fire? Your answer from God
is, that the rod shall be indeed removed, and even cast into the fire in your
stead, but when? it shall be when the Lord has performed his whole work upon
Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem. Isa.1 0 12. If the Judgment have not yet done
all the work it was sent for, Ezech. 15.7.
then they shall go out from on fire, and another fire shall devour them,
says the Lord. God is a wise refiner, and will not take the silver out of the
fire, till the dross be purged away from it. He is a wise Father who will not
cast the rod of correction, till it have driven away all that folly which is
bound up in the hearts of his children. Behold, therefore says the Lord, I
will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem, as they gather silver and brass,
and iron,and lead, and tin into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire
upon it, to melt it: so will I gather you in mine anger, and in my fury, and I
will leave you there, and melt you. He speaks it to those who had escaped the
captivity of Jeboiakim, and also the captivity of Jehoiachin, and thought they
should be safe and secure in Jerusalem, when their brethren were in Babylon, I
will gather you, says the Lord, even in the midst of Jerusalem, and when thou
think you are out of one furnace, you shall fall into another; and if you will
not be refined from your dross, you shall never come out of that furnace, but
I will melt you there, and leave you there, which did so come to pass; for the
residue that escaped to Egypt, and thought to shelter themselves there, as
likewise these that remained in Jerusalem, and held out that siege with
Zedekias, even all these did fall under the sword, and the famine, and the
pestilence, till they were consumed; Jer. 24.8.10. Let those that are longest
spared, take heed they be not ^orest smitten. Say not with Agag, the
bitterness of death is past. The child chast^ed in the afternoon, weeps as
sore as the child chastised in the forenoon. Remember the Lord will not take
away the judgment till he have performed his work; yea his whole work; and
that upon Mount Zion and Jerusalem it self. It is no light matter, the rod must
be very heavy before our uncircumcised heart can be humbled, and the furnace
very hot, before our dross depart from us. We have need of all the ^ore
strokes which we mourn under, and if one less could do the turn it should be
spared, for the Lord does not afflict willingly; we our selves rive every
stroke out of his hand.

But in the fourth and last place, 4 Use.
let us give God the glory of his mercy also, he means to do us good in our
latter end. It is the hand of a father, not of an enemy: It is a refining, not
a consuming fire. Ezekiel. 37. ^^.
The poor mourners in Zion are ready to say, Our bones are dried, and our hope
is lost, we are cut off for our parts: we are like to lie in this fire and
furnace for ever, because our dross is is not departed from us, we are still an
unhumbled, an unbroken, an unmortified generation; yea, many like Ahaz in the
time of affliction trespassing yet more against the Lord, many thinking of
going back again to Egypt. To such I have these two things to say for their
comfort: First, there is a remnant which shall not only be delivered, but
purified, and shall come forth as gold out of the fire. The third part shall be
refined, and the Lord shall say, It is my people, Zach. 13.9. And a most sweet
promise there is after the saddest denunciation of judgment, Ezekiel. 14.22, 23.
Yet behold therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought both sons and
daughters, ^ehold they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way
and their doings, and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have
brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it. And
they shall comfort you when you see their ways and their doing^: and ye shall
know that I have not done without cause all that I have done in it, says the
Lord God. Dan. 12.10. Many shall be purified and made and tried: but the wicked
shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand, Jer. 24.7. After the promise of delivering those that were carried
away to Babylon, there is a another promise added of that which was much better:
I will give an heart to know me that I am thy Lord, and they shall be my
people, and I will be their God, for they shall return unto me with their whole
heart, Psalm. 130.8 He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities, Zebp. 3.12,
13. I will also leave in the mid^ ^ them an afflicted and poor people, and
they shall trust in the name of the Lord. The remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity, not speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their
mouth. Let your souls now apply these and the like promises, and cry, Lord
remember thy promise, and let not a jot of thy good word fall to the ground.

Secondly. as the promises of spiritual and eternal blessings, so the
promises of peace and temporal deliverances, are not legal but even
Evangelicall: If we be not refined and purged as we ought to be, that is a
matter of humiliation to us, but it is also a matter of magnifying the riches
of free mercy, Isa. 48.9, 10, 11. For my Names sake will I defer mine anger,
and for my praise will ^refrain for thee. Behold, I have refined thee, but not
with silver, I have chosen thee in the fornance of affection, for mine own
sake, yea for mine own sake will I do it. The Lord is there arguing with his
people, to humble them, to convince them, and to cut off all matter of glorying
from them. And among other things, left they should glory in this, Bulling
Gualt. and A. cularius on the place.
that what ever they were before, they became afterward as silver refined seven
times in the furnace; Nay, says the Lord, I have refined you in some sort, but
notas silver, not so as that you are clean from your dross: but I have chosen
you, and set my love upon you, even while you are in the furnace not yet
refined: and I will deliver you even for my own names sake, that you may owe
your deliverance for ever to free mercy, and not to your own repentance and
amendment. A land is accepted, and a peoples peace made with God, not by their
repentance and humiliation, but by Christ believed on, Micah 5:5. This man
shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall come into our Land. There were
Sin Offerings, and Burnt-offerings appointed in the Law for a National
atonement, Levit. 4.13.21. Number. 15.25, 26. which did typisie pardoning of
National sins through the merit of Jesus Christ. We must improve the office of
the Mediator, and the promise of free grace, in the behalf of Gods people, as
well as of our own souls, which (if it be indeed done) will not hinder, but
further a great mourning, and deep humiliation in the Land. And so much of
tribulation.

The third thing held forth in this Text (of which I must be very short) is
Mortification: This also is a refining fire, Matthew. 3.11. He shall baptize you
with the holy Ghost and with fire, Mark 9.49. For every one shall be salted
with fire; and every Sacrifice shall be salted with salt. He has been before
speaking of mortification, of the placking out of the right eye, the cuting off
the right hand, or the right foot, Levit. 2.13.
and now he presses the same thing by a double allusion to the Law, there was
a necessity both of fire and salt, the Sacrifice was seasoned with salt, Lev.
6.12, 13.
and the fire upon the Altar was not to be put out, but every morning the wood
was burnt upon it, and the burnt offering laid upon it. So if we will present
our selves as a holy and acceptable Sacrifice to God, we must be seasoned with
the salt, and our corruptions burnt up with the fire of mortification.

The Doctrine shall be this: 4 Doctrine.
It is not enough to join in public Reformation, yea to suffer tribulation for
the name of Christ, except we also endeavor mortification. This mortification
is a third step distinct from the former two; and without this, the other two
can make us but almost Christians, Matthew 13.
or, not far from the Kingdom of God In the parable of the Sower and the seed,
Mark 4.
as we find it both in Matthew, Mark, Luk 8.
and Luke, this method may be observed, That of the four sorts of ground, the
second is better then the first, the third better then the second; but the
fourth only is the good ground, which is fruitful, and gets a blessing.
Some men's hearts are like the high way, and the hard beaten road, where every
soul spirit, and every lust has walked and converted, their consciences
through the custom of sin, are as it were seared with a hot Iron: In these the
Word takes no place, but all that they hear does presently slip from them.
Others receive the Word with a present good affection and delight, but have no
depth of earth, that is, neither having had a work of the Law upon their
consciences for deep humiliation, nor being rooted and grounded in love to the
Gospel, nor paradventure so much as grounded in the knowledge of the truth, nor
having counted their cost, and solidly resolved for sufferings; thereupon it
comes to pass, when suffering times come, these wither away, and come to
nothing. thing. There is a third sort, who go a step further, they have some
root, and some more solid ground then the former, so that they can suffer many
things, and not fall away because of persecution, yet they perish through want
of mortification. One may suffer persecution for Christ, not being sore tried
in that which is his Idol lust, yet enduring great losses and crosses in other
things. Mark 4.19.
Of such it is said, that the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of
riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the Word, and it
becomes unfruitful. Mark that, the lusts of other things, that is, whether it
be the lust of the eyes, or the lust of the flesh, or the pride of life; and he
speaks of the entering in, meaning of some strong tentation coming upon a man to
catch him in that which is the great Idol of his heart, and his beloved lust,
what ever it be, such a tentation he never found before, and therefore thought
the lust had been mortified, which was but lurking. Did not Judas suffer many
things with Christ, during the time of his public Ministry? Did not Ananias
and Saphira suffer for a season, with the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem?
What was it then that lost them? They neither made defection from the
profession of the truth, nor did they fall away because of persecution: But
having shined in the light a sound profession, having also taken up the cross,
and born the reproach of Christ, they make shipwreck at last upon an
unmortified lust.

I shall enlarge the Doctrine nofurther, I Use.
but touch upon some few Uses, and so an end.

First, let all and every one ofus be convinced of the necessity of our further
endeavoring after mortfication. The best silver which comes out of the earth,
has dross in it, and therefore needs the Refiners fire; and the whitest
garment that is worn, will touch some unclean thing or other, and therefore
will need the Fullers soap. The best of Gods children have the dross of their
inherent corruptions to purge away, which made Paul say, I keep under my body,
and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means when I have preached to
others, 1 Cor. 9.27.
I my self should be a castaway. It is a spee^h borrowed from reprobate silver
which is not refined from dross, (...)
and so is the word used by the Septuagints, Isa. 1.22. Thy silver is become
dross. The Apostle therefore sets himself to the study of mortification, lest,
says he, when I have been refining and purifying others, I my self be found to
be drossie silver. And as there is inherent dross, so there is adherent
uncleanness in the best, and who can say, that he has kept his garments so
clean that he is unspotted of the world, Isa 1.27.
or that he has so separate himself from the pollutions of the world, as that
he has touched no unclean thing. So that there is an universal necessity of
making use both of the refiners fire, and of the Fullers soap.

Secondly, 2 Use.
let us once become willing and contented, yea desirous to be thoroughly
mortified. A man's lus^s and corruptions are indeed so strongly interested in
him, that sin is himself, and his corruptions are his members, therefore when we
leave off sin, we are said to live no more to our selves. 2 Cor. 5.15.
And morification is the greatest violence that can be done to nature,
therefore it is called a cutting off of the chief members of the body, Mark
9.43.45.47. a salting with salt, and a burning with fire, ver. 49. a
ciccumcision, Col. 2.11. a crucifying, Romans 6.6. So that nothing can be more
difficult or displeasing; yea, a greater torment to flesh and blood. Yet now
art thou willing, notwithstanding of all this, to take Christ on his own terms,
to take him not only for rightousnesse and life, but to take him as a refiners
fire, and as fullers soap? O that there were such a heart in thee. When Christ
bids thee pluck out thy right eye, and cut off thy right hand, say not in thy
heart, how shall I do without my right eye, and my right hand. Nay thou shall
do well enough, thou shall even enter into life without them, thou shall be a
gainer, and no looser. Say not thou, how shall I go through this refining fire:
fear not, thou shall lose nothing but thy dross. Thus get thy heart wrought to
a willingness, and a condesending, in the point of mortification.

Lastly, 3 Use.
if you say, But after all this, how shall I attain unto it? put thy self in
the hands of Jesus Christ, trust him with the work, if you mark the Text here;
and the verse that follows, Christ is both the refiner, and the refiners
fire: thou shall be refined by him, and thou shall be refined in him. Thou
deceivest thy self if thou think to be refined any other way but by this
refiner, and in this refiners fire. The blood of Christ does! not only wash us
from guilt, but purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God,
Heb. 9.10. and they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. Here you may see the thing is feceable and
attainable, and not only by an Apostle or some extraordinary man, but by all
that are Christ's. Being his and in him, they are enabled through his strength
to crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof.

FINIS.
A Brotherly Examination of some passages of Mr. Colemans late Sermon upon Job
11.20. as it is now Printed and published: By which he has to the great
offense of very many, endeavored to strike at the very root of all Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Government, contrary to the Word of God, the solemn League
and Covenant, other reformed Churches, and the Votes of the Honorable Houses
of Parliament, after advice had with the Reverend and Learned Assembly of
Divines.
I Have before touched this purpose in the third branch of the third
Application of my second Doctrine: and did in my Sermon in the Abbey Church,
express my thoughts of it at some length. But as I was then unwilling to fall
upon such a Controversy so publicly, and especially in a Fast Sermon, if that
which I intend to examine had not been as publikly and upon the like occasion
delivered: So now in the publishing, I have thought good to open my mind,
concerning this thing distinctly, and by itself. That which had been too late
to be preached after Sermon, is not too late to be Printed after Sermon. Others
(upon occasion offered) have given their testimony against his Doctrine; And I
should think my self unfaithful in the Trust put upon me, if upon such an
occasion I should be silent in this business: and I believe no man will think
it strange, that a piece of this nature and strain get an Answer: and I go
about it, without any disrespect either to the person or parts of my Reverend
Brother. Only I must give a testimony to the truth when I hear it spoken
against, and I hope his Objections have made no such impression in any man's
mind, as to make him unwilling to hear an Answer. Come we therefore to the
particulars.

Four rules were offered by the Reverend Brother, as tending to Unity, and to
the healing of the present Controversies about Church Government. But in truth
his cure is worse than the disease: and instead of making any agreement, he is
like to have his hand against every man, and every man's hand against him.

The first Rule was this. Est^blish as few things Jure Divino as can well be.
Which is by Interpretation, as little fine gold, and as much dross as can well
be. Psalm 12.6.
The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times. What you take from the Word of God is fine gold tried in
the fire. Rev. 3.18.
But an holy thing of man's devising is the dross of silver. Can he not be
content to have the dross purged from the silver, except the silver it self be
cast away? The very contrary rule is more sure and safe, which I prove thus.

If it be a sin to diminish or take ought from the Word of God, in so much that
it is forbiden under pain of taking away a man's part out of the Book of Life
and out of the holy City: then as many things as are to be established Jure
Divino, as can well be. But it is a sin to diminish or take ought from the Word
of God, in so much that it is forbiden under pain of taking away a man's part
out of the book of life, and out of the holy City. Therefore as many things are
to be established Jure Divino, as can well be.

It must be remembered withal. 1. That the question is not now whether this or
that form of Church Government be Jure Divino? but whether a Church Government
be Jure Divino? Whether Jesus Christ have thus far revealed his will in his
Word, that there are to be Church Censures, and those to be dispensed by
Church Officers? The Brother is for the Negative of this Question. 2 Neither is
it stood upon by any (so far as I know) that what the Parliament shall
establish concerning Church Government, must be established by them Jure
divino. If the Parliament shall in a Parliamentary and Legislative way
establish that thing which really and in it self is agreeable to the Word of
God, though they do not declare it to be the will of Jesus Christ, I am
satisfied, and I am confident so are others. This I confess, that it is
incumbent to Parliament Men, to Ministers, and to all other Christians,
according to their vocation and interest, to search the Scriptures, and thereby
to info^^ their own and other men's Consciences, so as they may do in faith what
they do in point of Church Government, that is, that they may know they are not
sinning, but doing the will of God: And it ought to be no prejudice nor
exception against a Form of Church Government that many learned and godly
Divines do assert it from Scripture, to be the will of God. And why should Jus
divinum be such a Noli me tangere? The reason was given: This was the only
thing that kindered union in the Assembly, (says he) Two parties came biased,
The Reverend Commissioners from Scotland, were for the Jus Divinum of the
Presbyteriall; The Independents for the Congregationall Government. How should
either move? Where should they both meet? If it was thus, how shall he make
himself blameless, who made union in the Assembly, yet more difficult, because
he came byased a third way, with the Erastian Tenants? And where he asks,
where the Independents and we should meet? I answer, in holding a
Church Government Jure Divino, that is, that the Pastors and Elders ought to
suspend or excommunicate (according to the degree ofthe offense) scandalous
sinners. Who can tell, but the purging of the Church from scandals, and the
keeping of the Ordinances pure (when it shall be actually seen to be the great
thing endeavored on both sides) may make union between us and the Independents
more easy than many imagine. As for his exception against us, who are
Commissioners from the Church of Scotland, Grotii Apologet. cap. 5. Extranci
autem quorum maximus ^sse debu^rat usus in p^ce concilianda, ex partium alicra
erant conqus^sit^. Et infra ^osa mandata externis data damma ionum
Remonstrantium prae se serebant, ut and orationes habitae ante ^aulum cognitam.
The Arminians in their Examen censurae cap. 25 p. 86.^87. hold this as a
necessary qualification of those that are admitted into Synods, that they be
not stricted to any Church, nor to any Confession of Faith.
I thank God its but such, yea not so much as the Arminians di d object against
the forrai^ne Divines who came to the Synod of Dorti. They complained that
those Divines were pre-ingaged and byased in regard of the judgment of those
Churches from which they came: And that therefore they did not help but hinder
union in that Assembly. And might not the Arrians have thus excepted against
Alexander, who was engaged against them before he came to the Council of Nice?
Might not the N^storians have made the same exception against Cyrill, because
he was under an engagement against them, before he came to the Council of
Ephesus? Nay, had not the Jewish. Zealots, the very same objection to make
against Paul and Barnabas, who were engaged (not in the behalf of one Nation,
but of all the Churches of the Gentiles) against the imposition of the
Mosaicall Rites, and had so declared themselves at Antioch, before they came to
the Synod at Jerusalem? Act. 15.2. It Is not fault to be engaged for the truth,
but against the truth: It Is not blameworthy, but praiseworthy to hold fast so
much as we have already attained unto. In our first paper presented to the
Grand Committee.
Nothwithstanding we, for our part, have also from the beginning professed,
That we are most willing to hear and learn from the Word of God, what needs
futher to be reformed in the Church of Scotland?

The second rule which was offered in that Sermon, was this; Let all precepts,
held out as divine Institutions, have clear Scriptures, etc. let the Scripture
speak expressly, (says he.) I answer; The Scripture speaks in that manner,
which seemed fittest to the wisdom of God, that is, so as it must cost us much
searching of the Sripture, as men search for a hid treasure, before we find out
what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God concerning the
Government of his Church. Will any Divine in the world deny that it is a divine
truth, which by necessary consequence is drawn from Scripture, as well as that
which in express words and syllables is written in Scripture? Are not diverse
Articles of our profession, for instance the Baptism of Infants necessarily
and certainly proved from Scripture, although it make no express mention
thereof in words and syllables? But let us hear what he has said concerning
some Scriptures (for he names but two of them) upon which the Acts of
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Government have been grounded. That place, 1 Cor.
5. takes not hold (says he) on my conscience for excommunication, and I admire
that Mat. 18. so should upon any. It Is strange that he should superciliously
pass them over without respect to so great a cloud of witnesses in all the
Reformed Churches, or without so much as offering any answer at all to the
arguments which so many learned and godly Divines of old and of late have drawn
from these places for excommunication; which if he had done, he should not want
a Reply. In the meantime, he intermixeth a politic consideration into this
debate of divine right. I could never yet see (says he) how two coordinate
governments exempt from superiority and inferioritie, can be in one State. I
suppose he has seen the coordinate Governments of a General, and of an
Admiral; or if we shall come lower, the Governments of parents over their
children, and masters over their servants, though it fall often out, that he
who is subject to one man as his master, is subject to another man as his
father. In one ship there may be two coordinate Governments, the Captain
governing the Soldiers, the Master governing the Mariners. In these and such
like cases, you have two coordinate governments, when the one Governor is not
subordinate to the other. There is more subordination in the Ministers and
other Church Officers toward the civil Magistrate. For the Ministers of Christ
must be in subjection to the Magistrate; and if he be not, he is punishable by
the Law of the Land as well as any other Subject. The persons and estates of
Church Officers and all that they have in this world is subject to civil
Authority. But that which is Chri^s and not ours, the royal prerogative of
the King of Saints, in governing of his Church, according to his own will, is
not subject to the pleasure of any man living. But the Reverend Brother might
well have spared this. It isnot the Independency of the Church Government upon
the civil Government, which he intended to speak against. It is the very thing
it self, a Church Government, as is manifest by his other two rules.

I come therefore to his next, which is the third rule, Lay no more ^urthen of
government upon the shoulders of Ministers, then Christ has plainly laid upon
them. He means none at all, as is manifest not only by his fourth rule, where
he says, that he finds no institution of other Governments beside Magistracy,
but also by the next words, The Ministers have other work to do, says he, and
such as will take up the whole man: He might have added this one word more,
that without the power of Church Government, when Ministers have done all that
ever they can, they shall not keep themselves nor the Ordinances from
pollution. Before I proceed any further, let it be remembered when he excludes
Ministers from Government: First, it is from spiritual or ecclesiastical
Government, for the question is not of civil Government. Secondly, he excludes
ruling Elders too, and therefore ought to have mentioned them with the
Ministers, as those who are to draw the same yoke together, rather then to tell
us of an innate enmity between the Clergy and the Laity. The keeping up of the
names of the Clergy and Laity savoureth more of a domineering power, then any
thing the Brother can charge upon Presbyteries. Bellarm. de Cler. l. 3. c. 1.
It is a point of Controversy between Bellarmine and those that writ against
him, he holding up, and they crying down those names, because the Christian
people are the (...) the heritage of the Lord, as well as the Ministers. Thus
much by the way of that distinction of names. And for the thing it self, to
object an innate enmity between the Ministers of the Gospel and those that are
not Ministers, is no less then a dishonouring and aspersing of the Christian
Religion. To return, you see his words tend to the taking away of all
Church Government out of the hands of Church Officers. Now may we know his
reasons? He fetches the ground of an Argument out of his own heart; I have a
heart (faith he) that knews better how to be governed, then govern. I wish his
words might hold true in a sense of plyablenesse and yielding to Government.
How he knows to govern I know not; but it should seem in this particular he
knows not how to be governed: For after both Houses of Parliament have
concluded, That many particular Congregations shall be under one Presbyteriall
Government; he still acknowledges no such thing as Presbyteriall Government. I
dare be bold to say, He is the first Divine in all the Christian world that
ever advised a State to give no government to Church Officers, after the State
had resolved to establish Presbyterian Government. But let us take the strength
of his Argument as he pretends it. He means not of an humble p^iablenesse and
subjection (for that should ease him from his fear of an ambitious ensnarement,
and so were contrary to his intention) but of a sinful infirmity and ambition
in the heart, which makes it fitter for him and others to be kept under the
yoke, then to govern. And thus his Argumentation runs, Might I measure others
by my self, and I know not why I may not (God fashions men's hearts alike; and
as in water face answers face, so the heart of man to man)I ingeniously
profess, I have a heart that knows better how to be governed, then govern: I
fear an ambitious ensnarement, and I have cause; I see what raised Prelacy and
Papacy to such a height, etc. The two Scriptures will not prove what he would.
The first of them, Psalm. 33.15. He fashioneth their hearts alike, gives him no
ground at all, except it be the homonomy of the English word alike, which in
this place notes nothing else but (...), all men's hearts are alike in this,
that God fashioneth them all, and therefore knows them all aeque or alike
(that is the scope of the place. (...) una simul From (...) u^ire.
) The Hebrew Jachad is used in the same sense, Ezra 4.3. We our selves together
will build; they mean not they will all build in the like fashion, or in the
same manner, but that they will build all of them together, one as well as
another. So Psalm. 2.2. The rulers take counsel together, Jer. 46.12, they are
fallen both together. The other place, Prove. 27.19. if you take it word by word
as it is in the Hebrew is thus, As in water faces to faces, so the heart of man
to man. Our Translators add the word answers, but the Hebrew will suffer the
negative reading, As in waters faces answer not to faces. The Septuagints read,
As faces are not like faces, so neither are the hearts of men alike. The
Chaldee paraphrase thus, As waters and as countenances which are not like one
another, so the heart of the sons of men are not alike. Thus does Master
Cartwright in his judicious Commentary give the sense, As in the water face
does not answer fully to face, but in some sort, so there may be a conjecture,
but no certain knowledge of the heart of man. Maldonat and Mercerus.
But let the Text be read affirmatively, not negatively, what shall be the
sense? Some take it thus, A man's heart may be someway seen in his countenance,
as a face in the water. Melanchton.
Others thus, As a face in the water is various and changeable to him that
looks upon it, so is the heart of man inconstant to a friend that trusts in
him. Jansenius Diodati. D. Jermin.
Others thus, As a man sees his own face in the water, so he may see himself
in his own heart or conscience. Others thus, As face answers face in the
water, so he that looks for a friendly affection from others, must show it in
himself. It will never be proved that any suchthing is intended in that place,
as may warrant this argumentation: There is such a particular corruption in one
man's heart, for instance, Ambition, which makes him unfit to be trusted with
Government; therefore the same corruption is in all other men's hearts: even as
the face in the water answers the face out of the water so just, that there
is not a spot or blemish in the one but it is in the other. I am sure Pan!
taught us not so, when he said, In lowliness of mind let each esteem other
better then themselves, Phil. 2.3. Nay, the Brother himself ha^h taken off the
edge of his own Argument (if it had any) in his Epistle printed before his
Sermon, where speaking of his Brethren, from whose judgment he dissenteth in
point of Government, he has these words, Whose wisdom and humility (I speak it
confidently) may safely be trusted with as large a share of Government as they
themselves desire. Well, but suppose now the same corruption to be in other
men's hearts, that they are in great danger of an ambitious insnarement, if they
be trusted with Government. Is this corruption only in the hearts of
Ministers, or is it in the hearts of all other men? I suppose he will say in
all men's hearts; and then his Argument will conclude against all civil
Government. Last of all, admit that there be just fears of abusing the Power
and Government Ecclesiastical; let the persons to be entrusted with it be
examined, and the power it self bounded according to the strictest rules of
Christ. Let abuses be prevented, reformed, corrected. The abuse cannot take
away the use, where the thing it self is necessary. Why might he not have
satisfied himself without speaking against the thing it self. Once indeed he
seems to recool, and faith, Only I would have it so bounded, that it might
be said, Hitherto shall thou come, and here shall thou stay thy proud waves;
yet by and by he passes his own bounds, and totally renounceth the Government
to the civil Power, which I shall speak to anon. But I must first ask, Whence
is this fear of the proud swelling waves of Presbyteriall Government? where
have they done hurt? Was it upon the coast of France, or upon the coast of
Holland, or upon the coast of Scotland? or where was it? Or was the dashing
upon Terra in cognita? He that would forewarn men to beware of Presbyteriall
usurpations, (for so the Brother speaking to the present Controversy about
Church Government must be apprehended) and to make good what he ^aith, falls
upon the stories of Pope Paul the 5. and of the Bishop of Canterbury, is not a
little wide from the mark. I should have expected some examples of evils and
mischiefs which Presbyteriall Government has brought upon other reformed
Churches.

Well, the Reverend Brother has not done, but he proceeds thus; I^n as the
King of Sodomes speech to Abraham, Give me the persons, ta^eth ^ the goods; So
say I, Give us Doctrine, take you the Government as (...) said: Right Honourab.
c, give me leave to make this request in the behalf of the Ministry, give us
two things and we shall do well; 1 Give us earning; And 2 Give us a competency.

This calls to ^inde a Story which Clemens Alexandrinus tells us; Paedag. lib.
2. cap. 12.
When one had painted Helena with much gold, Apelles looking upon it, Friend,
(says he) when you could not make her fair, you have made her rich; Learning
and competency do enrich: The Jesuits have enough of both, but that which
makes a visible Ministerial Church to be beautiful as Tirzah, comely as
Jerusalem: That which makes fair the outward face of a Church, is Government
and Discipline, the removing of scandals, the preserving of the Ordinances from
pollution. He had spoken more for the honor of God, and for the power of
godliness, if he had said this in the behalf of the Ministry, It were better
for us to want competency and helps to learning, then to partake with other
men's sins, by admitting the scandalous and profane to the Lords Table; his way
which he advises, will perhaps get ^s an able Ministry, and procure us honor
enough, as he speaks, but (sure) it can neither preserve the purity, nor
advance the power of Religion, because it puts no black mark upon
profaneness and scandal in Church Members, more then in any others: The King
of Sodoms Speech cannot serve his turn, except it be turned over, and then it
will serve him as just as any thing, thus, Give us the goods, take you the
persons, (or the souls, as the He^rew and the Chaldee has it) Give us a
competency, says he, here he asks the goods, Take you the Government, here
he quitteth the persons or souls to be governed only by the civil power;
however, as at that time Abraham would take nothing that was not his own,
insomuch as he answered the King of Sodom, Genesis 14.23.
I will not take from a thread, even to a shoe latchet, and I will not take any
thing that is thine: So this Parliament, I trust, shall be so counseled and
guided of the Lord, that they will leave to the Church, what is the Churches,
or rather to Christ what is Christ's: Verse. 32.
And as A^raham had lift up his hand to the most high God, to do that; so have
the Honorable Houses, with hands lifted up to the most high God, promised to
do this.

And now seeing I have touched upon the Covenant, I wish the Reverend Brother
may seriously consider, whether he has not violated the Oath of God, in
advising the Parliament to lay no burden of Government upon Church Officers,
but to take the Government of the Church wholly into their own hands. In the
first Article of the solemn League and Covenant, there is thrice mention made
of the Government of the Church; and namely, That we shall endeavor the
Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, and the
example of the best reformed Churches. Where observe, 1. The extirpation of
Church Government is not the Reformation of it. The second Article is indeed of
things to be extirpated; but this of things to be preserved and reformed.
Therefore, as by the Covenant Prelacy was not to be reformed, but to be
abolished: so by the same Covenant Church Government was not to be abolished,
but to be reformed. 2. Church Government is mentioned in the Covenant as a
Spiritual, not a Civil thing. The matters of Religion are put together;
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government: The Privileges of Parliament
come after, in the third Article. 3. That Clause, according to the Word of God,
implies, that the Word of God holds forth such light unto us, as may guide
and direct us in the Reformation of Church Government. 4. And will the Brother
say, that the example of the best reformed Churches leads us his way, that
is, To have no Church Government at all distinct from the Civil Government?


And so much concerning his third Rule.

The fourth was this: A Christian Magistrate, as a Christian Magistrate, is a
Governor in the Church. And who denies this? The Question is, Whether there
ought to be no other Government in the Church, beside that of the Christian
Magistrate. That which he drives at, is, That the Christian Magistrate should
leave no power of Spiritual Censures to the Elderships. He would have the
Magistrate to do like the rich man in the Parable, who had exceeding many
Flocks and Herds, and yet did take away the little ewe-lamb from the poor man,
who had nothing save that. The Brother says, Of other Governments besides
Magistracy, I find no institution; of them I d^, Romans 13.1, 2. I am sor^y he
sought no better, else he had found more. Subjection and obedience is
commanded, as due, not only to Civil, but to Spiritual Governors, to those
that are over us in the Lord, 1 These. 5.12. So 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that
ru^e well, be counted worthy of double honor. Heb. 13.7. Remember them which
have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the Word of God. Verse. 17. Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for
your souls. And what understands he by him that rules, R^m. 12.8? If the
judgment of Gua^ther and Bullinger have any weight with him (as I suppose it
has) they do not there exclude, but take in, under that word, the ruling
Officers of the Church.

But now in the close, let the Reverend Brother take heed he has not split
upon a Rock, and taken from the Magistrate more then he has given him. He
says, Christian Magistrates are to manage their Office under Christ, and for
Christ. Christ has placed governments in his Church, 1 Cor. 12.28, etc. I
find all Government given to Christ, and to Christ as Mediator (I desire all
to consider it) Ephesians. 1.3. last verse. and Christ as Head of these given to the
Church. If this be good Divinity, then I am sure it will be the hardest task
which ever he took in hand, to uphold and assert the Authority either of Pagan
or Christian Magistrates.

First, he lets the Pagan or Infidel Magistrate fall to the ground, as an
Usurper who has no just title to reign, because all Government is given to
Christ and to him as Mediator: But which way was the Authority of Government
derived from Christ, and from him as Mediator, to a Pagan Prince or Emperor?

Next, he will make it to fare little better with the Christian Magistrate: For
if the Christian Magistrate be the Vicegerent of Christ, and of Christ as
Mediator; and if he be to manage his office under and for Christ; then the
Reverend Brother must either prove from Scripture, that Christ, as Mediator,
has given such a Commission of Vice-gerent-ship and Deputy-ship to the
Christian Magistrate; or otherwise acknowledge that he has given a most
dangerous wound to Magistracy, and made it an empty title, claiming that power
which it has no warrant to assume.

God and Nature has made Magistrates, and given them great Authority: But from
Christ as Mediator they have it not.

I find in Scripture, that Church Officers have their power from Christ as
Mediator, and they are to manage their Office under and for Christ, and in the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ do we assemble our selves together, Matthew. 18.
20. in his Name do we preach, Luke 24.47. Acts 4.17, 18. and 5.28.44. and 9.27.
In his Name do we baptize, Act. 2.38. and 4.12, 16. and 19.5. In his Name do we
excommunicate, 1 Cor. 5.5. But I do not find in Scripture that the Magistrate
is to rule, or to make Laws, or to manage any part of his Office in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ. And as the Mediator has not any where given such a
Commission and power to the Magistrate: so, as Mediator, he had it not to give:
For he was not made a Judge in Civil affairs, Luke 12.14 and his Kingdom is not
of this world, Job. 18.36. How can that power which Christ as Mediator has not
received of the Father, be derived from Christ to the Christian Magistrate? I
know that Christ, as he is the eternal Son of God, and thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, does with the Father and the holy Ghost reign and rule
over all the Kingdoms of the sons of men. He that is Mediator, being God, has,
as God, all power in heaven and earth, (and this power was given to him, Matthew.
28.18. both by the eternal Generation, and by the declaration of him to be the
Son of God with power, when he was raised from the dead, Romans 1.4. even as he
said to be begotten, when he was raised again, Act. 13.33. he had relinquished
and laid aside his Divine Dominion and Power, when he had made himself in the
form of a servant; but after his Resurrection it is gloriously manifested.) And
so he that is Mediator, being God, has power to subdue his and his Churches
enemies, and to make his foes his footstool. Religion^s Christianae b^evis
Institutio, ^nno, 1634. ca. 23. Qud ^st regium munus? Ref. Est munus ipsi a Deo
commissum omnes creaturas intelligentia praeditas, as imprimis homines and ex
iis collectam, summa c^in auctoritate (...) potestate gubernandi. Iac. Martini
Synops. relig. Photin. cap. 23 (...) non negomus Christo jam ad dextr^m Dei
sedenti subjecta esse omnia, inimicosque ipsi subjici^ (...) siab ellum pedum
suorum, etc. Praprie tamen d^citur Rex suae Ecc^esiae, uti etiam Ecclesia,
proprie Joquendo ejus regnum est Sic enim de ipso vat cinatus est Zecharias,
cap. 9. v 9. etc. Vnde (...) cum Me^e^r ferro osstium Christi Regium defiaimus,
quo Christus ciues suos Verbi (...) vio usque ad mundi fiacra colligit, consque
praeclaris donis ornat, contra hosts (in quorum medio domitatur) sortiter
defendis, as ^and^ aeterna gloria and honor coronat. Fr. Gomar. Aral. prop.
Obad. verse ult. Is autem Jesus Christus, in N.T. exhibitus Rex. Qui ut cum
Patre habet (...) generale omnipotentiae: it a habet speciale, de quo bic
agitur, mediationis.
But as Mediator he is only the Churches King, Head and Governor, and has no,
other Kingdom. The Phatinians have defined the Kingly Office of Christ thus. It
is an Office committed to him by God, to govern with the highest authority and
power all creatures endued with understanding, and especially men, and the
Church gathered of them. But those that have written against them have
corrected their definition in this particular, because Christ is properly King
of his Church only.

As for those two Scriptures which the Brother cites, they are extremely
misapplied. He cites. 1 Cor. 12.28, to prove that Christ has placed Civil
Governments in his Church. If by the Governments or Governors there mentioned,
be understood the Civil Magistrates; yet that place says not that Christ has
placed them, but that God has done it.

Next, the Apostle speaks of such Governors as the Church had at that time; but
at that time the Church had no godly nor Christian Magistrates. This is Calvin's
argument, whereby he proves that Ecclesiastical, not Civil Governors, are
there meant.

Thirdly, I ask, How can we conceive that Civil Government can come into the
Catalogue of Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Administrations? for such are all the
rest there reckoned forth.

Lastly, the Brother, after second thoughts, may think he has done another
disservice to the Magistrate, in making the Magistracy to be below and behind
the Ministry. The Apostle puts them in this order: God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that
Miracles, then gifts of Healings, Helps, Governments, etc. How makes the
Brother this to agree with his Interpretation?

Next, he cites Ephesians. 1.21, 22, 33. to prove that all Government is given to
Christ, and to him as Mediator; and Christ, as head of these, given to the
Church. But this place makes more against him then for him: for the Apostle
says not that Christ is given to the Church as the Head of all Principalities
and Powers. The Brother says so; and in saying so, he makes Christ a Head to
those that are not of his Body.

The Apostle says far otherwise, that God gave Christ to be the Head over all
things to the Church, which is his Body; which the Syriack reads more
plainly, And him who is over all, he gave to be the Head to the Church. He is a
Head to none but the Church: but he who is Head to the Church is over all, God
l^^sed forever, Romans 9.5. yea, even as man, he is over or above all. The very
Humane nature of Christ which was raised from the dead, being set at the right
hand of the Majesty of God, is exalted to a higher degree of honor and glory,
then either man or Angel ever was, or ever shall be: So that he that is Head of
the Church, is over all, because he does not only excel his own members, but
excel all creatures that ever God made. It is one thing to say that Christ is
exalted to a dignity, excellency, preeminence, majesty, and glory, far above
all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion: Another thing to say that
Christ is head of all Principalities and Governments, and as Mediator
excerciseth his Kingly Office over these. The Apostle says the former, but not
the latter.

Shall I need to illustrate this distinction? Is there any thing more known in
the world? Will any say, that he who excels other men in dignity, splendour,
honor, and glory, must therefore reign and rule over all those whom he thus
excels?

The Apostle says indeed, in another sense, that Christ is the Head of all
Principality and Power, Col. 2.10. But that is spoken of Christ not as he is
Mediator, but only as he is God: And the Apostles meaning in those words is
nothing but this; That Christ is true God, says Tosanus; That he is
Omnipotent, says Gualther; That he, being the natural Son of God, is together
with the Father Lord of all things, says Bullinger.

That this is the meaning, will soon appear: 1. From the scope of the place,
which is to teach the Colossians not to worship Angels, because they are but
servants, and the Son of God is their Lord and Head. 2. The Apostle expounds
himself, how Christ is the Head of all Principality and power, Col. 1.15, 16,
17. Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:
For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in the
earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, ord^minions, or
principalities or powers: All things were created by him, and for him; and he
is before all things, and by him all things consist. Now all this is without
controversy, to be understood, not of the Office, but of the Person of Jesus
Christ; not of his governing and Kingly Office, as he is Midiator, but to prove
that he is true and very God. Therefore Beza, Zanchius, Gualther, Bullinger,
T^ssanus, M. Bayne, and diverse other Interpreters upon the place, do generally
agree, that the Apostle, verse. 15.16, 17, speaks of the dignity and excellency
of the Person of Jesus Christ, proving him to be true God; and that verse. 17.
he comes to speak of his Office, as he is Mediator: And be is the Head of the
Body, the Church, etc. So that we may distinguish a twofold Headship of Jesus
Christ. One, in regard of his Godhead; and so he is Head of all Principality
and Power: Another in regard of his Office of Mediatorship; and so he is Head
of the Church only. The present Question is of the later, not of the former.
The former is common to the Son of God, with the Father and the holy Ghost: The
latter is proper to Christ God and man. The former shall continue for ever: The
latter shall not continue for ever. The former does not necessarily suppose the
latter; but the latter does necessarily suppose the former. Christ can reign as
God, though he reign not as Mediator; but he cannot reign as Mediator, and not
reign as God. The object of the former is every creature: the object of the
latter is the Church gathered out of the world.


This digression concerning the Headship of Jesus Christ, may for the future
prevent diverse Objections. So I shall return.

And now (I desire all to consider it) there is not one word in those three
last verses of Ephesians. 1. P. Martyr. loccom class 2. cap. 17 p. 293. regnare
interdum accipi quasi sit, excellere, eminere prae caeteris, and summum locum
tenere. Ac ista significatione Christus perpetuo regnabit. Sin vero dicamus
regnare idom quod officia Regis exercere, etc. Christus non semper reguabit
Zanchius in Ephesians. 1.271. expounds the latter part of that verse of the eternity
of Christ's Kingd^me: but he adds, F^^crit regnand. hoc modo quo j^^; egnat,
tanquam Mediator.
which will give any ground for that which the Brother with so much confidence
averreth. Verse. 21. affords this Argument against him. The Honor and Dignity
of Jesus Christ there spoken of, has place not only in this world, but in
that which is to come. But the Kingdom and Government which is given to Christ
as Mediator, shall not continue in the world to come (for when Christ has put
his enemies under his feet, he shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and
reign no longer as Mediator, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25.) Therefore the Government given
to Christ, as he is Mediator, cannot be meant in that place, but the
dignifying, honoring, preferring and exalting of Christ, to a higher degree of
glory then either man or Angel.

Come on now, and see whether verse. 22. makes any whit more for him; He has
put all things under his feet; that is, says Zanchius, all things but the
Church, which is his Body. But this must be meant in respect of the Decree and
foreknowledge of God, as Hierome expounds the place; and so does the Scripture
expound it self, Heb. 2.8. But now we see not yet all things put under him.
1.15.25. He must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet. Acts
2.34, 35 Sit thou on my right hand till I make thy foes thy footstool. Now when
Christ shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, and shall put
his enemies under his feet; then he shall cease to reign any more as Mediator
(which I have even now proved:) But before that be done, he reigns as Mediator.
So that it can never be proved, that the meaning of these words, He has put
all things under his feet, is, That all Government in this world is given to
Christ as Mediator: And whoever says so, must needs acknowledge, that Christ's
exercising of government (as he is Mediator) over all Principalities and
Powers, shall continue after all things shall be put under his feet; Or that
Christ shall not govern as Mediator, till all things be put under his feet;
which is so contrary to the Apostles meaning, that Christ shall then cease to
reign as Mediator.

The next words, And he gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church,
do furnish another Argument against him. Christ's Headship and his Government as
Mediator, are commensurable, and of an equal extent. Christ is a Head to none
but to his Church: Therefore no Government is given to him as Mediator, but the
Government of his Church.

The last verse does further confirm that which I say: For the Apostle
continuing his speech of the Church, says, Which is his Body, the fullness of
him that f^lleth all in all. He calls the Church Christ fullness, in reference
to his Headship, that which makes him full and complete so far as he is a Head
or King: Having his Church fully gathered, he has his complete Kingdom, his
perfect Body; and this being done, he wants nothing, so far as he is Mediator.
So that the holy Ghost does here as it were on purpose anticipate this Opinion,
lest any should think all C^^^l Government is given to Christ as Mediator.
Though, as God, he fills heaven and earth; yet, as Mediator, his filling of
all in all extends no further then his Body, his Church* which is therefore
called his fullness.

Finally, to avoid the mistake of this place, and upon the whole matter; let
these three things be well distinguished, in the Mediator Jesus Christ. 1. His
(...) or (...) his eminence and highness in respect of the glory and majesty
he is exalted to, far above whatsoever is highest among all the creatures. 2.
His (...) the power, by which he can, and does by degrees, and will more and
more subdue his and his Churches enemies, and dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel, and break them with a rod of Iron. 3. His (...), his Kingly
Power, by which he exercises acts of Government. These three are distinguished
in an earthly King, the first two being of a larger extent then the third. The
conclusion of that prayer which our Lord taught his disciples, does distinguish
the same three in God. Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory. Now
these being distinguished in the Mediator Jesus Christ, I conclude with these
three distinct Assertions (the truth whereof I hope I have made to appear.) 1.
As Mediator, he is exalted and dignified above all creatures, and his glory is
above all the earth. 2. As Mediator, he exercises acts of divine power and
omnipotency over all creatures, in the behalf of, and for the good of his
Church, and restrains, or diverteth, or destroys all his Churches enemies.
3. As Mediator, he is King, Head, and Governor to none but his Church: Neither
was all Government put in his hand, but the Government of the Church only.

I could enlarge my self further against that most dangerous Principle, That
all Government, even that which is Civil, is given to Christ, and to him as
Mediator. But let these things suffice for the present. The Reverend Brothers
opinion will find better entertainment among the Jews, who expect a Temporal
Monarchy of the Messiah; and among Papists, who desire to uphold the Popes
Temporal Authority over Kings, as Christ's Vicegerent upon earth.

Die Iovis 28. Aug. 1645.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr Gillespie
who preached yesterday before their Lordships in the Ab'ey Church Westminster,
it being the day of the public Fast, is hereby thanked for his great pains he
took in the said Sermon: And desired to Print and publish the same, which is
only to be done by Authority under his hand.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

I Appoint Robert Bostock to Print this Sermon.

Geo. Gillespie.

FINIS.

