AARONS ROD BLOSSOMING.

OR, The Divine Ordinance of Church Government VINDICATED, So as the present
Erastian Controversy concerning the distinction of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, Excommunication, and Suspension, is fully debated and discussed,
from the holy Scripture, from the Jewish and Christian Antiquities, from the
consent of latter Writers, from the true nature and rights of Migistracy, and
from the groundlesnesse of the chief Objections made against the Presbyteriall
Government in point of a domineering arbitrary unlimited power.

By George Gillespie Minister at Edinburgh.

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government
shall be upon his shoulder. Isaiah 9. 6.

Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.
17.

And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, for God is not
the Author of confusion but of peace. 1 Cor. 14 32, 33.

August. lib. contra Donatistas post collationem, Cap. 4. Ne forte aut
indisciplinata patientia foveat iniquitatem, aut impatiens disciplina dissipet
unitatem.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by E. G. for Richard Whitaker, at the sign of the Kings Arms
in Paul's Church yard. 1646.

TO THE Reverend and Learned Assembly of DIVINES Convened at WESTMINSTER.
Right Reverend,

THough many faithful servants of God did long ago desire to see those things
which we see, and to hear those things which we hear; Yet it has been one of
the special mercies reserved for this Generation, and denied to the times of
our Ancestors, that Divines of both Kingdoms within this Island, should be
gathered and continued together, to consult peaceably and freely concerning a
Reformation of Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government. It Is
a mercy yet greater, that two Nations formerly at so great a distance in the
form of public Worship and Churchgovernment, should (to their mutual comfort
and happiness, and to the further endearing of each to other) through the good
hand of God be now agreed upon one Directory of Worship, and with a good
progress advanced, as in one Confession of Faith, so likewise in one form of
Church Government. For all which, as the other Reformed Churches, (in regard of
their common interest in the Truth and Ordinances of Christ) so especially your
Brethren in the Church of Scotland are your debtors: Your name is as precious
Oynment among them, and they do esteem you very highly in love for your
works sake. A work, which as it is extraordinary and unparalleld, requiring a
double portion of the Spirit of your Master, so You have very many Hearts and
Prayers going along with you in it, that the pleasure of the Lord may prosper
in your hand.

As for my Reverend Colleagues and my self, it has been a good part of our
happiness that we have been partakers of, and Assistants in your grave and
learned Debates. Yet (as we declared from our first coming amongst you,) we
came not hither presuming to prescribe any thing unto You, but willing to
receive as well as to offer light, and to debate matters freely and fairly
from the Word of God, the common Rule both to you and us. As herein You were
pleased to give testimony unto us in one of your Letters to the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, so the great respects which in other things
and at other times you have expressed, both toward that Church from which we
are entrusted, and particularly toward our selves, do call for a return of
all possible and public testimonies of gratitude. For which purpose, I do
for my part take hold of this opportunity. I know that I owe much more unto
You, then I have either ability to pay, or Elocution to set forth. Yet although
I cannot retaliate your Favors, nor render that which may be worthy of your
selves; I beseech you to accept this part of my retribution of respects. I do
offer and entitle unto You this Enucleation of the Erastian Controversy, which
is Dignus vindice nodus. I hope here is a word in season concerning it. Others
might have done better, but such furniture as I had, I have brought to the
work of the Tabernacle. I submit what is mine unto your greater learning and
better judgment, and shall ever continue

Yours to serve you,

GEO. GILLESPIE.

To the Candid Reader.
I Have often and heartily wished that I might not be distracted by nor engaged
into polemick Writings, of which the World is too full already, and from which
many more learned and idoneous have abstained; and I did accordingly resolve
that in this Controversall age I should be slow to write, swift to read and
learn. Yet there are certain preponderating reasons which have made me
willing to be drawn forth into the light upon this subject. For beside the
desires and solicitations of diverse Christian friends, lovers of truth and
peace, seriously calling upon me for an answer to Mr Prynne his Vindication of
his four Questions concerning Excommunication and Suspension, the grand
importance of the Erastian controversy, and the strong influence which it has
into the present juncture of asfaires, does powerfully invite me.

Among the many Controversies which have disquieted and molested the Church of
Christ, those concerning Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline are not the
least, but among the chief, and often managed with the greatest animosity and
eagerness of spirit, whence there have grown most dangerous divisions and
breaches, such as this day there are, and for the future are to be expected,
unless there shall be (through Gods mercy) some further composing and healing
of these Church-consuming distractions: which if we shall be so happy as once
to obtain, it will certainly contribute very much toward the accommodation of
civil and State-shaking differences. And contrariwise, if no healing for the
Church, no healing for the State. Let the Gallio's of this time (who care for
no intrinsecall evil in the Church) promise to themselves what they will,
surely he that shall have cause to write with Nicolaus de Clemangis, a Book of
lamentation de corrupto Ecclesiae statu, will find also cause to write with
him de lapsu and reparatione Justitiae. As the thing is of high concernment to
these so much disturbed and divided Churches, so the elevation is yet higher by
many degrees; This controversy reaches up to the Heavens, and the top of it
is above the clouds. It does highly concern Jesus Christ himself, in his
glory, royal prerogative, and kingdom, which he has and exercises as
Mediator and Head of his Church. The Crown of Jesus Christ, or any part,
privilege, or pendicle thereof must needs be a noble and excellent Subject.
This truth that Jesus Christ is a King, and has a Kingdom and government in
his Church, distinct from the kingdoms of this World, and from the civil
Government, has this commendation and character above all other truths, that
Christ himself suffered to the death for it, and sealed it with his blood. For
it may be observed from the story of his Passion, Luke 23. 3. John 18. 33, 36
37.
this was the only point of his accusation, which was confessed and avouched
by himself, Luke 23. 2. John 19. 12, 15.
was most aggravated, prosecuted, and driven home by the Jews, Joh. 19. 12, 13
was prevalent with Pilate as the cause of condemning him to die, and d John
19. 19.
was mentioned also in the superscription upon his cross. And although in
reference to God, and in respect of satisfaction to the Divine justice for our
sins, his death was (...) a price of redemption, yet in reference to men who
did persecute, accuse, and condemn him, his death was (...), a Martyrs
Testimony to seal such a truth. This Kingly Office of Jesus Christ (as well as
his Prophetical) is administered and exercised, not only inwardly and
invisibly by the working of his Spirit in the souls of particular persons, but
outwardly also and visibly in the Church, as a visible political ministerial
body, in which he has appointed his own proper Officers, Ambassadors, Courts,
Laws, Ordinances, Censures, and all these administrations, to be in his own
name, as the only King and Head of the Church. This was the thing which Herod
and Pilate did, and many Princes, Potentates, and States do look upon, with
so much fear and jealousy, as another Government coordinate with the civil.
But what was dark upon the one side to them, has been light upon the other
side to those servants of Jesus Christ who have stood, contended, and sometime
suffered much for the Ordinance of Church Government and Discipline, which they
looked upon as a part of Christ's Kingdom. So De regno Christi lib. 1. cap 4
Non d^fuerunt quoque intra ^os triginta annos, praesertim in Germania, qui
videri voluerunt just^m Evangelii praedi (...) (...) etc. v^um perpauci adhuc
repei ti sunt qui se Christi Evangelio and regno emuino subj^cissent: imo qui
passi fuissent Christi religionem and Ecclesia^um Disciplinam restitui per
omnia juxta leges Regis nostri. Et infra In Hungaria, gratia Domino, non-paucae
jam existunt Ecclesiae quae cum p^a Christi doctrina, s^lidam etiam ejus
discipl^nam receperunt, custodiunique religiose. Rex noster Christus saxit ut
^arum Ecclesiarum exemplunt quam plurimae sequantur.
Bucer. So De polit. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 2. Politeia Ecclesiastica est pars
regni Christi.
Parker. So M John Welseh his Letter to the Lady Fleemming, written from his
prison at Blackness in January 1616. Who am I that he should first have called
me and then constituted me a Minister of glad things, of the Gospel of
salvation these fifteen years already, and now last of all to be a sufferer
for his cause and kingdom, to witness that good confession that Jesus Christ
is the King of Saints, and that his Church is a most free Kingdom, yea as free
as any Kingdom under Heaven, not only to convocate hold and keep her
meetings, conventions, and assemblies, but also to judge of all her affairs,
in all her meetings and conventions, among his Members and Subjects! These two
points, that Christ is the head of his Church, Secondly that she is free in her
government from all other Jurisdiction except Christ's; these two points are the
special cause of our imprisonment, being now convict as traitors for
maintaining thereof. We have been waiting with joyfulnesse to give the last
testimony of our blood in confirmation thereof, if it would please our God to
be so favorable as to honor us with that dignity. Thus he.
M. Welseh my countreyman of precious memory, who suffered much for the same
truth, and was ready to seal it with his blood. Beside diverse others who might
be named, especially learned Didoclavius in his Altar Damascenum Cap. 1. and
throughout.

I am not ignorant that some have an evil eye upon all government in a Nation,
distinct from civil Magistracy, and if it were in their power they would have
all Anti-Erastians (and so consequently both Presbyterians and Independents)
looked upon as guilty of Treason, at least, as violaters of, and encroachers
upon the rights and privileges of Magistracy, in respect of a distinct
Ecclesiastical government. And indeed it is no new thing for the most
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ to be reproached and accused as guilty of
Treason, which was not only the lot of M. Calderwood, and (as has been now
showed) of M. Welsch, and those that suffered with him, Discourse of the
troubles at Frankeford first published in the year 1575 and reprinted at
London in the year 1641. page 37.
but of M. Knox before them, as likewise of many Martyrs and confessors, and
Acts 17. 6, 7.
of the Apostles themselves. Yet (if we will judge righteous judgment, and
weigh things in a just balance) we do not rob the Magistrate of that which is
his, by giving unto Christ that which is Christ's. We desire to hold up the
honor and greatness, the power and authority of Magistracy, against Papists,
Anabaptists, and all others Jude ep. v. 8.
that despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. We do not Fr a S. Clara
Apolog. Episcop. cap. 2.
compare (as Innocentius did) the civil and the ecclesiastical powers, to the
two great lights, that to the Moon, this to the Sun. We hold The second
book of the Discipline of the Church of Scotland, cap. 1.
it is proper to Kings, Princes and Magistrates, to be called Lords, and
Dominators over their Subjects whom they govern civilly, but it is proper to
Christ only to be called Lord and Master in the Spiritual government of the
Church; and all others that bear office therein, ought not to usurp Dominion
therein, nor be called Lords, but only Ministers, Disciples and Servants. We
acknowledge and affirm The confession of faith of the Church of Scotland Art.
25
that Magistracy and civil Government in Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions, and
Cities, is an Ordinance of God for his own glory, and for the great good of
mankind, so that whoever are enemies to Magistracy, they are enemies to mankind
and to the revealed will of God: Ibib.
That such persons as are placed in authority, are to be beloved, honored,
feared, and holden in a most reverend estimation, because they are the
Lieutenants of God, in whose seat God himself does sit and judge; We teach
Ibid.
that not only they are appointed for civil policy, but also for maintenance
of the true Religion, and for suppressing of Idolatry and superstition
whatsoever. We confess Ibid.
that such as resist the supreme power, doing that thing which appertains to
his charge, do resist Gods Ordinance; and therefore cannot be guiltless. And
further we affirm, that whosoever deny unto them their aid, counsel and
comfort, whilst the Princes and Rulers vigilantly travel in execution of
their Office, that the same men deny their help, support, and counsel to God,
who by the presence of his Lieutenant does crave it of them. We know and
believe, The Confession of Helvetia in the head of Magistracy.
that though we be free, we ought wholly in a true faith holily to submit our
selves to the Magistrate, both with our body, and with all our goods, and
endeavor of mind, also to perform faithfulness, and the oath which we made
to him, so far forth as his government is not evidently repugnant to him for
whose sake we do reverence the Magistrate. The confession of Bohemia cap. 16.
That we ought to yield unto Kings and other Magistrates in their own
stations, fear, honor, tribute, and custom, whether they be good men or
evil, as likewise to obey them, in that which is not contrary to the Word of
God: It being always provided that in things pertaining to our souls and
consciences, we obey God only and his holy Word. We believe The French
confession Art. 39.
that God has delivered the Sword into the hands of the Magistrates, to wit,
that offenses may be repressed, not only those which are committed against the
second Table, but also against the first. We do agree and avouch, The
confession of Belgia At. 36.
that all men of what dignity, condition, or state soever they be, ought to be
subject to their lawful Magistrates, and pay unto them Subsidies and Tributes,
and obey them in all things which are not repugnant to the word of God. Also
they must pour out their prayers for them, that God would vouchsafe to direct
them in all their actions, and that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life
under them, with all godliness and honesty. We teach The confesof Saxony, Art.
23.
that it does belong to the authority and duty of the Magistrate, to forbid and
(if need be) to punish such sins as are committed against the ten
Commandments or the Law natural: as likewise to add unto the Law natural
some other laws, defining the circumstances of the natural Law, and to keep
and maintain the same by punishing the transgressors. We hold Irish Articles
of Religion Art. 61, 62.
that the laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous
and grievous offenses. And that it is lawful for Christian men, at the command
of the Magistrate, to bear Arm, and to serve in just wars All these things
we do sincerely, really, constantly, faithfully, and cheerfully yield unto and
assert in behalf of the civil Magistrate. So that the cause which I now take
in hand does not depresse but exalt, does not weaken but strengthen Magistracy.
I do not plead against the power of the Sword when I plead for Matthew. 16, 19.
and 18 18. which is meant ^t laying on or taking of Church censure. August.
Tract. 50 in Jo. Si (...) in Ecclesia fit, ut quae in terrd ligantur in caelo
ligentur, and que solvuntur in terrd, solvantur in caelo: quiacum excommunicat
Ec. clesia, in caelo ligatur excommunicatustcum reconciliatur ab Ecclesia, in
caelo solvitur reconciliatus, etc.
the power of the Keys. These two are most distinct, they ought not to be
confounded, neither need they to clash or interfeere between themselves. The
controversy is not about taking from the Magistrate what is his, but about
giving to Christ that which is his. We hold a reciprocal subordination of
persons, but a coordination of powers. The second Book of the Discipline of
the Church of Scotland, cap. 1.
As the Ministers and others of the Ecclesiastical estate are subject to the
Magistrate civil, so ought the person of the Magistrate be subject to the
Church Spiritually, and in Ecclesiastical government. And the exercise of both
these jurisdictions cannot stand in one person ordinarily. Again, b The
Magistrate neither ought to preach, minister the Sacraments, nor execute the
censures of the Church, nor yet prescribe any rule how it should be done, but
command the Ministers to observe the rule commanded in the Word, and punish the
transgressors by civil means. The Ministers exerce not the civil
Jurisdiction, but teach the Magistrate, how it should be exercised according to
the word. See the Laws and Statutes of Geneva translated out of the French and
printed at London 1643. page 9, 10.
The Laws and Statutes of Geneva do at once ratify the Ecclesiastical
Presbyteriall power of Jurisdiction or censure, and withal appoint that
Ministers shall not take upon them any civil jurisdiction, but where there
shall be need of compulsion or civil punishments, that this be done by the
Magistrate. Yea, under a Popish Magistrate (as in France) and even under the
Turk himself many Churches do enjoy not only the Word and Sacraments, but a
free Church government and Discipline within themselves, rectio disciplinae
libera, which is thought no prejudice to the civil government, they that
govern the Churches having no dominion nor share of Magistracy. Vide D.
Chytraei orat. de statu Ecclesiarum in Graecia etc.

I know well, that there are other horrid calumnies and mis-representations of
Presbyteriall Government, besides that of encroaching upon Magistracy: but they
are as false as they are foul. And although we go upon this disadvantage De
corona orat. 5. in initio
which Demosthenes (being loadened with a heavy charge and grievous aspersions
by In orat. contr^ Ciesiphontem.
Aeschines) did complain of, that though by right both parties should be
heard, yet the generality of men do with pleasure hearken to reproaches and
calumnies, but take little or no pleasure to hear men's clearing of themselves
or their cause; and that his adversary had chosen that which was more pleasant,
leaving to him that which was more tedious: Nevertheless I must needs expect
from all such as are conscionable and faithful in this Cause and Covenant,
that their ears shall not be open to calumnies, and shut upon more favorable
informations. And however, let the worst be said which malice it self can
devise, it shall be no small comfort to me, that our Lord and Master has said,
Matthew. ^. 11.
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my names sake.

I know also that a Government and Discipline in the Church (the thing which I
now undertake to plead for) is a very displeasing thing Psalm 2. 3. Luke 1^* 14.
to those that would feign enjoy liberty either of pernicious errors, or gross
prophannesse. But (as Maimonides says well) we must not judge of the easiness
or heaviness of a Law according to the affections and lust of any evil man,
being rash (in judgment) and given to the worst vices; but according to the
understanding of one who is most perfect among men, like unto whom, according
to the Law, all others ought to be. More Nevochim part. 2. Cap. 39. No marvel
that the licentious hate that way wherein they shall find themselves hemmed
in, if not hedged up with thorns. And that they may the more flatter
themselves in their sinful licentiousness, they imagine that Christ's yoke is
easy and his burden light, to the flesh as well as to the Spirit, to carnal
as well* as to spiritual men. For my part if I have learned Christ aright, I
hold it for a sure principle, that in so far as a man is spiritual and
regenerate, in as far his flesh is under a yoke; and in so far as he is
unregenerate, in as far his flesh is sine jugo without a yoke. The Origin. in
Levit. Hom. 3. Quid percu^it? carnem. Quid sanat? Spiritum. Prorsus ut illa
deficiat, iste pro* ficiat.
healing of the spirit is not without the smiting of the flesh.

When I speak of this Divine Ordinance of Church Government, my meaning is not
to allow, muchlesse to animate any in the too severe and over strict exercise
of Ecclesiastical discipline and censures. It was observed by Hier. ad
Marcellum.
Hierome, as one of the errors of the Montanists: Illi ad omne pene delictum
Ecclesiae obserant fores. They shut the Church door, (that is, they
excommunicate and shut out of the Church) almost at every offense. I confess
the greater part are more apt to fail in the defect, then in the excess, and
are like to come too short, rather than to go too far. Yet a failing there
may be, and has been both ways. The best things, whether in Church or State,
have been actually abused, and may be so again, through the error and
corruption of men. The holy Scripture it self is abused to the greatest
mischiefs in the world, though in its own nature it serves for the greatest
good in the world. The abuse of a thing which is necessary, and especially of a
divine Ordinance, whether such abuse be feared or felt, ought not, may not
prejudice the thing it self. My purpose and endeavor shall be (wherein I
beseech the* Lord to help my infirmities) to own the thing, to disowne the
abuses of the thing, to point out the path of Christ's Ordinance, without
allowing either rigor against such as ought to be tenderly dealt with, or too
much lenity toward such as must be saved with fear, and pulled out of the
fire, or at all any aberration to the right or left hand.

I have had much ado to gain so many ^orae sub^isivae from the works of my
public calling, as might suffice for this work. I confess it has cost me
much pains, and I think I may say without presumption, he that will go about
solidly to answer it, will find it no easy matter. Subitane lucubrations will
not do it. But if any man shall by unanswerable contrary reasons or evidenees
discover error or mistake in any of my principles, let truth have the victory,
let God have the glory. Only this favor (I may say this justice) I shall
protest for. First, that my principles and conclusions may be rightly
apprehended, and that I may not be charged with any absurd, dangerous or odious
assertion, unless my own words be faithfully cited from which that assertion
shall be gathered, yea also without concealing my explanations, qualifications,
or restrictions, if any such there be. Which rule to my best observation I have
not transgressed, in reference to the Opposites. Secondly, that as I have not
dealt with their Nauci, but with their Nucleus, I have not scratched at their
shell, but taken out their kernel (such as it is) I have not declined them,
but encountered, yea sought them out, where their strength was greatest, where
their Arguments were hardest, and their exceptions most probable: so no man may
decline or dissemble the strength of my Arguments, Inferences, Authorities,
Answers and Replies, nor think it enough to lift up an Axe against the
uttermost branches, when he ought to strike at the root. Thirdly, if there be
any acrimony, let it be in a real and rational conviction, not in the manner
of expression. In which also I ask no other measure to my self than I have
given to others. It Is but in vain for a man to help the bluntness of reason
with the sharpness of passion: for thereby he loses more than he gains with
intelligent Readers: the simpler sort may peradventure esteem those (...),
those despicable nothings, to be something, but then they are delu ded, not
edified. *Therefore let not a man cast sorth a flood of passionate words, when
his Arguments are like broken cisternes which can hold no water.

If any Replyer there be of the Erastian party, who will confine himself
within these Rules and Conditions, as I do not challenge him, so (if God spare
me life and liberty) I will not refuse him. But if any shall so reply as to
prevaricate and do contrary to these just and reasonable demands, I must (to
his greater shame) call him to the Orders, and make his tergiversation to
appear.

I shall detain thee (good Reader) no longer. The Lord guide thee and all his
people in ways of truth and peace, holiness and righteousness, and grant
that this Controversy may (I trust it shall) have a happy end to the glory of
God, to the embracing and exalting of Jesus Christ in his Kingly Office, to the
ordering of his House according to His own will, to the keeping pure of the
Ordinances, to the advancing of Holiness, and shaming of profaneness, and
finally to the peace, quiet, wel-being, comfort, and happiness of the Churches
of Christ. These things (without thoughts of provoking any either public or
private person) the searcher of hearts knows to be desired and intended by
him who is

Thine, to please thee, for thy good to edification,

GEO. GILLESPIE.

THE CONTENTS.
The first Book. Of the Jewish Church Government.
CHAP. I. That if the Erastians could prove what they allege concerning the
Jewish Church Government, yet in that particular the Jewish Church could not be
a president to the Christian.
THe Jewish Church a pattern to us in such things as were not typical or
temporal. If it could be proved, that the Jews had no supreme Sanhodrin but
one, and it such as had the power of civil Magistracy, yet there are four
reasons for which that could be no president to the Christian Church. Where the
constitution, manner of proceedings, and power of the Sanhedrin, ure touched.
Of their Synagoga Magna, what it was. That the Priests had great power and
authority not only in occasional Synods, but in the civil Sanhedrin it self.

CHAP. II. That the Jewish Church was formally distinct from the Jewish State
or Commonwealth.
WE are content that the Erastians appeal to the Jewish government. Seven
distinctions between the Jewish Church and the Jewish State. Of the proselytes
of righteousness, and that they were imbodied into the Jewish Church, not into
the Jewish State.

CHAP. III. That the Jews had an ecclesiastical Sanhedrin and Government
distinct from the civil.
Diverse Authors cited for the ecclesiastcal Sanhedrin of the Jews. The first
Institution thereof, Exo. 24. That the choosing and calling forth of these 70
Elders is not coincident with the choosing of the 70 Elders mentioned Number. 11.
nor yet with the choosing of Judges Exodus 18. The institution of two coordinate
Governments, cleared from Deuteronomy. 17. A distinct Ecclesiastical government
settled by David, 1 Chro. 23. and 26. The same distinction of Civil and Church*
government revived by Iehoshaphat, 2 Chro. 19. That Text vindicated. Two
distinct Courts, one Ecclesiastical, another Civil, proved from Ierem. 26.
Another argument for an Ecclesiastical Senate from Ierem. 18. 18. Who meant by
the wise men of the Jews? Another argument from Ezech. 7. 26. Another from 2
Kings 6. 32. and Ezech. 8. 1. Another from Psalm. 107. 32. Another from Zech. 7.
1, 2, 3. That Ezech. 13. 9. seems to hold forth an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin.
That the Council of the chief Priests, Elders and Scribes, so often mentioned
in the Gospel, and in the Acts of the Apostles, was an Ecclesiastical
Sanhedrin, and not a civil Court of Justice, as Erastus and M. Prynne suppose:
which is at length proved. That the civil Sanhedrin which had power of life
and death did remove from Jerusalem, 40 years before the destruction of the
Temple and City, and consequently near three years before the death of
Christ. The great objection, that neither the Talmud nor Talmudicall Writers
do distinguish a civil and an ecclesiastical Sanhedrin, answered. Finally,
those who are not convinced that there was a distinct ecclesiastical Sanhedrin
among the Jews, may yet by other Mediums be convinced that there was a
distinct ecclesiastical Government among the Jews: as namely, the Priests
judgment of cleanness or uncleanness, and so of admitting or shutting out.

CHAP. IV. That there was an Ecclesiastical Excommunication among the Jews:
and what it was.
FIfteen witnesses brought for the Ecclesiastical excommunication among the
Jews, all of them learned in the Jewish antiquities. Of the 24 causes of the
Jewish excommunication, which were looked upon formally qua scandals, not qua
injuries. Of the three degrees of their excommunication, Niddui, Cherem, and
Shammata. The manner and form of their Excommunication, shows that it was a
solemn Ecclesiastical censure. Formula anathematis. The excommunication of
the Cuthites. The excommunication among the Jews was a public and judicial
act: and that a private or extrajudicial excommunication was void, if not
ratified by the Court. The effects of the Jewish excommunication. That such as
were excommunicated by the greater excommunication were not admitted to come to
the Temple. He that was excommunicated with the lesser excommunication was
permitted to come, yet not as other Israelites, but as one publicly bearing
his shame. The end of their excommunication was spiritual.

CHAP. V. Of the cutting of from among the people off God frequently mentioned
in the Law.
THe sense of the Hebrew word (...) scanned. That the commination of cutting
off a man from his people, or from the Congregation of Israel, is neither meant
of eternal death, nor of dying without children, nor of capital punishment
from the hand of the Magistrate, nor yet of cutting off by the immediate hand
of God for some secret sin. Reasons brought against all these. That
Excommunication was meant by that cutting off, proved by six reasons.

CHAP. VI. Of the casting out of the Synagogue.
THe casting out of the Synagogue is understood by Interpret^rs and others to
be an excommunication from the Church assemblies, and not a civil punishment.
Eight considerations to prove this. That he who was cast out of the Synagogue
was shut out, not only from the company and fellowship of men, but from the
place of public sacred assemblies. It cannot be proved, that he who was cast
out of the Synagogue was free to enter into the Temple. The casting out of the
Synagogue was abused by the Pharisees, as the casting out of the Church by
Diotrephes.

CHAP. VII. Other Scripturall arguments to prove an Excommunication in the
Jewish Church.
THat the separation from the Congregation, Ezra 10. 8. was Excommunication.
Josephus explained in this particular. Of the devoting of a man's substance as
holy to the Lord* which was joined with the Excommunication. What meant by the
cursing Neh. 13. 25. That the (...) or separating mentioned Luke 6. 22. was
Excommunication, or a segregation not from civil fellowship only, but from
sacred or Church communion. The Ecclesiastical use of that word touched.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Jewish Exomologesis, or public Declaration of Repentance
by confession of sin.
THe Heathens had their public Declaration of repentance from the Jews. The
Jewish Exomologesis proved from the imposition of hands upon the head of the
Sacrifice. The Law Lev. 5. 5. did also appoint Confession of sin, to be made
at the offering of a Trespass offering. Which confession was made in the
Temple, and in the Priests hearing* The Law of confessing sin Number. 5, 6, 7.
explained, and diverse particulars concerning confession deduced from it. Other
proofs of the Jewish Confession of sins from Ioh. 9. 24. Also from that which
interveened between their Excommunication and their absolution. From Ezra 10
10, 11. That David's confession Psalm 51. was published in the Temple, after
ministerial conviction by Nathan. That if there be necessity of satisfying an
offended brother, how much more of satisfying an offended Church?

CHAP. IX. Whether in the Jewish Church there was any suspension or exclusion
of profane, scandalous, notorious sinners, from partaking in the public
Ordinances, with the rest of the children of Israel in the Temple.
THe affirmative is proved by plain and full testimonies of Philo, and
Josephus, beside some late Writers well acquainted with the Jewish antiquities.
That the Publican Luke 18. came not into the Court of Israel, but into the
Court of the Gentiles. Nor can it be proved, that he was a profane Publican,
so much as in the opinion of the Pharisees and Jews. That the Temple into which
the adultresse was brought John 8. was also the Court of the Gentiles: neither
was she admitted into the Temple for worship, but brought thither for a
public trial and ^entence. Seven Scripturall arguments brought to prove an
exclusion of the scandalous and known profane persons, from the Temple.
Somewhat de jure Zelotarum. What esteem the Hebrews had of an Heretical or
Epicurean Israelite. That the Temple of Jerusalem was a Type of Christ, (which
is instanced in ten particulars) and had a Sacramental holiness in it, so
that the analogy is not to be drawn to an exclusion of profane persons from
the Word preached, but from the Sacrament.

CHAP. X. A debate with M. Prynne, concerning the exclusion of profane
scandalous persons from the Passover.
THe Analogy of the Law of the Passover, as Master Prynne understands it,
will militat strongly against that which himself yields. That the unclean
might be kept back from the Passover longer then a month. That they were
kept back by an authoritative restraint, and were cut off if they did eat in
their uncleanness. That some unclean persons were not put out of the camp,
nor from the company of men, but from the Tabernacle and holy things only.
That all unclean persons were not suspended from all Ordinances. That
scandalous and flagitious persons were not admitted to a trespass offering
(which was a reconciling Ordinance) much less to the Passover (which was a
sealing Ordinance) without a public penitential Confession of their sin.
M. Prynnes replies to this argument of min^ confuted.

CHAP. XI. A Confutation of the strongest arguments of Erastus, namely, those
drawn from the Law of Moses.
THe strength of these Arguments put together. Which is not only e^ervated,
but retorted. That the confession of sin required Levit. 5. 5. Number. 5. 6, 7.
was a confession of the particular sin by word of mouth: and that this
confession was required even in criminal and capital cases. That moral, as
well as ceremonial uncleanness, was a cause of sequestration from the
Sanctuary, yea much more, the moral uncleanness being more hateful to God,
more hurtful and infective to Gods people. That the exclusion of the unclean
under the Law could not so fitly signify the exclusion from the Kingdom of
Heaven, as from communion with the Church in this life. That this legal Type
did certainly signify a sequestration of scandalous or morally unclean
persons from Church Communion under the New Testament, is proved from Esaias 52.
1. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. also from the exposition of Peter's vision Acts 10.
That among the Jews such as attended a litigious action, or at least a
capital judgment, upon the preparation day, were thought defiled and not
allowed to eat the Passover. That it was not left to a man's free will to
judge of his own cleanness or uncleanness, nor to expiate his sin when he
pleased. That the universal precept for all that were circumcised to eat the
Passover, does admit of other exceptions, beside those that were legally
unclean, or in a journey. The great difference between Sacraments and
Sacrifices, which Erastus confounds.

CHAP. XII. Fourteen arguments to prove that scandalous and presumptuous
offenders against the moral Law, (though circumcised, and not being legally
unclean) were excluded from the Passover.
KNown presumptuous and obstinate sinners, were cut off from among their
people, therefore not admitted to the Passover. The Jews themselves held that
moral, as well as ceremonial uncleanness did render them incapable of eating
the Passover. Who were esteemed Heretical or apostat Israelites? Who
Epicurean Israelites? That these and such like were not acknowledged to be in
the communion of the Church of Israel, nor was it allowed to speak or converse
with them, muchlesse that they should eat the Passover. Grotius his argument,
there was an excommunication for ceremonial uncleanness, therefore much more
for moral uncleanness. What God did teach his people by the purging out of
leaven. If the shewbread might not be given to David's men, unless they had
for some space before abstained from their wives, much less might known
adulterers be admitted to the Passover. Ezech. 2^. 26. discussed against Mr.
Coleman. The original words explained. Proph^ne Church members have the name
of Heathens, and strangers. The qualifications of Proselytes, without which
they were not admitted to Circumcision and the Passover. That course was taken
Ezra 10. that none defiled with unlawful marriages might eat the Passover.
By Erastus his principles the most scandalous conversation was not so hateful
to God as legal uncleanness. The Law of confessing sin, Levit. 5. Number. 5. is
meant of every known sin, which was to be expiated by Sacrifice, especially the
more notorious and scandalous sins.

CHAP. XIII. M. Prynnes argument from 1 Cor. 10. (which he takes to be
unanswerable) discussed and confuted.
Mr Prynne in expounding that Text of the Passover differs both from the
Apostles, and from Erastus himself. His argument (if good) will necessarily
conclude against his own Concessions. If scandalous sinners had been suspended
from the Manna, and Water of the Rock, they had been suspended from their
ordinary orporal meat and drink. That the scandalous sins mentioned by the
Apostle, were committed, not before, but after their eating of that Spiritual
meat, and drinking of that Spiritual drink. The Argument strongly retorted.
The scandalous sins mentioned by the Apostle were National sins, and so come
not home to the present Question, which is of persons, not of Nations.

An Appendix to the first Book.
THe Erastians misrepresent the Jewish Government. Their compliance with the
Anabaptists in this particular. Their confounding of that which was
extraordinary in the Jewish Church, with that which was the ordinary rule.
Fourteen Objections answered. M. Prynne his great mistakes of Deuteronomy. 17. and 2 Chronicles. 19. The power and practice of the godly Kings of Judah in the
reformation of Religion cleared. The Argument from Solomon his deposing of
Abiathar, and putting Zadock in his place, answered four ways. The Priests
were appointed to be as Judges in other cases, beside those of leprosy and
jealousy. 2 Chro. 23. 19. further scanned. A scandalous person was an unclean
person both in the Scripture phrase, and in the Jewish language. The
sequestration of the unclean from the Sanctuary, no civil punishment. Of
Laws and causes Civil and Ecclesiastical among the Jews. Of their Scribes
and Lawyers. Some other observable passages of Maimonides concerning
Excommunication. What meant by not entering into the Congregation of the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 23. 1, 2, 3. and by separating the mixed multitude, Nehem. 13. 3. Five
reasons to prove that the meaning of these places, is not in reference to civil
dignities and places of government, nor yet in reference to unlawful marriages
only, but in reference to Church Membership and communion. Two Objections to
the contrary answered. One from Exodus 12. 48. Another from the example of Ruth.
An useful observation out of Onkelos, Exodus 12.

The second Book. Of the Christian Church Government.
CHAP. I. Of the rise, growth, decay and reviving of Erastianisme.
THe Erastian error not honest is parentibus natus. Erastus the Midwife, how
engaged in the business. The breasts that gave it suck, prophannesse and
selfinterest. Its strong food, arbitrary Government. Its Tutor, Arminianisme.
Its deadly decay and consumption, whence it was? How ill it has been harbored
in all the reformed Churches? How stiffled by Erastus himself? Erastianisme
confuted out of Erastus. The Divines who have appeared against this error. How
the Controversy was lately revived?

CHAP. II. Some Postulata or common principles to be presupposed.
THat there ought to be an exclusion of vile and profane persons, (known to
be such) from the holy things, is a principle received among the Heathens
themselves. That the dishonor of God by scandalous sins ought to be
punished, as well, yea much rather, than private injuries. That public sins
ought to be publicly confessed, and the offenders put to public shame. That
there ought to be an avoiding of, and withdrawing from scandalous persons in
the Church, and that by a public order, rather then at every man's discretion.
That there is a distinction of the Office and power of Magistracy and
Ministry. That the directive judgment in any business does chiefly belong to
those who by their prosession and vocation are set apart to the attendance and
oversight of such a thing.

CHAP. III. What the Erastians yield unto us, and what we yield unto them?
THey yield that the Magistrate his power in Ecclesiasticis, is not arbitrary,
but tied to the word. That there may be a distinct Church government under
Heathen Magistrates. That the abuse takes not away the just power. They allow
of Presbyteries, and that they have some jurisdiction. That the Ministry is
Iure divino, and Magistracy distinct from it. We yield unto them* That none
ought to be Rulers in the Church, but such against whom there is no just
exception. That Presbyteriall government is not a Dominion but a Service. That
it has for its object only the inward man. That Presbyteriall government is
not an Arbitrary government, cleared by sive considerations. That it is the
most limited, and least Arbitrary government of any other, cleared by
comparing* it with Popery, Prelacy, Independency, and with lawful Magistracy.
That the civil Magistrate may and ought to do much in and for Religion,
ordinarily, and yet more in extraordinary cases. That the civil Sanction is a
free and voluntary act of the Magistrates favor. That Ministers owe as much
subjection and honor to the Magistrate as other Subjects.

CHAP. IV. Of the agreement and the differences between the nature of the
Civil, and of the Ecclesiastical powers or Governments.
TEn agreements between the Civil power and the Ecclesiastical power. The
differences between them opened in their causes, efficient, matter, (where a
fourfold power of the keys is touched) for me, and ends, both supreme and
subordinate, (where it is opened, how and in what respect the Christian
Magistrate intends the glory of Jesus Christ, and the purging of his Church;)
Also effects, objects, adjuncts, correlations, ultimate terminations, and
divided executions.

CHAP. V. Of a twofold Kingdom of Jesus Christ: a general Kingdom as he is
the eternal Son of God, the Head of all Principalities and Powers, reigning
over all creatures: and a particular Kingdom, as he is Mediator, reigning over
the Church only.
HOw this controversy falls in, and how deep it draws. That our Opposites
herein* join issue with the Socinians. Nine Arguments to prove this
distinction of a twofold Kingdom of Christ. In which, of the eternity,
universality, donation, and subordination of the Kingdom of Christ. The
Arguments brought to prove that Christ as Mediator reigns over all things,
and has all government (even civil) put in his hands, examined and confuted.
In what sense Christ is said to be over all, the heir of all things, to have
all things put under his feet, to be the head of every man. A distinction
between Christ's Kingdom, Power, and Glory, cleared.

CHAP. VI. Whether Jesus Christ, as Mediator, and Head of the Church, has
placed the Christian Magistrate, to hold and execute his office, under and for
him as his Vicegerent? The Arguments for the affirmative discussed.
THe decision of this Question will do much, (yet not all) in the decision of
the Erastian controversy. The question rightly stated. Ten Arguments for the
affirmative discussed and answered. Where diverse Scriptures are debated and
cleared. How we are to understand that Christ is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. How all power in Heaven and in Earth is said to be given to him. That
the Governments set in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. are not civil Magistrates,
fully proved, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22, 23. and Colos. 2. 10. vindicated.

CHAP. VII. Arguments for the negative of that Question formerly propounded.
THe lawful authority of the Heathen Magistrates vindicated. It can not be
showed from Scripture, that Christ as Mediator has given any Commission of
Vice-gerentship to the Christian Magistrate. That the work of the Ministry is
done in the name and authority of Jesus Christ: the work of Magistracy not so.
The power of Magistracy or civil Government, was not given to Christ as
Mediator, showed from Luke 12. 14. John ^8 36. Luke 17. 20, 21. Magistracy
founded in the Law of nature and Nations. The Scripture holds forth the same
origination of Heathen Magistracy, and of Christian Magistracy.

CHAP. VIII. Of the power and privilege of the Magistrate in things and causes
Ecclesiastical, what (...) (...) not, and what it is?
THat no administration formally and properly Ecclesiastical, (and namely the
dispencing of Church censures) does belong unto the Magistrate* nor may
(according to the Word of God be assumed and exercised by him, proved by six
Arguments. That Christ has not made the Magistrate head of the Church, to
receive appeals from all Ecclesiastical Assembles. There are other sufficient
remedies against abuses or Mal-administration in Church Government Reasons
against such appeals to the Magistrate. The Arguments to the contrary from the
Examples of Ieren^y and of Paul, discussed. Of the collaterality and
coordination of the Civil and Ecclesiastical powers. What is the power and
right of the Magistrate in things and causes Ecclesiastical, cleared, first
generally; next, more particularly by five distinctions. 1. (...) belong to the
civil power, but non (...), 2. The Magistrate may imperare that which he may
not elicere. 3. Distinguish the directive power from the coercive power. 4. The
Magistrates power is cumulative not privative. 5. He may do in extraordinary
cases that which he ought not to do ordinarily. A caution concerning the
Arbitrary power of Magistrates in things Ecclesiastical.

CHAP. IX. That by the Word of God there ought to be another Government besides
Magistracy or civil Government, namely an Ecclesiastical Government (properly
so called) in the hands of Church Officers.
THe Question stated, and the Affirmative proved by one and twenty Scripturall
Arguments. Who meant by the Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy 5. 17. (...) and
(...) names of government. The words (...) and (...) Heb 13. 7, 17. examined.
Of receiving an accusation against an Elder. Of rejecting an Heretic. Of the
excommunication of the Incestuous Corinthian, and the sense of the word (...)*
Of the subjection of the spirits of the Prophets to the Prophets. The Angels of
the Churches why reproved for having false Teachers in the Church? Note that
man, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. proved to be Church-censure. Of the Ruler, Romans 12. 8. and
Governments, 1 Cor. 12. 28. A pattern in the Jewish Church for a distinct
Ecclesiastical government. What meant by cutting off, Gal. 5. 12? (...)
properly what? Of the Ministerial power to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor.
10. 6. (...) 2 Cor. 2. 8. what? Of the visible administration of the Kingdom
of Christ by his Laws, Courts, Censures. The Arguments for Excommunication,
from Matthew. 18. and 1 Cor. 5. briefly vindicated. That Elders are rulers of the
flock. (...) a name of Government Ministers why called S^ewards of the
Mysteries of God. (...) a name of government. Church Government exercised by
the Synod of the Apostles and Elders, Acts 15.

CHAP. X. Some objections made against Ecclesiastical Government and
Discipline, answered.
Mr Husseys objection does stricke as much against Paul, as against us. The
fallacy of comparing Government with the word preached, in point of efficacy.
Four ends or uses of Church Government. That two coordinate Governments are
not inconsistent. The objection, that Ministers have other work to do,
answered. The fear of an ambitious ensnarement in the Ministry, so much
objected, is no good Argument against Church Government. M. Husseys motion
concerning Schools of Divinity examined. Church Government is no immunity to
Church Officers from Censure. Though the Erastian principles are sufficiently
overthrown by asserting from Scripture the may be of Church Government, yet our
Arguments prove a must be or an Institution. Six Arguments added which conclude
this point.

CHAP. XI. The necessity of a distinct Church Government, under Christian, as
well as under Heathen Magistrates.
THis acknowledged by Christian Emperors of old. Grotius for us in this
particular. Christian Magistracy has never yet punished all such offenses as
are Ecclesiastically censurable. Presbyteries in the primitive times did not
exercise any power which did belong of right to the Magistrate. No warrant from
the word, that the Ordinance of a distinct Church government, was only for
Churches under persecution: but contrariwise the Churches are charged to keep
till the coming of Christ, the commandment then delivered. No just ground for
the fear of the interfeering of the civil, and of the Ecclesiastical power.
The Churches liberties enlarged, (not diminished) under Christian Magistrates.
The Covenant against this exception of the Erastians. The Christian Magistrate,
if he should take upon him the whole burden of the corrective part of
Church Government, could not give an account to God of it. The Erastian
principles do involve the Magistrate into the Prelaticall guiltiness. The
reasons and grounds mentioned in Scripture, upon which Church Censures were
dispensed in the Primi^ive Churches, are no other then concern the Churches
under Christian Magistr^tes. The end of Church Censures, neither intended nor
attained by the administration of Christian Magistracy. The power of binding
and loosing not temporary. They who restrict a distinct Church Government, to
Churches under Heathen or persecuting Magistrates, give a mighty advantage to
Socinians and Anabaptists. Gualther and Master Prynne for us in this Question.

APPENDIX.
A Collection of some testimonies out of a Declaration of King James, the
Helvetian, Bohemian, Augustane, French, and Dutch confessions, the
Ecclesiastical Discipline of the reformed Churches in France, Harmonia
Synodorum Belgicarum, the Irish Articles, a Book of Melanchton, and another of
L. Humfredus.

The third Book. Of Excommunication from the Church, AND Of Suspension from
the Lords Table.
CHAP. I. An opening of the true state of the question, and of Master Prynnes
many mistakes and mis-representations of our Principles.
A Transition from Church Government in general, to Excommunication and
Suspension in particular. The present controversy ten ways misstated by M.
Prynne. That which was publicly depending between the Parliament and
Assembly, did rather concern the practical conclusion it self, then the
Mediums to prove it. The strength of the Assemblies proofs for Suspension
scarce touched by M. Prynne. That the power of Suspension is neither in the
Minister alone, nor unlimitted. The question is practically stated by Aretius.
The present controversy how different from the Prelaticall? The power desired
to Elderships, is not to judge men's hearts, but to judge of external
evidences. The distinction of converting and confirming Ordinances how
necessary in this question? Excommunication and Suspension confounded by M.
Prynne (as likewise by the Separatists) contrary to the manner both of the
Jewish Church, and of the ancient and reformed Christian Churche^* M. Prynnes
assertion concerning suspension, is contrary to the Ordinances of Parliament.
The Question stated, as it ought to be stated.

CHAP. II. Whether Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. prove Excommunication.
THe Erastians cannot avoid an argument ex consequenti from this Text for
Excommunication, although we should grant that the literal sense and direct
intendment of the words, is not concerning Excommunication. Of the word (...).
That the trespass meant verse. 15. is sometime known to more then one at first.
That the meaning is not of a civil personal injury, but of a scandalous
sin, whether there be materially a personal injury in it or not. This
confirmed by six reasons. That if it were granted these words, If thy brother
trespass against thee, are understood of a personal injury, this could be no
advantage to the Erastian cause, in six respects. Erastus his Argument, that
the trespass here meant is such as one brother may forgive to another,
answered. That the Law of two or three witnesses belongs to Ecclesiastical,
as well as to civil Courts. That Tell the Church here can not be, Tell the
civil Sanhedrin or Court of justice among the Jews. Of the meaning of these
words Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publican. M. Prynnes
Argument retorted. That the Heathens might not enter into the Temple, to wit,
into the Court of Israel, but into the Intermurale they might come and worship.
That there is not the like reason for excluding Excommunicate persons wholly
from our Churches. Of Solomon's porch. That M. Prynne confounds the devout
penitent Publican with the profane unjust Publicans. The Objection from the
Publicans going up to the Temple to pray, examined. Publicans commonly named as
the worst and wickedest of men. Another objection, Let him be to thee, (not to
the whole Church) as an Heathen, etc. discussed.

CHAP. III. A further demonstration that these words Let him be unto thee as an
Heathen man and a Publican, are not meant of avoiding Civil, but Religious or
Churchfellowship.
THe great disorder and confusion which M. P^ynne his sense of this Text might
introduce. That it was not unlawful to the Jews to have civil company or
fellowship with Heathens, unless it were for religious respects, and in case
of the danger of an idolatrous insnarement, which is cleared by a passage of
Elias in Thesbyte. In what sense Peter says Acts 10. 28. that a Jew might not
keep company or come unto one of another Nation. That the Jews did keep
civil and familiar fellowship with Ger toschav, or Gerschagnar, the proselyte
indueller, or the proselyte of the gate, who yet was uncircumcised, and no
member of the Jewish Church, nor an observer of the Law of Moses, but only of
the seven precepts given to the sons of Noah. Which clears the reason why
the Synod of the Apostles and Elders, who would not impose circumcision nor any
other of the Mosaicall ceremonies upon the believing Gentiles, did
nevertheless impose this as a necessary burden upon them, to abstain from
blood and things strangled. Christians are permitted by Paul to eat and drink
with them that believe not. Further proofs that some uncircumcised Heathens
had civil fellowship with the Jews, and some circumcised Hebrews had not
Ecclesiastical communion with the Jews. The Question decided out of
Maimonides. That these words, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a
Publican do imply somewhat negative, and somewhat positive. The negative part
is, that he must not be worse used in civil things, than an Heathen man or
Publican: that Excommunication breaks not natural and moral duties: neither
is any civil fellowship at all forbidden to be kept with an Excommunicate
person, except under a spiritual notion and for spiritual ends, not qua
civil fellowship. The positive part is, that he must be used in the same
manner, as an Heathen man and a Publican in Spiritual things, and in
Church Communion. Heathens five ways excluded from communion with the Jews in
the holy things. Let him be as a Publican implies two things more then Let him
be as an Heathen, but exclusion from some Ordinances was common both to
Heathens and scandalous Publicans. That the Phraisees speech concerning the
Publican who went up to the Temple to pray, shows that he was not esteemed a
profane Publican.

CHAP. IV. A Confutation of Erastus and Bilson their Interpretation of Matthew.
18. 15, 16, 17. as likewise of Dr. Sutcliffe his Gloss, differing somewhat
from theirs.
THe scope of this Scripture wholly spiritual, concerning the gaining of a
brother from sin, not civil concerning the prosecuting of a personal injury.
Rebuke for sin a common Christian duty. Which is necessary in sins
committed against God, rather than in injuries committed against man. That any
sin by which thou art scandalized is a trespass against thee. The Erastian
Interpretation of Matthew. 18. makes it lawful for one Christian to go to law
with another before an unbelieving Judge, and so makes Paul contrary to
Christ. The same Interpretation restricteth the latter part of the Text to
those Christians only, who live under an unbelieving Magistrate, while it is
confessed that the former part belongs to all Christians. It is contrary also
to the Law of Moses. They contradict themselves concerning the coercive power
of the Sanhedrin. The gradation in the Text inconsistent with their sense. The
Argument of Erastus to prove that the words as a Publican, are meant of a
Publican qua Publican, and so of every Publican, examined. Their exception, Let
him be TO THEE, etc. not to the whole Church, answered three ways.

CHAP. V. That Tell it unto the Church has more in it, then, Tell it unto a
greater number.
THe word (...) never given to any lawful assembly, simply because of majority
of number. This Interpretation provideth no effectual remedy for offenses.
Kahal by the Hebrews and (...) by the Grecians often used for an assembly of
such as had Jurisdiction and ruling power. Whether the two or three witnesses
Matthew. 18. 16. be only witnesses or assistants in the admonition, or whether
the intention be that they shall prove the fact before the Church forensically,
(if need be) and whether two or three witnesses must be taken when the offense
is known to him only that gives the first rebuke; discussed? This their
Interpretation brings a brother under the greatest yoke of bondage. Grotius his
Interpretation of the word Church, not inconsistent with ours. Diverse Authors
of the best note for our Interpretation, that is, that by the Church here is
meant the Elders of the Church assembled. The name of the Church given to the
Elders for four considerations.

CHAP. VI. Of the power of binding and loosing, Matthew. 18. 18.
OUr Opposites extremely difficulted and divided in this point. Binding and
loosing both among Hebrews and Grecians, authoritative and forensicall words.
Antiquity for us, which is proved out of Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Isidorus Pelusiota, Hilary, Theophylact. That this power of
binding and loosing belongs neither to private persons, nor to civil
Magistrates, but to Church officers, and that in reference, 1. to the bonds of
sin and iniquity. 2. To the dogmaticall decision of controversies concerning
the will of Christ. That this power of binding and loosing is not merely
doctrinall but juridicall or forensicall, and meant of inflicting or taking off
Ecclesiastical censure. This cleared by the coherence and dependency between
verse 17. and 18, (which is asserted against M. Prynne) and further confirmed
by eleven reasons. In which the agreement of two on earth verse 19. the
restriction of the rule to a brother or Churchmember, also Matthew* 16. 19. John
20. 23. Psalm 149. 6, 7, 8, 9. are explained. Another Interpretation of the
binding and loosing, that it is not exercised about persons, but about things
or Doctrines, confuted by ^ive reasons. How binding and loosing are acts of the
power of the Keys, as well as shutting and opening.

CHAP. VII. That 1 Cor. 5. proves Excommunication, and (b^ a necessary
consequence even from the Erastian Interpretation) Suspension from the
Sacrament of a person un excommunicated.
THe weight of our proofs not laid upon the phrase of delivering to Satan.
Which phrase being set aside that Chapter will prove Excommunication, verse 8.
Let us keep the Passover* etc. applied to the Lords Supper, even by M. Prynne
himself. Master Prynnes first exception from 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. and 11. 20 21.
concerning the admission of all the visible members of the Church of Corinth,
even drunken persons to the Sacrament, answered. His second, a reflection upon
the persons of men. His third, concerning these words, No, not to eat,
confuted. Hence Suspension by necessary consequence. His fourth exception taken
off. His three conditions which he requires in Arguments from the lesser to
the greater, are false and do not hold. Our Argument from this Text does not
touch upon the rock of separation. Eight considerations to prove an
Ecclesiastical censure, and namely excommunication from 1 Cor. 5. compared
with 2* Cor. 2. More of that phrase, to deliver such a one to Satan.

CHAP. VIII. Whether Judas received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
THe Question between M. Prynne and me concerning Judas, much like unto that
between Papists and Protestants concerning Peter. Two things premised. 1. That
Matthew and Mark mentioning Christ's discourse at Table, concerning the
Traitor, before the Institution and distribution of the Lords Supper, place it
in its proper order, and that Luke places it after the Sacrament by an (...)
or recapitulation: which is proved by ^ive reasons. 2. That the story John. 13.
concerning Judas and the sop, was neither acted in Bethany two days before the
Passover, nor yet after the Institution of the Lords Supper. The first
Argument to prove that Judas received not the Lords Supper from Ioh. 13. 30. he
went out immediately after the sop. Mr Prynnes four answers confuted. His
opinion that Christ gave the Sacrament before the common supper, is against
both Scripture and Antiquity. Of the word immediately. The second Argument from
Christ's words at the Sacrament. That which M. Prynne holds, viz. that at that
time (when Christ infallibly knew Judas to be lost) he meant conditionally that
his body was broken and his blood shed for Judas; confuted by three reasons.
The third Argument from the different expressions of Love to the Apostles, with
an exception, while Judas was present; without an exception at the Sacrament.
M. Prynnes Arguments from Scripture to prove that Judas did receive the
Sacrament, answered. That Judas received the Sacrament, is no indubitable
verity as Mr. Prynne calls it, but has been much controverted both among
Fathers, Papists and Protestants. That the Lutherans who are much of M. Prynnes
opinion in the point of Judas his receiving of the Lords Supper, that they may
the better uphold their Doctrine of the wicked their eating of the true body of
Christ, yet are much against his opinion in the point of admitting scandalous
persons not Excommunicated to the Sacrament. M. Prynnes bold assertion that all
the Ancients except Hilary only, do unanimously accord that Judas received
the Lords Supper, without one dissenting voice; disproved as most false, and
confuted by the testimonies of Clemens, Dionysius Areopagita, Maximus,
Pachymeres, Ammonius Alexandrinus, Tacianus, Innocentius 3. Rupertus
Tuitiensis, yea by those very passages of Theophylact, and Victor Antiochenus,
cited by himself. Many modern writters also against his opinion, as of the
Papists, Salmeron, Turrianus, Barradius, of Protestants, Danaeus, Kleinwitzius,
Piscator, Beza, Tossanus, Musculus, Zanchius, Gomarus, Diodati, Grotius. The
testimonies cited by M. Prynne for Judas his receiving of the Sacrament*
examined: some of them found false, others prove not his point, others who
think that Judas did receive the Sacrament, are clear against the admission
of known profane persons. The confession of Bohemia and Belgia not against us,
but against Master Prynne.

CHAP. IX. Whether Judas received the Sacrament of the Passover that night in
which our Lord was betrayed.
THat Christ and his Apostles did eat the Passover, not before, but after
that Supper at which he did wash his Disciples feet, and give the sop to Judas.
These words before the Feast of the Passover, Joh. 13. 1. scanned. The Jews
did eat the Passover after meal, but they had no meal after the Paschall
supper. (...) Ioh. 13. 2. needs not be turned, supper being ended, but may
suffer two other readings. Christ's sitting down with the twelve is not meant of
the Paschall supper, and if it were, it proves not that Judas did eat of that
Passover, more than 1 Cor. 15. 5. proves that Judas did see Christ after his
resurrection. A pious observation of Cartwright. Another of Chrysostom.

CHAP. X. That if it could be proved that Judas received the Lords Supper, it
makes nothing against the Suspension of known wicked persons from the
Sacrament.
Christ's admitting of Judas to the Sacrament when he knew him to be a devil,
could no more be a president to us, then his choosing of Judas to be an
Apostle, when he knew also that he was a devil. Judas his sin was not
scandalous but secret, at that time when it is supposed that he did receive the
Sacrament. The same thing which M. Prynne makes to have been after the
Sacrament, to prove that Judas did receive the Sacrament, the very same he
makes to have been before the Sacrament, to prove that Judas was a scandalous
sinner, when he was admitted to the Sacrament. He yields upon the matter that
Judas received not the Sacrament. That before Judas went forth, none of the
Apostles knew him to be the Traitor except John, yea some hold that John knew
it not. That Christ's words to Judas, Thou have said, did not make known to the
Apostles that he was the Traitor, and if they had, yet (by their principles who
hold that Judas received the Sacrament) these words were not spoken before the
Sacrament. Diverse Authors hold that Judas was a secret* not a scandalous
sinner, at that time when it is supposed he received the Sacrament, yea M.
Prynne himself holds so in another place. He loses much by proposing as a
president to Ministers what Christ did to Judas in the last Supper. Christ did
upon the matter excommunicate Judas; which many gather from these words, That
thou do do quickly. And if Christ had admitted him to the Sacrament, it
could be no president to us.

CHAP. XI. Whether it be a full discharge of duty to admonish a scandalous
person of the danger of unworthy communicating? And whether a Minister in
giving him the Sacrament after such admonition, be no way guilty?
Mr Prynne does here mistake his mark, or not hit it, whether the Question be
stated in reference to the Censure of Suspension, or in reference to the
personal duty of the Minister. Five duties of the Minister in this business
beside Admonition. Admonition no Church censure, properly. Six conclusions
promised by M Prynne, examined. His Syllogism concerning the true right of all
visible members of the visible Church to the Sacrament discussed. Four sorts of
persons, beside children and fools, not able to examine themselves, and so not
to be admitted to the Lords Supper, by that limitation which M. Prynne yeedeth.
His Argument from the admission of carnal persons to Baptism, upon a mere
external slight profession, answered. His eleven reasons for the affirmative
of this present Question answered. The Erastian Argument from 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man examine himself, not others, nor others him, fails many ways. M.
Prynne endeavors to pacify the consciences of Ministers by persuading them to
believe, that a scandalous person is outwardly fitted and prepared for the
Sacrament. How dangerous a way it is to give the Sacrament to a scandalous
person, upon hopes that Omnipotency can at that instant change his heart and
his life. Of a man's eating and drinking judgment to himself.

CHAP. XII. Whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be a converting or
regenerating Ordinance.
Mr Prynne in this controversy joyneth not only with the more rigid
Lutherans, but with the Papists. The testimonies of Calvin, Bullinger, Ursinus,
Musculus, Bucerus, Festus Honnius, Aretius, Vossius, Pareus, the Belgicke
confession, and form of administration, the Synod of Dort, Gerhardus, Walaeus,
Chamierus, Polanus, Amesius, are produced against M. Prynne, all these and many
others denying the Lords Supper to be a converting Ordinance. How both
Lutherans and Papists state their controversy with Calvinists (as they call
them) concerning the efficacy of the Sacraments. M. Prynnes distinctions of two
sorts of conversion, and two sorts of sealing, being duly examined, do but
the more open his error instead of covering it. Of the words Sacrament and
Seal: concerning which M. Prynne as he leans toward the Socinian opinion, so
he greatly calls in question that truth, without the knowledge whereof the
Ordinance of Parliament appoints men to be kept back from the Sacrament.
Four distinctions of my own premised, that the true state of the Question may
be rightly apprehended. The 1. Distinction between the absolute power of God,
and the revealed will of God. 2. Between the Sacrament it self, and other
Ordinances which do accompany it. 3. Between the first grace, and the
following graces. 4. Between visible Saints and invisible Saints.

CHAP. XIII. Twenty Arguments to prove that the Lords Supper is not a
converting Ordinance.
1. FRom the nature of signs instituted to signify the being or having of a
thing. The significancy of Sacraments a part ante. 2. Sacraments suppose faith
and an interest had in Christ, therefore do not give it. 3. The Lords Supper
gives the new food, therefore it supposes the new life. 4. It is a seal of
the righteousness of faith, therefore instituted for justified persons only.
5. From the example of Abraham's Justification before circumcision. 6. From the
duty of self-examination, which an unregenerate person cannot perform. 7. From
the necessity of the wedding garment. 8. Faith comes by hearing, not by seeing
or receiving. 9. Neither promise nor example in Scripture of conversion by the
Lords Supper. 10. Every unconverted and unworthy person, if he come (while
such) to the Lords Table) cannot but eat and drink unworthily, therefore ought
not to come. 11. The wicked have no part in an Eucharisticall consolatory
Ordinance. 12. Christ calls none to this Feast but such as have spiritual
gracious qualifications. 13. They that are visibly no Saints, ought not to
partake in the Communion of Saints. 14. Baptism it self (at least when
administered to persons of age) is not a regenerating, but a sealing Ordinance.
15. From the necessity of the precedence of Baptism before the Lords Supper.
16. From the method of the Parable of the lost son. 17. From the doctrinall
dehorting of all impenitent unworthy persons from coming to the Sacrament,
unless they repent, reform, etc. (allowed by M. Prynne himself) which a
Minister may not do, if it be a converting Ordinance. 18. From the
incommunicablenesse of this Ordinance to Pagans, or to excommunicated
Christians for their conversion. 19. From the isntrumental causality of a
converting Ordinance, which in order does not follow, but precede conversion,
and therefore is administered to men, not qua penitent, but qua impenitent,
which can not be said of the Sacrament. 20. Antiquity against M. Prynne in this
point. Witness the Sancta Sanctis. Witness also Dionysius Areopagita, Justin
Martyr, Chrysostom, Augustine, Isidorus Pelusiot^, Prosper, Beda, Isidorus
Hispalensis, Rabanus Maurus, besides Scotus, Alensis, and other Schoolmen.

CHAP. XIV. Master Prynne his twelve Arguments brought to prove that the Lords
Supper is a converting Ordinance, discussed and answered.
HIs first Argument answered by three distinctions. His second proves nothing
against us, but yields somewhat which is for us. His third charged with
diverse absurdities. His fourth concerning the greatest proximity and most
immediate presence of God, and of Christ in the Sacrament retorted against
himself, and moreover not proved nor made good by him. His fifth Argument has
both universal grace and other absurdities in it. His sixth concerning
conversion by the eye, by the book of nature, by Sacrifices, by Miracles, as
well as by the ear, examined and confuted in the particulars. His seventh not
proved. Nor yet his eighth, concerning conversion by afflictions without the
word. His ninth concerning the rule of contraries is misapplied by him. His
tenth concerning the ends of the Sacrament yields the cause and mireth
himself. His eleventh a gross petitio principii. His twelfth appealing to the
experience of Christians, rectified in the state, and repelled for the weight.
That this debate concerning the nature, end use, and effect of the Sacrament,
does clearly cast the balance of the wholecontroversie concerning Suspension.
Lucas Osiander cited by M. Prynne against us, is more against himself.

CHAP. XV. Whether the admission of scandalous and notorious sinners to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, be a pollution and profanation of that holy
Ordinance? And in what respects it may be so called?
THe true state of this Question cleared by five distin^ions. Nine Arguments to
prove the affirmative. That the admitting of the scandalous and profane to the
Sacrament gives the lie to the word preached, and loses those whom the word
binddeth. That it is a strengthening of the hands of the wicked It Is a
profanation of Baptism to baptize a Catechumene Jew, or a Pagan, being of a
known profane life, although he were able to make confession of the true faith
by word of mouth. That such as are found unable to examine themselves (whether
through natural or sinful disability) or manifestly unwilling to it, ought
not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. The reason for keeping back children
and fools holds stronger for keeping back known profane persons. Hag. 2. 11,
12, 13, 14. explained. A debate upon Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy
to dogs, etc wherein M. Prynne is confuted from Scripture, from Antiquity, from
Erastus also and Grotius.

CHAP. XVI. An Argument of Erastus (drawn from the Baptism of John) against
the excluding of scandalous sinners from the Lords Supper, examined.
THat John baptized none but such as confessed their sins, and did outwardly
appear penitent. It Is a great question whether those Pharisees who came to his
Baptism, Matthew. 3. were baptized. The coincidency of that story Matthew. 3. with
the message of the Pharisees to John Baptist, Ioh. 1. The Argument retorted.

CHAP. XVII. Antiquity for the Suspension of all scandalous persons from the
Sacrament, even such as were admitted to other public Ordinances.
O^ the four degrees of Penitents in the ancient Church and of the Suspension
of some unexcommunicated persons from the Lords Supper who did join with the
Church in the hearing of the word and prayer. Proved out of the ancient Canons
of the Councels of Ancyra, Nice, Arles, the sixth and eighth General Councels,
out of Gregorius Thaumaturgus, and Basilius Magnus, confirmed also out of
Zonaras, Balsamon, Albaspin^us. The Suspension of all sorts of scandalous
sinners in the Church from the Sacrament further confirmed out of Isidorus
Pelusiota, Dionysius Areopagita with his Scholiast Maximus, and his paraphrast
Pachimeres. Also out of Cyprian, Justin Martyr, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Augustine, Gregorius Magnus, Walafridus Strabo.

CHAP. XVIII. A discovery of the instability and looseness of M. Prynne his
principles, even to the contradicting of himself in twelve particulars.
AN Argument hinted by M. Prynne from the gathering together all guests to the
wedding Supper, both bad and good, examined, and four answers made to it. That
M. Prynne does profess and pretend to yield the thing for which his
Antagonists contend with him, but indeed does not yield it: his Concessions
being clogged with such things as do evacuate and frustrate all Church
Discipline. That M. Prynne contradicts himself in twelve particulars. Four
Counter-quaerees to him. A discourse of M. Fox the Author of the Book of
Martyrs, concerning three sorts of persons who are unwilling that there should
be a Discipline or power of Censures in the Church.

The Names of Writers or Works cited and made use of in this Tractate.
IS. Abrabanel Melchier Adamus Ainsworth Aeschines Albaspinaeus Albinus Flaccus
Alcuinus Alex. Alensis Algerus Ambrosius Ambrose the Monk Ammonius
Alexandrinus Ampsin^ius Dutch Annotations English Annotations Apoll^nius
Aquinas Arabic N. T. Aretius Arias Montanus Aristotle Arnobius Irish Articles
of faith Augustinus Azorius
B
BAlsamon Io. Baptista derubcis Baronius Basilius Magnus Mr Bayne Becanus
Becmanus Beda Bellarmine Bertramus Beza Bilson Brentius Brochmand Brughton
Mart. Bucerus Gers. Bucerus Budoeus Bulling^r Buxtorff
C
CAbeljavius Cajetanus Calvin I. Camero Camerarius Canons of the African
Church. L. Capellus D. Carthusianus Cartwright I. Casaubon The Magdeburgian
Centurists Chaldee Paraphrase Chami^rus Chemnitius Chrysostomus D. Chytraeus
Is. Clarus Fr. a S. Clara Clemens Clemens Alexandrinus Nic. de Clemangis
Iudocus Clichtoveus I. Cloppenburgius I. Coch Mr Coleman A^gid de Coninck
Barthol. Coppen Balthazar ^orderius Corpus Disciplinae Mr Cotoon Tomes of
Councels Richardus Cowsin Cyprian Cyrill.
D
DAn^us R. David Ganz. Demos^henes M. David Dickson Didoclavius Lud. de Dieu
Mich. Dilherrus Di^dati The Directory of both Kingdoms Dio^yfins (...) Syn^d
of Dort Jesuits of Doway I. Drusius Du^renus Durandus Duran^s
E
ELias R. Eli^ser C ^ Empereur Erastus Erasmus C. Espen^us Es^ius Euthymius
Aben Ezra
F
FA^ritius Mr Fox Chapter Francken Hist. of the troubles at Franckeford The
Discipline of the reformed Churches of Fran^ Dr Fulk^
G
P. Galatinus Phil. Gamachaeus Gelenius Laws and Statu^es of Genevah
Genebrardus Geo. Genzius I. ^rhardus Gesnerus S^l. Glassius Godwyn Gomarus
Gorranus Gregorius Magnus Gregorius Thaumaturgus Professors of Groaning Grotius
Gualther
H
HArmony of confessions Harmonia Synoder^n Belgicarum Haymo Helmichius
Hemmiugius Heshusius Hesychius Hier^ Hilarious M. Hildersham P. Hinkelmannus
Fra^. Holy-Oke (...) Honnius H^go de S. Uict^re Hug^ Cardi^lis L. Humfredus
Aegid. H^ius M. Hussy Hutterus
I
KIng James Iansen^us I'lyricus I^nocentius. 3. Josephus Iosuae levitae
Halichoth Olam. Isidorus Hisp^lensis Isidorus (...) Julius Caesar Fr. Iunius
Justinius Martyr
K
KE^erm ^nnus Dr K^llet C. Kir^erus
L
COrn. a Lapide Lavater Laurentius de la bar Mr Leigh Nieolaus Lambardus
Lorinus Luthe^us Lyr^
M
MAccovius Maimonides Maldonat Man^sseh Ben. Israel Concilia^or Marianae
Marlorat Martial M. Martinius P. Martyr Maximus Medina Meisnerus Menochius
Mercerus P. Maulin Munsterus Musculus
N
G. Nazianzen I. Newenklaius Nonnus Novarinus
O
OEcumenius Origin Luc. Osiander
P
PAchymeres Mr Paget: Pagnin Paraeus Parker Pasor Pelargus Pellicanus Pemble
Philo the Jew Piscator Plato Polanus Mr Prynne
R
RAbanus Maurus Raynolds The Remonstran^s Revius Rittangelius D. Rivetus
Rupertus Tuitiensis M. Rutherfurd
S
EManuel Sa Salmasius Salmeron M. Sal^marsh Sanctius Saravia I. Scaliger
Scapula Schindlerus Jonas Schlichtingius The Book of Discipline of Scotland
Scotus Subtilis M. Seldom The (...) ^eius F. Socin^s ^ipingius Fr. Spanbemi^t
Spelman Stegmannus Strigelius Suarez Suidas Su^livius Syariac^ N. T.
T
TAcianus The Talmud Tannerus Tertullian Theodoretus Theophylactus Tilenus
Tirinus Titus Bostrorum Episcapus Toletus Tostatus Tossanus Trelcatius
Triglandius Tully
W
WAlaeus Walafridus Strabo Mr Io. Welsh Mr John Wey^es of Craigton Mr John
Weimes of Latho^ker Westhemerus Whitgift Whittakerus Willet I. Winkelmannus
Wolphius
V
GR. de Valentia Vatablus Uazquez Uedelius Uictor Antiochenus Gisb. V^etius
Gul. Vorstius Hen. Vorstius Ger^ardus Uossius Dionysius Vossius Ursinus
Z
ZAnc^ius Zepperus Zon^ras Z^inglius.
Aarons Rod blossoming: OR, The Divine Ordinance of Church Government
VINDICATED.
The first Book. Of the Jewish Church Government.
CHAP. I. That if the Erastians could prove what they allege concerning the
Jewish Church Government, yet in that particular the Jewish Church could not be
a president to the Christian.
OBserving that very much of Erastus his strength, and much of his followers
their confidence, lie^h in the old Testament, and Jewish Church, which (as they
aver) knew no such distinction, as Civil Government, and Church Government;
Civil Justice, and Church Discipline; I have thought good, first of all, to
remove that great stumbling block, that our way may afterward lie fair and
plain before us. I do heartily acknowledge, that what we find to have been an
Ordinance, or an approved practice in the Jewish Church, ought to be a rule and
pattern to us, such things only excepted which were typical, or temporal,
that is, for which there were special reasons proper to that infancy of the
Church, and not common to us. Now, if our opposites could prove that the Jewish
Church was nothing but the Jewish State, and that the Jewish Church Government,
was nothing but the Jewish Stategovernment, and that the Jews had never any
supreme Sanhedrin but one only, and that civil, and such as had the temporal
coercive power of Magistracy (which they will never be able to prove) yet there
are diverse con^iderable reasons, for which that could be no president to us.

First, Casaubon exerc. 13. anno 31. number. 10. proves out of Maimonides, that
the Sanhedrin was to be made up (if possible) wholly of Priests and Levites;
and that if so many Priests and Levites could not be found, as were fit to be
of the Sanhedrin, in that case some were assumed out of other Tribes. Howbeit I
hold not this to be agreeable to the first institution of the Sanhedrin. But
thus much is certain, that Priests and Levites were members of the Jewish
Sanhedrin, and had an authoritative decisive suffrage in making decrees, and
inflicting punishments, as well as other members of the Sanhedrin. Philo the
Jew de vita Mosis page 530. says that he who was found gathering sticks upon
the Sabbath, was brought ad principem and sacerdotum consistorium, (...). that
is, to the Prince or chief Ruler (meaning Moses) together with whom the
Priests did sit and judge in the Sanhedrin. Jehosaphat did set of the Levites,
of the Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the judgment
of the Lord, etc. 2 Chro. 19. 8.

Secondly, the people of Israel had Gods own Judicial Law given by Moses, for
their civil Law: and the Priests and Levites in stead of civil Lawyers.

Thirdly, the Sanhedrin did punish no man, unless admonition had been first
given to him for his amendment. Maimon. de fundam. legis cap. 5. sect. 6. (yea
says Gul. Vorstius upon the place, though a man had killed his parents, the
Sanhedrin did not punish him unless he were first admonished) and when
witnesses were examined, seven questions were propounded to them, one of which
was, whether they had admonished the offender, as the Talmud it self tells us ad
tit. Sanhedrin cap. 5. sect. 1.

Fourthly, the Sanhedrin respondebat de Jure, did interpret the Law of God, and
determine controversies, concerning the sense and intent thereof. Deuteronomy. 17. 8,
9, 10, 11. and it was on this manner as the Jerusalem Talmud in Sanhedrin cap.
10. sect. 2. records. There were there (in Jerusalem) three assemblies of
Judges: one sitting at the entry to the mountain of the Sanctuary: another
sitting at the door of the Court: the third sitting in the Conelave made of
cut stone. First, address was made to that which sat at the ascent of the
mountain of the Sanctuary: then the Elder (who came to represent the cause
which was too hard for the Courts of the Cities) said on ^his manner. I have
drawn this sense from the holy Scripture, my fellows have drawn that sense. I
have taught thus, my f^llows so and so. If they had learned what is to be
determined in that cause, they did communicate it unto them. If not, they went
forward together to the Judges sitting at the door of the Court: by whom they
were instructed, if they (after the laying forth of the difficulty) knew what
resolution to give. Otherwise all of them jointly had recourse to the great
Sanhedrin. For from it does the Law go forth unto all Israel. It is added in
Exc. Gemar. Sanhed. cap. 10. sect. 1. that the Sanhedrin did sit in that room
of cut stone (which was in the Temple) from the morning to the evening daily
sacrifice. The Sanhedrin did judge cases of Idolatry, apostasy, false
Prophets, etc. Talm. Hieros. in Sanhed. cap. 1. sect. 5.

Now all this being unquestionably true of the Jewish Sanhedrin: if we should
suppose, that they had no supreme Sanhedrin but that which had the power of
civil Magistracy, then I ask where is that Christian State, which was, or is,
or ought to be molded according to this pattern. Must Ministers have vote in
Parliament? Must they be civil Lawyers? must all criminal and capital
Judgments be according to the Judicial Law of Moses, and none otherwise? Must
there be no civil punishment, without previous admonition of the offender?
Must Parliaments sit, as it were in the Temple of God, and interpret Scripture,
which sense is true, and which false, and determine controversies of faith and
cases of conscience, and judge of all false doctrines? yet all this must be, if
there be a parallel made with the Jewish Sanhedrin. I know some divines hold,
that the Judicial Law of Moses, so far as concerns the punishments of sins
against the moral ^aw, Idolatry, blasphemy, Sabbath-breaking, adultery, theft,
etc. ought to be a rule to the Christian Magistrate. and for my part, I wish
more respect were had to it, and that it were more consulted with. This by the
way. I am here only showing, what must follow, if the Jewish Government be
taken for a pr^sident, without making a dis^inction of Civil and Church
government. Surely, the consequences will be such, as I am sure our opposites
will never admit of, and some of which (namely concerning the civil places or
power of Ministers, and concerning the Magistrates authority to interpret
Scripture) ought not to be admitted.

Certainly, if it should be granted that the Jews had but one Sanhedrin, yet
there was such an intermixture ^of Civil and Ecclesiastical both persons and
proceedings, that there must be a partition made of that power, which the
Jewish Sanhedrin did exercise, which (taken whole and entire together) can
neither suit to our Civil nor to our Ecclesiastical Courts. Nay, while the
Erastians appeal to the Jewish Sanhedrin (suppose it now to be but one) they
do thereby engage themselves to grant unto Church officers a share at least
(yea a great share) in Ecclesiastical government: for so they had in the
Supreme Sanhedrin of the Jews.

And further the Jews had their Synagoga magna, which Grotius on Matthew. 10.
17. distinguishes from the Sanhedrin of 71. for both Prophets and others of
place and power among the people praeter (...), besides the members of that
Sanhedrin were members of that extraordinary assembly, which was called the
great Synagogue, such as that Assembly Ezra 10. which did decree forfeiture and
separation from the Congregation, to be the punishment of such as would not
gather themselves unto Jerusalem: in which assembly were others beside those of
the Sanhedrin. Of the men of the great Synagogue I read in Tzemach David page
56. ^dit. Hen. Vors. that they did receive the traditions from the Prophets;
and it is added Viri Synagogae magnae ordinarunt nobis preces nostras. The men
of the great Synagogue did appoint unto us our prayers, meaning their
Liturgies, which they fancy to have been so instituted. The Hebrews themselves
controvert, whether all the men of the great Synagogue did live at one and the
same time, or successively; but that which is most received among them, is,
that these men did flourish all at one time, as is told us in the passage last
cited, where also these are named as men of the great Synagogue, Haggai,
Zechariah, Malachi, Zerubbabel, Mordechai, Ezra, Jehoshua, Seria, Rehaliah,
Misphar, Rechum, Nehemias. Rambam adds, Chananiah, Mischael, and Azariah.

Finally, as Prophets, Pries^s, and Scribes of the Law of God had an interest
in the Synagoga magna after the Captivity, so we read of occasional and
extraordinary Ecclesiastical Synods before the Captivity, as that assembly of
the Priests and Levites under Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 29. 4. 15. and that erring
Synod of the 400 Prophets, 1 Kings 22. 6. Herod also gathered together the
chief Priests and Scribes, Matthew. 2. 4. I conclude, that if it should be
granted there was no Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin among the Jews, distinct from
the civil, yet as the necessity of a distinct Ecclesiastical Government among
us, is greater then it was among them (in respect of the four considerations
above mentioned) so likewise the Priests had a great deal more power and
authority in the Jewish Church, (not only by occasional Synods, but by their
interest in Synagoga magna, and in the civil Sanhedrin it self) then the
Erastians are willing that Church officers should have in the Christian Church.

CHAP. II. That the Jewish Church was formally distinct from the Jewish State
or Commonwealth.
IT has been by some (with much confidence and scorn of all who say
otherwise) averred that Excommunication and Church Government distinct from the
Civil, has no pattern for it in the Jewish Church. I am sure (says Mr
Coleman in his Brotherly examination re-examined, page 16.) the best reformed
Church that ever was went this way, I mean the Church of Israel, which had no
distinction of Church government and Civil government. Have thou appealed unto
Caesar? unto Caesar shall thou go. Have you appealed to the Jewish Church?
thither shall you go. Wherefore I shall endeavor to make these five things
appear: 1. That the Jewish Church was formally (...) from the Jewish State. 2.
That there was an Eccle^iasticall Sanhedrin and Government distinct from the
Civil. 3. That there was an Ecclesiastical Excommunication, (...) from Civil
punishments. 4. That in the Jewish Church there was also a public exomologesis
or declaration of repentance, and thereupon a reception or admission again of
the offender to fellowship with the Church in the holy things. 5. That there
was a suspension of the profane from the Temple and Passover.

First, the Jewish Church was formally di^tinct from the Jewish State. I say
formally, because ordinarily they were not distinct materially, the same
persons being members of both. But formally they were distinct, (as now the
Church and State are distinct among us Christians.) 1. In respect of distinct
laws; the Ceremonial Law was given to them in reference to their Church
state, the Judicial Law was given to them in reference to their Civil State.
Is. Abrabanel de capite fidei cap. 13. puts this difference between the
Laws given to Adam and to the sons of Noah, and the divine Law given by
Moses: that those Laws were given for conservation of humane society and are in
the classis of Judicial or civil Laws. But the divine Law given by Moses,
does direct the soul to its last perfection and end. I do not approve the
difference which he puts between these Laws. This only I note, that he
distinguishes Judicial or Civil Laws for conservation of society, (though
given by God) from those Laws which are given to perfect the soul, and to
direct it to its last end, such as he conceives the whole moral and
ceremonial Law of Moses to be* Halichoth Olam tract. 5. cap. 2. tells us that
such and such Rabbis were followed in the ceremonial Laws: other Rabbis
followed in the Judicial Laws. 2. In respect of distinct acts: they did not
worship God and offer Sacrifices in the Temple, nor call upon the name of Lord,
nor give thanks, nor receive the Sacraments as that State, but as that Church.
They did not punish evil doers by mulcts, imprisonment, banishment, burning,
stoning, hanging, as that Church, but as that State. 3. In respect of
controversi^s; some causes and controversies did concern the Lords matters,
some the Kings matters, 2 Chro. 19. 11. To judge between blood and blood was
one thing. To judge between Law and Commandment, between Statut^s and
judgments; that is, to give the true sense of the Law of God when it was
controverted, was another thing. 4. In respect of Officers: the Priests and
L^vites were Church Officers. Magistrates and Judges not so, but were Ministers
of the State. The Priests might not take the Sword out of the hand of the
Magistrates. The Magistrates might not offer Sacrifice nor exercise the Priests
office. 5. In respect of continuance, when the Romans took away the Jewish
State and civil Government, yet the Jewish Church did remain, and the Romans
did permit them the liberty of their religion. And now though the Jews have no
Jewish State, yet they have Jewish Churches. Whence it is, that when they tell
where one did or does live, they do not mention the Town, but the Church: In
the holy Church at Uenice, at Frankford, etc. See Buxtorf. lex. Rabin. page
1983. 6. In respect of variation. The constitution and Government of the Jewish
State was not the same, but different, under Moses and Joshua, under the
Judges, under the Kings, and after the Captivity. But we cannot say, that the
Church was new modelld as often as the State was. 7. In respect of members. For
as De Iure nature. and Gentium lib. 2. cap. 4. Prosely^us Iustitiae utcunque
novato patriae nomine Iudaeus dice^etur, non tam quidem (...) Iudaicus
simpliciter censendus ^sset qu^m peregrinas semper, cui jura quamplurima inter
cives. See the like lib. 5. c. 20.
M. Seldom has very well observed concerning that sort of Proselytes, who had
the name of Pr^selyti Justitiae; they were initiated into the Jewish religion
by Circumcision, Baptism, and Sacrifice: and they were allowed not only to
worship God apart by themselves, but also to come into the Church and
Congregation of Israel, and to be called by the name of Jews: nevertheless
they were res^rained and secluded from Dignities, Magistracies and preferments
in the Jewish Republique, and from diverse marriages, which were free to the
Israelites: Even as strangers initiated and associated into the Church of Rome,
have not therefore the privilege of Roman Citizens. Thus M. Seldom, who has
thereby made it manifest, that there was a dis^iuction of the Jewish Church and
Jewish State, because those Proselytes Buxtorf. lexic. Chald. Talm. and Rabbin
page 408 Proselyti justitiae sunt qui non rerum externarum, sed solius
religionis causa, and gloriae Dei studio, religionem Iudaicam amplectuntur, and
totam legem Mosis dicto modo recipient. Hi natis Iudaeis habentur aequales:
understand in an Ecclesiastical, not in a Civil capacity. In which sense also
Matthias Martinius in lexic. philol. page 2922. says that these Proselytes,
cum ad sacrorum Iudaicorum communionem admit^ebantur, etc. very Iudaei
censebantur: and that to be made a Proselyte, and to be made a Jew, are used
promiscuously in the Rabbinicall writings. So also Drusius praet. l. 4. in Io.
12. 20.
being imbodied into the Jewish Church as Church members, and having a right to
communicate in the holy Ordinances among the rest of the people of God, yet
were not properly members of the Jewish State, nor admitted to Civil
privileges: Whence it is also that the names of Jews and Proselytes were used
distinctly, Acts 2. 10.

CHAP. III. That the Jews had an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin and Government
distinct from the Civil.
I Come to the second point, that there was an Ecclesiastical government, and
an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin among the Jews. This distinction of the two
Sanhedrins, the Civil and the Ecclesiastical, is maintained by Zepperus de
polit. eccles. l. 3. cap. 7. Iunius in Deuteronomy. 17. Piscator ibid. Wolphius in 2.
Reg. 23. Gerhard Harm. de pass. cap. 8. G^dwin Moses and Aaron lib. 5. cap. 1.
Bucerus de gubern. eccl. page 61, 62. Walaeus Tom. 2. page 9. Pelargus in Deuteronomy.
17. Sopingius ad bonam fidem Sibrandi page 261. et seq. The Dutch Annotations
on Deuteronomy. 17. and 2 Chronicles. 19. Bertramus de polit. Jud. cap. 11. Ap^llonii jus
Majest. part. 1. p. 374. Strigelius in 2. Paralip. cap. 19. The professors of
Groaning. (Vide Judicium facult. Theol. academiae Groninganae, apud Cabeljav.
def. potest. Eccl. page 54.) I remember Raynolds in the Conference with Heart is
of the same opinion. Also M. Paget in his defense of Church government, page
41. Besides diverse others. I shall only add the Testimony of Constantinus
L'Empereur, a man singularly well acquainted with the Jewish antiquities, who
has expressed himself concerning this point both in his Annotations upon
Bertram page 389. and Annot. in Cod. Middoth. page 187, 188. The latter of
these two passages you have here in the Caete^um supremus Senatus cujus in hoc
concl^visedes, duplex fuisse videtur, pro ^erum Ecclesi^ticarum and politicarum
diversitate: quonia^ Deuteronomy 17. 12. ubi de supremis Senatoribus agitur, maniseste
Sacerdos d Iudice distinguitur; ad sacerdotema^t ad Iudicem i. e. Sacerdotes
aut Iudices, ut com. 9. inaicio est, ubi pro Sacerd^te ponuntur Sacerdotes.
Add Ieboshaphatum, cum Iudicia Hicrosolymis restaura^et, duos ordines
conflituisse, Sacerdetes and Capita samilia^um, ad judicium Dei and ad litem:
similiter duos praes^les com 11. un^m ad omnem causam Dei: alterum scilicet
duce^ Iudaeorum ad omne negotium Regis. Quibus succinunt verba Jerem. 19. 1.
quibus Seniores populi^ Senioribus Sacerdot^m distinguntur. Quocirca in N. T.
sublato (ut videtur) per H^rodem, uno synedrio, sc. politico; al^erum
Apostolorum seculo supersuit, in quo politici etiam manebant reliqui^: nam ab
Ecclesiasticis Seniores populi distinguntur, Matthew. 26. 3. 59 and 27. verse. 1.
Ni magis placeat, quod ab aliis observatum suit, Herodem, sublatis 70.
Senioribus e familia Davidica, alios inseriores substitu^sse: quod judiciorum
quibusdam excmplis firmari videtur. Adeo (...) illis temporibus duplex quoque
Synedrium suerit, quamvis utriusque Senatores subinde convenirent: qu^ forte
reserendum (...), quod Matthew. 26. 59. Marc 14. 55. and 15. 1. Acts 22. 30.
occurrit. (Quin etiam cap 1. cod. Iomae, eadem distinctio his verbis
confirmatur (ubi de (...) Sacerdotis magni ad diem expiationis agitur) tradunt
eum Seniores d^mus Iudicii, Senioribus Sacerdotii.
Margin, expressing not only his opinion, but the ground of it.

And it is no obscure footstep of the Ecclefiasticall Sanhedrin, Propter
meritum assess^rum Sy^edrii, qui occupati sunt in lege, and illuminant
Iudicium. Et descendit in Babyloniam ad concilium Sapientum. I^ non fuit
Synedrium Iudicum and Magistratus summi, sed collegium doctorum.
which is cited out of Elias, by D. Buxtorf in his Lexicon Chald. Talmud. and
Rabbin. p. 1514.

The first institution of an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin appears to me to be
held forth Exodus 24. 1. where God says to Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou
and Aaron, Nad^ and Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel. It is a
controversy among Interpreters who those seventy Elders were. Iu Exodus 24.
Quaest. 3.
Tostatus makes it clear, that they were not the seventy Elders chosen for
the government of the Commonwealth, Number 11. Nor yet the Judges chosen by the
advice of Iethro, Exodus 18. Nor yet any other Judges which had before time
Judged the people. These three negatives Willet upon the place holds with
Tostatus. Not the first: for this was done at Mount Sinai, shortly after their
coming out of Egypt. But on the twenty day of the second month, in the second
year, they took their journey from Sinai to the Wilderness of Paran, Number.
10. 11, 12. and there pitched at Hibroth-hattaavath Number. 33. 16. where the
seventy Elders were chosen to relieve Moses of the burden of Government. So
that this election of seventy Exodus 24. was before that election of seventy Number
11. Not the second: for this election of seventy Exodus 24. was before that
election of Judges by Iethros advice Exodus 18. Iethro himself not having come
to Moses till the end of the first year, or the beginning of the second year
after the coming out of Egypt, and not before the giving of the Law: which
Tostatus proves by this argunent, The Law was given the third day, after they
came to Sinai; but it was impossible that Iethro should in the space of three
days, hear that Moses and the people of Israel were in the wilderness of
Sinai, and come there unto them, that Moses should go forth and meet him, and
receive him, and entertain him; that Iethro should observe the manner of Moses
his government, in litigious judgment from morning till evening, and give
counsel to rectify it; that Moses should take course to help it; how could
all this be done in those three days, which were also appointed for
sanctifying the people against the receiving of the Law? Therefore In Exodus 18.
Quest. 2.
he concludes that the story of Iethro Exodus 18. is an anticipation. Lastly,
he says, the seventy Elders mentioned Exodus 24. could not be Judges who did
judge the people before Iethro came, because Iethro did observe the whole
burden of government did lie upon Moses alone, and there were no other Judges.

Now it is to be observed, that the seventy Elders chosen and called Exodus 24.
were also invested with Menocbius in Exodus 24. 14. redite ad populum, ut illum
regatis, and in officio contineati^. Pelargus upon the place says that Moses
would not leave the Church without Rulers to avoid the danger of popular
anarchy.
authority in judging controversies, wherein Aaron or Hur were to preside verse.
14. They are joined with Aaron, Nadad, and Abihu, and are called up as a
Representative of the whole Church, when God was making a Covenant with his
people. It Is after the Judicial laws, Exodus 21. and 22. and 23. and that 24
Chapter is a transition to the ceremonial laws concerning the worship of God,
and structure of the Tabernacle, which are to follow. Neither had the seventy
Elders (of which now I speak) any share of the Supreme civil Government, to
judge hard Civil causes, and to receive appeals concerning those things from
the inferior Judges; for all this did still lie upon Moses alone, Number. 11. 14.
Furthermore they saw the glory of the Lord, and were admitted to a sacred
banquet, and to eat of the Sacrifices in his presence Exodus 24. 5, 10, 11. and
were thereby confirmed in their calling. All which laid together may seem to
amount to no less then a solemn interesting and investing of them into an
Ecclesiastical authority.

The next proof for the Ecclesiastical Sanhed^in shall be taken from Deuteronomy.
17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. where observe 1. It Is agreed upon both by Jewish and
Christian Expositors, that this place holds forth a supreme civil Court of
Judges, and the authority of the civil Sanhedrin is mainly grounded on this
very Text. Now if this Text hold forth a superior civil Jurisdiction (as is
universally acknowledged) it holds forth also a superior Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction distinct from the Civil. For the Text carries the authority and
sentence of the Priests as high, as the authority and sentence of the Judges,
and that in a disjunctive way, as two powers, (not one) and each of them
binding, respectively, and in its proper sphere. 2. The Hebrew Doctors tell us
of three kinds of causes, which being found difficult were transmitted from the
inferior Courts to those at Jerusalem. 1. capital causes. 2. mulcts. 3.
leprosy, and the judgment of clean or unclean. Now this third belonged to the
cognizance and judgment of the Priests. Yea the Text it self holds forth two
sorts of causes, and controversies, some forensicall between blood and blood:
some ceremonial between stroke and stroke; not only Hierome, but the Chaldee,
and Greek, reads, between leprosy and leprosy. Grotius notes, the Hebrew
word is used for leprosy, many times in one chapter, Lev. 13. Plea and plea
seems common to both, there being difference of judgment concerning the one
and the other. 3. Here are two Iudicatories distinguished by the disjunctive Or
V. 12. which we have both in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek, and in our English
Translation; so that verse. 9. and is put for or, as Grotius notes, expounding
that verse by verse. 12. And as the Priests and Levites are put in the plural
V. 9. the like must be understood of the Judge, whereby we must understand
Judges, and so the Chaldee reads V. 9. even as (says Ainsworth) many
Captains are in the Hebrew called an head, 1 Chronicles. 4. 42. And so you have
there, references of difficult cases from inferior Courts, to the Priests or to
the Judges at Jerusalem. 4. There is also some intimation of a twofold
sentence; one concerning the meaning of the Law, according to the sentence of
the Law, which they shall teach thee, V. 11. and this belonged to the Priests,
Mal. 2. 7. for the Priests (its not said the Judges) lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth. Another concerning matter
of fact, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall
do. Grotius upon the place acknowledges a udgement of the Priests distinct
from that of the Judges: and he add^th a simile from the Roman Synod consisting
of seventy Bishops which was consulted in weighty controversies. But he is of
opinion that the Priests and Levites did only end avour to satisfy and
reconcile the dissenting parties, which if they did, well, if not, that then
they referred the reasons of both parties to the Sanhedrin, who gave forth
their decree upon the whole matter. The first part of that which he says,
helps me. But this last has no ground in the Text, but is manife^ly
inconsistent therewith, V. 12. The man that will do presumptuously, and will
not hearken unto the Priest, or unto the Judge, even that man shall die. Which
proves, Eros^us Confirm th^s. lib. 4 cap. 3 M^ses (...) ait, intersici ^dum
^sse illum, qu^ vel (...), sentemiae vel Judicis assentire nollet Non ergo
liberum facit ab i^lo ad (...) pr^vocare.
that the judgment of both was supreme in suo genere, that is, if it was a
controver^e ceremonial, between leprosy and leprosy, or between clean and
unclean, Lev. 10. 9, 10, 11. Ezech. 22. 26. or dogmaticall and doctrinall,
concerning the sense of the Law, and answering de Jure, when the sense of the
Law was controverted by the Judges of the Cities, then he that would not stand
to the sentence of the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin, whereof the high Priest was
pre^dent, was to die the death. But if the cause was criminal, as between
blood and blood, wherein the nature or proof of the fact, could not be agreed
upon, by the Judges of the Cities, then he that would not submit to the decree
of the civil Sanhedrin at I^rusalem should die the death. And thus the English
Divines in their late annotations, give the sense according to the disjunction,
V. 12. While the Priest brings warrant from God for the sentenee which he
passes in the cause of man, Ezech. 44. 23, 24. he that contumaciously
disobeyeth him disobeyeth God, Luke 10. 16. Matthew. 10. 14. The cause is alike
if the just sentence of a competent Judge be contemned in secular effaires.

In the third place, we read that David did thus divide the Levites (at that
time eight and thirty thousand) four and twenty thousand of them were to set
forward the work of the house of the Lord, four thousand were porters, and
four thousand praised the Lord with instruments, and six thousand of them were
made some schoterim Officers, and some sch^phtim Judges, 1 Chro. 23. 4. Some
understand by Schoterim Rulers, or those who were over the charge. To speak
properly schophtim were those that gave sentence; schoterim those that looked to
the execution of the sentence, and to the keeping of the law, like the (...)
among the Craecians: (for (...) was one thing, (...) another.) So 1 Chro. 26.
29. Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward business over Israel, for
Officers (or Rulers or over the charge) and Judges: that is, they were not tied
to attendance and service in the Temple, as the Porters and singers, and those
that did service about the Sacrifices, Lights, Washings, and such like things
in the Temple: but they Me^ochius in 1. Paral. 23. 4. idem sunt praepositi and
Iudices, quorum mun^s erat Israelitarum causas qu^ juxta legem finiebantur,
judicare, quod patet ex 2. Paral. 19. 8. ubi habemus constituit Jehosaphat in
Jerusalem levi^as and sacerdotes, and Princip s famil^arum ex Is^a l, ut
judicium and causam domini judicarent.
were to judge and give sentence concerning the law and the meaning thereof,
when any such controversy should be brought before them from any of the Cities
in the Land: They were not appointed to be Officers and Judges over the rest of
the Levites to keep them in order (for which course was taken in another way)
but to be Rulers and Judges over Israel, says the Text, in the outward
business which came from without to Jerusalem, in judging of which
peradventure they were to attend by course, or as they should be called. If any
say that all those Levites who were Judges did not sit in judgment at
Jerusalem, but some of them in several Cities of the Land, that there might be
the easier access to them; I can easily grant it, and I verily believe it was
so, and it makes the more for a Church government in particular Cities, which
was subordinate to the Ecclesiastical Sanh d^in at Jerusalem. However the
Levites had a ruling power, and Deuteronomy. 31. 28. those who are schoterim in the
original, the Septuagints call (...), Hierome, Doctores, because their
Teachers were Officers over the charge, and had a share in Government. Now no
man can imagine that there were no other Officers over the charge not Judges in
Israel, except the Levites only; for it follows in that same Story, ^ Chro.
28. 1. And David assembled all the Princes of Israel, the Princes of the
Tribes, and the Captains of the Companies that ministered to the King by course,
and the Captains over the thousands, etc. Nor yet will any man say, that the
Levites were Officers over the charge, and Judges of the same kind, in the same
manner, or for the same ends, with the civil Rulers and Judges, or the
military Commanders; or that there was no distinction between the ruling power
of the Princes, and the ruling power of the Levites. Where then shall the
difference lie, if not in this, that there was an Ecclesiastical Government,
besides the Civil and Military? I grant those Levites did rule and judge not
only in all the business of the Lord, but also in the service of the King, 1
Chro. 26. 30, 32. But the reason was, because the Jews had no other civil
Law, but Gods own Law, which the Priests and Levites were to expound. So that
it was proper for that time, and there is not the like reason that the
Ministers of Jesus Christ in the New Testament should judge or rule in civil
affairs: (nay it were contrary to the rule of Christ and his Apostles for us to
do so) yet the Levites their judging and governing in all the bufines of the
Lord, is a pattern left for the entrusting of Church officers in the New
Testament with a power of Church government: there being no such reason for it,
as to make it peculiar to the old Testament, and not common to the New.

The fourth Scripture which proves Salmas. apparat. ad libros de Primatu p.
302. Quae ad ^es sacras ac divinas pertinebant, de his praecipue judicium
Sacerdotum fuit, de ali^ civilibus and regalib^, praesides (...) rege
constituti, ut patet ex lib. 2. Chro. cap. 19. Titinus in 2. Chro. 19. 11. Ubi
not a distinctionem sori seu Magistratus Ec clesiastici and civilis, contra
Anglo-Calvinistas and nostros Arminianos.
an Ecclesiastical government and Sanhedrin, is 2 Chro. 19. 8, 10, 11. where
Iehoshaphat restores the same Church government, which was first instituted by
the hand of Moses, and afterward ordered and settled by David. Moreover (says
the Text) in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the Priests,
and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, and
for controversies, etc. It is not controverted whether there was a civil
Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, but that which is to be proved from the place, is an
Ecclesiastical Court, which I prove thus. Where there is a Court made up of
Ecclesiastical members, judging Spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes, for a
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical end, moderated by an Ecclesiastical president,
having power ultimately and authoritatively to determine causes and
controversies brought before them by appeal or reference from inferior
Courts; and whose sentence is put in execution by Ecclesiastical officers;
There it must needs be granted that there was a supreme Ecclesiastical court,
with power of Government. But such a Court we find at Jerusalem in
Iehoshaphats time. Ergo. The Proposition I suppose no man will deny. For a Court
so constituted, so qualified, and so authorized, is the very thing now in
debate. And he that will grant us the thing which is in the assumption, shall
have leave to call it by another name if he please. The assumption I prove by
the parts. 1. Here are Levites and Priests in this Court, as members thereof,
with power of decisive suffrage, and with them such of the chief of the
Fathers of Israel, as were joined in the government of that Church; Whence the
Reverend and learned Assembly of Divines, and many Protestant Writers before
them have drawn an argument for Ruling Elders. And this is one of the
Scriptures alleged by our Divines against Bellarmin, to prove that others
beside those who are commonly (but corruptly) called the Clergy ought to have a
decisive voice in Synods.

2. Spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes were here judged: which are called by
the name of the judgment of the Lord, V. 8. and the matters of the Lord
distinguished from the Kings matters, V. 11. so V. 10. beside controversies
between blood and blood, that is, concerning consanguinity and the interpreting
of the Laws concerning forbidden degrees in marriage, (it being observed by
interpreters that all the lawful or unlawful degrees are not particularly
expressed, but some only, and the rest were to be judged of by parity of
reason, and so it might fall within the cognizance of the Ecclesiastical
Sanhedrin.) Though it may be also expounded otherwise, between blood and blood,
that is, Whether the murder was wilful or casual, (which was matter of fact)
the cognizance whereof belonged to the civil Judge; It is further added
between Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments: noting seeming
contradictions between one Law and another, (such as Manasseb Ben Israel has
spoken of in his Conciliator) or when the sense and meaning of the Law is
controverted, (which is not matter of fact, but of right) wherein special use
was of the Priests whose lips should preserve knowledge and the Law was to be
sought at his mouth, A^al. 2. 7. and that not only ministerially and
doctrinally, but judicially and in the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, such
controversies concerning the Law of God were brought before them, as in 2 Chro.
19. the place now in hand. Yea shall even warn them, etc. Which being spoken to
the Court, must be meant of a synedricall Decree, determining those questions
and controversies concerning the Law, which should come before them. As for
that distinction in the Text of the Lords matters and the Kings matters,
Erastus page 274. says that by the Lords matters is meant any cause expressed
in the Law, which was to be judged. Whereby he takes away the distinction which
the Text makes; for in his sense the Kings matters were the Lords matters.
Which himself (it seems) perceiving, he immediately yields our
interpretation, that by the Lords matters are meant things pertaining to the
worship of God; and by the Kings matters, civil things. Si per illas libet res
ad cultum Dei spectantes, per haec res civiles accipere, non pugnabo. If you
please (says he) by those, to understand things pertaining to the worship of
God, by these, civil things, I will not be against it.

3. It was for a Spiritual and Ecclesiastical end, ye shall even warn them
that they trespass not against the Lord. Its not said against one another, but
against the Lord, for two reasons. 1. Because mention had been made of the
Commandments, Statutes, and Judgments, after the general word Law, V. 10. by
which names Interpreters use to understand (both in this and many other places
of Scripture) the Laws moral, Ceremonial and Judicial. Now the case to be
judged might be part of the Ceremonial Law, having reference to God and his
Ordinances; and not part of the Judicial law, or any injury done by a man to
his neighbor. And in refer^nce to the moral Law it might ^e a trespass
against the first Table, not against the second. 2. Even in the case of a
personal or civil injury, or whatso^ver the controversy was that was brought
before them, they were to warn the Judges in the Cities not to trespass
against the Lord by mistaking or misunderstanding the Law, or by righting men's
wrongs so as to wrong Divine right. And for that end they were to determine the
Ius, and the intendment of the law, when it was controverted.

4. Whatsoever cause of their brethren that dwelt in the Cities, should come
unto them, V. 10. (whether it should come by appeal, or by reference and
arbitration) this Court at Jerusalem was to give out an ultimate and
authoritative determination of it. So that what was brought from inferior
courts to them, is brought no higher to any other Court.

5. This Court had an Ecclesiastical Prolocutor or moderator, V. 11. Amariah
the chief Priest is over you in all matters of the Lord: Whereas Zebadiah the
Ruler of the house of Judah, was Speaker in the civil Sanhedrin for all the
Kings matters. Amariah and Zebadiah were not only with the Sanhedrin, as
members, or as Counselors, but over them as Presidents. Eis summos Magistratus
((...)) ex amicorum numero praeposuit, Amasiam Sacerdotem, and ex Judae tribu
Zebadiam, says Josephus antiq. l. 9. cap. 1. Erastus confesses page 273. that
both of them were Presidents set over the Sanhedrin. and page 275. Si
Sacerdotem in Dei nomine, Zebadiam autem Regis praesedisse affirmetur, non
refragabor. He confesses also, that the one was more especially to take care
of the Lords matters, the other of the Kings matters. What then? He says they
were Presidents both of them to the whole Sanhedrin, not the one to one number,
and the other to another. Yet in this he yields also p. 273. Quanquam non
peccet forte, qui Senatores hos per officia distributos di^at, ut alii magis
haec, alii magis illa negotia tractarint. Whosoever denies that that place
proves two distinct Courts, he may be convinced from this one reason, and I
shall say to him in the words of Bildad, Jo^ (...). 8. Enquire I pray thee of
the former age, and prepare thy self to the s^arch of their fathers: and in
the Prophets words, Ierem. 2. 10. Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and see, and
send unto Kedar and consider diligently: and see if there be such a thing.
Where was it ever heard of, that a Priest was President of a Count, and that in
sacred things and causes; that a civil Magistrate was president of a Court,
and that in civil causes: and yet not two Courts, but one Court? If both
Courts had materially consisted of the same members, of the same Priests, and
of the same fathers of Israel, (which yet cannot be proved) this very
diversification of the Presidents, and of the subject matter, (if there were no
more) will prove two Courts formally distinct. Even as now among our selves the
same men may be members of two, or three, or four, or more Courts, but the
distinction of Presidents, and of the subject matter, makes the Court distinct.

6. Here were also Ecclesiastical Officers, verse. 11. also the Levites shall
be officers before you. As before 1 Chro. 23. and 26. some of the Levites were
schophtim Judges to give sentence, others schoterim, officers to see that
sentence put in execution, and to cause those that were refractory to obey it,
(so do the Hebrews distinguish these two words) so it was here also, some of
the Levites appointed to judge, V. 8. some to do the part of Officers in point
of execution of Ecclesiastical censures, for they could not, nor might not
compel men by the civil Sword. The same name is given to military Officers
who prosecute the commands of authority, Josh. 1. 10. And so much of this
fourth.

The fifth place which I take to hold forth that distinction of Courts and
Jurisdictions is Ierem. 26, where first the Prophet is taken into the Court of
the Priests and Prophets, for which the Chaldee reads Scribes, whose office
it was to be Doctors of the law, and to resolve the difficult cases, and in
that capacity they were members of Ecclesiastical councels, Matthew. 2. 4. To
the same sense says Diodati, that the Prophets here spoken of, were such as
were learned in the law, and had been bred in the Schools and Colleges of the
chief Prophets, and in Jeremiahs time were present at Ecclesiastical
judgments and assemblies, 2 Kings 23. 2. as in Christ's (...) Scribes and
Doctors of the Law used to be, who were somewhat like these Prophets. Menochius
and others expound it as the Chaldee does. In this Court Jeremiah was examined
and judged as a false Prophet, V. 8. 9. yet though they had judged him worthy
to die, the Court of the Princes acquitteth him as a Prophet of the Lord, who
had spoken to them in the name of the Lord, V. 10, 11, 16. That Ieremiahs cause
was twice judged in two distinct Courts, and two different sentences upon it,
has been asserted by diverse of the Erastian party to prove appeals from
Ecclesiastical to Civil courts: to which argument I have elsewhere spoken.
Only I take here what they grant, that there were two Courts, and two
sentenc^s given, and so it was. The sentence of the Court of the Priests, (as
themselves explain it, V. 11.) was this, This man is worthy to die, or as the
Hebrew has it, the judgment of death is for this man. The Chaldee thus, a
sin of the judgment of death is upon this man. For (say they) he has (...)
so and so; and he that speaks against this City, and against this holy place
is worthy to die. But the sentence ^f the Court of the Princes is V. 16. This
man is not worthy to die, for he has spoken to us in the name of the Lord our
God. They do not say to the Priests, Who did put any jurisdiction or authority
to judge, in your hands? but they acquit him in point of fact, whom the Court
of the Priests had condemned in point of right, as if they had said to the
Priests, if Jeremiah were a false Prophet, you had reason to call for justice
upon him even unto death: but your judgment has run upon a false
supposition in point of fact, which we do not find proved, but know to be
false. Wherefore from this place, these two things may appear: 1* That the
Court of the Priests had not power of capital punishments; for if they had,
certainly Jeremiah had been put to death, as Hierom notes. 2. Yet they had a
power to judge of a false Prophet, and judicially to pronounce him to be a
false Prophet, and such a one as ought to be punished so and so, according to
the Law. That they had such a power, appears, 1. from V. 8, 9. where they do
not take him to lead him to the Court of the Princes, and there to ^ccuse him;
but they take him, so as to give forth their own sentence against him, as
against a false Prophet, Thou shall surely die, say they, why have thou
prophesied in the name of the Lord, etc. Why did thou dare to pretend the
name of God, as if God had sent thee to preach against the Temple and holy
City? 2. I^remiah does not in all his differences allege that the Priests and
Scribes had not power to judge of a false Prophet, or to give sentence against
one in such a case. Nor yet did the Princes object this, as has been said; yet
this had been as strong an exception as could have been made against the
Priests, if they had assumed a power and authority of judgment, which was
without their Sphere, and did not at all belong unto them. 3. If you compare
the sentence of the Priests with the sentence of the Princes, the former is in
suo genere, no less judicial, authoritative, and peremptory, than the later:
only that was affirmative, this was negative. Finally, let us take for a
conclusion of this Argument, that which Mr. Prynne himself in his fourth part
of The Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, page 144. tells us out of
vindiciae contra Tyrannos, with an approbatory and encomiastick close of his
citation. Jeremy being sent by God to denounce the overthrow of the City
Jerusalem, is for this first condemned (citing in the Margin Ierem. 26.) by the
Priests and Prophets, that is, by the Ecclesiastical Judgment or Senate:
after this by all the people, that is, by the ordinary Judges of the City, to
wit, by the Captains of thousands and hundreds: at last by the Princes of
Judah: that is, by 71 men sitting in the new porch of the Temple; his cause
being made known, he is acquitted.

The sixth place which intimates an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin, is Ierem. 18.
18. where the adversaries of Jeremiah say among themselves, Come and let us
d^vise devices against Jeremiah, for the Law shall not perish from the Priest,
nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. Come, and let us
smite him with the tongue. The force of their argument, (as not only our
Interpreters, but Maldonat also and Sanctius, following Aquinas and Lyra, tell
us) stands in this, those who are of greatest authority in the Church, the
Priests, Prophets, and Elders, with whom are the Oracles of truth, do
contradict Jeremiah, therefore he is a false Prophet. But what was the ground
of this consequence? surely the ground was, that which Bullinger and the late
English Annotations do observe, namely, the Popish error was also their error,
the Church cannot err. But let us yet follow the argument to the bottom. How
came they to think the Church cannot err? or what was that Church which they
thought infallible? No doubt they had respect to the Law of the Sanhedrin,
Deuteronomy. 17. 10, 11, 12. And thou shall do according to the sentence which they
of that place (which the Lord shall ^hoose) shall show thee; and thou shall
observe to do according to all that they inform thee. According to the
sen^ence of the Law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment
which they shall tell thee, thou shall (...): thou shall not decline from the
sentence which they shall show thee, to the right hand, or to the left; And the
man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest (that
stands to minister there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even
that man shall die. From this Scripture misapplyed they drew an argument
against Jeremiah. Wherein their meaning could not be this, that the doctrine of
every individual Priest, or of every individual Scribe, is infallible, (for
as the Law now cited did speak of the Sanhedrin, not of individual Priests, so
neither the Jews of old nor the Papists after them, have drawn the conceited
infallibility so low, as to every particular Priest.) But they mean
collectively, and point at an assembly or council of Priests, Wisemen, and
Prophets, which (as they apprehended) could not err, and whose determination
they preferred to the word of the Lord by Jeremiah: for the Law (that is, says
Menochius, the interpretation of the Law) can not perish from the Priest, nor
counsel from the wise. Now this was an Ecclesiastical, not a civil
Sanhedrin, which may appear thus: First, they do not make mention of the
Judge mentioned Deuteronomy. 17. (where the Priest and the Judge are distinguished)
only they mention the Priest, the Prophet, (for which the Chaldee has Scribe:
which is all one, as to the (...) argument for we find both Prophets and
Scribes in Ecclesiastical assemblies, as was said before) and the wise. By the
wise are meant those that were chief or did excel among the Scribes or
Doctors of the Law. So Grotius annot. in Matthew. ^3. 34. and it may be collected
from Ierem. 8. 8, 9. This is cert^ine, that these wise men were Churchofficers;
for as they are (...) from the Judges, Esaias 3. 2. so Jesus Christ speaking of
(...), and other Ministers of the Gospel, whom he was to send forth, expresses
himself by way of allusion to the Ecclesiastical Ministers of the Jews.
Matthew 23. 34. Behold I send unto you Prophets, and Wise men, and Scribes, which
Luke chapter 11. V. 49. has thus, I will send them Prophets and Apostles.
Secondly, the civil Sanhedrin at this time did (so far as we can find)
contradict Jeremiah; but when his cause came afterward before them, Ierem. 26.
they show much favor and friendship to him. Thirdly, that which is added, come
and let us him smite with the tongue: may be three ways read, and every way it
sut^th to the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin (whether themselves be the speakers in
the Text, or whether the people be the speakers of it, as of that which they
would desire and move the Sanhedrin to do in the name of them all) either
thus: Let us smite him for the tongue, that is for an Ecclesiastical cause,
for false Doctrine. Or thus, Let us smite him in the tongue (so the Septuagint,
and Arias Montanus) that is, Let us smite him with an Ecclesiastical censure,
and silence him, and discharge him to preach any more to the people. Or thus,
Let us smite him with the tongue, that is, with an Ecclesiastical sentence or
declaration, smite him not with the Sword (which belonged only to the civil
Magistrate) but with the tongue, by declaring him to be a false Prophet, and by
determining the case de jure, what ought to be done with him according to the
Law.

Seventhly, consider another place, Ezech. 7. 26. Then shall they seek a vision
of the Prophet: but the Law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from the
ancients. Here again, these are to be looked upon collectively and conjunctly,
(not di^tributively and severally) and this I prove from the Text it self, not
only because the counsel here sought for, was not to be given by one ancient,
but by the ancients, yea i^ was a principal part of the curse or judgment,
that counsel could not be had from an assembly of ancients or Elders, suppose
it might be had from some individual Elders here or there:) but also because
the Antithesis in the Text intimates a disappointment in that thing which was
sought after. They shall seek a vision from the Prophet, or (as the Chaldee
has it) discipline from the Scribe. This they shall not find, and why?
because the Law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from the Ancients.
It was therefore Consistoriall or Synedricall counsel, Judgment, or
Disscipline, which should be sought, but should not be found. So that though a
Prophet of the Lord shall peradventure be found, who can reveal the council
of the Lord, in a time of general defection, like Micaiah contradicting the
400 Prophets, yet an Ecclesiastical counsel of Prophets, Scribes, Priests,
and Elders, sometime Isreal's glory, shall turn to be Isreal's shame, and that
assembly which did sometime respondere d^ jure, and pronounce righteous
judgment, and give light in difficult cases, shall do so no more: the very
light of Israel shall be darkness; the law and counsel shall perish from
them; that is, they shall not find council, nor the understanding of the law,
says Sanctius. Polanus upon the place draws an Argument against the
infallibility of counsels, because the law and counsel did perish not only
(says he) from the Priests here and there in the Cities, but also from the
high Priest, and the other Priests and Elders, who were together at Jerusalem.
If this Text be rightly applied by him (and so it is by other Protestant
Writers) to prove against Papists that Councels may err, then here was an
Ecclesiastical council.

Eighthly, even without Jerusalem and I^da there was a Senate or assembly of
Elders, which did assist the Prophets in overseeing the manners of the people,
censuring sin, and deliberating of the common affairs of the Church. This C.
Bertramus de polit. Jud. c. 16. collecteth from 2 Kings 6. 32. But Elisha sat
in his house, and the Elders sat with him. I know some think that those Elders
were the Magistrates of Samaria, but this I cannot admit, for two reasons. 1.
Because Josephus Antiq. lib. 9. cap. 2. calls them Elishaes disciples: and from
him Hugo Cardinalis, Carthusianus, and others do so expound the Text. They are
called Elishas Disciples, as the Apostles were Christ's Disciples, by way of
Excellency and eminency: all the disciples or sons of the Prophets were not
properly Elders, but those only who were assumed into the Assembly of Elders,
or called to have a share in the mannaging of the common affairs of the
Church. 2. Cajetan upon the place gives this reason from the Text it self, to
prove that these Elders were spiritual men (as he speaks) because Elisha
asks them, See ye how this son of a murderer has sent to take away my
head? What expectation could there be, that they did see a thing, then secret
and unheard of, unless they had been men familiar with God? Now these Elders
were sitting close with Elisha in his house. It was not a public or Church
assembly for worship, but for counsel, deliberation, and resolution, in some
case of difficulty and public concernment. So Tostatus and Sanctius on the
place. A parallel place there is, Ezech. 8. 1. I sat in mine house, and the
Elders of Judah sat before me. Whether those Elders came to know what God had
revealed to the Prophet, concerning the state of Judah and Jerusalem, as
Lavater upon the place supposes, or for deliberation about some other thing,
it is nothing like a civil Court, but very like an Ecclesiastical senate. Now
if such there was out of Jerusalem, how much more in Jerusalem, where (as there
came greater store of Ecclesiastical causes and controversies concerning the
sense of the Law, to be judged, so) there was greater store of Ecclesiastical
persons ^it for government? whatsoever of this kind we find elsewhere, was but
a Transsumpt, the Archetype was in Jerusalem.

Ninthly, that place Ze^h. 7. 1, 2, 3. helps me much. The Jews sent
Commissioners unto the Temple, there to speak unto the Priests which were in
the house of the Lord of Hosts, and to the Prophets (the Chaldee has and to
the Scribes) saying, Should I weep in the first month, etc. Here is an
Ecclesiastical assembly, which had authority to determine controversies
concerning the worship of God. Grotius upon the place distinguishes these
Priests and Prophets from the civil Sanhedrin, yet he says they were to be
consulted with, in controverted cases, according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 9. If
so, then their sentence was authoritative and binding, so far that the man who
did presumptuously disobey them, was to die the death, Deuteronomy. 17. 12.

Tenthly, let it be considered what is that Moshav Zekenim consessus or
Cathedra seniorum, Psalm. 107. 32. (for though every argument be not an
inf^llible demonstration, yet cuncta juvant) let them exalt him also in the
Congregation (or Church) of the people, and praise him in the Assembly of the
Elders. Compare this Text with Psalm 115. 9, 10, 11. as likewise with Psalm
118. 2, 3, 4. In all the three Texts, there are three sorts of persons
distinguished, and more especially called upon to glorify God. Oh that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, says the Text in hand, Psalm 107. 31.
for that you have in the other two places, Ye that fear the Lord, etc. for the
congregation of the people, you have in the other two places Israel, and the
house of Israel. For the Assembly of the Elders, you have in the other Texts,
the house of Aaron. I will not here build any thing upon the observation of
Hugo Cardinalis on Psalm 107. 32. that the congregation of the Princes is not
mentioned in this business, because not many mighty, not many noble, etc. One
thing I am sure of, there were Elders in Israel, clearly distinct both from the
Princes, Judges, and civil Magistrates, Ios. 23. 2. 2 Kings 10. 1. Ezra 10.
14. Acts 4. 5. and elsewhere. And the parallel Texts before cited, do couple
together these Elders and the house of Aaron, as Pastors and ruling Elders now
are; and as the Priests and Elders are found conjoined elsewhere in the old
Testament, Exodus 24. 1. Deuteronomy. 27. 1. with verse. 9. Ezech. 7. 26. Ier. 19. 1. So
Matthew. 26. 59. The work also of giving thanks for mercies and deliverances
obtained by the afflicted and such as have been in distress (the purpose which
the Psalmist has in hand, extended also to the deliverances of particular
persons.) is more especially commended to those who are assembled in an
Ecclesiastical capacity. Even as now among our selves, the civil Courts of
Justice, or Magistrates and Rulers or Judges assembled by themselves in a
politic capacity, use not to be desired to give thanks for the delivery of
certain persons from a danger at Sea, or the like. But it were very proper and
fit to desire thanks to be returned, 1. by those that fear God; for as we
should desire the prayers, so likewise the praises of the Saints. 2. By the
Church or Congregation, of which they that have received the mercy are members.
3. By the Eldership, yea (if therebe occasion) by a Synod of Elders, who as
they ought to watch over the City of God, and to stand upon their watchtower
for observing approaching dangers, so they ought to take special notice of
exemplary mercies, bestowed upon the afflicted members of the Church, and be an
ensample to the flock, in giving thanks, as well as in other holy duties.

The eleventh place, which seems to hold forth unto us an Ecclesiastical
Sanhedrin, is Ezech. 13. 9. where its said of the Prophets that did see vanity,
and Divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall
they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they inter
into the Land of Israel. Where (as Diodati and Grotius observe,) the speech
rises by degrees. 1. they shall not any more be admitted into the assembly or
council to have any voice there, as Prophets in those days had says Diodati
citing Ier. 26. 7. Secondly, they shall not so much as come into the
computation or numbering of the people as members of the Church of Israel. 3.
Nay they shall not be permitted to dwell in the holy Land, or to return
thither from their captivity; they shall not have so much favor as strangers
had, who might come into the holy Land and sojourne there.

In the first branch, the word translated assembly is (...) sod which properly
signifies a secret, and is used for counsel (because counsel ought to be
secret) or for the place of counsel, or assembly of Counselors. Pagnin in his
Thesaurus p. 1761. reads this place with Hierome, in consilio, or otherwise
says he, in concilio. Vatablus: in concilio populi mei non erunt. The
Septuagints read (...): that is, those Prophets shall have no hand in the
Discipline of my people. The same word they render in other places by (...),
and (...), yea by both these put together, Prove. 20. 19. where for the Hebrew
sod, the Septuagints have (...). He that reveals the secret counsels in the
Sanhedrin; and it cohereth well with the preceding Verse, where they mention
(...), Governments. Sometime they expound the word by an Episcopal (I mean not
Prelaticall) inspection Job 29. 4. (...). God was an overseer of my house. So
that, so far as the Septuagints authority can weigh, that place Ezekiel. 13. 9.
must be understood of the secluding of those Prophets from the Sanhedrin, not
from the Civil (in which the Prophets were not members) but from the
Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin.

In the twelfth and last place, the new Testament holds out to us an
Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin: Whether the civil Sanhedrin was wholly taken away by
Herod, and another civil Sanhedrin not substitute in the place of that which
he took away, but the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin only remaining, as some hold;
or whether both did then continue though not so clearly distinct, as others
hold: This we find that there was an Ecclesiastical government in the hands
of Church Officers; for 1. there was a council of the Priests and Elders and
Scribes Matthew. 2. 4. and 16. 21. and 21. 23. and 26. 57, 59. and 27. 1. 12.
Mark 14. 43. Luke 22. 66. Acts 4. 5. Magdeb Gent. (...). lib. 1. cap 6.
Seniores populi videntu^ fuisse (...) e populo lecti viri, aetate, d ctrina,
and vitae p^obitate spectati, gui simul cum Ecclesiasticis (...), Templi, (...)
and (...) rerum (...) (...) Ecclesiae (...) (...), (...) habuerunt.
The Centurists say that those Elders were joined with the Priests in the
government of the Church, with Ecclesiastical persons in Ecclesiastical
affairs. Which has been rightly taken for a president of our ruling Elders.
2. That Council is called (...) Luke 22. 66. Acts 22. 5. the Presbytery or
Eldership: the very name which Paul gives to that assembly of Church Officers,
who ordained Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 14. is it credible that the Apostle would
transfer the name of a civil Court to signify an Assembly, which was merely
Ecclesiastical and not Civil? The very use of the word in this sense by the
Apostle, tells us that in his age the word (...) was taken in an Ecclesiastical
notion only. 3. This Council did examine Jesus concerning his Disciples and
his doctrine, and received witnesses against him, and pronounced him guilty of
blasphemy, Matthew. 27. 57. Mark 14. 53, 55. Ioh. 18. 19. Hence Protestant
writers draw an argument against Papists, to overthrow their infallibility of
Councels: unto which argument Bellarmine devises four answers. But it came
not once into his thoughts, to reply that this council was civil, not
Ecclesiastical, which had been his best answer, if any probability for it. It
has been supposed, both by Protestant, and Popish Writers, that it was an
Ecclesiastical Council, such as the controversy is about: otherwise our
Argument had been as impertinent, as their answer was insufficient. 4. Our
opposites have no evasion here, but that which Bilson, Saravia, and others of
the Prelaticall party did answer in opposition to ruling Elders; namely, that
the Jewish Elders were Judges or Magistrates; But the reply which served then,
will serve now: the Elders are plainly distinguished from Judges, Rulers, and
Princes, Ios. 8. 33. and 23. 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 23. Iud. 8. 14. 2 Kings 10. 1, 5. Ezra
10. 14. Acts 4. 5. T^status on Deuteronomy. 21. 2. and 22. 15, 16. observes the same
distinction of Judges and Elders. Pelargus on Deu^. 21. 2, 3, 4. observes the
like. That which I say concerning the distinction of Judges and Elders may be
confirmed by Halichoth Olam Tract. 1. cap 3. The Judges of Soura, M. Houna, and
D. Isaac. The Judges of Phoumbeditha M. Papa the son of Samuel, etc. The
Elders of Soura M. Houna and M. Hisda. The Elders of Phoumbeditha Ena and Abimi
the son of Rahba. And thus we are taught how to under and th^se Gemarick
phrases, of the Judges of such a place, and the Eld^rs of such a place, that we
may not mistake them as if they were one. 5. Some have also drawn a pattern
for the constitution of Synods, from that Council, Acts 4. 5, 6. where we
find assembled together Rulers, (...), Elders, Scri^es, according to which
pattern we have in our Synods, 1. the civil (...) to preside in the order of
proceedings, for preventing tumults, injuries, disorders, and to assist and
protect the Synod. 2. Pastors of Churches. 3. Doctors from universities,
answering to the Scribes or Doctors of the Law. 4. Ruling Elders who assist in
the Government of the Church. 6. After that Iudaea was redacted into a
Province, and the Romans having keptin their own hands, not only the power of
life and death John 18. 31. but all judgment in whatsovever civil, or
criminal offenses, falling out among the Jews, meant by matters of wrong or
wicked leudness, Acts 18. 14. And having left to the Jews no government, nor
any power of judgment, except in things pertaining to their religion only Ib.
verse 15. These six things considered, it is very unprobable (if not
unpossible) that the Council of the Priests, Elders, and Scribes, mentioned so
often in the New Testament, should be no Ecclesiastical Court, but a temporal
and civil Magistracy. The Centurists Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 10. reckon that
Council for an Ecclesiastical Court, distinct from civil Magistracy: and
they propose these two to be distinctly treated of, Acta coram Pontificibus seu
Magistratu Ecclesiastico, (and here they bring in the council of the Priests,
Elders, and Scribes,) And Actio coram Pilato seu magistratu politico.

I know Erastus lib. 3. cap. 2. and lib. 4. cap. 4. though he confess plainly
that the Jewish Sanhedrin mentioned in the Gosspell, and in the Acts of the
Apostles, had only power of judging causes belonging to Religion, and that the
Romans did leave them no power to judge of civil injuries; yet he holds,
that in these causes of Religion, the Sanhedrin had power not only of
imprisoning, and scourging, but even of death it self. And so endeavors to
make it a temporal or civil Magistracy, (which Mr Prynne also does vindic.
page 4, 5. yet he speaks dubiously of their power of capital punishments.)
But this is confuted by the reasons which I have given. Whereunto I further
add these few animadversions.

1. The strongest proof which Erastus brings out of Josephus antiq. lib. 20.
cap. 8. which (as he alleges) puts the thing out of all controversy, is a
very weak and insufficient proof. Josephus tells us in the close of that
Chapter, that after the death of Herod and A chelaus, this was the Jewish
Government, (...). This he cites page 177. and page 178. to prove that the
Sanhedrin in Christ's time, was a civil Magistracy, having power of the Sword.
But I may with a great deal more probability argue contrariwise from these
words. Josephus tells us the Constitution and form of the Jewish policy or
Government was at that time Aristocraticall, but it was an Ecclesiastical
Aristocracy, the government was in the hands of the chief Priests. Or thus (if
you will) the Jews at that time had a bare name of an aristocracy; they had
their (...) Optimates, Primates, or Rulers: but it was titulo tenus, all power
of civil government being taken from them by the Romans, and the government
that was, was Ecclesiastical. That very Chapter gives us a better argument to
prove, that the Romans did not permit to the Jews capital Judgments: for
Josephus there records that Ananus the high Priest taking the opportunity after
the death of Festus, while Albinus the Successor of Festus, was but yet on his
journey toward Judea, did call a Council of Judges ((...)) before whom he
presented James the brother of Christ, and some others, who were (as guilty of
impiety) condemned to be stoned. Which mightily displeased all such as did
observe the Laws. Albinus at that time coming from Alexandria, being informed
of the thing, and that it was not lawful for Ananus to do any such thing,
without the Roman Governor, wrote a chiding and threatening letter to Ananus.
And further, the thing being secretly signified by some to King Agrippa, who
did also beseech the King to command Ananus to do no such thing again, he
having trespassed in this. Whereupon Agrippa was so highly offended, that he
took away from Ananus the high Priests place, and gave it to Jesus the son
of Damneus. 2. Whereas Erastus argues from the imprisoning, beating, or
scourging, yea taking counsel to kill the Apostles Acts 4, and 5. the stoning
of Steven Acts 7. Paul's letters from the high Priest, for biuding and bringing
to Jerusalem the Disciples of the Lord Acts 9. 1, 2. also the imprisoning and
condemning to death the Saints Acts 26. 10. Unto all this I answer out of
Antiq. Iud. lib. 20. cap 6. Ipsi (...) pontifices dissiacre cae^erunt a
Sacer^otibus and primatibus Hieroso^ mi^anorum ^ivium, singuleque m^edebant
stipati manu au* dacissimorum and seditiosorum bominum, (...) inter se mutu^S
ce^tabant convitiis and (...): nec erat qui compesceret, quasi vacant urbe
Magistratibus. In tantum autem exarsit summorum pontific^m impudentia, ut
auderent servos suos in areas mittere, qui auf^rrent debitas Sacerdotibus
decimas, aliquotque pauperiores e Sacerdo^um ordine alimentorum in^pia fame
deficerent. Tanto plus ^um pol^ebat violentia sedi- tiosorum quam justitia.
Josephus, that in that degenerate age the high Priests and such as adhered to
them, did use a great deal of violence, whereby they did many things for which
they had no just nor lawful power. So that the Letters and Warrants given out
to Saul, and the execution of the same by a cruel and bloody persecuting of
the Saints, can not prove the (...) the power and authority which was allowed
to the Sanhedrin, but only the (...) the present prevalent power of the high
Priest and his faction in that confusion of affairs; and their extreme malice
against the Saints, to have been such as made them to do things for which they
had no legal power nor warrant. And this one Animadversion breaks all the
strength of Mr Prynnes argument vindic. page 5. that the Council of the Jews
had power (which no mere Ecclesiastical consistory can do) to scourge,
imprison, torture, and outlaw offenders, if not to c^ndemne, put to death.
(Where he cites diverse Texts, none of which proves either torturing, or
out-lawing, and the most of which, prove not so much as that the Council of
the Jews at that time had authority to scourge or imprison, as Matthew. 5. 22.
and 10. 17. Mark 13. 9. Acts 6. 12, 13, 14. and 24. 20. and 25. 15.) The
imprisonment of the Apostles was not without the authority of the Captain of
the Temple Acts 4. 1, 3. This captain of the Temple, is thought by the best
interpreters, to have been the Captain of the Garrison which the Romans placed
in the ca^tle Antonia hard by the Temple, and that to prevent tumults and
uproares when the people came to the Temple, especially at the solemn feasts
in great multitudes. But that the Captain of the Temple was a civil
Magistrate of the Jews, or one d puted with authority and power from the
Sanhedrin, will never be proved. When the Council thought of slaying the
Apostles Acts 5. 33. it was in a sudden passion, being cut to the heart at that
which they heard. But Gamaliel tells them Verse 35. Ye men of Israel take heed
to your selves (...) warning them as Interpreters take it, of their own danger,
from the Romans, if they should put any one to death. The putting of Steven to
death was upon pretense of Iudicium zeli, or Ius zelotarum, as Grotius thinks
d^ Jure belli a^ pacis lib. 2. cap 20. sect. 9. If so, it was an extraordinary
act. I am sure it was done most tumultuously, disorderly and furiously, before
either himself was heard speak out, or any sentence was given against him, as
is manifest Acts 7. 54, 57, 58. 3. Erastus his gloss upon John 18. 31. It is
not lawful for us to put any man to death, meaning (says he) for making
himself a King against Caesar, the cause for which they did chiefly accuse him
to Pilate. So likewise Bishop Bilson (a great follower of Erastus) of the
perpetual government of Christ's Church cap. 4. But mark the words, Then said
Pilate unto them, Take ye him and judge him according to your Law; The Jews
therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death.
Pilate durst not have refused to judge a man who made himself a King against
Caesar, nor durst he have put it over upon the Jews to have judged one in that
which concerned Caesar's crown. Nay, as soon as the Jews objected, If thou
let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend; for whosoever makes himself a
King, speaks against Caesar. Pilate when he heard that, went in again, and
sat down on the Judgment seat John 19. 12. 13. Therefore when Pilate said to
the Jews take ye him, and judge him according to your law, he spoke it of
matters of their Law. The Council of the chief Priests, Elders and Scribes
had given sentence against Christ de ju^e, that he was guilty of blasphemy, and
thereupon (not having power to put any man to death) they led him to Pilate,
Matthew. 26. 65, 66. with Matthew. 27. 1, 2. Mark 14. 63, 64. with Mark 15. 1.
Luke 22. 71. with Luke 23. 1. Pilate unwilling to meddle against Christ, waves
the business in the Judgement-hall, I perceive (would he say) that this man is
accused of such things as concern your Law and your Religion; therefore take
him and judge him according to your Law. They reply, in reference to that which
Pilate did drive at, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. If they
had meant, for causes which concerned Caesar's Crown, it had been not only an
impertinent reply, but a yielding to Pilates intention; for he might have said,
I do not mean, that ye shall judge him for that which concerns Caesar, but
for that which concerns your own Law and Religion. Therefore certainly the
answer which the Jews made to Pilate, did reply, that though they had power to
judge a man in that which concerned their Law and Religion, yet they had no
power to put any man to death, no not for that which concerned their Law. 4.
There are several passages in the story of Paul which show us, that though the
Jewish Sanhedrin might judge a man in matters of their Law, yet they were
accusers, not Judges, in civil or capital punishments, I mean when a man was
accused as worthy of bonds or of death, though it were for a matter of their
Law, they had no liberty to judge, but only to accuse. The Jews drew Paul
before the judgment seat of Gallio, even for a matter of their law. This
fellow (say they to Gallio) persuades men to worship God, contrary to the Law
Acts 18. 13. If they had intended only an Ecclesiastical censure, their
recourse had been either to the Sanhedrin, or at least to the Synagogue, but
because they intended a corporal temporal punishment, which neither the
Sanhedrin nor the Synagogue had power to inflict, therefore they must prosecute
Paul before Gallio; whose answer was to this purpose, that if it had been a
matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, it had been proper for him to have judged
it, but that since it was no such thing, he would not meddle in it, knowing
also, that the Jews had no power to do it by themselves. Again, Acts 23. 28,
29. Claudius Lysias writes to Faelix concerning Paul thus, and when I would
have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into
their Council. Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their Law, but
to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or of bonds. That which made
Lysias interpose in the business, and rescue Paul from the hands of the Jews,
was the Jews design to put Paul to death, under color of judging him
according to their Law (which was the pretense made by Tertullus Acts 24. 6.)
Now in that which was to be punished, either by death, or so much as by bonds,
Lysias conceives the Jews to be no competent Judges, therefore he brings Paul
into the council of the Jews, not to be judged by them, but to know what
accusation they had against him. For the same reason Paul himself did decline
going to Jerusalem, to be judged there, no not of matters concerning the
Religion and Law of the Jews, that accusation being so far driven on, as to
make him worthy of death. His accusers (says Festus to King Agrippa) brought
none accusation of such things as I supposed, but had certain questions
against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus which was dead, whom
Paul affirmed to be alive. And because I doubted of such manner of questions* I
asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these
matters, Acts 25. 18, 19, 20. This Paul had declined verse. 10. I stand at
Caesar's judgment seat (said he) where I ought to be judged. And why? but
because his accusation was capital, even in that which concerned the Law of
the Jews, and he knew the Jews at that time had no power of capital
judgments. Some have alleged this example of Paul for appeals from
Presbyteries or Synods to the civil Magistrate: by which argument themselves
grant that the Jewish Sanhedrin then declined by Paul, was a Ecclesiastical,
not a civil Court. 5. Besides all this Erastus his opinion is strongly
confuted by that which Constantinus L'Empereur Annot. in remp. Jud. page 404.
to 407. proving that the Jews after the thirtieth year of Christ, had no
power of punishing with death; for proof hereof cites a passage of Aboda
zara, that forty years before the destruction of the Temple, the Sanhedrin
(which had in former times exercised capital judgments) did remove from
Jerusalem, quum viderent se non posse judicia capitalia exercere, when they
perceived that they could not exercise capital judgments, they said let us
remove out of this place, lest we be guilty: it being said Deuteronomy. 17. 10.
according to the sentence which they of that place shall show thee: whence they
collected, that if they were not in that place, they were not obliged to
capital judgments: and so they removed. And if you would know when there he
tells us out of Rosch Hasschana, they removed from Hieru salem to Iabua, thence
to Ousa thence to Sc^aphrea, etc. He that desires to have further proofs for
that which has been said, may read Buxtorf. lexic. Chald. Talmud. and rabbin.
page 514, 515. He proves that Iudicia criminalia, criminal judgments did
cease, and were taken away from the Jews forty years before the destruction
of the second Temple. This he says is plain in Talmud Hierosol. in lib.
Sanhedrin cap. 7. in Talmud Babyl. in Sanbedrin fol. 41. 1. in Aboda z^ru fol.
8. 2. in Schab. fol. 15. 1. in Iuchasin fol. 51. 1. Majen^on. in Sanhedrin cap.
14. sect. 13. He cites also a passage in Berachos fol. 58. 1. concerning one
who for a heinous crime even for lying with a beast ought to be adjudged to
death; but when one said that he ought to die, it was answered, that they had
no power to put any man to death. And this says Dr. Bux^orf is the very same,
which the Jews said to Pilate John 18. 31. Now this power being taken from the
Jews forty years before the destruction of the Temple and City, which was in
the 71 year of Christ, his death being in the 34. Hence he proves that this
power was taken from the Jews near three years before the death of Christ.
And I further make this inference, that since the Sanhedrin which had power of
life and death, did remove from Jerusalem forty years before the destruction
of the Temple (for which see also Tzemach David. edit. Hen. Vorst. page 89. and
so about three years before the death of Christ; it must needs follow that the
Council of the Priests, Elders, and Scribes, mentioned so often in, and before
Christ's passion, was not a civil Magistracy, nor the civil Sanhedrin, but an
Ecclesiastical San^edrin. Whence also it follows, that the Church Matthew. 18.
17. unto which Christ directs his Disciples to go with their complaints, was
not the civil Court of Justice among the Jews, (as Mr Prynne takes it) for
that civil Court of Justice had then removed from Jerusalem, and had lost its
authority in executing Justice, I. Coch annot. in Exc. Gem. Sanhedrin. cap. 1.
s^ct. 13. bears witness to the same story above mentioned, that forty years
before the destruction of the Temple, the Sanhedrin did remove from its proper
seat (where he also mentions the ten stations or degrees of their removing) and
Iam tum cessarunt judicia capitalia, says he. Now at that time the capital
judgments did cease. Thus we have three witnesses singularly learned in the
Jewish Antiquities. Unto these add Casau^on exerc. 16. anno 34. number. 76. He
holds that though the Council of the Jews had cognizance of the offense (for
otherwise how could they give a reason or cause when they demanded justice) in
which respect the Council did judge Christ to be guilty of death, Mark 14.
64. yet their Council had then no more power of capital punishments, which
says he, the more learned modern writers do demonstrate e Iuchasin, and from
other Talmudicall writings; he adds that this power of putting any man to
death was taken from the Jews some space before this time when they said to
Pilate, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death: for this power was
taken from them, says he, forty years before the destruction of the second
Temple, as the Rabbinicall writers do record.
I have thus largely prosecuted my last argument, drawn from the New Testament,
mentioning the Council of the Priests, Elders, and Scribes.

And I trust the twelve arguments which have been brought may give good
satisfaction toward the proof of an Ecclesiastical Jewish Sanhedrin.

The chief objection which ever I heard or read against this distinction of a
Civil Sanhedrin and an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin among the Jews, is this.
That neither the Talmud nor the Talmudicall writers mention any such
distinction, but speak only of one supreme Sanhedrin of 71, and of other two
Courts, which sat the one at the door of the Court before the Temple, the
other at the gate which enters to the mountain of the Temple. There were
also Courts in the Cities where capital cases were judged by three and twenty,
pecuniall mults by three.

Answ. It must be remembered that not only the Talmudicall Commentators, but
the Talmud it self, is much later than the time of the Sanhedrin, and the
integrity of the Jewish government. Yea later (by some Centuries) than the
destruction of the Temple and City of Jerusalem. So that the Objection which is
made is no stronger than as if one should argue thus, There is no mention of
Elderships constituted of Pastors and Ruling Elders (without any Bishop having
preeminence over the rest) neither in the Canon Law, nor decretals of Popes,
nor in the Book of the Canons of the Roman Church. Therefore when Paul wrote
his Epistle to the Church of Rome, there was no such Eldership in that Church,
constituted as has been said. But if the Ecclesiastical Government either of
the Church of Rome, or of the Church of the Jews can be proved from Scripture
(as both may) it ought to be no prejudice against those truths, that they are
not found in the Writers of af^ertimes, and declining ages. Howbeit there may
be seen some footsteps of a Civil and Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin, even in the
Talmudicall writers, in the opinion of Constantinus L'Empereur, and in that
other passage cited by D. Buxtorf out of Elias. Of which before. And so much
concerning an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin among the Jews.

If after all this, any man shall be unsatisfied in this particular, yet in the
issue, such as are not convinced that there was an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin
among the Jews, distinct from their civil Sanhedrin, may nevertheless be
convinced not by the former arguments, but by other Mediums, that there was an
Ecclesiastical government among the Jews distinct from their civil
government. For it belonged to the Priests, (not to the Magistrates or Judges)
to put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean. And
the Priests (not the Magistrates) are challenged for not putting difference
between the holy and profane Ezech. 22. 26. And this power of the Priests was
not merely doctrinall or declarative, but decisive, binding, and juridicall, so
far as that according to their sentence men were to be admitted as clean, or
excluded as unclean. Yea in other cases, as namely in trying and judging the
scandal of a secret and unknown murder, observe what is said of the Priests,
Deuteronomy. 21. 5. by their word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried.
Yea themselves were Judges of controversies Ezech. 44. 24. And in controversy
they shall stand in judgment, and they shall judge it according to my
judgments. Where the Ministers of the Gospel are principally intended, but
not without an allusion unto and parallel with the Priests of the old
Testament, in this point of jurisdiction. Suppose now it were appointed by Law,
that Ministers shall separate or put difference between the holy and profane,
that by their word every controversy concerning the causes of suspension or
sequestration of men from the Sacrament, shall be tried; that in controversy
they shall stand in judgment, and judge according to the word of God: Would
not every one look upon this, as a power of government put into the hands of
Ministers. And none readier to aggravate such government, then the Erastians.
Yet all this amounts to no more, then by the plain and undeniable Scriptures
above cited, was committed to the Priests. Suppose also, that men were kept
back from the Temple and from the Passover, not for any moral uncleanness,
but for ceremonial uncleanness only (which is to be afterward discussed)
yet the Priests their judging and deciding of controversies concerning men's
legal uncleanness, according to which judgment and decision, men were to be
admitted to, or kept back from the Temple and Passover (yea sometime their
own houses, as in the case of leprosy) could not choose but entitle them to a
power of government, which power was peculiar to them, and is not in all the
old Testament ascribed to Magistrates or Judges. And as the exercise of this
power did not agree to the Magistrate, so the commission, charge, and power
given to those who did keep back the unclean, was not derived from the
Magistrate; for it did belong to the intrinsecall sacerdotall authority 2 Kings
11. 18. The Priest (Iehojada) appointed Officers over the house of the Lord.
The 70 thus, (...). These Officers or overseers over the Temple, were appointed
by Iehojada, for keeping back the unclean, as Grotius upon the place,
following Josephus, has observed. Compare 2 Chro. 23. 19. And he (Iehojada)
set the Porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none which was
unclean in any thing should enter in* For the same end did he appoint these
overseers over the Temple, 2 Kings 11. It was also appointed by the Law, that
the man who should do any thing presumptuously, contrary to the sentence of
the Priests, should die the death, as well as the man who should do any thing
presumptuously, contrary to the sentence of the Judge, Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 12.

Finally, the high Priest was a ruler of the people, and to him is that law
applied, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ru^ers of thy people Acts 23. 5.
Which is not meant only in regard that he was president of the Sanhedrin; for
there was an Ecclesiastical ruling power, which was common with him to some
other Priests, 2 Chro. 35. 8. Hilkiah the high Priest, and Zachariah and Iehiel
Priests of the second order, are called Rulers of the house of God: being in
that very place thus distinguished from other Priests and Levites employed in
the manual work of the Temple about Sacrifices and the like.

CHAP. IV. That there was an Ecclesiastical Excommunication among the Jews:
and what it was.
IT has been affirmed by some who pretend to more skill in Jewish antiquities
than others, that though the Jews had an excommunication which did exclude a
man from the liberty of civil fellowship, so that he might not come within
four cubits of his neighbor, (and so one man might and did excommunicate
another) yet no man was judicially or by sentence of a Court excommunicated, at
least not from the Temple, Sacrifices, and holy assemblies.

To these I shall in the first place oppose the judgment of others who have
taken very much pains in searching the Jewish antiquities, and are much
esteemed for their skill therein. Lexicon Chald. Talmud. and Rabbin. edit.
1639. page 8^7, 828. (...) Excommunicatio, exclusio ^ caetu sacro, ejectio ex
syna* goga etc. Cum tali excommunicato non licet edere nec bibert. Quo forte
respicit Apostolus 1 Cor. 5. 11. (...), Nam admonitionem illam generalem facit,
ex occasion incestuosi quem excommunicare jubet.
D. Buxtors expounds (...) cherem to be a casting out of one from the holy
assemblies, or an ejection from the Synagogue, and makes it parallel to the
Excommunicating of the incestuous man 1 Cor. 5. De Iure nature. and Gentium lib.
4. cap. 9. Atque is plane a communicatione orationis, and convenius, and omnis
sancti commercii relegabatur, quemadmodum de bujusmodi anathemate sub initils
Ecclesie Christianae loquitur Tertullianus.
Mr Seldom extends the Jewish Excommunication so far, as to comprehend an
exclusion from fellowship in prayer and holy assemblies, and makes it parallel
to that which Tertullian tells us to have been used by the Primitive Church. Mr
Brughton in his exposition of the Lords prayer page 14. makes a parallel
between the Jewish and the Christian Church in many particulars, and among the
rest, he says they agree in the manner of Excommunication and absolution.
Animad in Pirke page 169. Qu^ enim dicat apostatam, blashemum aliaque sacra
capita intra templum suisse admissa? etc. Certe si quibuslibet excommunicatis
permissum suisset in trare Templom, tum (...) mitior Judaicae Synagoga
disciplina esset statuenda, quam veteris Christianae Ecclesiae.
Henric. Vorstius in his late animadversions upon Pirke Rabbi Eliezer, wonders
how any man can imagine that an Apostate, a blasphemer, or the like was
admitted into the Temple. For his part, he thinks some excommunicate persons
were absolutely excluded from the Temple, and that others for whom there were
hopes of reconciliation, were admitted into it. Quest. and Resp. l. 1. quaest.
9 Solebant autem veteres (I^der) si qu^ gravius deliquerat, primum eum movere
caetu Ecclesiastico: si non emendabat se, tum feriebant (...): quod si ne tum
quidem redibat ad srugem, ultimo ac postremo loco samatizabant.
Drusius and Annot. in Exc. Gemar. Sanhedrin cap. 1. Qui simpliciter
excommunicatus est (menudde) est ille quidem separatus a caetu, ita ut pro vero
membro Ecclesie non habeatur.
Johannes Coch hold, that there were such excommunicate persons among the
Jews, as were removed from Church assemblies, and were not acknowledged for
Church members. Lexicon pentaglot. page 655. (...) Excommunicatio, cum quis se
non emendans catu Ecclesiastico ^ovetur, and ex populo suo excinditur. Where he
also mentions the three distinct kinds of Excommunication Niddui, Cherem, and
Schammata. Ibid. page 1076. (...) remetio, excommunicatio, ejectio ex caetu
piorum, illa anathematis species, qua quis immundus ab bominum contubernio, aut
qua aliquis ^ caetu Ecclesiastico removetur ad tempus* a lege praescriptum.
Schindlerus describes their excommunication to be a putting away of an
impenitent obstinate sinner from the public assembly of the Church, and so a
cutting him off from his people. De arcano sermon cap. 47. Ejectio autem e
Synagega, communicationis abnegatio est, and abalienatio a religiosa
consuetudine, quae a nostris recepto jam verbo sixcommunicatio dicitur.
Arias Montanus expounds their casting out of the Synagogue to be an
excommunication (such as in the Christian Church) from religious fellowship.
Magdeb. Cent. 1. ^ib. 1. cap 7. Judicabant degmata and promulgobant eorum
damnationes, una cum personis: quae quidem res* nihil aliud quam publica
Excommunicatio erat Jo. 9. 22. and 11. 47. 48. and 1^. 4^. Et infra. Extra
Synagogam fieret, *hoc est excommunicaretur.
So do the Centurists plainly, where they do purposely show what was the
Ecclesiastical policy and Church government of the Jews: They make it a
distinct Question, whether the Jews in Christ's time had any civil Government,
or Magistracy. (...)* Ebr. cap 7. legis sanctio triplex etc. Prima est (...)
aversatio, antolitio and amandatio etc. Secunda est (...) devo^ extremo cuidam
exitio. Excommunicatio: quando videlicet a^quis excindi duebatur ex populo sue,
and in eo amplius non censeri (ut jam supra expo* suimus) ex majore aliquo
delicto. atque hoc p^to esse (...) fieri etc. Primae illae speciei respondet
quod in Ecclesiis nostris vocamus prohibitionem seu suspensionem a Sacramentis:
(...) Excommunicatio public facta.
Cornelius Bertramus thinks that to the Jewish Niddui answers our suspension
from the Sacrament, and that to their cherem answers our excommunication from
the Church: and that the Jews had the very same kind of excommunication, by
which the incestuous Corinthian, Hymeneus and Philetus, and the Emperor
Theodosius were excommunicated. Constansinus l' Empereur annot. in rempub. Jud.
page 370. to 378. holds the same thing which Bertramus holds concerning the
Jewish excommunication, and which has now been cited. Godwyn in his Moses and
Aacon, lib. 5. cap. 1 speaks of the Ecclesiastical Court of the Jews, unto
which (says he) belonged the power of excommuication, the several sorts of
which censure he explaineth cap. 2. namely Niddui, cherem, and Shammata. After
all which, he begins cap. 3. to speak of civil Courts of the Jews, a
distinct government.

Grotius. annot. in Luke 6. 22. compares the Jewish excommunication with that
which was exercised by the Druides in France, who did interdicere saerificiis,
interdict and prohibit from their Sacrifices impious and obstinate persons. Yea
those who were excommunicate by Niddui or the lesser excommunication, he likens
to those penitents or mourners in the ancient Christian Church, who were said
to be (...), qui non cum caeteris orabant etc. He tells us the ancient
Christians did in diverse things follow the Jewish discipline, and among other
things in excommunication; He cites the same passage of Tertullian which is
cited by Mr Seldom, concerning a shntting out, a communicatione orationis, and
conventus, and omnis sancti commercii. Which is as full and high a description
of the Ecclesiastical censure of Excommunication, as any can be. So that the
Jewish Excommunication being paralleld with that Excommunication which
Tertullian speaks of, and which was practiced in the ancient Christian Church,
what more can be required in this particular? And here I cannot but take
notice, that Master Prynne does very much mistake and misrepresent Mr Seldom,
as if he held the Jewish excommunication to have been no more but a shutting
out from civil company or fellowship, whereas he clearly holds lib. 4. de jure
not. and Gent. cap. 9. p. 522. that he who was excommunicated by the Jewish
cherem, was put away and cast off from fellowship in prayer, and from all
religious fellowship, even as Tertullian speaks of excommunicated persons in
the Church.

Lud. Capellus in Spicilegio upon Ioh. 9. 22. speaking of the common
distinction of the three degrees of the Jewish Excommunication, does plainly
bear witness to that which I plead for, namely, Harum trium Excommunicationis
specierum vel potius graduum, secunda primam, tertia utramque includebat. Prima
piis quidem Iudaeis erat formidabtlis, quia per eam a sacrorum communione
submovebantur, at qui minus pii erant ea non magnopere movebantur.
that there was a Jewish Excommunication from communion in the holy things. I
confess he understands the Cherem, and the Shammata, otherwise then I do; for
he takes the Cherem to be nihil aliud, nothing else than the forfeiture of a
man's substance for the use of the Sanctuary: (whereas it is certain there was
a Cherem of persons as well as of things, and the formulae of the Cherem which
shall be cited afterward, contain another thing than forfeiture.) And Shammata
he takes to be the devoting of men to death, and that being Shamatized they
must needs die. (And yet the Jews did shamatize the Cuthites or Samaritans (as
we shall see afterward) whom they had not power to put to death.) However he
speaks of the Niddui as a mere Ecclesiastical censure, and therefore tells us
it was formidable to the godly, it being a shutting out from communion in the
holy things, but not formidable to wicked men; which must be upon this reason,
because wicked men did care little or nothing for any censure or punishment,
except what was civil. He grants also that Niddui was included in the other
two: so that in all three there was a shutting out from the holy things.

I must not forget the Testimony of my Countreyman Master Weemse in his
Christian Synagogue lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 3. paragr. 7. They had three sorts of
Excommunication; first the lesser, then the middle sort, then the greatest. The
lesser was called Niddui: and in the New Testament they were called (...), put
out of the Synagogue: and they hold that Cain was excommunicated this way. The
second was called Cherem or Anathema: with this sort of Excommunication was the
Incestuous person censured 2 Cor. 2. The third Shammatha, they hold that Enoch
instituted it, Jude v. 14. And after, these who were (...), put out of the
Synagogue were not simply secluded from the Temple, but suffered to stand in
the Gate, etc. These who were Excommunicated by the second sort of
Excommunication, were not permitted to come near the Temple. These who were
Excommunicated after the third sort, were secluded out of the society of the
people of God altogether.

And thus I have produced fifteen witnesses for the Ecclesiastical
Excommunication of the Jews. I might produce many more, but I have made choice
of these, because all of them have taken more than ordinary pains in searching
the Jewish antiquities, and diverse of them are of greatest note for their skill
therein.

In the next place let us observe the causes, degrees, manner and rites how,
the authority by which, the ends and effects of excommunication among the
Jews, and see whether all these do not help to make their Excommunication a
pattern for ours. For the causes, there were 24 causes, for which a man was
Excommunicated among the Jews. You may read them in Buxtorfs Lexicon Chald*
Talmud and Rabbin. p. 1304, 1305. M. Seldom de jure not. and Gentium. lib. 4.
cap. 8. Jo. Coch Annot. in Excerp. Gem. Sanhedrin cap. 2. page 147. diverse of
these causes did not at all concern personal or civil injuries (for such
injuries were not accounted causes of Excommunication, but were to be punished
otherwise, as shall be proved afterward) but matters of scandal, by which God
was dishonored, and the stumbling-blocke of an evil example laid before
others; One cause was the despising of any of the preceps of the Law of Moses,
or Statutes of the Scribes. Another was the selling of Land to a Gentile.
Another was, a Priest not separating the gifts of the oblation. Another, he
that in captivity does not iterate or observe the second time a holy day.
Another, Buxtors lexic. Rabbin. p. 2463 ex Pesachim fol. 50. Qui vespera
sabbathi and aliorum dierum festorum operas serviles ^cit, infaustum illud
quidem est, neque videt signum benedictionis, sed non schammatisamus eum: at
qui vesper^ pas ch^tis operas serviles facit, hic vero omnino schammatisamus
eum. They did also excommunicate an heretical or Epicurean Israelite. Buxtorf
ibid, page 195.
he that does any servile work upon Easter eve. Another, he that mentions
the name of God rashly, or by a vain oath. Another, he that enduceth, or
gives occasion to others to profane the name of God. Another, he that makes
others to ^ate holy things without the holy Temple. Another, he that makes
computation of years and months without the Land of Israel: that is, (as Dr
Buxtorf) writes Calendars, or (as M. Seldom) computeth years and months
otherwise than their fathers had done. Another, he that retardeth or hinders
others from doing the Law and Commandment. Another, he that makes the
offering profane (as Dr Buxtorf) or offers a sickly beast, (as I. Coch.)
Another, a Sacrificer that does not show his Sacrificing Knife before a Wise
man or a Rabbi, that it may be known to be a lawful Knife, and not faulty.
Another, he that cannot be made to know or to learn. Another, he that having
put away his wife, does thereafter converse familiarly with her. Another, a
Wise man (that is, a Rabbi or Doctor) infamous for an evil life. The other
causes had also matter of scandal in them, namely, the despising of a Wise man
or Rabbi, though it were after his death. The despising of an Officer or
messenger of the house of judgment. He that casts up to his neighbor a
servile condition, or calls his neighbor servant. He that contumaciously
refuses to appear at the day appointed by the Judge. He that does not submit
himself to the Judicial sentence. He that has in his house any hurtful
thing, as a mad dog or a weak leather. He that before Heathen Judges bears
witness against an Israelite. He that makes the blind to fall. He that has
Excommunicate another without cause, when he ought not to have been
Excommunicate. Thus you have the 24 causes of the Jewish Excommunication; of
which some were mere scandals: others of a mixed nature, that is, partly
injuries, partly scandals; but they were reckoned among the causes of
Excommunication qua scandals, not qua (...). Io. Coch. Annot. in Exc. Gem.
Sanhedrin. page 146* explaining how the wronging of a Doctor of the Law by
contumelies, was a cause of Excommunication, shows that the Excommunication
was because of the scandal. Licet tamen condonare nisi res in praputulo gesta
sit. Publicum Doctoris ludibrium in legis contemptum redundat. (...) ob causam
Doctor legis honorem (...) remittere non potest. Ubi res clam and sine scandalo
gesta est, magni animi and sapientis est injuriam contemptu vindicare. If there
was no scandal, the injury might be remitted by the party injured, so as the
offender was not to be Excommunicate* But if the contumely was known abrond,
and was scandalous, though the party wronged were willing and desirous to bury
it, yet because of the scandal, the Law provided that the offender should be
excommunicate. For they taught the people that he who did contend against a
Rabbi did contend against the holy Ghost (for which see Gul. Vorstius annot. in
Maimon. de fundam. legis. page 77, 78.) and hence did they aggravate an
Ecclesiastical or Divine (not a Civil) injury. Whence it appears that the
causes of Excommunication, were formally looked upon as scandals. Add that if
qua injuries, then a quatenus ad omne, all personal or civil injuries had
been causes of Excommunication. But all civil injuries do not fall within
these 24. causes. If it be objected, that neither do all scandalls fall within
these 24. causes. I answer they do; for some of the causes are general and
comprehensive, namely these two, the 5th. He that despises the Statutes of the
Law of Moses, or of the Scribes; and the 18th. He that retardeth or hinders
others from doing the Law.

When I make mention of any particular heads, either of the Jewish Discipline,
or of the ancient Christian discipline, let no man understand me, as if I
intended the like Strictness of Discipline in these days. My meaning is
only, to prove Ecclesiastical censures, and an Ecclesiastical Government.
And let this be remembered upon all like occasions; though it be not everywhere
expressed. And so much for the causes.

The degrees of the Jewish excommunication, were (...) Niddui, (...) Cherem,
(...) Schammata. Elias in Tisbite, says plainly that there were three kinds of
excommunication, Niddui, Cherem, and Schammata. Niddui is (...) out; but if he
be not converted, they smite him with Cherem; and if neither so he repent, they
schammatize him. These three Doctor Buxtorf thus distinguishes, not only out
of Elias, the common sentence of the but Hebrew Doctors. The first and smallest
excommunication is Niddui, which is a simple separation for a certain time. The
greater excommunication is Cherem, which* is a separation with imprecations and
curses. The greatest of all is Schammata, a final excommunication, without
hope of returning to the Church. So likewise Hen. Uorstius animad. in Pirke
page 230. And answerably hereunto some Divines have distinguished
Excommunicatio Minor, Major, and Maxima. The first is suspension from the
Sacrament. The second is a casting out of the Church, and a delivering over to
Satan: which yet is a medicinal excommunication for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved. The third is Anathema Maranatha, an
accursing of a man to the comimg of Christ, without hope of mercy; which is
excommunicatio exterminativa, and cannot be done, without a prophetical
Spirit. Corn. Bertramus de repub. Ebraeor cap. 7. says that our suspension
from the Sacrament answers to their Niddui: our Excommunication to their
Cherem. And for their Schammata, he thinks it was an adjudging of one to
eternal death; whereunto answers the Apostles Anathema, and the Churches
devoting of Julian the Apostate, as one to be no more prayed for, but to be
prayed against. Munsterus will have Schammata to be the same with Niddui.
Wherein Master Seldom agrees with him, still holding a difference between
Niddui, and Cherem, as between the lesser, and the greater excommunication: de
Jure not. and Gentium, l. 4. c. 8. Of the same opinion is Io. Coch, Annot. in
Exc. Gem. Sanhedrin. p. 149. But Constantinus l' Empereur annot. in rempub.
Jud. tells us, that the Talmudists in diverse places, do distinguish the three
degrees of Excommunication, as Bertramus does; and that Schammata was the
highest Excommunication, greater then either Niddui or Cherem, he proves not
only by the Epitheton adonai added by the Chaldee paraphrase Number. 21. 25. Et
percussit eum Israel per Schammata dei; but further from the words of Rabbi
Solomon, comparing one excommunicated by Schammata, to the fat cast in the
Furnace, which is wholly consumed, and which never comes out, so he that is
Schammatized, is lost for ever, and without all remedy unto all eternity. He
confirms it also, from the words of Elias above mentioned. It is not much to
my present argument, to dispute whether the Jews had three distinct degrees of
excommunication or two only. However it is agreed, that the Jews had their
Excommunicatio Minor and Major. And Niddui* was an Excommunication for 30.
days, during which time if the person (man or woman) repent, well and good: if
not, he was excommunicate, for other 30. days. Yea, says Doctor Buxtorf, the
time might be triplicate to 90. days. And if after all that time he repent
not, then he was excommunicate, with the greater excommunication Cherem. And so
much for the degrees.

As for the manner, and rites of their excommunication, it was done most
solemnly, Lexicon. Chald. Talmud. and Rabbin. page 2468. Excom municatio siebat
quandoque verbis expressis, quando excommunicandus erat praesens: quandeque
scripto public affixo, quando absens erat. Hinc legitur in Majemone in libro
Madda cop. 7. Sect. 2. Quomodo sit Niddui: dicit N. esto in excommunicatione.
Si. excommunicant eum in faciem, id est presentem, dicit N. hic esto in
excommunicatione sive banno. Ibid. page 2469. Nuncius vel minister publicus
judicii ca side habetur, ut si dicat, N. a me citatus ad Judicium, contempsit
me, aut vilipendit Judicem, aut dixit sa nolle comparere in Judicio, tunc
sammatisent ipsum ad verba ejus, sed non scribunt super eo Schedam
Excommunicationis Shammata, donec veuerint duc quo testentur ipsum noluisse
comparere ad Judicium.
Doctor Buxtorf tells us, if the party was present, the sentence of
Excommunication was pronounced against him by word of mouth: If he was absent,
there was a writ publicly affixed, containing the sentence of Excommunication,
which writ was not published, till the offense was proved, at least by two
witnesses.

It is certain from Pirke Rabb. Elierser cap. 38. that Cherem was not without
an assembly of ten at least. And it is as certain that Cherem was not only in
a solemn, but in a sacred manner performed, which is manifest from that Formula
Anathematis, which Lexicon Rabbin. p. 828. Ex sententia domini Dominorum, sit
in Anathemate Ploni Filius Ploni, in utraque domo Judicii, Superiorum scilicet
and Inferiorum, in Anathemate item Sanctorum Excelsorum, in anathemate Seraphim
and Ophannim, in anathemate denique totius Ecclesiae, maximorum and minimorum
etc.
Doctor Buxtorf has transcribed out of an old Hebrew Manuscript; and from
Another form more full and large see in Vorstius his Animadversions upon Pirke
page 226. to 230. Decreto vigilum atque edicto Sanctotum anathemizamus.
adju^amus, excommunicamus Schammatizamus, maledicimus, execramus ex sententia
hujus loci atque ex scientia hujus coe^us, hoc libro legis, sexcentis tredecim
praeceptis in illo conscriptis. Anathe. mate quo Joshua devo vie Jericho;
maledictione qua maledixit Eliseus pueris, and maledictione quam imprecatus est
Gichazi servo suo. Shammate quo Schammatizavit Barack Meroz, etc. Nomine
Aebthariel Jah Domini Zehaoth. Nomine Michael Principis magni. Nomine
Mathatheron cujus nomen est sicuti nomen Domini ejus. Nomine Sandalphon qui
nectit coronas pro domino suo. Nomine Nominis 42. literarum. Nomine quod
apparuit Mosi in Sinai. Nomine quo dissecuit Moses Mare. Nomine Ehieh ascher
Ehieh, Ero qui ero. Arcano nominis Amphor^sch. Scriptura quae exarata est in
tabulis. Nomine Domini exercituum Dei Israelis, qui sedit inter cherubim, etc.
Maledictus ex ore nominis celebrandi, and tremendi, quod e^reditur ex ore
Sacerdotis magni die expiationum, etc. Evellatur ipse e tabernaculo. Nolit
dominus illi condonare, sed tunc sumet furor and indignatio contra virum illum.
Incumbant illi omnes maledictiones conscriptae in hoc libro legis. Expellat
nomen ejus sub caelo, and segreget illum in malum ex omnibus tribubus Israelis,
juxta omnes execrationes hujus faederis consignatas in hoc libro legis, etc.
Haec sit voluntas Dei and dicatur Amen.
another form, which Hen. Vorstius takes out of Col Bo both showing, that it
was not a civil, but a sacred business, done in the name and authority of the
God of heaven: and the latter formula still used in most of the Jewish
Synagogues as Vorstius informs us

We read also in Pirke Rabb. Elieser cap. 38. Quid tum fec^runt Ezra,
Zerobahel, and Jehoshua? Congregaveront totam Ecclesiam seu caetum populi in
templum dom ni and introduxerant 300. sacerdotes, and 300. adoles* centes (seu
discipulos minores) quibus erant in manibus 300. buccinae, and 300. libri
legis. Hi clangebant; Levitae autem cantabant and psallebant: and
excommunicabant Cuthaeos per mysterium nominis Te r^grammati, and per
scripturam descriptam in Tabulis legis, and per anathema fori superioris seu
caelestis, and per anathema fori inferioris seu terrestris, ita ut nemo
Israelitarum unquam in posterum comederet buccellam aliquam Cuthaeorum. Hinc
dicunt Quicunque comedit carnem Cuthaei, is vescitur quasi carne poreina.
Cuthaeus quoque ne seret proselytus, neque haberet partem in resurrectione
mortuorum, juxta illud quod scriptum est. Non ad vos simul nobiscum attinet
instauratio domus dei nostri: neque in hoc neque in suturo seculo. Praeterea
quoque ne haberet partem in Jerusalem. hinc dicitur, Uobis non est pars neque
jus, neque memoria in Jerusalem. Transmisetunt autem Anathema hoc ad Israelitas
qui erant in Babylonia.
that the Cuthites (who were also called Samaritans) after they had been
circumcised by Rabb. D^stai, and Rabbi Zacharias, and had been taught by them
out of the Book of the Law; they were excommunicate by Ezra, Zerubbabel, and
Joshua the high Priest, 300. Priests, and 300. Disciples, and the whole Church,
in the Temple; the Trumpets sounding, and the Levites singing; they did even by
the great name of God, excommunicate the Cuthites, that there should be no
fellow-ship between any man of Israel and the Cuthites, that no Proselyte
should be received of the Cuthites; and that they should have no part in the
resurrection of the dead, nor in the building of the house of God, nor in
Jerusalem. This passage Doctor Buxtorf, in his Rabbinicall Lexicon, p. 2464.
and Master Seldom de Jure not. and Gentium. l. 4. c. 8. have observed out of
Pirke; and Doctor Buxtorf, both there and dissert de lit. Hebr. these. 49.
notes the three words used by the Hebrews in this relation, (...) that is,
they did excommunicate them both by Niddui, Cherem, and Schammata. And so much
for the manner and rites.

As for the authority, by which a man was excommunicated, we see (by that which
has been already noted) that it was a public and judicial act, and it was
necessary there should be at least an Assembly of ten. Those formulae before
cited, make it evident, that it was an authoritative sentence of an
Ecclesiastical Assembly, (and therefore done as it were in name of the Court
of heaven, to which purpose domus Judicii superioris seu coelestis, was
mentioned in the business, and it was a juridicall or forensicall act, and
done solemnly in the Temple, in that case of the Cuthites) Drusius de tribus
Sectis Judaeorum lib. 4. Number. 237. concerning the Discipline of the Essaeans,
and their Excommunicating of ungodly persons, tells us it was done by a
hundredth men Assembled together. It is very true, which Mr. Seldom observes,
de Jure not. and Gentium l. 4. c. 8. the Hebrews writ of a Judicial
excommunication, and of an extrajudiciall excommunication, by which one private
man might excommunicate another. Yet, that extrajudiciall excommunication could
not stand in force, unless it were ratified by the Court; and of it self, it
was rather optative, or imprecative, than obligative: as is manifest by the
Instance, which Annot Gem in Ex. Sanhedrin. p. 147. R. Simon, si^. Lakisch
custodiebat hortum. venit quidam and ficus caepit vovare. Ille inclamare: hic
non nauci facere. Tum ille* excommunicatus esto. Tu vicissim inquit alter
excommunicatus esto. Nam si ad pecuniam tibi obstrictus sum, numquid anathemati
obnoxious sum? Adiit R. Lakisch super hoc Scholae rectores. Responsum est:
Ipsius Anathema anathema est* tuum nullum est.
Io. Coch gives us ex Gem. Moed Caton. Two men having mutually excommunicated
each other, it comes to an authoritative decision. He that had excommunicated
the other, for that for which he ought to have been punished by a pecuniall
mulct, but not by excommunication, was himself justly excommunicate by the
other, according to the last of the 24. causes of excommunication before
mentioned, that is, that he who unjustly excommunicateth another, shall be
himself excommunicated. So the excommunicating of the one man for a civil
injury was declared null: and the excommunicating of the other, for his unjust
act of excommunication, was ratified. Which does not only prove what I have
said of private, or extrajudiciall excommunication: but also confirm what I
asserted before, concerning the causes of excommunication, that it was not for
personal or civil injuries, but for matter of scandal. And that pecuniary
mulcts and excommunication, were not inflicted for the same but for different
causes. And so much for the authority.

The effects of excommunication were Buxtorf. Lexion Chald. Talm. and Rab. p.
1305. 828.
these. He might not be admitted into an Assembly of ten persons. He might not
sit within four cubits to his neighbor. He might not shave* his hair, nor
wash himself. It was not lawful to eat nor drink with him. He that dyed in
excommunication got no Funerals, nor was there any mourning made for him, but a
stone was set over him, to signify that he was worthy to be stoned, because he
did not repent, and because he was separated from the Church. An excommunicate
person might not make up the number of ten, where there were nine. The reason
was because he might not be acknowledged for a Church Member, or one who could
make up a lawful Assembly. Drusius de tribus sectis Judaeorum lib. 3. cap. 11.
draws two consequences from that excommunication of the Cuthites before
mentioned. 1. That it was not lawful for a Jew, to eat bread with a Samaritan.
2. That the Samaritans were cut off from the Jewish Church, and that without
hope of regresse, being Shammatized.

It is more disputable, how far forth Excommunication did deprive a man of
the liberty of access into the Temple. The Talmudists hold, that of old an
Excommunicate person might enter into the Temple, yet so as he might be known
that he was Excommunicate. It is said in Pirke Rabb. Elieser cap. 17. that
Solomon built two Gates, one for Bride-grooms, another for Mourners and
Excommunicated persons; and when the Children of Israel, sitting between these
two Gates, upon the Sabbath-dayes and Holy Days, did see a Bridegroom come
in, they knew him, and did congratulate with him: but when they saw one come in
at the door of the mourners, having his Lips covered, they knew him to be a
mourner, and said, He that dwells in this house, comfort thee. But when they
saw one come in at the door of mourners, with his Lips not covered, they knew
him to be Excommunicated, and spoke to him on this manner. He that dwells in
this house comfort thee, and put into thy mind, to hearken unto thy
Neighbors. The like you have in codice Middoth cap. 2. Sect. 2. where it is
said that ordinarily, all that came into the Temple, did enter upon the right
hand; and they went out upon the left hand, those excepted to whom some sad
thing had befallen; and when it was asked of such a one, why do thou enter
upon the left hand, he either answered, that he was a mourner, and then it was
said to him, He that dwells in this house comfort thee, or he answered, because
I am Excommunicate (so reads Buxtorf) or quia ego contaminatus rejicior (so
reads l' Empereur) and then it was said to him, He that dwells in this house,
put into thy mind, to hearken to the words of thy companions, that they may
restore thee. The same thing is cited e libro Musar by Drusius praeter. lib. 4.
in Jo. 9. 22. His opinion is that (...) those that were separate and
excommunicate by the lesser excommunication, were admitted into the Temple, in
the manner aforesaid: but that they were not admitted into the Synagogue:
because its added in libro Musar, (which I find also added in the
forementioned place of Pirke R Elies.) that after the temple was destroyed, it
was decreed, that Bride-grooms and Mourners should come into the Synagogues,
and that they in the Synagogue, should congratulate with the one, and condole
with the other. Behold says Drusius, no mention here of excommunicate persons,
for they did not come into the Synagogues. Peradventure every Excommunicate
person, had not access to the Temple neither, but he that was extrajudicially,
or by private persons excommunicate, as those words might seem to intimate, He
that dwells in this house put into thy mind, to hearken to thy neighbors or
companions, that they may restore thee. Or if you take it to extend to
judicial excommunication, then Hen. Vorstius does expound it, animad. in Pirke
p. 169. De his merito dubitari potest, number licuerit ipsis sacra adire limina,
imprimis qui severi^i ex communicationis genere vel (...) multati erant. Quis
enim dicat Apostatam, blasphemum, al^aque sacra capita intra Templum suisse
admissa? De (...) alia ratio ^sse potest, eum his spes veniae non fuerit
adempta.
so, as it may be understood only of the lesser excommunication, when there
was still hope of repentance, and reconciliation. So Io. Coch. ubi supra page
149. thinks that an excommunicate person was not altogether cast out of the
Synagogue, but was permitted to hear, and to be partaker of the Doctrine, but
otherwise and in other things he was separate, and not acknowledged for a
Church Member; and this he says of (...) menudde, of him that was simply
excommunicate by the lesser excommunication or Niddui. But he says otherwise
of him that was excommunicate with Cherem. Non docet, non docetur. He is
neither permitted to teach, nor to be taught. Grotius on Luke 6. 22. tells us,
that excommunicate persons under Niddui, came no otherwise to the Temple than
Heathens did, that is, had no liberty to come into the Court of Israel.
However, such as were excommunicate by Cherem were not permitted to come near
the Temple, says Master Weemse in his Christian Synag. p. 138. An
excommunicate person of the first sort, ( Niddui,) when he came to the Temple,
or Synagogue, you see (by what has been said) he was there publicly bearing
his shame, and looked upon as one separate from the Communion of the people of
God. And so much for the effects.

The end of Excommunication was spiritual, M. Seldom de ^ure nature. and
Gentium lib. 4. cap. 8. Effectus ac finit excommunicationis hujusmodi, Jure
communi erat, ut solitae popularium consuetudin^ liberate reu^ privaretur,
usque dum panitentia ad bonam mentem rediens solveretur sententia.
that a sinner being by such public shame and separation humbled, might be
gained to repentance, and thereby his soul saved; (which is the end of Church
Discipline, not of civil censures.) The Court waited 90. days upon his
Repentance, and did not proceed to Cherem, except in case of his continuing
impenitency, when all that time he gave no sign of repentance, nor sought
absolution.

From all that has been said, I hope it is fully manifest, that the Jewish
excommunication was an Ecclesiastical censure, and not (as ( Independency
examined page 10. Vindic. of the 4. Questions p. 4. 5
Master Prynne would have it) a civil excommunication, like to an outlary at
Common Law.

I conclude with a passage of Drusius de Tribus Sectis Judaeorum lib. 4. cap.
22. concerning the Essaeans, who did most religiously retain the Discipline of
Excommunication. Jus dicturi inter se congregantur centum viri, qui eos quos
deprehenderint reos and improbos expellunt e caetu suo. These words he cites
out of Salmanticensis. Being to Judge or give sentence among themselves, a
hundredth men are gathered together, who do expel from their Assembly those
whom they find to be guilty and ungodly. He adds this Testimony of Rufinus.
Deprehensos vero in peccatis a sua congregatione depellunt. Such as are
deprehended in sins they put away from their Congregation. Lo, an
Ecclesiastical Excommunication because of scandalous sins.

CHAP. V. Of the cutting off from among the people of God, frequently mentioned
in the Law.
IT has been much controverted, what should be the neaning of that
commination, so frequently used in the Law of Moses: that soul shall be cut
off from among his people. The radix (...) signifies properly such a cutting
off, as is like the cutting off a Branch from the Tree: and (...) cutting off,
is applied to divorcement, Deuteronomy, 24. 1. a bill of divorcement, in the Hebrew,
of cutting off. So Isa. 50. 1. Ier. 3. 8. It is certain that (...) carath does
not necessarily signify to cut off by death, destruction, or a total
abolition of the very existence of him that is cut off, but any cutting off, by
whatsoever loss or punishment it be. The Septuagints render it, not seldom,
by such words as signify the loss or punishment of the party, without
destroying him, as by (...), abscindo, amputo, succid^, excindo, (...) avello,
abstraho, (...), demitto (...), circumcido, (...), aufere, (...) percutio,
(...) verbero. Sometime they render it by (...) contero, extero, terendo
excutio: to strike out, (sometime, to wash out, or, to wipe off spots or filth,
as H. Stephanus tells us: thence (...), the cloth wherewith we wipe our hands
when we wash them) Numb. 19. 13. that soul shall be cut off from Israel. The
Septuagints (...). Yea where they render it by (...), that (...) or cutting off
is sometimes meant of captivity Amos 1. 5. sometimes of the decay and
dissolution of a Monarchy Ezech. 31. 12. Sometimes of the deposition or
repudiating of Priests. 1 Samuel 2. 33. the man of thine whom I shall not cut off
from mine Altar. Sometimes generally for a judgment or punishment, Isa. 22.
25. The English translators in some places where it is (...) in the original
and (...), render it to fail, 1 Kings 2. 4. to loose 1 Kings 18. 5. Sometime
they render the same original word to hew, 1 Kings 5. 6. to hew timber, Jer.
66. Sometime simply to cut, Ezech. 16. 4 thy navell was not cut. In other
places where the Septuagints have (...) aufero, the English has to fail, 1
Kings 8. 25. and 9. 5. 2 Chro. 7. 18. This (...) is the word used by the
Apostle in the case of Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 13.

There are five different opinions concerning that cutting off mentioned in the
Law. First, Augustine in diverse places, understands the meaning to be of the
second death or eternal condemnation. But this is not suitable to the infancy
of the Jewish Church; for whiles they were bred under the paedagogy of the Law,
things eternal and invisible were not immediately and nakedly propounded unto
them, but under the shadows and figures of temporal and visible things. So
that if eternal death were the ultimate intendment of that commination (as I
verily believe it was) yet it must needs be acknowledged, that there was some
other punishment in this life, comprehended under that phrase, to resemble in
some sort, and to shadow forth that everlasting cutting of.

2. Some understand that cutting off to be when a man dies (...), without
children, having no offspring or posterity behind him to preserve the memory
of him; for he that left children behind him, was esteemed to live in some sort
after he was dead. But the cutting off in the Law, is privative, not negative,
it is a depriving of a man of what he has, not the denial of what he would
have. Neither was that of the preserving of ones name in the posterity,
applicable to women, but to their husbands only; whereas their cutting off was
threatened to all that were guilty, whether men or women. Finally, if that were
the sense, then the cutting off did neither belong to such as choosed
voluntarily to live unmarried, nor to men who being married had children to
preserve their memory after their death. But all that committed such or such a
sin, were to be cut off, whether married or unmarried, whether having
children or wanting children.

3. Others understand capital punishment to be inflicted by the civil
Magistrate. But if all the offenses for which cutting off was threatened in the
Law, had been punished by death, the Mosaicall laws, no less then those of
Draco, might have been said to be written in blood, says De gubern. Eccl. page
57.
Gersomus Bucerus. Is it credible that all and every one, who did by any
chance, eat the fat, or the blood, or did make a perfume for smell like to the
holy perfume, or did touch a dead body, or a grave, or a tent wherein a man had
died, or any thing which an unclean person had touched; and had not been
thereafter sprinkled with the water of separation; were without mercy to die
for any of these things? Yet these were cut off from among their people Exodus
30. 38. Lev. 7. 15, 17. Number. 19. 13. 20. Another reason I take from Mercerus on
Genesis 17. 14. We nowhere find either in Scripture, or in the Jewish writings,
that such of the seed of Abraham, as did neglect circumcision, were punished by
the Sword of the Magistrate, yet by the Law such were to be cut off. Now
without all controversy such were excluded from communion with the Church of
Israel, and being so excluded they were said properly to be cut off from among
their people, says Mercerus. And moreover the cutting off in the Law, is
expressed by such a word, as does not necessarily signify that the person cut
off cease to have any being, but it is used to signify a cutting off from a
benefit, relation, or fellowship, when the being remains, as was noted in the
beginning.

4. Many of the Hebrews whom M. Ainsworth annot. in Genesis 17. 14. Exodus 31. 14.
Numb. 15. 30. follows, understand by that cutting off, untimely death, or the
shortning of life, before the natural period. This interpretation I also
dislike, upon these reasons, 1. That which is taken for a foundation of that
opinion, namely, that the cutting off in the Law is meant only as a punishment
of private sins known to God alone, and which could not be proved by
witnesses; this (I say) is taken for granted which is to be proved. 2. Yea, the
contrary appears from Levit. 17. 4, 5. the end of that cutting off was, that
the children of Israel might fear to do that thing which they saw so
punished. But how could they make this use of a Divine judgment inflicted for
some private sin, they knew not for what? 3. The commination of Divine
judgments is added in a more proper place Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26. and in diverse
places, where wrath and punishment from God is denounced against all such as
would not observe his Commandments, nor keep his Statutes and Judgments. But
the cutting off is a part (and a great part) of the corrective or penal
Mosaicall Laws, which contain punishments to be inflicted by men, not by God;
which makes Piscator almost everywhere in his Scholia to observe, that
exscindetur is put for exscinditor, that soul shall be cut off for, let that
soul be cut off. 4* The cutting off was a distinguishing punishment; they that
did such and such things were to be cut off, and in being cut off, were to
bear their iniquity, Lev. 18. 29. Numb. 15. 31. But we cannot say that Abijah
the son of Jeroboam, or King Josiah, being taken away by an untimely death,
were thereby marked with a sign of Gods wrath, or that they were cut off from
among their people, and did bear their iniquity. 5. And whereas they object
from Levit. 17. 10. and 20. 5, 6. that the cutting of was a work of God, not
of men, it is easily answered from that same place, it was only so, in
extraordinary cases, when men did neglect to punish the offenders. Levit. 20.
4, 5. And if the people of the land hide their eyes from the man, when he
gives of his seed unto Molech, and kill him not: then I will set my face
against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off. Which gives
light to the other place Levit. 17. 10. What I have said against the third and
fourth opinion, does militate against Erastus, for he expounds the cutting
off these two ways, that is either of capital punishment, or of destruction
by the hand of God, yet he inclines chiefly to the last. See lib. 3. c. 6. He
touches this cutting off in diverse places but valde jejune. And because he is
pleased to profess he had no skill of the Hebrew, he appealeth to the word
(...). Of which before.

There is a fifth exposition, followed by many both Popish and Protestant
writers, who understand by the cutting off, excommunicating or casting out from
the Church, and of this opinion are some very good Hebritians, as Schindlerus
lexic. pentagl. page 655. Cornelius Bertramus de republica Ebraeorum. cap. 2.
Godwyns Moses and Aaron lib. 3. cap. 4. The Jewish Canons of Repentance printed
in Latin at Cambridge, anno 1631. where the Hebrew has (...) the Latin has
ordinarily Excommunicatio. So do diverse of our soundest writers take the
cutting off in the Law to be excommunication. Synops. pur. Theol. Disp. 48.
These. 24. 39. There are these reasons for it.

1. The cutting off had reference to an Ecclesiastical corporation or
fellowship. It is not said, that soul shall be cut off from the earth, or cut
off from the Land of the living, but, cut of from his people: more plainly,
from Israel, Exodus 12. 15. Number. 19. 13. but most plainly, that soul shall be
cut off from the Congregation (or Church) of Israel, Exo. 12. 19. that soul
shall be cut off from among the Congregation (or Church) Number. 19. 20.
intimating somewhat Ecclesiastical. So Lev. 22. 3. that soul shall be cut off
from my presence. The Septuagints (...) from me. The Chaldee, from my face. And
this was the very cutting off or excommunication of Cain from the Church, by
God himself Genes. 4. 14. from thy face shall I be hid. and verse. 14, and Cain
went out from the presence of the Lord. It is another and much different
phrase, which is used to express cutting off from the world, or from the land
of the living Ezech. 25. 7. I will cut thee off from the people, and will cause
thee to perish out off the Countries, Jerem. 11. 19. Let us cut him off from
the land of the living. Zeph. 1. 3. I will cut off man from off the Land. 2. He
that in his uncleanness did eat of an unholy thing was to be cut off Levit.
7. 20, 21. yet for such a one was appointed confession of sin, and a
trespasse-offering, by which he was reconciled and atonement made for him, as
M. Ainsworth himself tells us on Levit. 5. 2. whence I infer, that the
cutting off such a one was not by death inflicted, either from the hand of the
Magistrate, or from the hand of God, but that the cutting off was
Ecclesiastical, as well as the reception or reconciliation. I know M.
Ainsworth is of opinion that the cutting off was for defiling the Sanctuary
presumptuously, or eating of an holy thing presumptuously, when a man was not
cleansed from his uncleanness: and that atonement by sacrifice was appointed
for such as defiled the Sanctuary ignorantly. But that which made him think
so, was a mistake; for he supposes, that for sins of ignorance or infirmity
only, God did appoint Sacrifices; but that for wilful or malicious sins
there was no Sacrifice. See his annot. on Levit. 4. 2. Which Faustus Socinus
also holds praelect. cap. 22. p. 144. But to me, the contrary is plain from
Levit. 6. 1. to 8. where we have atonement to be made by Trespass offerings,
for wilful lying, perjury, fraud, robbing, or violence, which made the
Septuagints, V. 2. for commit a trespass, to read, despising despise the
commandments of the Lord. And whereas M. Ainsworth confirms his opinion from
Heb. 10. 26. for if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sins; I answer with
Calvin, Beza, Hemmingius, and others upon the place, it is not meant of all
sins done wilfully, (which to hold were a most dangerous and despairing
Doctrine,) but of a total defection from Christ and the truth. And now to
return, there is nothing Levit. 5. 2. to exclude a Trespasse-offering for one
who should in his uncleanness wilfully go to the Sanctuary, or touch an holy
thing: but there is this reason, why it should not be excluded, because in that
very place Verse 1. he that did wilfully, for favor or malice, conceal his
knowledge, being a witness in judgment, was yet admitted to bring his
Trespasse-offering. 3. The Apostle 1 Cor. 5. gives us some light concerning the
cutting off; for as Verse. 6, 7, 8. most manifestly he points at the purging
of all the congregation of Israel from leaven* Exodus 12. so Verse. 13. when he
says, therefore put away from among your selves* that wicked person, he
plainly alludeth to Exodus 12. 15, 19. Whosoever eats that which is leavened,
even that soul shall be cut off from the Congregation, (or Church) of Israel.
Theophylact on 1 Cor. 5. 13. observes the Apostles allusion to the old Law of
cutting off: and Maccovius (otherwise no very good friend to Church Discipline
and Government) loc. com. disp. 22. proves that Excommunication was
transferred from the Jews to us, by Christ himself Matthew. 18. and that the
cutting off mentioned in the Law, is no other thing than that which the Apostle
means, when he says, put away from among your selves that wicked person. 4.
The cutting off soul from among his people did typifie or resemble eternal
death and condemnation; In which respect Peter does some way apply it to the
days of the Gospel, that every soul which will not hear Christ the great
Prophet, shall be destroyed from among his people, Acts 3. 23. So Vatablus on
Genesis 17. 14. that soul shall be cut off, that is, shall not be partaker of my
promises, and of my benefits. So that as I. Coch. annot* in Sanhedrin. cap. 9.
says well, death inflicted by the hand of God is less then (...) cutting off.
Nam exterminii post mortem poena luitur. The same thing Guil. Vorstius
confirms out of Maimonides, annot. in Maimon. de fundam. legis page 127. And
Abrabanel de capite fidei cap. 8. says that the greatest reward is the life of
the world to come, and the greatest punishment is the cutting off of the soul.
Now this could not so fitly be resembled, and shadowed forth by the cutting off
from the land of the living, either by the hand of God, or by the hand of the
Magistrate, as by cutting off from the Church, and from the communion of
Saints, by excommunication, which is summum futuri judicii praejudicium, as
Tertullian called it, and fore-sheweth that the ungodly shall not stand in the
judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 5. But
Gods taking away of a man by death in the phrase of the Old Testament, is not a
cutting off from, but a gathering of him unto his people; yea Genesis 25* 17.
it is said of wicked Ishmael when he died, he was gathered unto his people.
And as for the abbreviation of life, and the untimelinesse of death in youth,
or middle age, that both is now, and was of old, one of the things which come
alike to all, to the good as well as to the bad. As touching the capital
punishment of malefactors by the hand of the Magistrate, it being founded upon
the very law of nature, and common to all Nations, without as well as within
the Church, (so that very often those from whom a malefactor is cut off, are
not so much as by profession the Church and people of God:) it cannot so fitly
resemble the separation or casting out of a man from having part or portion of
the inheritance of the Saints in light. 5. Dr. Buxtorf lexic. chald. Talm. and
Rahbin. page 1101. tells us that this difference was put between him that was
guilty of cutting off, and him that was guilty of death. Reus* mortis, ipse
tantum, non semen ejus: paena excidii comprehendit ipsum and semen ejus. Now if
the punishment of death was personal one^* and the punishment of cutting off,
comprehensive not only of them but of their seed, how can this agree so well,
to any thing else, as to Excommunication; especially if that hold which Godwyn
in his Moses and Aaron lib. 5. cap. 2. tells us, that the children of
excommunicate persons were not circumcised. 6. M. Seldom de jure not. and Gent.
lib. 7. cap. 10. tells us, that the Hebrew Doctors themselves do not agree
concerning that cutting off in the Law. He says that R. Bechai and others,
make three sorrs of cutting off. i. a cutting off, whereby the body only is
cut off, which they understand by that phrase Levit. 20. 6. I will cut him off
from among his people: and this is untimely death Palm 55. 23. Bloody and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days. 2. They say there was
another cutting off, which was of the soul only, Levit. 18. 29. the souls
that commit these things ^all be cut off from among their people. By this
cutting off (they say) the soul cease to have a being, the body not being
taken away by death, before the natural period. 3. They make a third kind,
whereby both soul and body is cut off, Number. 15. 31. That soul shall be
utterly cut off, his iniquity shall be upon him. Whereby (say they) both the
body is destroyed before the natural time, and likewise the soul cease to
have a being. But whatsoever any of the Hebrews fancied in their declining
latter times, concerning that second kind of cutting off, (which M. Seldom
does not approve, but relate out of them) I am confident it was only the
degenerating notion of Excommunication; and that very fancy of theirs, is a
footstep thereof; which may make us easily believe that the more ancient
Hebrews in purer times, did understand that such a cutting off was mentioned in
the Law, by which a man in respect of his Spiritual being was cut off from the
Church of Israel, whiles his natural life and being was not taken ftom him.
Yea Gul^elmus Vorstius annot. in Maimon. de fundam. legis page 60. shows us,
that some of the Hebrews acknowledge nothing under the name of the cutting
off, but that which is the cutting off of the soul only. But if there be so
much as some cutting off mentioned in the Law, which concerns a man's
Spiritual estate only, it does abundantly confirm what I plead for: and I
shall not need to assert, that everywhere in the Law Excommunication must needs
be understood by cutting off. Some understand the cutting off in the Judicial
or Civil laws, to be meant of capital punishments: and the cutting off in
the ceremonial Laws (which were properly Ecclesiastical) to be meant of
Excommunication, or cutting off from the Church only. If anywhere the cutting
off be Excommunication, it suffices me. Or what ever it may signify more, or
be extended unto, if Excommunication be one thing which it signifies, then
they who think it signifies some other thing beside Excommunication, are not
against me in this question.
I shall conclude with that in the Dutch Annotations upon Genesis 17. 14. that
soul shall be cut off from his people. The Annotation Englished says thus,
that man shall be excommunicate from the fellowship of Gods people. This kind
of expression implies also (as some do conceive) a bodily punishment to be
i^sticted withal by the Magistrate. They hold determinately and positively
that it signifies Excommunication. Whether it signify some other thing
beside, they judge not to be so clear, and therefore offer it to be considered.

It is but a poor argument, whereby Bishop Bilson, of the Government of the
Church, chap. 4. would prove the cutting off not to be meant of
Excommunication, because it is applied even to capital offenses, such as the
Law elsewhere appoints men to be put to death for. As if it were any
absurdity to say, that one and the same offense, is to be punished sub
formalitate scandali with excommunication, and sub formalitate criminis with
capital punishment. And who knows not that a capital crime is a cause of
excommunication, which is also sometimes the sole punishment, the Magistrate
neglecting his duty. If a known blasphemer or incestuous person be not cut off
by the Magistrate as he ought by the Law of God: shall he therefore not be cut
off by excommunication? If he had proved that all the causes of cutting off in
the Law were capital crimes, he had said much: but that will never be proved.

CHAP. VI. Of the casting out of the Synagogue.
WE read of a casting out of the Church, which was pretended to be a matter of
conscience and religion, and such as did more especially concern the glory of
God, Isa. 66. 5. Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names
sake, said, let the Lord be glorified. Such was the casting out of the
Synagogue, mentioned in the Gospel Ioh. 9. 22. and 12. 42. and 16. 2. Arias
Montanus de arcano Sermon cap. 47. expounds it of excommunication from Church
Assemblies. So the Magdeburgians cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 7. and Corn. Bertramus
de repub. Ebraeor. cap. 7. Godwyn in his Moses and Aaron, lib. 3. cap. 4. and
lib. 5. cap. 2. Wherein the interpreters also upon the places cited do
generally agree, Erasmus, Brentius, Tossanus, Diodati, Cartwright in his
harmony, Gerhard, etc. So likewise M. Leigh out of Paulus Tarnovius, (...)
dicitur* ejectus e (...) sacro Ecclesiae, excommunicatus. See Critica Sacra of
the new Test. page 391. So does Aretius, Theol. Probel. loc. 133. (though cited
by our Opposites againstus) he says, though it was abused by the Pharisees,
yet it shows the Ancient use of the the thing it self, that there was such a
discipline in the Jewish Church. It is not much material, to dispute which of
the degrees of the Jewish Excommunication, or whether all the three were meant
by that casting out of the Synagogue. Drusius, and Grotius expound, Io. 9. 22.
of Niddui. Gerhard expounds Io. 16. 2. of all the three Niddui, Cherem, and
Shammata. It is enough for this present argument, if it was a spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical Censure, not a civil punishment. Master Prynne, Vindic. page
48, 49. tells us. First, this casting* out of the Synagogue, was not warranted
by Gods Word, but was only a humane invention. Secondly, as it was practiced
by the Jews, it was a diabolical institution. Thirdly, that it was merely a
civil Excommunication, like to an Outlary, whereby the party cast out, was
separate from civil conversation only, or from all company with any man, but
was not suspended from any Divine Ordinance. Fourthly, that it was inflicted by
the Temporal Magistrate. Fifthly, that in the Jewish Synagogues at that time,
there was neither Sacrament nor Sacrifice, but only Reading, Expounding,
Preaching, Disputing, and Prayer, so that it cannot prove suspension from the
Sacrament. To the first, I answer, it was not only warranted by the cutting
off mentioned in the Law, but Erastus himself gives a warrant for it from Gods
word. He says, page 315. the casting out of the Synagogue, was vel idem vel
simile quidpiam with that separating from the congregation Ez^a. 10. 8. To the
second Aretius has answered. The best things in the world may be abused. To
the third, I offer these eight considerations to prove that it was an
Ecclesiastical, not a civil Censure.

First, the causes for which men were put out of the Synagogues, were matters
of scandal, offenses in point of Religion, and we read of none cast out of the
Synagogue for a civil injury or crime; It was for confessing Christ Io. 9. 22.
and 12. 42. then counted heresy: and for Preaching of the Gospel Io. 16. 2.
Secondly, The Synagogicall Assembly or Court, was Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as Ludoviens de Dieu notes upon Matthew 10. 17. we read of the
Rulers of the Synagogue, Act. 13. 15. among whom he that did pre^de and
moderate, was called the chief Ruler of the Synagogue Act. 18. 8. 17. names
never given to civil Magistates or Judges. Therefore Brughton makes this of
the Rulers of the Synagogue, to be one of the paralells between the Jewish,
and the Christian Church. Se^ his exposition of the Lords Prayer page 14. 16.
As for that Assembly of the Pharisees, which did cast out, or excommunicate the
blind man, Io. 9. Tossanus upon the place calls it Senatus Ecclesiasticus; and
Brentius argues from this example against the infallibility of Counsels,
because this Council of the Pharisees called Christ himself a finner. 3 The
Court of civil Judgment, was in the Gates of the City, not in the Synagogue.
4 Such as the Communion and fellowship was in the Synagogue, such was the
casting out of the Synagogue. But the Communion or fellowship, which one
enjoyed in the Synagogue, was a Church Communion and Sacred fellowship, in acts
of Divine worship. Therefore the casting out of the Synagogue was also
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, not civil or temporal. 4 The end was Sacred
and Spiritual, to glorify God Is. 66. 5. to do God good service Io. 16. 2.
in that which did more immediately and nearly touch his name and his glory,
Though the Pharisees did falsely pretend that end, their error was not in
mistaking the nature of the Censure, but in misapplying it where they had no
just cause. 5 Master Prynne himself tells us page 49. That this excommunication
from the Synagogue was of force forty days (though I believe he has added ten
more then enough, and if he look over his Books better, he will find he should
have said thirty,) yet so as that it might be shortened upon repentance. But I
pray, are civil punishments shortened or lengthened according to the parties
repentance? I know Church Censures are so. But I had thought, the end of civil
punishments, is not to reclaim a man's soul by repentance, and then to be
taken off: but to guard the Laws of the Land, to preserve Justice, Peace, and
good order, to make others fear to do evil, to uphold the public good. The
Magistrate must both punish and continue punishments, as long as is necessary
for those ends, whether the party be penitent or not. 6 How is it credible,
that the holy Ghost meaning to express a casting out from civil company or
conversation only, (which was not within, but without the Synagogue) would
choose such a word as signifies the casting out from an Ecclesiastical or
Sacred Assembly? (for such were the Synagogues, in which the Jews had Reading,
Expounding, Preaching and Prayer, as Master Prynne tells us) Christ himself
distinguishes the Court or Judicatory, which was in the Synagogue, from civil
Magistracy Luke 12. 11. And when they bring you unto the Synagogues, and unto
Magistrates and Powers. Magistrates and Powers are civil Rulers, supreme and
subordinate, but the Synagogues are distinct Courts from both these. 7 Our
Opposites cannot give any other rational interpretation of the word (...).
Erastus page 315. confesses, it is very hard to tell what it was. He gives
three conjectures. First, that it was some ignominy put upon a man: which I
think no body denies, and it may well stand with our interpretation. Secondly,
he says not that it was a separating of the party from all company, or society
with any man. (for which Master Prynne cites Erastus with others) but a
pulling away, or casting out of a man from some particular Town only; for
instance, from Nazareth. Thirdly, He says, it seems also to have been a
refusal of the privileges of Jewish Citizens* or the esteeming of one no
longer for a true Jew, but for a Proselyte. But that a Proselyte, who was free
to come both to Temple and Synagogue (for of such a Proselyte he speaks
expressly) should be said to be made (...) it may well weaken, it cannot
strengthen his cause. 8. In Tzemach David edit. Hen. Vorst. page, 89. We read,
that when the Sanhedrin did remove from Jerusalem, 40. years before the
destruction of the Temple, there was a Prayer composed against the Heretics.
Hen. Vorstius in his observe. page 285* shows out of Maimon* that it was a
maledictory Prayer appointed to be used against the Heretics of that time, who
increased mightily: and that R. Sol. Jarchi adds this explanation of the word
(...) Minim, the Disciples of Jesus of Nazareth. D. Buxtorf. Lexic. Chald.
Talm. and rab. page 1201. collecteth that this maledictory Prayer was composed
in Christ's time, and against his Disciples. Surely it suteth no story so well,
as that of the decree of casting out of the Synagogue Io. 12. 42.
After all these eight considerations, this I must add, that I do not a
little admire, how Master Prynne could cite Godwyns Jewish Antiquities lib. 5.
cap. 2. for that opinion, that the casting out of the Synagogue was not an
Ecclesiastical but only a civil censure. If he had but looked upon the page
immediately preceding, he had found this distinction between the
Ecclesiastical and civil courts of the Jews; The office of the
Ecclesiastical Court, was to put a difference between things holy and unholy,
etc. It was a representative Church. Hence is that, di^ Ecclesiae. Matt. 18.
17. Tell the Church because unto them, belonged the power of excommunication,
the several sorts of which censure follow; and so he begins with the
casting out of the Synagogue, as the first or lesser Excommunication o^ Niddui,
and tells us among other effects of it, that the male Children of one thus cast
out were not circumcised.

To Master Prynnes fourth exception, the Answer may be collected from what is
already said. We never find the temporal Magistrate called the Ruler of the
Synagogue, nor yet that he sat in Judgment in the Synagogue. The beating or
scourging in the Synagogues, was a tumultuous disorderly act; we read of no
sentence given, but only to be put out of the Synagogue, which sentence was
given by the Synagogicall consistory, made up of the Priest or Priests and
Jewish Elders. For the power of judging in things and causes Ecclesiastical,
did belong to the Priests and Levites, together with the Elders of Israel. 1
Chro. 23. 4. and 26. 30. 32. 2. Chro. 19. 8. And therefore what reason Master
Prynne had to exclude the Priests from this corrective power, and from being
Rulers of the Synagogue, I know not. Sure I am the Scriptures cited make
Priests and Levites to be Judges and Rulers Ecclesiastical; of which before.
As for the chief Ruler of the Synagogue: Archysynagogus erat primarius in
Synagoga Doctor, say the Centurists Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap 7. and if so, then not
a civil Magistrate.

To the fifth I Answer, 1. If there was an exclusion from Reading, Expounding,
Preaching, and Prayer, then much more from Sacraments, in which there is more
of the communion of Saints. 2. He that was cast out of the Synagogue might not
enter in the Synagogue, says Menochius in Io. 9. 22. therefore he did not
communicate in Prayer with the Congregation, nor in other acts of Divine
Worship, (which how far it is applicable to excommunication in the Christian
Church, I do not now dispute, nor are all of one opinion, concerning
excommunicate persons, their admission unto some, or exclusion from all public
Ordinances, hearing of the word and all) I know Erastus answers the word
Synagogue may signify either the material house, the place of Assembling; or
the people, the congregation which did Assemble; and some who differ in
Judgment from us in this particular, hold that when we read of putting out of
the Synagogue, the word Synagogue does not signify the house or place of
public worship (which yet it does signify in other places, as Luke 7. 5. Act.
18. 7.) but the Church or Assembly it self. But I take it to signify both
jointly; and that it was a casting out, even from the place it self, such as
that Io. 9. 34. (...). and they cast him out, or excommunicated him, as the
English Translators add in the Margin. Besides, I take what it is granted. It
was a casting out from the Assembly, or Congregation it self. But how could a
man be cast out from the Congregation, and yet be free to come where the
Congregation was Assembled together? O but he must keep off four cubits
distance, from all other men. And was there so much room to reele to and fro
in the Synagogue? I do not understand how a man shall satisfy himself in
that notion. But I rather think Bertramus speaks rationally, that he that was
excommunicate by Niddui was shut out ab hominum contubernio atque ade^ ab
ipsius Tabernaculi aditu. de Rep. Jud. cap. 7. which Niddui he takes to be the
same with casting out of the Synagogue. He that was cast out from men's society,
must needs be excluded from the public holy Assemblies, and from the place
where these Assemblies are. Whereunto agrees that which we read in Exc. Gem.
Sanhedrin cap. 3. Sect. 9. a certain Disciple, having after two and twenty
years divulged that which had been said in the School of R. Ammi, he was
brought out of the Synagogue, and the said Rabbi caused it to be proclaimed,
this is a revealer of secrets.

3 It is more then Mr. Prynne can prove that the Sacrament of Circumcision was
not then administered in the Synagogues. The Jews do administer it in their
Synagogues; and that John was Circumcised in the Synagogue, some gather from
Luke 1. 59. Venerunt, they came (to wit to the Synagogue) to Circumcise the
Child; for my part I lay no weight upon that argument. But I see l^sse ground
for Mr. Prynnes Assertion.

As for that which M. Prynne adds in the close, that those who were cast out
of the Synagogue might yet resort to the Temple, he has said nothing to prove
it. I find the same thing affirmed by Sutlivius de Presbyt. page 25. (though I
had thought Master Prynnes Tenen^s of this kind, should never have complied
with those of Episcopal men, against the Anti-Episcopall party) But neither
does Sutlivius prove it; only he holds that the casting out of the Synagogue
was merely a civil Excommunication, and his reason is that which he had to
prove, that Christ and his Disciples, when they were cast out of the
Synagogues, had notwithstanding a free access to the Temple. To my best
observation, I can find no Instance of any admitted to the Temple, while cast
out of the Synagogue. I turn again to Erastus page 314. to see whether he
proves it. He gives us two instances, first of Christ himself who was cast out
of the Synagogues, and yet came into the Temple. But how proves he that Christ
was (...)? for this, he tells us only Quis dubitat? who makes Question of it?
I am one who make a great Question of it^, or rather put it out of Question,
that Christ was not cast out of the Synagogues; for what says he himself Io.
18. 20. I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whether the Jews
always resort. Christ was cast out of the City of Nazareth in the tumult by
the people Luke 4. but here was no consistoriall sentence, it was not the
casting out of the Synagogue of which our Question is. The other Instance which
Erastus gives, helps him as little. The Apostles says he, were cast out of the
Synagogue, and yet immediately went to the Temple, and taught the people Act.
4. and 5. And how many Synagogues was Paul cast out of? 2 Cor. 11. Yet he is
not reprehended for coming into the Temple. Answ. I find nothing of the
Synagogue in those places which he cites. It was the Council, not the
Synagogue which the Apostles had to do with Act. 4. v 5.

But what have they gained if they could prove that Christ or his Apostles,
while known to be excommunicate from the Synagogues, were admitted into the
Temple? How often did they come into the Temple, when the Priests, and Elders,
and Scribes, would gladly have cast them out, but they feared the people, and
so were restrained? Nay, what if they could give other Instances, that such as
were cast out of the Synagogue, were permitted to come into the Temple; what
gain they thereby? If we understand the casting out of the Synagogue to be
meant of Niddui, of the lesser Excommunication as Drusius, Bertramus, Grotius,
and Godwyne understand it, we are not at all pinched or straightened. Nay, though
we should also comprehend the Cherem or greater excommunication under this
casting out of the Synagogue, all that will follow upon the admission of such
into the Temple, will be this, that excommunicate persons when they desired to
make atonement for their sin by Sacrifice, were for that end admitted into
the Temple (which who denies?) but still with a mark of Ignominy upon them as
long as they were excommunicated, as I have showed before. Chap. 4. Finally
whereas Master Prynne concludes his Discourse of this point, that we may as
well prove excommunication from Diotrephes 3. Io. 10, as from the casting out
of the Synagogue, I admit the parallel thus. The Pharisees did cast out from
the Synagogue such as professed Christ; Diotrephes did cast out of the Church
(as John says) such as received the Brethren. Both clave errante: the
Ecclesiastical censure was abused and misapplyed; yet from both it appears*
that Ecclesiastical Censures were used in the Church. There was a casting out
of the Synagogue used among the Jews, which the Pharisees did abuse. There was
a casting out of the Church used among Christians, which Diotrephes did abuse.
I remember I heard Master Coleman once draw an argument against excommunication
from that Text in John concerning Diotrephes. Which is as if we should argue
thus, the Scripture tells us it is a sin to condemn the righteous, Ergo it
is a sin to condemn. It is a sin to cast out of the Church godly persons
who love and receive the Brethren, Ergo it is a sin to cast out of the
Church. A fallacy a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. The weight is
laid upon the application of such a Censure to such persons: An unju^
Excommunication is not imitable, but a just Excommunication is imitable*
according to the warning given us in the words immediately added, follow not
that which is evil, but that which is good.

CHAP. VII. Other Scripturall Arguments to prove an Excommucation in the Jewish
Church.
ANother Scripture proving Excommunication in the Jewish Church (which is also
parallel to that casting out of the Synagogue as Erastus himself told us) is
Ezra. 10. 8. that whosoever would not come within three days, according to the
counsel of the Princes and Elders, all his Substance should be forfeited, and
himself separated from the Congregation (or Church, It is Kahal in the Hebrew,
and (...) in the Greek) of those that had been carried away.

This separation from the Congregation or Church is not meant of banishment,
but of Excommunication, as it is interpreted by Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis, Cajetan,
Nicholaus Lombardus, Mariana, Cornelius a lapide: of Protestants Pellicanus,
Lavater, Diodati, the Dutch Annotations, the late English Annotations; all upon
the place. Also by Zepperus de pol. eccl. lib. 3. cap. 7. and diverse others who
cite that place occasionally. Ampsingius disp. advers. Anabaptist. page 276.
does from that place confute the Anabaptists tenent, that there was no other
but a Civil Tribunal in the Jewish Church. Beda upon the place calls this
Assembly a Synod, ^nita Synodo etc. Josephus antiq. lib. 11. cap. 5. expresses
the punishment of those who would not come to Jerusalem at that time, thus,
(...) A double punishment (...) and (...): the former is referred to the
persons themselves, and it signifies an abalienation of those persons from the
Congregation, not a banishing or driving of them out of the Land; for (...)
signifies to abalienate a person or thing, by renouncing and quitting the
right, title, and interest which formerly we had in that person or thing; so
houses, lands, persons, etc. are abalienated, when (though they and we remain
where before) we cease to own them as ours; and thus the Congregation of
Israel did renounce their interest in those offenders, and would not own them
as Church Members. The other punishment was the dedicating or devoting of their
substance. Gelenius the Interpreter has rightly rendered the sense of
Josephus: Et quisquis non adfuerat intra praescriptum ^empus, ut
excommunicetur, bonaque ejus sacro aerario addicantur. You will object, this
separation from the Congregation is coupled together with forfeiture of a man's
estate, and so seems rather banishment than Excommunication. This objection
being taken off, I think there shall be no other difficulty to perplex our
interpretation. Wherefore I answer these two things. 1. It is the opinion of
diverse who hold two Sanhedrins among the Jews, one Civil, and another
Ecclesiastical; that in causes and occasions of a mixed nature which did
concern both Church and State, both did consult conclude, and decree, in a
joint way, and by agreement together. Now Ezra 10. the Princes, Elders,
Priests, and Levites, were assembled together upon an extraordinary cause,
which conjuncture and concurrence of the Civil and the Ecclesiastical power
might occasion the denouncing of a double punishment upon the contumacious,
forfeiture and excommunication. But 2. The objection made, does rather confirm
me, that Excommunication is intended in that place. For this forfeiture was
(...) a making sacred, or dedicating to an holy use, as I have showed out of
Josephus. The original word translated forfeited is more properly translated
devoted, which is the word put in the margin of our books. The Greek says
(...), anathemstizabitur which is the best rendering of the Hebrew (...). It was
not therefore that which we call forfeiture of a man's substance. Intellige
says Grotius, ita ut Deo sacra fiat. And so the excommunication of a man, and
the devoting of his substance as holy to the Lord, were joined together: and
the substance had not been anathematized if the man had not been anathematized.
I do not say that Excommunication ex natura rei does infer and draw after
it, the devoting of a man's estate as holy to the Lord. No: Excommunication can
not hurt a man in his worldly estate, further than the Civil Magistrate and
the Law of the Land appoints. And there was Excommunication in the
Apostolical Churches, where there was no Christian Magistrate to add a Civil
mulct. But the devoting of the substance of Excommunicated persons Ezra 10. as
it had the authority of the Princes and Rulers for it, so what extraordinary
warrants or instinct there was upon that extraordinary exigence, we can not
tell.

Finally M. Seldom de Jure not. and Gentium. lib. 4. cap. 9. p. 523. agrees
with Lud. Capellus that the separation from the Congregation Ezra 10. 8. plane
ipsum est (...) fieri, it is the very same with casting out of the Synagogue,
which confuteth further that which M. Prynne holds, that the casting out of the
Synagogue was not warranted by Gods word, but was only a humane invention.

I know some have drawn another argument for the Jewish Excommunication from
Nehem. 13. 25. I contended with them, and cursed them, id est, anathematizavi
and excommunicavi, says C. a lapide upon the place. So Tirinus upon the same
place. Mariana expounds it, anathema dixi. Aben Ezra understands it of two
kinds of Excommunication, Niddui and Cherem. For my part, I lay no weight upon
this, unless you understand the cursing or malediction to be an act of the
Ecclesiastical power, only authorized or countenanced by the Magistrate:
Which the words may well bear* for neither is it easily credible that Nehemiah
did with his own hand smite those men and pluck off their hair, but that by
his authority he took care to have it done by civil Officers, as the cursing
by Ecclesiastical Officers. The Dutch annotations lean this way, telling us
that Nehemiah did express his zeal against them as persons that deserved to
be banned or cut off from the people of God.

Another Text proving the Jewish Excommunication is Luke 6. 22. When they shall
separate you, and shall reproach you, and ^ast out your name as evil. It was
the most misapplied censure in the world, in respect of the persons thus cast
out; but yet it proves the Jewish custom of casting out such as they thought
wicked and obstinate persons. This (...) Beda upon the place understands of
casting out of the Synagogue, Separent and Synagoga depellant etc. yet it is a
more general and comprehensive word then the casting out of the Synagogue. It
comprehends all the three degrees of the Jewish Excommunication, as Grotius
expounds the place. Which agrees with Munsterus Dictionar. Trilingue, where
(...) is the only Greek word given both for the three Hebrew words Niddui,
Cherem, and Shammata, and for the Latin Excommunicatio. Wherefore (...) in
this place is extermino, excommunico, repudio, which is one of the usual
significations of the word given by Stephanus, and by Scapula. It is a word
frequently used in the Canons of the most ancient Councels, to express such a
separation as was a Church-censure, and namely suspension from the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper. For by the ancient Canons of the Councels, such offenses as
were punished in a Minister by (...) that is deposition, were punished in one
of the people by (...) that is segregation or sequestration. Zonaras upon the
13th Canon of the eighth general Council, observes a double (...) used in
the ancient Church ^ne was a total separation or casting out of the Church
which is usually called Excommunication; another was a suspension or
sequestration from the Sacrament only. Of which I am to speak more afterward
in the third Book. I hold now at the Text in hand, which may be thus read,
according to the sense and letter both, when they shall excommunicate you, etc.
Howbeit the other reading when they shall separate you, holds forth the same
thing which I speak of; separate, from what? our Translators supply from their
company: but from what company of theirs? not from their civil company only,
but from their* sacred or Church assemblies, and from religious fellowship, it
being a Churchcensure and a part of Ecclesiastical discipline, in which sense,
as this word frequently occurreth in the Greek fathers and ancient Canons when
they speak of Church discipline, so doubtless it must be taken in this place.
1. Because, as Grotius tells us, that which made the Jews the rather to
separate men in this manner from their society was the want of the Civil
coercive power of Magistracy, which sometime they had. And I have proved before
that the civil Sanhedrin which had power of criminal and capital judgments
did remove from Jerusalem, and cease to execute such judgment, forty years
before the destruction of the Temple. 2. Because in all other places of the new
Testament where the same word is used, it never signifies a bare separation
from civil company, but either a conscientious and religious separation by
which Church members did intend to keep themselves pure from such as did walk,
(or were conceived to walk) disorderly and scandalously, Acts 19. 9. 2 Cor. 6.
17. Gal. 2. 13. or Gods separating between the godly and the wicked, Matthew 13.
49. and 25. 32. or the setting apart of men to the ministry of the Gospel,
Acts 13. 2. Romans 1. 1. Gal. 1. 15. Thirdly, a Civil separation is for a Civil
injury; but this separation is for wickedness and impiety, whether accompanied
with civil injury or no; they shall cast out your name as evil, (...), or as
it seems the Syriak and Arabik interpreters did read (...) tanquam improborum,
as of wicked and evil men. The sense is the same.

Thus far of the Jewish Church, the Jewish Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin, the
Jewish Excommunication. I proceed to the Jewish Exomologesis or public
Confession of sin.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Jewish Exomologesis, or public Declaration of Repentance
by confession of sin.
AS there were some footsteps of public Confession among the Heathens, and
namely among the Lacedaemonians: Lorinus in Psalm. 31. 5. ex Plutarcho.
who made him that was deprehended in a crime, to compass the Altar, and there
to express his own shame, and to pronounce some disgraceful words against
himself. So, I make no doubt, they had this (as many other rites) from an
imitation of the people of God, who had their own Exomologesis, and public
testimonies of Repentance, which may thus appear.

First, a man was to put his hand upon the head of the Sacrifice which he
brought, and so it was accepted to make atonement for him, Lev. 1. 4. and this
was done in the Tabernacle publicly before the Priest. Genebrardus and
Lorinus in Psalm 31. 5. tell us out of Aben Ezra and other Rabbinicall Autors,
and ex libro Siphri, that when he that brought the Sacrifice, did put his hands
between the horns of the beast which was to be offered, he did distinctly
commemorate that sin for which he did then repent, professing his detestation
thereof, and promising to do* so no more. Mr Ainsworth on Levit. 1. 4. to the
same purpose cites out of Maimeny in treat. of offering Sacrifices, cap. 3.
these words. He lays his hands between the two horns, and confesses upon
the same offering, the iniquity of sin, and upon the trespasse-offering, the
iniquity of trespass: and upon the burnt offering he confesses the iniquity
of doing that which he should not* and not doing that he ought, etc. Now that
confession of sin was joined with the laying on of hands upon the Sacrifice,
is not only proved by the judgment of the Hebrews, understanding the Law in
that sense, but by the Law it self, Lev. 16. 21. where Aaron is commanded to
lay his hands upon the head of the live Goat, and confess over him all the
iniquites of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat. Secondly, the Law appoints
confession to be made at the bringing of Trespasse-offerings Levit. 5. and that
in three kinds of trespasses.
1 If one hear the voice of swearing, that is, hear his neighbor swearing or
cursing, which he ought to reveal: and is a witness whether he has seen or
known of it: (that is, whether he himself has been present at the cursing or
reviling (of God Levit. 24. 10, 11. or of man, 2 Samuel 16. 7.) or has heard it
by relation from others, and known it that way. So the Dutch Annotations and
the best Interpreters) if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his
iniquity. The meaning is when one does for favor or malice (So Aretius and
Pareus upon the place) dissemble the truth, and conceal his knowledge, and so
make himself partaker of other men's sins. Grotius expounds it by Prove. 29.
Who so is partner with a thief hates his own soul: he hears a cursing and
bewrays it not. In such a case a man did greatly scandalize all those (were
they more or fewer) who knew his dissimulation, and that he did not utter his
knowledge. 2 If one had touched any unclean thing, and not being cleansed from
his uncleanness See Ainswarth upon the place.
did go into the Sanctuary or touch an holy thing (whether he knew himself to
have touched the unclean thing, when he went into the Sanctuary, but did
afterward forget it, as the Hebrews understand the place; or whether he did not
know of his uncleannes when he went into the Sanctuary) as soon as it was
revealed to him by others who did take offense at it, or otherwise brought to
his knowledge, he was held guilty till confession and atonement was made. It
was not simply the touching of an unclean thing, for which the confession and
trespasse-offering was appointed: Seeing the Law (says Ainsworth) makes such
unclean but till evening Lev. 11. 24, 31. when washing themselves and their
clothes they were clean, and for uncleanness by a dead man, the sprinkling
water cleansed them, Number. 19. 17, 18, 19. Wherefore he resolves out of the
Hebrew Doctors, that this confession of sin, and the trespasse-offering was
required in case an unclean person in his uncleanness came to the Sanctuary,
or did eat of an holy thing. 3 If one had sworn unadvisedly, as David, 1 Samuel
25. 22. Herod, Mark 6. 23. those conspirators against Paul, Acts 23. 21. (which
are the examples given in the Dutch Annotations, and they are examples of
scandals) if the thing were hid from him, through the distemper, impetuosity,
and passion of his spirit, overclouding the eye of his mind, so that when he
has sworn a scandalous oath, he scarce knows or remembers well the thing. Or
thus; If a man had sworn an oath to do a thing, or not to do it, and
afterward falsified his oath, either because he could not do what he had
rashly sworn, or because he was unwilling to do it, or because he neglected
to do it: ( Aretius puts this triple case in expounding the Text:) When a man
was brought to the knowledge of the falsifying of his oath, being told, or put
in mind of it by others, says Diodati, which was also a case of scandal.
In any of these three cases, a man was to confess his ^inne, when he brought
his trespasse-offering, and the offering was not accepted without confession:
Lev. 5. 5. And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things,
that he shall confess that he has sinned in that thing. And he shall bring
his trespasse-offering, etc. Bucer. scripta Anglicana* page 310. Nunc autem
legimus* Lev. 4, 5. and 6. Deum populo suo ordin^sse ac mandasse: si quos de
populo, de sacerdotibus, aut principibus, aut si etiam populus universus
aliquid forte deliquisset contra mand^a sua, seu ^aciendo quae ipse vetuerat,
seu omittendo quae praeceperat; ut tales ante se in ecclesia sua, and coram
sacerdote comparerent, ibi peccatum suum confiterentur, veniam pererent,
oblationes suas offerrent, and hoc modo per sacerdotem recoaciliationem
consequerentur. idque haud dubie non absque seria humiliatione, planctu, and
jejunio.
This confession was made in the Priests hearing, and not to God alone, as Mr
Prynne affirms Vindic. page 17. For, 1. It was a cereomoniall Law, concerning
the external worship of God, and a part of the Law of trespasse-offerings. He
might as well have said, that the Trespasse-offering was made to God alone,
without the presence of the Priest or any other* 2. He himself does not deny
(but intimate) that till such confession was made, a man was not admitted to
make atonement by trespasse-offerings. And so do the Jews understand the Law
of confession, as we shall hear by and by. Now how could it be known, whether
a man had confessed any thing at all, if it was secretly, and to God alone? 3.
The sins to be confessed, were often times scandalous and known to others, (as
has been cleared.) Therefore the confession was to be known to others also. 4
That this confession (not private and auricular, but public and penitential)
was made in the Temple, before and in the hearing of the Priest, I prove from
Philo the Jew. In his book de sacr. Abelis and Caini, at the close, speaking
of the Levites ministry, he says, that he did execute and perform (...), all
those services which belong to a perfect Priesthood, and to the bringing of man
to God, whether by burnt-offerings, (...) aut pro peccatis quorum paenitet
says Gelenius the Interpreter, meaning the trespasse-offerings. But observe
further, he speaks of the penitential part, as a public thing, or rather of
the public declaration of repentance. Repentance of sins, that is,
repentance declared or professed (which was in the confession joined with the
trespasse-offerings) was one of the chief things about which the Leviticall
ministry was exercised: which is the clear sense of the place. More plainly,
the same Philo lib. de victimis toward the close, where he tells that certain
parts of the trespasse-offerings were eaten by the Priests, and that these must
be eaten in the Temple, he gives this reason for it, lest the penitents sin
and shame should be divulged and punished more then needs must, which
intimates that the particular offense was so confessed that it was made known
to such as were within the Temple.

The third Scripturall proof is Number. 5. 6, 7. When a man or a woman shall
commit any sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that
person be guilty, Then they shall confess their sin which they have done:
and he shall recompense his trespass, etc. The Hebrews expound it thus: All
the precepts in the Law, whether they command or forbid a thing, if a man
transgress against any one of them, either presumptuously or ignorantly, when
he makes repentance and turns from his sin, he is bound to confess before
the blessed God, as in Numb. 5. 7. This confession is with words, and it is
commanded to be done. How do they confess? He says, Oh God, I have sinned, I
have done perversely, I have trespassed before thee, and have done thus and
thus: and lo I repent, and am ashamed of my doings: and I will never do this
thing again. And this is the foundation of confession. And who so makes a
large confession, and is long in this thing, he is to be commended. And so the
owners of sin and trespasse-offerings, when they bring their oblations for
their ignorant or for their presumptuous sins: atonement is not made for them
by their oblation, until they have made Repentance and Confession by word of
mouth. Likewise all condemned to death by the Magistrates, or condemned to
Stripes, no atonement is made for them by their death, or by their Stripes,
until they have repented and confessed. And so he that hurts his Neighbor,
or does him damage, though he pay him whatsoever he owes him, atonement is
not made for him, tell he confess and turn away from doing so again for
ever, as it is written in Number. 5. 6. Any of all the sins of men. All this
Ainsworth transcribeth out of Maimony in Misn. treat. of Repentance, Chap. 1.
Sect. 1. See also the Latin Edition of the Jewish Canons of Repentance Printed
at Cambridge Ann. 1631. Where beside that passage in the first Chapter,
concerning the necessity of confessing by word of mouth, that sin for which
the Trespass offering was brought, you have another plain passage, cap. 2.
for ( Eximia l^us est paenitentiam agenti, ut public confiteatur, iniquitates
suas toti caetui indicans, and delicta quae in proximum admisit, aliis aperiens
hunc in modum. Revera peccavi in N. N. (virum nominans) and haec vell illa
feci: Ecce autem me vobis nunc convertor, and me facti paenitet. Qui vero prae
super^ia non indicat, sed abscondit iniquitates suas* ill^ perfecta non est
paenitentia: quia dicitur, Qui abscondit scelera sua, non dirigetur. Haec dicta
intelligenda sunt de peccatis quae in proximum admittuntur. Verum in
transgressionibus quae sunt hominis in Deum, non necesse est cuiquam seipsum
propalare: Quin imo perfrictae frontis est, illiusmodi peccata revelare: Sed in
conspectu Dei paenitentiam agit, and coram illo peccata haec speciatim recenset.
) public confession (not of private sins known to God only, but) of known
sins by which others were scandalized.

In which passage I nnderstand by sins against God, sins known to God
only. 1. Because its forbidden to reveal those sins, therefore they were
secret. 2. Because otherwise those Canons shall contradict themselves, for cap.
1. it is told us that all who brought trepasse offerings, were bound to confess
by word of mouth, the sin which they had done, without which confession, they
got not leave to make atonement by the trespasse-offering. Now trespass
offerings were for sins against God as well as for sins against man. 3. It
should otherwise contradict the Law Number. 5. 6. which appoints any sin or
trespass against the Lord to be confessed. 4. Those trespasses were to be
publicly confessed, for which in case of impenitency and obstinacy, a man was
excommunicated with Cherem, or the greater Excommunication. But a man was
excommunicated for diverse sins against God, which did not at all wrong his
Neighbor, setting a side the scandal. Which I have proved before. These four
reasons will prove either that the meaning of that Canon must be of private
sins, and not of public and scandalous sins against the first Table: or
otherwise that the Canon is contrary to and inconsistent with both Scripture,
Reason, and other Rabbinnicall writings.

From the Law Number. 5. thus explained, observe concerning the Confession of
sin. 1. It was for any scandalous sin, of commission or omission against
the first or second Table. 2. It was not free and voluntary to the offender. I
do not say that he was compelled to it by any external Force or coercive
power: but he was commanded and obliged by the Law to confess; Vatablus on
Number. 5. 7. Fatebuntur 1. ^. t^nebuntur fateri, they shall confess, that is,
they shall be bound to confess: and a man was not admitted with his trespass
offering except he confessed. 3. It was done by word of mouth. 4. And publicly
before the Congregation that were present. 5. Hanc (...) confessionem Hebraei
vocant confessionem super peccato singulari, quia in aliis sacrificiis siebat
confessio peccatorum generalis, says ^atablus upon the place.
The particular trespass was named in the Confession. 6. Sins both of
Ignorance and Malice, when scandalous, were to be confessed. 7. The sinner was
not slinted to a Prescript form of words in Confession, but was to enlarge his
confession, as his heart was enlarged. 8. In Criminal and Capital cases,
beside the civil or corporal punishment, confession was to be made, because
of the scandal which had been given. Which does further appear from the
Talmud it self in Sanhedrin. cap. 6. Sect. 2. for that is observed in all who
are put to death, that they must confess; for whoever does confess he has
part in the world to come; and namely it is recorded of Achan, that Joshua said
to him, my Son give now Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession
unto him; And Achan answered, Indeed, I have sinned against the Lord God of
Israel, and thus and thus etc. Whence is it collected that his confession did
expiate his sin. And Joshua said, why have thou troubled us? God shall
trouble thee this day. This day thou shall be troubled, not in the world to
come. The like you read of Achan in Pirke R. Elieser cap. 38. I know Achans
confession was not in the Sanctuary, nor at a Trespass offering. But I make
mention of it because Confirm. These. page 106. 113.
Erastus holds that under the Law, confession was only required in such
cases, where the sin was not criminal or capital. Which is confuted by the
aforementioned passages in Maimonides and the Talmud it self: proving that
whether the sin was expiated by Sacrifice or by death, it was always to be
confessed; from the same example of Achan does P. Ex ^o quod in libro Joma, id
est, dierum, in capite, jom h^kippurim, id est, dies propitiationum, ita
scribitur. Dixit Rab. Hunna: Omnis qui transgressione transgressus est, necesse
est ut singulatim exprimat peccatum.
Galatinus lib. 10. cap. 3. prove that Declaration of repentance was to be made
by word of mouth, and that the sin was to be particularly confessed, which he
further proves by another rabbinicall passage.

In the fourth place, Io. 9. 24. seems to hold forth a judicial public
confession of sin to have been required of scandalous sinners. The Pharisees
being upon an examination of him that was born blind, and was made to see, they
labor to drive him so far from confessing Christ, as to confess sin and
wicked collusion, Give God the Praise say they, we know that this man is a
sinner. Which is to be expounded by Ios. 7. 19. Give glory to the Lord God of
Israel, and make confession.

Fifthly, as the Jews had an Excommunication, so they had an absolution, and
that which interveened was Confession and Declaration of Repentance. And hence
came the Arabik (...) nadam, he has repented; and (...) nadim a penitent, the
Niddui made the nadim: for when a man was excommunicated by the lesser
Excommunication, Seld. de jure not. and Gentium lib. 4. cap. 8. Pro diversitate
peccati and peccantis moribus, nunc citius nunc serius sequebatur absolutio.
Sed ut plurimum excommunicatio fiebat in diem tricesimum etc. Intra hoc tempus
exspectabat forum ut ad Bonam ^ediret. mentem, (...), and quae juberent ipsi
praestaret etc. Post trignta di^um contumaciam, idem tempus semel i^erabatur
etc* At vero s^* neque intra id spatii paenitens absolutionem pe^eret, (...)
Cherem seu Anathemate feriebatur.
the Consistory waited first 30. days, and then other 30. days, and as some
think (the third time) 30. days, to see whether the offender were penitent,
(which could not be known without confession) and would seek absolution: which
if he did not, but continued obstinate and impenitent, then they proceeded to
the greater excommunication. Which does prove a public Confession, at least in
the case of the excommunicated.

Sixthly, we find a public penitential confession Ezra. 10. 10. 11. And Ezra
the Priest stood up and said unto them, ye have transgressed and have taken
strange wives to increase the trespass of Israel. Now therefore make
confession unto the Lord God of your Fathers, and do his pleasure, and
separate your selves from the people of the land, and from the strange wives.
Mark here the foresaking of the sin could not su^fice without confessing the
sin. All Israel had sworn and covenanted to do the thing, to put away the
strange wives verse. 5. But Ezra the Priest tells them they must also make
confession of their sin; confession of their former trespass must be joined
with Reformation for the future: All which the people promise to do as Ezra
had said verse. 12. But what was this confession? was it only a private
confession to God alone? or was it only a general confession made by the
whole congregration of Israel at a solemn Fast and humiliation? Nay, that
there was a third sort of Confession differing from both these, appears by
verse. 13. neither is this a work of one day or two: for we are many that have
transgressed in this thing; yea, three Months are spent in the business,
verse. 16, 17. during which space, all that had taken strange wives, came at
appointed times out of every City, and were successively examined by Ezra the
Priest and certain chief of the Fathers and Levites, (such of both, as were
not themselves guilty) before whom such as were found guilty did make
Confession: The Sons of the Priests made Confession as well as others, yea,
with the first; and gave their hands, that they would put away their wives: and
being guilty, they offerered a Ram of the Flock for their trespass. With which
trespass offering confession was ever joined, as has been before showed from
the Law.

Seventhly, Master Hildersham of worthy memory in his 34. Lecture upon Psalm.
51. draws a^ Argument from David's example for the public Confession of a
scandalous sin before the Church, He made, says he, public Confession of
his sin to the Congregation and Church of God; for we see in the Title of
this Psalm. 1. That he committed this Psalm (that contains the
acknowledgement of his sin, and profession of his repentance) to the chief
musician to be published in the Sanctuary and Temple. 2 That in this
publication of his Repentance, he hides not from the Church his sin, nor
cloketh it at all, but expresses in particular the special sin, etc. Add
hereunto, this public Confession was made after ministerial conviction by
Nathan, who did convince David of the greatness of that scandalous sin, in
which he had then continued impenitent near a year or thereabout. The Doctrine
which Master Hildersham draws from David's example is this, That they whose
sins God has detected and brought to light, whose sins are public and
notorious, scandalous and offensive to the congregations where they live, ought
to be willing to confess their sins publicly, to make their Repentance as
public and notorious as their sin is. He adds in his explanation, when
they shall be required to do it by the Discipline of the Church. Mark one of
his applications (which is the Subject of the 37. Lecture) The second sort that
are to be reproved by this Doctrine, are such as having authority to enjoyne
public Repentance to scandalous sinners, for the satisfying of the
Congregation, when they are detected and presented unto them, refuse or neglect
to do it. And here he complains, that the public acknowledgement of
scandalous sins, was grown out of use, and that though it was ordered by
authority, yet it was not put in execution. The Canons of our Church (says he)
can. 26. straightly charge every Minister, That he shall not in any wise admit
to the Communion, any of his flock which be openly known to live in sin
notorious without Repentance. And the Book of Common Prayer in the rubrike
before the Communion, commands, that if any be an open and notorious evil
liver, so that the Congregation by him is offended, the Minister shall call
him, and advertise him in any wise, not to presume to the Lords Table, till he
has openly declared himself, to have truly repented, that the Congregation may
thereby be satisfied, which were before offended. So that you may see the Laws
and Discipline of our Church, require that open and scandalous sinners should
d^e open and public Repentance* yea, give power to the Minister to repel and
keep back such from the Communion that refuse to do it. Where it may be
observed by the way, that the Power of Elder-ships for suspending scandalous
persons (not Excommunicated) from the Sacrament, now so much contented against
by Master Prynne, is but the same Power which was granted by authority to the
Ministry, even in the prelaticall times. And he has upon the matter
endeavored to bring the Consciences of a whole Elder-ship into a greater
servitude under this present Reformation, then the Conscience of a single
Minister was formerly brought under by Law in this particular.

Eighthly, Master Hildersham Ibid. Lect. 34. argues not only ^ pari, but ^
fortiori. If a necessity of satisfying an offended Brother, how much more a
necessity of satisfying an offended Church, which will equally hold both for
the old and new Testament? His own words are very well worth the transcribing.
This is evident by those two Laws Lev. 6. 5. 6. and Number. 5. 6. 8. where God
plainly taught his people, that their trespass offering which they brought to
him, to seek pardon of any sin, whereby they had wronged any man, should not
be accepted, till they had first made satisfaction to the party to whom the
wrong was done. And le^t we should think those Laws concerned the Jews
only, our Savior himself gives this in charge Matthew. 5. 23. 24. If thou
bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has
ought against thee: leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift. And if
there be such necessity of making satisfaction to any one Brother that has
ought against us, before we can get assurance of our reconciliation with God,
what necessity is there of making satisfaction to a whole Church and
Congregation, that we have given just cause of offense unto? In this case it is
not sufficient to approve our Repentance and truth of heart to God; we must be
willing also and desirous to approve it to the Congregation and Church of God,
that we may say as the two Tribes and half said, Josh. 22. The Lord God of
Gods he knows, and Israel he shall know. Thus Master Hildersham.

CHAP. IX. Whether in the Jewish Church, there was any Suspension or exclusion
of profane, scandalous, notorious sinners, from partaking in the public
Ordinances, with the rest of the Children of Israel in the Temple.
ERastus and his followers hold, that among the Jews none was excluded from
any public Ordinance in the Temple, for moral uncleanesse, that is, for a
profane scandalous conversation, but only for legal or ceremonial
uncleanesse. The like Master Prynne says of the Passover, and of the Temple
he holds that even those who were for their offenses cast out of the
Synagogues, were yet free to come and did come to the Temple. I shall
particularly make Answer both to Erastus and to Master Prynne in this point,
when they shall fall in my way afterward. I shall here, more generally
endeavor to rectify their great mistake, and to prove an exclusion from the
Temple and public Ordinances, for public and scandalous offenses in life and
conversation, or for moral as well as ceremonial uncleanesse.

First, I shall prove it ex ore duorum, from the Testimonies of two of the most
famous witnesses of the Jews themselves, Philo and Josephus. Offerenti
victimas le^ praecipit, ut p^rus fiat corpore ac animo. Et infra. Necessum est
igitur adituros Templum sacr^rum gratia, and corpore nitidos esse, and multo
magis anima. ^ etc. nam very Dei Templum non patet prophanis sacrificiis.
(...).) Et post. an dubium est, neque legem quicquam ab injustis, neque solemn a
tenebris accipere? Et versus finem. Caeterum quia societatem humanitatemque
((...)) maxim docet lex nostra, utrique vir^ti honorem habet meritum, neminem
deplorate malum ad eas admittens, sed quam longissime in rem malam ablegans.
Cum igitur sciret concionibus ((...)) admisceri multos improbos, quod se posse
in turba latere autument, ut id caveret in posterum, omnes indignos a sacro
caetu edicto prohibint ((...)) incipiens a semiviris obscaeno (...)
laborantibus, qui naturae monetam adulterantes, in impudicarum mulierum
affectum and formam sponte degenerant. Spadones item and castratos arcet etc.
Pariter repellit non tantum scorta, sed and natos e prostitutis, contactos
materno dedecore propter natales adulterinos. etc. Alii vero quasi contendant
hos in impietatis stadio post se relinquere, addunt amplius, ut non solum
ideas, sed and deum esse negent. Et post. Proinde omnes hi merito pelluntur a
sacris c^ibus, ((...))
Philo lib de Victimas offerentibus, is so full and plain, as if he had
purposely written that Book to record the exclusion of scandalous persons from
Communion with the Church of Israel in the Temple. He presses all along the
necessity of holiness and purity in those who bring Sacrifices, and tells us
that their Law did exclude from their holy Assemblies meretricious persons,
despisers of God, and all that were known to be impious and profane, as well
as those who were legally unclean.

The same thing may be confirmed out of Josephus, Antiq. lib. 19. cap. ^.
libenter and continuo degebat ( Agrippa) Hierosolymis, institutorum ac rituum
patriae servator religiosissimus* (...) enim ^rat a contaminamentis omnibus,
nec ulla dies ei praeteribat absque sacrificio. Accidit aliquando ut quidam
Hierosolymita legis peri^s, nomine Simon, advocata concione, per regis
absentiam, agentis ^um Caesareae, crimina^etur illum ^t impurum and arcendum
templi aditu, quod non ni^i dignis pateat. Id ubi praefectus u^bis illi
significavit per literas, confestim accersivit hominem etc. Di^ mihi inquit,
quid ribi non probatur ex his quae ^acimus.
who records that one Simon a Doctor of the Law, did in the absence of King
Agrippa, accuse him to the people as an impure unworthy man, who ought not be
suffered to enter into the Temple. Josephus gives a good Testimony to Agrippa,
that he was unjustly accused. Agrippa himself sends for Simon, and asks him
what he had ever done which deserved such an accusation. But neither Agrippa
himself, nor Josephus, says one syllable to this purpose, that the excluding
of a man from the Temple for profaneness and impiety was a new Arbitrary
censure, contrary to the law or custom of the Jews: which (no doubt) they had
done, if there had been any ground for them to say so. Their very pleading of
innocence, and no more, tacitly confirms that if guilty, it had been just to
exclude from the Temple. Again de bello Jud. lib. 4. cap. 5. Josephus records
that Ananus the high Priest (whom cap. 7. He highly commends for good
government) had an oration to the Jews against the (...), the zelots, who
under color of that name, which they took to themselves, committed a great
deal of injustice and violence. He said with tears, I had rather dye then see
the house of God filled (...) with such crimes (or criminal persons) (...),
and the forbidden and holy places to be haunted and trod with the feet of
those who are polluted with murders: speaking of those zelots. What can be
more plain; (...), a piacular crime, was a cause of keeping back from the
Temple (even as also among the Heathens, some were for piacular crimes
interdicted the Sacrifices) (...), blood-guiltinesse, defilement by murder,
was also a cause of exclusion from the Temple, and to such the Temple was a
place inaccessible and forbidden. I add a Testimony of I. Scaliger Elench.
Trihaeres. Nic. Terar. cap. 28. where speaking of those Essaeans who did not
observe the Mosaicall rites, he says, Itaque non mirum, si tanquam (...) and
piaculares aditu Templi prohibebantur. The like Constantinus l'Empereur annot.
in Cod. Middoth page 44. proves from another passage in Josephus: vi^i autem qui
non per omnia cas^i essent ab interiori aula prohibebantur. Where l'Empereur
adds, In spacii descripti partem interiorem non admittebant quoque
haereticum: which he says may be proved out of the Talmud. Quis enim dicat
(says Hen. Vorstius, animad. in Pirke page 169.) apostatam, blasphemum,
aliaque sacra capita intra Templum fuisse admissa. Of the exclusion of
excommunicate persons I have before spoken, following their opinion who hold,
that such as were excommunicate by the lesser Excommunication or Niddui, had
liberty to come into the Temple, yet so that they were to enter in at the gate
of the mourners, and were not seen in the Temple, but as penitents: but such as
were excommunicated by the greater Excommunication or Cherem were not suffered
to come into the Temple, nor so much as into any assembly of ten men, and they
might neither teach nor be taught. Annot* in Luke 6. 22. Qui hac nota (minoris
(...) five Niddui) inusti erant, s^ante Templo, accedebant ad Templum, ut ex
Hebraeis vir doctus notavit: sed haud dubie consistebant extra ^ (...) qui
distingueb^t (...)* ab Israelitis. Nam (...) interim (...). lo^o habebantur.
Grotius holds that such as were excommunicated by Niddui or the lesser
Excommunication had power to come to the Temple, but no otherwise then
Heathens, and that they might not come into the Court of Israel: which is an
answer to M. Prynnes objection, that such as were cast out of the Synagogue
came to the Temple.

There are but two places in the new Testament, which seem at first to make
much against that which I have said. One is, Luke 18. concerning the Publicans
going up to the Temple to pray, as well as the Pharisee. The other is John 8.
concerning the woman taken in adultery, whom they brought before Christ in the
Temple. I remember Confirm These. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 99. and elsewhere.
Erastus objecteth them both.

To the first I answer, it rather confirms then confuteth what I have said.
For 1. The Text says, Verse. 13. the Publican stood afar off: the Pharisee
not so. Nam mos id^ ^erebat ut Publicani in atrio. Gentilium, Pharisaei in
atrio Israelitarum sta^nt, nec quicquam in ^o erat insolitum au^ Pharisaeo
imputandum.
Grotius upon the place, Verse 11. notes, that the Pharisees fault was not in
this particular, that he came further into the Temple then the Publican: for
the custom was such, that the Publicans were to stand in the Court of the
Gentiles, the Pharisees in the Court of Israel. Camer. myroth. in Luke 18. is
also of opinion that the Publican stood in the Court of the Gentiles, or in
that first Court into which Josephus lib. 2. contra Appion. says, that all,
even Heathens, might come. 2. And though our opposites could prove, that the
Publican came into the Court of Israel, (which they will never be able to do)
yet this place helps them not at all, unless they can prove that this was a
scandalous and profane Publican. It is certain that diverse of the Publicans
were religious and devout men, and that this was one of them, we may more then
conjecturally know, by the Pharisees own words, for when he has thanked God,
that he is not as other men, adulterers, unjust, extortioners, he adds with a
disjunction, or even as this Publican, thus preferring himself not only to
the infamous and scandalous Publicans, but even to this devout Publican. More
of this place afterward, in the debate of Matthew. 18.

To the other objection from John 8. 2, 3. where it is said that the Pharisees
brought a woman taken in adultery into the Temple, and set her before Christ;
First, I answer with Sane cum Servator in Templo d^cuisse cap. 8. Joh. legitur,
quo mulierem depraehensam Pharisaei ipsi adduxerunt; alium locum praeter hunc
qui ^at extra a tria, designati credere nequeo: quandequidem e Josepho
obs^vatum jam suit, impu^is atria adire fa^ non fuisse.
Constable. l'Empereur annot. in Cod. Middoth cap. 2. page 45. by the Temple, in
that place, we are to understand the Intermurale, the utter Court, or Court of
the Gentiles, which was without the Court of Israel, which utter Court (says
he) both the Evangelists and Josephus call by the name of (...) the Temple. Yea
the whole mountain of the Temple, even comprehending that part of it which was
without the Intermurale, had the name of the Temple, as M. Seldom notes de
Jure not. and Gent. l. 3. c. 6. p. 298. And lib. 4. cap. 5. he expounds that of
the Money Changers in the Temple, to be meant of the court of the Gentiles.
This answer does the better agree to John 8. because V. 2. tells us, it was in
the place where all the people came unto Jesus, and he taught them. Now it is
certain that both Christ and his Apostles did often teach the people in the
Coutt of the Gentiles, and in Solomon's porch, which was without the Court of
Israel, in the Intermurale, that all might have the better occasion of hearing
the Gospel, even they who were not permitted to enter into the Court of
Israel. Wherefore since the Text tells us, that when the Pharisees brought the
woman to Christ, he was teaching in such a place, where all the people had
access to hear him: this agrees better to the Intermurale, then to the Court
of Israel. Secondly, I answer, that woman did not come as a privileged person,
free to come and worship ^in the Court of Israel, with the Church of Israel;
but she is brought as an accused person, that in the most public and
shameful manner she might be sentenced and condemned, and made vile before all
the people: so that it was in her paena, non privilegium. P. Cuneu^ de* repub.
Hebr. lib. 1. cap. 12. Concilii magni seeds in ipso ^anctuario fuit.
The Sanhedrin also did sit in the Temple, so that such as were to be examined
and judged, must be brought to that place where the Sanhedrin was, which sat
in that part of the Temple that was called Gazith. This might be the occasion
of bringing some to the Temple as parties to be judged, who were not admitted
to the Ordinances of worship in the Court of Israel. Even as the prohibition of
reading atheistical or heretical books, Sanhedrin cap. 11. sect. 1. was not
violated by the Councels reading or searching of them for a Judicial trial
and examination: as is rightly observed by Dionysius Vossius, annot. in Maimon.
de Idol. page 25.

And now having taken off the two principal objections, we shall take notice
of such Scriptures as either directly, or at least by consequence prove, that
notorious and scandalous sinners were not allowed to be admitted into the
Temple, and partake in all the ordinances.

1. God reproves not only the bringing of strangers into his Sanctuary, who
were uncircumcised in the flesh, but the bringing of those who were
uncircumcised in heart, that is, known to be such, for de secretis non judicat
Ecclesia, Ezech. 44. 7, 9. Such ought not to have had fellowship in the holy
things. No stranger uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my Sanctuary, of
any stranger that is among the children of Israel. It is a law concerning
proselytus domicilii, such proselytes as having renounced idolatry, and
professing to observe the seven precepts given to the sons of Noah, were
thereupon permitted to dwell and converse among the children of Israel. (Of
which more elsewhere.) Such a one ought not be admitted into the Sanctuary, or
place of the holy assemblies, there to partake in all the Ordinances with the
Church, unless he be both circumcised in flesh, and also in regard of his
profession and practice a visible Saint, or one supposed to be circumcised in
heart. The disjunction Nor tells us that if he were either uncircumcised in
flesh, or known to be uncircumcised in heart, God did not allow him to be
admitted to communion with the children of Israel in all publik ordinances. 2.
There is a Law, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. forbidding to bring the hire of a whore into the
house of the Lord: and that because it was the price of a whore; how much more
was it contrary to the will of God, that the whore her self, being known to
be such, should be brought to the house of the Lord? For propter quod
ununiqu^que est tale, id ipsum est magis tale. This argument is hinted by De
monarchia lib. 2. proinde recte honest que vetitum est alicubi, ne merce^
meretrici^ inferatur in sacratium. Atqui nummi per se carent crimine, sed quae
hos accepit una cum suo quaestu est abominabilis.
Philo the Jew. 3. The Lord sharply contendeth with those who did steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn Incense to Baal,
and yet presumed to come and stand before him in his own house. Is this house
which is called by my name, says the Lord, become a den of robbers in your
eyes? Ierem. 7. 9, 10, 11. A den of robbers is the place which receives
robbers; and (says Vatablus upon the place) as robbers after their robbing
come to their den, so do these even after their stealing, murdering, etc.
come to the Temple. To the same purpose is that challenge Ezech. 23. 38, 39.
Moreover this they have done unto me, they have defiled my Sanctuary in the
same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths. For when they had slain their
children to their Idols, then they came the same day into my Sanctuary to
profane it. But God would not have the Temple to be a receptacle for such.
When Christ applies that Scripture, Ierem. 7. against those who bought and
sold in the Temple, Matthew. 21. 12, 13. he makes it clear, that the Temple was
made a den of robbers, not only as it was made a place of gain, or a den
where the robbers prey lies, but even as it was a receptacle of the robbers or
thieves themselves: therefore he is not contented with the overthrowing of the
Tables of money changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves, but he did
also cast out all them that sold and bought in the Temple: that is, he would
neither suffer such things, nor such persons in the Temple, yea though it was
only in the utmost Court, or the Court of the Gentiles, as Grotius and Mr
Seldom think: how much less would he have suffered such persons in the Court
of Israel. Lib. de Victimas offerentibus. Nam very Dei Templum non pater
profanis sacrificiis. Tali homini dicerem, obon^, non gaudet D^us centenis boum
victimis etc. mavult pia^ mentes etc*
Philo the Jew does also apply what is said in the Prophets of Gods hating the
Sacrifices of the wicked, even to the excluding of profane men from the
Temple. Mr. Seldom de jure not. and Gent. lib. 4. cap. 5. does so explaiue that
casting out of the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, that the argument in
hand is not a little strengthened thereby. He says truly, that those who were
cast out had polluted and profaned that holy place, ideo and ipsi, ut qui tum
criminis aliorum participes, tum suo infames pariter, sie Templum seu montis
Templi locum illum ipsis permissum profanabant, ejiciendi. He holds also that
this which Christ did was done ex jure patrio, to wit, ex Zelotarum jure: and
that else it had been challenged by the Priests and Scribes, if it had been
contrary to the law or custom. Zelots, that is, private persons zealously
affected, were permitted to scourge, wound, yea kill such as they saw
publicly committing atrocious wickedness, by which the holiness either of
the name of God, or of the Temple, or of the Nation of the Jews was violated.
So Mr. Seldom shows out of the Talmudists, Ib. cap. 4. Now (says he)
Zelotarum jure, our Savior though a private person (for so he was looked upon
by the Priests and Scribes) did scourge and cast out the buyers and sellers. If
so, then certainly such wicked and abominable persons were not allowed to come
to the Temple; and if they did, they ought to have been judicially and by
authority cast out; for that which was permitted to private persons in the
executing of justice or inflicting of punishment, out of their zeal to the
glory of God, was much more incumbent to such as had authority in their hands
for correcting and removing the profanation of the Temple in an authoritative,
judicial, and orderly way. 4. The Levites had a charge to let none that were
unclean in any thing enter into the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. Now this is like
that 1 Cor. 5. 11. with such a one no not to eat: an argument from the denial
of that which is less, to the denial of that which is more. So here, it was a
necessary consequence: If those that were ceremonially unclean were to be
excluded from the Temple, much more those who were morally or impiously
unclean. For, 1. the legal uncleanness did signify the sinful
uncleanness; and the exclusion of those that were known to be legally unclean
from the Temple, did signify the excluding of those who are known to be
grossly and notoriously unclean in their life and conversation. Which shall
be abundantly confirmed afterward. Therefore Bertramus de Rep. Ebr. cap. 7.
says rightly that the Levites had a charge to keep from the Temple the
unclean aut etiam alio quovis modo indignos, or those also who were any
otherways unworthy. 2. Godwyn in his Moses and Aaron, lib. 5. cap. 2. makes a
comparison between the three degrees of the Jewish excommunication, and the
three degrees of excluding the unclean, Numb 5. 2. which parallel if we please
to make then as for any of the three sorts of uncleanness, the touch of the
dead, issue, or leprosy, a man was excluded from the camp of God or the
Sanctuary; so it will follow that even those who were cast out by the Niddui*
or lowest degree of Excommunication, were for a time suspended from communion
with the Church in the Ordinances. 3. The Levites were appointed to put a
difference not only between the clean and the unclean, but between the
holy and unholy, Levit. 10. 10. or between the holy and profane, Ezech. 22.
26. and 44. 23. By clean and unclean I understand persons or things that were
ceremonially such; by holy and profane, persons that were morally such. 5. I
prove the same point from Psalm 118. 19, 20. open to me the gates of
righteousness, I will go into them, and will praise the Lord. This gate of
the Lord into which the righteous shall enter. The Chaldee says, The gate of
the house of the Sanctuary of the Lord. The gates of Gods Sanctuary, are called
gates of righteousness, says Ainsworth on the place, because only the just
and clean might enter into them. We read also that it was written over the
gates of some of the Jewish Synagogues, This is the gate of the Lord, into
which the righteous shall enter. Haec porta etc. i. e. D^us hoc Templum sibi
dicari voluit, hic est sanctuarium ejus: debet pu^um esse ab omnibus sordibus,
quemadmodum etiam lex severe jubet. Antehac impuri and scelerati (quales Saul,
and alii omnes impii qui primas tenebant, i^a ut nemo non (...) ipsorum esse
Templum) co^ruperant hoc templum. Non fuit igitur tam domicilium ipsius Dei,
quamlatronum ^verna.
Vatablus upon this place, thinks that David speaks by way of antithesis to
the former* pollution of the Sanctuary by Saul, and other wicked persons, who
by coming to the house of God had made it a den of thieve^* But now the
righteous shall enter in it. [The righteous] ^on to such (says Di^dati) and
(...) to profane persons, it belongs to enter in there. 6. The same thing
may be proved, from Psalm 15. 1. Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who
shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, etc. I know the chief intendment of God in this place is to
describe such a one as is a true member of the Church invisible, and shall
enter into the Heavenly Jerusalem. But certainly there is an allusion to the
Sanctuary, and the holy hill thereof in Jerusalem, as to the type of that which
is Spiriuall and eternal, which Iansenius upon the place notes: and the
Prophet here teaches the people so to look upon those offenses for which men
were excluded from the Sanctuary, as to learn what kind of persons are true
members of the Church, and who not; who shall be allowed to commun^cate in all
the Ordinances of the new Testament, and who not; who shall be received into
everlasting life, and who not; and thus by the type he holds forth the thing
tipyfied; Gesnerus upon the place thinks that communion with the Church in
this world is meant in the first words, Lord who shall sojourne (so the word is
jagur in the Hebrew, (...) in the Greek) in thy Tabernacle. (the name of
Tabernacle fitly expressing the moveable and military estate of the Church in
this world:) and that reception into the Church Triumphant, is meant in the
following words: who shall dwell in thy holy hill? which notes a permanent and
durable estate. The Chaldee Paraphrase expounds the whole, of such as were
thought worthy to be admitted into the house of the Lord, thus, Lord who is
worthy to abide in thy (...) (...) and who shall be worthy to sojourne in the
mountain of the house of thy holiness. So Psalm 24. 3. the Chald^ reads
thus, Who shall be worthy to ascend unto the mountain of the house of the
Sanctuary of the Lord? So that the thing alluded unto in both these places, is
that the Priests and Levites did admit (...) to the Sanctuary, but such as had
the marks or characters there enumerated, so far as men can judge of these
marks, that is so fa^e as they are external and discernable. 7. The same
thing seems also to be alluded unto Psalm 50. 16. Unto the wicked (the
Chaldee adds, that repents not, and prays in his transgression) God says,
what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth. It is spoken to a scandalous profane man, Verse. 18, 19,
20. who yet will needs take upon him a form of godliness. Lib. 3. de vit^
Mos^s: quem ne honoris quidem gratia ^as est nominari ab omnibus^ sed a solis
optimis and purificatis hominibus.
Where Philo the Jew speaks of him that blasphemed the name of the Lord, he
adds, that it was not lawful for all men to name the name of God, no not for
Honor or Religions sake, but only for good and holy men. And this gives me
occasion to add in conclusion a further confirmation out of the Hebrew
Doctors. They held that an Israelite turning an Heretic, (that is, denying
any of their thirteen fundamental Articles) to be as an Heathen man, and did
therefore permit a Jew to lend to him upon usury even as to an Heathen. M.
Seldom de Jure not. and Gentium. lib. 6. cap. 10. They held that such a one, an
heretical Israelite, had no communion with the Church of Israel. See Tzemach
David translated by Hen. Vorstius page 67. Abrabanel de capite fidei cap. 3.
dub. 5. and Ib. cap. 6. They esteemed an heretical Jew, more heretical then a
Christian, and did excommunicate him, even summarily and without previous
admonition. See Buxtorf. lexic. Chald. Talm. and Rabbin. page 195. Moses
Maimonides de fundam. legis. cap. 6. sect. 10. tells us that if an Epicurean
Israelite had written a copy of the book of the Law, it was to be burnt, with
the name of that Epicurean wretch, because he had not done it holily, nor in
the name of God. They who did imagine the Scripture it self to be polluted and
profaned, when it came thorough the hands of an Epicurean, or Heretical
Israelite, no doubt, they thought the Temple polluted and profaned, if such a
one should be suffered to come and worship in it. From all which it appears,
how much reason L'Empereur had to say, that they did not admit an Heretic into
the inner part of the Intermurale, or that part of the Temple which divided
between the Israelites and Heathens.
If any man shall ask, what I mean to infer from all this. Must all
profane persons be kept back from our (...) ^s and public Assemblies, and so
from hearing the word? I answer; God forbid. The Analogy which I understand is
to hold between the Jewish and Christian Church, is this. As profane persons
were forbidden to enter into the Temple because of the sacramental and
typical holiness thereof (for the Temple was a Type of Christ) so profane
persons are now much more to be kept back from the Sacrament of the Lord
Supper, which has more of Sacramental signification, mystery, and holiness
in it, then the Temple of Jerusalem had, and whereby more ample Evangelicall
promises are set forth and sealed unto us. And as profane persons might of old
come into the Court of the Gentiles, and there hear the word preached in
Solomon's Porch (where both Christ and his Apostles did Preach Io. 10. 23. Act
3. 11. Act. 5. 12. which Porch was in the utmost Court, That is, the Court of
the Gentiles: of which elsewhere out of Josephus) but might not come into the
Court of Israel, nor have communion in the Sacrifices: so profane obstinate
sinners are to be excluded, for their impiety, from the Church communion of
Saints, though they may hear the word, as Heathens also may do. Now that the
Temple of Jerusalem had a Typical Sacramental resemblance of Christ, may
appear plainly in diverse particulars. 1. As the glory of the Lord dwelt in the
Temple within the oracle, above the Arc and the Mercy seat; and at the
dedication of the Temple, the cloud of the glory of the Lord did visibly fill
the whole house; so in Christ the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, as
the Apostle speaks* 2. As the great God whom the heavens of heavens cannot
contain, was yet pleased to dwell on earth, by putting his name in that place;
so notwithstanding of the infinite distance between God and man, yet they are
brought near each to other, to have fellow-ship together in Jesus Christ. 3.
God revealed his will, that he would accept no Sacrifices from his people, but
in the Temple only, after it was built: So God has revealed his will, that
(...) spiritual Sacrifices cannot be acceptable to him, except in* Jesus
Christ only. 4. The people of God were bound to set their Faces toward the
Temple of Jerusalem, when they prayed 1. Kings 8. 30. 48. Dan. 6. 10. So are
we bound in Prayer to look toward Jesus Christ with an eye of faith 5. As
there was an ample promise of God to hear the Prayers which should be made in
that place 2. Chro. 7. 15, 16. so has God promised to hear us and accept us,
if we seek unto him in and through Jesus Christ. 6. God said of the Temple,
mine eyes and mine heart, shall be there perpetually. 2 Chro. 6. 16. so he said
of Christ, This is my well beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. 7. There was
but one Temple so but one Mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ
says Paul. 8. As the Temple was appointed to be a house of Prayer for all
Nations Isa. 56. 7. and the s^ranger, as well as the Israelite, might come and
pray in it 2 Chro. 6 32. So (...) is a propitiation, not for the Jews only,
but for the Gentiles; and whosoever believes on him, (Jew or Gentile) shall not
be confounded. 9. Because of thy Temple at Jerusalem, shall Kings bring
presents unto thee, says the Prophet, Ps. 68. 29. so because of Jesus Christ
(who has got a name above every name, and has received all power in heaven
and earth) shall Kings submit themselves and bow the knee. 10. Glorious things
were spoken of Jerusalem the City of God, but the Temple was the glory of
Jerusalem: so glorious things are spoken of the Church, But Christ is the
Churches glory. Other like considerations might be added, but these may suffice.

CHAP. X. A debate with Master Prynne, concerning the exclusion of profane
scandalous persons from the passover.
THat which Master Prynne in his Vindication page 15, 16. pleads for his
opinion, from the Law of the passover, may be (as I conceive) with no great
difficulty answered, and I shall do it very shortly, (being to insist further
in answering Erastus, who said much more for that point, which deserves ^n
answer) First, in answer to our argument from the keeping back of the unclean.
Number. 9. he says, that all circumcised persons whatsoever, had a right to eat
the passover, etc. being bound to eat the passover in its season, except in
cases of necessity, disability, by reason of a journey, or of legal
uncleanness only, not spiritual, as is clear by Exo. 12. 3. 43. to 50. Number.
9. 1. to 15. Deuteronomy. 16. 16, 17. Ezra. 6. 19, 20, 21. 2 Kings 23. 21, 27, 2.
Chron. 35. 6, 7. 13. 17. 18. where we read that all the people and all the
males that were present received the passover, not one of them being excluded
from eating it.

Answ. 1. If it was so, does not this make as much against himself as against
us, unless he will say, that the Analogy must hold so far, that all Baptized
persons whatsoever, none excepted (if it be not in cases of necessity or
disability) how scand^lous, impenitent, and obstinate soever they be, ought to
be admitted to the Lords Table? so there shall be no excommunication at all
(which yet himself grants) for if any Baptized person, (though such as
Master Prynne himself would have to be excommunicated) shall be shut out from
the Church and from all public Ordinances, and so from the Lords Supper,
because of his obstinacy and continuance in some foul scandal, after previous
admonitions, in so doing, we shall, by his principles, do contrary to the Law
of the passover, in the point of Analogy. 2. The Texts cited by him, prove
that men were debarred for legal uncleanness, but there is not one of them
which will prove that men were debarred only for legal uncleanness, and no
man for moral uncleanness. Yea, one of those Texts. Ezra. 6. 21. tells us
that those who were admitted to the passover, were such as had separated
themselves from the silthynesse of the heathen of the Land, to seek the Lord
God of Israel. 3. That moral uncleanness, I mean known prophannesse or
scandalous sins, did render men incapable of eating the passover I shall
prove anon by diverse arguments, unto which I remit Master Prynne.

That which he objecteth from 1 Cor. 10. I am to answer also distinctly by it
self. His second reply is, that those who were legally unclean at the day
appointed for the passover, so as they could not then receive it, were yet
peremptorily enjoined to eat it the 14. day of the second month, etc. Number. 9.
11. 12. he must not be suspended from it above one month. Answ. The Scripture
cited proves no such thing, except upon supposition that they be clean the 14.
day of the following month. And what if any of them were in the second month
also unclean, by the touch of a deadbody or otherwise? Were they not kept off
in the second month, as well as in the first? Is it not plainly said of the
second passover verse. 12. (the very pla^e cited by himself) according to all
the Ordinances of the passover they shall keep it? and one of those Ordinances
was the keeping back the unclean.

Thirdly, he says, that he who was legally unclean, was kept back neither by
the Priest nor Magistrate, but by those of the same Family as verse. 6, 7.
imports. And the true reason (says he) in this Text why his uncleanness did
seclude him from eating the passover, was because it quite excluded him out of
the camp for a time, (not Tabernacle or Temple) and so by necessary consequence
from the house wherein he was to eat the passover, etc. and by like reason it
debarred him from all other Ordinances.

Answ. 1 The Text Number. 9 6, 7. tells us the unclean were kept back; but by whom
they were kept back, it tells not. That it was neither left free to the unclean
person to eat of the passover, nor to the Family to admit him, but that there
was an authoritative restraint, I prove by this argument. He that was unclean
and before his cleasing did eat of the flesh of the Peace Offerings was cut off
from among his people Lev. 7. 20. 21, Therefore he that in his uncleanness,
did eat the passover, was to be cut off also. No man will say that there was
any less punishment intended for the pollution of the passover, than for the
pollution of Peace Offerings. And if the unclean were not permitted, under the
Law, to eat of the Flesh of the Sacrifices, or if they did they were cut off;
shall not as great care be had to keep the body of Jesus Christ (which was
signified by the flesh of the sacrifices) and the blood of the Covenant, from
being trod under Foot by Dogs and Swine? 2. Neither is there any such reason
in that Text Number. 9. as the excluding quite out of the camp, those who were
unclean by a dead body, and so by consequence from the passover. Nay the Text
rather intimates, that they were in the camp; for they came before Moses and
Aaron on that day, when the passover was kept, and said, We are defiled by the
dead body of a man, Wherefore are we kept back. verse. 6. 7. I hope Moses and
Aaron were not without the camp. I knew the Lepers and some other unclean
persons were put out of the camp; but there is not one of the Texts cited by
him which gives the least shadow of reason to prove that the unclean by the
dead body of a man were quite excluded out of the Camp, except Number. 5. 2. And
if he will believe the Hebrew Doctors, and others upon that place, there were
three Camps, the Camp of Israel, the Camp of the Levites, and the Camp of
Divine Majesty; Vatablus in Number. 5. 2. T^ia secundum Hebraeos castra erant.
Castra nempe Dei, id est Tabernaculum: Castra levitarum, and castra Israel.
Leprosi ab omnibus arcebantur: Impuri per fluxum a primis duobus excludebantur.
Pollutus vero propter cadaver solum a tabernaculo Ecclesiae arcebatur. Godwyn
in his Moses and Aarom lib. 5. cap. 2. cit^th Paulus fagius for the same thing.
See also Mr. Wee^se his Christian Synagogue page 135. 136.
The unclean by the dead were free (say they) to be in the first two Camps,
and were only excluded from the third. However, its agreed, that some unclean
persons were excluded from the Sanctuary, who were not excluded from the camp
of the Chidren of Israel, as is observed by Tostatus in Lev. 12. Quaest. 21.
Menochius in Number. 5. 2. the English Annotations on Number. 5. 2. and others. And
if Master Prynne can prove, that those unclean persons who were excluded from
the Sanctuary, were not excluded from the Passover, let him try it. That this
thing may be yet better understood, let us observe with Tostatus in Levit. 22.
Quest. 7. a threefold separation of the unclean under the Law: some were
separate only from the Sanctuary and the holy things; for he that had but
touched a man or a woman, who had an issue, or had touched the Bed, Clothes, or
any thing else, which had been under him or her, was not permitted to come unto
the Tabernacle, till he was cleansed Lev. 15. Others were separated both from
the holy things, and from the company or society of their Neighbors, yet not
cast out of the camp: for this he gives the case of women having an issue of
blood, who were put apart seven days Lev. 15. and for the same space a woman
after the birth of a male Child, was unclean, so far as to be kept apart
from human society, but she did continue unclean three and thirty days
longer, as to the Sanctuary and hallowed things, during which space of the
three and thirty days, she was not separated from company and society, as in
the first seven days, only she was forbidden to touch any hallowed thing, or
to come into the Sanctuary. There was a third sort separated not only from the
Sanctuary, and from humane society, but also cast out of the camp, which was
the case of Lepers. I conclude, all unclean persons whatsoever were excluded
from the Tabernacle Lev. 15. 31. and from eating of the flesh of the Sacrifices
Lev. 7. 20. 21. Neither might any of the Sons of Aaron having his
uncleanness upon him eat of the holy things, though it was his Food Lev. 22.
v. 2. to 7. in which places cutting off is appointed to be the punishment, not
for unclean persons their being in the camp, but for their coming to the
Tabernacle, or for their eating of the holy things; and accordingly it is said
2 Chro. 23. 19. that Ichojada set the Porters at the Gates of the house of the
Lord, that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in. But we never
read that none which was unclean in any thing, was permitted to enter in at
the Gates of Jerusalem, or to converse among the people. 3 Whereas Master
Prynne thinks that unclean persons were excluded from all Ordinances, as well
as from the Passover, first, what says he to that which Erastus holds and
(as he thinks) grounded upon Scripture, namely that all unclean persons as
well as others, were admitted to the feast of expiation? Next, what says he to
that which is observed by Master Seldom and diverse others, namely, that some
unclean persons might come not only to the mountain of the house of the
Lord, but might also enter into the intermurale? Into that utmost Court the
heathens might come and pray; and so might the Israelites that were not legally
clean says De tempfabrie. p. 15. in quod (at^ium) exte^i, id est Gentes, quae
Israolis nomen non prosit erentur, conve nire ad orandum poss^nt: and
Isr^elitae etiam qui caeremoniali ritu puri non essent:
Arias Montanus.
The fourth and fifth Answers which Mr. Prynne gives that there is no such
warrant for keeping back scandalous persons from the Lords Table, as there was
for keeping back the unclean from the Passover; and that suspension for
legal uncleanness: proves not suspension for moral uncleanness, These I say
do but petere principium, and therefore to be passedover, because he takes for
granted what is in controversy.

I shall therefore proceed to that which he adds in the next place, in answer
to an argument of mine in my controversall fast Sermon, (as he miscalleth it)
The argument as I did propound it, was this. Those scandalous sinners that were
not admitted to offer a trespass offering (which was reconciling ordinance)
without confession of sin, and Declaration of their Repentance for the same,
were much less admitted to the Passover (which was a sealing Ordinance)
without confession of known and scandalous sins, if they had committed any
such. But circumcised persons, if they were scandalous sinners, were not
admitted to offer a trespass offering (which was a reconciling Ordinance)
without confession of sin and Declaration of their Repentance for the same
Lev. 5. 5. 6. Ergo Mr Prynne answers page 17. its a mere non-sequitur. 1.
Because contradicted (as he thinks) by 1 Cor. 10. which is a contrarious
argument, and I shall answer it in the proper place. 2. He says that
examination of the Conscience, Repentance, and Confession, are no where
required of such as did eat the Passover, it being only a commemoration of
Gods mercy in passing over the Israelites first borne, when he slew the
Egyptians: but there being no remission without confession, it was necessary
that those who came to offer a trespasse-offering for some particular sins,
should confess those very sins, yet not to the Priest, but to God alone.

Answ. 1. If examination of the Conscience, Repentance, and confession, were
not required in those that did eat the Passover, and if there might be a
worthy eating of it without this (as he plainly intimates when he says that
this is no where required in Scripture, of such as did eat the Passover,
though all circumstances and necessaries for the worthy eating of it, he most
punctually enumerated) And if the Passover was but only a commemoration of
Gods infinite mercy in passing over the Israelites first borne, as he says,
(which was but a temporal mercy) Then he must needs say, either that in the
Sacrament of the Passover, or confirmation of faith, increase of grace, nor
spiritual mercy was given, or that in that Sacrament this grace (yea, by his
Principles, conversion and regeneration it self) was conferred ex opere
operato. And he must either say the like of the Lords Supper, or otherwise hold
that the Sacraments of the new Testament differ from those of the old,
specifically; and that the Passover did not seal the same covenant of grace
for the substance, which is now sealed by the Lords Supper. 2 What was the
meaning of the bitter Herbs, with which the Passover was commanded to be
eaten? Were not the people of God thereby taught the necessity of Repentance in
that very action? And what means it that at Hezekiahs Passover, the people are
called to turn again unto the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30. 6. that the Priests and the
Levites were ashamed and sanctified themselves, verse. 15. and offered
Peace Offerings made confession to the Lord God of their fathers, verse. 22.
where I understand confession of sin, according to the Law, which appointed
confession of sin to be made with the Peace offerings, which confession was
signified by laying hands upon the head of the offering Lev. 3. 2. 8. 13.
compared with Lev. 16. 21. and so we find Repentance joined with peace
offerings. Judge. 20. 26. finally read we not of the peoples preparing of their
heart to seek God at the Passover 2 Chro. 30. 19. which as it could not be
without Repentance and examination of their consciences, so Hezekiah mentions
it, as that without which the peoples eating of the Passover, could not have
been in any wise accepted. 3. That it was not a private confession to God
alone, but a public penitential confession in the Temple, and before the
Priests, I have before Chap. 8. made it to appear both out of the Text, and out
of Philo the Jew. This I add here. The Confession of the sin was made in the
place of offering the trespass offering, before the Priest, at the laying on
of hands between the horns of the beast, therefore it was not made in secret to
God only: which does further appear, by the ^awes concerning such and such
Sacrifices, for such and such sins, Lev. 5. and by the restitution which was
also joined with the confession Number. 5. 7. And it is also clear from the
Jewish Uide edit. lutin. Cantabr. a^no. 1631. page 5. Eximia laus est
paenitentiam agenti, ut public confiteatur, iniquitat^s suat toti caetui
indicans, and delicta q^ae in proximum admisit, ^liis (...) hunc in modum,
^evera pecca^i in N. N. (vitum nominans) and haec and illa seci (...) Ecce
autem me vobis nunc conv^rtor and me facti paenitet. Q^i vero prae superbia non
i^dicat, sed abscondit iniquitates suas, illi perfecta non est paenitentia,
Quia dicitu^, Qui abscondit scelera sua, non dirigetur.
Canones paenitentiae cap. 1. and 2. where we find confession of ^inne to be
made both by word of mouth, and publicly before the congregation. 4. In stead
of making my argument a non-sequitur, he makes it a clare-sequitur: for the
first part of it not being taken off, but rather granted by him, because (as he
says truly) without confession of sin there is no remission of it, hence the
other part must needs follow: for if it was in vain so much as to sue for
pardon in a reconciling Ordinance, when the sin was not confessed; how much
more had it been a taking in vain of the name of God, and a profaning of a
sealing Ordinance, to seal up pardon to a scandalous sinner, who had not so
much as confessed his scandalous sin, but continued in manifest impetency?
But we will try whether his third and last answer can relieve him. It is
this: That every particular communicant before he comes to receive the
Sacrament, makes a public confession of his sins to God with the rest of the
congregation, and in words at least, voweth newness of life for the future,
there being no communicant that ever I heard of (says he) so desperately wicked
and atheistical, as not to profess heartily sorrow for all his forepast
sins, or to avow impenitent continuance in them when he came to the Lords
Table. Behold, what a latitude? If the vilest sinner practically persevering in
a scandalous sin, shall but join with, and not gainsay the public
confession of the whole congregation (wherein the best men do and ought to
join) and in words promise newness of life (and who will not promise to
endeavor to live better?) nay if he have but so much wit, as not to profess
or avow impenitency: then Mr. Prynne allows his admission to the Sacrament.
But is this the confession that my argument did prove? nothing like it. It was
a particular confession of such a sin by name, Levit. 5. 5. and it shall he
when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess that he
has sinned in that thing: and with the confession there was a real amendment.
For instance, a recompencing of the trespass with the principal, and the
addition of a fifth part, when the case did so require, Number. 5. 7. Then they
shall confess their sin which they have done, and he shall recompense his
trespass, etc. This is that my argument did drive at, and it still stands in
force to conclude that the confession of the particular sin which has given
public scandal, R. Mosis canones panitentiae cap. 2. Quicunque verbis
confitetur, and ^x cord non statuit peccacum derelinquere: ecce hic ei similis
est qui lavat, and manu reptile immundum retinet: Neque enim quicquam prodest
lavatio, donec reptile abjecerit. Et hoc illud est quod a Sapiente illo
dicitur. Qui autem confessus fuerit and reliquerit ea, misericordiam
consequetur. Quin and oportet ut pecca^um speciatim recenseat: Quia dicitur:
Obsecro domine, peccavit populus iste peccatum maximum seceruntque sibi deos
anreos.
together with the forsaking of it externally and in practice, is so necessary,
that without these the admission of a scandalous sinner is a most horrible
profanation of the Sacrament.

But now finding the argument concerning the Passover and legal uncleanness
to have been more fully prosecuted by Erastus than it is by Mr. Prynne, I do
resolve to trace it hard at the heels whithersoever it goes.

CHAP. XI. A Confutation of the strongest arguments of Erastus, namely, those
drawn from the Law of Moses.
AMong Erastus Confirm. These. lib 1. cap. 3. and 4.
his arguments against Excommunication, three of them, namely, the first, the
seventh, and the sixteenth, are all one for the substance, the strength of them
lying in this supposition, that the Scripture does not restrain, nor keep off
any from the Sacrifices nor any other Sacraments (as he speaks) of the old
Testament, because of a wicked or scandalous conversation: but contrariwise
commands that all the males both Jews and forreiners, being circumcised, and
not being legally unclean, nor in a journey, should compear thrice in the
year before the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the three solemn feasts, of the
Passover, Weeks, and Tabernacles. Now (says he) Christ has not in this thing
destroyed nor altered the Law of Moses, nor has he made the rule straiter now
then it was then: but as then all circumcised, so now all baptized persons must
be acknowledged for Church members, having a right to partake of Church
privileges: and as then there was no discipline or punishment for the
flagitious and wicked, except by the hand of the Magistrate; so ought it to be
in like manner in the Christian Church. This argument he trusts very much
unto. And because it is the common opinion, that the excluding and separating
of the unclean under the Law, did signify the excluding of scandalous sinners
from communion with the Church, he spends Lib. 2. cap. 1.
a long chapter against that opinion, and labors to make it appear that the
legal uncleanness did signify the corruption of our nature and unbelief;
that exclusion from the Temple did signify exclusion from the heavenly
Paradise; and that the cleansing and reception into the Temple, did tipyfie the
cleansing of our souls, and the turning of us to God by the blood of Jesus
Christ.

Now here I shall make such animadversions, as shall not only enervate the
strength which these arguments may seem to have against Church censures: but
also afford some strong reasonings against Erastus, from those very grounds
rightly apprehended, from which (upon misapprehensions) he disputes against
the excluding of scandalous sinners. First, it is certain that for diverse
sins against the moral Law, the sinners were appointed not only to bring
their Trespasseofferings, but to confess the sin which they had committed,
and to declare their repentance for the same, and till this was done, the
Trespasse-offering was not accepted. Let us but have the like, that is a
confession of the sin, and declaration of repentance, and then men shall not
be excluded for scandals formerly given. Page 106, 107, 148, 149.
Erastus himself acknowledges that in this point of the confession of sin,
the analogy must hold betwixt the old and new Testament; only he pleads,
that the very act, the very desiring of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is
really a confession that he is a sinner who desires it: and that, much more,
it may suffice, if sinners being asked by the Minister, confess themselves to
be sinners, and that they have not perfectly kept the Commandments of God. But
all this, say I, can not satisfy the argument drawn from that confession of
sin under the Law. For, 1. It was not a confession ipso facto, by the
bringing of the Trespasse-offerings, but by word of mouth, and See Ainsworth*
annot. on Number. 5. 7.
thus it has been expounded by the Hebrew Doctors. The owners of siune and
Trespasse-offerings, when they bring their oblations for their ignorant or for
their presumptuous sins, atonement is not made for them by their oblation,
until they have made repentance, and confession by word of mouth. 2. It was
not a general confession that one is a sinner, and has not perfectly kept the
Commandments of God, (for who did ever refuse to make such a confession, that
were in their right wits? that limitation is as good as nothing, when we speak
of the suspending of any from the Lords Table.) But it was a confession of the
particular individual sin, which had been committed, Levit. 5. 5. And it
shall be when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess
that he has sinned in that thing. Mark, in that thing. Number. 5. 7. Then they
shall confess their sin which they have done. Ainsworth on Lev^t. 6 4.
Which Law is to be understood of all like sins and trespasses, that is, that
other sins which were expiated by Sacrifice, were first to be confessed. All
this makes against Erastus.

Next, whereas he says Page 106. 113.
that this confession or declaration of repentance for sin, in the old
Testament, had place only in those sins for which the Law appointed no
particular punishments: and that there was no confession imposed where the
Magistrate was to punish the crime: This with a great deal of boldness and
considence (as his manner is) he does maintain: Intending thereby (it seems)
to exempt from all manner of Church Discipline whatsoever is punishable by the
civil Magistrate, as adultery, perjury, and the like. But that which he
affirms so strongly, is manifestly contrary to the express Law, Levit. 6.
from verse. 1. to verse. 8. where wilful lying, and perjury, robbing and
violence, fraud and couzenage, all these were to be confessed and expiated by
Sacrifice; notwithstanding that they were also to be severely punished by the
civil Magistrate. Nay, in that very place it is commanded that what had been
violently taken away, or deceitfully gotten, or fraudulently detained, should
be restored, and moreover a fifth part added thereto, for a mulct, yet this did
not exempt the sinner from making confession. So Number. 5. 6, 7, 8. for one and
the same offense the Law enjoyneth both that confession be made and expiation;
and moreover that recompense be made to the party injured or to his kinsman.
Yea the Law, Number. 5. 6, 7. speaks universally; When a man or woman shall
commit any sin that men commit, etc. then they shall confess their sin
which they have done. Which made the Hebrews extend this Law to criminal and
capital cases, as Mr. Ainsworth upon the place notes out of these words of
Maimony. Likewise, all condemned to death by the Magistrates, or condemned to
stripes; no atonement is made for them by their death, or by their stripes,
until they have repented and confessed. And so he that hurts his neighbor,
or does him damage, though he pays him what ever he owes him, atonement is
not made for him till he confess. Therefore Erastus is still a double loser in
arguing from the Law of Moses. It proves not what he would, and it does prove
what he would not.

Thirdly, men were kept from the Sanctuary of the Lord, not only for
ceremonial, but for moral uncleanness, I mean for public and scandalous
sins against the moral Law. Ezech. 44. 7, 9. God was offended when such
proselytes were brought into his Sanctuary, as were either uncircumcised in
flesh, or uncircumcised in heart; that is, whose practice or conversation did
declare them to be uncircumcised in heart: else the Lord would not have
challenged those who brought such proselytes into his Sanctuary, if their
uncircumcision of heart had not been externally manifested, so that it might be
perceived by his people; according to that Psalm 36. 1. The transgression of
the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his
eyes. To the same purpose we read Ezra 6. 21. not that all proselytes, nor all
uncircumcised, but only all such as had separate themselves from the
filthiness of the Heathen of the Land, to seek the Lord God of Israel, did
eat of the Passover. Moreover we may argue by a necessary consequence from
Scripture. The ceremonial uncleanness was a cause of exclusion from the
Sanctuary, and from the holy things. Therefore much more moral uncleanness.
It was more sinful in its self, and more abominable in Gods sight for those
who did steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, and burn Incense to
Baal, to come and tread in the Courts of the house of the Lord, and to offer
Sacrisices there, as if Gods house had been a den of robbers, Isa. 1. 11, 12,
13, 14. Ierem. 7. 9, 10, 11. This I say was more abominable to God then if he
that had touched a dead body, or had come into the tent where a man died,
should have come unto the Tabernacle in his legal uncleanness. Therefore when
Christ casts out the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, it is not for
ceremonial but moral uncleanness, and he applies to them the words of
Jeremiah, Ye have made it a den of thieves, Matthew. 21. 13. with Ierem. 7. 11.
And as it was more sinful to the person, and more hateful to God, so it was
more hurtful to the souls of others, who were in greater danger of infection
from the moral, then from the ceremonial uncleanness. This Page 145. Cum
ergo quaeritur cur ei qui semen praeter voluntatem noctu emisit, ad sacra adire
non licuerit, priusquam mundaretur, scortatori autem and concubinario licuerit?
respondeo, quia ille ad se appropinquantes contaminabat; hic Deo and sibi
immundus tantum erat: aliosque non magis inquinabat, quam si cum uxore legitima
cubavisset.
Erastus denies indeed, but his expression is unsavory and unholy, which I am
ashamed to repeat. Sure the Apostle speaks far othewise Heb. 13. 15, 16.
Lest any root of bitterness sp^inging up trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled; lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esan. A profane
or scandalous person defiles, you see, many others: and sin was of a
defiling nature under the old Testament, as well as under the new. I mean a
root of bitterness not plucked up, a profane person not censured, does defile
others, as well as himself. Both Peter and Jude have told us, that scandalous
persons are spots and blemishes in the communion of Saints, 2 Pet. 2. 13. Jude
verse. 12. So that as Erastus grants, that one legally unclean could make
others legally unclean among whom he came, and therefore was kept off from
fellowship and company with the congregation of Gods people: It must likewise
be granted, that scandalous persons are to be suspended from the sacred
communion of the Christian Church, because if they should be admitted, the
Church should be thereby sinfully defiled. For if the saying God speed to a
false teacher make us partakers of his evil deeds 2 John 10. how much more
does the admitting of such or the like scandalous sinners to the Lords Table
make (I say not all who communicate then and there, but) all who consent to
their admission, to be partakers of their evil deeds.

Fourthly, whereas Page 140. Quocirca non fuit exclusio haec, qua propter legis
immunditiam aliqui prohibebantur venire in caetus publicos, sigu^a rei
cujuspiam in hoc seculo complendae, sed i^ago and simulacrum suit rei in altera
vita persiciendae.
Erastus holds that the exclusion of the unclean under the Law, did only
typyfie something which is to come to pass in the life to come, that is, the
shutting forth of sinners from the Heavenly Paradise, if they be not washed
from their silthynesse by the blood of Jesus Christ: and therefore ought not to
be unto us any argument for the exclusion of scandalous sinners. I answer, If
the shutting out from Heaven was the only thing signified, and if there be a
fit analogy or proportion between the Type and the thing typified, then 1. one
may be in Heaven and cast out again, and in and out again, as under the Law
one might be many times admitted to the Temple and shut out again. 2. It would
also follow, that there is some other exclusion greater then the exclusion from
Heaven, as under the Law there was a greater exclusion than the exclusion from
the Sanctuary, and that was to be cast out from the company and conversation of
Gods people: Tostatus in Levit. 12. quast. 21.
for though every uncleanness which did exclude one from the company of the
Israelites, did also exclude him from the Sanctuary; yet every uncleanness
which did exclude one from the Sanctuary, did not exclude him from the company
of the Israelites. Even as now among us, suspension from the Lords Table is not
the greatest and worst exclusion, but there is another greater then that. Thus
you see Erastus could not make his Type agree with his Antitype. Whence it does
further appear that the exclusion of the unclean under the Law, did teach and
hold forth somewhat in a political sense, touching the communion and
fellowship of the Church in this life. Whatsoever it might signify more, I
will not now dispute, but this it did signify. And this I shall so far make
good, that I shall at once both answer Erastus, and propound a strong argument
for the keeping off from the holy things those that are morally and
scandalously encleane. First, let it be remembered that I have proved already
from Heb. 13. 15, 16. 2 Pet. 2. 13. Jude verse. 12. that the people of God are
defiled by communion and fellowship with scandalous sinners. In the second
place consider that prophecy, Isa. 52. 1. Put on thy beautiful garments, O
Jesusalem, the holy City: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the
uncircumcised and the unclean. That whole Chapter is a prophecy concerning the
condition of the Church in the New Testament, as is evident by six parallels at
least. Verse. 5. with Romans 2. 24. Verse. 7. with Romans 10. 15. Verse. 10. with Luke
3. 6. the beginning of Verse. 11. with Revel. 18. 4. the following part of Verse.
11. with 2 Cor. 6. 17. Verse. 15. with Romans 15. 21. Neither is it the Church
invisible, but the Church visible, for Verse. 15. is applied to the calling of
the Gentiles Romans 15. 21. and Verse. 11. to the Churches open separation from
Babylon, Revel. 18. 4. It is also the Church ministerial Verse. 7, 8, 11. How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings,
etc. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, etc. Be ye clean that bear the
vessels of the Lord. It remains to consider what is meant by the unclean,
Verse. 1. it cannot be meant of legal uncleanness (the ceremonial Law being
abolished) nor of the hid uncleanness of close hypocrites (for in that sense
it is only the privilege of the Church triumphant, that no unclean thing,
nor no hypocrite shall enter there.) It must therefore be meant of such as are
visibly or scandalously unclean. And when it is said, there shall no more come
into thee the uncircumcised, and the unclean, it must be understood
respective, the uncircumcised, signifying such as are not fit to be at all
Churchmembers: the unclean signifying such as are not fit to have communion in
the holy things: for so these two were distinguished under the Law. Thirdly,
there is another place which (to me) puts it out of controversy, 2 Cor. 6: 14,
15, 16, 17. Where the Apostle exhorts believers to avoid all intime
conversation or fellowship with unbelievers, by marrying with them, by going to
the Idol Temples, or the like; he concludes with a manifest allusion to the
legal ceremony, Be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, or the
unclean things as the Syriacke has it. And what agreement has the Temple of
God with idols, Verse. 16. Where the Syriack reads thus: And what agreement
has the Temple of God with the temple of Devils? Remember, would the Apostle
say, that as under the Law, the touching or eating of unclean things made
those that touched them, or did eat of them to be unclean; so does your
fellowship with unbelievers, or your eating in their Idol temples defile you.
And as then those that had touched any unclean thing were not received into the
Sanctuary, so I will not receive you into fellowship with me and my people,
says the Lord, except you be separate from the sons of Belial. Therefore
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you: Which is not spoken of
receiving us into Heaven, but of receiving us into the Tabernacle of God in
this life, as is manifest by Levit. 26. 11, 12. the place cited by the Apostle
in the words immediately preceding. And I will set my Tabernacle among you, and
my soul shall not abhor you. And I will walk among you, and will be your
God, and ye shall be my people. And in this manner, God says he will not
receive us, except we avoid fellowship with the workers of iniquity, especially
in holy things.

I shall add fourthly, for further clearing of this point in hand, Peter's
vision, and the interpretation thereof Act 10. and 11. a passage cited by
Erastus page 138, 139. while he is proving, that the thing signified by the
legal uncleanness, was only the corruption and Infidelity of nature which
excludes a sinner from heaven. The place is so far from proving what he
would, that it proves the contrary; for it speaks plainly of that
uncleanness which excludes men from fellow-ship with the Saints in this life;
from companying together, from eating together. And when Peter expounds the
vision, he says, ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a
Jew to keep company, or to come unto one of another Nation: but God has showed
me that I should not call any man common or unclean, meaning for being a
Gentile and not a Jew. Act. 10. 28. you see, the not eating nor touching of
unclean Beasts, Birds, and creeping things (such as Peter saw in the vision)
was understood by the people of God, as forbidding their association or
fellowship in this world with Heathens, or irreligious persons, and such as
walked not according to the Law. And in this sense the Law was understood, not
only by Peter, but generally by the Jews Act. 11. 3. Gal. 2. 12.

Nay fifthly, the legal uncleanness, in the sense of the Jews, did signify
not only such things as did exclude others from fellow-ship with them, but
such as did exclude the Jews themselves from the holy things. Therefore it is
said Io. 18. 28. they themselves went not into the Judgment hall, lest they
should be defiled: but that they might eat the Passover: Intimating that if
they had gone into the house of an uncircumcised man, or had upon such a day
gone into the Judgment Hall about a litigious action, they had been unclean,
and so might not eat the Passover. Whether it were the coming into the house
of Pilate, he being a man uncircumcised; or Tostatus in Matthew. 26. quaest. 48.
Etiam actus quidam praeter contactum, reddebant homines immundos ad manducandum
agnum, vel quaecunque sanctificat^, sicut litigare judicialiter, vel intrare in
locum Judicii ad litigandum, sic dicitut Io. 18. Lud. Capelli (...) de ultimo
Christi paschate p. 25. Cum itaque haec una fuerit illarum Traditionum, ut ne
die festo capitali judicio vacarent, causa nulla est curex istimemus eos sine
necessitate voluisse proprias constitutiones ita pedibus conculcare, and tam
sole^is festi religionem prophanare. Casaubon Exerc. 16. Anno 34. number. 32.
cites a plain passage in Maimonides declaring that they held it unlawful to
judge of capital cases upon the perparation to the Sabbath or to a Holy Day.
whether it were (which I rather think) a litigious action upon a Holy Day,
which might have defiled them: this is plain, that they thought there was a
moral uncleanness (signified by the ceremonial uncleanesse) which might keep
men from the Passover.

The fifth animadversion shall be this: whereas Erastus holds page 106. that
under the law every one was judged clean or unclean, according to his own
judgment and conscience, and not according to the Priests, the Lepers only
excepted; Also that when a man had committed any sin, it was in the free will
of the sinner to expiate his sin when he pleased, and he was no way compelled
to it. I answer, If every unclean person except the Leper was allowed to judge
and pronounce himself clean when he pleased, then to what purpose did L'
Empereur annot. in cod. middoth. p. 40. Arcebantur autem hujusmodi contaminati,
donec ca peregissent quae ad reatum caeremonialem quem contraxerant delendum
facerent, atque hac ratione suis magistris morem gessissent. The unclean were
not permitted to partake of the sacrifices. Josephus de bello Iud lib. 7. c. 17.
that Law serve Lev. 7. 20. 21. or that whoever was unclean and had not
purified himself, was not to be admitted to come into the Tabernacle, and if he
presumed to come, he was to be cut off from the congregation Number. 19? By
Erastus his principles no man should have been cut off, if he had pleaded
himself not to be unclean; and how many would do so, if that could save them
from being cut off? Is it not also plain from Levit. 15. 15. 30. 31. that both
men and women who were unclean by their issues, (not by Leprosy) were to
bring an offering to the Priest for their cleansing, otherwise were not to be
accounted clean, but looked upon as defilers of the Tabernacle in their
uncleanness, whatever they might think of themselves. So women that were
unclean after Childbirth, had not power to pronounce themselves clean, and
were not free to come to the Sanctuary when they pleased, but they were first
to bring a sin offering, and the Priest was to make atonement for them Lev.
12. 6. 7. 8. There was a certain number of days appointed for the cleansing,
both of women after Childbirth, and of men who had an issue, yea, when the
days of the cleansing were full-filled, they were not free to come unto the
Tabernacle, except they brought their offering for atonement. Lev. 12. 6. 7.
and 15. v. 13. 14. 15. Philo the Jew de vita Mosis lib. 3. page 531. tells us
there was a certain definit time, till the expiring whereof, those that were
unclean by a dead body, were excluded from the Temple. Josephus antiq. Iud.
lib. 3. cap. 10. records the like, not only of Lepers, but of those that had
an issue, or were defiled by the dead, that till the set time was fulfilled,
all these were kept back from the congregration.

The other thing which Erastus says, that it was left free to the sinner to
expiate his sin when he pleased, does no better agree with the Word. for it
was commanded that upon the very knowledge of the sin, the trespass offering
should be brought, and the sin confessed Levit. 4. 14. 28. and 5. 3. 4. 5.

Sixthly, whereas Erastus page 105. urges the universal Law, by which all are
commanded to keep the Passover except the unclean, and those in a journey,
therefore all others (how flagitious or scandalous soever in their lives) were
bound to keep it; I answer. Who knows not, that many universalls in Scripture
are to be restricted, and not to be understood as the words at first sound? as
Io. 2. 10. every man at the beginning does set forth good wine, that is every
Master of a feast Luke 13. 15. does not each one of you on the Sabbath lose his
Ox or his Ass; that is each one that has an Ox or an Ass; Io. 10. 8. all
that ever came before me were Thieves and Robbers, meaning whoever before him
did make himself the true door, by which the sheep must enter in. So Joel. 2.
28. I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, yet not upon all and every one,
but upon those only whom he receives in Covenant. Rev. 13. 8. and all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship him (the Beast) whose names are not written
in the Book of life; yet there have been many reprobates who neither
worshipped the Pope nor knew him: but it is meant of all under the power of the
Beast. So when all are commanded to keep the Passover, it must be understood
of all sit persons, and such as were not to be excepted. You will say the Law
excepteth none, but the unclean, and those in a journey, therefore all others
not excepted were to keep it; for where an exception is made from an universal
Rule, that Rule is the more sure and certain concerning all other particulars
not excepted. To that I answer, Erastus himself adds another exception, and
that is, of the sick who could not be present. The Hebrews make diverse other
exceptions, for they say, Women and Servants are not bound to appear: but all
men are bound except the deaf, and the Dumb, and the Fool, and the
little-Child and the Blind, and the Lame, and the defiled, and the
uncircumcised; and the old man, and the sick, and the tender and weak which
are not able to go up on their Feet. All these eleven are discharged etc. See
Ainsworth on Exo. 23. 17. And compare this with Maimonides de Idolol. ch^o. 11.
Sect. 18. where he that hearkens to Soothsayers, Wizards, Charmers, and the
like, is said to be reckoned among Fools and Children whose reason is
imperfect. Therefore these were to be excepted as well as Fools and Children,
and so were other scandalous persons, which I shall prove anon.

A Seventh Animadversion shall be this. Erastus in these Arguments of his from
the Law, does confound Sacraments with Sacrifices (as I touched in the
beginning) yea, Page 94. Huc ipso, quod ad expiandum peccatum jubetur adferre
Sacrificium, non excluditur a Sacramentis, sed ad ea invitatur; nam o^nnia haec
Sacrificia etant vera Sacramenta,
he argues expressly, that whoever were admitted to expiate their Sin by
Sacrifices, were thereby admitted to Sacraments, because (says he) all these
Sacrifices were true Sacraments. So he speaks in other places, that he might
seem to dispute the more appositely for promiscuous admission to the Sacrament
of the Lord Supper. Pareus in ^evit. 4. differunt Sacrificium and Sacramentum;
quod Sacrificium est obedientia nostra Deoad mandatum ejus praestita, sive
moralis five caerimonialis cum morali conjuncta* Sacramentum est Signum gratiae
dei erga nos in fide a nobis susceptum.
But Sacrifices and Sacraments are as different as Giving and Receiving. In
Sacrifices man is the giver, God is the Receiver. In Sacraments God is the
Giver, Man is the Receiver. In Sacrifices Peace is made with God. In Sacraments
it is sealed and supposed to be made. They therefore that hold the Passover
was a Sacrifice (an opinion partly grounded on Deuteronomy. 16. 2. and partly taken
from the Jews dispersed, who though they observe diverse paschall rites, yet
they do not kill the Paschall Lamb, nor keep the Passover according to the
Law, it being to them unlawful to offer Sacrifices, except in the Land of
Canaan) have the shorter evasion from Erastus his Argument touching the
admission to the Passover. But I have given other answers. And this much shall
suffice for answer to the Erastian Arguments drawn from the Law of Moses, which
some suppose to be the strongest.

CHAP. XII. Fourteen Arguments, to prove that scandalous and presumptuous
Offenders against the moral Law (though circumcised and not being legally
unclean) were excluded from the Passover.
THere is so much weight laid, both by Erastus himself, and by Master Prynne,
upon the universal Law commanding all that were circumcised to eat the
Passover, except such as were legally unclean, or were in a journey: that I
am resolved, once for all, to demonstrate against them, that men were excluded
from the Passover, for scandalous and enormous Trespasses against the moral
Law, as well as for legal uncleanness. Peradventure it will seem to some,
that I undertake to prove a paradox, and to walk in an untrodden or obscure
Path. Yet my Arguments are such, as I trust shall weigh much with intelligent
men.

The first Argument shall be this. (which is hinted by Ursinus and Pareus
Explic. catechit. Quest. 85. art. 2.) Whosoever by Gods appointment were
excluded from the privileges of Church Members, and not to be reckoned among
the Congregation of Israel, those were by Gods appointment excluded from the
Passover. But whosoever committed any scandalous sin presumptuously, or with
an high hand, were by Gods appointment excluded from the privileges of Church
Members and not to be reckoned among the Congregation of Israel. Ergo. The
Proposition has this manifest reason for it. Those all who were commanded to
eat the Passover, cannot be understood to be of a larger extent then the
Church of Israel: Those therefore who were not to be acknowledged or used as
ChurchMembers, were by Gods appointment excluded from the Passover. The
Assumption is proved from Numb 15. 30. 31. But the soul that does ought
presumptuously (whether he be born in the land, or a stranger) the same
reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from among his people,
Because he has despised the word of the Lord, and has broken his
commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off: his iniquity shall be upon
him.

The presumption here spoken of, is not only the presumption of heart (says
Cajetan) of which God only is Judge, but a presumption manifested in word or
work, which he conceives to be intimated by the Hebrew phrase, with an high
hand. Grotius understands one that either denies that there is a God, or that
the Law was given by God, or after admonition goes on in his trespass. But
sure he mistakes the punishment, which he understands to be extrajudiciall, and
that he who finds one thus sinning presumptuously, may kill him ex jure
Zelotarum, as Phinehes did kill Zi^i and Cosbi.

I have spoken before of the cutting off, which I will not here resume. Only
this, such presumptuous and contumacious sinners were not to be reckoned among
the people of God, nor to enjoy the privilege of Church Members, therefore not
admitted to the Passover.

Secondly, Josephus de bello Iud. lib. 7. cap. 17. speaking of such as were
permitted to eat the Passover, in the time of Cestius, does thus design them,
(...), being all of them pure and holy, not only pure from legal
uncleanness, but such as were also esteemed holy. But moreover, it is clear
from Io. 18. 28, they themselves (the Jews) went not into the Judgment Hall
lest they should be defiled: but that they might eat the Passover: that the
Jews did so understand the Law, that moral as well as ceremonial
uncleanness, did render them incapable of the Passover: for they had no such
ceremonial Law, that they who come into the Judgment Hall, should be legally
or ceremonially unclean: yet this had disabled them from eating the Passover:
for they held litigious or forensicall actions unlawful upon a holy day as
Capellus, and Casaubon (above cited) do prove. Such a finfull and scandalous
act had kept them back from the Passover.

Thirdly, if we consult the Chaldee paraphrase upon Exodus 12. 43. it says
thus. Every Son of Israel, who is an Apostate, shall not eat of it. And upon
the same place Master Ainsworth proves out of Maimonides that no Apostate nor
Idolater was permitted to eat of the Passover. Yea, some Israelites who were
not apostates, nor idolaters, were for a seandalous action excluded from
civil, how much more from Ecclesiastical fellow-ship? See Maimon; of Idolatry
cap. 9. Sect. 15. With an Israelite, who has made defection to the worship of
Idols, it is forbidden to have traffic or commerce either in his going or
returning: with another Israelite going to the Markets and Faires of Heathens,
we are only forbidden to have commerce in his returning. If it was unlawful
to them, so much as to have civil commerce with an Israelite coming from the
Markets of Heathens (fearing lest he had sold some what which was dedicate to
Idolatry, as the reason is there given) although he was no Apostate nor
Idolater: it is not easily ^imaginable, that such a one was freely admitted to
the Passover.

Fourthly, an Israelite though circumcised, and not legally unclean, yet if he
either turned Idolater, or an Heretic, or an Epicurean, was no longer
acknowledged to be in ChurchFellowship or Communion, therefore rendered
incapable of the Passover. Is. Abrabanel in his Book de capite fidei, as he
shows whom they esteemed Apostats or Heretics cap. 12. so he also intimates
that such were excluded from the communion of their Law Cap. 3. dub. 5. none
being acknowledged to be in the Communion of Israel, who did not believe the
Articles of faith professed in the Jewish Church Cap. 6. yea, he tells us Cap.
24. (which the Talmud it self says ^it. Sanhedrin. cap. 11. Sect. 1.) that
Heretical or Epicurean Israelites were looked upon as excluded from having
portion in the world to come. And as Doctor Buxtorf shows out of their own
writers, they esteemed an Heretical Israelite to be so abominable, that they
did straight and without delay excommunicate him. Lexic. Chald. Talm. and
Rabbin. page 195. How is it then imaginable that they admitted such a one to
eat the Passover? Let us hear R. Moses Maimonides himself de Idololatria cap.
2. Sect. 8. An Idolatrous Israelite is as an Heathen in all things which he
does etc. So also Israelites who are Epicures are not esteemed to be Israelites
in any action of theirs etc. Now they are Epicures who ask counsel from the
thoughts of their own mind, being Ignorant of those things we have spoken of,
until having transgressed the chief heads of the Law, they offend by contumacy
and presumption, and say there is no sin in this thing. But it is forbidden
to speak with them or to answer them; for it is said, come not near the door
of her house Prove. 5. 8. Therefore the whorish woman that Solomon speaks of,
was (in the opinion of Maimonides) such a one as was not to be esteemed as an
Israelite, nay nor such as was to be spoken with, much less to be admitted to
the Passover. yea, Maimonides de Idal. cap. 10. Sect. 2. says yet more. But
those Israelites which forsake their religion, or become Epicures we are bidden
kill them and persecute them even unto hell. How could they then admit to the
passover those whom they thought themselves obliged to persecute even unto
hell?

Fifthly, those Arguments which prove an exclusion of known profane persons
from the Temple, will also prove an exclusion of known profane persons from
the Passover: for none might eat of the Passover, who might not also come
into the Temple. That scandalous profane persons might not come into the
Temple, has been proved already.

Sixthly, I argue from the lesser to the greater. If men were to be kept back
for legal uncleanness, much more for moral uncleanness, this being more
hateful to God and more hurtful to men then the other. This just consequence
Grotius annot. in Luke 6. 22. does admit. If by the Law says he, one that was
leprous or had a filthy scab, was separated from men's company, lest he should
infect others, it was no ill consequence. that (if no heavier thing) this at
least should be imposed on flagitious and wicked persons, who did by the
contagion of their sinful example hurt others, and bring a reproach upon the
whole congregation from which the congregation could not be made free, but by
some publik detestation of that wickedness* thus Groti:

Seventhly, the purging out of leven from the Congregation of Israel, was a
significant teaching Ceremony* holding forth this duty, that the Church ought
to put away wicked persons from among them; for so does the Apostle expound it
1. Cor. 5. verse. 6. 7. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump? purge out therefore the old leaven. Which relates not only to the
purging of their own hearts, but to the purging of the Church, and the putting
away of that wicked person, this being the scope of the whole Chapter. Now the
moral signification of that ceremony of purging out the leaven, did concern
the Church of Israel as well as the Christian Church; even as the diverse
washings under the Law did teach and hold forth the duty of sanctification and
purity to the people of God at that time, as well as typifie the sanctification
of the Christian Church.

Eighthly, though the hallowed bread might in case of necessity be lawfully
given to David and his men, (the Ceremonials of the first Table yielding to the
Substantials of the second) yet Abimelech the Priest would not adventure to
give it, till he understood that the young men had then kept themselves at
least from women, 1 Samuel 21. 4, 5, 6. this being a part of that sanctification
which was required in those who did partake of holy things, not only among the
Hebrews, but among other Nations, as Hugo Grotius notes upon the place, and
upon Exodus 19. 15. Now the Shewbread, or the twelve loaves which did show or
present the people to God, can not be supposed to be holier then the Paschall
Lamb which did show or present Christ to the people, and was a Sacrament or
Seal of the covenant of grace. David also and his men in that danger of their
lives had as good right to eat the Shewbread, as any Israelite could pretend
to for his eating the Passover: yea that was a substantial duty of the second
Table, which Christ himself justifies: this was a ceremonial duty of the
first Table, and grounded on a positive law. This therefore does afford me an
argument with manifold advantages. For if the Shewbread might not be given to
David and his men in their extreme necessity, unless they had for a certain
space before abstained from the use of their wives, otherwise lawful: how much
less might the Passover be given as an holy Ordinance (which did not concern
the saving of men's lives in extreme necessity) to scandalous persons living in
known whordome and adultery?

Ninthly, I argue from that place, Ezech* 22. 26. Her Priests have violated my
law and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no difference between
the holy and profane. Will any man say, that they were to put a difference
between the holy and profane in other Ordinances, and not in the Passover?
and why not in the Passover, as well as in other Ordinances? If such
difference was to be put in the Passover, then how shall one imagine that no
man was kept back from the Passover because of known profaneness or moral
uncleanness? for what difference was put between the holy and profane, when
the profane were received as well as the holy? Mr Coleman held that this Text
reaches not to the keeping pure of the Ordinances by any act of government,
but only that the Priests did profane the holy things in their own practice,
by eating in their uncleanness, and also in their ministry because they
taught not the children of Israel to put a difference between the clean and
the unclean. Maledicis page 11. But the Text gives not the least ground to
restrain this fault of the Priests here reproved, either to their personal
actions, or to their doctrinall ministry. Nay the Text will reach to an act of
government neglected; for the word here used to express the distinguishing or
putting of a difference between the holy and profane is (...) which is often
used in Scripture to express an act of government or authority, whereby one
person is separated or distinguished from another person, or one thing from
another thing, as Ezra 8. 24. Then I separated twelve of the chief of the
Priests, etc. Ezra 10. 8. all his substance should be forfeited, and himself
separated from the congregation. Here it signifies such a separation, as was a
public censure: why not also Ezech. 22. 26? The same word is used in the
story of the division of the Land by Joshua, Josh. 16. 9. And the separate
Cities for the children of Ephraim. It is used also to express Gods dividing
of light from darkness, Genes. 1. 4. also his separating of Israel from all
other Nations, Levit. 20. 24. And whereas Mr Coleman did take hold of the
following words in that place of Ezechiel, neither have they showed difference
between the unclean and the clean, as being merely doctrinall. First, (if it
were so) how will it appear that these words are exegeticall to the former,
and that the putting of difference between the holy and profane, mentioned in
the former words, was only meant of showing the difference doctrinally? or why
may we not rather understand, that the Priests are charged with neglect of duty
both in Doctrine and Government. Secondly, even that latter word (...) fecerunt
scire, the Septuagints render (...): and they use (...) as Synonymous with
(...): by all these (signifying to separate or to divide) they render (...) yea
the Septuagints express a forensicall censure or judicial separation by (...)
as Ezra 108. (...). So that when they retalne the same word in rendering (...)
in this Text of Ezekiel, they do thereby intimate that the latter word will
reach a power which was more then doctrinall, as well as the former. Which I
do the rather assert, because (...) is taken by the Septuagints (not seldom)
as agreeing in signification with (...) de voluntate sua certiorem reddidit,
constituit, decrevit: so that it will reach the making of others to know a
thing, not only doctrinally, but by rules, Canons, Statutes, and Government.
Yea (...) will reach the teaching or making men to know by censures or
punishments inflicted, as Judge. 8. 16. Gedeon took briars and thorns (...)
Pagnin, and confregit. and he brake with these the men of Succoth. Hierome, and
contrivit. The Septuagints (...) comminui^. The English Translation, and with
these be taught (in the Margent made to know) the men of Succoth. For this
signification of the word, namely conterere, Arias Montanus in his Hebrew
Lexicon cites Isa. 53. 3. Ezech. 19. 7. So conteri Psalm 74. 5. Prove. 10. 9.
Upon this last place Mercerus tells us that the Hebrews do not only admit this
sense of that Text, but in other places also take the same word pro confringi.
So that without the least violence to the Text in Ezekiel it may be thus read;
They have not separated (or put difference) between the holy and profane,
neither have they broken (or divided) between the unclean and the clean. The
latter part seems to charge the Priests with the admission of such as were
legally unclean; the former part, with the admission of such as were morally
unclean or profane, to such ordinances as were appointed only for the holy
and clean.

Tenthly, Heathens or strangers who were not Proselytes of the covenant or of
righteousness, were not permitted to eat of the Passover. Now one that is by
profession a Church member, but living in profaneness and scandalous
wickedness, ought to be esteemed as an Heathen, Matthew. 18. 17. yea as worse
than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Hence was it that the word Heathen was used for
an irreligious or wicked man, as is observed by Mathias Martinius in lexic.
philol. page 717. 718. and as a discriminating name from believers; so Zonaras
in Cone. Carthag. Can. 24. When David speaks of his persecuting wicked enemies,
though Israelites, he calls them strangers and heathen, Psalm. 54. 3. Psalm. 59.
5. How then can it be supposed, that those who were esteemed as heathens, were
admitted to all Church privileges, as well as the best Israelites?

Eleventhly, that which was among the Jews a sufficient cause to deny
circumcision to him who desired to be admitted and received into the Jewish
Church as (...) Ger ben berith, a proselyte, son of the covenant, or (...)
Ger tsedeck, a proselyte of righteousness, was also a sufficient cause to deny
the Passover to a proselyte who desired to eat it. Even as now that for which
we may and ought to refuse Baptism to one that desires it, must needs be also
a cause and reason to refuse the Lords Supper to him that desires to receive
it; for he that is not fit to be baptized, is much less fit to receive the
Lords Supper. But profaneness or a scandalous conversation was among the Jews
a sufficient cause and reason to refuse Circumcision. Yea as Dr Buxtorf tells us
in Lexic. Chald. Talm. and Rabbin. page 408. before the Jews would circumcise
or baptize a proselyte (for after circumcision they did baptize him) they did
first examine him exactly, and prove him narrowly, whether he desired to be a
proselyte, from covetousness, ambition, fear, the love of an Israelitish
virgin, or the like sinister end. If upon examination it did appear that he
was not moved by any worldly consideration, but by affection to Religion and
the glory of God, then they proceeded to set before his eyes the strictness of
the law, and how strait and narrow a path he must walk in, telling him also of
the persecutions and tribulations of Israel. If after all this trial they
found him steadfast in his desires and resolutions, then they received him, he
being first instructed in the Articles of their faith, and in the Commandments
of the Law. How much less would they have circumcised a scandalous person,
being so far from any hopeful signs of sincerity, that he had the black
marks of a worker of iniquity? And if they would not receive such a scandalous
flagitious person to circumcision, how could they receive such a one (being
circumcised) to the Passover?

Twelfthly, compare Ezra 6. 21. with Ezra 10. 16, 17. First it is marked Ezra
6. 21. that such proselytes did eat the Passover with the children of Israel,
as had separated themselves unto them from the silthinesse of the Heathen of
the Land, to seek the Lord God of Israel. If those who did eat were thus
qualified, it is not obscurely intimated, that those who were not thus
qualified did not eat. And if no proselyte who did not separate himself from
the filthiness of the Heathen, was allowed to eat the Passover, then
muchlesse was an Israelite who did not separate himself from the silthynesse
of the Heathen, allowed to eat it. I like well Beda his observation upon Ezra
10. 16, 17. Israel was purged from unlawful marriages, and the strange wives
put away; and this work was ended against the beginning of the first month,
to the intent that none defiled with unlawful marriages might eat the
Passover, Ut ante initium mensis primi consummarentur omnes qui prophano erant
connubio maculati, id est a tali scelere purgarentur, quatenus ipsum mensem
primum in quo erat pascha faciendum, mundi intrarent, mundi paschalia festa
peragerent etc.

Thirteenthly, I argue from the signification of the legal or ceremonial
uncleanness, and from that which was signified by the exclusion of those that
were legally unclean. Without all controversy the keeping back of such, was
a significant ceremony. For all the legal ceremonies concerning cleanness or
uncleanness were teaching ceremonies, and are therefore called Doctrines,
Matthew. 15. 9. Col. 22. 2. What was taught and signified thereby, I have before
showed, namely, that profane ones be not admitted to fellowship with Gods
people in their holy things. Yea, was not prophannesse and open wickedness
more hateful to God than legal uncleanness? yes says Erastus page 144.
because God appointed greater punishments for the former then for the latter:
the greater crimes were punished by fire and sword, stoning, hanging; the
smaller by mulcts, and stripes. But yet (say I) by his grounds the legal
uncleanness was more hateful to God than profaneness and wickedness, in
reference to fellowship in the holy things, (for that is the point) He holds
that the most flagitious and profane were commanded of God to eat the
Passover, and yet those that were only Iegally unclean were forbidden:
though the Scripture say, Prove. 15. 8. and 21. 27. that the Sacrifice of the
wicked is abomination to the Lord, and the oblations of those whose hands were
full of blood, his soul hated, and he could not away with them* Isa. 1. 11,
12, 13, 14. and when they came to his house, he told them, When ye come to
appear before me, who has requird this at your hands, to tread my courts?

I shall not need to insist here, upon the excluding of bond servants, and
those that were bought with money, from the Passover, and the admitting only
of those that were free. Which Lavater hom. 23. in Ezram.
some of the Zurik Divines themselves have interpreted to signify the
exclusion of those who are servants of sin, and of those who seek only the
things of the earth. But there is one argument more (it shall be the last)
which does convince me, that others besides the uncircumcised, and they that
were legally unclean, even those that had scandalously transgressed the moral
Law, were excluded from the Passover. The ground of my argument is that
whereof I have spoken before, the law for confession of sin and declaration
of repentance; without which the Trespasse-offering was not accepted Levit. 5.
5, 6. which Law is extended to every known sin that was to be expiated by
Sacrifice, Numb. 5. 6, 7. When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men
commit, to do a trespass against the Lord (the 70 read, and despising he
despise; to note rebellion or co^macy) and that person be guilty (that is be
found guilty, or when the sin shall be known, so the phrase of being guilty
is explained, Levit. 4. 13, 14.) Then they shall confess their sin which
they have done. After which follows restitution to the party wronged, and
atonement made by the Priest. Whence I argue thus. If the scandalous persons
were not admited to the Trespass offering (which was a reconciling Ordinance)
without confession of their sin, which was known to have been committed by
them, much less were they admitted to the Passover (which was a sealing
Ordinance) without such confession of their sin. But scandalous persons were
not admitted to the Trespasse-offering, (which was a reconciling Ordinance)
without confession of their sin which was known to have been committed by
them. Therefore much less were they admitted to the Passover, (which was a
sealing Ordinance) without such comession. This argument I did before Chap. 10.
vindicate from Mr. Prynne. I will here further strengthen it, and vindicate it
from another exception, which peradventure will be made against it. The
proposition is certain: for some are called to make their peace with God, who
can not have any assurance sealed unto them, that their peace is made with God;
But if God will not be reconciled, he will far less seal reconciliation.
There is no peace to the wicked says God, how much less can their peace be
sealed to them? The assumption is manifest from the Scriptures last cited. And
if any shall say that the Law, Levit. 5. is meant only of private sins, and
those of ignorance, which so soon as they come to knowledge, are to be
confessed: I answer. 1. Its more then can be proved, that only private sins
and those of ignorance are there meant of. Of this I have spoken elsewhere. But
be it so. If some private sins, yea sins of ignorance were to be publicly
confessed when they were known, how much more were public and scandalous sins
to be publicly confessed? 2. The Hebrews understand the Law of confession to
be extended to all sins whatsoever that were expiated by Sacrifice, and that
before atonement could be made, the sinner must make confession and say, O God
I have sinned, and done perversely, I have trespassed before thee, and have
done thus and thus: and lo I repent and am ashamed of my doings, and I will
never do this thing again. 3. In all Sacrifices for atonement or expiation a
man laid his hand upon the head of his offering, Levit. 1. 4. Exodus 29. 10, 15,
19. This laying on of hands was the rite used in confession of sin, whereby a
man did profess that he was worthy to be destroyed for his sin, and that he
laid his sin upon the beast which was killed in his stead, thereby figuring
that upon Christ are laid the iniquities of us all. And with the laying on of
hands upon the Sacrifice, confession of sin was made by word of mouth; which
as it is the judgment of Tostatus in Levit. 1. quaest. 15. Ainsworth on Levit.
1. 4.
Interpreters, so it is easily proved from Levit. 16. 21. And Aaron shall lay
both his hands upon the head of the live Goat, and confess over him all the
iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat. Whereupon I conclude, that any
sin which was expiated by Sacrifice, whether a public or secret offense,
was confessed before it was expiated. 4. The Law Numb. 5. 6. extends confession
to any sin that men commit, as has been before observed. 5. Philippus
Gamachaeus a learned Doctor of Sorbon, comment. in tertiam partem Thomae, de
Paenitentiae Sacramento cap. 13. does ingenuously acknowledge, that the
foresaid law of Moses, concering confession of sin, is no warrant for their
private auricular, and Sacramental confession, Deinde nec Judaei confiteban^
peccata omnia exact, accurate, sicut nos; non enim peccata interna and
mentalia, sed solum externa, quae opere ipso consummata essent, and in
exteriorem actum trans^issent etc. Tertio, nec Judaei omnia externa peccata in
confessione declarabant, sed praesertim notoria and publica, ut fert opinio
probabilior.
because the Jews were not by that Law bound to confess any other sins, but
sinful actions or external transgressions, nor all such, but chiefly the
notorious and scandalous sins. If he had perceived the least color of an
argument, from that Mosaicall Law, for the necessity of confessing private
sins to the Priest, surely he had taken hold of it, and had not quit it.

CHAP. XIII. Master Prynnes Argument from 1 Cor. 10. (which he takes to be
unanswerable) discussed and confuted.
MAster Prynne in the 15. page of his Vindication endeavors to prove, that
spiritual pollution by reason of gross and scandalous sins, did not debaree
them that were circumcised from the Passover. as Paul (says he) expressly
determines 1 Cor. 10. 1. to 10. (an unanswerable Text to this purpose) moreover
Brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant that: (the Text says how that)
all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were
all Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea; and did all eat the same
spiritual meat (to wit the Passover and Manna) and did: all drink of the
same spiritual drink, for they drank of the Rock that followed them, and
that Rock was Christ. But perhaps all these Communicants were visible Saints,
free from any legal pollution, at least not Tainted with any scandalous sin:
The Apostle to take off this evasion, subjoynes, in the very next words. But
with many of them, God was not well pleased, etc. So that the Israelites being
once circumcised, were all admitted to eat the Passover, though some of them
were Idolaters, others lusters after evil things; others fornicators, others
tempters of Christ; others murmurers against God and Moses. The same argument
he hinteth page 9. to prove the like under the Gospel. It Is one of Erastus his
argments, Confirm. These. page 118. 119. and as colorable as any other, yet not
unanswerable as Master Prynne holds.

For 1. though he says the Apostle clearly determines, that those who were
tainted with gross and scandalous sins, were admitted to the Passover; yet
I find nothing of the Passover, neither in the Text, nor in the sense of any
Interpreter which I have looked upon. Nay, it did not so much as fall in the
thoughts of Erastus himself; for Beza having objected to him that he ought to
have compared our Sacraments with the purely sacred Feasts in the old Testament
rather than with the manna, and with the water of the Rock, which were for
corporal nourishment; Erastus replyeth nothing concerning the Passover (which
had been his best answer if he had seen any probability for it,) only he says
that he compares our Sacraments with the manna and the water of the Rock, as
the Apostle does before him. 2. The Text it self seems rather to determine
clearly, that the Passover is not there intended for all the other particulars
there mentioned did agree to all the Israelites, men, women, and Children: all
these were under the Cloud, and all these passed through the Sea, and all these
drank of the water of the Rock; and why shall we not understand, that all these
did also eat of the same spiritual meat, that is of the Manna, not of the
Passover, of which women and Children under 13 years of age did not eat:
neither did all the males above 13 years eat of it* for the unclean were
excluded by the Law: those that were in a journey did not eat of it nor the
hired Servant: the sick says Erastus did not eat of it: the Jews exclude also
the Dumb and the Deaf. If it be said, that verse. 1. speaks only of the
Fathers, and that therefore the Text is not to be understood of women and
Children also. I answer, This is as inconsequent, as if one would argue, Paul
says Men, Brethren, and Fathers, therefore no women were among that multitude
of the people Act. 21. 35. 36. 39. 40. or thus, the Apostle says Brethren pray
for us, therefore he desires not believing Sisters to pray for him. In this
same Text in hand, the Apostle speaks to the whole Church of Corinth, to make
them afraid of Gods judgments if they sin as the Israelites did. If he had
argued only from the sin and judgment of the men, and not also of the women
in the wilderness, the women in Corinth had so much the less applied it to
themselves. But if I should grant (which will never be proved) that by the
Fathers are understood the men only, yet it cannot be said that as all the men
of Israel were Baptized in the Cloud and Sea, and all of them drank of the same
spiritual drink which came out of the Rock, so all of them did eat the
Passover* for even of the males diverse were excluded from the Passover, as
the unclean, the hired Servant, the Child, the sick, etc. so that this would
make the Apostles argumentation running upon a fivefold all to hang ill
together. I had not insisted at all upon this, but to show the weak grounds of
Mr. Prynnes strong confidence. 3. If this argument of his hold good, he must
grant by Analogy that all Baptized persons must be admitted to the Lords Table,
though they be Idolaters, fornicators, etc. which as it is contrary to the
Ordinance of Parliament, so to his own professed Tenants, for he professes
otherwhere, he is not for the admission of scandalous persons to the Sacrament,
and that he would have them in case of obstinacy, not only suspended from the
Sacrament, but excommunicated from all other Ordinances, till public
satisfaction given for the scandal, and till external symptoms of repentance
appear. So the Antidote animadverted tells us and his own vindication page 50.
If this be his mind, then it is incumbent to him to loose his own knot, all
circumcised persons though Tainted with gross scandalous sins, as Idolatry,
and Fornication, were admitted to the Passover, and so it ought to be under
the Gospel. If he say that those scandalous sinners in the wilderness had not
been admonished, were not obstinate, or that they professed repentance, and
promised amendment, and did not in the mean while persevere in their
wickedness, but satisfied for the scandal: first how proves he that? next, in
so saying he will answer for us as well as for himself, and his argument (if
all granted) cannot prove that such scandalous sinners as have manifest
symptoms of impenitency, or do not confess and forsake their sin, may be
admitted to the Lords Table. 4. The Manna and the water out of the Rock, though
they had a spiritual and evangelicall signification, and di^ typifie Jesus
Christ, yet they were also the ordinary Food and Drink of the people in the
wilderness: so that if scandalous sinners had been excluded from partaking of
these, they had been deprived of their ordinary daily corporal nourishment;
which makes a vast difference between their case in the wilderness, and ours
at the Lords Table. 5. The Apostle speaks of those scandalous sins, as
committed, not before, but after the eating of that spiritual meat, and
drinking of that spiritual drink; first this is clear of their Baptism in the
Cloud and in the Sea, which was at their passing through the Red Sea, Exodus 14.
before any of the gross and scandalous sins there mentioned were committed;
and therefore was not pertinent to be objected. Immediately thereafter they did
eat of the spiritual meat, that is of the manna Exo. 16. and drank of the
spiritual drink, that is of the Water out of the Rock which followed them
Exodus 17. to give drink to my people, my chosen says the Lord Isa. 43. 20. Now
after those men had eaten of the spiritual meat, and drunk of the spiritual
drink, they did fall into Idolatry, Fornication, etc. and this is all which the
Apostle says, thereby warning the Corinthians not to presume upon their
partaking in the Ordinances, nor to think all well with themselves, because
they were Baptized, and had eaten and drunk at the Lords Table; for after all
this they had need to take heed, lest they fall in foul sins, and lust after
evil things, and so draw upon themselves the heavier judgments. That which
Master Prynne takes for granted (upon a mavelous mistake of the Apostles
words) he has yet to prove, that is, that after some of them had fallen into
Idolatry, others into fornication, others into murmuring against God, those who
were known to have committed those gross and scandalous sins, were allowed
and admitted, as before, to eat of the spiritual meat, and drink of the
spiritual drink. I mean not only the Passover, (which is not at all meant in
this Text) but even from the Manna and the water of the Rock those scandalous
sinners were cut off by death, except such of them as did repent and turn, for
whom atonement was made to God. As soon as Moses came into the camp, he gave a
charge to slay every man his Brother, and every man his companion which had
committed the sin of Idolatry: and for the rest who survived Moses made
atonement, and got an answer of Peace from God, concerning them. Exo. 32. and
33. We read also that the Lord plagued the people, because of their Idolatry
Exo. 32. 35. and the people did mourn and humble themselves and cast off their
Ornaments Exo. 33. 4. So that (I am sure) the first case mentioned by the
Apostle makes much against our Opposites. The second example is the matter of
Peor, where they did fall both into Idolatry and Fornication together; but what
came of it? Moses gave a charge to the Judges of Israel, to slay every one his
men that were joined to Baal Peor Numb. 25. 5. and there died also of the
Plague 24000. v. 9. But what was the peoples part in Repenting? verse. 6. tells
us, that all the congregation of the Children of Israel were weeping before the
door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and for those that remained alive,
Phinehes made atonement, and the Lord smelled a savor of rest verse. 11. 13. As
for the third case, instanced by the Apostle, which is the tempting of Christ,
much people of Israel dyed for it, and the remnant did repent, and confess
that particular sin that they had spoken against the Lord and against Moses,
and therefore did desire Moses, to pray unto the Lord for them. Number. 21. 6. 7.
Lastly, for that of murmuring, those that had the chief hand in it died of the
Plague, Number. 14. 37. and the people mourned greatly, and confessed, We have
sinned verse. 34. 40. And thus by searching for an Answer to our Opposites
argument, we have found this argument against them.

If God himself did execute such Discipline upon those who were tainted with
the gross and scandalous sins of Idolatry, Fornication, etc. That he would
not permit them to enjoy their former liberty of eating of the Manna, and
drinking of the Water of the Rock, (being spiritual meat, and spiritual
drink, as Typifying Christ, though appointed of God also for ordinary daily
food and drink to his people) until they mourned, repented, confessed, and
atonement was made for them: It is much less the will of God, that such
scandalous sinners, as are manifestly impenitent and manifestly not reconciled
to God, should be admitted and received to the Lords Supper, which is an
Ordinance purely spiritual.

But the former part is true. Therefore so is the latter.

6. Another Answer I shall add, (though I need add no more) Those sins
mentioned by the Apostle were not scandals given by a few persons, nor yet by a
few Families, nor by a Tribe, but they were common national sins; and so
fall not within the verge of our Controversy, which is not concerning the
suspending of a scandalous Nation from the Sacrament, for some national sin;
but concerning the suspension of scandalons persons for their personal public
offenses. If it be objected unto me, that the Apostle says, that some of them
were Idolaters, and some of them did commit Fornication, etc. I answer, when he
says some, he says so in reference to the All which had gone before, that is,
all the Israelites who did eat of the Manna and drink of the water of the Rock,
during the 40 years in the wilderness, successively: so that he makes a
distribution of Israel in the wilderness, comparing one passage with another,
not distributing those that lived together at one and the same time. And that
it must needs be so understood I prove from Exo. 32. where we find all the
people falling into Idolatry, so Number. 14. 2. And all the Children of Israel
murmured against Moses and against Aaron. The other two are also called the
sins of the people, and of Israel, and the people were punished, and for one
of them all the Heads of the people commanded to be hanged. Number. 21. 5. 6. and
25. 3. 4. Peradventure every one did not act in each of these sins, but yet
they were national (as we call national) sins, the generality of the
Children of Israel, either acting or partaking therein. In such a case
Augustine thought fit to suspend the exercising of Excommunication for the
sin of drunkenness rather than to excommunicate all Africa.

These are my six answers to Master Prynnes unanswerable argument.


The end of the first Book.
AN APPENDIX To the First Book: Containing an additionall debate concerning
the Jewish Church Government and Censures.
I Have said enough (as I suppose) of a Church Government and Church Censures
distinct from Magistracy and civil Justice among the Jews, whereby the
seeming Old Testament strength of the Erastians, is sufficiently yea abundantly
broken; And now it appears how ill grounded that Assertion is which did
lately come abroad in the Discourse entitled, The difference about
Church Government ended Page 8. Moses was first the sole Ruler, etc. Afterward
when Kings reigned in Israel, King Solomon put Abiathar the high Priest from
his Office, setting up Zadok, and David distinguished the courses of the
Priests, and other godly Kings from time to time ruled in things
Ecclesiastical, and Priests never; till that after their return from the
Babylonish captivity, etc. And no better grounded are the first five questions
in Mr Prynne his Diotrephes catechized, in which he does intimate that there
was no distinct Ecclesiastical jurisdiction among the Jews, and that all
scandalous sins and offenses now pretended to be of Ecclesiastical
cognizance, were by Gods own institution throughout the old Testament,
inquireable, examinable, determinable, and punishable only by the temporal
Magistrates or ^ivill powers, not by any Ecclesiastical persons or Officers.
But when he should prove that there was no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
distinct from the civil, he brings many Scriptures to prove that there was a
civil jurisdiction and civil or temporal punishments in the Old Testament.
How cold the consequence from hence will be, against Church Government, the
intelligent Reader cannot but perceive.

The most of that strength which does militate against these Erastian
Principles, is presented and drawn up in this preceding Book. That which I now
intend is only an additionall debate.

And first of all it is to be observed that the same point of Controversy is
debated S^e A^psiagius Di^p: adv. Anabapt. page 276. Ioh. Cloppenburg. in
Gangraena Theol. Anabapt. part. 3. Disp. 11. cites these words out of a book
of the Anabaptists de Censur. Eccles. Ante adventum Christi tempore veteris
Testamenti, unicum tantum institutum suisse regimen, ac non nisi unicam
punitionem, videlicet d m^gistratu exercendam secundum scriptam lagem a Mose
traditam: qua luendum erat vel in bonis vel in corpore, ^c sustinenda aut Mors,
aut carcer, aut muleta pecuniaria: quae omnia politici (...), non Ecclesiastici
judicii. In opposition hereunto he adds. In Ecclesiis reformatis creditur ex
verbo Dei, fuisse a Deo jam olim in U. T. (...) duplex regimen, duplici officio
gubernationis, qua politicae, qua Ecclesiasticae; distinctum.
with the Anabaptists, they holding as the Erastians do, that in the old
Testament, there was but one kind of government, one kind of jurisdiction, one
kind of punishment, and that it was Civil or Temporal; but an Ecclesiastical
Judicature or censure in the old Testament they deny. Wherein they are
contradicted by those that writ against them.

Secondly, we must distinguish with great caution, and (as they say) cum grano
salis, between that which was ordinary and that which was extraordinary in the
Jewish Government. We can not, from extraordinary cases collect and conclude
that which was the fixed, settled, ordinary rule. The examples which have been
alleged for the administration of Church Government, the purging away of
scandals, the ordering of the Ministry in the old Testament, by the Temporal
Magistrate or civil powers only, and by their own immediate authority, how
truly alleged or how rightly apprehended shall appear by and by: this I say
for the present, diverse of them were extraordinary cases, and are recorded as
presidents for godly Magistrates their duty and authority, D. (...) in Deuteronomy.
17. Judicia ecclesiastica ad Ecclesiam pertinent secundum verbum Dei.
Magistratus nihil ominus est custos utriusque Tabulae, and ces^antibus
Sacerdotibus vel degenerantibus, debet reformare secundum legem.
not in a reformed and constituted Church, but in a Church which is full of
disorders, and wholly out of course, needing reformation. So that the Erastian
Arguments drawn from those examples, for investing the Magistrate with the
whole and sole power of Government and jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical
affairs, are no whit better than the Popish and Prelaticall Arguments, for the
lawfulness of the civil power and places of Clergymen (as they called them)
drawn from some extraordinary examples of Aaron his joining with Moses, and
Eleazer with Joshua, in civil business of greatest consequence; of the
administration and Government of the Commonwealth by Eli the Priest, and by
Samuel the Prophet; of the anointing of Iehu to be King by Elisha; of the
killing of Athaliah, and the making of Ioash King by the authority of Iebojada
the Priest; of the withstanding and thrusting out of King Uzziah, by fourscore
valiant men of the Priests, and such like cases. Master Prynne himself in his
Diotrephes catechized page 4. notes that Ezra the Priest received a special
commission from Artaxerxes, to set Magistrates and Judges which might judge all
the people Ezra 7. 11, 25. from all which it appears that as Priests did
extraordinary some things which ordinarily belonged to Magistracy, so
Magistrates did extraordinarily that which ordinarily did not belong to their
administration. I conclude this point with a passage in the second book of the
Discipline of the Church of Scotland Chap. 10. And although Kings and Princes
that be godly, sometimes by their own authority, when the Church is corrupted,
and all things out of order, place Ministers, and restore the true service of
the Lord, after the example of some godly Kings of Judah and diverse godly
Emperors and Kings also in the light of the new Testament: yet where the
Ministry of the Church is once lawfully constituted, and they that are placed
do their Office faithfully, all godly Princes and Magistrates ought to bear
and obey their voice, and reverence the Majesty of the Son of God speaking in
them.

In the third place, let us take a particular survey of such Objections, from
which the Erastians do conclude that the power of Church-gov^rnment in the old
Testament was only in the hand of the Magistrate.

And first concerning Moses, it is objected that he being the supreme
Magistrate did give Laws and Ordinances for ordering the Church in things
pertaining to God.

Answ. This he did as a Prophet from the mouth of the Lord, yea as a type of
Jesus Christ the great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. 18. not as civil Magistrate.

2. Object. We read not of an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin adjoined with Moses,
but only of a civil Sanhedrin Number. 11. Neither does the Talmud mention any
supreme Sanhedrin but one.

Answ. 1. If those 70 Elders, Number. 11. be understood only of the civil
Sanhedrin, (which some do not admit, though for my part I do not gainsay it)
yet we read of the con^itution of another Sanhedrin or Assembly of 70 before
them. Which I have before proved from Exodus 24. 1.

2. And if there had been no dis^inct Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin in Moses his
time, yet by the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. when the people came into the Land of promise,
they were to have two distinct Courts in the place which the Lord should
choose. Of which also before. And whereas Mr Prynne in his Diotrephes
catechized quaest. 2. intimates, that by the Law Deuteronomy. 17. the Priests were
only ^oyntly and together with the temporal Judges, to resolve hard civil
cases or controversies: this sense can neither agree with the dis^unction in
the Text verse 12. the man that will not hearken unto the Priest, or unto the
Judge: nor yet with the received interpretation of those words between stroke
and stroke, that is, between leprosy and leprosy, the decision whereof, is no
where in Scripture found to be either committed unto or assumed by the civil
Judge. As for the Talmud, that of Babylon was not begun to be compiled before
the year of (...) 367, nor finished before the year of Christ 500. The
Jerusalem Talmud can pretend to no greater antiquity than the year of Christ
230. So that both were collected long after the dissolution of the Sanhedrin
and government of the Jews. No marvel therefore, if these declining times did
wear out the memory of some part of their former government.

3. Object. The King was by Gods appointment entrusted with the custody of the
book of the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 2 King. 11. 12.

Answ. 1. The principal charge of the custody of the Law was committed to the
Priests and Levites, Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 24, 25 26. Of the King it is only said Deuteronomy.
17. 18. That he shall write him a copy of this law in a Book, out of that
which is before the Priests and Levites.

2. I heartily yield that a lawful Magistrate, whether Christian or Heathen,
ought to be a keeper or guardian of both Tables, and as Gods V^cegerent has
authority to punish heinous sins against either Table, by civil or corporal
punishments which proves nothing against a (...) Church Government for keeping
pure the Ordinances of Christ.

4. Object. King David did appoint the Offices of the Levites and divided their
courses 1 Chr^. 23. So likewise did Solomon appoint the courses and charges of
the Priests, Levites and Porters in the Temple.

Answ. David did not this thing as a King, but as a Prophet, 2 (...). 8. 14.
For so bad David the man of God commanded; the same thing being also commanded
by other Prophets of the Lord, 2 hro. 29. 25. According to the commandment of
David, and of G^d the Kings seer, and Nathan the Prophet, for so was the
commandment of the Lord by his Prophets. Which clears also Solomon's part,
for (beside that himself also was a Prophet) he received from David the man of
God, a pattern of that which he was to do in the work of the house of the
Lord, and directions concerning the courses of the Levites, 1 Chro. 28. 11, 12,
13. 2 Chro. 8. 14.

5 Object. King Solomon deposed Abiathar from his Priesthood, and did put (...)
in his place.

Answ. Abiathar was guilty of high treason for assis^ing and ayding Adonijah,
against Solomon, whom not only his father David but God himself had designed
to the Crown. So that the crime was of civil cognizance, and Abiathar
deserved to die for it. That which Solomon did was an (...), a moderation of
the punishment, as Strigelius calls it; when Solomon might justly have put him
to death, he only banisheth him from Jerusalem to Anathoth, there to enjoy
his own inheritance, to live a private life, and no more to intermeddle in
State affairs. Wherefore this example does belong to the case of a capital
crime committed by a Minister, but not to the case of scandal or
mal-administration in his Ministry.

2. Neither did Solomon directly or intentionally put Abiathar from the
Priesthood for that offense, but by consequence it followed upon his banishment
from Jerusalem, the place where the high Priest was to exercise his calling, 1
King. 2. 27. So (that is, in respect of banishment from Jerusalem mentioned in
the verse immediately preceding) Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest
unto the Lord. A Minister now banished is not thereby thrust out from all
exercise of his Ministry, for he may exercise it in another place; but
Abiathar being thrust out from Jerusalem was eo ipso thrust from the calling
of the high Priest, which was necessarily to be exercised in that place.

3. Solomon being a Prophet, who knows what warrants he had more then ordinary
for that which he did to Abiathar? that it was not without an extrordinary
divine instinct, some collect from the next words; that he (Solomon) might
fulfill the word of the Lord which he spoke cencerning the house of Eli in
Shilo.

4. As for the investing of Zadok with the place and authority of the high
Priest, it does not prove that the Magistrate has a constitutive power to make
or authorize Church officers: for Zadok had been formerly chosen by the
congregation of Israel, and anointed to be high Priest, 1 Chro. 29. 22. yea he
did fall to the place Iure divino: for the high Priesthood was given to Eleazar
the eldest son of Aaron, and was to remain in the family of Eleazar, from
whom Zadok had lineally descended: Whereas Abiathar was not of the family of
Eleazar, but of the family of I^hamar.

6. Object. Hezekiah did apply his regal power to the reformation of the
Levites and to the purging of the Temple, 2 Chr. 29. 5. and did also appoint
the courses of the Priests and Levites every man according to his service, 2
Chro. 31. So likewise did King Josiah, 2 Chro. 35.

Answ. Hezekiah in exhorting the Levites to sanctify themselves and to cleanse
the Temple, does require no other thing than the Law of God did require, Number.
8. 6. 11. 15. and 18. 32. which Hezekiah himself points at, 2 Chro. 29. 11.
And why should not the Magistrate command Ministers to do the duties of their
calling according to the Word of God? As for his appointing of the courses of
the P^iests and Levites, he did nothing therein, but what the Lord had
commanded by his Prophets, 2 Chro. 29. 25. The like I answer concerning King
Josiah, for it is recorded, that what he did, was after the writing of David
and Solomon, 2 Chro. 35. 4. and according to the Commandment of David and
Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun, the Kings seer, Verse 15. as it is written in
the book of Moses, v. 12.

7. Object. King Ioash while he yet did right in the days of Iebojada the
Priest, sent the Priests and Levites to gather from all Israel, a collection
for repairing the house of the Lord, and when they dealt negligently in this
business he discharged them to receive any more money so collected.

Ans. Joash did impose no other collections, but those quae divino jure
debebantur, which were due by divine right, says Wolphius, in 2 Kings 12. The
thing was expressly commanded in the Law of Moses, compare 2 Chro. 24. 6. Exo.
30, 12, 13, 14. As for the Kings prohibition afterward laid upon the Priests,
1. the Priests had still neglected the work till the three and twentieth year
of his reign was come, 2. The Priests themselves consented to receive no more
money, 3. The high Priest had still a chief hand in the managing of that
business, in which also the Priests that kept the door had an interest. All
which is plain from 2 Kings 12. 6. 8, 9, 10. And beside all this, it was a
money matter, concerning the hyring and paying of workmen, and so did belong
to (...), to the extrinsecall, not to the intrinsecall things of the Church.

8. Object. The Kings of the Jews have purged the Land from Idolatry and
Superstition, have broken down Altars, cut down Groves, destroyed high places,
and such like Idolatrous Monuments.

Ans. This was nothing but what was commanded in the Law of Moses, whereunto
also the secular coercivepower was necessary.

Let it be remembled concerning those godly reforming Kings of (...) 1. The
case was extraordinary, no matter of ordinary Government. 2 Their reformation
was Iure divino. The Law of God was the rule, and Ius Divinum was not then
startled at, but embraced. 3. Sometime also the reformation was not without an
assembly of the Prophets, Priests and Elders, as 2 Kings 23. 1.

9. Object. Mr. Prynne in his Diotrephes Catechized, Quest. 2. (...) another
objection from 2 Chr. 19. asking, whether it be not clearly meant, that as King
Josiah himself (he should have said Iehoshaphat) did by his own regal
authority, appoint Judges in the Land and in Jerusalem, in the preceding 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. and 10. Verses, to d^termine all controversies and punish all offenses
whatsoever, acco^ding to the Laws of God and that Kingdom, so he did by the
self same regal authority appoint Amariah then chief Priest, over the
Priests and Levites only. (employed in the word you, not over the people of the
Land) in all matters of the Lord, that is, to Order, direct the Priests and
Levites, under him in their several courses, and all matters whatsoever
concerning the Worship, etc.

Ans. 1. Mr. Prynne will never prove from that Text, That Iehoshaphat by his
regal authority did appoint, or set Amariah the chief Priest to be over the
rest; The English translators express the sense by interlacing the word is
Verse 11. And behold Amariah the chief Priest is over you in all matters of
the Lord. 2. To restrict the word you to the Priests and Levites only, is an
intolerable wresting of the Text; for all these relatives, Verse 9, 10, 11.
them, ye, you, must needs repeat the antecedent Verse 8. and so relate to the
chief of the Fathers of Israel, as well as to the Priests and Levites. So that
these words, Amariah the chief Priest is over you, are spoken to the
Sanhedrin; and the plain meaning is, that Amariah the chief Priest was at
that time the Nasi, or princeps Senatus, the Prince or chief Ruler of the
Senate, as Grotius expounds it. 3. That the high Priest was a Ruler of the
People, as well as of the Priests and Levites, is manifest from, Acts 23. 5.
where Paul applies to the high Priest, that Law, Thou shall not speak evil
of the Ruler of thy people. 4. Wherefore to retort the Objection, Mr. Prynne
does here acknowledge upon the matter two distinct Governments to have been at
that time, one civil, another Ecclesiastical: distinct I say both
objectively, and subjectively: objectively, for he expounds the Lords matters
to be meant of the sacrifices and other services in the Temple, The Kings
matters he takes to be the Kings Househould, Lands, Revenues: Subjectively
also, for he yields upon the matter both Amariah and Zebadiah to have had a
certain ruling or governing power in ordering and directing these over whom
they were set, which well agrees both with the version of the 70 (giving the
name of (...) both to the one and to the other) and with the Original; for he
that is over the Sanhedrin it self must needs be a Ruler.

10. Object. The causes of Leprosy, Lev. 13. and 14. and jealousy Number. 5. are
the only cases wherein the Priests were appointed to be as Judges in the Old
Testament. So Mr. Prynne in his Diotrephes catechized quest. 3.

Ans. 1. If the Priests were Judges in these cases, then (so far at least)
there was a judging, decisive, binding sentence of the Priests, distinct from
and not subordinate unto the civil Magistracy. 2. But that these two were the
only cases wherein the Priests were appointed to be as Judges, is easily
confuted, being an assertion contrary to diverse Texts of Scripture, as first
Deuteronomy. 21. 5. in the trial of secret murder the Law appoints thus: And the
Priests the sons of Levi shall come near, etc. and by their word shall every
controversy and every stroke be tried, that is, every controversy which was to
be ended by purgations or purifications, Oaths or confession, as Pelargus
notes upon the place. There is also a general comprehensive expression
concerning the Priests their judging and deciding of controversies
forensically, Ezech. 44. 24. And in controversy they shall stand in judgment,
and they shall judge it according to my judgments. Likewise Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9,
12. the Priest as well as the Judge has authority to give forth a binding
decree concerning hard matters, brought from inferior Courts to Jerusalem.
Again 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. the Porters of the Temple (that is, the Priests that
kept the door as they are designed 2 Kings 12. 9. of whom also it is said,
that I^hojadah the high Priest, appointed Officers over the house of the Lord,
2 Kings 11. 18. which Text Grotius following Josephus does parallel wi^h 2
Chro. 23. 19.) had this charge, that none which was unclean in any thing should
enter in.

11. Object. If the Priests power of judging reached further than the cases of
Leprosy, and Jealousy, the most was to judge of such as were unclean in any
thing, and that according to their sentence the unclean were to be excluded.

Ans. Not to insist now upon these Texts, Deuteronomy. 17. 9. 12. and 21. 5. Ez^. 44.
24. which hold forth the juridicall power of the Priests more generally and
comprehensively, without restricting it to cases of clean and unclean only;
nor yet to repeat diverse other answers before given, in answer to Erastus and
M. Prynne, concerning legal and moral uncleanness; I shall here only give
this one answer out of that Text 2 Chro. 23. 19. none which was unclean in any
thing. What cogent argument can now restrict this Text concerning the exclusion
of unclean persons from the Temple, to such only who were legally or
ceremonially unclean? If we should suppose and grant that it is meant only of
the legal uncleanness, yet both by Analogy and a fortiori, that Text
affoordeth an argument against the Erastians, and I have accordingly made use
of it before; Yet nevertheless I believe it will puzle them to prove that this
Text does not comprehend those also that were morally unclean, that is,
scandalous profane persons. For my part I do believe that it is meant of
keeping back those that were morally unclean, as well as those that were
ceremonially such. And my reasons are these, 1. The Text says generally, none
which was unclean in any thing, or as the 70 have it, (...), such as were
unclean in every or any word, or (if you will) against any word, that is,
against any Commandment of the Law, 2. Because impiety, profannesse, and
wickedness has the name of uncleanness, even in the old Testament; and such
as commit sin and ungodliness are called unclean, and are said to defile
themselves, as well as those that were legally unclean. I shall not need to
expound, Lev. 5. 3. if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever
uncleanness it be that a man shall be defiled withal; as if it were meant of
fellowship with scandalous sinners; which is Origens Interpretation, Hom. 3. in
Levit. who also takes a commentary to that Text from, 1 Cor. 5. 11. It will
have more weight in it, to observe Targum Onkel^s, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. Where the Law
concerning Mamzer a bastard or whoores son, is thus explained, A bastard shall
not be clean that he may enter into the Congregation of the Lord: even unto the
tenth Generation his sons shall not be clean that they may enter into the
Congregation of the Lord. But I will give yet surer warrants for what I say.
Job. 36. 14. their life is among the unclean, that is, (as Pagnin following
the Chaldee paraphrase expresses it) inter scortatores; Hierome, inter
effaeminatos: others, inter impudicos; the same word is rendered Sodomites, 1
Kings 14. 24. It comes from (...) which (...) or per Antiphrasin signifies
to be impure or unclean, and it is used of the legal uncleanness, Deuteronomy. 22.
9. lest the fruit of thy Vineyard be defiled. So Hag. 2. 13, 14. both he that
touched a dead body, and he that trespassed against the moral Law, is (...)
unclean; for after the resolution concerning that which was legally unclean,
it is added, So is this people, and so is this nation before me says the Lord,
and so is every w^rke of their hands, and that which they offer there is
unclean. The same name is given to an ungodly person, Eccle. 9. 2. where the
godly person is called the clean, the notorious scandalous profane person is
called the unclean. So wickedness is frequently called uncleanness as, Ezra.
9. 11. Ezec. 36. 25. Zech. 13. 1. I will here add a Testimony of Maimonides in
More Nevochim part 3. cap. 47. Hence also the transgression of the Commandment
is called uncleanness or pollution, and it is said of the principal and
fundamental Commandments, of Idolatry, of uncovering the nakedness, of the
shedding of blood. Of Idolatry it is said Lev. 20. 3^
: Because he has given of his seed unto Molech, to defile my Sanctuary, and to
profane my holy Name. Of the uncovering of the nakedness; Lev. 18. 24*
defile not your selves in any of these things. Of the shedding of blood, Number.
35. 33, 34.
defile not therefore the Land wherein ye dwell. Wherefore this word
uncleanness or defilement is said of three sorts of things, first of a man's
qualities and of his transgressions of the Commandments, whether theoricall or
practical (that is, which concern either Doctrine, or his conversation.)
Secondly of external filthiness and defilements, etc. Thirdly, of these
imaginary things, that is, the touching or carrying upon the shoulders some
unclean thing, etc. Add hereunto the observation of Drusius de tribus sect.
Judaeor. lib. 2. number. 82. 83. 84. The Pharisees did account sinners and
profane persons to be unclean, and thought themselves polluted by the company
of such persons, for which reason also they used to wash when they came from
the mercate. Though there was a superstition in this Ceremony, yet the opinion
that profane persons are unclean persons, and to be avoided for uncleanness,
had come from the purest antiquities of the Jews, even from Moses and the
Prophets. Since therefore both in the old Testament phrase, and in the usual
language of the Jews themselves, a scandalous profane person was called an
unclean person, it is to me more then probable that where I read, none which
was unclean in any thing should enter in it is meant of those that were
morally unclean by a scandalous wicked conversation, no less yea much more
than of those that were only ceremonially unclean. 3. Especially considering
that the Sanctuary was profaned and polluted by the moral uncleanness of
sin, and by profane persons their entering into it, as is manifest from Lev.
20. 3. Eze. 23. 39. How can it then be imagined that those Priests whose charge
it was to keep back those that were unclean in any thing, would admit and
receive such as were not only unclean persons in the language of Scripture and
of the Jews themselves, but were also by express Scriptures declared to be
defilers or polluters of the Sanctuary? 4. It is said of the high Priest, Lev
16. 16. and he shall make atonement for the holy place, because of the
uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions in
all their sins: or from their uncleanness and from their transgressions, as
the Chaldee and the LXX have it: the sense is the same: and it shows that the
holy place was made unclean by the transgressions and sins of the children
of Israel: which uncleanness of transgression, if it were visible, publik and
notorious, then the Priests had failed in admitting such to the holy place.

12. Object. Throughout the old Testament we read only of temporal
punishments, as burning, hanging, stoning, fines, stripes, and the like, but
never of Excommunication or any Church censure. Neither did the Jews know the
distinction of Laws Ecclesiastical and Laws civil, causes Ecclesiastical
and causes civil, for the Church of the Jews was their CommonWealth, and
their Commonwealth was their Church, and the Government of Church and State
among them was one and the same. Their civil Lawyers were also Expositors or
Doctors of the Law of God.

Ans. That in the Jewish Church, there was an Ecclesiastical censure or
punishment distinct from the civil, I have proved in this preceding book,
both from Scripture and from the Jewish antiquities. And if there were no more
but the sequestration or separation from the Temple or from the passover, for
such legal uncleanness as did not separat a man from his house, nor from all
company of men, even that alone proves a kind of censure distinct from all
civil punishment: neither did it belong to the Magistrate or civil Judge, but
to the Priests to examine, judge, and determine concerning cleanness or
uncleanness, and consequently concerning admission to or separation from the
Temple, Passover, and sacrifices.

That the Jewish Church and the Jewish State were formally distinct, see before
Chap. 2. Where it has been observed that some Proselytes had the full
privileges of the Jewish Church, though none of them had the full privileges
of the Jewish commonwealth. The like I have read of the Spaniards, who admit
the Moors or inhabitants of Morisco to turn Christians, and receive them into
Ecclesiastical Membership and Communion, but by no means into their civil
liberties. That the causes of Excommunication among them were looked upon as
scandalls, and not as civil in^uries, see Chap. 4. This only I add that More
Nevochim part. 2. Chap. 40. does distinguish civil Laws from sacred Laws,
even among the people of God, making the scope of the civil Laws to be the
good safety and prosperity of the Commonwealth; the Sacred or Divine Laws to
concern properly Religion and men's souls. He that will compare the civil
Laws and panall Statutes of the Jews mentioned in Baba Kama, with their
ceremonial Laws concerning the holy Ordinances of God, and who should have
communion therein, who not, cannot but look upon their Church and (...) Laws,
as formally distinct from their State and civil Laws. Again, he that will
consider who were the viri synagogae magnae, the men of the great synagogue,
and what their power and acts were, (as Dr. Buxtorf describes the same in his
Tyberi^t Cap. 10, 11.) and their authoritative determinations, concerning the
right writing, reading, and expounding of the holy Scripture, etc. must needs
acknowledge that it was Senatus ecclesiasticus magnus (as Buxtorf calls it) and
that such power and acts were incompetent to the civil Magistrate. As for
their Doctors of Law and Scribes, they were of the sons of Aaron, yet some way
diversified in their administrations. Scaliger in elench. Trihaeres. Nic.
Serar. cap. 11. distinguishes between the (...) and the (...), Quum (...)
legem interpretarentur, quod proprium (...) vero formulas juris praescriberent,
and actiones civiles docerent, and forensia magis tractarent.
that the former were the wisemen or chief of the Scribes who did interpret the
Law, and declare the sense of it; the latter did attend civil forensicall
matters. Drusius de tribus sect. Jud. lib. 2. cap. 13. notes from Luke. 11.
45. 46. that there was some distinction between the (...) and the (...),
between the Scribes and the Lawyers, for when Christ had spoken of the Scribes
and Pharisees, then answered one of the Lawyers and said unto him, Master, thus
saying thou reproachest us also. And he said, Woe unto you also ye Lawyers: This
will be more plain by that other distinction observed by Lud. de dieu. in Mat.
22. 35. and diverse others, between (...), and (...), between the Scribes of
the Law of God who did interpret the Law, such as Ezra the Priest; and the
Scribes of the people who were Actuarii publici, public Notaries or Clerks.
Whence it appears that the Offices of Scribes and Lawyers (although the
persons themselves were of the Tribe of Levi) were so ordered, as that civil
and sacred affairs might not be confounded. Yea, the Scriveners or Notaries
were of two sorts; for besides those which did attend civil Courts of Justice,
etc. There was a chief Scribe who waited upon the King and wrote unto him a
copy of the Book of the Law, according to that Deuteronomy. 17. 18. Such a Scribe was
Sheva, 2 Samuel 20. 25. Shaphan 2 Kings 22. 3. 8. Baruch Jer. 36. Such a Scribe
had Joash 2 Kings 12. 10. There were diverse other Scribes for the house of the
Lord and for the people, whose office it was to write and to read the Law, 1
Chro. 2. 55, Psalm. 45. 1. Ier. 8. 8.

13. Object. But neither in the old Testament nor in the Talmudists can there
be found any Ecclesiastical Excommunication properly so called.

Answ. I deny both, yea I have disproved both. Moreover, as touching the
Excommunication used in the Jewish Church I shall add here these following
Testimonies of M^imonides. In libro (...) Tract. Talmud Torah Cap. 6. sect. 10.
He that revileth a wiseman, though after his death, shall be excommunicated by
the Sanhedrin, by whom also after repentance he shall be absolved. Ib. sect.
11. He who is excommunicated in his own Town, ought also to be esteemed in all
other Cities and Towns, as a person excommunicated. Answerable hereunto were
the ancient Canons, which did appoint that a person excommunicated in his own
Church should not be received to communion in another Church. The 24. causes of
excommunication (above mentioned) he there reckons forth from sect. 13. to
the end of that Chapter. Again, Cap. 7. sect. 2. What is the manner of a simple
excommunication or Niddui? He that does excommunicate says: Let that person N.
be in (or under) an excommunication or separation. If the person excommunicated
be present, they who do excommunicate say unto him, Let this person N. be
separated or excommunicated. And when Cherem or the greater excommunication is
inflicted, what is the manner? They say, Let N. be devoted and accursed, let an
execration, adjuration and separation be upon him. But how do they loose the
person excommunicated, and how do they free him from the separation or the
curse? they say, Be thou loosed, be thou pardoned. If the guilty party be
absent, they say. Let N. be loosed, and let him be pardoned. In the same
Chapter sect. 8. Neither is there any certain space of time predetermined,
before which the bond of the excommunication inflicted may not be loosed. For
immediately and at the same time when excommunication is inflicted, it may be
loosed if the guilty party do immediately repent, and come to himself. Which
does further set forth the great difference between the nature and scope of
Excommunication, and the nature and scope of corporal or civil punishments.
For how soon soever an excommunicat person gives good signs of true
repentance, he is to be loosed from the bond of excommunication. But he that is
punished in his body or estate for any crime, is not freed from the punishment,
because he is known to be penitent; The repentance of a criminal person is no
supersedeas to civil Justice. Thereafter Maimonides proceeds thus. Yet if it
seem good to the Sanhedrin that any man shall be left in the state of
excommunication, for how many years shall be be left in excommunication? The
Sanhedrin will determine the number of years and space of time, according to
the haynousnesse of the trespass. So likewise if the Sanhedrin will, it may
devote and subject to a curse, first the party himself who is guilty of the
crime, and then also every other person whosoever eats or drinks with him,
or sits near unto him unless at four cubits distance: that so by this
means the heavier correction may fall upon the sinner, and there may be as it
were a hedge put about the law, which may restrain wicked men from
transgressing it. Whence observe 1. It was from the Jewish Church, that the
ancient Councels of the Christian Church, took a pattern for determining and
fixing a certain number of years to the separation of some heinous offenders
from the Sacrament, and sometimes from other Ordinances also. Though I do not
approve this thing, either in the Jewish or Christian Church; for at what time
soever a scandalous sinner does give evident signs of repentance, the Church
ought to receive him again into her bosom and fellowship. 2. From the Jewish
Church also was the pattern taken, for that ancient Discipline in the
Christian Church, that he who keeps company and communion with an
excommunicated person, should fall under the same censure of excommunication.
Which thing must be well explained and qualified before it can be approved. 3.
Compare also this passage of Maimonides with 1 Cor. 5. 11. with such a one no
not to eat, 2 These. 3. 14. have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.
Which Texts do fitly answer to that which the Hebrew writers say of a person
excommunicated. 4. The excommunication of an offender among the Jews, was
intended not only for the offenders humiliation and amendment, but for an
ensample to others, that they might hear and fear and do no more any such
thing: it was therefore a public and exemplary censure. And so much of Sect.
8.

In the 9. and 10. Sections Maimonides shows us, that though a wise man was
allowed to prosecute unto the sentence of excommunication one that did revile
or calumniat him, yet it was more praiseworthy and more agreeable to the
example of the holy men of God to pass in silence and to endure patiently such
injuries. Then follows Sect. 11. These things which have been said, are to be
understood of such reproaches and contumelies as are clandestine. For if
railers do put a public infamy upon a wise man, it is not lawful to him to
use indulgence or to neglect his honor: and if he shall pardon (as to the
punishment) him who has hurt his fame, he himself is to be punished, because
that is a contempt of the law. He shall therefore avenge the contumely, and not
suffer himself to be satisfied, before the guilty party has craved merey.
Here is the true object, or (if you will) the procuring and meritorious cause
of Excommunication, viz. not a private personal or civil injury, which a man
may pass by or pardon if he will, but a scandalous sin the scandal whereof
must be removed and healed, by some Testimony or Declaration of the sinners
repentance, otherwise he must fall under the censure and public shame.

These Testimonies of Maimonides, and the observations made thereupon, beside
all that has been said in this preceding Book, will make it manifest that the
Spiritual censure of excommunication was translated and taken from the Jewish
Church into the Christian Church.

Furthermore, beside all the Scriptural proofs already brought, I shall desire
another Text, Nehem. 13. 1, 3. to be well weighed. After the reading of the law
( Deuteronomy. 23. 3.) that the Amm^nite and the Moabite should not come into the
congregation of God for ever, it came to pass, says the Text, when they heard
the law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude. I conceive
that this separation was a casting out of the Church of Israel, and is not
meant here of a civil separation from honors and privileges, nor yet only
in reference to the dissolution of unlawful marriages. I understand also by
the prohibition of entering into the congregation of the Lord Deuteronomy. 23. 1, 2, 3.
that such were not to be received into Church communion. Ostendit autem qui a
caetibus fidelium debeant excludi. He shows who ought to be excluded from the
assemblies of the faithful, says Aretius upon Deuteronomy. 23. 1. Hic dicitur
Ecclesia Dei atrium mundorum, quod non debebant tales ingredi. Here that Court
of the Temple which was appointed only for the clean, is called the
Congregation of God, whereunto such persons ought not to enter, says Hugo
Cardinalis upon the same place. Audita lege de duabus inimicis gentibus
anathematizandis, etc. Having heard the law concerning the two hostile Nations,
to be anathematized or accursed, says Beda on Nehem. 13. thereupon they
separated the mixed multitude. Pelargus on Deuteronomy. 23. cites Theodoret,
Procpius, and Rabanus, besides the Canonills, for this sense, that the not
entering into the Congregation of the Lord, is meant of refusing Ecclesiastical
not civil privileges. I know that diverse others understand Deuteronomy. 23. 1, 2, 3.
of not admitting unto, and Nehem. 13. 3. of separating from marriages with the
Jews, and civil dignities or places of Magistrates or Rulers in that
Commonwealth, such a one shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord,
that is, shall not be received into the Assembly or Court of Judges. But there
are some reasons which diswade me from this and incline me to the other
interpretation.

First, the Law Deuteronomy. 23. being read to the people Nebem. 13. 3. upon the
hearing of that law they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude. It is
not to be imagined that all this mixed multitude was married to Jews,
muchlesse that they were all Magistrates, Rulers, or members of Courts and
Judicatures in Israel. But by the mixed multitude are meant all such as were in
Israel but not of Israel, or such as conversed and dwelt among the Jews and
had civil fellowship with them, but had no part nor portion (by right) in
Church Membership and Communion: in which sense also the mixed multitude is
mentioned Exodus 12. 38. Number. 11. 4. Secondly, that this separation from Israel
is to be understood in a spiritual and ecclesiastical sense, it appears by
the instance and application immediately added Neb. 13. 4. to verse. 10. And
before this, that is, before this separation, Eliashih the Priest being allied
unto Tobiah had prepared for him a chamber in the Courts of the house of God,
but now when the separation of the mixed multitude was made; Nehemiah did east
out the stuff of Tobiah, and commanded to cleanse the chambers of the Temple
which had been defiled by Tobiah. Behold an instance of the separation in
reference to the Temple or holy place, not to any civil Court. Thirdly, the
Chaldee paraphrase helps me Deuteronomy. 23. 1, 2, 3. for instead of these words,
shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord, Onkelos reads shall not be
clean to enter into the congregation of the Lord; having respect to the law
which did forbid unclean persons to enter into the Temple. Ita isti mundi
reputabantur; so likewise were these (Ammonites, Moabites, bastards, etc.)
esteemed as unclean, says Tostatus in Deuteronomy. 23. quaest. 1. Fourthly, Edomites
and Egytians might enter into the congregregation of the Lord in the third
generation Deuteronomy. 22. 7, 8. Was the meaning, that Edomites and Egyptians should
in the third generation marry with the Jews, or be Magistrates in Israel,
members of the Sanhedrin, or Judges? He that will think so, will hardly prove
that it was so. To me it is not at all probable, that God would allow his
people either to marry with the Edomites and Egyptians, or to prefer them to be
Magistrates and Judges in Israel, no not in the third generation. But it is
very probable, that when an Edomite or Egyptian came to dwell in the Land of
Israel, as a proselyte indweller, ob erving the seven precepts given to the
sons of Noah, the children of that Egyptian or Edomite in the third
generation, mi^ht enter into the congregation of the Lord, that is, might upon
their desire and submission to the whole law of Moses, be received as
proselytes of righteousness or of the Covenant, and so free to come to the
Court of Israel, and in all Church relations to be as one of the Israelites
themselves. Fifthly, Philo the Jew lib. de victimas offerentibus toward the
end, tells us that their Law did prohibit all unworthy persons from their sacred
Assemblies, (...). From the same sacred Assemblies of the Church, he says that
their law did also exclude Eunuohs, and bastards, or such as were borne (...)
(the word used by the LXX in Deuteronomy. 23. 2.) where Philo most certainly has
respect to that Law, Deuteronomy. 23. understanding by the congregation of the Lord in
that pla^e, neither a civil Court nor liberty of marriage, but the sacred or
Church Assembly.
There are but two objections which I find brought against that which I have
been now proving. One is from Exodus 12. 48. a law which admits strangers to
the Church and Passover of the Jews, provided they were willing to be
circumcised. The other objection is from the example of Ruth the Moabitesse,
who was a member of the Church of Israel.

To the first I answer, that Exodus 12. 48. will not prove that every stranger
who desired to be circumcised, and to eat the Passover, was to be immediately
admitted upon that desire, without any more ado: only it proves that before
any stranger should eat of the Passover, he must first be circumcised. A
stranger might not be Gertsedek, a proselyte of righteousness, when he
pleased, but he was first to be so and so qualified. Besides this, it may be
justly doubted whether Deuteronomy. 23. 3. be not an exception from the rule Exodus 12.
48. for all strangers were not to be alike soon and readily received to be
proselytes of righteousness: but a great difference there was between those
Nations which God had expressly and particularly devoted and accursed, and
others not so accursed.

To the other objection concerning Ruth, Rabanus cited by Pelargus on Deuteronomy. 23.
answers that the tenth generation of the Moabites was past, before Ruth did
enter into the congregation of the Lord. And if it had not, yet the case was
extraordinary, and one Swallow makes not Summer.

14. Object. But is there any pattern or president in the Jewish Church, for
keeping back scandalous sinners from the Sacrament?

Ans. There is; for I have proved a keeping back of notorious sinners both from
the Passover, and from the Temple it self which had a Sacramental
signification and was a Type of Christ and Communion with him. It is worthy of
observation that by the Chaldee paraphrase, Exodus 12. 43. Any Israelite who was
(...) an apostate, might not eat of the Passover. Again, verse 48. (...) and
omnis prophanus. So the Latin Interpreter of Onkelos: And no profane person
shall eat of it. The word is used not only of a Heathen, but of any profane
person, as Prove. 2. 16. where the Chaldee expresses the whorish woman (though
a Jewesse) by the name of (...). It comes from (...) to be profaned, e
sancto prophanum fieri. Surely Onkelos had not thus paraphrased upon Exodus 12.
if it had not been the Law of the Jews, that notorious profane persons should
be kept back from the Passover.

The second Book OF THE CHRISTIAN Church-Goverment.
CHAP. I. Of the Rise, Growth, Decay, and Reviving of Erastianisme.
DIverse Learned men have (to very good purpose) discovered the origination,
occasion, first authors, fomenters, rise and growth of Errors, both Popish, and
others: I shall after their example make known briefly, what I find concerning
the rise and growth the planting and watering of the Erastian Error, I cannot
say of it, that it is honest is parentibus natus, it is not borne and descended
of honest parents. The Father of it is the old Serpent, who finding his Kingdom
very much impaired, weakened and resisted by the vigor of the true
Ecclesiastical discipline, which separateth between the precious and the vile,
the holy and profane; and so contributeth much to the shaming away of the
unfruitful works of darkness; thereupon he has cunningly gone about to draw
men, first into a jealousy, and then into a dislike of the Ecclesiastical
discipline, by Gods mercy restored in the Reformed Churches. The Mother of it,
is the enmity of nature against the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; which he, as
Mediator, does exercise in the government of the Church: Which enmity is
naturally in all men's hearts, but is unmortified and strongly prevalent in
some, who have said in their hearts, We will not have this man to reign over
us. Luke 19. Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from
us. Psalm. 2. 3. The Midwife which brought this unhappy brood into the light of
the world, was Thomas Erastus Doctor of Medicine at Heidelberg of whom I shall
say no more, then what is apparent by his own Preface to the Reader, namely,
that as he was once of opinion, that excommunication is commanded in the Word
of God, so he came off to the contrary opinion, not without a male-contented
humor, and a resentment of some things which he looked upon as provocations and
personal reflections, though its like enough they were not really such, but in
his apprehensions they were. One of these was a public dispute at Heydelberg
in the year 1568. upon certain Theses concerning the necessity of Church
Government, and the power of Presbyteries to excommunicate: Which Theses were
exhibited by M. George Withers an Englishman, who left England because of the
Ceremonies, and was at that time made Doctor of Divinity at Heydelberg. And the
learned dispute had thereupon, you may find epitomized (as it was taken the day
following from the mouth of Dr. Vrsinus) in the close of the second part of Dr.
Pareus his explication of the Heidelberg Catechism.

The Erastian error being borne, the breasts which gave it suck were
profaneness and self-interest. The sons of Belial were very much for it,
expecting that the eye of the civil Magistrate shall not be so vigilant over
them, nor his hand so much against them for a scandalous and dissolute
conversation, as Church Discipline would be. Germanorum bibere est vivere, in
practice as well as in pronunciation. What great marvel if many among them (for
I do not speak of all) did comply with the Erastian Tenent? And it is as little
to be marvelled at, if those, whether Magistrates, Lawyers, or others, who
conceived themselves to be so far losers, as Ecclesiastical Courts were
interested in Government, and to be greater gainers by the abolition of the
Ecclesiastical interest in government; were by assed that way: Both these you
may find among the causes (mentioned by Aretius (...). probl. loc. 133.) for
which there was so much un willingness to admit the discipline of
Excomunication. Magistratus jugum non admittuxt, timent honoribus, licentiam
amant, etc. The Magistrates do not admit a yoke, are jealous of their honors,
love licentiousness. Vulgus quoque and plebs dissolutior: major pars
corruptissima est, etc. The Communaltic also and people are more dissolute: the
greater part is most vicious.

After that this unlucky child had been nursed upon so bad milk, it came at
last to eat strong food, and that was Arbitrary Government, under the name of
Royal Prerogative. Mr. John Wemys (sometime Senator of the College of Justice
in Scotland) as great a Royalist as any of his time, in his book de Regis
primatu, lib. 1. cap. 7. does utterly dissent from and argue against the
distinction of Civil and Ecclesiastical laws, and against the Synodical power
of censures; holding that both the power of making Ecclesiastical laws, and
the corrective power to censure Transgressors, is proper to the Magistrate.

The Tutor which bred up the Erastian error, was Arminianisme; for the
Arminians finding their plants plucked up, and their poison antidoted by Classes
and Synods, thereupon they began to cry down Synodical authority, and to appeal
to the Magistrates power in things Ecclesiastical, hoping for more favor and
less opposition that way. They will have Synods only to examine, dispute,
discuss, to impose nothing under pain of Ecclesiastical censure, but to leave
all men free, to do as they list. See their exam. cens. cap. 25. and Vindic.
lib. 2. cap. 6. page 131. 133. And for the Magistrate they have endeavored to
make him head of the Church, as the Pope was; yea so far, that they are not
ashamed to ascribe unto the Magistrate that Jurisdiction over the Churches,
Synods, and Ecclesiastical proceedings' which the Pope did formerly usurp: For
which see Apollonius in his Ius Maj^statis circa sacra.

But the Erastian Error being thus borne, nursed, fed, and educated, did fall
into a most deadly decay and consumption: the procuring causes whereof were
these three. First, the best and most (and in some respect all) of the Reformed
Churches refused to receive, harbor, or entertain it, and so left it exposed
to hunger and cold, shame and nakedness.

Some harbor it had in Switzerland, but that was looked upon as coming only
through injury of time, which could not be helped; the Theological and
Scriptural principles of the Divines of those Churches, being Anti-Erastian,
and Presbyteriall, as I have See Nihil Respondes page 32 33. Male audis page
52. 53.
elsewhere showed against Mr. Coleman. So that Erastianisme could not get
warmth and strength enough, no not in Zurick it self. Yea Dr. Ursi^us in his
Iudicium de Disciplina Ecclesiastica, and excommunicatione, exhibited to the
Prince Elector Palatine Frederick the third (who had required him to give his
judgment concerning Erastus his Theses) does In alijs (Ecclesijs) ubi aut
nulla est excommunicatio in usu, aut non lecitime administratur, ac nihilomirus
absque omni convoversia, in consesso est ac palam docetur, eam merito in
Ecclesia vigere debere, Et infra, Ne etiam Celsitudo tua se suasque Ecclesias
ab alijs omnibus Ecclesijs, tain ab ijs quae nullam habent Excommunicationem,
quam ab ijs quae habent, nova hac opinione sejungat: siquidem universae ac
singulae uno ore confitentur, semperque confessae sunt, merito illam in usu
esse debere.
once and again observe, that all the Reformed Churches and Divines, as well
those that did not practice excommunication, as those that did practice it,
agree notwithstanding in this principle, that excommunication ought to be in
the Church. Which is a mighty advantage against Erastianisme.

The second cause was a mis-accident from the Midwife, who did half stisle it
in the birth, from which did accrue a most dangerous infirmity, of which it
could never recover. Erast. praefat. Nos de illis solis loqui peccatoribus qui
doctrinam intelligunt, probant amplectuntur: peccata sua se agnoscere vere
atque edisse aiunt, and Sacramentis secundum Institutienem Christi uti cupiunt.
Et lib. 6. cap. 2. faciunt praelerea nobis injuriam (imo vera calumnia est) cum
dicunt nos omnes sine ullo examine velle admitti, quales quales sint ac esse
velint. Quippe sic volumus unumquemque admitti, quomodo Ecclesiae nostrae
consuetudo and regula jubet. Et intra. Sane ut Idololatram and Apostatam,
negamus membrum esse Ecclesiae Christi, sic etiam Nequitiam suam desendentem
negamus inter membra Ecclesiae censendum esse. Et quemadmodum illos ex
Christiano coetu judicamus exterminandos, sic hos queque putamus in eo coeiu
non esse ferendos. Verum neque de bis, neque de illis quaerunt nostrae Theses:
sed disputatur in eis, de solis doctrinam amplexantibus, and Sacramentis rite
cum Ecclesia uti cupientibus, hoc est poenit entiam eodem modo quo alij
profitentibus.
Read the preface of Erastus before the Confirmation of his Theses; also the
close of his sixth Book; put these together, you will find him yield, that all
ought not to be admitted promiseuously to the Sacrament, but that such
admission be according to the custom and rule observed in the Church of
Heidelberg (and what that was, you may find in the Heidelberg Catechism
Quaest. 82. and 87. namely a suspension of profane scandalous persons from the
Sacrament, and in case of their obstinacy and continuing in their offenses, an
excommunicating of them.) He yields also that these seven sorts of persons
ought not to be esteemed as members of the Church, and that if any such be
found in the visible Church, they ought to be cast out. 1. Idolaters. 2.
Apostates. 3. Such as do not understand the true Doctrine, that is, Ignorant
Persons. 4. Such as do not approve and embrace the true Doctrine, that is,
Heretics and Sectaries. 5. Such as desire to receive the Sacrament otherwise
then in the right manner, and according to Christ's Institution. 6. Such as
defend or justify their wickedness. 7. Such as do not confess and acknowledge
their sins, and profess sorrow and repentance for them, and a hatred or
detestation of them. And thus you see as Erastianisme pleads for no favor to
Sectaries, or whosoever dissent in doctrine, or whose Tenants concerning
Christ's Institution, or manner of Administration, are contrary to that which is
received in the Church where they live: (for Erastus ib. Equidem in Thesibus ab
initi^ monui, me de sola illa excommunicatione apere, qua aliqui doctrinam
intelligentes, probantes, amplexantes, and Sacramentis recte uti cupientes,
quod ad externum usum attinet ab eijsdem propter anteactae vitae turpitu linem
a quibusdam Presbyteris repelluntur: quia scilic et non videtur eis serio
dolere, qui lapsus fuit, ac sibi dolere id profitetur.
it is content that all such, were they never so peaceable and godly, be cast
out of the Church by excommunication. All the favor and forbearance which it
pleads for, is to the loose and profane) So neither does it altogether
exempt the profane, but such only as do neither deny nor defend their
wickedness, but confess their sins, and profess sorrow for them. Let the
Erastians of this time observe what their great Master has yielded touching
the Ecclesiastical Censure of profane ones. Which though it is not
satisfactory to us, for reasons elsewhere given, yet it can be as little
satisfactory to them. But whereas Erastus together with those his Concessions
(that he may seem to have said somewhat) falls a quarrelling with Presbyteries
for presuming to judge of the sincerity of that repentance professed by a
scandalous sinner, and their not resting satisfied with a man's own profession
of his repentance. If his followers will now be pleased to reduce the
controversy within that narrow circle, Whether a Presbytery may excommunicate
from the Church, or at least suspend from the Sacrament, any Churchmember, as
an impenitent scandalous sinner, who yet does not defend nor deny his sin by
which he has given scandal, but confesses it, and professes sincere and
hearty repentance for it: (which is the point that Erasius is feign to hold at
in the issue) Then I hope we shall be quickly agreed, and the controversy
buried; for we do rest satisfied with the offender his confession of his sin,
and profession of his repentance, unless his own known words or actions give
the lie to his profession of repentance; that is, if he be known to justify
and defend his sin in his ordinary discourse, or to continue in the practice of
the sin, which he professes to the Presbytery he repents of; if these or such
like sure signs of his impenitency be known, must the Presbytery
notwithstanding rest satisfied with his verbal profession of repentance? All
that fear God (I think) would cry shame, shame, upon such an assertion. And
moreover, let us take it in the case of an Idolater, Heretic, Apostate (for
Erastus is content that such be excluded from the Sacrament.) Suppose such a
one does confess his sin, and professes repentance, in the mean while is
known to be a writer or spreader of books in defense of that Idolatry or
Heresy, or to be a perswader and enticer of others secretly to that way, or if
there be any other known infallible sign of his impenitency, must his verbal
profession to the Presbytery in such cases be trusted and taken as
satisfactory? I am confident Erastus himself would not have said so. Wherefore
as in the case of an Heretic, so in the case of a profane person, or one of a
scandalous conversation, there is a necessity that the Presbytery examine the
real signs of repentance, and the offenders verbal profession is not all.

The third cause which helped forward the deadly malady and consumption of
Erastianisme; was the grief, shame, confusion and loss which it sustained by
the learning and labor of some Divines in the Reformed Churches, who had to
very good purpose taken pains to discover to the world the curled nature of
that unlucky brood, being of the seed of the Amalekites, which ought not to
enter into the Congregation of the Lord. The Divines who have more especially
and particularly appeared against it, are (to my observation) these. Beza de
Excommunicatione, and Presbyterio contra Erastum: Which was not printed till
Erastus his Reply unto it was first printed. Whereunto as Beza in a large
Preface lays the foundation of a duply, so he had prepared and perfected his
duply, had he not been hindered by the great troubl^s of Geneva, at that time
besieged by the Duke of Savoy; Beza himself being also at that time 71. years
old; howbeit for all this, he did not lay aside the resolution and thought of
that duply, if he should have opportunity, and see it requisite or called for;
all which is manifest from that preface. Next to him, I reckon Zacharias
Ursinus a most solid judicious Divine, who did (as I touched before) exhibit
to the Prince Elector Palatine Frederick the third, Iudicium de disciplina
Ecclesiastica and Excommunicatione (which you may find in the end of his third
Tome) wherein he does soundly confute the Theses of Erastus, neither has any
reply been made thereto, that ever I could learn of ^ Also in his Catecheticall
explications, Quaest, 85. He plainly disputes against the Erastian principles.
The more strange it is that Mr. Hussy in his Epistle to the Parliament would
make them believe that Ursinus is his, and not ours, in this controversy.

After these, there did others, more lately, come upon the Stage against the
Erastian Principles, as Casparus Brochmand a Lutheran, in System. Theol. Tom.
2. Artic. De disciplina Ecclesiastica, where he examineth the most substantial
Arguments of Erastus: Antonius Walaeus de munere ministrorum Ecclesiae and
inspectione Magistratus circa illud. Et in loc^ com. de clavivibus and
potestate Ecclesiastica. Et Tom, 2. Disp. de disciplina Ecclesiastica.
Helmichius de vocatione Pastorum and institutione Consistoriorum. D.
Triglandius in differtatione de potestate civili and Ecclesiastica. D. Revius
in examine libelli de Episcopatu Constantini magni. D. Apollonij (...)
Majestatis circa sacra. D. Cabeliavius de liberate Ecclesiae in exercenda
disciplina spirituali. Dr. Voqtius in his Politica Ecclesiastica, especially
his Disputations de potestate and Politia Ecclesiarum. Beside Acronius,
Thysius, Ludov. a Renesse, who were Champions against that unhappy error
revived in the Low Countries by W^enbogard a Proselyte of the Arminians.

But now, while E^astianisme did thus lie a dying, and like to breath its last,
is there no Physician who will undertake the cure, and endeavor to raise it up
from the gates of death to life? Yes, Mr. Coleman was the man, who (to that
purpose) first appeared publicly; First by a Sermon to the Parliament; Next,
by debating the Controversy with my self in writing; and lastly, By engaging
in a public debate in the Reverend Assembly of Divines, against this
Proposition: Jesus Christ as King and Head of His Church, has appointed a
Government in the Church, in the hands of Church Officers, distinct from the
Civil Government. After he had some days argued against this proposition
(having full liberty both to argue and reply as much as he pleased) it pleased
God to visit him with sickness, during which, the Assembly (upon intimation
from himself, that he wished them to lay aside that Proposition for a time,
that if God should give him health again, he might proceed in his debate) did
go upon other matter, and lay this aside for that season. The Lord was pleased
to remove him by death, before he could do what he intended in this, and other
particulars. One of his intentions was to translate and publish in English the
Book of Erastus against Excommunication. But through Gods mercy, before the
poison was ready, there was one Antidote ready, I mean Mr. Rutherford his
answer to Erastus. But though Mr. Coleman was the first man he was not the
only man that has appeared in this present Controversy in England. Others
(and those of diverse professions) are come upon the Stage. I shall leave every
man to his Judge, and shall judge nothing before the time. Only I shall wish
every man to consider sadly and seriously, by what Spirit and Principles he is
led, and whether he be seeking the things of Christ, or his own things;
whether he be pleasing men, or pleasing Christ; whether sin be more shamed, and
holiness more advanced, this way, or that way; Which way is most agreeable to
the Word of God, to the example of the best Reformed Churches; and so to the
sol^mne League and Cov^nant. The Controversy is now hot: every faithful
servant of Christ, will be careful to deliver his own soul by his
faithfulness, and let the lord do what seems him good. The cause is not
ours, but Christ's; it stands him upon his Honor, his Crown, his Laws, his
Kingdom. Our eyes are toward the Lord, and Isa. 33. 2^.
we will wait for a divine decision of the business: For the Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, The Lord is our King, he will save us.

CHAP. II. Some Postulata or common Principles to be presupposed.
FOr a foundation to the following discourse, I shall premise the particulars
following, which I hope shall be condescended upon, and acknowledged, as so
many (...)

1. There must be a most conscientious and special care had, that there be not
a promiscuous admission of all sorts of persons (that please or desire) to
partake in all the public Ordinances of God: but a distinction is to be made
of the precious and the vile, the clean and the unclean; I mean those who are
apparently and visibly such. This was a principle and rule among the Heathens
themselves, therefore Procul, hinc procul ite prophani,
Conclamat vates, totoque absistite luco.
Et illud, (...)
Et illud, Tu Genitor cape sacra manu patriosque penates.
Me bello extento digressum and caede recenti
Attrectare nefas, donec me flumine vivo
Abluere --

when they came to do sacrifice, the profane were bidden be gone, and Caesar
lib. 6. de bello Gallico, Si quis privatus aut publicus eorum decreto non
steterit, sacrificijs interdicunt. Haec poena est apud eos gravissima Quibus
est interdictum, ij numeroimpiorum ac sceleratorum habentur. Ij omnes decedunt
(others read) ab ijs omnes decedunt) adinim sermonemque defugiunt, ne quid ex
contagione incommodi accipiant.
Caesar tells us, that of old the Druides (the Heathnish French Priests) did
interdict the flagitious from their sacrifices and holy things.

These Druides France had from England, if the observation of Francis Holy-Oke
out of Tacitus, hold.

2. That censures and punishments ought to be appointed and inflicted, as for
personal and private injuries between man and man, so much more for public and
scandalous sins, whereby God is very much dishonored, and the Church
dangerously scandalized. Tyberius his slighting maxim, Deorum injurias Dijs
curae esse, may be entertained among Atheists, but is exploded among all true
Christians. (...), is the Christian maxim. Care is to be first taken of things
pertaining to God. 3. It is requisite and necessary, that he who has given
public scandal and offense to the Church, and has openly dishonored God by
a gross notorious sin, should honor God, edify others, and (so far as in him
lies) remove the offense by a public confession of the sin, and declaration
of his sorrow and repentance for the sa^ne; and of his resolution (through the
grace of Christ) to do so no more: As many of the Believers at Ephesus did
publicly confess and show their deeds: Act. 19. 18. The Syriack adds their
offenses. A pattern of this confession we have in the Law of Moses, and Jewish
policy (whereof elsewhere) as likewise in the Baptism of John, Matthew. 3. 6.

Of this public Confession of sin, see Festus Honnius disp. 51. These, 2. Mr.
Hildersham on Psalm. 51. Lect. 34. and 37. and diverse others. Both the Word of
God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, leads us this way. The
Centurists Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. observe four kinds of confession in the
New Testament: First, a Confession of sin to God alone. 1 John 1. 9. Secondly,
a confession coram Ecclesia, before the Church, when men acknowledge publikcly
their wicked and scandalous deeds, and do profess their repenting and lothing
of the same: And for this they cite Act. 19. 18. Thirdly, a confession one to
another of particular private injuries and offenses, chiefly recommended to
those who are at variance, and have wronged one another. Iam. 5. 16. Fourthly,
the confession or profession of the true Faith. 1 John 4. 2.

4. That public shame put upon a scandalous sinner, and the separating or
casting out of such an one, as the vlle from the precious, is the fittest and
most eff^ctual means which the Church can use to humble him, to break his
heart, and to bring him to the acknowledgement of his offense. 5. That there
may be and often are such persons in the Church, whom Erastus lib. 4. cap. 7.
Horum debetis vitam and mores observare, and quos impuros esse cognovistis
vitare, ne vos quoque inficiamini; ipsi autem pudefiant and in viam redeant.
we must avoid, Romans 16. 17. Withdraw from them. 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 2
These. 3. 6. Have no company with them. 2 These. 3. 14. Not eat with them. 1 Cor.
5. 11. Nor bid them God speed. 2 Epist. John, verse. 10. 11. 6. That since there
must be a withdrawing from a brother that walks disorderly and scandalously,
its more agreeable to the glory of God, and to the Churches peace, that this be
done by a public authoritative Ecclesiastical judgment and sentence, than
wholly and solely to trust it to the piety and prudence of each particular
Christian, to esteem as heathens and publicans, whom, and when, and for what he
shall think good, and accordingly to withdraw and separate from them. 7. That
there is a distinction between Magistracy and Ministry, even Iure Divino. That
the civil Magistrate has not power to abolish or continue the Ministry in
abstracto at his pleasure; nor yet to make or unmake Ministers in concreto,
that is, to ordain or depose Ministers, as he thinks fit. 8. As the Offices are
distinct Salmasius appar. ad lib. de prim. page 303. Cum sit ut jam vidimus
duplex potestas Ecclesiastica, altera interna, external altera tam peccant qui
utramque principi, vel magistratui civili tribuunt, quam qui utramque denegant
ministre Ecclesiastico.
so is the power; Magistrates may do what Ministers may not do: and Ministers
may do what Magistrates may not do. 9. It is Iuris Communis, a principle of
common equity and natural reason, that the directive Judgment in any matter
does chiefly belong to such as (by their profession and vocation) are devoted
and set apart to the study and knowledge of such matters, and (in that respect)
supposed to be ablest and fittest to give Judgment thereof. A consultation of
Physicians is called for, when the Magistrate desires to know the nature,
symptoms, or cure of some dangerous disease. A consultation of Lawyers, in
Legal questions. A Council of War in military expeditions. If the Magistrate
be in a ship at Sea, he takes not on him the directive part of Navigation,
which belongs to the master, with the mates and pilot. Neither does the master
of the ship (if it come to a Sea Fight) take on him the directive part in the
fighting, which belongs to the Captain. And so in all other cases, Artifici in
sua art credendum. Wherefore though the Judgment of Christian prudence and
discretion belongs to every Christian, and to the Magistrate in his Station;
and though the Magistrate may be, and sometime is learned in the Scriptures,
and well acquainted with the principles of true Divinity, yet ut plurimum, and
ordinarily, especially in a rightly Reformed and well constituted Church,
Ministers are to be supposed to be fittest and ablest to give a directive
Judgment in things and causes Spiritual and Ecclesiastical: with whom also
other ruling Church. Officers do assist and join, who are more experimentally
and practically (they ought also, and diverse times are more Theoretically)
acquainted with the right way and rules of Church Government and censures; then
the civil Magistrate (when he is no ruling Elder in the Church, which is but
accidental) can be rationally or ordinarily supposed to be. 10. There is some
power of Government, in the Church given to the Ministry by Christ: else why
are they said to be set over us in the Lord, and called Rulers and Governors,
as we shall see afterward?
CHAP. III. What the Erastians yield unto Us, and what We yield unto them.
FOr better stating of the controversy, We shall first of all take notice of
such particulars as are the Opposites concessions to us, or our concessions to
them. Their concessions are these.

1. Erastus confirm. These. lib. 3. cap. 1. Veruntamen ut in rebus prophanis
curandis ei (Magistratui) non licet terminos and fines aequitatis, justitiae ac
honestatis, hoc est praescriptionem legum and statutorum Reiptranscendere. Sic
in disponendis and ordinandis rebus sacris, vel ad cultum divinum
pertinentibus, long minus ei licet (...) in part, a praescripto verbi Dei
discedere; quod tanquam re gulam in omnibus debet sequi, ab eoquenusquam vel
latum pilum deflectere.
That the Christian Magistrate in ordering and disposing of Ecclesiastical
causes and matters of Religion, is tied to keep close to the Rule of the Word
of God; and that as he may not assume an Arbitrary Government of the State, so
far less of the Church. 2. That Church Officers may exercise
Church Government, and authority in matters of Religion, where the Magistrate
does not profess and defend the true Religion: In such a case two Governments
are allowed to stand together, one civil, another Ecclesiastical. This Erastus
ibid. Intelligi hoc debet de ea Repub. dictum, in quia Magistratus and subditi,
eandem profitentur Religionem, eamque veram. In hac dico duas distinctis
jurisdictiones minime debere esse. In alta, in qua videlicet Magistratus falsam
tuetur sententiam, certo quodo^modo toler abilis videri fortosse possit divisi^
rectionum.
Erastus grants, as it were by constraint, and it seems by way of compliance
with the Divines of Zurik (who hold excommunication by Church Officers under an
infidel Magistrate, and that Iure Divino) to move them to comply the more with
him in other particulars. 3. That the abuse of Church-governement is no good
argument against the thing it self: There being no authority so good, so
necessary in Church or State, but by reason of their corruptions who manage it,
may be abused to tyranny and opression. These are Mr. Prinnes words, Vindic. of
the 4. Questions page 2. 4. That some Jurisdiction belongs to Presbyteries by
Divine Right. Mr. Prynne in his Epistle Dedicatory before the vindication of
his four questions, says, that his scope is, not to take from our new
Presbyteries, all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction due by Divine Right to them, but
to confine it within certain definite limits, to prevent all exorbitant abuses
of it. 5. That the Christian Magistrate ought not, may not preach the Word, nor
minister the Sacraments. Mr. Coleman in his Brotherly examination re-examined
page 14. I never had it in my thoughts that the Parliament had power of
dispensing the Word and Sacraments: Then so far there is a distinction of
Magistracy and Ministry Iure Divino: Yet in this he did not so well agree with
Confirm. These. lib. 4. cap. 2. Quod addis non licere magistratui, re ita
postulante, docere and Sacramenta administra re (si modo per ne gotia possit
utrique muneri sufficere) idverum non est.
Erastus. 6. That the ministry is Iure Divino, and Ministers have their power
and authority of preaching the Word derived to them from Christ, not from the
Magistrate. So Mr. Hussy in his Epistle to my self. We preach the Word with
all authority from Christ, derived to us by those of our Brethren that were in
Commission before us. Magistrates may drive away false Teachers, but not the
Preachers of the Gospel but at their utmost peril. 7. They admit and allow of
Presbyteries, so that they do not exercise Government and Jurisdiction. Erast.
lib. 4. cap. 1.
Our Concessions to our Opposites, are these.

1. That all are not to be admitted promiscuously either to be governors or
members in the Ecclesiastical Republic, that is, in a visible political
Church. None are to govern Bullinger de Conc. lib. 1. c. 8. Si turpe aut
indignum quondam videbatur gentes inducere in templum Del: quare non videatur
hodie sacrilegum, introducere in Synodum Ecclesiasticam canes and porcos.
nor to be abmitted members of Presbyteries or Synods, except such as both for
abilities and conversation, are qualified according to that which the Apostle
Paul requires a Bishop or Elder to be. Scandalous or profane Church Officers
are the worst of dogs and swine, and to be first cast out. And as all are not
to govern, so all are not to be governed Ecclesiastically; but only
Church Members, 1 Cor. 5. 12. Therefore what has been objected concerning many
both Pastors and People in England, who are still branches of the old stock,
does not strike against what we hold. All are not sit for a Church Government.
Therefore those that are fit shall not have a Church Government. So they must
argue; Or thus, a Popish people are not fit to be governed Presbyterially, and
Episcopal Ministers are not fit to govern; therefore the rest of the Nation
shall want a Government. 2. Presbyteriall Government is not despotical, but
ministerial, it is not a Dominion, but a Service. We are not Lords over Gods
heritage: 1 Pet. 5. 3. but we are the servants both of Christ and of his
Church. We preach not our selves, says the Apostle, but Christ Jesus the Lord,
and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. 2 Cor. 4. 5. 3. That power of
Government with which Pastors and Elders are invested, has for the object of
it, not the external man, but the inward man. It is not, nor ought not to be
exercised in any compulsive, coercive, corporal, or civil punishments. When
there is need of coertion or compulsion, it belongs to the Magistrate, not to
the Minister, though the question be of a matter of Religion; of Persons or
things Ecclesiastical. Which as it is rightly observed by Appar. ad lib. de
primatu page 294. Ubicunque sane imperio opus est per vim agente ac jubenie,
aut Jurisdictione cogente and cohercente, nihil istic habent quod agant verbi
divini ministri, neque jus agendi ullum, etiamsi de re aut persona
Ecclesiastica quaestio sit, aut de Religione agatur, sed ad principes out
Magistratus ea vis coactiva, and il'ud jus imperativum and coercitivum
pertinet. Ibid. page 295. Iurisdictionem ijdem (pontificij Doctores) porro
interiorem ac exteriorem ita distinguunt, ut interior sit qua Sacerdos possit
peccatorem confessum a peccatis absolvere and satisfactionem ponere: exterior
autem qua peccatores adstringit (...) Anathematis, aliasque publicas censuras
irrc^at, and abijsdem exsolvit. Verum hae duae Iurisdictiones un^m faciunt, ean
que solam interiorem. Nulla quippe exterior est, cum utraque respiciat and p^o
objecto habeat hominem interiorem, id est animam. lb. p. 297. Finis tantum
respici debet. Aliquis suspenditur and excommunicatur? Sane, sed ut per
poenitentiam restitui possit, and Sacramenta corporis and sanguiris Christi
iterum participare. Et poenitentia illa quam quis agit ut possit reconciliari,
interioris est hominis.
Salmasius, so he further asserteth against the Popish Writers, that all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction has for the object of it, only the inward man;
for consider the end of Church Censures, says he, even when one is ex
communicated or suspended from the Sacrament, it is but to reduce him and
restore him by repentance, that he may again partake of the Sacrament rightly
and comfortably: which repentance is in the soul or inward man, though the
signs of it appear externally. 4. Presbyterial Government is not an arbitrary
Government; for clearing whereof take these five Considerations. 1. We can do
nothing against the Truth but for the Truth: and the power which the Lord has
given u^, is to edification and not to destruction 2 Cor. 13 8 10. All
Presbyterial proceedings must be levelled to this end, and squared by this
rule. 2. Presbyters and Presbyteries are (...) to the Law of the Land, and to
the corrective power of the Magistrate; Quatenus Ecclesia est in Republica, and
Reipub. pars, non Respublica Ecclesiae: In so far as the Church is in the
Commonwealth, and a part of the Commonwealth; not the Commonwealth a part of
the Church, says Salmasius appar. ad lib. de Primatu page 292. for which, page
300. he cites, Optatus Milivitanus lib. 3. Non enim Respullica est in Ecclesia,
sed Ecclesia in Republica. Ministers and Elders are Subjects and Members of the
Commonwealth, and in that respect punishable by the Magistrate, if they
transgress the Law of the Land. 3. Yea also as Church Officers, they are to be
kept within the limits of their calling, and compelled (if need be) by the
Magistrate to do those Duties which by the clear Word of God and received
principles of Christian Religion, or by the received Ecclesiastical
Constitutions of that Church, they ought to do. 4. And in corrupto Ecclesiae
statu, I mean, if it shall ever happen (which the Lord forbid, and I trust
shall never be) that Presbyteries, or Synods shall make defection from the
Truth to Error, from Holiness to Profaneness, from Moderation to Tyranny and
Persecution, censuring the innocent and absolving the guilty, as Popery and
Prelacy did, and there being no hopes of redressing such enormities in the
ordinary way by intrinsecal Ecclesiastical remedies, that is, by
well-constituted Synods, or Assemblies of Orthodox, holy, moderate Presbyters:
In such an extraordinary exigence, the Christian Magistrate may and ought to
interpose his Authority to do diverse things which in an ordinary course of
Government he ought not to do; for in such a case, Magistracy (without
expecting the proper intrinsecal remedy of better Ecclesiastical Assemblies)
may immediately, by it self, and in the most effectual manner, suppress and
restrain such defection, exorbitancy, and tyranny, and not suffer the unjust,
heretical, tyrannical Sentences of Presbyteries or Synods to be put in
execution. Howbeit in Ecclesia been constituta, in a well constituted and
Reformed Church, it is not to be supposed, that the condition of affairs will
be such as I have now said. We heartily acknowledge with Mr. Cartwright annot.
on Mat. 22. Sect. 3. That it belongs to the Magistrate, to reform things in
the Church, as often as the Ecclesiastical persons shall either through
ignorance, or disorder of the affection of covetuousnesse or ambition, d^file
the Lords Sanctuary. For says Iunius Animad. in Bell. contr. 4. lib. 1. cap.
12. and 18. Both the Church when the concurrence of the Magistrate fails, may
extraordinarily do something which ordinarily she cannot: and again when the
Church fails of her duty, the Magistrate may extraordinarily procure, that
the Church return to her duty. 5. I dare confidently say, that if comparisons
be rightly made, Presbyterial Government is the most limited and the least
Arbitrary Government of any other in the world. I should have thought it very
unnecessary and superfluous, to have once named here the Papal Government, or
yet the Prelatical, but that Mr. Prynn in his preface to his four grand
Questions, puts the Reverend Assembly of Divines in mind, that they should
beware of usurping that which has been even by themselves disclaimed against,
and quite taken away from the Pope and Prelates. Mr. Coleman also in his Sermon
brought objections from the usurpations of Pope Paul the fifth, and of the
Archhbishop of Canterbury: Well, if we must needs make a comparison, come on.
The Papal usurpations are many. 1. The Pope takes upon him to determine what
belongs to the Canon of Scripture, what not? 2. That he only can determine
what is the sense of Scripture. 3. He adds unwritten Traditions. 4. He makes
himself Judge of all controversies. 5. He dispenses with the Law of God it
self. 6. He makes himself above General Councels. 7. His government is
Monarchical. 8. He receives appeals from all the Nations in the world. 9. He
claims Infallibility at least ex Cathedra. 10. He makes Laws absolutely
binding the Conscience, even in things indifferent. 11. He claims a Temporal
Dominion over all the Kingdoms in the world. 12. He says he may depose Kings,
and absolve Subjects from their oath of allegiance. 13. He persecuteth all with
fire and sword and Anathema's, who do not subject themselves to him. 14. He
claims the sole power of convocating general Councels. 15. And of presiding
or moderating therein by Himself or his Legates.
What Conscience or ingenuity can there now be, in making any parallel between
Papal and Presbyteriall Government?

As little there is in making the comparison with Prelacy, the power whereof
was indeed arbitrary and impatient of those limitations and rules which
Presbyteries and Synods in the Reformed Churches walkby. For 1. The Prelate was
but one, yet he claimed the power of ordination and jurisdiction as proper to
himself in his own Diocese. We give the power of ordination and Church
censures not uni, but unitati, not to one, but to an Assembly gathered into one.

2. The Prelate assumed a perpetual precedence and a constant privilege of
moderating Synods, Which Presbyterial Government denies to any one man. 3. The
Prelate did not tie himself either to ask or to receive advice from his fellow
Presbyters, except when he himself pleased. But there is no Presbyteriall nor
Synodicall sentence, which is not concluded by the major part of voices. 4. The
Prelate made himself Pastor to the whole Diocese (consisting it may be of some
hundreds of Congregations) holding that the Ministers of particular
Congregations did preach the Word and minister the Sacraments, in his name by
virtue of authority and order from him, and because he could not act by himself
in every Congregation. The Presbyteriall Government acknowledges no Pastoral
charge of preaching the Word and ministering the Sacraments to more
Congregations then one; and does acknowledge the Pastors of particular
Churches, being lawfully called, to have power and authority for preaching the
Word and ministering the Sacraments in the name of Christ, and not in the name
of the Presbytery. 5. The Prelates as they denied the power and authority of
Pastors, so they utterly denied the very offices of ruling Elders, and Deacons
for taking more especial care of the poor, in particular Congregations. 6.
They did not acknowledge Congregationall Elderships, nor any power of
discipline in particular Congregations which the Presbyteriall Government does.
7. They intruded Pastors often times against the consent of the Congregation, and
reclamante Ecclesia, which the Presbyteriall Government does not. 8. They
ordained Ministers without any particular charge, which the Presbyterial
Government does not. 9 In Synods they did not allow any but the Clergy alone
(as they kept up the name) to have decisive suffrage. The Presbyterial
Government gives decisive voices to ruling Elders as well as to Pastors. 10.
The Prelates declined to be accountable to and censurable by either Chapters,
Diocesan or National Synods. In Presbyteriall Government all (in whatsoever
Ecclesiastical administration) are called to an account in Presbyteries,
Provincial and National Assemblies respectively, and none are exempted from
Synodicall censures in case of scandal and obstinacy. 11. The Prelates power
was not merely Ecclesiastical, they were Lords of Parliament, they held Civil
places in the State, which the Presbyterial Government condemns. 12. The
Prelates were not chosen by the Church, Presbyters are. 13. The Prelates did
presume to make Laws binding the Conscience, even in things indifferent, and
did persecute, imprison, fine, depose, excommunicate men for certain Rites and
Ceremonies acknowledged by themselves to be indifferent (setting aside the will
and authority of the Law makers) This the Presbyteriall Government abhors.
14. They did excommunicate for money matters, for trifles. Which the
Presbyteriall Government condemns. 15. The Prelates did not allow men to
examine by the Judgment of Christian and private discretion, their Decrees and
Canons, so as to search the Scriptures and look at the Warrants, but would
needs have men think it enough to know the things to be commanded by them that
are in place and power. Presbyteriall Government does not lord it over men's
consciences, but admits (yea commends) the searching of the Scriptures,
whether these things which it holds forth be not so, and does not press men's
Consciences with Sic volo, sic jubeo, but desires they may do in faith what
they do. 16. The Prelates held up pluralities, non-residencies etc. Which the
Presbyteriall Government does not 17. As many of the Prelates did themselves
neglect to preach the Gospel, so they kept up in diverse places a reading
nonpreaching Ministry: Which the Presbyteriall Government suffers not. 18.
They opened the door of the Ministry to diverse scandalous, Arminianized, and
popishly affected men, and locked the door upon many worthy to be admitted. The
Presbyteriall Government herein is as contrary to theirs, as theirs was to the
right. 19. Their Official Courts, Commissaries, etc. did serve themselves
H^ires to the sons of Eli, Nay, but thou shall give it me now, and if not, I
will take it by force. The Presbyterial Government (...) such proceedings. 20.
The Prelates and their High Commission Court did assume pot^statem utriusque
gladij, the power both of the Temporal and Civil Sword. The Presbyteriall
Government medleth with no Civil nor Temporal punishments.

I do not intend to enumerate all the differences between the Papal and
Prelatical Government on the one side, and the Presbyterial Government on the
other side; in this point of unlimitednesse or arbitrarynesse. These
differences which I have given, may serve for a conscientious caution to
intelligent and moderate men, to beware of such odiou^ and unjust comparisons,
as have been used by some, and among others by Mr. Sal^marsh in his Parallel
between the Prelacy and Presbytery: Which as it cannot strike against us, nor
any of the Reformed Churches (who acknowledge no such Presbytery as he
describes) and in some particulars, strikes at the Ordinance of Parliament
(as namely in point of the Directory) so he that has a mind to a
Recrimination, might with more truth lay diverse of those imputations upon
those, whom (I believe) he is most unwilling they should be laid upon.

In the third place, The Presbyterian Government is more limited and less
arbitrary than the Independent Government of single Congregations, which
exempting themselves from the Presbyterial subordination, and from being
accountable to, and censurable by Classes or Synods, must needs be supposed to
exercise a much more unlimited or arbitrary power, than the Presbyterial
Churches do: especially when this shall be compared and laid together with one
of their three grand Principles, which disclaimeth the binding of themselves
for the future unto their present judgment and practice, and avoucheth the
keeping of this reserve to alter and retract. See their Apologetical narration,
page 10, 11. By which it appears that their way will not suffer them to be so
far molded into an Uniformity, or bounded within certain particular rules (I
say not with others, but even among themselves) as the Presbyterian way will
ad^it of.

Finally, The Presbyterial Government has no such liberty nor arbitrarinesse,
as Civil or Military Government has: there being in all civil or temporal
affairs a great deal of latitude (...) to those who manage the same, so that
they command nor act nothing against the Word of God. But Presbyterial
Government is tied up to the rules of Scripture, in all such particulars as are
properly spiritual and proper to the Church; Though in other particular,
occasional circumstances of times, places, accommodations, and the like, the
same light of nature and reason guides both Church and State; yet in things
properly Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, there is not near so much latitude left
to the Presbytery, as there is in civil affairs to the Magistrate.

And thus I have made good what I said, That Presbyterial Government is the
most limited and least arbitrary Government of any other. All which Vindication
and clearing of the Presbyterial Government, does overthrow (as to this Point)
Master Hussey's Observation, page 9. of the irregularity and arbitrarinesse of
Church Government. And so much of my fourth Conc^ssion.

The fifth shall be this: It Is far from our meaning, that the Christian
Magistrate should not meddle with matters of Religion, or things and causes
Ecclesiastical, and that he is to take care of the Commonwealth, but not of
the Church. Certainly there is much power and Authority which by the Word of
God, and by the Confessions of Faith of the Reformed Churches, does belong to
the Christian Magistrate in matters of Religion. Which I do but now touch by
the way, so far as is necessary to wipe off the aspersion cast upon
Presbyterial Government. The particulars I refer to Chapter 8.

Our sixth Concession is, That in extraordinary cases, when Church Government
does degenerate into tyranny, ambition, and avarice; and they who have the
managing of the Ecclesiastical power, make defection and fall into manifest
Heresy, Impiety, or Injustice, (as under Popery and Prelacy it was for the most
part:) then, and in such cases (which we pray and hope we shall never see
again) the Christian Magistrate may and ought to do diverse things in and for
Religion, and interpose his Authority diverse ways, so as does not properly
belong to his cognizance, decision, and administration, ordinarily, and in a
Reformed and well constituted Church. For extraordinary diseases must have
extraordinary remedies. More of this before.

A seventh Concession is this: The Civil Sanction added to Church Government
and Discipline, is a free and voluntary Act of the Magistrate. That is,
Church Government does not ex (...) (...), necessitate the Magistrate to aid,
assist, or corroborate the same, by adding the strength of a Law. But the
Magistrate is free in this, to do or not to do, to do more or to do less, as
he will answer to God and his conscience: it is a cumulative Act of favor done
by the Magistrate. My meaning is not, that it is free to the Magistrate* in
genere moris; but in genere entis. The Magistrate ought to add the Civil
Sanction hic and nunc, or he ought not to do it. It is either a duty, or a sin;
it is not indifferent. But my meaning is, The Magistrate is free herein from
all coaction, yea from all necessity and obligation; other then arises from
the Word of God, binding his conscience. There is no power on Earth, Civil or
Spiritual, to constrain him. The Magistrate himself is his own Judge on Earth,
how far he is to do any cumulative Act of favor to the Church. Which takes off
that calumny, that Presbyterial Government does force or compel the conscience
of the Magistrate. I pray God we may never have cause to state the Question
otherwise, I mean, concerning the Magistrate his forbidding what Christ has
commanded, or commanding what Christ has forbidden: in which case we must
serve Christ and our consciences, rather then obey Laws contrary to the Word of
God and our Covenant: whereas in the other case, of the Magistrate his not
adding of the Civil Sanction, we may both serve Christ, and do it without the
least appearance of disobedience to the Magistrate.

Eighthly, We grant that Pastors and Elders, whether they be considered
distributively, or collectively in Presbyteries and Synods, being Subjects and
Members of the Commonwealth, ought to be subject and obedient in the Lord to
the Magistrate and to the Law of the Land; and as in all other duties, so in
Civil subjection and obedience they ought to be ensamples to the Flock; and
their trespasses against Law are punishable, as much, yea, more then the
trespasses of other Subjects. Of this also before.

Ninthly, If the Magistrate be offended, at the sentence given, or censure
inflicted by a Presbytery or a Synod, they ought to be ready in all humility
and respect, to give him an account and reason of such their proceedings, and
by all means to endeavor the satisfaction of the Magistrate his conscience: or
otherwise to be warned and rectified, if themselves have erred.

CHAP. IV. Of the agreements and differences between the nature of the Civil
and of the Ecclesiastical Powers or Governments.
HAving now observed what*our opposites yield to us, or we to them, I shall for
further unfolding of what I plead for, or against, add here the chief
agreements and differences between the Civil and Ecclesiastical powers, so far
as I apprehend them. They both agree in these things: 1. They are both from
God; both the Magistrate, and the Minister is authorized from God, both are the
Ministers of God, and shall give account of their administrations to God. 2.
Both are tied to observe the Law and Commandments of God: and both have certain
directions from the Word of God to guide them in their administration. 3. Both
Civil Magistrates and Church Officers are Fathers* and ought to be honored and
obeyed according to the fifth Commandment: Utrumque scilicet dominium, says
Luther, Tom. 1. fol. 139. both Governments, the Civil and the Ecclesiastical,
do pertain to that Commandment. 4* Both Magistracy and Ministry are appointed
for the glory of God as Supreme, and for the good of men as the subordinate
end. 5. They are both of them mutually aiding and auxiliary, each to other.
Magistracy strengthens the Ministry, and the Ministry strengthens Magistracy.
6. They agree in their general kind; they are both Powers and Governments. 7.
Both of them require singular qualifications, eminent gifts and endowments* and
of both it holds true, Quis ad haec idoneus? 8. Both of them have degrees of
censures and correction according to the degrees of offenses. 9. Neither the
one nor the other may give out sentence against one who is not convict, or
whose offense is not proved. 10. Both of them have a certain kind of
Jurisdiction in foro exteriori. For though the Ecclesiastical power be
spiritual, and exercised about such things as belong to the inward man only;
yet as Dr. Rivet upon the Decalogue, page 260. 261. says truly, there is a
twofold power of external jurisdiction which is exercised in foro exteriori:
one by Church Censures, Excommunication, lesser and greater* which is not
committed to the Magistrate, but to Church Officers: Another, which is Civil
and coercive, and that is the Magistrates. But Mr. Coleman told us, he was
persuaded it will trouble the whole World to bound Ecclesiastical and Civil
Jurisdiction, the one from the other; Maledicis page 7. Well: I have given ten
agreements. I will now give ten differences.

The difference between them is great; they differ in their causes, effects,
objects, adjuncts, correlations, executions, and ultimate terminations.

1. In the efficient cause. The King of Nations has instituted the Civil
power; The King of Saints has instituted the Ecclesiastical power. I mean the
most high God, possessor of Heaven and Earth, who exercises Soverainty over
the workmanship of his own hands, and so over all mankind, has instituted
Magistrates to be in his stead, as gods upon Earth. But Jesus Christ as
Mediator and King of the Church, whom his Father has set upon his holy Hill of
Zion, Psalm. 2. 6. to reign over the House of Jacob for ever, Luke 1. 33. who
has the key of the House of David laid upon his shoulder, Isa. 22. 22. has
instituted an Ecclesiastical power and government in the hands of
Church Officers, whom in his name he sends forth.

2. In the matter, Magistracy or Civil power has for the matter of it the
earthly Scepter and the Temporal Sword: that is, it is Monarchical and
Legislative: it is also punitive or coercive of those that do evil; understand,
upon the like reason, remunerative of those that do well. Festus Honnius disp.
30. these. 6. Circa bonum spirituale versatur potestas Ecclesi astica proprie
ita dicta, cujus proprium officium est verbum Dei praedicare, Sacramenta
administrare, disciplinam Ecclesiasticam exercere, Ministros Ecclesiae
ordinare, de controversiis Ecclesi isticis quae circa doctrinam aut regimen Ec
clesiae intercidunt, ordinary judicare, and de ritibus adiaphoris ad ordinem,
decorum atque aedificationem Ecclesiae pertinentibus, Canones seu leges
Ecclesiasticas constituere. I. Gerard loc. com. Tom. 6. page 494. Distinguitur
Christi regnum ad quod potestas clavium pertinet, ab imperiis mundanis quae
gladio corporali in administratione utuntur.
The Ecclesiastical power has for the matter of it, the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven. 1. The key of knowledge or doctrine, and that to be administered, not
only severally by each Minister concionaliter, but also Consistorially and
Synodically in determining controversies of Faith, and that according to the
rule of holy Scripture only: which is clavis (...). 2. The key of order and
decency, so to speak: by which the circumstances of Gods Worship and all such
particulars in Ecclesiastical affairs, as are not determined in Scripture, are
determined by the Ministers and ruling Officers of the Church, so as may best
agree to the general rules of the word concerning order and decency, avoiding
of scandal, doing all to the glory of God, and to the edifying of one another.
And this is clavis (...). 3. The key of corrective discipline or censures to be
exercised upon the scandalous and obstinate: which is clavis (...). 4. Add
also the key of Ordination or mission of Church Officers, which I may call
clavis (...), the authorizing or power giving key, others call it missio
potestativa.

3. They differ in their forms. The power of Magistracy is (...) and (...). It
is an authority or dominion exercised in the particulars above mentioned, and
that in an immediate subordination to God: for which reason Magistrates are
called gods. The Ecclesiastical power is (...), or (...), or (...) only. It is
merely Ministerial and Steward-like, and exercised in an immediate
subordination to Jesus Christ, as King of the Church, and in his name and
authority.

4. They differ in their ends. The supreme end of Magistracy is only the glory
of God, as King of Nations, and as exercising dominion over the inhabitants of
the earth: And in that respect the Magistrate is appointed to keep his Subjects
within the bounds of external obedience to the moral Law, the obligation where
of lies upon all Nations, and all men. The supreme end of the Ecclesiastical
power, is either proximus or remotus. The nearest and immediate end is the
glory of Jesus Christ, as Mediator and King of the Church. The more remote end
is the glory of God, as having all power and authority in heaven and earth. You
will say, Must not then the Christian Magistrate intend the glory of Jesus
Christ, and to be subservient to him as he is Mediator and King of the Church?
Certainly he ought and must; and God forbid but that he should do so. But how?
not qua Magistrate, but qua Christian. If you say to me again, Must not the
Christian Magistrate intend to be otherwise subservient to the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ as Mediator, then by personal or private Christian duties, which are
incumbent to every Christian? I answer, no doubt he ought to intend more, even
to glorify Jesus Christ in the administration of Magistracy. Which that you
may rightly apprehend, and that I be not misunderstood, take this distinction.
It is altogether incumbent to the ruling Officers of the Church, to intend the
glory of Christ as Mediator, even ex natura rei, in regard of the very nature
of Ecclesiastical power and government which has no other end and use for
which it was intended and instituted, but to be subservient to the Kingly
office of Jesus Christ in the governing of his Church upon earth (and therefore
sublata Ecclesia perit regimen Ecclesiasticum, take away the Church out of a
Nation, and you take away all Ecclesiastical power of government, which makes
another difference from Magistracy, as we shall see anon.) But the Magistrate
though Christian and godly, does not ex natura rei, in regard of the nature of
his particular vocation* intend the glory of Jesus Christ as Mediator, and King
of the Church: but in regard of the common principles of Christian Religion,
which do oblige every Christian in his particular vocation and station (and so
the Magistrate in his) to intend that end. All Christians are commanded that
whatever they do in word or deed, they do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
Col. 3. 17. that is, according to the will of Christ, and for the glory of
Christ: And so a Merchant, a Mariner, a Tradesman, a Schoolmaster, a Captain,
a Soldier, a Printer, and in a word, every Christian in his own place and
station ought to intend the glory of Christ, and the good of his Church and
Kingdom. Upon which ground and principle, if the Magistrate be Christian, it is
incumbent to him so to administer that high and eminent vocation of his, that
Christ may be glorified as King of the Church, and that this Kingdom of Christ
may flourish in his Dominions, (which would God every Magistrate called
Christian did really intend.) So then the glory of Christ as Mediator and King
of the Church, is to the Ministry both finis operis, and finis operantis. To
the Magistrate, though Christian, it is only finis operantis; That is, it is
the end of the godly Magistrate, but not the end of Magistracy: whereas it is
not only the end of the godly Minister, but the end of the Ministry it self.
The Ministers intendment of this end, flows from the nature of their
particular vocation. The Magistrates intendment of the same end, flows from
the nature of their general vocation of Christianity, acting, guiding, and
having influence into their particular vocation. So much of the supreme ends.

Now the subordinate end of all Ecclesiastical power, is, that all who are of
the Church, whether Officers or members, may live godly, righteously, and
soberly in this present world, be kept within the bounds of obedience to the
Gospel, void of all known offense toward God, and toward man, and be made to
walk according to the rules delivered to us by Christ and his Apostles. The
subordinate end of the Civil power is, that all public sins committed
presumptuously against the moral Law, may be exemplarly punished, and that
peace, justice, and good order may be preserved and maintained in the
Commonwealth, which does greatly redound to the comfort and good of the Church,
and to the promoting of the course of the Gospel* For this end the Apostle bids
us pray for Kings, and all who are in Authority (though they be Pagans, much
more if they be Christians) that we may live under them a peaceable and quiet
life, in all Godliness and Honesty: 1* Tim. 2. 2. He says not simply, that we
may live in Godliness and Honesty, but that we may both live peaceably and
quietly, and also live godly and honestly: which is the very same that we
commonly say of the Magistrate, that he is Custos utriusque Tabulae. He is to
take special care that all his Subjects be made to observe the Law of God, and
live not only in moral honesty, but in Godliness, and that so living, they
may also enjoy peace and quietness. More particularly; the end of Church
censures is, that men may be ashamed, humbled, reduced to repentance, that
their spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. The end of civil punishments
inflicted by the Magistrate is, That justice may be done according to Law, and
that peace and good order may be maintained in the Commonwealth, as has been
said. The end of delivering Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan, was, that they may
learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 20. Erastus yields to Beza, page 239. that
the Apostle does not say Ut non possint blasphemare, that henceforth they may
not be able to sin as they did before (which yet he acknowledges to be the end
of civil punishments,) but that they may learn not to blaspheme. Wherefore when
he expounds (...), to no other sense but this, That the Apostle had delivered
those two to be killed by Satan, Ut non possint, that they may not be able to
blaspheme so any more; just as a Mastgirate delivers a thief from the gallows,
that he may not be able to steal any more, and (as he tells us some speak) that
he may learn to steal no more: He is herein confuted, not only out of the
Text, but out of himself. So then, the end of Church Censures is (...), that
the offenders may learn or be instructed to do so no more; which belongs to
the inward man or soul. The end of civil punishments is, Ut non possint (as
Erastus tells us) that the offenders may not be able or at least (being alive
and some way free) may not dare to do the like, the sword being appointed for a
terror to them who do evil, to restrain them from public and punishable
offenses, not to work upon the spirit of their minds, nor to effect the
destroying of the flesh by mortification, that the spirit may be safe in the
day of the Lord.

The fifth difference between the Civil and Ecclesiastical powers, is in
respect of the effects. The effects of the Civil power are Civil Laws, Civil
punishments, Civil rewards. The effects of the Ecclesiastical power, are
Determinations of Controversies of Faith, Canons concerning Order and Decency
in the Church, Ordination or Deposition of Church Officers, Suspension from the
Sacrament, and Excommunication. The powers being distinct in their nature and
causes, the effects must needs be distinct, which flow from the actuating and
putting in execution of the powers. I do not here speak of the effects of the
Ecclesiastical power of Order, the dispensing of the Word and Sacraments; but
of the effects of the power of Jurisdiction or Government, of which only the
Controversic is.

Sixthly: The Civil power has for the object of it (...), the things of this
life, matters of Peace, War, Justice, the Kings matters, and the
Countrey-matters, those things that belong to the external man: But the
Ecclesiastical power has for the object of it, things pertaining to God, the
Lords matters, as they are distinct from Civil matters, and things belonging to
the inward man, distinct from the things belonging to the outward man. This
difference Protestant Writers do put between the Civil and Ecclesiastical
powers. Fr. Junius Ecclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 4. says thus: We have put into our
definition humane things to be the subject of Civil administration: but the
subject of Ecclesiastical administration, we have taught to be things Divine
and Sacred. Things Divine and Sacred we call both those which God commands
for the sanctification of our mind and conscience, as things necessary; and
also those which the decency and order of the Church requires to be ordained
and observed, for the profitable and convenient use of the things which are
necessary: For example, Prayers, the administration of the Word and Sacraments,
Ecclsiastical censure, are things necessary and essentially belonging to the
Communion of Saints: but set days, set hours, set places, fasts* and the like,
belong to the decency and order of the Church etc. But humane things we call
such as touch the life, the body* goods and good name, as they are expounded in
the second Table of the Decalogue; for these are the things in which the whole
Civil administration stands. Tilen, Synt. part. 2. disp. 32. tells us to the
same purpose, That Civil Government or Magistracy versatur circa res terrenas
and hominem externum. Magistratus, says Danaui Pol. Christ. lib. 6. cap. 1.
instituti sunt a Deo rerum humanarum quae hominum societati necessariae sunt,
respectu, and ad earum curam.

If it be objected, How can these things agree with that which has been before
by us acknowledged, that the Civil Magistrate ought to take special care of
Religion, of the conservation and purgation thereof, of the abolishing idolatry
and superstition; and ought to be Custos utriusque Tabulae, of the first, as
well as second Table? I answer, That Magistrates are appointed, not only for
Civil Policy, but for the conservation and purgation of Religion* as is
expressed in the Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland, before cited,
we firmly believe, as a most undoubted truth. But when Divines make the object
of Magistracy to be only such things as belong to this life and to humane
society, they do not mean the object of the Magistrates Care (as if he were not
to take care of Religion;) but the object of his Operation. The Magistrate
himself may not assume the administration of the keys, nor the dispensing of
Church Censures; he can but punish the external man with external punishments.
Of which more afterward.

The seventh difference stands in the Adjuncts: For 1. the Ecclesiastical power
in Presbyterial or Synodical Assemblies, ought not to be exercised without
prayer and calling upon the Name of the Lord, Matthew. 18. 19. There is no such
obligation upon the Civil power, as that there may be no Civil Court of Justice
without prayer. 2. In diverse cases Civil Jurisdiction has been and is in the
person of one man: But no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is committed to one man,
but to an Assembly in which two at least must agree in the thing, as is
gathered from the Text last cited. 3. No private or secret offense ought to be
brought before an Ecclesiastical Court, except in the case of contumacy and
impenitency, after previous admonitions: This is the ordinary rule, not to
dispute now extraordinary exceptions from that rule. But the Civil power is not
bound up by any such ordinary rule: For I suppose, our opposites will hardly
say (at least hardly make it good) that no Civil injury or breach of Law and
Justice, being privately committed, may be brought before a Civil Court, except
first there be previous admonitions, and the party admonished prove obstinate
and impenitent.

The eighth difference stands in their correlations. The Correlatum of
Magistracy is people embodied in a Commonwealth, or a Civil corporation. The
Correlatum of the Ecclesiastical power is people embodied in a Church, or
Spiritual corporation. The Commonwealth is not in the Church, but the Church
is in the Commonwealth, that is, One is not therefore in or of the Church,
because he is in or of the Commonwealth, of which the Church is a part; but yet
every one that is a Member of the Church, is also a Member of the Commonwealth,
of which that Church is a part. The Apostle distinguishes those that are
without, and those that are within in reference to the Church, who were
notwithstanding both sorts within in reference to the Commonwealth, 1 Cor. 5.
12, 13. The Correlatum of the Ecclesiastical power may be quite taken away by
persecution, or by defection, when the Correlatum of the civil power may
remain. And therefore the Ecclesiastical and the civil power do not se mutuo
ponere and tollere.

Ninthly: There is a great difference in the ultimate termination. The
Ecclesiastical power can go no further then Excommunication, or (in case of
extraordinary warrants, and when one is known to have blasphemed against the
holy Ghost) to Auathema Maranatha. If one be not humbled and reduced by
Excommunication, the Church can do no more, but leave him to the Judgment of
God, who has promised to ratify in Heaven, what his Servants in his Name, and
according to his Will, do upon Earth. Salmasius spends a whole chapter in
confuting the Point of the coactive and Magistratical Jurisdiction of Bishops.
See Walo Messal. cap. 6. He acknowledges in that very place, page 455, 456,
459, 462* that the Elders of the Church have in common the power of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, to suspend from the Sacrament and to excommunicate,
and to receive the offender again upon the evidence of his repentance. But the
Point he asserteth is, That Bishops or Elders have no such power as the
Magistrate has, and that if he that is excommunicate do not care for it, nor
submit himself, the Elders cannot compel him. But the termination or Quo usque
of the civil power, is most different from this. It is unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Ezra 7. 26.

Tenthly: They differ in a divided execution. That is, the Ecclesiastical power
ought to censure sometime one whom the Magistrate thinks not fit to punish with
temporal or civil punishments: And again, the Magistrate ought to punish with
the temporal Sword, one whom the Church ought not to cut off by the Spiritual
Sword. This difference Pareus gives, Explic. Catech. quaest. 85. art. 4. and it
cannot be denied: For those that plead most for Liberty of conscience* and
argue against all civil or temporal punishments of Heretics, do
notwithstanding acknowledge, that the Church whereof they are Members ought to
censure and excommunicate them, and does not her duty except she do so. The
Church may have reason to esteem one as an Heathen and a Publican that is no
ChurchMember, whom yet the Magistrate in prudence and policy does permit to
live in the Commonwealth. Again, the most notorious and scandalous sinners,
blasphemers, murderers, adulterers, incestuous persons, robbers, etc. when God
gives them repentance, and the signs thereof do appear, the Church does not
bind but loose them, does not retain but remit their sins; I mean
ministerially and declaratively. Notwithstanding the Magistrate may and ought
to do Justice according to Law, even upon those penitent sinners.

CHAP. V. Of a twofold Kingdom of Jesus Christ: a general Kingdom, as he is the
eternal Son of God, the Head of all Principalities and Powers, reigning over
all creatures: and a particular Kingdom, as he is Mediator, reigning over the
Church only.
THe Controversy which has been moved concerning the civil Magistrate his
Vicegerentship, and the holding of his Office* of and under and for Jesus
Christ as he is Mediator, has a necessary coherence with, and dependence upon
another Controversy concerning a twofold Kingdom of Jesus Christ; one, as he
is the eternal Son of God, reigning together with the Father and the holy Ghost
over all things; and so the Magistrate is his Vicegerent, and holds his Office
of and under him: another as Mediator and Head of the Church, and so the
Magistrate does not hold his Office of and under Christ as his Vicegerent.
Wherefore before I come to that Question concerning the origination and tenure
of the Magistrate's Office, I have thought good here to premise the enodation
of the Question concerning the twofold Kingdom of Jesus Christ. It is a
distinction which Master Hussy cannot endure* and no marvel; for it
overturneth the foundation of his opinion. He looks upon it as an absurd
assertion, page 25. Shall he have one Kingdom as Mediator, and another as God?
He quarrelleth all that I said of the twofold Kingdom of Christ, and will not
admit that Christ as Mediator is King of the Church only, page 25, 26, 27, 35,
36, 37.

The Controversy draws deeper then he is aware of: for Socinians and
Photinians finding themselves puzzled with those arguments which (to prove the
eternal Godhead of Jesus Christ) were drawn from such Scriptures as call him
God, Lord, the Son of God; also from such Scriptures as ascribe Worship and
Adoration to him; and from the Texts which ascribe to him a Supreme Lordship,
Dominion, and Kingdom over all things: (For this has been used as one Argument
for the Godhead of Jesus Christ and his consubstantiality with the Father. The
Father raigns, the Son raigns, the holy Ghost raigns. Vide lib. Isaaci Clari
Hispani adversus Varimadum Arianum:) Thereupon they devised this answer* That
Jesus Christ in respect of his Kingly Office, and as Mediator, is called God,
and Lord, and the Son of God, (of which see Fest. Honnij Specimen Controv.
Belgic. page 24. Jonas Schlichtingius contra Meisnerum page 436.) and that in
the same respect he is worshipped, that in the same respect he is King, and
that the Kingdom which the Scripture ascribes to Jesus Christ, is only as
Mediator and Head of the Church, and that he has no such Universal Dominion
over all things as can prove him to be the eternal Son of God. This gave
occasion to Orthodox-Protestant-Writters, more fully and distinctly to assert
the great difference between that which the Scripture says of Christ, as he is
the eternal Son of God; and that which it says of him, as he is Mediator: and
particularly to assert a twofold Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to prove from
Scripture, that besides that Kingdom which Christ has as Mediator, he has
another Kingdom over all things which belongs to him only as he is the eternal
Son of God. This the Socinians to this day do contradict, and stisly hold that
Christ has but one Kingdom, which he exercises as Mediator over the Church,
and in some respect over all things; but by no means they admit that Christ as
God reigns over all things: But our Writters still hold up against them the
distinction of that twofold Kingdom of Jesus Christ. See Stagmanni
Photinianismus Disp. 27. quaest. 6. The same distinction of the twofold Kingdom
of Christ, as God, and as Mediator, is frequently to be found in Protestant
Writers. See Synops. pur. Theol. Disp. 26. these. 53. Gomarus in Obad. verse.
ult. The late English Annotations on 1 Cor. 15. 24. and many others. Let Synt.
Theol. lib. 6. cap. 29. Regnum Christi vel natural est* vel (...) (...).
Regnum Christi natural est quod Christus a natura hal et, estque communis
totius Deita is etc. Hes Regnum etiam universale dicitur, quia est simpliciter
in universa. At Regnum Christi donativum est qued Christus tradiium a Patre ut
(...) accepit etc. Hoc Regnum (...) prium Christi, quod ut Rex Mediator obtinet
in persona sua: ac Regnum etiam singular di^ quia est peculiare in Ecclesia
etc. Utque natural Regnum obtinet jure naturae, quia est naturalis filius Dei
Patris: ita donativum Regnum obtinet jure donationis.
Polanus speak for the rest. See also the same distinction cleared and asserted
by Master Apollonius in his Ius Majestatis circa sacra, part. 1. page 33. and
seq.

The Arguments to prove that distinction of the twofold Kingdom of Christ, are
these:

First, Those Kingdoms of which the one is accessory and adventitions to the
Son of God, and which, if it were not, the want of it could not prove him not
to be God: the other necessarily flows from his Godhead, so that without it
he were not God; are most different and distinct Kingdoms. But the Kingdom of
Christ as Mediator, and the Kingdom of Christ as he is the eternal Son of God,
are such. Ergo: If the Son of God had never received the Office of Mediator,
and so should not have reigned as Mediator, yet he had been the natural Son of
God; for this could not be a necessary consequence, He is the natural Son of
God, Therefore he is Mediator; for he had been the natural Son of God, though
he had not been Mediator, and though man had not been redeemed. But if you
suppose that the Son of God raigns not as God with the Father and the holy
Ghost, from everlasting to everlasting, then you must needs suppose that he is
not the natural and eternal Son of God. Secondly, Those Kingdoms of which the
one is proper and personal to Jesus Christ God-man; the other is not proper and
personal, but common to the Father and the holy Ghost, are most different and
distinct Kingdoms. But the Kingdom of Jesus Christ as Mediator, and his Kingdom
as he is the eternal Son of God, are such. Ergo: That Kingdom which Christ has
as Mediator, by special dispensation of God committed to him, is his alone
properly and personally: for we cannot say that the Father raigns as Mediator,
or that the holy Ghost raigns as Mediator. But that Kingdom which Christ has,
as he is the eternal Son of God, is the very same consubstantially with that
Kingdom whereby God the Father and God the holy Ghost do reign. Thirdly, He
that has a Kingdom which shall be continued and exercised for ever, and a
Kingdom which shall not be continued and exercised for ever, has two distinct
Kingdoms. But Jesus Christ has a Kingdom which shall be continued and
exercised for ever, namely, the Kingdom which he has as the eternal Son of
God; and another Kingdom which shall not be continued and exercised for ever,
namely, the Kingdom which he has as Mediator. Ergo: The eternity of the one
Kingdom is not doubted of: But that the other Kingdom shall not be for ever
exercised, that is, Synt. pur. Theol. Desp. 26. these. 35. Ipsi (Patri) suum
queque Sceptrum Mediatorium seu oeconomieum traditurus dicitur, ut imperium
mere divinum eadem gloria ae Majestate cum Patre, erga suos electos in aeternum
exerceat. Zach. Ursinus Tom. 1. page 398. Christus Patri tradet Regnum post
glorificationem Ecclesiae, id est, desinet facere Officium Mediatoris.
that Christ shall not for ever reign as Mediator, is proved from 1 Cor. 15.
24, 25. Master Hussy page 35, 36, 37. goes about to answer this Argument,
which he confesses to say something: and indeed it says so much, that though
he makes an extravagant exception, (Does it appear, says he, that the Kingdom
that he shall lay down to God his Father, is not over all the world?) yet he
plainly yields the Point, which I was then proving. Christ, says he, in the
day of Judgment shall lay down all the Office of Mediatorship. I hope he will
not say that Christ shall lay down at the day of Judgment that Kingdom which
he has as the eternal Son of God. So then I have what I was seeking, that
Christ has one Kingdom as Mediator, another as the eternal Son of God. And
whereas Master Hussy holds that Christ as Mediator raigns over all things as
the Vicar of his Father, we shall see anon the weakness of his Arguments
brought to prove it. Mean while, I ask, What then is that Kingdom which belongs
to Christ as the eternal Son of God, and which shall not be laid down, but
continued for ever? Let him think on this Argument, Whatsoever belongs to that
Kingdom which shall be continued for ever, and shall not be laid down at the
day of Judgment, does belong to Christ, not as Mediator, but as the eternal
Son of God. But the general Power and Dominion, by which Jesus Christ
exercises Sovereignty over all creatures without exception, doing to them and
fulfilling upon them all the good pleasure of his Will, belongs to that Kingdom
which shall be continued for ever, and shall not be laid down at the day of
Judgment. Ergo: That general Power and Dominion by which Jesus Christ
exercises Sovereignty over all creatures without exception, doing to them and
fulfilling upon them all the good pleasure of his Will; does belong to Christ,
not as Mediator, but as the eternal Son of God. And thus I make a transition to
another Argument. Fourthly, He that has a Kingdom administered by and in
Evangelical Ordinances, and a Kingdom administered by his Divine Power, without
Evangelical Ordinances, has two different and distinct Kingdoms. But Jesus
Christ has a Kingdom administered by and in Evangelical Ordinances, and a
Kingdom administered by his Divine power, without Evangelical Ordinances. Ergo:
Does not Jesus Christ reign over the Devils and damned Spirits by his Divine
Power, reserving them in chains of darkness to the Judgment of the great day?
But will Master Hussy say that Christ raigns over the Devils and damned
Spirits as Mediator or by the same Kingdom by which he raigns in his Church by
and in his Ordinances? Therefore we must needs say, That Christ has one
Kingdom as the eternal Son of God, another as Mediator. Fifthly, He that has a
Kingdom in subordination to God the Father, and as his Vicegerent; and another
Kingdom wherein he is not subordinate unto, but equal with God the Father, has
two most different Kingdoms. But Jesus Christ has a Kingdom in subordination
to God the Father, and another Kingdom wherein he is not subordinate unto, but
equal with God the Father. Ergo: The Kingdom which Christ has as Mediator does
(in regard of the Office of Mediatorship) constitute him in a subordination to
his Father, whose Commandments he executes, and to whom he gives an account of
his Ministration. So that though he that is Mediator, being the eternal Son of
God, is equal with the Father; yet as Mediator, he is not equal with the
Father, but subordinate to the Father, which our Divines prove from these
Scriptures, Isai. 42. 1. Behold my servant. Jo. 14. 28. My Father is greater
then I. 1 Cor. 11. 3. The Head of Christ is God: In the same consideration as
Christ is our Head, God is Christ's Head, namely, as Christ is Mediator. But
that Kingdom which Christ has as he is the eternal Son of God, he holds it not
in a subordination to God the Father; but as being consubstantial with his
Father, and thinking it no robbery to be called equal with God: So that in this
consideration, the Father is not greater then he. Master Hussy page 37. says
of Christ, in respect of the Government which he has as Mediator, He is as it
were the Vicar of his Father. I hope he will not say so of that Government
which Christ has as the eternal Son of God. And page 27. he holds that Christ
as Mediator is subject to God; But in the consideration that Christ is the
second person of Trinity, so he is not inferior to God the Father. So that he
himself cannot but yield my Argument. Sixthly, If Christ has a Kingdom in time
dispensed and delegate to him, and unto which he was anointed, and has another
Kingdom which is not delegate nor in time dispensed, nor he anointed to it; but
does necessarily and naturally accompany the communication of the Divine nature
to him by eternal generation: then he has two most different Kingdoms, one as
he is Mediator; another as he is the eternal Son of God. But Christ has a
Kingdom in time dispensed and delegate etc. If you speak of Christ as Mediator,
God has made him both Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. but as he is the eternal
Son of God he is not Dominus factus; he is not made Lord and King, no more then
he is made the natural Son of God. When the Psalmist speaks of that Kingdom
which Christ has as Mediator, he tells us of the anointing of Christ. Ps. 45.
6. The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter: verse. 7. Thy God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness. But we cannot say that Christ was
anointed to that Kingdom, which he has as the eternal Son of God. Seventhly,
If the Scripture holds forth a Kingdom which Christ has over all creatures,
and another Kingdom which he has over the Church only* then it holds forth
the twofold Kingdom which I plead for, and which Master Hussy denies. But the
Scripture holds forth etc. Christ as he is God over all, blessed for ever, Romans
9. 5. exercises Sovereignty and Dominion over all things, even as his Father
does, Psalm. 115. 3. Dan. 4 34, 35. for his Father and he are one. But as he is
Mediator, his Kingdom is his Church only, and he is over his own House, Heb.
3. 6. You will say the word only is not in Scripture. I answer: When we say
that Faith only justifies, the word only is not in Scripture, but the thing
is. Just so here: For, first, David, Solomon, and Eliakim were types of Christ
the King. Now David and Solomon did reign only over Gods people as their
Subjects, though they had other people tributaries and subdued: So does Christ
reign over the House of Jacob only, Luke 1. 32, 33. The Lord shall give unto
him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever. Isai. 9. 7. Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall
be no end, upon the Throne of David and upon his Kingdom to order it. Isa. 21.
22. I will commit the Government into his hand, and he shall be a Father to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah, and the key of the house
of David will I lay upon his shoulder. 2. It was foretold and applied to the
Church and people of God as a proper and peculiar comfort to the Church, that
Christ was to come and reign as a King: Isai. 9. 6. Unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulder. Zech. 9.
9. Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Zion: Shout O Daughter of Jerusalem: Behold
THY KING comes unto thee. Matthew. 2. 6. Out of thee shall come a Governor that
shall rule my people Israel. 3. The Jews did generally understand it so, That
the Messiah was to be the Churches King only, which made Pilate say to them,
Shall I crucify your King? And hence it was also, that the wise men who came
to enquire for Christ, said, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? Matt.
2. 2. Eighthly, That very place Ephesians. 1. 21, 22, 23. from which Master Coleman
drew an Argument against us, does plainly hold forth a twofold supremacy of
Jesus Christ, one over all things, another in reference to the Church only
which is his body, his fullness, and to whom alone he is head, according to
that Text: Of which more afterward. Ninthly, The Apostle Col. 1. does also
distinguish this twofold preeminence, supremacy, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ:
one, which is universal, and over all things, and which belongs to him as he
is the eternal Son of God, verse. 15. 16. 17. Who is the Image of the Invisible
God, the first born of every creature: For by him were all things created that
are in Heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by
him and for him. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.
Calv. in Col. 1. 18. Postquam generaliter de Christi excellentia disseruit,
deque summo ejus in omnes creaturas principa^: iterum redit adea quae
peculiariter ad Ecclesiam spectant. In nomine capitis alii plura considerant
etc. Hic vero potissimum, meo judicio, de guhernatione loquitur.
Another which is oeconomicall and particular in and over the Church, and this
he has as Mediator: verse. 18. And he is the head of the body the Church: who
is the beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things he might
have the preeminence. That verse. 18. he speaks of Christ as Mediator, is not
controverted. But Mr. Hussy page 35. would fain make it out (if he could) that
Christ as Mediator is spoken of, verse. 15. 16. 17. The Apostle indeed in that
which went before did speak of Christ as Mediator. But the scope of these three
verses is to prove the Godhead of Jesus Christ. Yea, Mr. Hussy himself
yields, that as God and not as Mediator he did create the world. How can he
then contend that the Apostle speaks here of Christ as Mediator? and why does
he find fault with my exposition that the Apostle speaks here of Christ as
God? Do not our Writers urge Col. 1. 16. 17. against the Socinians and
Photinians, to prove the eternal Godhead of Jesus Christ, because by him all
things were created, and he is before all things. See Stegmanni Photinianismus
disp. 5. Quaest. 12. Becmanus Exercit. 4. and Exerc. 8. Where you may see, that
the Adversaries contend (as Mr. Hussy does) that the Apostle verse. 15. 16. 17.
does not speak of the person of Jesus Christ, proving him to be true God; but
that he speaks of Christ as Mediator or in respect of his Office, and of that
dominion which Christ has as Mediator (So Jonas Schlichtingius contra Meisner.
page 469.) and that verse. 15. 16. 17. ascribes no more to Christ, than verse.
18. But Becmanus answering Julius, distinguishes the Text as I do: for which
Analysis I did formerly cite Beza, Zanchius, Gualther, Bullinger, Tossanus, M.
Bayne, beside diverse others. But I have found none that understands the Text
as Mr. Hussy does, except the Socinians and Photinians, who do not acknowledge
that Christ has such an universal dominion and Lordship over all things, as
God the Father, but only that he rules over all things, as Mediator. Now for
answer to that which Mr. Hussy page 26. 27. alleges, to prove that Christ as
Mediator reigns over all things, First, he tells us out of Diodati that
Christ is head of the Church, and King of the Universe, and out of Calvin, that
the Kingdom of Christ is over all, and fills heaven and earth: But who
denies this? That which he had to prove, is, that Christ as Mediator, is King
of the Universe, and as Mediator his Kingdom is spread over all: and when he
has proved that, he has another thing to prove, that the universality of
Christ's Kingdom as he is Mediator, is to be understood not only in an
Ecclesiastical notion, that is, so far as all Nations are or shall be brought
under the obedience of the Gospel; but also in the notion of Civil Government,
that is, that Christ reigns as Mediator over all creatures, whether under or
without the Gospel: and that all Civil Power, Principality, and Government
whatsoever in this World, is put in Christ's hand as Mediator. If therefore he
will argue, let him argue so, as to conclude the point.

The next objection he makes, is from Heb. 1. 2. Christ as Mediator is made
Heir of all things.

But I answer, Christ is Heir of all things. 1. as the eternal Son of God, in
the same respect as it is said of Christ in the next words of the same verse,
that he made the world: and thus he may be called Heir of all things by nature,
even as Col. 1. 15. he is called the first borne of every creature. 2. He is
heir of all things as Mediator, for the Heathen and all the ends of the earth
are given him for an inheritance, Psalm. 2. 8. but that is only Church-wise, he
shall have a Catholic Church gathered out of all Nations, and all kings and
people, and tongues, and languages shall be made to serve him.

Moreover Mr. Hussy objecteth from Heb. 2. 8. and 1 Cor. 15. 28. that God has
put all things under Christ's feet as he is Mediator. Answ. As this is not
perfectly fulfilled in this World, but will then be fulfilled when Christ shall
have put down all rule and all authority, and power: so in the measure and
degree wherein it is fulfilled in this World, it concerns not men only, but
all the works of Gods hands, Heb. 2. 7. Thou crownedst him with glory and
honor, and did set him over the works of thy hands. Which is taken out of
the eighth Psalm, verse. 6. 7. Thou have put all things under his feet, all
sheep and oxen etc. Now how is it that the Apostle applies all this to Christ?
How does Christ rule over the beasts, fowls, fishes? Calvin in 1 Cor. 15. 27.
28. answers, dominatur ergo, ut omnia serviant ejus gloriae. He rules, so as
all things may serve for his glory. So then, all things are put under Christ's
feet as he is Mediator, both in regard of his excellency, dignity, and glory
unto which he is exalted far above all the glory of any creature; and in
respect of his power and overruling providence whereby he can dispose of all
things so as may make most for his glory. But it is a third thing which Mr.
Hussy has to prove, namely, that Christ as Mediator exercises his office and
government over all men as his Subjects, and over all Magistrates as his
Deputies, yea over all things, even over the reasonlesse creatures; for by his
arguing, he will have Christ as Mediator to govern the sheep, oxen, fowls,
and fishes: all things as well as all persons being put under Christ's feet. But
in the handling of this very argument Mr. Hussy yields the cause. God is said
to put all things under him, says he, whereby it is employed that all things
were not under him, before they were put under him; but as the second Person in
Trinity, so nothing could be said to be put under him, because they were in
that respect always under him. Is not this all one for substance with that
distinction formerly cited out of Polanus, of a twofold Kingdom of Christ, one
natural; as he is the second Person in the Trinity, another donative, as he is
Mediator?

Lastly, Mr. Hussy argues from Phil. 2. 8. 9. 10. Christ as Mediator is
exalted to have a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
may bow. Answ. Here is indeed a dignity, glory, and power, as Diodati says,
above all things, but yet not a government or kingdom, as Mediator: for those
who must bow the knee to Christ, are not only things in heaven, that is,
Angels, and things in earth, that is, men, but also things under the earth,
that is, devils, yet devils are none of the Subjects of Christ's kingdom as he
is Mediator. Therefore this Text proves not a Head-ship or Government over all,
(which Mr. Hussy contends for) but a power over all.
I will here anticipate another objection, which is not moved by Mr. Hussy. It
may be objected from 1 Cor. 11. 3. that the head of every man is Christ. I
answer, 1. Some understand this of Christ as God, and as the Creator of man.
And if it be said that the latter clause the head of Christ is God, is meant of
Christ as Mediator, and not as God: yet Martyr tells us out of Chrysostom,
that all these comparisons and subordinations in this Text, are not to be taken
in one and the same sense. 2. I grant also that Christ may be called the head
of every man, not only in respect of his Godhead, but as Mediator, that is,
the head of every man in the Church, not of every man in the World: for the
Apostle speaks, de ordine divinitus sancito in Ecclesiae corpore mystico, as
Mr. David Dicksone (an Interpreter who has taken very good pains in the
Textuall study of Scripture) says upon the place. I shall clear it by the like
forms of speech. Ier. 30 6. Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his
loins? Luke 16. 16. The Kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses unto
it. 1 Cor. 12. 7. The manifestaetion of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal. Heb. 2. 9. Jesus did taste death for every man. Yet none of
these places are meant of every man in the World. 3. Yea in some sense Christ,
as Mediator, may be called the head of every man in the World, that is, in
respect of dignity, excellency, glory, eminence of place, quia in hoc sexu ille
supra omnes eminet, says Gualther, or because no man has parity or equality
of honor with Christ: So Martyr and Hunnius. The English annotations say, that
Christ is the Head of every man, in as much as he is the first begotten among
many brtheren. Which best agrees with my second answer.

But for taking off all these, and for preventing of other objections, that one
distinction will suffice, which I first gave in examining Mr. Colemans Sermon.
In the Mediator Jesus Christ there is, 1. (...), dignity, excellency, honor,
glory, splendour. 2. (...), his mighty power, by which he is able to do in
heaven and earth whatsoever he will. 3. (...) his Kingdom, and Kingly-office or
government. Which three as they are distinguished in God* Thine is the Kingdom,
and the power, and the glory: Why not in the Mediator also? In the first two
respects, Christ as Mediator is over all things, and so over all men, and so
over all Magistrates, and all they in subjection to him. But in the third
respect the relation is only between Christ and his Church, as between King
and Kingdom. So that the thing in difference, is that which Mr. Hussy has not
proved, namely, that Christ as Mediator does not only excel all things in
glory, and exercise a supreme power and providence over all things, for his own
glory, and his Churches good (neither of which is denied) but that he also is
as Mediator, King, Head, and Governor of the Universe, and has not only the
government of his Church, but all Civil government put in his hand. When Mr.
Hussy page 28. says that I denied page 43. what this distinction yields,
namely, that Christ as Mediator exercises acts of divine power in the behalf
and for the good of his Church, it is a calumny: for that which I denied page
43. was concerning the Kingdom, not the power: my words were these. But as
Mediator he is only the Churches King, Head, and Governor, and has no other
Kingdom. Yea himsef, page 26. speaking to these words of mine, notes that I
did not say, that as Mediator he has no such power. How comes it to pass
that he charge me with the denying of that, which himself but two pages
before had observed that I deny it not?

Well, but page 43, he desires from me a further clearing of my distinction,
Kingdom, power, and glory, and that I will show from Scripture, how it agrees
to Christ. I shall obey his desire: though it was before easy to be
understood, if he had been willing enough to understand. Solomon did excel all
the Kings of the earth in wisdom, riches, glory, and honor, 2 Chronicles. 1. 12.
and herein he was a type of Christ, Psalm. 89. 27. I will make him my first
born, higher then the Kings of the earth: But as Solomon was only King of
Israel, and was not by office or authority of Government, a Catholic King
over all the Kingdoms of the World, nor all other Kings Solomon's Vicegerents,
or Deputies: So Jesus Christ as Mediator is only the Churches King, and is not
King or Governor of the whole World, nor Civil Magistrates his Vicegerents,
though he excel them all in dignity, glory, and honor. Again, David did
subdue by power diverse States, Provinces, and Kingdoms, and make them
tributary. But was David King of the Philistines, and King of the Moabites, and
King of the Syrians, and King of the Edomites, because he smote them and
subdued them, 2. Sam. 8. Nay it is added, in that very place verse. 15. And
David reigned over all Israel, and David executed justice and judgment unto
all his people. (And this is one argument to prove that those subdued and
tributrary Territories, were not properly under the government of Israel,
because Israel was not bound to extirpate Idolaters out of those lands, but
only out of the holy land. See Maimonides de Idolol. cap. 7. sect. 1. with the
annotation of Dionysius Vossius.) So Christ who was set upon the throne of
David, does as Mediator, put forth his divine and irresistible power in
subduing all his Churches enemies, according to that Psalm. 2 9. Thou shall
break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters
vessel. Rev. 17. 14. The Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of lords, and
King of kings. But this vis major, this restraining subduing power makes not
Christ, as Mediator, to be King and Governor, not only of his Church, but of
the whole World beside. Yea the power of Christ is over all things, as well as
all persons, over all beasts, fowls, and fishes; Heb. 2. 7. 8. compared with
Psalm. 8. 7. 8. Yea his power is over devils, meant by things under the earth,
Phil. 2. 10. Wherefore it cannot be said, that Christ as Mediator, is King,
Head, and Governor of all those whom he excels in glory, or whom he has
under his power, to do with them what he will. It is a strange mistake when Mr,
Hussy page 43. objecteth against this distinction, that a Kingdom without
power and glory, is a nominall empty thing. Surely there may be a Kingly right
and authority to govern, where there is little either power or glory. But this
is nothing to my distinction, which does not suppose a Kingdom without power
and glory, nor yet power and glory without a Kingdom, but only that the
Kingdom and Government is not to be extended to all those whom the King
excels in glory (for then one King that has but little glory, shall be
subject to a King that has much glory:) or over whom the King exercises acts
of power, (for then the King shall be King to his and his Kingdoms enemies) I
verily believe that this distinction rightly apprehended, will discover the
great mistakes of that supposed universal Kingdom of Christ, as Mediator,
reigning over all things, and the Civil Magistrate as his Vicegerent*

CHAP. VI. Whether Jesus Christ, as Mediator and head of the Church, has laced
the Christian Magistrate to hold and execute his Office under and fo him, as
his Vicegerent. The Arguments for the (...) discussed.
MR. Hussy is very angry at my distinctions and arguments which I brought
against Mr. Col^mans fourth rule, insomuch that in his Reply to me, he spends
very near two parts of three upon this matter, from page 16. to 44. having past
over sicco ped much of what I had said of other points in difference. Come now
therefore and let us try* his strength in this great point. He holds that
Christ as Mediator has placed the Christian Magistrate under him, and as his
Vicegerent, and has given him commission to govern the Church, which if he or
any man can prove from the Word of God, it will go far in the decision of the
Erastian controversy: though this is not all which is incumbent to the
Erastians to prove, for as I first replied to Mr. Colemans fourth rule, the
Question is, whether there be not some other government instituted and
appointed by Jesus Christ to be in his Church beside the Civil Government: and
if it should be granted that Christ even as Mediator has committed, delegated
and instituted Civil Government in his Church, yet they must further prove,
that Christ has committed the whole and sole power of Church Government to the
Magistrate, and so has left no share of Government to the Ministry. But I can
by no means yield that so much contended for Vicegerentship of the Christian
Magistrate, and his holding of his Office of and under Christ as he is Mediator.

Mr. Coleman in his re-examination page 19. was fearful to set his foot upon
so slippery ground. He was loath to adventure upon this a^sertion, that
Magistracy is derived from Christ as Mediator by a Commission of Deputation and
Vicegerentship (which yet did necessarily follow upon the fourth rule which he
had delivered in his Sermon) Wherefore he made a retreat and held him at this,
That Magistracy is given to Christ to be serviceable in his Kingdom. But out
steps Mr. Hussy and boldly (...) a great deal more: I much mistake if he shall
not be made either to make a retreat as Mr. Coleman did, or to do worse.

First of all, this part of our Controversy is to be rightly stated. The
Question is not. 1. Whether the Magistrate be Gods Deputy or Vicegerent, and as
God upon earth; for who denies that? Nor 2. Whether the Magistrate be Christ's
Deputy as Christ is God, and as he exercises an universal dominion over all
things, as the Father and the holy Ghost does. Here likewise I hold the
affirmative. Nor 3. Whether the Christian Magistrate be useful and subservient
to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, even as he is Mediator and King of the Church;
for in this also I hold the affirmative, that is, that as every man in his own
calling, parents, masters, servants, merchants, soldiers etc. being
Christians, so the Magistrate in his eminent station, being a Christian, is
obliged to endeavor the propagation of the Gospel, and the good and benefit of
the Church of Christ. But the Question is, Whether the Christian Magistrate be
a Governor in the Church Vice Christi, in the room and stead of Jesus Christ
as he is Mediator. Or (which is all one) Whether the rise, derivation, and
tenure of Christian Magistracy be from Jesus Christ under this formal
consideration, as he is Mediator and head of the Church. Or (which is also the
same) whether Jesus Christ by virtue of that authority and power of Government
which as Mediator, and as God-man, he received of the Father, has substituted
and given commission to the Christian Magistrate to govern the Church in
subordination to him, as he governs it in subordination to his Father. In all
these Mr. Hussy is for the affirmative, I am for the negative. Let us hear his
reasons. First page 16. He argues from my concession. A Christian Magistrate
is a Governor in the Church, said Mr. Coleman, This understood sano sensu I
admitted. Now says Mr. Hussy, If the Church be Christ's Kingdom, surely such
as govern in it, must receive commission from him. Which commission says he,
must be in this form. Christ the Mediator, King of his Church, does appoint
Kings and Civil Magistrates to govern under him. Let him find this commission
in Scripture, and I shall confess he has done much. Neither does any such
thing follow upon my Concession. For 1. It is one thing to govern in the
Church* another thing to govern the Church: Christian parents, masters of
Colleges, and the like, are Governors in the Church, that is, being within,
not without the Church, yet as Parents or masters they are not
Church Governors. 2. I can also admit that the Christian Magistrate governs
the Church; and if this had been the concession, which is more then the other,
it could not have helped him. For how does the Magistrate govern the Church?
not qua a Church, but qua a part of the CommonWealth, as learned Salmafiu^
distinguishes, Appar. ad lib. de primat. page 292. 300. For the Commonwealth
is not in the Church, but the Church in the Commonwealth, according to that
Rev, 2. The Church in Smyrna, the Church in Pergamus, the Church in Thyatira.
And suppose all that are members of the Commonwealth to be also
Church Members, yet in an universal spread of the Gospel, the Church is
governed by the Magistrate as it is a Commonwealth, not as it is a Church.
Every soul must be subject to the higher powers, Church Officers,
Church Members and all, but the (...) qua tale, and (...): quo ad, is not any
Ecclesiastical or spiritual, but a humane and civil relation. But whereas Mr*
Hussy adds that the Gospel is the Law by which Christ will judge all the
world: if all the world be under the Law of Christ, th^n the Kingdom of Christ
must needs reach over all the World: his proofs are mere mistakes: he cites 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8. Christ shall come in slaming fire, to take vengeance on all
them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:
but in that place they that obey not the Gospel, are those disobedient persons
to whom the Gospel was preached: He cites also Romans 2. 16. Judge all the world
according to my Gospel: but the Text says not so; it says, the secrets of
men, not all the World. Wherefore as the Apostle there says of the Law verse.
12. so say I of the Gospel, as many as have sinned without the Gospel, shall
also perish without the Gospel; and as many as have sinned under the Gospel,
shall be judged by the Gospel.

Secondly, He draws an argument the strength whereof is taken from Psalm. 2.
8. Ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession: and from 1 Timothy 6. 15. our
Lord Jesus Christ is said to be King of kings, and Lord of lords: Jesus,
Christ, being names that agree to him only as Mediator.

Answ. Christ as Mediator has right to the whole earth, and all the kingdoms
of the World, not as if all government (even civil) were given to Christ (for
in this kind he governs not so much as any part of the earth as he is
Mediator) which was the thing he had to prove: but it is meant only of his
spiritual kingdom, which is not of this world, and in this respect alone it is,
that Christ as Mediator has right to the government of all Nations, he has
jus ad rem, though not in re. As for that title King of kings, and Lord of
Lords, it may be understood two ways. First, as Christ is the eternal and
natural Son of God, the eternal wisdom of God, by whom Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice, Prove. 8. 15. 16. which is spoken of Christ, as he was
the Fathers delight, and as one brought up with him before the foundation of
the World: Ibid. verse. 22. to 30. Neither can the names of Jesus and Christ
prove that what is said there must needs be meant of him as Mediator, mark how
well grounded Mr. Husseys arguments are. Jesus sat at meat in Simon the
Pharisees house. Luke 7. 37. Jesus wept for Lazarus because he loved him. John
11. 35. 36. Must we needs therefore say, that as Mediator he sat at meat in
the Pharisees house, and as Mediator he wept for Lazarus? Christ is the Son of
David, Matthew. 22. 42. Must we therefore say that as Mediator he is the Son of
David? Christ is God over all, blessed for ever. Romans 9. 5. Must we therefore
say that this is meant of Christ only as Mediator? What is more ordinary then
to use the names of Jesus and Christ when the thing which is said is meant in
reference to one of the natures? Secondly, Christ is King of kings, and Lord of
lords, even as Mediator: not in Mr. Husseys sense, as if Kings had their
commission from Christ, and did reign in his stead, as he is Mediator; but in
the sense of the Hebraisme, Vanity of vanities, that is, most vain; holy of
holies, that is, most holy; so King of kings, and Lord of lords, that is, the
most excellent glorious King of all others: the excellency, splendour, dignity,
and majesty of Kings may be compared without any subordination. Drusius
Pr^terit. lib. 8. upon this very place which Mr. Hussy objecteth, says that
this form of speech, King of kings, and Lord of lords, was taken from the
Persians and Assyrians, who called a great King, King of kings, and Lord of
lords.

Thirdly, The Kingdom of Christ says Mr. Hussy, is a^ ample as his Prophecy;
but the Prophecy of Christ is extended to all Nations, as may appear by the
commission, G^ teach all Nations. But 1. I throw back the argument; Christ's
Kingdom and his Prophecy are commensurable: therefore as his prophecy is not
actually extended to all Nations, except successively, as the Gospel comes
among them, so his Kingdom, as he is Mediator, is extended no further then the
Church, not to all Nations. 2. His argument therefore is a miserable fallacy a
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. Christ's prophecy is extended to all
Nations successively, and when the Gospel comes among them, therefore his
Kingdom is simply extended to all Nations* and is not bounded within the Church
only.

Fourthly, He tells us page 17. if kings may be called holy, if their Offices
may be accounted holy Offices, or not sinful, they must be held off and under
Christ. Answ. If he mean holy in opposition to civil, humane, worldly, secular,
I deny the office of kings to be holy; if he mean holy in opposition to
sinful, unlawful, unholy (as it seems he does) then I confess the office of
Kings is lawful not sinful, and themselves are holy when sanctified: but this
proves not that they hold their office of and under Christ, more then carters
or cobblers hold their office of and under Christ: I am far from making a
parallel between the Magistrate and these: but this I say, Mr. Husseys plea for
the Magistrate is no other than agrees to these. And where he adds out of
Calvin, Kings have place in the Church, and flock of Christ, and are not
spoiled of their Crown and Sword that they may be admitted into the Church;
this in reference to the conclusion he drives at, is no more than if he had
argued thus, carters and cobblers have place in the Church and flock of Christ,
and are not necessitated to quit their secular calling that they may be
admitted into the Church of Christ, therefore they hold their offices of and
under Christ.

Fifthly, He argues thus, That Office which Christ has declared to be of God,
and bounded and limited in his Gospel, that Office is held under Christ as
Mediator: But the Civil Magistrate is so, Romans 13. 4.

Answ. 1. His proposition is most false, and will never be proved. 2. If this
argument hold good, then the Pagan Magistrate holds his office under Christ as
Mediator (for of such Magistrates then in being, the Apostle means, Romans 13.)
So that either he must recall what he says here, or what he says afterward,
that the office of the Pagan Magistrate is sinful and unlawful. 3, By Mr.
Husseys medium, one might prove that servants hold their office under Christ as
Mediator, because he has declared their office to be of God, and has bounded
and limited the same in his Gospel. Ephesians. 6. 5* 6, 7, 8.

Sixthly, He says they be the same persons that are under Christ, and under
the Magistrate, and further, Christ's ends and the Kings ends are both one, 1 Timothy 2. 2. that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Now either the office of the Mediators Kingdom is superior, or
inferior, or coordinate, in reference to the Magistrates office.

Answ. 1. Very often they are not the same persons that are under Christ, and
under the Magistrate. For 1 Cor. 5. 11, 12. the Apostle distinguishes those
that were within, or those that were called brethren, from those that were
without, both were under the Magistrate, both were not under Christ; and now
the Jews in diverse places are under the Christian Magistrate, not under
Christ. 2. The and of (...) kingly office, and the end of Magistracy are so
different, that to say they are the same, i^ to offer indignity and dishonor
to Jesus Christ. Kings are indeed appointed, that we may live under them a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: But herein he has
answered himself page 29. the civil Magistrate may require of the people, that
they will attend upon the means, out of natural Principles, Deum esse and
colendum. More of the ends of Magistracy I have spoken before, whether I remit
him. The ends of Christ's Kingly Office are quite another thing; namely, to
destroy all our souls enemies, Satan, the flesh, the wicked world, death, to
put all his enemies under his feet; to send out his officers and ministers for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying
of the body of Christ, to govern his people by his Word and Spirit, and to keep
them by the power of God through faith unto salvation. 3. The comparison
between Christ's Kingly office as Mediator, and the Magistrates office, is
neither to be drawn from superiority and inferiority, nor co-ordination; for
they are disparata, and differ toto genere.

And now I shall proceed for methods sake to examine other four Arguments from
Scripture, upon which Mr. Hussy (though he does not join them to the former
six) afterward lays no small weight for upholding that opinion, that the
Magistrate holds his office of and under Christ, as he is Mediator.

The seventh argument therefore shall be that which he draws from Matthew. 28.
18. page 25. Whereunto I have two answers, according to two different
applications of that Text. When Christ said All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth, it may be understood either as he is Mediator, or as he is
the second person in the blessed Trinity, the eternal Son of God. So when
the Ubiquitaries would prove from that place the real communication of Divine
omnipotency to the humane nature of Christ, our Divines answer, the Text may be
understood either of Christ's person, God-man, or as he is the natural Son of
God. See Gomarus upon the place. Now take the Text either way, it proves not
what Mr. Hussy would. Let it be understood of Christ as God-man, and as
Mediator, (which is the most promising sense for him) yet it cannot prove that
all power without exception, and all government as well without as within the
Church, as well secular as Ecclesiastical, is put in Christ's hand as he is
Mediator, and that the civil Magistrate holds his office of and under Christ:
but the sense must be Greg. de Valenti^. comment. in Thom. tom. 4. disp. 1.
quaest. 32. punct. 6. Si autem per omnem potestatem, secundo intelligamus ibi
cum Hieronymo and Anselmo omnem potestatem necessariam quidem Christo ad
gubernandam spiritualiter omnem Ecclesiam, tum in coelo, ubi est caput and rex
(...); tum in terra, ubi (...) homines, quorum item est rex and caput: satis
constat non inde sequi quod accepe^it etiam potestatem pol^ticam. Medina in
tertiam partem, quaest: 59. a^t. 4. Dicendum quad omnis potestas and auctoritas
tribuenda est Christo, si tamen decens sit ad efficium redemptionis; at quod
fuerit rex temporalis totius orbis minime decuit Christum, ^b idque istam
auctoritatem non accepit.
All power which belongs to the Mediator, and all authority which belongs to
the gathering and governing of the Church is given to me: for we must needs
expound his meaning as himself has taught us: John 18. 36. Luke 12. 14. We
must not say that any such power is given to him, as himself denies to be
given to him, namely, civil power and Magistracy. Wherefore Martin Bucer in his
Scripta Anglicana, page 273. does rightly refer these words, All power is
given unto me in heaven and in earth, to the head de Ecclesiae oeconomia, and
makes this Text parallel to John 20. 21, 22, 23. As my Father has sent me, even
so send I you, etc. Whose soever sins ye remit, etc. and to Matthew. 16. 19. I
will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And this is the (...) all authority or
power in heaven and in earth, which is meant Matthew. 28. 18. Which is further
confirmed by the Syriack, which reads thus verse 18. All power is given unto
me in heaven and in earth: but as my Father has sent me* even so send I you.
Verse. 19. Go therefore teach all Nations: So restricting the sense to be in
reference to the Church only, and excluding civil government and Magistracy,
from which Christ had before excluded his Apostles. Medina in tertiam Partem,
quaest. 59. art. 4. holds the same thing, that the context and cohesion of
verse. 18. and verse. 19. proves the Kingdom of Christ to be merely spiritual.

But 2. The Text will suffer yet a further restriction, namely that all power
in heaven and in earth is said to given unto Jesus Christ, as he is the eternal
Son of God, and that both in respect of the eternal generation by which the
Godhead, and so all Divine properties (of which omnipotency is one) was from
all eternity communicated from the Father to the Son: and in respect of the
declaration or manifestation of him to be the Son of God with power, when God
raised him from the dead. Mr. Hussy says he is astonished to hear that any
thing should be given to Christ, as God; Where first of all I observe how
miserably he mangleth and maimeth my words as in other places, so here; He
cites these words as mine, That Christ as he is eternal God, does with the
Father and the holy Ghost reign over the Kingdoms of the earth, etc. and this
power was given etc. It is not fair nor just dealing to change a man's words in
a citation, especially when the change is material. Now here are diverse
changes in this passage. This one only I take notice of, I said not as he is
eternal God, but as he is the eternal Son of God, and all along in that
Question I spoke of the Son of God, not essentially, but personally, as he is
the Son of God, or second person in the Trinity, and so the God head and all
the attributes and properties thereof, are communicated to him from the Father
by the eternal Generation; and as the Nicene Creed said he is Deus de Deo,
Lumen de Lumine, God of God, Light of Light. I ask therefore Mr. Hussy, What
do you mutter here? Speak it out, Do you hold that Jesus Christ is not only
(...), but (...), not only essentially, but personally (...), that he is not
only ex seipso Deus, but ex seipso filius? If this be the thing you hold, then
you oppose me indeed, but so as you fall into a blasphemous heresy, that
Christ as he is the eternal Son of God, has not all power in in Heaven and
in Earth, but only as he is Mediator, because that power is given to him, and
nothing can be given to Christ as he is the eternal Son of God, but only as
he is Mediator, by your principles: But if your meaning be no more then this,
that Christ considered (...) in respect of the very nature and essence of the
Godhead, is (...), not God of God, but God of himself, and that so nothing can
be said to be given to him: then why have you dealt so uncharitably as to
suppose me to be herein opposite unto you; when I plainly spoke of the eternal
Son of God (...) in respect of the personality or relation of filiation, or as
he is the eternal Son of God, in which sense I yet aver confidently, that
all power in heaven and earth may be said to be given to Jesus Christ, as he is
the eternal Son of God by eternal generation.

I added, that all power in heaven and earth may be said to be given to Christ
as he is the eternal Son of God, in another respect, namely in respect of the
declaration thereof at his resurrection. To this Mr. Hussy replieth, that to
hold any thing should be given him that should concern his Godhead at the time
of his resurrection, is more monstrous. Then has Gomarus and others given a
monstrous answer to the Ubiquitaries, yet they clear it by Augustines rule,
aliquid dicitur fieri quando incipit patesieri. Is it any more strange then to
say that Christ was begotten that day when he was raised from the dead Act. 13.
33. The Son of God had in obedience to his Fathers will, laid aside and
relinquished his divine dominion and power when he took upon him the form of a
servant (which I said before, but it seems was not considered by Mr. Hussy)
now at his resurrection the Father restores with advantage that formerly
relinquished Sovereignty.

But he adds, that if Matt. 28. 18. be not understood of Christ as Mediator,
then he had no authority as Mediator to send his Apostles: for it follows Go
ye therefore and preach: from this authority here spoken of, is the authority
to preach the Gospel.

Answ. Not to stand upon the want of the particle (...) therefore, in diverse
Greek coppies: I admit of the cohesion and dependence of the words, thus.
Christ being to give a commission to the Apostles to go and preach the Gospel
to all Nations, he first anticipateth a great objection, which might arise in
the Apostles minds; They might think, how shall we be able to carry the Gospel
through the Nations? We shall have all the powers of the world against us. To
remove this fear, he said, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth,
as if he had said, Do you believe that I who send you out, a^ the Son of the
living God? T^en know assuredly, that my divine power and sovereignty shall be
for you, and I will so overruled all the Kings and Potentates and States of the
World, as may be most for my glory and your good; fear not therefore, but go
and preach to all Nations.

And so much of that Text Matthew. 28. 18. Salmeron upon the place draws from it
Christ's dominion even in temporal things (as Mr. Hussy does) and thence he
deriveth the temporal power of the Pope as Christ's Vicar over the Kings and
Kingdoms of the World. So Suarez in tertiam partem Thomae disp. 48. sect. 2.
Gamachaeus in tertiam partem Thomae, Quaest. 22. yet some of the Papists
themselves are ashamed to defend Christ's dominion in temporal things (except
as God only) it appearin to them so far contrary to other Scriptures.

Bellarmine himself lib. 5. de Pont. Romans cap. 4. confesses that Christ as he
did not execute any Temporal dominion, so he neither had nor received such
power and authority: thereupon he infers that the Pope whom he calls
Christ's Vicar and Representee on earth, has not any Temporal dominion
directly, but indirectly, and in ordine ad spiritualia. I appeal also to
Salmeron in another place where he speaks more soundly Tom. 4. part* 3. Tract.
4. page 413. he proves from John 18. 36. and Luke 12. 14. that Christ had not
nor received not any temporal power, and thence infers, Cum ergo Christus
hujusmodi potestatem non habuerit, nec Petro illam tradidit.

The eigth argument shall be that which Mr. Coleman did draw from 1 Cor. 12.
28. to prove that Christ has placed in his Church Magistrates or civil
Governments. Hereunto I had made four answers. Mr. Hussy passes two of them,
which he is pleased to esteem trifles not worth answer. Now the Gamaliel speaks
e cathedra. The other two he offers to confute, page 28, 29, 30 31. First,
whereas I said that if by Governments in that place be understood civil
Magistrates, yet the Text says not that Christ has placed them. Then says
Mr. Hussy a fortiori you disclaim by that means any Government in this place
as Officers under Christ. No Sir, this reasoning is a baculo ad angulum. I hold
Church Officers and Church Government to be under Christ, and under him as
Mediator, and King of the Church, and am ready to prove it against any that
will deny it: But upon supposition, that civil Government is meant in that
Text, (which I utterly deny) I had reason to call the affirmer to his proper
task, to prove from that Text, that Christ as Mediator has placed civil
Government or Magistracy in his Church. This was the point it was brought for,
and still I call to make good that proof, for I deny it. It seems Mr. Hussy
finds himself puzzled to make it out, and therefore he says, if Mr. Coleman
will be ruled by me. so as Mr. Gilespie will not urge this for constitution of
Church-Governments, he shall (...) it go. But if it be a truth, Sir you ought
to buy it, and not sell it: For my part I dare make no bargain of Scripture.

My next answer was, that the Apostle speaks of such Governors, as the Church
had at that time; but at that time the Church had no Godly nor Christian
Magistrates. Mr. Hussy answers that it cannot be proved that the Apostle
speaks of such Officers as were in the Church in his time only. He adds, I
shall urge some few argaments to the contrary. To the contrary of what? I did
not say that the Apostle speaks of such Officers as were in the Church in his
time only: but that the Church at that time had all those Officers whom the
Apostle speaks of. One would think that he who censureth others so much for
want of skill in disputations, should not so far mistake his mark. But we know
what he would have said though he has not hit it. Let us hear his arguments.
First, he tells us that the word (...) will signify proposuit or decrevit, so
that where we read God has set in the Church, it may be read God has
appointed to his Church, so to take in those Governments which should afterward
by Gods appointment come to the Church. He clears it by John 15. 16. Act. 19.
21. Answ. Then the Apostle says no more to the Corinthians, then might have
been said to the old world before the flood, for if the meaning be that God
has ordained and purposed, all this Text had been true, if delivered in
terminis terminantibus, to the old World, God has set some in the Church,
first Apostles, etc. 2. The context shows that the Apostle speaks only of
such administrations, as the Church had at that time, for all this is spoken in
reference to the preventing of a Schism in the Church of Corinth, and that
every member of that body might discharge its own proper function without
usurping another. 3. He confuteth himself, for he adds, This cannot be a
Catalogue of such Officers as are at all times necessary to the Church, for
th^n Apostles might not be mentioned. Therefore it must be said, that (...) in
this place is posuit or collocavit (according to the more usual signification
of (...)) and does relate to that present time, as well as Act. 20. 28. The
holy Ghost has made or set you overseers (...): In like manner here God has
set (or placed) in the Church, and so it will agree both to ordinary and
extraordinary officers. But if (...) be decrevit, then it will refer the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, miracles, to the future estate of the Church,
as if they were ordinary Officers to continue in the Church. 4. When (...)
signifies decrevit, then the thing is not mentioned, as having an actual
present existence, but a futurition; so that when he takes him to the decrevit,
he quits the posuit, and by that means one cannot prove from that Text, that
the Church at that time had any of these Officers there enumerated: (...)
relates to all that follows, and either it must be posuit to them all, or to
none of them.

5. If he had intended to express Gods decree or purpose to give unto his
Church certain Officers, he would not have said (...) and God has decreed some
in the Church. Which could make no perfect sense except some other thing were
added. Mr. Hussy might as well expound Act. 5. 18. (...), thus, and they
decreed them in the common prison. Mr. Hussy would render the Text thus, he
has appointed to his Church: If the Text had said (...) he might have rendered
it so, but when the Text says (...) he must not render it ^o the Church, but
in the Church, as Act. 19. 21. (...), Paul purposed in the spirit: the purpose
was not to the Spirit, but in the Spirit.

The second Argument whereby he (...) that which I said, is this, at tha^ time
there were workers of miracl^s which did supply the defect of civil
Magistrates. And here he insisteth a while to tell us that thus much a National
Covenant and (...) Magistrate may require of the people, that they will attend
upon the means out of natural principles, which at that time miracles caused
men to attend upon. But quid haec ad Rhombum? How comes this home to that which
he undertook to prove? And if it did, I must say that the civil Magistrate is
but little, and a National Covenant far less beholding to him. And if the
workers of miracles did at that time supply the defect of civil Magistrates (I
suppose he should have said Christian Magistrates) then he must draw Christian
Magistracy to come in succession not so much to the civil Magistracy in the
Apostles times (which yet was true Magistracy) as to the miracles mentioned in
the Text, and so bring in the Christian Magistrate upon the ceasing of
miracles. A fine plea indeed for Christian Magistracy.

His third Argument goes thus, We have in the Text first, second, and third;
when the Apostle speaks of these which might be liable to present view, but
then he breaks off with (...), after that miracles, which lasted somewhat
longer then the Apostles and Prophets; and last we have (...), and these may be
ordinary gifts, and this (...) relates to helps, Governments: that Calvin
thinks the helps were some Officers the Church has lost: But being put both in
one case without any conjunction copulative, why they may not (I believe he
would have said, why may they not? for the sense can be no other) belong both
to one thing, and this (...) may not have some influence upon the times and
after age. Answ. If this be his manner, we shall not much fear the dint of his
Arguments, when it comes to the Schools, which he calls for. What a great
matter is made of mere nothing? First, he offers violence to the Text,
because if (...) note posteriority of time, and ordinary gifts, then (...),
which is compounded from (...) must much rather note the same thing, and so we
shall have not only gifts of healing, but miracles too, ordinary and
continuing administrations in the Church. Next he offers violence to the
Greek language: for when (...) and (...) signify posteriority, not only in
the enumeration, but in the time of existence, then the one must needs signify
a pre-existence, and the other a post-existence, they cannot be contemporary
from their beginnings; yet Mr. Hussy will needs have (...) before miracles,
and again (...) efore gifts of healing and diversities of tongues, to signify
posteriority of time, though he cannot say that gifts of healing and
diversities of tongues were not contemporary but posterior in time to miracles,
And further observe that when the Text runs in this order, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of
healings, etc. Mr. Hussy will make this the sense, that there were Apostles
before prophets, there were Prophets before teachers, there were Teachers
before miracles, there were miracles before gifts of healings, etc. and vice
versa, there were no gifts of healings till after there had been miracles, no
miracles till after there had been Teachers in the Church, etc. even as Mark.
4. 28. (...) first the blad (...) then the ear, (...) after that the full corn
in the ear: the blade has an existence before the ear, the ear before the
full corn. So that taking (...) and (...) in his sense, he must either make
out distinctly the order of time, or else confess he would make the Apostle
speak as never Grecian in the world spoke, or lastly be content to understand
the Apostles words of the order of enumeration. If the word (...) had been in
the Text* that had indeed carried it to posteriority of time as Heb. 12. 17.
but (...) (though sometime it signifies posteriority of time, yet) in this
place having reference to such antecedents and consequents cannot bear his
sense. I see it were no ill sport to examine his quint Arguments if a man had
but so much leisure.

Thirdly, He offers violence to Calvin, for Calv. in 1 Cor. 12. 28. Aut certe
tam munus quam domum olim suit, quod nobis hodie est incognitum: aut ad
diaconiam pertinet, hoc est curam pauperum. Atque hoc secundum mihi magis
arridet*
Calvin says that these helps mentioned 1 Cor. 12. 28. were either an ancient
gift and office unknown to us now, or it belongs to Deaconship, that is, the
care of the poor. And this second (says he) rather pleases me. Qua fide then,
could Mr. Hussy affirm that Calvin thinks they were some Officers that the
Church has lost.

Fourthly, Whereas he thinks helps, governments, to belong both to one thing,
there was some such thing once foisted into the English Bibles: (...), was read
thus, helps in Governments: but afterward the Prelates themselves were ashamed
of it, and so it was printed according to the Greek distinctly, helps,
Govirnments. The Syriack adds a copulative, and reads thus, and helpers,
and Governors, so making them distinct officers in the Church. Neither is it
any unusual thing in the Greek, to put together Nouns in the same case without
any conjunction copulative, when the things themselves so expressed are most
different, as Matthew. 15, 19. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Romans 1. 29, 30. 31.

The next thing he brings against me, is from Ephesians. 4. 11. where there is no
ordinary or standing Officer left to us, but the Teacher of the Word: here is
neither help nor government but this poor Teacher left alone to edify the body
of Christ, and to perfect the Saints. Answ. What Argument is there here? ruling
Elders are not mentioned Ephesians. 4. therefore the Governments mentioned 1 Cor*
12. are such as the Church had not at that time. There are diverse passages of
Christ's doctrine, life, and sufferings, which are not mentioned by Matthew, yet
they are mentioned by John or some of the other Evangelists. So if we take the
primitive platform right, we must set the whole before us, that which is not in
one place is in another place. The Apostle Ephesians. 4. intends only to speak of
preaching officers who are appointed for this work of the Ministry, to bring
us to unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, that we be not
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, v 12 13, 14. And if the Apostle had
intended to enumerate all Church Officers in that place, which were then in the
Church, how comes it he does not mention Deacons which he distinguishes from
Bishops or Elders? 1 Timothy 3.

His last Argument is, that in this very place 1 Cor. 12. the Apostle, when he
does again enumerate the particulars verse. 29. 30. he leaves out helps,
Governments, for which, he says, he knows no reason, but because there were
none such at that time, and the Apostle in that induction was to deal with
their experience. This (as many other things which he has) was before answered
to Mr. Coleman. I give this plain reason for the omission of these two. The
Apostle speaks to those, who were not well satisfied nor contented with their
own station in the Church, but were aspiring to more eminent gifts and
administrations, are all Apostles? says he, are all Prophets? etc. and so he
reckons out only those rare and singular gifts, which men did most covet:
and for that cause it was neither necessary, nor had it been agreeable to the
scope of the Apostle to have added, are all helps? are all Governments? But now
he purposely leaves out these, thereby intimating to the ruling Elders and
Deacons of the Church of Corinth, that they ought to be contented with their
own station, though they be neither Apostles, nor Prophets. etc.

It remains therefore that the Governments in the Church mentioned 1 Cor. 12.
28. were such Governments as were in the Church at that time, and therefore not
to be understood of Christian Magistracy: but of Church*Government distinct
from the civil.

The ninth Argument brought to prove that all Government is given to Christ as
Mediator, and that the Christian Magistrate holds his office of and under
Christ, as the head of Magistracy and Principality, is from Ephesians. 1. 21, 22, 23.
This Argument first propounded by Mr. Coleman, is prosecuted by Mr. Hussy page
32, 33. etc. He demurres upon that which I said, that this place makes more
against him then for him; the meaning whereof was no more then this, that this
place does rather afford us an Argument against him, then him against us. Come
we to the particulars. My first Reply was, The Apostle says not that Christ is
given to the Church, as the head of all Principalities and Powers. The Brother
says so, and in saying so he makes Christ a head to those that are not of his
body. This exception Mr. Hussy quarrelleth, but when he has endeavored to
prove from that Text that Christ is the head of Principalities: because he that
is head of all things, is also head of Principalities: though he will never be
able to make it out from that Text, that Christ (as Mediator) is head of all
things, but only, that he who is the Churches head is over all things; and
gave him to be the head over (not of) all things to the Church, says the Text,
which as I told before, the Syriack reads more plainly thus, and him who is
over all, he gave to be the head to the Church.) At last he fairly gives over
the proof. It is true says he, disputations do require men to keep close to
terms, but in Col. 2. 10. ye have the very words, head of all Principality and
Power. In Col. 2. 10. Christ as he is the eternal Son of God, is called head
of all Principality and power: as we shall see anon: but Ephesians. 1. where the
Apostle speaks of Christ's headship, in reference to the Church, and as
Mediator, he is not called the head of all Principality and Power. So that I
had reason to except against Mr. Colemans argument which made that Text Ephesians.
1. to say what it says not. Now what says he to the reason I added, can
Christ be a head to them that are not of his body? He tells me the visible
Church is not the body of Christ, but only the faithful. He might have
observed the visible Church consisting of visible Saints, plainly spoken of, as
the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 12, 12. 14 27. I know the visible
Church is not all one with the invisible and mystical body of Christ; but he
who denies the visible Church to ^e the visible, political, ministerial body
of Christ, must also deny the visible Church to be the visible Church; for if a
Church, then certainly the body of Christ, at least visibly.

The next thing which I did reply, was in explanation of the Text, which was
to this sense. He that is the Churches head, is over all, both as he is the
Son of God, or as the Apostle says Romans 9. 5. God over all, blessed for
ever, yea even as man he is over or above all creatures, being exalted to a
higher degree of glory, majesty, and dignity, then man or Angel ever was, or
shall be: but neither his divine omnipotency, nor the height of glory and
honor which as man he is exalted to, nor both these together in the Mediator
and Head of the Church, omnipotency and exaltation to glory, can prove that (as
Mediator) he exercises his Kingly office over all Principalities and Powers,
and that they hold of and under him as Mediator. Mr. Hussy replieth that the
Text makes Christ over or above Principalities and Powers, not only in dignity
and honor, but as King or Head of them, and that thus we must understand the
comparison, that he is above Principality in Principality, Power in Power,
Might in Might, Dominion in Dominion. This is nothing but a begging of what is
in Question: That the Power and Dominion of the civil Magistrate, is eminently
in Christ as Mediator, and from him (so considered) derived to the Magistrate,
is that which I deny can be proved from that Text; and lo when he comes to the
point of probation, he supposes what he had to prove. My exposition of the
Text made good sense; For as an earthly King is exalted to have more power and
more glory, then those not only of his Subjects, but of another State or
Kingdom to whom he is not King; so the Mediator and King of the Church is
exalted to power and glory far above all Principality and Power, but is not
therefore Head or King or Governor to all Principality and Power, as Mediator.
And as me exposition makes good sense of the Text, his makes very bad sense of
it. For if Christ as Mediator be head and King of all Principalities, powers,
and Dominions, then he is, as Mediator, head and King of Heathenish and Turkish
Principality, Power, might, and Dominion; and when the Apostle wrote this to
the Ephesians, it must be granted (according to Mr. Husseys gloss) that Christ
as Mediator was head and King of the Roman Emperor, and that Caesar held his
office of and under Christ as Mediator: for if head of all Principality, how
shall they except any?

I further brought several reasons from the Text it self. The first was this,
The honor and dignity of Jesus Christ there spoken of, has place not only in
this world, but in that which is to come (verse. 21) But the Kingdom and
Government which is given to Christ as Mediator, shall not continue in the
World to come. Mr. Hussy answers page 41. this is Ignoratio el nehi, it
follows not, that which belongs to him in reference to the World to come,
belongs not to him as Mediator, therefore that Government that is given to
him in reference to this World, is not given to him as Mediator. But still he
beggs what is in Question, and divides asunder what the Text coupleth
together, not only in this World, but also in that which is to come: here is a
rising and heightning, but no contradistinction, nothing here of one exaltation
in reference to the World to come, another in reference to this World: but that
exaltation of Christ above every name that is named, (which this Text speaks
of) begins in this World, and shall continue in the World to come. Calvin. in
Ephesians. 1. 21. Seculi autem futuri disertam facit mentionem, ut significet non
temporalem esse Christi excellentiam, sed aeternam. He makes express mention
of the World to come, that he may signify Christ's excellency not to be
temporal, but eternal. This does well agree to the dignity, excellency, glory,
and honor of Christ, but it cannot be said that Christ shall for ever continue
in his Kingly Office as Mediator.

The second reason which I fetched from the Text, was from verse. 22. He has put
all things under his feet; that is, all things except the Church, says
Zanchius. But all things are not yet put under his feet, except in respect of
Gods decree; It is not yet done actually. Heb. 2. 8. Now Christ reigns as
Mediator before all things be put under his feet, not after all things are put
under his feet, which is clear 1 Cor. 15. 25. Act. 2. 34, 35. Mr. Husseys reply
page 41. 42. says, that the Church is not here to be excepted, but Church and
all is here put under Christ's feet, which he proves by Heb. 2. 8. He left
nothing that is not put under him. But this cannot be understood to be actually
done; for the next words say, But now we see not yet all things put under him:
and if not done actually, but in respect of Gods decree and foreknowledge,
(according to the sense I gave out of Hierome on Ephesians. 1. 22.) how can it
strengthen him in this particular? We see not yet. This yet shall not expire
till the end, when Christ shall put down all authority and power. And now when
it is said He has put all things under his feet. Ephesians. 1. 22. that the Church
is not meant to be comprehended, but to be excepted in that place as Zanchius
says, may thus appear; the Apostle distinguishes the all things from the
Church, and calls the Church the body of Christ, and him the head to that body,
but the all things are put under Christ's feet (his body is not under his feet,
but under the head) and he over all things: for so runs the Text, and has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church, which is his body.

And whereas Mr. Hussy distinguishes between Christ's putting all his enemies
under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. and the Fathers putting all things under his
feet, Ibid. verse. 27. and makes this latter to be an actual putting under him
of friends, foes, Church and all, whence it seems he would have it to follow,
that Christ reigns as Mediator, even after all things are put under his feet.
He is herein easily confuted from Heb. 2. ^. Where God the Father his putting
all things under Christ's feet, is plainly declared to be a thing to come, and
not yet actually done.

The next reason which I gave out of the Text was from those words, And gave
him to be the head over all thiags to the Church; Christ's headship and his
Government as Mediator, are commensurable. Christ is a head to none but to his
Church. These words of mine Mr. Hussy changes thus: he is head over none
says Mr. Gilespie, but his Church, and then he adds, Is this to argue out of
Scripture, or rather to deny and outface the Scripture? the Scripture says, he
is over all. See what unconscionable impudent boldness this is, to cite my
words (yea in a different character too, that his Reader may believe it the
better) and yet to change not only my words, but my meaning. I purposely kept
my self to the Text, that Christ is a head to none but to his Church, yet he
that is the Churches head is over all things. And since Mr. Hussy will needs
hold that Christ as Mediator is head of all things (which the Text says not)
what were the consequence hereof? The Text says (...) over all things, not
over all persons only: So Heb. 2 7, 8. compared with Psalm. 8. 6, 7. Whence it
follows by Mr. Husseys principles (which I tremble to mention) that Christ as
Mediator is Head and King not only of men, but of sheep, oxen, fowls, and
fishes. Behold how dangerous it is for men to be wise above that which is
written.

The last reason which I brought from the last verse, was this, The Church is
there called Christ's fullness in reference to his Headship. This Mr. Hussy
says, seems to come tolerably from the Text; but the next words, that which
makes him full and complete so far as he is a Head or King: he calls a
fallacy, How comes this word King in here? says he; First here he yields
that the Church makes Christ full and complete so far as he is a Head, whence
it follows that as Mediator he is only the Churches head, and there is no
other body of Christ but the Church; for if the Church be his fullness, his
complete body, there can be no other body of Christ. Does not this destroy what
he has been arguing for, that Christ as Mediator is head of all Principality
and Power? And for the word King, it may well come in where Head comes: for
is not Christ's Kingdom as Mediator, commensurable with his Headship as
Mediator? Is he as Mediator King to any to whom he is not Head? Surely this
very answer as it is his last, so it really yields the cause.

The tenth objection is that which I my self moved to prevent my Antagonists.
Christ is called the Head of all Principality and Power, Col. 2. 10.

To this I answered out of Bullinger, Gualther, and Tossanus; the scope and
meaning of the Apostle, is to show that Christ is true God, and therefore we
must not understand the Apostle to speak of Christ's headship as he is Mediator,
but as he is the natural and eternal Son of God. Mr. Hussy page 34. thinks
it is no good consequence, the Apostle speaks not of Christ as Mediator,
because he speaks of him as true God, Is not Christ says he, true God as
Mediator? I answer, As Mediator he is God-man. But he must remember the
Argument is urged to prove the subordination of all Principality and power to
Jesus Christ as Mediator. Now let him prove that the Apostle speaks there of
Christ as Mediator; I say he speaks of Christ as God; He cannot conclude
against what I said, except he argue thus, that which Christ is as God, he is
as Mediator; which is false, as I have made it appear elsewhere. Well: but Mr.
Hussy proves from the Text that Christ is there spoken of as Mediator. verse.
9, 10. For in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are
complete in him which is the head of all Principality and power. But he draws
no argument from the words. Neither is there any thing in them which makes
against me. The Apostle shows them, that the man Jesus Christ is also true God,
equal and consubstantial with the Father; for the very fullness of the Godhead
is in him, that is, he is fully and completely God, so that says Calvin, they
who desire something more then Christ, must desire something more then God.
Wherefore our Writers make the right use of this place when they bring it
against the Socinians, to prove the Godhead of Christ. See Christian. Becman.
exercit. 9. This fullness of the Godhead is in Christ bodily, that is, either
personally, to distinguish him from the holy men of God, who were inspired by
the holy Ghost; or substantially, as others take the Word, in opposition to the
Tabernacle and Temple in which the Godhead was typically. Ye are complete in
him, says the Apostle, meaning because he is completely God, so that we need
not invocate or worship Angels, as if we were not complete in Christ. Mr.
Hussy admits what I said concerning the scope of the place, to teach the
Colossians not to worship Angels, because servants: But says he, may they not
worship Christ as Mediator? yes doubtless they may. No doubt he that is
Mediator must be worshipped, because he is God; Christ God-man is the object of
divine adoration, and his Godhead is the cause of that adoration; but whether
he is to be worshipped because he is Mediator, or under this formal
consideration as Mediator; and whether the Mediator ought to be therefore
adored with divine adoration, because he is Mediator, is res altioris
indaginis. If Mr. Hussy please to read and consider what diverse School*men
have said upon that point, as Aquinas tertia part. quaest. 25. art. 1. and 2.
Alex. Alensis Sum. Theol. part* 3. quaest. 30. membr. 2. Suarez in tertiam
part. Thomae Disp. 53. sect. 1. Valentia Comment. in Tho. Tom. 4. Disp. 1.
quaest. 24. punct. 1. Tannerus Theol. Scholast. Tom. 4. Disp. 1. quaest. 7.
Dub. 7. But much more if he please to read Disputatio de adoratione Christi,
habita inter Faustum Socinum and Christianum Francken: and above all Dr.
Voetius select. disput. ex poster. part. Theol. Disp. 14. An Christus qua
Mediator sit adorandus? Then I believe he will be more wary and cautious what
he holds concerning that Question. But I must not be ledd out of my way to
multiply Questions unnecessarily: All that I said was, that the Apostle
teaches the Colossians, not to worship Angels, because they are servants, but
Christ the Son of the living God, who is the Head and Lord of Angels; and in
that place the Apostle speaks of the honor which is due to Christ as God;
and if we would know in what sense the Apostle calls Christ the Head of all
Principality and Power, see how he expounds himsel Coloss. 1. 15, 16, 17.
speaking of the Godhead of Jesus Christ. Finally, If Mr. Hussy will prove any
thing from Coloss. 2. 10. against us, he must prove that those words which is
the head of all Principality and power, are meant in reference not only to the
Angels, but to Civil Magistrates; and next, that they are meant of Christ, not
only as God, but as Mediator. Both which he has to prove, for they are not
yet proved.

CHAP. VII. Arguments for the Negative of that Question formerly propounded.
MY Arguments against the derivation of Magistracy from Jesus Christ as
Mediator, and against the Magistrates holding of his office of and under Christ
as Mediator, are these.

First, This Doctrine does evacuate and nullify the civil Authority and
Government of all Heathen or Pagan Magistrat^; for which way was the authority
of Government derived from Christ, and from him as Mediator, to a Pagan
Magistrate or Emperor? If he has not his power from Christ as Mediator, then
he is but an usurper, and has no just title to reign, according to their
Principles which hold that all government, even civil, is given to C rist, and
to him as Mediator. Mr. Hussy forsooth does learnedly yield the argument, and
answers page 20. that not only it is a sin to be a Heathen, but the
government of a Heathen is sinful and unlawful, for which he gives this
reason, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. He might as well conclude, in that
sense, that the best virtues of the Heathen were sin, because not of faith,
that is, accidentally sin, in respect of the end, or manner of doing, not
materially, or in their own nature. Upon the same reason he must conclude, that
the government of a Christian Magistrate is unlawful, if it be not of faith,
as oftimes it is not, through the blindness and corruption of men's hearts who
govern. But whether is the government of a Heathen Magistrate per se,
simpliciter, and ex natura sua, unlawful and sinful? Whether has he any just
right or title to Government and Magistracy? If his title to civil Magistracy
be just, and if his government be in it self materially and substantially
lawful* then he must have a Commission from Christ, and from him as Mediator:
This I suppose cannot be Mr. Husseys sense, for he has not answered one
syllable to the argument, tending that way. But if the Government of an Heathen
Magistrate be in it self materially, substantially, and in the nature of the
tenure, sinful and unlawful, so that as long as he remains an Heathen, he
has no real right, nor true title to Government, but only a pretended and
usurped title (which must needs be Mr. Husseys sense, if he has answered any
thing at all to my Argument) then he goes cross not only to the holy men of
God in the old Testament who honored Heathen Princes, and were subject to them
as to lawful Magistrates; but also to the doctrine of Jesus Christ, who taught
his Disciples to give unto Caesar what is Caesar's; and of the Apostles who in
their time exhorted the Churches to be subject even to Heathen Magistrates (for
they had no other at that time) to obey them, to pray for them. Romans 13. Titus
3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. 17. It is justly condemned as one of
the errors of the Anabaptists, that an heathen Magistrate is not to be
acknowledged as a lawful Magistrate, or as being from God. See Gerhard loc.
com. Tom. 6. Page 498 499 P. Hinkelmannus de Anabaptismo disp. 13. cap. 1. The
Scriptures now cited are so clear, that when Mr. Hussy says of the heathen
Magistrate, Let Baal plead for himself, he might as well have said, that Christ
and his Apostles pleaded for Baal. They that plead for the authority of an
heathen Magistrate do not plead for Baal, but for God, and for his ordinance:
for the powers that be, are ordained of God, says Paul speaking even of the
heathen Magistrates, Romans 13. 1. But what will Mr. Hussy say, if his great
master Erastus be found a pleader for Baal, as much as I am? Confirm. These.
lib. 3. cap. 2. page 184. speaking of the heathen and unbeleeving Magistrates,
before whom the Corinthians went to law one against another, he says, An non
est impius quoque Magistratus a Deo praepositus, ut subjectes quoslibet ab
injuria and vi tueatur? Is not the ungodly Magistrate also preferred by God,
that he may defend any of his Subjects from injury and violence. Yea the
Scriptures before touched are so clear in this point, that Gamachaeus in primam
secunda Quaest. 4. and 5. cap. 33. though he hold that by humane and
Ecclesiastical right, Pagan Princes lose their dominion and authority over
their Subjects, when their Subjects turn Christians; yet he acknowledges that
they still retain their former Jurisdiction over those Subjects, by the Law of
God and nature. Surely one might as well say, that heathen Parents are
unlawful, and heathen masters are unlawful, and heathen husbands are unlawful;
(all which were contrary to the Word of God) as to say that heathen Magistrates
are unlawful. Take the instance in Parents, for all lawful Magistrates are
fathers by the fifth Commandment. Does the paternity of a heathen father
differ specie, from the paternity of a Christian father? are they not both
lawful parents, being made such by God and nature? are not their children bound
to honor them, and be subject to them, and obey them in things lawful? The
paternity is the same in se, but different modaliter that I may borrow a
distinction from Mr. Hussy. The Christian father is sanctified, and qualified
to do service to Jesus Christ, as a father, in educating his children
Christianly, which an heathen father can not do. So the heathen Magistrate, and
the Christian Magistrate are both lawful Magistrates, being made such by God
and nature, or by election of people: they are both of them to be honored,
submitted unto, and obeyed, they are both of them the ministers of God for good
to their people: their power is the same in actu signato, though not in actu
exercito. The heathen Magistrate may do and ought to do what the Christian
Magistrate does; but the Christian Magistrate is fitted, qualified, enabled,
and sanctified to glorify and serve Jesus Christ, as a Magistrate, which the
heathen Magistrate is not.

Secondly, They that hold the derivation of Magistracy to be from Jesus Christ,
and that it is held of and under him as Mediator, must either show from
Scripture that Jesus Christ as Mediator has given a commission of
Vicegerentship or Deputyship to the Christian Magistrate, or otherwise
acknowledge, that they have given the most dangerous and deadly wound, even to
Christian Magistracy it self, which ever before it received. Mr. Hussy page 20
answers, I conceive he (the Christian Magistrate) has a Commission from
Christ: but when he should prove it (which my argument called for) here he is at
a loss. He cites Psalm. 72* 11. All Kings shall fall down before him, all
Nations shall serve him. Isa. 60. 12. That Nation and Kingdom that will not
serve thee shall perish. I hope indeed there is a time coming when all Kings
shall fall down before Jesus Christ, and all Nations shall serve him, and that
will make an end of the Erastian controversy. But I pray, do all that serve
Jesus Christ, hold their office of and under Christ, as Mediator, and as his
Vicegerents? then the poorest servant that fears God shall be a Vicegerent of
Jesus Christ, as Mediator, and shall have a commission from Christ to that
effect, for every godly servant does not serve his master only, but Christ,
Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7. Again, if those who shall perish because they serve not
Christ, be his Deputies and Vicegerents; then the wickedest persecuters in the
World shall have a commission of Vicegerentship from Jesus Christ. Well, let
the Christian Magistrate animadvert, whether these men have done any
thankworthy service to Magistracy, who will needs have it to hold of and un^er
Christ as Mediator, and by a commission of Vicegerentship from him; and when
they are put to it, to produce that commission, they prove no more then agrees
either to the meanest Christian, or to the wickedest persecuter. The Ministry
has a clear undeniable commission from Christ as Mediator (even our opposites
themselves being Judges) Matthew. 16. 19. and 28. 19. 20. John 20. 21, 22* 23. 2
Cor. 5. 19, 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Act. 20. 28. Tit. 1. 5. I say therefore again*
let them also show from Scripture a commission from Jesus Christ constituting
Christian Magistrates to be his Vicegerents as he is Mediator, and to hold
their office of and under him as Mediator: which if they cannot show, they have
done a greater disservice to the Christian Magistrate, then they can easily
repair or amend: We are sure the lawful Magistrate (whether Heathen or
Christian) is Gods Vicegerent* and that is a safe holding of his office. But
our opposites shall never prove, that any civil Magistrate (though Christian
and godly) is the Vicegerent of Jesus Christ as Mediator. And in seeking to
prove it, I am persuaded they shall but discover their own weakness, and shall
also weaken the Magistrates authority more then they can strengthen it.

Thirdly, The Scripture intimates this difference between Ministry and
Magistracy; that the work of the Ministry and the administrations thereof are
performed in the name of Jesus Christ as Mediator and King of the Church: the
work of Magistracy not so, except we add to the Word of God; they who will do
any thing in the Name of Jesus Christ as Mediator, and cannot find any
Scripture which can warrant their so doing, are liars, and the truth is not in
them. Now let our opposites show (if they can) where they find in Scripture,
that the Christian Magistrate is to rule in the name of Christ, to judge in the
name of Christ, to make laws in the name of Christ, to make war or peace in the
name of Christ, to punish evil doers with the Temporal Sword in the name of
Christ. Of the Ministry I did show, that in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ
we do assemble our selves together, Matthew. 18. 20. in his name do we preach,
Luke 24. 47. Act. 4. 17, 18. and 5. 28. 44. and 9. 27. In his name do we
baptize, Act. 2. 38. and 8. 16. and 19. 5. In his name do we excommunicate, 1
Cor. 5. 5. These my proofs from Scripture Mr. Hussy page 21. professes he
will examine according to laws of disputation. I know none transgresses those
laws more than himself, and even in this very place where he professes to keep
close to laws of disputation: my first proof from Matthew. 18. 20. he
quarrelleth upon a mere mistake of his own. He says I brought it to prove the
institution of Church Officers, and that to prove it, I do appropriate the
meeting in the name of hCrist to Church Officers, and thereupon he tells us the
Text says not, that none shall gather together in my name but Church Officers.
Are these Mr. Husseys laws of disputation? He had need to be a better disputer
who calls others to School. I did not speak here of the Institution of
Church Officers, and far less did I exclude all others from meeting in the
name of Christ; Church Officers assemble in the name of Christ with the Church;
and when they assemble in the name of Christ apart, and without the multitude,
will it follow that because they meet in the name of Christ, therefore none but
they meet in the name of Christ. Well, let Mr. Hussy try all his Logic in
this consequence, it will not do. The sixth general Council, Action 17. apply
unto their own oecumenicall Assembly, that promise of Christ Matthew. 18. 20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, etc. Protestant Writers
both in their Commentaries, and Polemick Writings, do usually apply the same
Text to Synods and Counsels: For instance, Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 9.
sect 1. and 2. holds that the authority of Counsels depends upon that
promise of Christ, Where two or three are met together in my name, etc. That
which went before, carries it to Assemblies for acts of discipline, as being
principally intended in that place. The promise ver. 20. is general, belonging
to all Church Assemblies: yet in that place it is applied to Assemblies of
Church Officers for discipline. But neither need I go so far in this present
argument; for when Church Officers meet with the Church for the Word,
Sacraments* and other parts of Worship, this is in the name of Jesus Christ,
without all controversy, and this is enough to justify all that I brought
that Text for; especially there being herein a difference between sacred and
civil Assemblies: there is no such promise made to Magistrates Courts of
Justice, as to Church Assemblies. That which he cites out of Dr. Whittaker and
Bishop Mortoun makes nothing against me, neither does he quote the places,
peradventure because he found something in those passages which made against
him. Whittakers sense is plainly of sacred, and not of civil Assemblies. And
for that so much controverted Text Matthew. 18. 17. Tell the Church. Whittaker
expounds it as we do against the Erastians, Tell the Pastors and Rulers of
the Church. Whittak. de Eccles. quaest. 1. cap. 2. Dic Ecclesiae, hoc est
Pastoribus and Praefectis Ecclesiae.

As for preaching, Mr. Hussy says, it is out of question that we preach in
the name of Christ. Well: then let him show such another thing of the
Magistrate, as is without controversy done by him in the name of Christ.

But where I added, that in the name of Jesus Christ we baptize, though I said
no more then the Scripture says, yet he is pleased to object against me. These
places he cites says he, to prove that we baptize in the Name of Jesus, as
exclusively to Father and holy Ghost, (leaving out the words of the commission:
Matthew. 28. Baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost) for so the
state of his question does require; for he distinguishes acutely and acurately
between Christ as Mediator and second person (he should have said as second
Person) in Trinity, in all this Argument. And so he concludes that which I had
said to be contrary to the words of the Commission and the practice of all
Churches. What does he drive at? I cited plain Texts to prove that baptism is
administered in the name of Christ: Either Mr. Hussy denies that this is done
in the name of Christ as Mediator: or he denies it not. If he deny it, let
him speak it out, and he shall not want an answer. Mean while let him remember
that himself page 25. says, that Christ as Mediator did give that commission
to the Apostles, Go Preach and baptize. If he deny it not, then let him give
the like instance for Magistracy and civil Government, to prove it to be
managed in the name of Jesus Christ as Mediator, else he must not plead that
Magistracy is of the same tenure from Christ as the Ministry. Again, either he
admits a distinction between Christ as Mediator, and as second person in
Trinity, or not. If he do not, he will infallibly wind himself into a gross
heresy; as namely these two. 1. He must deny that principle which according
to the Word of God, all Orthodox Divines hold against the Arrians and
Antitrinitarians, that Synop. pur. Theol. Disp. 26. These. 29. Tametsi ob istam
mediationem filius Dei minor sit Patre, non propterea ipso minor est quoad
Deitatem.
Christ as Mediator is subordinate unto, and lesser then the Father; but as
second person in the Trinity he is not subordinate unto nor lesser then the
Father, nor the Father greater then he, but as such he is equal with the Father
in greatness, glory, and honor. 2. As opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa, he must also hold that whatsoever Christ as Mediator does, that also
the Father and the holy Ghost does: but Christ as Mediator did humble himself
to the death, offer himself in a sacrifice for sin, makes intercession for us,
Ergo, he must conclude the Father does the same. But if he do admit the
distinction as Mediator, and as second person in Trinity, then why does he so
often quarrel it? And in this very place his Argument must drive against that
distinction, or against nothing. But how does the baptizing in the name of
Christ as Mediator, agree with the commission to baptize in the name of the
Father* Son, and holy Ghost? Though this belong not to my Argument, yet I will
by the way speak to it. First I say, the Question is of things or actions, not
of words. Mr. Hussy (it seems) did apprehend my meaning, as if I had intended
an expression to be made in the act of baptizing, thus, I baptize thee in the
name of Jesus Christ. But I spoke of the action, not of the expression, even as
in the other instance I gave; our assembling together is in the name of Christ,
though we do not say in terminis, We are now assembled in the name of Christ.
In baptism Christ does not command us to say, either these words, I baptize
thee in the Name of Christ; or these words, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: but we are commanded to do the thing, both in the
name of Christ as Mediator, and in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
But in different respects. A minister of Christ does both preach and baptize in
the name of Christ as Mediator, that is vice Christi* in Christ's stead, and
having authority for that effect from Christ as Mediator; for Christ as
Mediator gave us our commission to preach and baptize by Mr. Husseys
confession. So that to preach and baptize (...) (which we find both of
preaching, Luke 24 47. and of baptizing, Act. 2. 38.) comprehends a formal
commission, power and authority given and derived from Christ, I say not that
it comprehends no more, but this it does comprehend. But when Christ bids
us baptize (...) unto, or into, or in the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. this does relate to the end and effect of baptism, or the
good of the baptized (if we understand the words properly) not the authority of
the baptizer, as if a formal commission were there given him from the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. So that to baptize one in or unto the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, is properly meant both of sealing the parties right and
title to the enjoyment of God himself, as their God by covenant, and their
interest in the love of God, the grace of Christ, and the communion of the holy
Ghost; and of dedicating the party to the knowledge, profession, says, love,
and obedience of God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

I return, The next branch of my Argument was that we excommunicate in the name
of Christ 1 Cor. 5 5. Mr. Hussy page 22. says I make great have here, deliver
to Satan says he is not to excommunicate, etc. But grant that it were
excommunication, etc. the decree was Paul's, and not the Corinthians. What is
meant by delivering to Satan, belongs to another debate. Call it an
Apostolical act, or call it an Ecclesiastical act, or both, yet it was done
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ; the like whereof we find not in Scripture
of any act of the civil Magistrate. Why does he not attend to the drift of the
Argument? And as to his exceptions Synops. pur. Theol. Disp. 42. Coroll. 4. An
Apostolus Paulus cum hominem incestuojum Satanae tra^ret, quicquam peculiare
habuerit? Nos contra Socinianos Apostolum Paulum non ex jwe sibi peculiari, sed
sibi cum omnibus Ecclesiae Preslyteris communi, incestuosum illum Satanae
tradidisse, colligimus ex 1 Cor. 5. 4. Mat. 18. 17. 18.
they are no other then Prelates, Papists, and Socinians have made before him,
and which are answered long ago. That the Apostle commands to excommunicate
the incestuous man, is acknowledged by Mr. Prynne. That he who is
excommunicated may be truly said to be delivered to Satan, is undeniable; for
he that is cast out of the Church, whose sins are retained, on whom the Kingdom
of heaven is shut and locked, whom neither Christ nor his Church does own, is
delivered to Satan, who reigns without the Church. That this censure or
punishment of excommunication was a Church act, and not an Apostolical act
only, may thus appear. 1. The Apostle blames the Corinthians, that it was not
sooner done; he would not have blamed them, that a miracle was not wrought. 2.
He writes to them, to do it when they were gathered together, not to declare
or witness what the Apostle had done, but to join with him in the
authoritative doing of it, verse. 4. 5. again he says to them verse. 7. Purge
out therefore the old leaven. verse. 12. Do not ye judge them that are within?
verse. 13. Put away from among your selves that wicked person. 3. It was a
censure inflicted by many, 2. Cor. 2. 6 not by the Apostle alone, but by many.
4. The Apostle does not absolve the man, but writes to them to forgive him, 2
Cor. 2. 7. Lastly, the Syriack makes for us, which runs thus, verse. 4. That
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you all may be gathered together, and I
with you in the Spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, verse. 5. That
you may deliver him to Satan. etc.

But now at last Mr. Hussy comes home, and gives this answer to my third
Argument. A thing may be said to be done in the name of Christ or of God, when
men do any thing in confidence that God will assist us: so Psalm. 20 5. In the
name of our God will we set up our banners in confidence God will assist us:
Thus I hope the Parliament and other Christians may undertake the business in
the name of Christ, etc. Secondly, In the name of Christ a thing is said to be
done, that is done in the authority, room, and place of Christ, etc. So he page
24. seeking a knot in the rush. In the first part of his distinction, he says
nothing to my Argument, neither says he any more of the Parliament then
agrees to all Christians, the poorest and meanest; for every Christian
servant, every Christian Artificer is bound to do whatsoever he does, in the
name of Christ, Colos. 3. 17. But what is that to the Argument? Come to the
other member of his distinction. The Ministers of Christ do act in the name of
Christ: that is, in the authority, room and place of Christ; We are Ambassadors
for Christ, and we preach in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. This he does not nor
cannot deny: (which makes good my Argument;) Why did he not show us the like
concerning Magistracy? I suppose he would, if he could: this is the very point
which he had to speak to, but has not done it.

My fourth Argument against the Magistrates holding of his office of, and
under, and for Christ, that is, in Christ's room and stead as Mediator, shall be
that which was drawn from Luke 12. 14. The Jews were of the same opinion,
which Mr. Coleman and Mr. Hussy have followed, namely, that civil government
should be put in the hands of Christ, which they collected from Ier. 23. 5. He
shall execute justice and judgment in the earth; and such other Prophecies by
them mis-understood. And hence it was that one said to Christ, Master, Speak to
my brother that he divide the inheritance with me. Our Lords answer was, Man
who made me a Judge or a divider over you. Whatsoever act of authority is done
by a Deputy or Vicegerent, as representing his Master and Sovereign, may be
done by the King himself when personally present: If therefore the Magistrate
judge civil causes, and divide inheritances, as the Vicegerent of Christ, and
of Christ as Mediator, then Christ himself, when present in the days of his
flesh, had power as Mediator to judge such causes. But this Christ himself
plainly denies. Let us hear Mr. Husseys answer, page 24. (It is the very same
with that which Azorius Instit. mor. part. 2. lib. 4. cap. 19. (pleading for
the Popes Temporal Dominion) answers concerning the point now in hand) It
does not follow that because Christ was not a Judge actu exercito, therefore
the original right of Government was not in him: And this Objection may be
answered thus, Christ does not say he was not a Judge, but who made me a Judge?
how do thou know that I am a Judge? And thus Christ in the time of his
humiliation did often hide the manifestation of his power. Jo. Brentius Hom. in
Luc. Tom. 1. Hom. 106. Quis me construit Judicem aut divisorem super vos? hoc
est, alia est civilis Magistratus voca to, alia mea vocatio. Ad illum pertinet
ut dijudicet controversias de haereditatibus, and id genus ahis rebus. Ad me
autem pertinet ut doceam Evangelion de remissione peccatorum, and vita aeterna.
Ut igitur nollem quod magistratus meum officium temere usurparet, ita and mea
interest, ne temere usurpem mihi vocationem magistratus. Observanda doctrina,
qua non solum erudimur, quod sit proprium and legitimum officium Christi in hoc
externo mundo, verum etiam admonemur exemplo Christi, ne quis alienam
vocationem illegitime invadut. Jo. Winckelmannus in Luke 12. 14. Negat se esse
politicum Judicem herciscundae familiae, sicut nec adulteram damnet, Joh. 8.
Ostendit enim esse discrimen inter Politicum magistraium, and munus
Ecclesiasticum.
What greater violence could be offered to the Text? For the Verb (...)
constituit is purposely used to deny the power or right, as well as the
exercise; and proves that he was not a Judge actu signato, having no such
power nor authority given him, it is the same phrase which is used Act. 7. 35.
(...), Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge? Moses was then beginning to do the
part of a Ruler and a Judge, actu exercito; but they refuse him as having no
warrant, power, nor authority, Act. 6. 3. the Apostles bid choose seven
Deacons, (...), whom we may appoint say they over this business, Tit. 1. 5.
(...): and ordain Elders in every City: yet neither can that of the Deacons,
nor this of the Elders, be understood otherwise, then of the right, power, and
authority given them. See the like Heb. 7. 28. Luke 12. 42. Matthew. 24. 47. The
scope therefore of Christ's answer was this (as Aretius upon the place) non
debeo aliena munia invadere. I ought not to invade such Offices as belong to
others, not to me.

Some of the Jesuits (as forward as they are to defend the Temporal Power of
the Pope as Christ's Vicar on earth, yet) cannot shut their eyes against the
light of this Text, who made me a Judge or a divider over you? But they are
forced to acknowledge Greg. de Valentia comment. Theol. Tom. 4. Disp. 1*
Quaest. 22. Punct. 6. Homo, quis me constituit Judicem aut divisorem inter vos?
Quasi diceret: Nemo plane, neque homo, and multo minus Deus. Si enim a Deo
habuisset Dominium Jurisdictionis politicae, multo verius su sset censtitutus
Judex politicus, quam si eam Jurisdictionem habuisset ab homine. Et tamen negat
omnino se fuisse talem Judicem constitutum. Unde per hoc quod addit, Quis me
constituit Judicem? etc. Eum remisit ad alium qui haberet eam potestatem, qua
ipse careret. See the like in Bellarmine de Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4.
that Christ denies that he had any right or authority to be a civil Judge. For
how can he who is authorized to be a Judge say, Who made me a Judge?

The fifth Argument I take from John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this World.
The great jealousy and fear which both Herod and Pilate had of Christ; was,
that they understood he was a King. Christ clears himself in this point, his
Kingdom was such as they needed not be afraid of, for though it be in the
World, it is not of the World; though it be here, it is not from hence, it is
heterogeneous to Temporal monarchy and civil Government. Mr. Hussy page 24.
tells us, he knows not how those Governments that should be executed by
Church Officers* should savor less of the World then the civil Government.
For this I remit him to those many and great differences, which I have showed
between the civil and the Ecclesiastical Power. In the mean while my argument
stands in force; For if all civil Government were put in Christ's hand as he is
Mediator, and he to depute and substitute others whom he will under him; then
what is there in that answer of his to Pilate, which could convincingly answer
those mistakes and misapprehensions of the nature of his Kingdom. That which is
now taught by Master Hussy, is the very thing which Herod and Pilate were
afraid of: but Christ denies that which they were afraid of: and verse. 36. is
an answer to the Question asked, verse. 33. Art thou the King of the Jews? My
Kingdom is not of this World, says he. To the same sense (as Grotius upon the
place notes out of Eusebius) Christ's kinsmen when they were asked concerning
his Kingdom, did answer to Domitian, (...)
that his Kingdom was not worldly; but heavenly.

Sixthly, I prove the point from Luke 17. 20, 21. And when he was demanded of
the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God should come; he answered them and said,
The Kingdom of God comes not with observation. Neither shall they say lo
here, or lo there; For behold the Kingdom of God is within you. By the Kingdom
of God is meant in this place the kingdom of the Messiah, as Interpreters do
unanimously agree. Both John Baptist and Chrst himself had preached, that the
Kingdom of God was at hand; and the Jews themselves were in expectation of the
Messiah to make them free from the Roman yoke, and to restore a temporal or
earthly monarchy to Israel. Hereupon they ask when this Kingdom should come.
His answer is* The Kingdom of God comes not (...) with observation, or
outward show and pomp, but it is within you, it is spiritual, it belongs to the
inward man. But if the Magistrate be Christ's Vicegerent, and hold his office of
and under Christ as Mediator, and if Christ as Mediator reign in, through and
by the Magistrate, then the Kingdom of the Messiah does come with observation
and pomp, with a crown, a scepter, a sword, and (...), with princely splendour,
riches, triumph, such as the Pharisees then, and the Jews now do expect: which
says Grotius is the thing that Christ here denies; For all the outward pomp,
observation, splendour, majesty, power, and authority, which a Vicegerent has,
does principally redound unto his Master and Sovereign: So that by our
opposites principles, the Kingdom of Christ must come with observation, because
the dominion of the Magistrate (whom they hold to be his Vicegerent) comes
with observation.

Seventhly, That Government and authority which has a foundation in the law of
nature and Nations (yea might and should have had place and been of use, though
man had not sinned) cannot be held of and under and managed for Christ as he is
Mediator. But Magistracy or civil Government has a foundation in the law of
Nature and Nations (yea might and should have had place and been of use though
man had not sinned) Ergo. The reason of the proposition, is because the law of
nature and nations, and the law which was written in man's heart in his first
creation, does not flow from Christ as Mediator, but from God as Creator:
neither can it be said that Christ as Mediator rules and governs all nations
by the law of nature and nations, or that Christ should have reigned as
Mediator, though man had not sinned. The Assumption is proved by Gerhard loc.
com. Tom. 6. page 459. 460. 474 In the state of innocence there had been no
such use of Magistracy as now there is; for there had been no evil doers to be
punished, no unruly persons to be restrained; yet as the wife had been subject
to the husband, and the son to the Father, so no doubt there had been an union
of diverse families under one head, man being naturally (...) as Aristotle
calls him, he is for society and policy, and how can it be imagined that
mankind multiplying upon the earth should have been without headship,
superiority, order, society, govenment? And what wonder that the law of nature
teach all Nations some government: Hier. Ru st co monacho. Etiam muta animantia
and serarum greges ductores sequuntur suos. In apibus principes sunt.
Hicrome observes, that nature guides the very reasonlesse creatures to a
kind of Magistracy.

Eighthly, If the Scripture hold forth the same derivation or origination of
Magistracy in the Christian Magistrate and in the heathen Magistrate, then it
is not safe to us to hold that the Christian Magistrate holds his office of and
under Christ as Mediator. But the Scripture does hold forth the same derivation
or origination of Magistracy in the Christian Magistrate, and in the Heathen
Magistrate. Ergo, The proposition has this reason for it, because the Heathen
Magistrate does not hold his office of and under Christ as Mediator; neither
does Mr. Hussy herein contradict me: only he holds the heathen Magistrate and
his Government to be unlawful: wherein he is Anabaptistical, and is confuted by
my first Argument. As for the Assumption, it is proved from diverse Scriptures,
and namely these, Romans 13. 1. the powers that be, are ordained of God, which is
spoken of heathen Magistrates. Dan. 2. 37. Thou O King art a King of Kings, for
the God of heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and Glory. So
says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar an Idolatrous and heathen King. See the like
Ier. 27. 6. Isa. 45. 1. God sent his servant the Prophet to anoint Hazael King
over Syria; 1 Kings 19. 15. Read to this purpose Augustine de civit. Dei, lib.
5. cap. 21. Where he says Qui Mario, ipse Caio Caesari: qui Augusto, ipse and
Neroni; qui Vespasianis vel patri vel filio, suavissimis Imperatoribus, ipse
and Domitiano crudelissimo. Et ne per singulos ire necessesit, qui Constantino
Christiano, ipse Apostatae Iuliano.
that the same God gave a Kingdom and authority both to the Romans, Assyrians,
Persians, Hebrews; and that he who gave the Kingdom to the best Emperors, gave
it also to the worst* Emperors; yea he that gave it to Constantine a Christian*
did also give it says he, to Julian the apostate. Tertullian Apol. cap. 30.
speaking of the heathen Emperors of that time, says that they were from God, a
quo sunt secundi, post quem primi ante omnes, that he who had made them men,
did also make them Emperors, and give them their power. Ibid. cap. 33. Ut
merito dixerim noster est magis Caesar, ut a nostro Deo constitutus: so that I
may justly say, Caesar is rather ours, as being placed by our God: says he,
speaking to the Pagans in the behalf of Christians. Wherefore though there be
huge and vast differences between the Christian Magistrate and the heathen
Magistrate, the former excelling the latter, as much as light does darkness,
yet in this point of the derivation and tenure of Magistracy; they both are
equally interested, and the Scripture shows no difference, as to that point.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Power and Privilege of the Magistrate in things and causes
Ecclesiastical; what it is not, and what it is.
THe new notion that the Christian Magistrate is a Churchofficer, and
Magistracy an Ecclesiastical as well as a civil administration, calls to mind
that of the Wiseman; Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See this is
new? it has been already of old time which was before us. Plato in his
Politicus (a little after the middle of that book) tells me, that the Kings of
Egypt were also Priests, and that in many Cities of the Grecians, the supreme
Magistrate had the administration of the holy things. Notwithstanding even in
this particular there still appears some new thing under the Sun. For Plato
tells me again Epist. 8. that those supreme Magistrates who were Priests, might
not be present nor join in criminal nor capital judgments, lest they (being
Priests) should be defiled. If you look after some other President for the
union of civil and ecclesiastical Government, secular and spiritual
administrations* in one and the same person or persons, perhaps it were not
hard to find such presidents, as our opposites will be ashamed to own.

I am sure Heathens themselves have known the difference between the office of
Priests and the office of Magistrates. Aristotle de Repub. lib. 4. cap. 15.
speaking of Priests says, (...). For this is another thing then civil
Magistrates. He had said before, (...) For a civil society has need of many
Rulers: but every (...) who is made by election or lot, is not a civil
Magistrate: and the first instance he gives is that of the Priests: and so
Aristotle would have the Priest to be (...) a Ruler, but not a civil
Magistrate. So de Repub. lib. 7. cap. 8. he distingu sheth between the Priests
and the Judges in a City.

But to the matter. I will here endeavor to make these two things appear. 1.
That no administration formally and properly Ecclesiastical (and namely the
dispencing of Church censures) does belong unto the Magistrate, nor may
(according to the word of God) be assumed and exercised by him, 2. That Christ
has not made the Magistrate head of the Church, to receive appeals (properly
so called) from all Ecclesiastical Assemblies. Touching the first of these, it
is no other than is held forth in the Irish Articles of Faith (famous among
Orthodox and Learned men in these Kingdoms) which do plainly exclude the
Magistrate from the administration of the Word and Sacraments, and from the
power of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. It is the unhappiness of this time
that this and other truths formerly out of controversy, should be so much
stuck at and doubted of by some.

Now that the corrective part of Church Government, or the censure of
scandalous persons in reference to the purging of the Church, and keeping pure
of the ordinances, is no part of the Magistrates office, but is a distinct
charge belonging of right to Ministers and Elders; as it may fully appear by
the Arguments brought afterward to prove a government in the Church distinct
from Magistracy: (which Arguments will necessarily carry the power of Church
censures and the administration of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven into other
hands then the Magistrates;) so I shall here strengthen it by these
confirmations.

First, Church Censures must needs be dispensed by Ministers and Elders,
because they are heterogeneous to Magistracy: For first, the Magistrate by the
power which is in his hand, ought to punish any of his Subjects that do evil,
and he ought to punish like si^s with like punishments. But if the power of
Church Censures be in the Magistrates hands, he cannot walk by that rule; For
Church Censures are only for Churchmembers, not for all Subjects: 1 Cor. 5.
10. 12. Secondly, Church Censures are to be executed in the name of Christ,
Matthew. 18. 20. with verse. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 4. and this cannot be done in his
name, by any other but such as have commission from him to bind and loose,
forgive and retain sins. But where is any such commission given to the civil
Magistrate, Christian more then Heathen? Thirdly, Church Censures are for
impenitent contumacious offenders: but the Magistrate does and must punish
offenders (when the course of Justice and law so requires) whether they appear
penitent or impenitent. Fourthly, The Magistrates power of punishing offenders,
is bounded by the law of the land. What then shall become of such scandalls as
are not crimes punishable by the law of the land? such as obscene rotten
talking, adulterous and vile behavior, or the most scandalous conversing and
companying together (though the crime of adultery cannot be proved by
witnesses) living in known malice and envy, refusing to be reconciled, and
thereupon lying off (it may be for a long time) from the Sacrament, and the
like, which are not proper to be taken notice of by the civil Judge. So that in
this case, either there must be Church Censures and discipline exercised by
Church Officers, or the Magistrate must go beyond his limits: Or lastly.
Scandalls shall spread in the Church, and no remedy against them. Far be it
from the thoughts of Christian Magistrates, that scandalls of this kind shall
be tolerated, to the dishonor of God, the laying of the stumbling blocks of
bad examples before others, and to the violation and pollution of the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, who has commanded to keep his ordinances pure.

A second Argument may be this, In the old Testament God did not command the
Magistrates, but the Priests to put a difference betwixt the profane and the
holy, the unclean and the clean: Levit. 10. 10. Ezech. 22. 26. Ezech. 44. 23,
24. Deuteronomy. 21. 5. 2 Chronicles. 23. 18, 19. And in the new Testament, the keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven are given to the Ministers of the Church: Matthew. 16. 19.
and 18. 18. John 20. 23. but no where to the civil Magistrate. It belongs to
Church Officers to censure false doctrine. Revel. 2. 2. 14. 15. to decide
controversies, Acts 16. 4. and to examine and censure scandalls, Ezech. 44 23,
24. which is a Prophecy concerning the ministry of the New Testament. And
Elders judge an Elder, 1 Timothy 5. 19. or any other Churchmember. 1 Cor. 5. 12.

Thirdly, The Scripture holds forth the civil and Ecclesiastical power as
most distinct; insomuch that it condemns the Spiritualizing of the civil
Power, as well as the Secularizing of the Ecclesiastical power; State Papacy,
as well as Papal-State: Church Officers may not take the civil sword, nor judge
civil causes: Luke 12. 13, 14, and 22. 25. Matthew. 26. 52. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 2 Timothy
2. 4. So Uzzah might not touch the Ark: nor Saul offer burnt offerings: nor
Uzziah burn incense: I wish we may not have cause to revive the proverb which
was used in Ambrose his time. That Emperors did more covet the Priesthood, then
the Priests did covet the Empire. Shall it be a sin to Church Officers to
exercise any act of civil government? and shall it be no sin to the civil
Magistrate to ingrosse the whole and sole power of Church Government? Are not
the two powers formally and specifically distinct? Of which before* Chap. 4.

It is to be well noted that Maccovius and Vedelius who ascribe a sort of Papal
power to the civil Magistrate, to the great scandal of the Reformed Church; do
notwithstanding acknowledge that Christ has appointed Church discipline and
censures, and the same to be dispensed by Church Officers only: And that the
Magistrate as he may not preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments; So he
may not exercise Churchdiscipline, nor inslict spiritual censures, such as
excommunication. Though Erastus page 175. has not spared to say, that the
Magistrate may in the New Testament (though he might not in the old) exercise
the ministerial function, if he can have so much leisure from his other
employments.

Fourthly, The power of Church discipline is intrinsecall to the Church, that
is, both they who censure, and they who are censured, must be of the Church, 1
Cor. 5. 12. 13. They must be of one and the same Corporation, the one must not
be in the body, and the other out of the body. But if this power were in the
Magistrate, it were extrinsecall to the Church. For the Magistrate quatenus a
Magistrate, is not so much as a Churchmember; far less can the magistrate as
magistrate have jurisdiction over Church Members, as Church members, even as
the minister as minister is not a member of the Commonwealth or State, far
less can he, as minister, exercise jurisdiction over the Subjects, as Subjects.

The Christian magistrate in England is not a member of the Church as a
magistrate, but as a Christian. And the minister of Jesus Christ in England, is
not subject to the magistrate as he is a minister of Christ, but as he is a
member of the Commonwealth of England He was both a learned man and a great
Royallist in Scotland, who held that all Kings, Infidel as well as Christian,
have equal authority and jurisdiction in the Church, though all be not alike
qualified or able to exercise it. Io. Wemius, de Reg. primat. page 123. Let our
opposites loose this knot among themselves; for they are not of one opinion
about it.

Fifthly, Church Officers might and did freely and by themselves dispense
Church Censures, under Pagan and unbeleeving magistrates, as is by all
confessed: Now the Church ought not to be in a worse condition under the
Christian magistrate, then under an Infidel; for the power of the Christian
magistrate is cumulative, not privative to the Church; He is a Nursing Father,
Isa. 49. 23. not a Step-Father. He is keeper, defender and guardian of both
Tables, but neither Judge nor Interpreter of Scripture.

Sixthly, I shall shut up this Argumentation with a convincing dilemma. The
Assemblies of Church Officers being to exercise discipline, and censure
offenses (which is supposed and must be granted in regard of the Ordinances of
Parliament) either they have power to do this Iure proprio, and virtute
officii: or only Iure devoluto, and virtute delegationis, such authority being
derived from the magistrate; If the former; I have what I would; If the latter,
then it follows, 1. That where Presbyteries and Synods do exercise spiritual
Jurisdiction, not by any power derived from, or dependant upon the civil
Magistrate, but in the name and authority of Jesus Christ, and by the power
received from him, as in Scotland, France, the Low Countries, etc. there all
Ecclesiastical censures, such as deposition of Ministers, and Excommunication
of scandalous and obstinate persons. have been, are, and shall be void, null,
and of no effect. Even as when the Prelaticall party did hold, that the power
of ordination and jurisdiction pertains only to Prelates, or such as are
delegate with commission and authority from them: thereupon they were so put to
it by the Arguments of the Anti-Episcopall party, that they were forced to say,
that Presbyters ordained by Presbyters in other Reformed Churches, are no
Presbyters, and their excommunication was no excommunication. 2. It will
follow, that the Magistrate himself may excommunicate, for nemo potest aliis
delegare plus juris quam ipse habet; No man can give from him by delegation or
deputation to another, that right or power which he himself has not. 3. If the
power of excommunication come by delegation from the Magistrate, either the
Magistrate must in conscience give this power to Church Officers only, or he
is free and may without sin give this power to others; If the former, what can
bind up the Magistrates conscience, or astrict the thing to Church Officers,
except it be Gods ordinance that they only do it? If the latter, then though
this Parliament has has taken away the old High Commission Court, which had
Potestatem utriusque gladii, yet they may lawfully and without sin erect a new
High Commission Court, made up of those who shall be no Church Officers, yea
having none of the Clergy in it (as the other had) with commission and power
granted to them to execute spiritual Jurisdiction and Excommunication, and that
not only in this or that Church, yea or Province, but in any part of the whole
Kingdom. So much of the first point. Now to the second, concerning appeals to
the Magistrate, as to the head of the Church.

It is asked, what remedy shall there be against the abuse of Church Discipline
by Church Officers, except there be appeals from the Ecclesiastical Courts to
the civil Magistrate: which if it be, Church Officers will be the more wary and
cautious to do no man wrong, knowing that they may be made to answer for it:
And if it be not, there is a wide door opened, that ministers may do as they
please.

Answ. 1 Look what remedy thene is for abuses in the preaching of the Word, and
administration of the Sacraments; the like remedy there is for abuses in
Church Discipline; Maladministration of the Word and Sacraments is no less
sinful to the ministers, and hurtful to others, then mal-administration of
discipline: and in some respects the former is more to the dishonor of God and
destruction of men than the latter: Ministers have not an arbitrary power to
preach what they will, Now when the word is not truly preached, nor the
Sacraments duly administered by any minister or ministers, the Magistrate
seeks the redress of these things (in a constituted Church) by the
convocating of Synods, for examining, discovering, and judging of such errors
and abuses as are found in particular Churches. But if the Synod should connive
at, or comply with that same error; yet the Magistrate takes not upon him the
supreme and authoritative decision of a controversy of faith, but still
endeavors to help all this by other Ecclesiastical remedies; as another
Synod, and yet another, till the evil be removed. The like we say concerning
abuses in Church Discipline: The Magistrate may command a resuming and
re-examination of the case in another Synod: but still the Synod ratisieth or
reverseth the censure. In which case it is betwixt the Magistrate and the
Synod, as betwixt the will and understanding; for Voluntas imperat Intellectui
quo ad exercitium, yet notwithstanding determinatur per intectellum quoad
specificationem actus.

Take for instance this also. If it be a case deserving deposition or
degradation: In such a case says learned Salmasius appar. ad lib. de primatu
page 298. the Prince or Magistrate cannot take from a minister that power which
was given him in ordination with imposition of hands, for he cannot take away
that which he cannot give. But if a Prince would have a minister for his
offence^ to be deprived of his ministerial power, he must take care that it be
done by the ministers themselves; qui Judices very ipsius sunt, and auferre
soli possunt quod per ordinationem dederunt. Who are his true Judges, and they
only can take away what by ordination they have given. Thus Salmasius.

2. And further, if Presbyteries or Synods exceed the bounds of Ecclesiastical
power, and go without the Sphaere of their own activity, interposing and
judging in a civil cause which concerns any man's life or estate, The
Magistrate may reverse and make null whatsoever they do in that kind, and
punish themselves for such abuse of their power; As Solomon punished Abiathar,
and banished him to Anathoth, he being guilty of high treason: 1 Kings 2. 26.
It was not a case of scandal only, or of Delinquency or mal-administration in
his Sacerdotall office, otherwise it had fallen within the cognizance, and
jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin.

3. Though the case be merely spiritual and ecclesiastical the Christian
Magistrate (by himself and immediately) may not only examine by the judgment
of discretion the sentence of the Ecclesiastical Court, but also when he sees
cause (either upon the complaint of the party, or scandal given to himself)
interpose by letters, messages, exhortations, and sharp admonitions to the
Presbytery or Synod, who in that case are bound in conscience, with all
respect and honor to the Magistrate, to give him a reason of what they have
done, and to declare the grounds of their proceedings, till by the blessing of
God upon this free and fair dealing, they either give a rational and
satisfactory account to the Magistrate, or be themselves convinced of their
mal-administration of Discipline.

4 And in extraordinary cases when the Clergy has made defection, and all
Church discipline is degenerated into Tyranny, as under Popery and Prelacy it
was; it belongs to the Magistrate to take the protection of those who are
cast out or censured unjustly; for extraordinary evils must have extraordinary
helps. And in this sense we are to understand diverse of our Reformers and
others, groaning under the pressures of the Roman Clergy, and calling in the
help of the civil Magistrate for their relief.

But we deny that (in a well constituted Church) it is agreeable to the will of
Christ, for the Magistrate, either Synops. pur. Theol. disp. 48. These. 19. E^si
vero hanc spiritualem p^testatem a Christiani Magistratus inspectione, tanquam
utriusque tabulae custode non eximimus, negamus tamen eam, aut ejus praxin a
Magistratus suprema aucto^itate pendere, sicuti quidam ^ecentiores contendunt,
cum a Christo solo pendeat, and ab ipso immediate Ecclesiae sit concessa ut
loci an^ea producti demon strant. Ac proinde nec per appellationem, aut
provocationem proprie dictam, po^estas haec ad Magistratus aut Principum
tribunal deferr^ potest. quum ejus executio penes ipsos non sit.
to receive appeals (properly so called) from the sentence of an Ecclesiastical
Court, or to receive complaints exhibited against that sentence by the party
censured, so as by his authority, upon such complaint, to nullifi^ or make void
the Ecclesiastical censure. The latter of these two V^delius pleads for, not
the former. But Apollonius oppugneth the latter, as being upon the matter all
one with the former. Now to ascribe such power to the Magistrate, is 1. To
change the Pope, but not the Po^edome; the Head, but not the Headship; for is
not this the Popes chief supremacy, to judge all men* and to be judged of no
man, to ratify or rescind at his pleasure the dec^ees of the Church, Councels
and all: and shall this power now be transferred upon the Magistrate? Good
Lord, where are we, if this shall be the up-shot of our Reformation? O^ for it?
Shall we condemn the Papists and Anabaptists who give too little to the
Magistrate, and then join hands with the Arminians, who give as much to the
Magistrate as the Pope has formerly usurp^d? 2. Appeals lie in the same line
of subordination, and do not go de g^nere in genus; but the civil and
Ecclesiastical Courts stand not in one line, neither are they of one kind and
nature; they are disparata, non subordinata. 3. They who receive appeals, have
also power to (...) the sentence, else the appeal is in vain. But the
Magistrate has no power to execute the Church ce^sure, nor to shut out of the
Church, our opposites themselves being Judges. It was not therefore without
just cause that Augustine did v^ry ^uch ^lame the Donatists for their appealing
from the Ecclesi^stical Assemblies, to the Emperors and civil C^urts, Epist.
48. and Epist. 162.

There are two examples alleged from Scripture for appeals from Ecclesiastical
to Civil Courts: One is the example of Jeremiah; I^r. 26. The other is the
example of Paul, Act. 25. But neither of the two prove the point. For 1.
Jeremiah was not censured by the Priests with any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
censure (of which alone our controversy is) but the Priests took him and said
to him, Thou shall surely die. Jer. 26. 8. 2. Would God that every Christian
Magistrate may protect the servants of God from such unjust sentences and
persecuting decrees. When Ecclesiastical Courts are made up of bloody
persecuters* that is an extraordinary evil which must have an extraordinary
remedy. 3. Neither yet is there any syllable of Ieremiahs appealing from the
Priests to the Princes, but the Text says, When the Princes of Judah heard
these things, then they came up, etc. verse 10. that is, The Princes so soon as
they understood that the Priests had taken Jeremiah, and had said to him Thou
shall surely die. verse 8. And being also informed that all the people were
gathered together tumultuously and disorderly against the Prophet, verse 9.
They thought it their duty to rescue the Prophet from the Priests and people,
that he might be examined and judged by the civil Court, he being challenged
and accused as one worthy to die.

As for Paul's Appellation to Caesar. First, It is supposed by our opposites
that he appealed from the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin of the Jews, which is a
great mistake; For he appealed from the Judgment Seat of Festus to Caesar;
that is, from an in^eriour civil Court, to a superior civil Court, which he
had just cause to do: for though Festus had not yet given forth any sentence
against Paul, yet he appeals a gravamine, and it was a great grievance indeed,
while as Festus showed himself to be a most corrupt Judge, who though the Jews
could prove none of those things whereof they accused Paul, Act. 25. 7. (which
should have made Festus to acquit and dismiss him) yet being willing to do the
Jews a pleasure, he would have Paul to go to Jerusalem, there to be judged
before himself. verse 9. Now this was all the favor that the Jews had desired
of Festus, that he would send Paul to Jerusalem, they laying wait in the way to
kill him. verse. 3. No appellation here from the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, where
he had not as yet compeered to be examined, far less could he appeal from any
sentence of the Sanhedrin. The most which can be with any color alleged from
the Text, is, that Paul declined to be judged by the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem,
they not being his competent and proper Judges in that cause. I stand at
Caesar's Iudgement-seat says he, where I ought to be judged; meaning that he
was accused as worthy of death, for sedition, and offending against Caesar;
whereof he ought to be judged only at Caesar's Tribunal; not by the Jews, who
were no Judges of such matters. A declinator of a Judge is one thing, and
Appellation from his Judgment or sentence is another thing. But put the case
that Paul had indeed appeal^d from the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, either it was
the civil Sanhedrin, or the Ecclesiastical. If the civil, it is no President
for appeals from Ecclesiastical Courts. If the Ecclesiastical, yet that serves
not for appeals from Ecclesiastical Courts in Ecclesiastical causes; for it
was a capital crime whereof Paul was accused. Nay, put the case that Paul had
at that time appealed from the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin in an Ecclesiastical
cause: yet neither could that help our opposites, for the government of the
Christian Church, and the government of the Jewish Church were at that time
separate and distinct, so that the Ecclesiastical Court, which should have
judged of any scandal given by Paul (if at all he ought to have been censured)
had been a Christian Synod, not a Jewish Sanhedrin. And so much of Appeals. Of
which Question Triglandius, Revius, and Cabeljavius, have peculiarly and fully
written. Three famous Academies also, of Leyden, Groening, and Utrecht, did
give their public testimonies against appeals from Ecclesiastical to civil
Courts. And the three Professors of Utrecht in their testimony do obtest all
Christians that love truth and peace, to be cautious and wary of the Arminian
poison lurking in the contrary Tenent. See Cabeljav. defensio potestatis
Ecclesiasticae. page 60.

It is further objected, That thus fixing a spiritual jurisdiction in
Church Officers, we erect two collateral Powers in the Kingdom, the Civil and
the Ecclesiastical, unless all Ecclesiastical Courts be subordinate to
Magistracy, as to a certain head-ship.

Answ. There is a subordination of Persons here, but a co-ordination of powers:
A subordination of Persons, because as the Ministers of the Church are subject
to the civil Magistrate, they being members of the Commonwealth or Kingdom; So
the Magistrate is subject to the Ministers of the Church, he being a
Churchmember.

The former we assert against Papists, who say that the Clergy is not subject
to the Magistrate. The latter we hold against those who make the Magistrate to
be the head of the Church: Again, a co-ordination of powers; because as the
subjection of the person of the Christian Magistrate to the Pastors and Elders
of the Church, in things pertaining to God, does not infer the subordination
of the power and office of the Magistrate to the Church Officers: So the
subjection of Pastors and Elders to the Magistrate in all civil things (as
other members of the Commonwealth are subject) may well consist with the
co-ordination of the Ecclesiastical power with the civil. And as it is an error
in Papists to make the secular power dependant upon, and derived from the
Ecclesiastical power: So it is an error in others to make the Ecclesiastical
power derived from, and dependant upon the civil power: for the Ecclesiastical
power is derived from Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11.

And now while I am expressing my thoughts, I am the more confirmed in the
same, by falling upon the concession of one who is of a different Judgment;
For he who wrote Ius Regum in opposition to all spiritual authority exercised
under any form of Ecclesiastical Government, does not withstanding acknowledge
page 16. Both of them (the Magistrate and the Minister) have their Commission
immediately from God, and each of them are subject to the other, without any
subordination of offices from the one to the other, for the Magistrate is no
less subject to the operation of the Word from the mouth of the Minister, then
any other man whatsoever: And the Minister again is as much subject to the
authority of the Magistrate as any other Subject whatsoever; And therefore
though there be no subordination of Offices, yet is there of Persons; the
Person of a Minister remaining a Subject, but not the function of the
Ministry. He might have said the same of the exercise of Church Discipline
which he says of the preaching of the Word, for the same Christ who gave the
keys of doctrine, gave also the keys of discipline, without any tie to make
the use thereof subject to the pleasure of the civil Magistrate. Let him prove
that the ministry of the Word is not subordinate to, nor dependant upon the
Magistrate; and I shall prove by the same medium, that the ministry of
Church Censures has as little of that subordination in it.

And this I must add, that least of all others can our Independent brethren
charge the Presbyterians with the setting up of an Ecclesiastical Government
coordinate with, and not subordinate unto the civil Government: For themselves
hold as much in this point (if not more) then we do. Take for instance Mr.
Cotton his k^yes of the Kingdom of Heaven, published by Mr. Goodwyn and Mr.
Nigh, page 49. The first Subject of the ministerial power of the keys, though
it be independent in respect of derivation of power from the power of the sword
to the performance of any spiritual administration: etc. Page 53. As the Church
is subject to the sword of the Magistrate in things which concern the civil
peace: so the Magistrate (if Christian) is subject to the keys of the Church.
etc.

As for that collaterality which is objected, I answer, The Civil and
Ecclesiastical power, if we speak properly, are not collateral. 1. They have no
footing upon the same ground: there may be many subject to the Magistrate, who
are no Church Members, and so not under the Spiritual power: and where the same
persons are subject to both the powers, there is no more collaterality in this
case, nay, not so much, as is betwixt the power of a Father in one man, and the
power of a Master in another man, when both powers are exercised upon the same
man who is both a son and a servant. 2. Powers that are collateral, are of the
same eminency and altitude, of the same kind and nature; but the civil Power
is a Dominion and Lordship: the Ecclesiastical power is Ministerial, not
Lordly. 3. Collateral powers do mutually and alike exercise authority over each
other respectively. But, though the Magistrate may exercise much authority in
things Ecclesiastical, Church Officers can exercise no authority in things
civil. The Magistrates authority is Ecclesiastical objective, though not
formaliter: but the Church Officers authority is not civil so much as
objective, not being exercised about either civil, criminal, or capital cases.
4. Collateral powers are subordinate to, and derived from the Supreme and
Original power, like two branches growing out of the same stock, two streams
flowing from the same fountain, two lines drawn from the same center, two arms
under the same head. But the power of the Magistrate is subordinate unto; and
depends upon the Dominion of God the Creator of all: the power of
Church Officers depends upon the Dominion of Christ, the Mediator and King of
the Church.

I shall conclude my answers to the present Objection, with the Testimony of
learned Apparat. ad lib. de Primatu page 282, 283. ^lebs autem ipsa quam curan^
Pastores, quantum a^tines ad animaecuram, Pastoribus suis subdita est. Si
corporis ratio aga^ur, summum in illud Imperium habent Principes ac Supremi
Magistratus. Delicta igitur hominum dupliciter puniumur, aut in anima sola, aut
in corpore. Poenae quae corporis necem aut noxam inferunt, aut bonorum
amissionem, a Magistratu civili infliguntur: Quae vero animarum castigationem
and emendationem spectant, per Ministrum Ecclesiae imponuntur. Summa earum
poenarum excommunicatio est. Et in^ra. Idem peccatum in eodem homine ali^er
vindicat Magistratus civilis, aliter punit Minister Ecclesiae.
Salmasius, who has so overthrown the Papal and Prelatical Government from
Scripture and antiquity, that he has withal preserved, yea strengthened the
distinction of civil Government and Church Government, and holds that
Church Censures and civil punishments do very well consist and sweetly agree
together.

I have now done with the negative part of this present Controversy, what the
power of the Magistrate in Ecclesiasticis is not. I proceed to the positive
part, what it is. To this I w^ll speak first more generally, then more
particularly.

For the general, I hold with the large Consession of Faith of the Church of
Scotland; Art. 25. Moreover to Kings, Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, we
affirm, that chiefly and most principally, the conservation and the purgation
of the Religion appertains; so that not only they are appointed for civil
Policy* but also for maintenance of the true Religion, and for suppressing of
Idolatry and Superstition whatsoever. To the same purpose, Calvin, Instit. lib.
4. cap. 20. sect. 9. Hoc nomine maxim laudantnr sancti Reges, quod Dei cultum
corruptum vel eversum restituerint, vel curam gesserint Religionis, ut sub
illis pura and incolumis s^oreret. The like see in Zanchius in 4. praec. page
791. and in Polanus Syntag. lib. 10. cap. 65. They hold that the Christian
Magistrate his Office, as concerning Religion, is, diligently to take care that
in his Dominion, or Kingdom, Religion from the pure Word of God, expounded by
^he Word of God it self, and understood according to the Principles of Faith
(which others call the Analogy of Faith) be either instituted, or (being
instituted) kept pure; or being corrupted, be restored and reformed: that false
Doctrines, Abuses, Idols, and Superstitions be taken away, to the glory of
God, and to his own and his Subjects salvation. Unto these things I do assent
as unto safe and undoubted truths.

But for the clearer un^erstanding and enodation of our present Question, I
will particularize and explain what I hold, by these five following
Distinctions.

1. Distingue materiam subjectam. There are two sorts of things belonging to
the Church. Some which are intrinsecal, and belonging to the soul or inward
man, directly and primarily. Such things are not to be dispensed and
administered by the civil Magistrate, I mean the Word and Sacraments, the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, the Suspension or Excommunication of Church Officers
or Members, the Ordination or Deposition of Officers, the Determination and
Resolution from Scripture of Controversies concerning the Faith, the Worship of
God, the Government of the Church, Cases of Conscience. These being in their
nature, end, and use, merely spiritual, and belonging not to the outward man,
but to the inward man or soul, are committed and entrusted to the Pastors and
other ruling Officers of the Church, and are not of civil and extrinsecal, but
of Ecclesiastical and intrinsecal cognizance and judgment. There are other
things belonging to the Church, which are extrinsecal and do properly belong to
the outward man, and are common to the Church with other humane Societies or
Corporations. Things of this kind fall within the civil Jurisdiction. For the
Churches of Christ, being Societies of men and women, and parts of
Commonwealths, are accountable unto and punishable by the civil Magistrate, in
their bodies, lives, civil Liberties, and temporal Estates, for trespasses
against the Law of God or the Law of the Land: By the Law of God I understand
here Ius divinum natural, that is, the moral Law or Decalogue, as it binds
all Nations (whether Christians or Infidels) being the Law of the Creator and
King of Nations. The Magistrate by his authority, may and in duty ought to keep
his Subjects within the bounds of external obedience to that Law, and punish
the external man with external punishments for external trespasses against that
Law. From this obligation of the Law, and subjection to the corrective power of
the Magistrate, Christian Subjects are no more exempted then Heathen Subjects,
but father more straightly obliged. So that if any such trespass is committed by
Church Officers or Members, the Magistrate has power and authority to summon,
examine, judge, and (after just conviction and proof) to punish these, as well
as other men. We do therefore abominate the disloyal Papal Tenent, that Clergy
men are not to be examined and judged by civil, but by Ecclesiastical Courts
only, even in causes civil and criminal. Whereof see Duarenus de Sacr. Eccl.
Minist. lib. 1. cap. 2. Spelman Council. Britann. Tom. 1. page 413.

I further explane my self by that common distinction, that there are two sorts
of things that belong to the Church, (...) and (...), things inward, and things
outward. For Church Officers and Church Members do consist (as other men) of a
soul, and of a body. All things properly belonging to the soul or internal man,
(which here we call things inward) are the object of Ecclesiastical power given
to Church Officers, Pastors, and other ruling officers. But what belongs to the
outward man, to the bodies of Church Officers and members (which things are
outward) the judging and managing thereof, is in the hand of the Magistrate,
who rules not only (...), those that are without, whom the Church judges
not, but (...), the things outward of the Church. Salmasius calls the power of
the Magistrate in things Ecclesiastical (...), the inward Episcopacy or
overseeing. Which well agrees with that which Constantine said to the Bishops,
(...). You are made Bishops of the inward things of the Church, I of the things
outward. So that he does not assume their government, but distinguishes his
from theirs. This external inspection and administration of the Magistrate, in
reference to Religion, is twofold. 1. Corrective, by external punishments. 2.
Auxiliary, by external benefits and adminicles. The Magistrate may and ought
to be both Custos and vindex utriusque Tabulae, he ought to preserve both the
first and second Table of the holy and good Law of God, from being despised and
violated, and punish by corporal or other temporal punishments such (whether
Church Officers or Churchmembers) as openly dishonor God by gross offenses,
either against the first or against the second Table; and this he does as Gods
Deputy and Vicegerent subordinate and subservient to that universal dominion
which God almighty exercises over the children of men. But in doing hereof, he
is also helpful and useful to the Kingdom of Christ as Mediator; Magistracy
being (in the respects aforesaid) serviceable and profitable (as to order the
Commonwealth aright, so also) to purge the Church of scandals, to promote the
course of the Gospel, and the edification of one another. But how? not
perfectly, but pro tanto; not every way, but more suo; not intrinsecally, but
extrinsecally; not primarily, but secundarily; not directly, but ex
consequenti; not sub formalitate scandali, sed sub formalitate criminis, not
under the notion of scandal, but of crime; The Magistrate in punishing all
crimes committed by any in the Church (which are contrary to the Law of God) in
suppressing tumults, disorders, in prot^cting the Church from danger, harm, or
mol^station, in putting a hook in the nostrils, and a bridle in the mouths of
unruly, obstinate, and contumacious sinners, who vex the Church, and create
trouble to the people of God; in so doing, he does by consequence, and
removendo prohibens, purge the Church, and advance the Kingdom of Christ, and
the course of the Gospel: In the mean while not depriving the Church of her
own int^insecall power and Jurisdiction, but making it rather more (...) by
the aid of the secular power. And so much of the corrective part of the
Magistrates administration. The other part of his administration in reference
to Religion, is auxiliary, or assistant to the Church. For the Magistrate
watches over the outward business of the Church, not only by troubling those
persons, and punishing those sins that trouble the Israel of God; but by
administering such things as are necessary for the well being and comfortable
subsistence of the Church, and for that end, does convocate Synods pro re nata,
(beside the ordinary and set meetings) and presideth therein (if he please) in
external order, though not in the Synodicall debates and resolutions: He
adds his civil sanction to the Synodical results, if he find nothing therein
which may hurt Peace or Justice in the Commonwealth. The Magistrate ought also
to take care of the maintenance of the Ministry, Schools, poor, and of good
works for necessary uses, that Religion and Learning may not want their
necessary adminicles. Finally, He ought to take care that all Churches be
provided with an able, orthodox, and Godly Ministry, and Schools with learned
and well qualified Teachers, such as shall be best approved by those to whom it
belongs to examine and Judge of their qualifications and parts. And all these
ways the Magistrate ought to be, and the well affected Magistrate has been
and is a nursing Father to the Church of Christ.

2. My second distinction shall be this: The Magistrate may and ought not only
to conserve Justice, peace and order in the Commonwealth, and in the Church,
as it is in the Commonwealth, but also to take special care of the
conservation of the true Reformed Religion, and of the Reformation of it when
and wherein it needs to be reformed, imperative, not elicitive. The
Magistrate says Dr. Rivet on the decalogue, page 262. is neither to administer
Word, nor Sacraments, nor Church discipline, etc. but he is to take care that
all these things be done by those whom God has called thereunto. What ever is
properly spiritual belonging to the soul and inward man (such as
Church Censures, and the other particulars before mentioned) cannot be actus
elicitus of the Magistrate: The Magistrate can neither immediatione suppositi,
nor immediatione virtutis, determine controversies of faith, ordain Ministers,
suspend from the Sacraments, or excommunicate. He can neither do these things
himself; nor are they done in the name and authority of the Magistrate or by
any Ministerial power receeived from him, but in the name and authority of
Jesus Christ, and by the power given from Jesus Christ. Yet all these and
generally the administration of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, are actus
imperati of the Christian Magistrate, and that both antecedenter and
consequenter. Antecedently, the Magistrate may command Church Officers to
suspend or excommunicate all obstinate and scandalous persons: he may command
the Classis to ordain able and godly ministers, and no other: he may command a
Synod to meet, to debate and determine such or such a controversy.
Consequently also, when the thing is examined, judged, resolved, or done by the
Ecclesiastical power, the Magistrate has power and authority to add his
civil sanction confirmation, ot ratification, to make the Ecclesiastical
sentence to be obeyed and submitted unto by all whom it concerns. In all
which the Christian Magistrate does exceeding much for the conservation and
purgation of Religion: not elici^ndo actus, doing or exercising by himself or
by his own authority acts of Church. Government or discipline, but taking
care, that such and such things be done by those to whom they do belong. 3.
Distinguish the directive part and the coercive part. The directive part, in
the conservation or purgation of Religion, does belong to the Ministers and
ruling Officers of the Church assembled together; In administering therefore
that which concerns Religion and peoples spiritual good, the Magistrate not
only juvatur, but dirigitur, is not only helped, but directed by the
Ecclesiastical directive power; Fest. Hon. Disp. 30. These. 6. Magistracy may
say to Ministry as Moses said to Hobab; Thou may be to us in stead of eyes.
Ad sacrae Religionis informationem, fid^lis Magistratus verbi divini
administris, veluti oculis, uti debet; and for that end he is to make use of
consistoriall and Synodicall Assemblies say the Professors of L^yden,
Synopspur. (...). Disp. 50. These. 44. But the coercive part, in compelling the
obstinate and unruly, to submit to the Presbyteriall or Synodicall sentence,
belongs to the Magistrate. Not as if the Magistrate had nothing to do, but to
be an executioner of the pleasure of Church Officers, or as if he were by a
blind and implicit faith to constrain all men to stand to their determination.
God forbid. The Magistrate must have his full liberty to judge of that which he
is to compel men to do, to judge of it, not only judicio appreh^nsivo, by
understanding and apprehending ^right what it is, but judicio discretivo, by
the judgment of Christian prudence and discretion, examining by the Word of
God, the grounds, reasons, and warrants of the thing, that he may in Faith, and
not doubtingly, add his authority thereto. In which judging, he does Iudicare,
but not Iudicem agere; that is, he is Iudex suarum actionum, he judges whether
he ought to add his civil authority to this or that which seems good to
Church Officers, and does not concur therewith, except he be satisfied in his
Conscience that he may do so; yet this makes him not supreme Judge or Governor
in all Ecclesiastical causes, which is the Prerogative of Jesus Christ,
revealing his will in his word: nor yet does it invest the Magistrate with the
subordinate ministerial forensicall directive judgment in Ecclesiastical
things or causes, which belongs to Ecclesiastical not to civil Courts. 4.
Distinguish between a Cumulative and a Privativ^ authority. The Mag^strate has
indeed an authoritative influence into matters of Religion and
Church Government; but it is cumulative, that is, the Magistrate takes care
that Church Officers as well as other Subjects may do those things which ex
officio they are bound to do; and when they do so, he aideth, assisteth,
strengthens, ratifieth, and in his way, makes effectual what they do. But
that which belongs to the Magistrate is not privative, in reference to the
Ecclesiastical Government. It is understood salvo jure Ecclesiastico: for the
Magistrate is a nursing Father, not a step. Father to the Church: and the
Magistrate (as well as other men) is under that tie; 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do
nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. This Proviso therefore is justly
made, that whatever power the Magistrate has in matters of Religion, it is not
to hinder the free exercise of Church discipline and censures against
scandalous and obstinate sinners.

As the Casuists in other cases distinguish Lucrum cessans, and damnum
emergens, so must we distinguish between the Magistrate his doing no good to
the Church, and his doing evil to the Church: between his not assisting, and
his opposing: between his not allowing or authorizing, and his forbidding or
restraining. It does properly and of right belong to the Magistrate to add a
civil sanction and strength of a law for strengthening and aiding the exercise
of Church discipline, or not to add it. And himself is Judge whether to add any
such cumulative act of favor or not. But the Magistrate has no power nor
authority to lay bands and restraints upon Church Officers to hinder any of
Christ's ordinances, or to forbid them to do what Christ has given them a
commission to do. And if any such restraints of prohibitions or laws should be
laid on us, we ought to obey God rather than men.

5. Distingue tempora. Whatever belongs to the Magistrate in matters of
Religion, more then falls under the former distinctions, is extraordinary, and
does not belong to ordinary Government. In extraordinary reformations the
Magistrate may do much by his own immediate authority, when Synods have made
defection either from the truth of doctrine, or from holiness and godliness:
yet in such a case he ought to consult with such orthodox godly Divines as can
be had, either in his own or from other Dominions. Fest. Hon. Disp. 30. These.
5.
And so much be spoken of the Magistrate his power and duty in things and
causes Ecclesiastical. As we do not deny to the Magistrate any thing which the
Word of God does allow him, so we dare not approve his going beyond the bounds
and limits which God has set him. And I pray God that this be not found to be
the bottom of the controversy, Whether Magistracy shall be an arbitrary
Government; if not in civil, yet in Ecclesiastical things? Whether the
Magistrate may do, or appoint to be done in the matter of Church Government,
admission to, or exclusion from the Ordinances of Christ, what ever shall seem
good in his eyes? And whether in purging of the Church he is obliged to follow
the rules of Scripture, and to consult with learned and godly Ministers?
although Erastus himself (as is before observed) and Sutlivius (a great
follower of him) de Presbyt. cap. 8. are ashamed of, and do disclaim such
assertions.

CHAP. IX. That by the Word of God there ought to be another Government beside
Magistracy ^r Civil Goveram^nt, ^amely an Ecclesiastical Government (properly
so called) in the hands of Church-offic^rs.
THis Question has arisen from Mr. Colemans third and fourth rule which he
offered to the Parliament, excluding all Government of Church Officers,
Ministers and Elders; that is, as he expounds himself all corrective
government, leaving them no power except what is merely doctrinal, and
appropriating all government properly so called to the Magistrate only. Mr.
Hussy following him falls in the same ditch with him. The Question is not
whether Church Officers ought to have any share in the Civil Government? Nor
whether Church Officers may have any Lordly government or imperious domination
over the Lords heritage? Nor whether Church Officers may exercise an arbitrary
irregular Government, and rule as themselves list? God forbid. But the Question
plainly is, Whether there may not, yea ought not to be in the Church a
Ministerial or Ecclesiastical Government properly so called, beside the civil
Government or Magistracy. Mr. Coleman did, and Mr. Hussy does hold there ought
not. I hold there ought: and I shall propound for the affirmative these
Arguments.

The first Argument I draw from 1 Timothy 5. 17. (...), Elders that rule well. Mr.
Hussy page 8. asks whether the word Elder be prima, or secunda notio. If
prima notio, why must not Elder women be Church Officers as well as Elder men?
If secunda notio for a ruling Officer, Parliament men, Kings and all Civil
Governors are such Elders. I know no use which that distinction of prima and
secunda notio has in this place, except to let us know that he understands
these Logical terms. Egregiam vero laudem. He might have saved himself the
labor, for who knows not Hieromes distinction? Elder is either a word of age
or of office: but in Ecclesiastical use it is a word of office. Mr. Husseys
first notion concerning Elder women is no masculine notion. His second notion
is an anti-parliamentary notion. For the honorable Houses of Parliament in the
first words of their Ordinance concerning ordination of Ministers have
declared, that by the word of God a Bishop and a Presbyter or Elder are all
one; for thus begins the Ordinance, Whereas the word Presbyter, that is to
say Elder, and the word Bishop, do in the Scripture intend and signify one and
the same function, etc. Therefore Parliament men and civil Governors cannot be
the Elders mentioned by the Apostle Paul, except Mr. Hussy make them Bishops,
and invest them with power of ordination. Besides this, if Kings and Parliament
men be such Elders as are mentioned in this Text, then the Ministers of the
Word must have not only an equal share in Government, but more honor and
maintenance then Kings and Parliament men. See how well Mr. Hussy pleads for
Christian Magistracy: It is also an anti-Scripturall notion, for some of those
Elders that ruled well, did labor in the Word and Doctrine, as Paul tells us
in the very same place; these (sure) are not civil Governors. Wherefore Mr.
Hussy must seek a third notion before he hit the Apostles meaning. It is not
hujus loci to debate from this Text the distinction of two sorts of Elders;
though among all the answers which ever I heard or read, Mr. Husseys is the
weakest, page 11. that by Elders that labor in the Word and Doctrine, are
meant those Ministers whose excellency lies in Doctrine and instruction, and
that by Elders that rule, are meant those that give reproof. He
contradistinguisheth a reproving minister from a minister laboring in the Word
and Doctrine. The very reproof given by a minister will be, (it seems) at last
challenged as an act of government. It is as wide from the mark, that he will
have the two sorts of Elders to differ thus, that the one must govern and not
preach, the other must preach and not govern; not observing that the Text makes
ruling to be common to both. The one does both rule and labor in the Word and
Doctrine: The other rules one y, and is therefore called ruling Elder, non
quia solus praeest, sed quia solum praeest. But to let all these things be laid
aside as heterogeneous to this present Argument: the point is, here are Rulers
in the Church who are no civil Rulers. Yea this my Argument from this Text was
clearly yielded by Mr. Coleman in his Maledicis page 8. But I will deal clearly
says he, these Officers are Ministers, which are instituted not here, but
elsewhere; and those are the Rulers here mentioned. Ergo, he yields
Ecclesiastical rulers (and those instituted) distinct from Magistracy. Neither
is it a Lordly but a ministerial ruling of which our Question is. For my part
says Mr. Hussy, I know not how Lordship and Government does differ one from
another. Then every Governor of a ship must be a lord. Then every Steward of a
great house must be lord of the House. There is an oeconomicall or ministerial
government, and of that we mean.

My second Argument I take from 1 These. 5. 12. And we beseech you brethren to
know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you. (...), qui praesunt vobis. Hence does Calvin conclude Praesunt in Domino.
Hoc additum videtur ad notandum spirituale regimen. Tametsi enim Reges quoque
and Magistratus Dei ordinatione praesunt, quia tamen Ecclesiae gubernationem
Dominus peculialiter vult suam agnosci, ideo nominatim praeesse in Domino
dieuntur, qui Christi nomine and mandato Ecclesiam gu-bernant.
a Church Government distinct from civil government, for this is a spiritual
Government, it is in the Lord, that is in the name of the Lord, or (as others)
in things pertaining to God. Hence also Beza argues against Episcopal
Government; because the Elders in the Apostolic Churches did govern in common.

But says Mr. Hussy page 18. Pasor tells us that (...) with a genitive case
signifies praecedo, and then it signifies no more but them that go before
you, either by Doctrine or example. I answer first to the matter, next to the
force of the Word. For the matter, certainly the (...) or ruling power of
ministers, is not merely doctrinall or persuasive, as is manifest by 1 Timothy 5.
17. where those who are not convinced of two sorts of Elders, are yet fully
convinced of two sorts of acts, the act of ruling, and the act of teaching.
Whatsoever that Text has more in it, or has not, this it has, that those who
labor in the Word and Doctrine, are Rulers; but they are more especially to be
honored for their laboring in the Word and Doctrine. Next, as to the force of
the Word, if it be true which Mr. Hussy here says, then the English
Translators that read are over you; Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Gualther, and
others that here follow Hierome, and read praesunt vobis; Arias Montanus who
reads praesidentes vobis, have not well understood the Greek. But if Mr. Hussy
would needs correct all these and many more, Why did he not at least produce
some instances to show us where the words (...), or (...), or (...), or (...),
or (...), are used for no more, but a mere going before, either by doctrine or
example, without any power or authority of Government. Yea if this here be no
more but a going before either by Doctrine or example, then every good
Christian who goes before others by good example is (...); Neither will that
of the genitive case help him, for see the like 1 Timothy 3. 4. (...), one that
rules well his own house, Mr. Hussy will make it no more but this, one that
goes before his own house, by teaching them, or by giving them good example,
though the very next words tell us there is more in it, and that is
authoritative government, having his children in subjection. So verse. 12. (...)
ruling their children well. Pasor is not at all against my sense, but for it:
for if Mr. Hussy will make Pasor to say that (...) with a genitive does never
signify any more but praecedo, then he makes him to say both that which is
manifestly false, and in so saying to contradict himself, for Pasor tells us
also, the word signifies praesum, and for that he cites 1 Timothy 3. 4. where it
is with a genitive. Sometime indeed with a genitive it may be turned praecedo,
as Pasor says, but he cites only Tit. 3. 8. where it is not Genitivus
personae (as 1 These. 5. but rei; and we may also read praestare, as A. Montanus
to excel or be chief in good works, or to maintain, as our books have it.

But furthermore I shall offer for answer to Mr. Hussy the observation of an
excellent Grecian. It is Et hoc nomine differt (...) a (...), quod haec
praesidentiam cum potestate, sive praeposituram cum jurisdictione ac
coercitione ^ibuat, (...) vero ut in loco quis sit priore collocatus, tantum
efficit. (...) Hesychius (...) interpretatur gubernationem vel
administrationem. Et notum qui dicerentur proprie (...) in Republica
Atheniensium.
Salmasius de primatu Papae, page 18, 19. (...), to speak properly, is another
thing then (...): the former signifies a power of jurisdiction and government:
the latter a precedence or placing of one before another: although they are
sometimes used promiscuously, and although (...) are also (...). Yea they have
the very names of (...) and (...) or (...) (if you look to the native
Etymology of the words) from their precedence or standing before, even as
Antistites quasi ante stantes, and praetor quasi praeitor: such names being
chosen (for mollifying and dulcifying of Government) as might hold forth
precedence, rather then high sounding names of power and authority. I shall
add but two testimonies of ancient Grecians: Plato Epist. 7. near the end:
(...). Or if he that rules some great City, and such as has the dominion over
many smaller Cities, should unjustly distribute to his own City the means and
substance of those lesser Cities. Dionysius Areopagita Epist. 8. speaking of
Moses his supreme power of rule and government over Israel, which was envyed by
Korah and his faction, calls it (...).

Well: Mr. Hussy will try if his Logic can help him, if his Greek cannot.
Whatsoever this person is that is to be beloved, ho is supposed not instituted
in this place, the subject is supposed not handled in any Science. The like he
says afterward page 22. that we cannot prove from 1 Cor. 5. that Paul did
institute excommunication, but at most that he supposed an Institution. For my
part, that Scripture which supposes an Institution, shall to me prove an
Institution; for I am sure that which any Scripture supposes, must be true.
And herein as I take it, Mr. Coleman would have said as I say, for in his
fourth rule he proved the Institution of Magistracy from Romans 13. yec
Magistracy is not instituted in that place, but supposed to be instituted.

A third Argument I take from Hebr. 13 7. Remember them which have the rule
over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God: Verse. 17. Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give an account. Bullinger and Gualther refer this 17th.
verse both to Magistracy and Ministry, and so far they are ours, in sharing
the rule and government between both, and in making obedience due to both. But
Calvin and many others do better expound the Text of Ecclesiastical Rulers or
Governors onel: wherein Salmasius follows the Greek Scholiasts, who expound
the Text of Bishops or Elders who did in common govern the Church. See Walo
Messal. page 137. 138. That it is not spoken of civil but of Ecclesiastical
rulers, may thus appear: beside that it were hard to take (...) in the 17th.
verse in another sense then it has verse 7. or the Rulers that watch for the
soul, verse. 17. to be any other, then the rulers that had spoken the Word of
God, verse. 7. it is further to be noted that the Apostle speaks of such Rulers
as the believing Hebrews had at that time, as is evident by verse. 24. Salute
all them Aretius comment. in Hebr. 13. 14. Primum Apostolus salutat suo nomine
ipsorum praepositos, hoc est (...), quo nomine intelligo tum Ministros, tum
etiam Seniores, qui reliquos auctoritate regebant, and in officio detinebant.
that have the rule over you, and all the Saints, and those Rulers did watch
for their souls. But they had no Christian or godly Magistrates that watched
for their souls, or whom the Apostle would thus salute with the Saints. But
the word is (...) says Mr. Hussy page 18. which is ducum, them that lead you.
The Apostle has indeed chosen a word free of ambition, yet says Beza,
auctoritatis maximae, it is a word of the greatest authority. The Syriack has
the same word here, by which he renders (...), 1 Cor. 12. 28. And if you
consult the Septuagints, the Word (...) except very rarely where it signifies
(...) seu viae ducem (and then, to speak properly, subjection and obedience is
not due to the (...)) as Exodus 23. 23. where yet it was an Angel that was the
guide, and so not without authority: they do usually and in innumerable places
use this word to express one invested with power and authority of Government;
and the same Hebrew words which they render by (...) and (...), are likewise by
by them translated (...) and (...); all which are names of superiority,
command, and government: (...) the Governor, is Pilates highest Title, Matthew.
27. 2. And Erastus, lib. 5. cap. 2. page 312, says, The Magistrates of the
Gentiles were called by the names of (...) and (...). Now (...) and (...) are
the same in signification. Stephen in Theslinguae Gr. cites out of Plutarch
(...); and tells us that (...) with a Genitive, and (...), generally is used
for praesum. (...) is Joseph's greatest Title, to express his government over
Egypt, Acts 7. 10. yea, Christ himself is called (...), to express his
governing or ruling power over his Church, Matthew. 2. 6. Salmasius does at once
show us, both that the Apostle means the Elders of the Church under the name
(...), and that the same name is used for civil Magistrates, yea Emperors. See
Walo Messal. page 219, 220. Far be it from all the Ministers of Christ, to
arrogate or assume any such dominion as belongs to the civil Magistrate, or to
lord it over the Lords Inheritance. Nay, here that rule must take place, Luke
22. 26. (...), he that is chief, as he that serves. Only the holy Ghost gives
to Church Officers those names of authority which are given to civil
Magistrates, thereby to teach the people of God their duty, and that there is
another Government beside the civil, whereunto they ought to submit and obey in
the Lord.

Master Husseys next answer is, that where our Books have it Obey them that
have the rule over you, the word is (...), which is no more but Be persuaded.
For proof whereof, he tells us out of Pasor, that (...) is verbum foreuse, a
word whereby the Advocates persuade the Judges: yet we cannot say that the
Judges obey the Advocates. I answer: Let him make of (...) what he can; the
passive (...), does frequently signisie I obey, or obtemper: For which
signification, H. Stephanus in the word (...), cites out of Xenophon (...):
out of Plutaroh, (...): out of Plato, (...). If we come to the Scripture
phrase, I am sure in some places (...) signifies a thing of another nature,
then to be persuaded forensically, as Iam. 3. 3, Behold, we put bits in the
horses mouths, that they may obey us: (...). But here when we speak of the
obedience of Church Members to Church Officers, it is a free, rational,
willing, Christian obedience; yet obedience it is which we owe to Spiritual
Rulers, as well as that which we owe to civil Magistrates. Sure Gualther and
Bullinger did understand (...) here to be more then be persuaded; for they
apply this Text to the obedience due to Magistrates. And M. Hussy might have
also observed that Pasor renders (...) by pareo, obedio; for which he cites
Gal. 3. 1. (...), not to obey the truth. And (...) he renders inobediens,
refractarius, as Romans 1. 30. (...), disobedient to parents. I know that (...)
is also used for to be persuaded; but I verily believe M. Hussy is the first
man that ever quarrelled the word obey in this Text, and turned it to be no
more but be persuaded. Yet if he shall well observe that which follows in the
very next words (...), and submit your selves (which in Theodorets opinion
notes here intense obedience: They must not only (...), yield, but (...),
yield with subjection and submission: This relates to authority; nor can we
say that the Judges do (...) to the Advocates, nor travelers to their guides)
he himself shall be persuaded to cast away this gloss, and to seek a better.
And if he will stand to it, he shall but do a disservice to Magistracy, whiles
he would weaken the power of the Ministry: for though there be much in the New
Testament concerning subjection or submission to Magistrates; yet the clearest,
fullest, yea (to my remembrance) the only express word for obedience to
Magistrates is (...), which is rightly translated in our Books to obey
Magistrates: but Master Hussy will make it no more, but to be persuaded by
Magistrates. Yea, the very simple and uncompounded Verb (...)* in the
forecited passages of Xenophon and Plutarch is used where they speak of
obedience to Magistrates and masters.

If this must fail him, he has yet another answer: Let the word stand, says
he, as it is translated obey; yet it is not always correlative to the command of
a Superior: and the holy Ghost requires obedience here, not by an argument
from the authority of him that leads them, but from the benefit that comes
to themselves; for that is unprofitable for you. He divides what the Apostle
joyneth; for there are two sorts of Arguments in the Text, by which the Apostle
persuades them to this obedience: one is taken from the authority of the
Ministry, which is intimated both by that name of authority (...), and by
their subordination or submission which the Apostle calls for: another from the
benefit that comes to themselves, by their obedience, and the hurt which they
shall do to themselves by their disobedience. Both these Arguments are wrapped up
in these words, For they watch for your souls, which is the very same with that
Acts 20. 28. To all the flock over the which the holy Ghost has made you
overseers. The Apostle does also persuade Christians to be subject to the
Magistrate, by an Argument taken from the benefit that comes to themselves,
Romans 13. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good: yet that does not
weaken but rather strengthen the Authority of the Magistrate.

The fourth Argument shall be taken from 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against an Elder receive
not an accusation, but before (or under) two or three witnesses. Which is not a
temporary charge laid upon Timothy as an Evangelist, and so incompetent to
ordinary Ministers: for it is joined with the rules of public Rebuking, of
laying on of hands, not partaking of other men's sins, and such like things
which are of ordinary concernment. He is also charged to keep the Commandment
till the appearing of Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 14, which cannot be otherwise
understood then as spoken to him in reference to the Ministry. Now what is an
act of Government, if this be not, to receive accusations, and that against
Elders, and that under two or three witnesses? The Apostle intends here the
avoiding of these two evils; first, upon the one hand, because veritas odium
parit, and Elders doing their duty faithfully, will certainly be hated, and
slandered, and evil spoken of by some, that therefore every Diotrephes prattling
against a servant of Christ with malicious words, may not be able to blast his
Christian reputation and good name: Next, upon the other part, because the
offenses and scandals of Elders are not to be connived at, but to be aggravated
and censured, more then the offenses of others, that therefore an accusation be
received against them, if it be under two or three witnesses. Now where
accusations ought to be received, and that under two or three witnesses, and
not otherwise (with special charge also to observe these things, without
partiality, or preferring one before another, verse. 21.) there is certainly a
forensical proceeding, and a corrective Jurisdiction or Government. More of
this Argument in Male audis, page 14.

Fifthly, what is that else but a corrective Jurisdiction, Tit. 3. 10. A man
that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject, (...) He
speaks of a rejecting of persons, not of things only; and of such a rejecting
of persons, as cannot be understood only of that avoiding or rejecting, by
which every private Christian ought to observe, and avoid, and not receive
false Teachers, but of a public Ministerial or Consistorial rejecting of an
Heretic, by cutting him off, or casting him out of the Church.

It is a Canon de Judiciis Ecclesiasticis, says Tossanus upon the the place.
This the Greek will easily admit: for Stephanus in Thesauro linguae Gr. tells
us that (...) or (...) is used for recuse, aversor, repudio; and cites out of
Plutarch (...), to repudiate or put away a wife. As here also we may read, A
man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, repudiate or
put away; though the word reject does also bear the same sense. And as the
Greek will admit it, so I have these reasons to confirm it, which shall suffice
for the present. (He that pleases, may read a large Discourse concerning the
censure of Heretics, in Claudius Espencaeus upon this place.) First, The
Apostles scope is not to hold forth the common duties of all Christians, except
ex consequenti: but his primary intention all along in that Epistle, is to
instruct Titus concerning the ordering and governing of the Church, Chap. 1.
verse. 5. Secondly, there must be a first and second admonition, before the
Heretic be thus rejected. This rejecting is not for his dangerous and false
Doctrine, simply or by it self considered, but for his contumacy and
incorrigiblenesse. But private Christians ought to observe by the judgment of
private discretion, and ought in prudence and caution to avoid all familiar
fellowship and conversation with a man that is an Heretic, though he has not
yet gotten a first and second admonition: Matthew. 7. 15, 16. Beware of false
Prophets which come to you in ^eeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Thirdly, the admonition in the Text
is a public authoritative or ministerial admonition, after that thou (Titus)
have once and again admonished him says the Syriack: therefore the rejecting
must also be public and ministerial. Fourthly, Zach Ursinus Tom. 3. page 769.
Object. 1. Tantum praecipit ministro ut eum sugiat ergo non excommunicantus.
Resp. Negatur antecedens quia non vult de una and eadem re, vel persona,
contraria judicia esse aut pugnantes sententias. Ergo dum vult ut Haereticum
pro everso habeat minister, non vult ut reliqui in Ecclesia habeant eum pro
stante. Object. 2. Sed non jubet excommunicari. Resp. Iubet, quia vult illum
pro everso and suopte judicio condemnato haberi. Ergo non est Ecclesiae
membrum, and alibi docet judicium hoc debere fieri ordinario and legitimo
consensu Ecclesiae.
This rejecting of an Heretic is the last act, when he appears incorrigible.
We find before chap. 1. verse. 13. Rebuke them sharply; and chap. 2. verse. 15.
Rebuke with all authority. But now when the Apostle says (...) reject, this is
a higher degree. and this (much more) must be with all authority, (...), which
words compare with 1 Cor. 7. 25. where the Apostle opposes (...),
commandment, and opinion or judgment. From all which it will appear, that
this rejecting of an Heretic by Titus and others joined with him in the
Government of the Church, was an authoritative and Juridical act, and the
judgment thereupon decisive, not consultative only. Fifthly, Look by what
authority Elders were ordained, by the same authority they were for heresy
(maintained with contumacy) rejected: for the Apostle commits into the same
hands, the ordaining of Elders, and the rejecting of Heretics; compare Tit. 3.
10. with Tit. 1. 5. Now the ordination was by the Presbytery: 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Therefore so was the rejection.

I conclude with the Dutch Annotations upon Tit. 3. 10. reject. i. e. Have no
communion with him. Let him go without disputing any further with him, and
casting the holy things before such dogs. Matthew. 7. 6. Let him not remain in
the outward communion of the Church.

The sixth Argument I draw from 1 Cor. 5. 12. Do not ye judge them that are
within? Verse. 13. Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person.
2 Cor. 2. 6. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment (or censure.) which
was inflicted of many. Here is an Ecclesiastical judging, not by the judgment
of private Christian discretion only (for so they judged those also that were
without) but an authoritative corrective Judgment, by which a scandalous
brother, a rotten member, like to infect other members, is put away from among
the people of God. And this Judgment was made, sentence given, and censure
inflicted (...), by many, that is not by all, but by the Elders of that Church
says Walaeus, Tom. 1. page 468, or you may read by the chiefest; So Piscator
and Heinsius upon the place. The sense is all one, as if the Apostle had said
(...), by them that have the rule over you. Now what will you make of judging,
putting away, and censuring, being acts neither of a civil power, nor put forth
upon any except Churchmembers, if you make it not a corrective
Church Government?

As for Mr. Colemans answer that (...) amounts to no more but an objurgation, I
have fully confuted that in Male audis page 12. 13. 14. which I will not
resume. But beside all I said there, I add somewhat which I have since
observed. Zonaras in Conc. Antioch. can. 22. uses (...) for to be punished or
censured: and in Conc. Carthag. can. 49. he calls the man who is under
Church-censure, (...). Balsamon in Conc. Carthag. can. 46. calls him (...).
Both of them do often use (...) for Church-censure, as in the place last cited,
(...). Yea the Council of Antioch held under Constantius, uses Paul's word
(...) to express Ecclesiastical censure, and an act of corrective government.
Can. 3. It is said of him that receives a Presbyter or Deacon being justly
deposed, (...), ille quoque a communi Synodo puniatur, ut qui Ecclesiastica
statuta dissolvat. Ibid. Can. 22. A Bishop is prohibit to ordain within the
charge of another Bishop, unless that other Bishop consent. But if any presume
to do such a thing, let the ordination be void or null, (...), and ipse a
Synodo puniatur, and let himself be punished by the Synod: (...) says
Balsamen, how they should be punished who ordain without the bounds of their
own charge, and without consent of him whose charge it is, may be learned from
other Canons. Where you see he understands (...) to agree in signification with
(...), which is punishment. The sixth general Council Can. 60. uses the verb
(...) for suffering punishment, adding also by way of explanation (...), to be
subject to afflictions and labors.

Seventhly, We have an Argument from 1 Cor. 14. 32, 33. And the Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets; for God is not the Author of confusion,
but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints. The Apostle is giving such
rules and directions concerning prophesying or interpretation of Scripture,
that upon the one hand there may be a liberty to all the Prophets to prophecy,
and that the Church may be edified by the gifts of all, and that for that end
one ought to give place to another: upon the other hand, that a boundless
liberty and confusion, and immunity from censure, may not be introduced into
the Church* To this latter branch belongs verse. 29. 32. 33. Let the Prophets
speak two or three, and let the other judge. He will have two, or at most three
Prophets to speak in one Congregation, at one diet or time of assembling: and
those Prophets, says he, must be Aegid. Hunnius in 1 Cor. 14. 32. Paulus hanc
regulam praescribit, ut spiritus Prophetarum Prophetis subjiciantur, id est* ut
is qui prophetas, non du^itet, sermonem and concionem suam censurae judicioque
reliquorum concionatorum subjicere.
examined, judged, and censured by the other Prophets: for the Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets, that is, every particular Prophet
distributively, is subject to all the Prophets collectively, or to the college
of Prophets (add, and of other spiritual persons entrusted with the government
of the Church, together with the Prophets, as from verse. 37. and Gal. 6. 1. is
well observed by our Countryman Mr. Dickson upon this place). Therefore
Walaeus Tom. 1 page 468. does rightly collect from this place an authority of
Church Government. Protestant Writers prove hence the authority of
General-Councels above the Pope: and that the Pope is a false Prophet, because
he refuses to be subject to the Prophets. Iunius in diverse places, applies
this Text to the authority of Presbyteries and Synods. Gualther upon the place
applies it against the Pope who will judge all men, and be judged of no man;
whereas (says he) the Apostle here will have no man how eminent soever, to be
free from censure, when he is censurable. So then we have in this Text a
subjection, and an authority of judging and censuring. And this Judgment which
the Apostle here speaks of, is neither the Judgment of the civil Magistrate,
nor the Judgment of discretion common to the whole Church, but it is the
Judgment or censure of Prophets, and that not School-wise according to Mr.
Husseys notion of Schools, that is by the Prophets disputing a man out of his
error, and no more, no vote, no decision, no result, except he that has taught
an error do agree to the arguments of the other Prophets, and so all end in a
brotherly accord, and in the unanimous consent of the whole Clergy (for so does
he advise the Parliament) so that he shall be no more subject to all the
Prophets, then all the Prophets to him. Yea in Mr. Husseys sense the Pope will
not refuse to be subject to a Council of Prophets, and then Protestant Writers
have been far out of their way, who have disputed against the Pope from this
Text, supposing it to hold forth a binding authoritative Judgment of the
Prophets, whereunto any one Prophet is bound to be subject, the Judgment of
his private discretion being always reserved to him, that he give not blind
obedience.

Eighthly, I argue from Revel. 2. 14. 20. The Lord Jesus reproves the Angel of
the Church in Pergamus for suffering those that taught the doctrine of Balaam,
and the Angel of the Church in Thyatira for suffering Iezebel which called her
self a Prophetess, to seduce his people. The fault here reproved must be the
neglect of Church Censures and corrective government, which is so manifest,
that they who plead most for liberty of Conscience from the Magistrate, do
acknowledge that the Angels of these Churches are reproved for not censuring
Ecclesiastically those that did thus seduce Gods people. Neither is it said
because thou art silent and do not reprove nor convince; but because thou
have there them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam: that is, because thou do
not cast them out of the Church, that they may not hurt others. So the English
Annotations upon the place, referring us also to 1 Cor. 5. The Angel of the
Church was guilty in this, that those who had so much scandalized the Church by
their Doctrine, were still in the Church, and not yet cast out of the Church.
And who can imagine that the Angels of those Churches whom Christ himself
commends for holding fast his name, and for their love, service, faith, and
patience were so void either of prudence as not to observe, or of zeal, as not
to gainsay and confute by sound doctrine those soul and scandalous errors?
Certainly their sin was like that of Eli, they did not together with the
doctrinal and monitory part, make use of that Jurisdiction and corrective
power, which God had put in their hands.

Ninthly, We have another Argument from 1 Thessalonians. 3. 14. And if any man obey not
our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no Company with him, that he
may be ashamed. Here the Syriack helps us much. And if any man obey not these
words which are contained in this Epistle, let that man be separated from you,
neither have company with him, that he may be ashamed. Gualther upon the place
says, the Apostle speaks de disciplina Ecclesiastica, what discipline they
ought to have in the Church, and the end thereof. So Calvin, Beza, Piscator,
Zanchius, Diodati, The Dutch Annotations, Gomarus, also Mariana, Cajetan,
Salmeron, Gorranus, Esthius in lib. 4. Sent. Did. 19. Sect. 7. and diverse
others following Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Theodoret,
Aquinas, all these do apply it to Ecclesiastical discipline and censure. Some
controversy there is whether this Text reach as far as Excommunication (which
does not belong to this present Argument) but certainly it reaches to a
public Church-censure, and is more then the withdrawing of private Company and
Fellowship, either because of personal or private injuries, or because of
profaneness. For 1. the offense spoken of by the Apostle is not a matter of
Civil or Personal injury, but of scandal; he speaks of idle bodies that walked
disorderly, not working at all, and if these must be noted and separated, how
much more says Theoylact. those who commit crimes and wickedness? 2. Here is
contumacy added to the offense, if any man obey not our word by this Epistle,
intimating that upon occasion of this Epistle, those that walked disorderly
were to be solemnly admonished, and required to work in quietness, and to eat
their own bread: which if after admonition they would not do, then to note
them. Aquinas clears it by 1 Samuel 15. 23- for rebellion is as the sin of
witck-craft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and as idolatry. 3. (...), note
that man: signate (as Menochius renders it) rather then either significate or
notate: set a mark upon him, even as (says Erasmus) we set a mark upon pushing
oxen that we may avoid them; which agrees well with the Syriack, Let that man
be separated from you: (...) is some what more then (...), The latter usually
signifies no more, but significo, indico, signum do: but the former is signum
and notam imprimo, obsigno, insignio. The Septuagints make (...) to answer to
the Hebrew (...) and (...), levavit, elevavit, sustulit, So Psalm. 4. 7. (...)
etc. signatum est super nos: that is, the light of thy c untenance is lifted up
upon us examplarly, or banner-wise, so as it may be remarkable to others. The
learned Authors of the Dutch Annotations upon 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. tell us that this
Greek word does not properly signify to present or represent one, but to note
one and mark him out, putting some ignominy upon him, or outing him from an
honorable Congregation, and marking or blotting out his name, as one unworthy
of that honor. By which reason, as likewise by that which follows, they
confute those who construe the word note with the Word Epistle, as if the
Apostle had said, note or present me such a one by a letter. 4. Have no company
with him. He speaks it to the (...) that they may have no fellowship with the
(...), he will have those that walk orderly and by rule, to have no company
with those that walk disorderly. Now this concerns the whole Church equally,
and it is spoken to the Church, for what reason can there be that some in the
Church should have no company with one, because of his scandalous and
disorderly walking, but the same reason will make the whole Church to have no
company with him? there may be diverse civil respects and considerations which
may make it unfit for some to keep familiar civil fellowship, which respects
and considerations do not concern others. But the avoiding of the company of
those who walk scandalously and disorderly, and that because they walk in that
manner, and further add obstinacy to their sin after public admonition; must
needs belong to the whole Church. 5. Note that man and have no company with
him; he must first be noted, before he be avoided, and both these are public
Ecclesiastical acts: for it was far from the Apostles meaning that every man
should be herein left to his liberty; he that pleases to note him and have no
company with him, well and good; he that pleases not, shall be free. But
unless there be an Ecclesiastical Judgment and censure past upon such a one,
every one had been left to his liberty. 6. That he may be ashamed: this as it
is the end of Church Censures, so it will be attained in a very small measure,
and perhaps not at all, by one private man his avoiding the company of another,
which will not make the offender ashamed, abased, and humbled, but when he is
publicly noted, and when the Church avoids his Company, that is it which most
covers a man with shame and confusion of face.

Tenthly, The Apostle mentions Ecclesiastical Rulers, Romans 12. 8. (...)
praefectus, or qui praeest, he that rules, that is, the ruling Elder. He is
making an enumeration of Ecclesiastical offices and administrations, and no
other: So Calvin, Beza, Piscator, Martyr, Tossanus, Diodati, all upon the
place, and Iunius Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 1. do conceive, and the whole context
and the allusion to the several offices of several members in the same body
proves it, and if all the rest be Ecclesiastical, why not Musculus upon the
place. Habet Ecclesia quaelibet suos praesectos and Gubernatores etc. Isti sunt
Seniores etc. Calv. ibid. Temporis illius conditio non de quibuslibet
praefectis Paulum loqui ostendit, (quia tunc nulli erant pii Magistratus) sed
de Senioribus qui morum erant Censores. Tossanus ibid. Id omne ad regimen and
ordinem Ecclesiae and potestatem illam spiritualem de qua 2 Cor. 10. referri
debet: and tribuitur praesidum appellatio quos (...) and (...) vocat Apostolus
1 Timothy 5. omnibus in genere ministris and etiam senioribus Ecclesiae.
the office of ruling also, which is there mentioned? for how should civil
ruling come in among the Ecclesiastical administrations, especially in those
days when Magistrates were not Christian? Musculus takes the Rulers here to be
Elders. Gualther and Bullinger, though they make this Text applicable to civil
Rulers, yet they do not exclude Church Officers from ruling, but expressly
mention Church Governors distinct from civil Governors, to be there
comprehended under (...). Mr. Hussy page 19. answering this argument, can
neither deny what I said of Gualther and Bullinger, nor yet does affirm that
civil Rulers are there meant, only his reply is that my argument is drawn from
the interpretation of the place, but the Disputant may not interpret says he,
that is the answerers part: This calls to mind the Anabaptistical error,
Concionatores non retinent verba Textus, sed interpretantur ea, id quod non
ferendum. For which see Petrus Hi^kolmannus de Anabaptism^, Disp. 9. cap. 1. My
Argument was drawn from the Text, for the Text rightly understood and
interpreted; is the Text. But see now what strange rules you may exspect when
Mr. Hussy comes to School-disputes, the disputant may not interpret, he must
keep close to terms, if the thing be not in terminis in the Text, its no
Argum^nt, by which rule he will at one dash overthrow not only the
disputations of Protestants against Papists; of the ancient Fathers against the
Heretics of their times (for how is Justification by Faith ONLY, the number
of the Sacraments, the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, and many
other most material points proved, but by Scripture rightly opened, cleared,
and interpreted?) but also the disputations of the Apostles, and of Jesus
Christ himself against the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Jews; for there is nothing
more ordinary with Christ and his Apostles in their disputes for the truth,
then to interpret Scripture, and give the sense of it.

Eleventhly, (...) the Governments mentioned 1 Cor. 12. 28. are not Civil but
Ecclesiastical Governments, as I have largely proved Chap. 6. and shall not
need here to repeat it; only observe what At Gubernatores vocavit Amb^osius
qui spiritu ilibus retina^ulis docum^nto (...) hominibus, quales sunt seniores,
Pres^yteri, and disciplinae Christianae praesecti, morum censores.
Bullinger says on the place: whereunto add the Testimony of Hugo Grotius
(whom I suppose our opposites do not look upon as an adversary) on Luke 12. 14.
He acknowledges that in the Church of Corinth, censura morum was penes
Presbyterium, the censure of men's manners, was in the power of the Presbytery.
This Government the Church of Corinth had, a Christian Magistrate they had not.

Twelfthly, If in the Jewish Church there was an Ecclesiastical Government,
distinct from the Civil; then in the Christian Church also there ought to be an
Ecclesiastical Government distinct from the Civil. But in the Jewish Church
there was an Ecclesiastical Government distinct from the Civil. Ergo.

The Proposition is proved thus. There can be no reason given for an
Ecclesiastical government among the Jews, distinct from the Civil, which will
not hold as well and as strongly for an Ecclesiastical government among
Christians, distinct from the Civil: for we speak not now of the particulars (a
high Priest, or the like) which were typical and proper to that time, but we
speak of a Church government distinct from the Civil, look upon it under that
notion, and then see if any reason can be given for it among them, which will
not conclude the like among us: yea much more among us, for if the Priests had
a great influence and interest into the Civil Government of the Jews, and yet
there was a Church Government distinct from the Civil; how much more now when
Ministers have not, neither ought to have any share in the Civil government?
The assumption has been abundantly proved before in the first book. I will not
repeat, but here note these Scriptures: Ier. 5. 31. The Prophets bear rule: It
was their office to bear rule, It was their sin to support themselves in their
ruling by the false Prophets. 1 Chronicles. 9 11. Azariah, the Ruler of the House of
God. 2 Chronicles. 31. 13. And Azariah the Ruler of the House of God. (...). 11. 11.
Serajah the Ruler of the House of God. All the chief Pri^sts or heads of the
several Classes or Orders of Priests were called Principes Sanctuarii says
Matthias Martinius Lexic. Philol. page 3268. So 2. Chron. 35. 8. Hilkiah and
Zachariah, and Jehiel, Rulers of the House of God. Act. 23. 5. Then said Paul,
I wist not brethren that he was the high Priest, for it is written thou shall
not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Finally, Deuteronomy. 31. 28. where we find
schoterim, that is Officers, Rulers, or such as were set over the charge; the
70. read (...), Hierome, Doctores. More plainly 2 Kings 11. 18. the Priest
appointed Officers over the House of the Lord.

Thirteenthly, A corrective Ecclesiastical government in the Churches of
Galatia seems to be intimated, Gal. 5. 12. I would they were even cut off
((...)) which trouble you. Which many understand of Excommunication. See
Esthius in lib. 4. Sent. Did. 19. Sect. 6. 7. Also Salmeron, Menochius,
Vasquez, Novarinus, and (of ours) B^za, Diodati, Gomarus, all upon the place,
beside diverse others. Musculus upon the place does parallel this cutting off,
with delivering to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20. and explaineth
excindantur by abalienentur which best suteth to excommunication. Certainly the
words will easily admit this sense, or rather invite to it: for (...) is not
properly perdo, destruo, consumo, but amputo, abscindo, also minuo, because
that from which any thing is cut off, is diminished and made less: also
repello, abjungo, separo, ahstraho. And so (...), abscindor, excindor, separor,
abstra^or. Hunters and such as trace the Vestigies, but cannot find them, are
said (...), to be cut off or abstracted. H^sych. (...). So (...), abscissus, is
not he who is cut off by death or destruction, but he that has his members cut
off: Which seems to have been the ground of Augustine his mistake of this Text,
conceiving the Apostles wish to be, that those men should be made Eunuchs. The
Septuagints have sometimes (...), circumcido, and (...), demitto, as synonymous
with (...). Now from the phrase, to the purpose of the Text. That it is meant
of Excommunication, I have these reasons which confirm me: 1. Because verse. 9.
a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, are the very same words which he
uses 1 Cor. 5. 6. where he presses the excommunication of the inces^uous man;
as there, one unclean person in life; so here, some few seducers (especially
that one who is singularly pointed at verse. 10.) is meant by the little leaven,
which was to be purged out, lest it should leaven the whole Church. 2.
Interpreters do generally agree, that the Apostle here alludeth to
Circumcision, which those Judaizing teachers pressed upon the Galatians as
necessary: wishing that they who would so fain have the Galatians circumcised,
were themselves cut off and cast out of the Church as rotten members, or as a
Gangren out of the body. This allusion suteth best with excommunication. 3. The
words so understood will more fitly answer and be parallel unto the cutting off
in the Law, that soul shall be cut off from among his people (which I have
before proved to be meant of excommunication) as likewise to that 1 Cor. 5. 14.
Put away that wicked person from among you. 4. Other Interpretations do not so
well agree to the Text. This cutting off could not be expected nor any hopes
had of it by the hand of Justice, or of the Magistrate, for the Magistrates of
that time were themselves troublers of the Christians, so far they were from
cutting of those that troubled them. Those that understand the words of an
imprecation of eternal cutting off from God, and being accursed from Christ,
draw themselves into thorny questions, wherein they can hardly satisfy
themselves or others. To understand it of cutting off by death, does not well
answer that allusion to Circumcision, generally observed (as has been said) by
Interpreters: which allusion does intimate that it is not a cutting off out of
the World, but a cutting off from the body of the Church. I would that they
themselves were cut off as the praeputium from the Church, that is, cut off a
consortio Ecclesiae says Gu^lther. If it be said, why then does the Apostle
only wish it? Why does he not prescribe or command to excommunicate them? To
this we may either answer as B^za, The Apostle Paul's authority at that time was
extremely blasted and weakened in the Churches of Galatia; Or thus, the Apostle
knew that as the Churches of Galatia then stood affected (being bewitched with
the Judaizing Zealots, and in a manner moved away to another Gospel) both
Churches and Ministry were unwilling to excommunicate those that he means of:
for which cause he would not peremptorily command their excommunication,
renitente Ecclesia, but forbeareth for that season, wishing for better times.
Some think that the Apostle speaks positively of excommunication, verse. 10.
He shall bear his Judgment. But others are of opinion the Apostle there speaks
of the judgment of God, which he certainly and positively denounces, and that
verse. 12. he adds this as a distinct purpose, that he could wish them also
cut off from the Church by excommunication.

It will be an Argument of more weight against Erastus his Interpretation of
that Text, if we object against him thus. This cutting off which the Apostle
wishes to those that troubled the Galatians, cannot be meant of a divine or
miraculous judgment upon them, such as he thinks to be meant 1 Cor. 5. (which
place he parallels with Gal. 5. 12. as to the punishment intended) for if so,
why does not the Apostle adjudge them positively to be cut off or destroyed, as
he did constitute and decree by his Apostolical power of miracles (so thinks
Erastus) the incestuous Corinthian to be delivered to Satan? To this Erastus
replieth, lib. 3. cap. 9, Because the Apostles had not power to work miracles
quoties vellent, as often as they would, nor to afflictor stay any, but when it
seemed good in Gods eyes, sed quando Deo visum fuit utile, necessarium, and
salutare. But I ask, Was it right and agreeable to the will of God, that the
Apostle should wish their cutting off? Was it not profitable and necessary for
the Churches good, that they should be cut off? Where shall we find that the
working of a miracle was profitable and necessary for the Churches good, and
that an Apostle did desire and thirst after the working of that miracle, and
yet had not power from God to work it? How had the false Apostles insulted at
this? Is this the great Apostle of the Gentiles, who has not power from God to
work a miracle, when himself professes he would gladly have it wrought?

Fourteenthly, that passage, 2 Cor. 10. 6. is by some brought (not without very
considerable Reasons) for the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical censures. And have in
readin^sse, says the Apostle, or (as the Syriack, we are ready) to revenge all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled. Novarinus in 2 Cor. 10. 6.
plerique de excommunicandi potestate haec verba interpretantur. In this sense
was the Text understood a thousand years ago by Gegro^y Epist. lib. 2. cap. 37.
The Dutch Annotations upon the place, say that the Apostles meaning is; of
declaring the vengeance of God against the obstinate; and of exercising the
Ecclesiastical Banne or Discipline, against those who professing themselves
members of the Congregation, do yet teach or lead unchristian lives or
doctrine. Others also (among whom is Master David Dickson) understand
Church Censures to be here meant. The Apostle is in that Chapter confuting the
calumny of such as said of him, His Epistles were weighty and powerful, and did
speak of great things; but when he himself is bodily present, he does but
little, he assumes no great authority, he is weak and almost contemptible. In
answer hereunto, he tells them, The weapons of our warfare (speaking not only
in his own name, but in the name of all the Ministers of Christ) though they be
not carnal, yet they are mighty through God to conquer and captivate souls to
the obedience of Christ. And as for the stubborn and unruly, we are armed with
a power of corrective government, which shall be more fully executed in due
time. There is but one of two Interpretations which can with any probability
seem to agree to this Text, namely, that it is meant either of the
extraordinary Apostolical power, by which they did miraculously punish some
offenders (as Peter did Ananias and Sapphira, and as Paul did E^ymas) or of a
corrective Church Government, and Excommunication. The Reasons which induce me
to believe, that the Apostle means here of Church Censures, especially
Excommunication, and not of that extraordinary miraculous power, are these. 1.
The reason added, When your obedience is fulfilled, cannot suit to the power of
working miracles (for it had been the more seasonable to work such miracles,
while the obedience of the Corinthians was not yet fulfilled. Miracles are not
for them that believe, but for them that believe not, says the same Apostle.)
But it suits very well to the power of Church Censures: for as Esthius and
Novarinus explain the Apostles reason, it is in vain to excommunicate all such
as are worthy of Excommunication, when there is a general re^itency and
unwillingnesse in the Church; or to cut off a member, when the same evil has
infected either the whole or the greatest part of the body; which Augustine
also tells us in diverse places. And this (by the way) confirms the reason which
I gave why the Apostle only wishes those that troubled the Galatians to be
cut off, but does not command it, in regard of the present unwillingnesse and
disaffection of those Churches. 2. We may have a great deal of light to this
place by comparing it with Cha^. 12. verse 20, 21. and Chap. 13. verse 2. Many
among the Corinthians had sinned foul and ^eandalous sins, whereof they had not
repented, and for which they were not censured or cast out of the Church. The
Apostle certifieth them, that if he come, he will not spare. What? was it his
meaning to work a miracle upon every fornicator, and each other scandalous
person in the Church of Corinth? No sure: mark his words; Now I write to them
which heretofore have sinned, and to ALL OTHER, that if I come again, I will
not spare. Who can imagine his meaning to be, that he would work a miracle upon
them and all other? So ^ere when it is said, having in readiness^ to (...) ALL
(...), let it be remembered that the Apostolical power of miracles was never
appointed to be executed against ALL disobedience. Thirdly, that which the
Apostle says of the Spiritual weapons, mighty through God to the pulling down
of strong holds, etc. was not proper or peculiar to the Apostles, but is
rightly applied to all the Ministers of the Gospel: the more hardly can it be
supposed, that what is immediately added, and as it were with one breath
uttered, And having in readiness to (...) all disobedience, is meant of the
extraordinary Apostolical power. Fourthly, such as the weapons are for
conquering and subduing souls to the obedience of Christ, such is the
corrective or punitive part there spoken of. But the weapons for conquering,
are merely Spiritual, not corporal: Therefore the corrective or punitive part
there spoken of, is also Spiritual, and so does not concern the inflicting of
corporal punishment, such as the Erastians understand by delivering to Satan.

Fifteenthly, an Ecclesiastical ruling power may be proved from 2 Cor. 2. 8. I
beseech you that you would confirm your love toward him. Here is a Juridical
power of loosing, and consequently of binding; for it belongs to the same
power to bind and loose, to excommunicate and to absolve. An authoritative
juridical loosing, I prove from the word (...), which properly signifies the
making a thing sure or firm by a decisive suffrage, authoritative judgment, or
ratificatory and obligatory sentence past upon it. Hen. Stephanus in These.
linguae Gr. in the word (...), says that this Text 2 Cor. 2. 8. is more
rightly read, Ut ratam faciatis in illum charitatem, then as the vulgar Latin
has it, Ut confirmetis. The Verb (...) he expounds thus; Auctoritatem do,
auctoritate mea comprobo; vel ratum habeo, ratum facio. Pasor renders the same
Verb sancio, ratum facio, and cites for that sense, 2 Cor. 2. 6. So Erasmus
likewise upon the place. So Cartwright upon the same place against the
Rhemists. So Chemnitius Exam. Conc. Trident. part. 4. de Indulg. page 53. The
force of this word (...) was urged against the opinion of Erastus in a public
Dispute at Heydelberg; the narration whereof is left by Ursinus in his
Catechetical explications. That the word signifies an authoritative act, and
supposes a ruling power, may be thus further confirmed. First, who did (...),
but (...)? No doubt the Apostle borrows the word from the language and
customs of the Heathen Greeks. Now (...) was a fixed or set lawful Assembly,
which met with a judicial ruling power, and ratified a thing by decisive
suffrages, (...). See Suidas in the word (...), Stephanus and Scapula in the
word (...); Erasmus in 2 Cor. 2. 8. Arias Montanus in the word (...), tells us
that to the Graecians (...) was the same thing, which Comitia to the Latins:
Therefore such Assemblies had a judicial power, and their suffrages were (...),
firm and ratified Sentences. Secondly, (...) comes from (...), whence also
comes (...) Lord, (...) dominion, (...) to rule, or to have a dominion: It was
long ago observed by Dionysius Areopagita, de divinis nominibus, cap. 12. where
after he has put into the description of (...) dominion, that it is (...),
true and unshaken firmness, he adds this reason, (...). Which Balthazar
Corderius rendereth thus: Qu^propter dominatio Grae^e a (...) derivato nomine,
idem est quod firmatio, firmamentum and firmum, ac firmans seu ratificans.
Pachimeres in his Paraphrase adds that (...) as it signifies (...), has its
name from (...). So then it is not every confirming, certifying, or making sure
a thing, but when a thing is made sure or firm with fullness of authority and
power. The word (...) is therefore rightly rendered by Stephanus, Scapula and
Pasor, not only firmamentum, rata fides, but auctoritas plena, full authority.
Thirdly, the same Apostle calls a ratified Testament (which ratification is by
a legal and judicial authority) (...), Gal. 3. 15. Fourthly, the opposite Verb
(...) signifies anctoritate priv^, omni imperio spolio, irritum reddo. As
(...) notes a privation of authority, so (...) a giving of authority or
ratification.

The sixteenth Argument to prove a distinct Church Government, is this. The
visible political ministerial Church is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and he is
the Head, King, Judge, and Lawgiver thereof, Isa. 9. 6. Isa. 22. 21, 22. Psalm.
2. 6. Luke 1. 33. 1 Cor. 15. 24 Ephesians. 1. 21m 22, 23. Dare any say that the Lord
Jesus shall not govern the Church of England, and reign over the same? Luke
19. 14 27. Must he not be received both as Lord and as Christ? Acts 2. 36. Now
in the administration and government of a Kingdom these three things are
necessarily required. 1. Laws. 2. Officers, Ministers, Judges, Courts. 3.
Censures and punishments of offenses. Which three being universally necessary
in every Kingdom, can (...) of all be supposed to be wanting in the Church and
Kingdom o^ Jesus Christ, who has been more faithful in the execution o^ his
Kingly office, and has provided better for the Government of his Church, then
ever any King or State in this world did for a Civil Government. I add the
Laws, Judicatories, and censures in the Kingdom of Christ must be spiritual
and Becl^siastical, because his Kingdom is not of this world, and his servants
cannot take the sword, John 18. 36. Neither are the weapons of our warfarre
carnal, but yet mighty through God, and in readiness to revenge all
disobedience: 2 Cor. 10. 4. 6. I do not see what can be answered to this
Argument, except any do so far deny the Kingly office of Jesus Christ, as to
say that the Church Political or Ministerial is not his Kingdom; but only the
Church Mystical; that is, as he rules over our souls by his Word and Spirit.
To which purpose Mr. Hussy in his plea page 33. denies that the visible
Church can be called the Body of Christ, or he their Head; and tells us that
the government which Christ has over the faithful, is truly spiritual, and of
this Kingdom faith he, he has indeed no Officers but his Spirit. I reply, 1.
The Scripture is plain that a visible ministerial Church is the body of
Christ, Romans 12. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 12. to 28. If we admit of
a visible Church and visible Saints, we must also admit of a visible body, and
a visible Kingdom of Christ. 2. The Political Ministerial Church were a body
without a head. The Analogy of a political head as well as of a natural head
agrees to Christ: the (...) as well as (...): and he has an influence upon
the Church potestative as well as effective. 3. He (...) his Prophe^icall
office not only in teaching us inwardly by his Spirit, but in teaching the
Church outwardly by his servants the Ministers of his Word: Now i^ he be a
Prophet to the visible ministerial Church, he is also a King to the same; for
his offices cannot be divided, his Scholars are his Subjects, and whosoever
receive him as a Prophet, must also receive him as a King. Yea, let us hear Mr.
Hussy himself page 17. The Kingdom of Christ is (...) ample as his Prophecy,
etc. the Doctrine which they must teach commands, no^ commands have always
power and authority (...). So that either he must say that Christ gives no
commands to the visible Church, or confess that the visible Church is the
visible Kingdom of Christ. 4 That the Kingdom of Christ comprehends the
Government and discipline of the Church, I prove from Matt^. ^16. 28. There be
some standing here which shall not tast^ of death till they see the Son of man
coming in his Kingdom: Where first of all note, Christ has not only an
invisible, but a visible Kingdom; Next, this visible Kingdom is not meant of
his coming again in glory to judge the quick and the dead; for all that were
then hearing Christ, have tasted of death, and yet Christ is not come to
judgment. Nor is it meant of Christ's tranfiguration mentioned Matthew. 17. for
that was six days after, Matthew. 17. 1. and if he meant that, he would not have
said so emphatically, there be some here that shall not taste of death, etc.
intimating what was to come to pass, not after some days, but after some
years; as if he had said this age or generation shall not pass away till
these things be fulfilled. Neither is that transfiguration any where called the
Kingdom of God, nor can it be properly so called. Nor lastly is the Kingdom of
God in that place meant only of the preaching of the Gospel, for so they had
seen Christ coming in his Kingdom. Luke 10. 9. 11. Nor is it meant of Christ's
working of miracles, for so likewise they had seen his Kingdom. Matthew. 12. 28.
Melius ergo Beda and Gregorius, quorum sententiam nostri sequuntur, per illud
Regnum Christi intelligunt constitutionem Ecclesiarum, post Christi ascensum,
says Tossanus upon the place. Some of those to whom he spoke at that time
lived to see Christ reign in the gathering and governing of Churches. Gregor..
Hom 32. in Evang. Et quia nonnulli ex discip^lis usque ad^o in corpore victuri
erant ut Ecclesiam Dei constructam conspiceren^, and contra mundi hujus glorium
erectam, consolatoria promissione nan^ dieitur: Sunt quidam de hinc (...) qui
non gustabu^t mortem, donec videant reg^um Dei. The very same words has Bed^
on Mark. 9. 1. following (it seems) Gregory. Grotius on Matthew. 16. 28. does
likewise understand the promulgation of the Gospel, and the Sc^pter of Christ,
that is, his law going out of Zion to be here meant. I conclude, as the Church
is not only a mystical but a political body, So Christ is not only a mystical
but a political Head.

But peradventure some men will be bold to give another answer, that the Lord
Jesus indeed reigns over the Church, even in a political respect, but that
the administration and influence of this his Kingly office is in, by, and
through the Magistrate, who is supreme Judge, Governor, and Head of the Church
under Christ. To this I answer, Hence it would follow 1. That Christ's Kingdom
is of this World, and comes with observation, as the Kingdoms of this World
do, which himself denies Luke 17 20 John 18 36. Next, It would follow, that
Christ does not reign nor exercise his Kingly office in the Government of his
Church under Pagan, Turkish, or persecuting Princes, but only under the
Christian Magistrate, which no man dare say.

3. The Civil Magistrate is Gods Vicegerent, but not Christ's: that is, the
Magistrates power has its rise, orig^nation, institution, and deputation, not
from that special dominion which Christ exercises over the Church as Mediator
and Head thereof, But from that Universal Lordship and Soveraignity which God
exercises over all men by right of Creation: In so much, that there had been
(for orders sake) Magistrates or superior Powers though man had not fallen, but
continued in his innocence; and now by the Law of Nature and Nations there are
Magistrates among those who know nothing of Christ, and among whom Christ
reigns not as Mediator, though God reigns over them by the Kingdom of power.

4. If the Magistrate be supreme Head and Governor of the Church under Christ,
then the Ministers of the Church are the Magistrates Ministers as well as
Christ's, and must act in the Magistrates name, and as subordinate to him; and
the Magistrate shall be Christ's Minister, and act in Christ's Name.

The seventeeth Argument I draw from the institution of Excommunication by
Christ, Matthew. 18. 17. Tell it unto the Church: But if he neglect to hear the
Church, Let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a Publican. In which Text 1.
All is restricted to a brother, or a Churchmember, and agrees not to him who
is no Churchmember. 2. His tre^pasle is here looked upon under the notion of
scandal, and of that which is also like to destroy his own soul. 3. The scope
is not civil, but spiritual, to gain or save his soul. 4. The proceedings are
not without witnesses. 5. There is a public complaint made to the Church. 6.
And that because he appears impenitent, after admonitions given privately, and
before two or three. 7. The Church speaks and gives a: Judgment concerning
him, which he is bound to obey. 8. If he obey not, then he is to be esteemed
and held as a heathen man and a Publican. 9. And that for his not hearing the
Church, which is a public scandal concerning the whole Church. 10. Being as as
an Heathen and Publican, he is kept back from some ordinances. 11. He is bound
on earth by Church Officers. Whatsoever ye bind, etc. 12. He is also bound in
Heaven. More of this place elsewhere. These hints will now serve. The
Erastians deny, that either the case, or the court, or the censure there
mentioned is Ecclesiastical or Spiritual. But I prove all the three.

First, Christ speaks of the case of scandals, not of personal or civil
injuries, whereof he would be no Judge, Luke 12. 14. and for which he would not
permit Christians to go to Law before the Roman Emperor or his deputies, 1 Cor.
6. 1. 6. 7. But if their interpretation stand, they must grant that Christ
gives laws concerning civil injuries, and that he permits one of his
disciples to accuse another for a civil injury before an unbeleeving Judge.
Beside, Christ says not, If he shall hear thee, thou have from him a voluntary
reparation of the wrong, or satisfaction for it (which is the end why we deal
with one who has done us a civil injury) But he says, If he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy brother, intimating that the offending brother is told and
admonished of his fault, only for a spiritual end, for the good of his soul,
and for gaining him to repentance. All which proves that our Savior means
not there of private or civil injuries, as the Erastians suppose, but of
scandals, of which also he had spoken much before, as appears by the
preceding part of that chapter. A civil injury done by one brother to another
is a scandal, but every scandal is not a civil injury. The Jews (to whose
custom Christ does here allude) did excommunicate for diverse scandals which
were not civil injuries. And Paul says of a scandal which was not a civil
injury: when ye sin so against the brethren. etc. 1 Cor. 8. 12.

2. The court is Ecclesiastical, not civil, for when it is said Tell it unto
the Church, must we not expound Scripture by Scripture, and not understand the
Word Church to be meant of a civil Court? for though the word (...) is used
Act. 19. reoitative, of a heathenish civil assembly, called by that name among
those heathens: yet the penmen of the holy Ghost have not made choice of the
Word (...) in any place of the new Testament, to express a civil court either
of Jews or Christians. So that we cannot suppose that the holy Ghost speaking
so as men may understand him, would have put the word (...) in this place to
signify such a thing as no where else in the new Testament it is found to
signify. Nay, this very place expounds it self, for Christ directs his
speech to the Apostles, and in them to their Successors in the government of
the Church. Whatsoever ye shall bind etc. And if two of you shall agree, etc.
So that the church which here binds or judges, is an Assembly of the
Apostles, Ministers, or Elders of the church.

3. The censure is spiritual, as appears both by these words, Let him be
unto thee as a Heathen and a Publican; which relate to the Excommunication from
the church of the Jews, and comprehends not only an exclusion from private
fellowship and company (which was the condition of the Publicans, with whom the
Jews would not eat) but also an exclusion from the Temple, Sacrifices, and
communion in the holy things, which was the condition of heathens, yea of
profane Publicans too: of which elsewhere. And further it appears by these
words, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc. The Apostles had no power to
inflict any civil punishment, but they had power to bind the soul, and to
retain the sin. Ioh. 20. 23. And this power of binding is not in all the
Scripture ascribed to the civil Magistrate.

The eighteenth Argument shall be drawn from the example of excommunication, 1
Cor. 5. 4, 5. The Apostle writes to the church of Corinth to deliver to Satan
(for the delivery to Satan was an act of the church of Corinth, as the Syriack
explaineth it) the incestuous man, which is called a censure inflicted by many
2 Cor. 2. 6. that is, by the whole Presbytery of the Church of Corinth. And
whereas some understand by delivering to Satan, the putting forth of the
extraordinary Apostolical power to the working of a miracle upon the offender,
by giving him over into the hands of Satan, so as to be bodily tormented by
him, or to be killed and destroyed (as Erastus takes it) I answer 1. It cannot
be meant of death, for it is said that Hymeneus and Alexander were delivered to
Satan, and to what end? that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 20
which had been too late to learn after death, 2. Nor is it at all meant of any
miraculous tormenting of the body by the devil, for beside that it is not
likely this miracle could have been wrought, Paul himself not being present to
work it, it is utterly incredible that the Apostle would have so sharply
rebuked the Church of Corinth, for that a miracle was not wrought upon the
incestuous man, (it not being in their power to do:) or that he would seek the
consent of that Church to the working of a miracle, and as a joint act
proceeding from him and the Church by common counsel and deliberation, for
where read we of any miracle wrought that way? Therefore it is much more safe
to understand by delivering to Satan, (as Gualther himself does)
Excommunication, which is a shutting out of a Churchmember from the Church,
whereby Satan comes to get dominion and power over him, for he is the God of
this World, who reigns at his pleasure in and over those who are not the
Church and people of God. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Eoh. 2. 2. And if any shall be so far
unsatisfied as not to admit this sense which we put upon that phrase of
delivering to Satan; Yet our Argument for Excommunication drawn from 1 Cor. 5.
stands strong, the weight of it not being laid upon tradere Satanae only,
but upon verse. 6. 7. 11, 12. compared with 2 Cor. 2. 6. which undeniably prove
Excommunication from Church fellowship.

The nineteenth Argument shall be drawn from Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore
unto your selves, and to all the flock over the which the holy Ghost has made
you Overseers (...), compared with 1 Pet. 5. 2. 3. Feed the flock of God which
is among you, taking the oversight thereof: (...): Which Texts as they hold
forth a Bishop and a Presbyter to be one and the same Iure divino, so they hold
forth the ruling power of Presbyters or Elders.

First, Because otherwise the simile (so much made use of in these Scriptures)
of overseeing the flock (mentioned and joined together with the feeding
thereof) will fall short in a main and most material point: for the overseers
of flocks do not only make them to lie down in green pastures, and lead them
beside the still waters, but they have also rodds and staves for ruling the
flocks, and for correcting and reducing the wandering sheep, which will not be
brought home by the voice of the shepherd, Psalm. 23. 2. 4. The Pastoral rod
there mentioned by David is corrective: as Clemens Alexandrinus paedag. lib. 1.
cap. 7. who does also parallel it with that 1 Cor. 4. Shall I com^ unto you with
a rod?

Secondly, Paul requires the Elders of the Church of Ephesus to take heed
unto, and to oversee the whole flock, which did consist of more then did or
could then meet together ordinarily into one place for the worship of God, as
appears by the Church in the house of Aquila and Priscilla (which was one,
but not the only one Church assembly at Ephesus) by the great and wonderful
increase of the Gospel at Ephesus, and such other Arguments which I do but
point at, the full debate of them not being my present work. Peter also writing
to the Churches of the strangers in several provinces, calls them the flock
not flocks, and commends unto the Elders the feeding and oversight of that
flock. Now what is it that can denominate many particular visible Churches or
Congregations to be one visible ministerial flock or Church, unless it be
their union and association under one Ecclesiastical Government? No doubt,
they had the administration of the Word and Sacraments partitive, or severally.
Nor do I deny but they had a partitive several Government: but there was also
an union or association of them under one common Government, which did
denominate them to be one visible Ecclesiastical flock.

Thirdly, The very name given to the Elders of the Church, (...), is a name of
authority, rule, and government, especially in the Christian and
Ecclesiastical use of the Word. H. Stephanus in These. ling. Gr. in the word
(...), says that the Elders of the Church were called (...), seu (...), to wit
says he, those qui verbo and gubernationi praeera^t. Where he tells us also
that the Magistrate or Praetor who was sent with a Judicial power into those
Towns which were under the power of the Athenians, was called by the name of
(...). The Septuagints use the word Nehem. 11. 9. Joel the son of Zi^hri was
their overfeer ((...)) and Judah the son of Senuah was second over the City. He
that had but the second place was a Ruler, how much more he that was in the
first place. Lo here, the head and chief Ruler of the Benjamites called by the
name of (...). So Numb. 31. 14. 2 Kings 11. 15. the chief officers of the Host,
the Captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, are called by the
Septu^gints (...). The same Hebrew words which they render by (...), they
render in other places by (...), praefectus, (...), Antistes (...),
praepositus, (...), Princeps: Yea the name of God (...) they render by this
word Job. 20. 29. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the
heritage appointed to him by God, (...) says the Greek, by the overseer, (even
as the same name of Bishop is given to Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 25.) Conradus
Kirch^rus in the word Pakad, tells us also that Genesis 41. 34. Let Pharaoh do
this and let him appoint Officers over the Land, where the 70. read (...), the
Greek Scholia which he uses to cite has (...)

Fourthly, Peter adds, not as being Lords, or overruling (...), that we
might understand he condemns the ruling power of the Lord Bishop, not of the
Lords Bishop, of Episcopus Dominus, not of Episcopus Domini. Just as Ezekiel. 34.
4. the shepherds of Israel are reproved for lording it over the flock, with
force and with cruelty have ye ruled them, It was their duty to rule them, but
it was their sin to rule them with force and with cruelty.

The twentieth Argument I take from 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as
of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. Moreover it
is required in Stewards that a man be found faithful. And Tit. 1. 7. a Bishop
is the Steward of God; (...). This name does exclude Lordship and dominion, but
withal it notes a ministerial rule or government, as in the proper, so in
the metaphorical signification: (...) is a name diverse times given by
Aristotle in his Politics to the civil Magistrate. The Septuagints have (...)
as fynonymous with (...). Esth^r 8. 9. To the Lieutenants and the Deputies. The
70. thus, (...). The holy Ghost by the same word expresses Government, Gal. 4.
2. (...), is under Tutors and Governors. Romans 16. 23. Erastus is called (...).
Theophylact thinks he was Governor of the City; Erasmus that he was praefectus
aerario, Town-Treasurer. The English Translators call him the Chamberlain of
the City. Yea setting aside the metaphorical signification of this name often
used for a name of rule; the very literal and native signification of the word
will serve to strengthen this Argument in hand. Ministers are (...), that is,
house-stewards, or over the house; but what house? Aristotle at the beginning
of the second book of his Oeconomicks, distinguishes a fourfold economy,
(...): kingly, noble, civil, private: The Ministers of Christ are (...) of the
first sort. They are stewards in the house of the great King. He that is
steward in a Kings house, must needs have a ruling power in the house. 1 Kings
4. 6. Ahishar was over Solomon's household. 1 Kings 18. 3. And Ahab called
Obadiah which was the Governor of his house. 2 Kings 18. 18. Eliakim which was
over the household. In all which places the 70. have (...). I hold therefore
with Curabit denique (oeconomus) ut impuros and perdite viventes a familia
excludat, eosdemque si poenitentiam egerins, rursus in eam recipiat.
Peter Martyr upon 1 Cor. 4. 1. that Ministers being by their calling and
office stewards in the house of God, ought to cast out profane impure persons
out of the house, and receive them again upon their repentance. And why are
they called Stewards of the mysteries of God? surely the Sacraments are part
(and a chief part) of those mysteries: and Christ has made his Ministers (not
the civil Magistrates) stewards of these mysteries, to receive unto, or to
exclude from the Sacraments; and as they may not keep back any of the children
of the house, so they may not suffer dogs to eat at the childrens Table.

The one and twentieth Argument, which shall claudere agmen, shall be drawn
from Act. 15. where we find an Ecclesiastical Assembly or Synod of the
Apostles, Elders, and other choice brethren, snch as Judas and Sylas: These did
so assemble themselves, and proceed with authority in a business highly
concerning the truth of the Gospel, Christian liberty, the healing of scandal,
and the preserving of peace in the Church, as that it is manifest they had, and
executed a power of government distinct from Magistracy. Mr. Seldom de Jure
nature. and Gent. lib. 7. cap. 12. has sufficiently expressed that which is the
ground of my present Argument: and I rather choose to speak it in his words
then in my own, Now a dispute being had of this thing at Antioch, Paul and
Barnabas (who having used many Arguments against that Pharisaical opinion, yet
could not end the controversy) are sent to Jerusalem that there the thing
might be determined by the Apostles and Elders. It is agitated in a Synod. In
it it is determined by the Apostles and Elders, that the Gentiles who had given
their names to Christ, are not indeed bound by the Law of Moses or of the
Hebrews, as it is Mosaicall and prescribed to the Church or Commonwealth of
the Jews, but that they ought to enjoy their Christian liberty. And so much
for that which the Synod loosed them from. But what dorh the Synod bind upon
them? The Synod does also impose certain things, namely abstinence from
fornication, and from things offered to Idols, and from blood, and things
strangled, VT QUAE NECESSARIO OBSERVANDA, EX AUTHORITATE SYNODI, says Mr.
Seldom, BEING SUCH AS WERE NECESSARILY TO BE OBSERVED, IN REGARD OF THE
AUTHORITY OF THE SYNOD, by those who giving their names to the Christian
Religion, should live with the Jews (they also giving their names to the
Christian Religion) and so enter into religious fellowship with them. I shall
add two other Testimonies of Mr. Prynns; The first I shall take out of his
twelve considerable serious Questions concerning Church Government, page 5.
where arguing against the Independency of particular Congregations, he asks,
whether the Synod^l Assembly of the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. who MADE AND SENT BINDING DECREES to the Churches of the
Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, and other Churches, be (...) an
apparent subversion of Independency. So that by Mr. Prynns confession, the
Scripture holds forth other Governors or Rulers in the Church beside
Magistrates, and the authority of these other Governors to be such as to make
and send to the Churches BINDING DECREES in things and causes Ecclesiastical.
Another Testimony I take from his Independency examined, page 10 11. where he
argues against the Independents, and proves from Act. 15. the authority of
ordinary Ecclesiastical Synods, bringing also six Arguments, to prove that the
Apostles did not there act in their extraordinary Apostolical capacity, or as
acted by a spirit of infallibility, but in their ordinary capacity. Thereafter
he concludes thus. Therefore their assembling in this Council, not in their
extraordinary capacity, as Apostles only, bu^ as Elders, Ministers: and the
Elders, Brethrens sitting together in Council with them, upon this
Controversy and occasion, is an undeniable Scripture authority for the
lawfulness, use of Parliaments, Councels. Synods under the Gospel, upon all
like nec^ssary occasions: and FOR THEIR POWER TO DETERMINE CONTROVERSIES OF
RELIGION, TO MAKE CANONS IN THINGS NECESSARY FOR THE CHURCHES PEACE AND
GOVERNMENT.

Lo here Mr. Prynn gives us an undeniable Scripture authority for a diataktick
governing power in the Church, distinct from Magistracy. How he will draw from
Act. 15. the use of Parliaments or their authority, I do not imagine: It is
enough for my Argument that he acknowledges this Scripture to warrant Synods
of Ministers and Elders, and the power of these Synods to be not only
consultive, but conclusive, decisive, and obligatory; for, this (I suppose) he
means by the power to determine controversies, and to make Canons for the
Churches peace and government: else he had concluded nothing against the
Independents, who yield a consultive Synodicall power.

If any shall yet desire to be more parti^ularly satisfied concerning the
strength of my present Argument from Act. 15. I will make it out from these
particulars following.

First, Here is a power and authority to assemble Synodically, and it is an
intrinsecall power within the Church it self, not adventitio^s or extrinsecall
from the Magistrate. Whence the soundest Protestant writers prove, that though
the civil Magistrate has a power of convocating Synods, and he ought to do it
when the Churches necessity or danger does call for such a remedy; yet this
power of his is positive, not privative, cumulative, not destructive, And that
if the Magistrate be an enemy and persecuter of the Church and of true
Religion, or cease to do his duty, that is to wit, in a manifest danger of the
Church, the Church notwithstanding ought not to be wanting to her self, but
ought to use the right and authority of convocation, which first and for^most
remains with the Rulers of the Church; as may be seen Act. 15. So say the
Professors of Leyden in Synops. purior. Theol. Disp. 49. These. 24. beside
diverse others whom I might here cite, but that is not now my business.

Secondly, Beside the public debate and deliberation, the Synod did also
choose and send certain delegates or commissioners to Antioch, and wrote by
them a Synodical Epistle to the Churches in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia. I
believe such Synodical acts of sending Commissioners and letters to the
Churches in other Nations or Provinces, should now be looked upon as acts of
government, if done without the leave of the Magistrate, as then Judas and
Silas were sent.

Thirdly, That Synod did exercise and make use of a threefold Ecclesiastical
power, for remedy of a threefold Ecclesiastical disease. 1. They purge out the
leven of false doctrine and heresy, by deciding and determining that great
controversy, whether Circumcision and the keeping of the Ceremonial Law of
Moses were neeessary to salvation. They hold forth and declare to the Churches
the negative; And this they do by the dogmatik power. 2. There was a great
scandal, taken by the believing Jews (then not fully instructed and persuaded
concerning the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law by the death of Christ) who
were so far stumbled and offended at the believing Gentiles for their eating of
things sacrificed to Id^ls, and of blood, and things strangled, that they could
not freely nor contentedly converse, company, and eat together with the
Gentiles. For remedy whereof, the Synod does require (in regard of the law of
love, edification, peace, and avoiding of scandal) that the Gentiles should
abstain from those things, as also from fornication, (which for what cause it
is added, I do not now dispute) And this they do by the Diataktik power. 3.
There was a (...), a schism, dissension, and rent made in the Church by the
Judaizing Teachers, verse. 2. Who clothed themselves with a pretended authority
and warrant from the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, and thereupon got the
more following, and drew away the more disciples after them. For remedy hereof,
the Synod stigmatizeth and brandeth those men, by declaring them to be liars,
troublers of the Church, and subverters of souls, verse. 24. And this they do by
the Critic power, or authority of censures.

Fourthly, The decree and Canon of the Synod, which is made, imposed, emitted
and promulgat, is authoritative, decisive, and binding; Act. 15. 28. For it
seemed good to the holy Ghost, and (here the Arabic repeateth it seemed good)
to us, to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary things, That ye
abstain etc. If it be said that this was but a doctrinal advice. It seemed good
etc. I answer, Josephus Antiq. Iud. lib. 4. cap. 8. speaking of the decree of
the supreme Sanhedrin (which he that disobeyed was to be put to death) calls it
(...), that which seems good: So likewise in this place, the word (...), is
not meant of an Opinion only, for an Opinion (as Schoolmen define it) is
properly such a (...) of or assent to a thing, as is evident and firm, but not
certain: So that Opinion cannot be ascribed to the holy Ghost; It is therefore
here a word of authority and decree: as Mr. Leigh in his Critica sacra at the
word (...) notes out of Ch^mnitius. In which sense the Grecians frequently use
it. So Stephanus out of Demosthenes: (...). It is de reed by the Senate. And
Budaeus out of Plato, (...). It is certainly appointed to die. Observe also the
word (...), and (...), imposing and burden. They do impose some burden, only
they are careful to impose no burden except in necessary things. Acts 16. 4.
And as they went through the Cities they delivered them (...), the decrees that
were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem. And here I
cannot pass the observation of that gentleman who has taken so good pains in
the Original Tongues, Mr. Leigh in his Critica sacra of the New Testament, in
the word (...): Wheresoever (...) is found in the New Testament, it is put for
Decrees or Laws, as Luke 2. 1. Acts 17. 7. it is put for the Decrees of
Caesar; and Ephesians. 2. 15. Colos. 2. 14. for the Ceremonial Laws of Moses; and
so frequently by the LXX. in the Old Testament for Decrees; as Dan. 2. 13. and
3. 10. 29. and 4. 6. for Laws, Dan. 6. 8. Caeterum says Erasmus upon Act. 16.
4. Dogmata Graeca vox est, significans and ipsa decreta five placita, non
doctrinam ut vulgus existimat. And whereas some have objected, that (...) and
(...) are used only in reference to a doctrinal power, as Col. 2. 20. (...). I
answer, Budaeus expounds (...) to be decerno, and Col. 2. 20. (...), The
Syriack makes it judicamini; Erasmus and Bullinger, Decretis tenemini.
Stephanus, Beza, and Gualther, ritibus oneramini; the English Translators, are
ye subject to Ordinances? This subjection was not only to Doctrines, but to
Commandments, verse. 22. after the Commandments and Doctrines of men: and
these commandments (though in deed and truth the commandments of men only at
that time) were imposed as the Commandments of God, and as Ceremonial Laws
given by Moses. The vulgar Latin has decernitis, and Tertullian reads
Sententiam fertis, both of them (it seems) having read (...): however they
understand the power related unto to be more then Doctrinall.

I conclude that (...), Acts 16. 4. must be more then Doctrinal declarations,
and that it is meant of binding decrees (that I may use Mr. Prynns phrase)
especially when joined with (...), there was a Judgment passed and given upon
the making and sending of those (...), not the judgment of one or two, but the
judgment of the Apostles and Elders Synodically assembled. So Acts 21. 25.
James and the Elders speaking of that Synodical judgment say, we have written
and concluded that they observe no such thing, etc.

These four considerations being laid together, concerning an intrinsecall
Ecclesiastical power of assembling together Synodically; of choosing and
sending Commissioners with a Synodical Epistle to the Churches in other parts;
of providing effectual and necessary remedies both for heresies, scandals, and
schisms arising in the Church; of making and imposing binding decrees on the
Churches, will infallibly prove from Scripture authority another Government in
the Church beside Magistracy.

I might here add other Arguments, but so much for this time.

CHAP. X. Some Objections m^de against Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline
answered.
MR. Hussy in his Epistle to my self objecteth thus, What will your censure
do? it will shame a few whores and knaves; a great matter to shame them the
Law of nature shameth.

All this in terminis might have been as justly objected against the Apostle
Paul, when he wrote to the Corinthians to put away from among themselves the
incestuous man. What will your censure do Paul? a great matter to shame one
whom the law of nature shameth. The Lord save me from that Religion which will
not shame Whores and Thieves, and all other whom the Law of Nature shameth, and
that in a Church way (as well as civilly) if any such member fall into such
impiety: yet this is not all. All Orthodox Writers that write of
Church Censures, will tell him, that scandalls either of Doctrine or life,
either against the first or second Table, fall under Ecclesiastical cognizance
and censure.

Secondly, He argues thus Ibid. Sure in the day of our Lord there will be as
good a return of the word preached, as of the censure. And in his plea page 1.
If the Word be able to make the man of God perfect, then nothing is wanting to
him: perfectum cui nihil deest: and it is a wonder how that Conscience should
be wrought upon by humane authority, with whom divine cannot prevail.

Answ. 1. This also he might as well have objected against the Apostle Paul,
who did require the Corinthians to put away from among them the incestuous man,
and Titus to rej^ct an Heretic after once or twice admonishing of him. 2. He
might object the same thing against Magistracy. Shall there not be a better
account of the word preached then of Magistracy? and if the Word be able to
make the man of God perfect, there is no need of Magistracy. Perfectum est cui
nihil deest. Surely many Erastian Arguments do wound Civil as well as
Ecclesiastical Government. 3. Church Censures are not acts of humane authority,
for they are dispensed in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and (if clave non
errante) are ratified in heaven. 4. Discipline is no addition to that Word
which is able to make the man of God perfect, for it is one of the directions
of the Word. 5. The comparison which some make between the efficacy of the Word
preached, and the efficacy of Church Discipline, as to the point of converting
and winning fowls, is a mere fallacy ab ignoratione ^lenchi: for Church
discipline is not intended as a converting, light-giving, or lifegiving
Ordinance. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: and the Word
is the power of God for salvation to every one that believes. But
Ecclesiastical Discipline has a necessary use, though it has not that use.
Discipline and censures in the Church are intended. 1. For the glory of God.
that his name may not be blasphemed, nor the doctrine of the Gospel reproached,
by occasion of uncensured scandalls in the Church. 2. For keeping the
Ordinances of Christ from profanation and pollution, that signa gratiae
divinae, the signs of Gods favor and grace, and the seals of his Covenant
may be denied to unworthy scandalous persons. 3. For preserving the Church from
the infection of bad and scandalous examples, it is fit to put a black mark
upon them, and to put away the wicked person as the Apostle says; for a rotten
member if it be not cut off, and a scabbed sheep if not separated from the
flock, may infect the rest. 4. For the good also of the offender himself, that
he may be ashamed, and humbled. 2 These. 3. 14. 2. Cor. 2. 7. This afflicting of
the sinner with shame and sorrow, may and shall by the blessing of God be a
means to the destruction of the flesh; 1 Cor. 5. 5. that is to tame and
mortify his lusts, and so far removere prohibens that he may be the better
wrought upon by the Word. I conclude, Church Government being instituted by
Christ, and having a necessary use in the Church; the Erastians gain nothing by
comparing it with the Word. Because it is not so necessary as the Word, Ergo,
it is not necessary at all. Or because it is not efficacious in the same manner
as the word is. Ergo it is not efficacious at all. The Apostle says Christ
sent me not to baptiz^ but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17. What if he had
said Christ sent me not to rule but to preach the Gospel? Then had the
Erastians triumphed. Yet this expression could not have proved that
Church Government is not an Ordinance of Christ, more then that can prove that
Baptism is not an Ordinance of Christ. A negative in the comparative, will not
infer a negative in the positive.

3. Object. I could never yet see said Mr. Coleman, how two coordinate
governments exempt from Superiority and inferiority can be in one State.

Against this I instanced in the coordinate governments of a General and an
Admiral, of a Master and a Father, of a Captain and a Master in one ship. Mr.
Hussy finding he can not make good Mr. Colemans word, tells me page 7. that he
means two supreme coordinate Governments. Where first he loses ground, and
tacitly yields that Church Government and Civil Government, distinct each
from other do well consist, as long as they are not supreme, but as two arms
under one head: No inconsistency therefore of Congregational and Classical
Elderships, and of Provincial Assemblies, with the subordinate Magistrates and
civil Courts in Cities and Counties. Next we shall find also in Scripture two
coordinate supreme Governments, for the civil and the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin
of the Jews were both supreme and coordinate, and there was no appeal from
the sentence of either: as is evident by that disjunctive Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest
(that is to the Priests, as verse. 9.) or unto the Judge (that is, the Assembly
or Court of Judges, as I have cleared elsewhere) even that man shall die. But
I have also answered more fully this objection concerning co-ordination. Chap.
8.

4. Object. Ministers have other work to do, and such as will take up the whole
man. To this Argument (says Mr. Hussy page 8.) Mr. Gilespie makes no answer
at all, though Saint Paul uses the very self same Argument to discharge the
Preachers from oversight of the poor. Act. 6. 2. God forbid we should leave the
care of the word of God, and serve at Tables. It will not be unseasonable to
mind both him and Mr. Prynne that the canonized names by them used Stylo
Romano, Saint Paul, Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, etc. ought to be laid aside,
except they will use it of all Saints, and why not as well Saint Moses, and
Saint Aar^n (whom the Psalmist calls the Saint of the Lord?) or why not Saint
Aquila, Saint Apollos, Saint Epaphras, etc. Methinks men professing Reformation
ought not to satisfy themselves in using this form of speech, only of such
as have been canoniz^dat Rome, and enrolled Saints in the Popes Calender. And
as strange it is that Mr. Hussy makes Paul to act in the business, Act. 6.
before he was either Saint or Apostle. Now to the Argument. I did answer at
first (though Mr. Hussy is pleased not to take notice of it) page 36. that
where Mr. Coleman objected, Ministers have other work to do, he might as well
have added, that when Ministers have done that other work, and all that ever
they can, yet without the power of Church Government, they shall not keep
themselves, nor the Ordinances from pollution: that is, Church Government is a
part of their work, and a necessary part, which has been proved: I thought it
enough to touch an answer where an objection was but touched: another objection
in that very place being more insisted on (and with more color of reason)
concerning the fear of an ambitious ensnarement.

And for the objection now in hand, Mr. Hussy has made it no whit stronger by
his instance from Act. 6. For 1. the Apostles did not wholly lay aside the care
of the poor. Sure Paul (afterward an Apostle) took great care of the poor at
diverse times, and in diverse places as himself records: but such taking care
of the poor as did distract and hinder them from the main work of preaching the
Gospel, this was it which they declined; and in that respect the work of
baptizing also did give place to the work of preaching, 1 Cor. 1. 17. Likewise
the work of Discipline must be so ordered, as may not hinder the principal work
of preaching the Gospel: which is very possible, yea probatum est: for where
Church Government is exercised, there are as painful Preachers as any in the
World, and such as neglect none of their other work. 2. To take special and
particular care of the poor, did belong by Christ's institution (whose mind was
no doubt known to the Apostles) to the office of Deacons, and for that reason
the Ministers of the word ought in like manner to be relieved of that burden
by Deacons: but Church Government does belong to the Elders of the Church, of
whom some labor both in Doctrine and Government, others in Government only.

But neither must the Argument go so, I have another thing to ask; what is that
other work which will take up the whole man? Mr. Hussy page 12. expounds Mr.
Colemans meaning, that the preaching of the Gospel would take up the whole man,
especially in our time: our knowledge of the Scriptures is to be acquired by
ordinary means etc. And in his Epistle to the Parliament he says, I found the
Minister charged only with preaching and baptizing, which being performed with
such zeal and diligence as is needful, is abundantly a sufficient employment.
And so he takes off the Minister not only from Government, but from visiting
particular families, especially the sick; from catechizing and examining those
who are to be admitted to the Lords Supper, from the celebration of the Lords
Supper it self, to say nothing of the solemnization of marriage, yea from
disputations in Schools concerning the controversies of the time, which yet
himself so much calls for. And why? the Minister has other work to do, and
such as will take up the whole man, which is to preach and baptize.

5. Object. If acts of Government be put in the hands of Church Officers, there
is fear of an ambitious ensnarement, which Mr. Coleman proved by an arguing
from his own heart to the hearts of other men. Mr. Gilespies answer to the
matter of ambition says Mr. Hussy, page 10. is only by involving the Civil
Magistrate in the same danger of ambition. And here he falls out into a
concertation, professedly with my answer, but really with Mr. Colemans
Argument: for the foundation of his Argument was universal. Might I measure
others by my self, and I know not why I may not (God fashioneth men's hearts
alike, and as in warer face answers to face, so the heart of man to man) etc.
Hereupon I replied, Is this corruption only in the hearts of Ministers? or is
it in the hearts of all other men? I suppose he will say in all men's hearts;
and then his Argument will conclude against all Civil Government.

And now per omnes musas I beseech him, which of us involveth the Magistrate in
ambition? Must I be charged with involving the Magistrate because I discovered
that Mr. Colemans Argument involveth the Magistrate? He might as truly say he
is not the Traitor that commits Treason, but he is the Traitor that (...)
Treason. And why says he that my answer was only concerning that involving of
the Magistrate? Did I not first show that the two Scriptures on which Mr.
Colemans Argument was grounded, did not prove it: though now Mr. Hussy tells
us Mr. Coleman did but allude to those Scriptures (I am sure it was all the
Scripturall proof which was brought for that Argument upon which so much weight
was laid) which I will not trouble my Reader withal says he: A pretty shift,
when a man cannot defend the Argument, then forsooth he will not trouble the
Reader. Next, did I not deny that which Mr. Coleman did take for granted; that
we may reason from this or that particular corruption in one man's heart, to
prove the same particular corruption in all other men's hearts, and that Paul
taught us not so? Phil. 2. 3. Did I not also answer in his own words, that his
Brethrens wisdom and humility may safely be trusted with as large a share of
Government as themselves desire? Did I not lastly answer, that if his whole
Argument were granted, it cannot prove that there ought to be no
Church Government, for where the thing is necessary, abuses must be corrected
and amended, but must not take away the thing it self? Unto which exceptions
nothing has been replied, nor offered to vindicate or make good that Argument
which was publicly offered to the Parliament. If such men were fit to put the
reverend Assembly and all the Ministry of England to school again, to learn to
dispute, let every pious and wise man judge. And so I am ledd on to another
Objection.

6. Object. Schools of Divinity will advance learning and Religion, and get us
an able Ministry more then Ecclesiastical Government can do. So Mr. Col man
in his Sermon page ^6. Yea Mr. Hussy calls for Schools, that there may be
unity found among the Preachers of the Gospel, together with more learning and
knowledge, page 12, 13, 14, 15. (where by the way the Jesuits are much
beholding to him, and Protestant Writers very little.) In his Epistle to the
Parliament he desires that Ministers would unbend their thought of Government,
and think on ways to get knowledge. I should have thought multum scientiae,
parum Cons^ientiae, might be as seasonable a complaint. Knowledge and learning
are indeed most necessary, and I am confident shall flourish more under
Presbyteriall Government, then either under Popery or Prelacy. School-disputes
need not hinder Ecclesiastical Government: that ought to be done, and this not
to be left undone. There is a practical part which belongs to Presbyteries and
Synods, as well as a contemplative part belonging to Schools: which made Synod.
Dord. sess. 18. Et quia vocati ad ministerium regimini Ecclesiae aliquando sunt
praeficiendi: Ecclesiarum vero regimen in Scholis exact non addiscitur, non
abs re f^ret si aliquot ante vocasionem mensibus, in urbibus (...) us potestas
His fiat ut inte^sint Presbyter^is, etc.
the Divines of Ze^land to offer this among other Articles to be advised upon
by the Synod of Dort, that they who are preparing for the Ministry, may (after
their education at Schools, before their settling in the Ministry) be for some
space present in Presbyteries, to learn Church Government. That which a
Minister must do, is work: and that work is laboring in the Word and Doctrine,
in ruling and watching over the flock, in dispensing the Ordinances to them as
a faithful Steward. But Mr. Hussy page 15. tells us the Minister must not be
called from his study to examine notorious offenses: which indeed suteth his
notion of Schools. The Grecians did not intend Schools for any such work; for
to them (...) was rest from work, and (...) to be idle, to take a vacation from
work, that is, from other affairs, and from a practical life, to attend reading
and studies. If Schools be made to serve for all those necessary uses which
Church Government will serve for; then there is much said; but other wise
nothing against us.

7. Object. But Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? if the power of Government and
censures be in the hands of Church Officers, how shall they be censurable and
punishable for their own offenses? How shall the Censurers themselves be
censured? This objection I find in the eight Epistle of Dionysius Areopagita
(or who ever he was that wrote under that name) It was made by one D^mophilus,
What then say you, must not the profane Priests, or such as are convicted to
have done somewhat amiss be corrected? and shall it be lawful to them alone,
while they glory in the Law, to dishonor God by breaking of the Law? A little
after, this direct answer is made to the objection. But if perhaps any among
these err from that which it becomes him to do, (...), let him be corrected
by the Saints of his own order, and so order shall not be intermixed with
order, but each one shall be exercised in his own order and administration. As
the faults of Church Officers deserve the greatest censures, so in all the
Reformed Churches, where the free exercise and administration of
Church Discipline is received, there is greatest severity of Church Discipline
against Church Officers, and especially against Ministers of the Word, when any
such are upon just proof convict of scandal. It is too much diffidence (and
groundless, I dare say) to apprehend that Ministers who have taken upon them
the bond of such a Covenant, and joined in such a Reformation, will yet be
ready to connive at any scandalous person of their own coat. And if a Classis
should happen to commit such an error, yet there can be no such fear in this
particular from a Provincial or National Assembly, which in a well Reformed
Church, (as they are constituted of choice, able, and godly, both Ministers and
others assembled from diverse quarters, so) use to correct (not to confirm)
the maladministration in inferior Ecclesiastical Courts. I speak here of the
Ecclesiastical offenses of Church Officers: their other offenses belonging
wholly to the Civil cognizance and Jurisdiction.

8. Object. But let the Scripture speak expressly, and Institutions appear
Institutions, and all must bow. It is asked why we must not prove a must be, as
well as a may be: and whether do our proofs amount to an Institution and a Ius
divinum. For satisfaction in this point also. I answer the Question which for
the present I speak to, is not whether Christ has in his Word limited and
determined us to any one particular form of Church Government, so as no other
form can be admitted as lawful or agreeable to the Word: Much less do I now
enquire what is that particular form or kind of Government which Christ has
instituted. But the present controversy with the Erastians is, whether Christ
have not appointed and instituted a Government in his Church in the hands of
Churchofficers, distinct from Civil government: As it is one thing to enquire
whether it be the will of God, that there be a civil Government or Magistracy,
that is, that there be not an Anarchie in a N^tion, but some rule and
government. Another thing, to enquire whether God has in his Word limited a
nation to any one particular kind of Civil Government, and if any, what it is?
So it is one thing to enquire whether it be the will of Christ, that there be
an Ecclesiastical Government, or an intrinsecal power of ruling in the hands of
Church Officers, distinct from the civil Government? Another thing to ask
whether the Word determines any one kind of Church Government as necessary,
and which it is? The former, not the latter is our present controversy. Yea in
very truth the Erastians do oppose not only the institution, but the
lawfulness and agreeableness to the Word of God, of a Church Government
distinct from the civil; For their principles and Arguments tend to the
investing of the civil Magistrate with the whole and sole power of
Church Government; as that which belongs to him only, and that Iure divino:
So that if their Principles hold good, it shall be unlawful and contrary to the
Word of God, for Church Officers to claim, or assume, or exercise any
Government or power of censures. Though (I say) the clearing and vindicating of
the lawfulness of a distinct Church Government, does overthrow the Erastian
Principles: yet that I may deal the more clearly and fully, for the
satisfaction of all such as may be satisfied, this I avouch and aver: It is
Jure divino, It is the will of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ the King and
Head of his Church, that there be a Church Government in the hands of
Church Officers distinct from the Civil Government. It is de necessitate
praecepti, of the necessity of precept that it be s^. It is sin and a violation
of Christ^ Institution if it be not so. I am confident the Arguments which I
have brought Chap. 9. will reach this point, and fully conclude it, especially
if the strength of them be put together. Yet now to drive the nail to the head,
I add these following Arguments, directly inferring and proving an Institution.

First, The Scripture speaks of Church Government in the same manner, and with
the same height, fullness, and peremptorinesse of expression, as it speaks of
other things which are without controversy acknowledged even by the Erastians
themselves to be Institutions of Christ. For instance, Let the Erastians prove
against the Socinians the necessity and perpetuity of the Ordinance of
Baptism, that it ought to continue alwais in the Church, and that by virtue of
an Institution and precept of Christ: I will undertake by the like medium to
infer the like conclusion concerning Church Government. Again, let them prove
the necessity, perpetuity, and institution (I say not now of the Word it self,
or of preaching, but) of the ministry, or of the Pastoral office, I will bring
the like Argument concerning Church Government: I do not now compare or parallel
the Government with the Ministry of the Word quo ad necessitatem medii vel
finis, as being equally necessary to salvation, nor yet as being equally
excellent; but this I say, The one is by the Scripture language an Institution
and Ordinance of Christ as well as the other. One Ordinance may differ much
from another, and still both be Ordinances.

Secondly, Church Government is reckoned among such things as had an
Institution, and which God did set in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. It is a good
Argument for the Institution of Pastors and Teachers, that God set them in the
Church, as we read in that place, and Christ gave them to the Church, Ephesians. 4.
11. Will not this then hold as well for the Institution of a Government in the
Church? That the Governments mentioned 1 Cor. 12. 28. are Ecclesiastical and
distinct from civil, is already proved, Chap. 6.

Thirdly, If it be the will and commandment of God, that we be subject and
obedient to Church-Governors, as those who are over us in the Lord, as well as
to civil Governors, then it is the will of God that there be a rule and
Government in the Church, distinct from the civil. For Relata se mut^o ponunt
vel tollunt. If we be obliged by the fifth commandment to honor Magistrates
as Fathers, then it is the will of God that there be such Fathers. So when we
are commanded to know them which are over us in the Lord, and to esteem them
highly, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. to honor doubly Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
to be subject and obedlent unto Ecclesiastical Rulers, Heb. 13. 17. with verse
7. 24. does not this intimate the will of God, that Pasto^s and Elders be over
us in the Lord, and rule us Ecclesiastically?

Fourthly, That which being administered is a praise and commendati^n to a
Church, and being omitted is a ground of controversy to Christ against a
Church, can be no other then an Ordinance, and necessary duty. But
Church Government and Discipline is such a thing, as being administered, it is a
praise and commendation to a Church, 2 Cor. 2. 9. Revil. 2. 2. and being
omitted is a ground of Controversy to Christ against a Church, 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2.
6. Revel. 2. 14. 20. Ergo.

Fifthly, The rules and directions concerning an Ecclesiastical Government and
Discipline are delivered preceptwise in Scripture 1 Cor. 5. 13. Put away that
wicked person from among you. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. Note that man. Tit. 3. 10. A man
that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition reject. Augustine
lib. contra Donatistas post Collationem, Cap. 4. says that Church-censur^s and
discipline are exercised in the Church secundum praeceptum Apostolicum,
according to the Apostolic precept, for which he cites 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.

Sixthly, There is an Institution and command, Matthew. 18 17. Let him be unto
thee as an Heathen man and a Publican. In which place there are three Acts of
the Church, that is, of the Assembly of Church Officers. 1. They must be met
together to receive complaints and accusations, Tell the Church. 2. They give
sentence concerning the case, if he neglect to hear the Church, etc. Where
heareing is required and obedience, there must needs be an authoritative
speaking or judging. So that they who would prove the Church here has only
power to admonish doctrinally, because it is said If he hear not the Church;
they may as well prove that the Judges of Israel had no more power but to
admonish doctrinally because it is appointed Deuteronomy. 17. 12. that the man who
will not hearken to the Judge shall die; and it is not there expressed that the
Judge shall put him to death, more then it is expressed here that the Church
shall declare the offender to be as a heathen and a publican. 3. They must bind
such a one by Excommunication, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, etc.

Neither could it ever enter in the thoughts of Jesus Christ to command one
Churchmember or private brother to esteem another brother as an heathen and a
publican, whom he would not have so esteemed by the whole Church: and least of
all can it be the will of Christ that one and the same person should be
esteemed by one of the Church to* be as a heathen and a publican, and withal
be esteemed by the whole Church as a brother, a good Christian, a
Churchmember, and accordingly to be freely admitted to the Ordinances.

CHAP. XI. The necessity of a distinct Church Government under Christian as
well as under Heathen Magistrates.
SOme when they could not deny but there was a Church Government in the
Primitive and Apostolic Churches, distinct from all civil Government, and
Churchcensures distinct from all civil punishments; yet they have aledged
(though no such thing was alleged of old, neither by Constantine and other
Christian Emperors, nor by others in their behalf) that this was for want of
Christian Magistrates, and that there is not the same reason for such a
Church Government or censures, where there is a Christian Magistracy. See Mr.
Husseys plea, page 24. As likewise Mr. Prynne in his Diotrephes catechized.
Master Colemans re-examination, page 16. calls for an instance where the State
was Christian. For taking off this exception, I shall observe,

First of all Annot. in Luc. 6. 22. Reperti sunt and qui Judicia ista Ecclesiae
putarent inhibenda; quoties Christiana^ potestates Deus concederet saeculo etc.
At Christi leges multo plus exigunt, quam in commune civibus impe^ii alicujus
praescribi solet, aut etiam potest, semper enim magna pars hominum (...). Quare
civiles quidem leges suo funguntur officio, si graviora and societati maxim
no^entia delicta coerceant: at quae contra dilectionis, contra mansuetudinis,
contra patientiae leges pec^antur, extra communes leges sunt posita: non etiam
extra eas leges*quas se sectantibus Christus praescribit, and secundum quas*
judicare debet ille selectus ex mundo coetus.
Grotius (otherwise no good friend to Church Government, being poisoned with
the Arminian Principles, who have endeavored to weaken extremely the authority
of Classical and Synodical Assemblies, and to give a kind of Papal power to the
Magistrate) yet in this particular he argues strongly for us, and not against
us.

Secondly, Where is that Christian Magistracy which has suppressed or punished
all such offenses as did f^ll under Ecclesiastical cognizance and censure, in
the Primitive and Apostolic Churches? Or where is that Christian Magistrate
that will yet undertake to punish all those offenses and scandals which were
censured in the Apostolic Churches? Till some such instance be given, this
exception against Church Discipline and censures under a Christian Magistrate
has not so much as color enough. Aliae sunt leges Caesarum* ali^e Christi:
aliud Papinianus, aliud Paulus noster praecipit says Hierome in Epitaph.
Fabi^lae. Caesar's Laws, and Christ's Laws are not the same, but different.
Papinianus commands one thing, Paul another thing. Chrysostom Homil. 12. in 1.
Epist. ad Cor. tells us that the best and wisest Lawgivers had appointed no
punishment for fornication, for consuming and trifling away of time with
playing at dice, for gluttony and drunkenness, for Stage-plaies and lascivious
whorish gestures therein. Is there not some cause to apply all this (and much
more of this kind) even to Christian Law givers and Magistrates? Put the case
that he who is called a brother (as the Apostle speaks) that is a member of the
visible Church, be found grossly ignorant of the Principles of Religion, and
so far from growing in knowledge, that he loses the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and of the truth of God which he had (for this has been diverse
times observed) through neglect of the means: or if he be known to neglect
ordina^lly prayer in and with his Family, and to continue in that offense after
admonition: or if he live in known or scandalous malice and envy, and refuse
to be reconciled with his neighbor, or if he be a known liar and dissembler:
or if by his words and actions he do scandalously and manifestly show himself
covetous, drowned in sensuality, ambitious, proud: or if he give a foul scandal
by filthy and obscene speeches, by lascivious, obscene, whorish-like gestures
or actions, where the act it self of adultery or fornication cannot be proved.
I suppose that for these and such like scandals (which are causes deserving not
only the Elderships enquiry and admonition, but suspension from the Lords
Table) the Christian Magistrate neither does, nor by the civil or municipal
Laws is bound to arraign and punish all such as are guilty thereof.

Thirdly, whereas Archbishop Whitgift Answ. to the Admon. page 114. did
allege that the Church may not be governed under a Christian Magistrate as it
may under a Tyrant, which he brings as an exception against ruling Elders and
Elderships, while he could not deny but such there were in the Primitive
Church. Mr. Cartwrigh* in his Reply page 140. answers, that if these Elders
under a Tyrant had meddled with any office of a Magistrate, then there had been
some cause why a godly Magistrate being in the Church, that office should
cease: but since they did only assist the Pastor in matters Ecclesiastical,
there is no distinction between times of persecution, and times of peace, as
touching the office of Elders. The like say I of Church Censures and
discipline. If the Government of the Church by Presbyteries and Synods, if
suspension and excommunication in the Apostles times had been an usurping of
any thing belonging to the Magistrate, then there had been some reason to lay
aside all Church Censures and Ecclesiastical Government, when the Magistrate
turned Christian, and willing to do his duty. But if not, then the civil and
Church Government may still remain distinct, even where the State is Christian.

Fourthly, Every Institution or Ordinance of Christ, must continue as a
perpetual obligation, unless we can find in the Word that Christ has given us
a dispensation or taken off the obligation, and set a period to the Ordinance,
that it shall continue so long and no longer. I mean every Ordinance of Christ
must be perpetual, which we cannot prove from the Word to be but temporal or
extraordinary. Now in the Word Christ has not appointed the governing the
Church, and correcting scandals, to be only under a Tyrant, and to cease under
a Christian Magistrate: neither is there any such thing held forth in Scripture
(which yet our opposites must show, if they will make good what they say) But
contrariwise, what Christ delivered to the Apostles, and they to the Churches,
is to be kept and continued, till our Lord come again 1 Cor. 11. 23. 26. 1 Timothy
6. 14. and he himself says, Rev. 2. 24. 25. That which ye have already, hold
fast till I come. These things were not spoken to the Apostles, to Timothy, to
the Churches of that time personally (for they were not to live till Christ's
coming again) but the charge was given to them in name of and with respect
unto all the Ministry and Churches of Christ.

Fifthly, This exception made against Church Censures under a Christian
Magistrate, supposes that such censures will make an interfering and clashing
between the civil and Ecclesiastical power. But there is no cause for that
fear, these powers being so hugely differenced in their efficient causes,
matters, forms, ends, effects, objects, adjuncts, correlations, and ultimate
terminations, as I have made it to appear in the particulars, Chap. 4.

Sixthly, The Churches liberty and power is not to be infringed, diminished,
nor taken away; but preserved, maintained, enlarged, and augmented under a
Christian Magistrate. Were it not a sad case, if there should be cause to say
that the Churches of Christ have not so much liberty under a Christian
Magistrate to keep themselves and the Ordinances from pollution, as they had
under Pagan and Infidel Magistrates?

Seventhly, Why may not Christian Church Government consist with Christian
Magistracy, as well as the Jewish Church government did consist with the Jewish
Magistracy, being of the same Religion? Or if we please to look to later
Presidents, who can be ignorant that civil government and Church Discipline
have rather strengthened then destroyed each other, not only in France where
the Magistracy is not Protestant, but in Scotland, in the Low Countries, in
Geneva, and elsewhere?

Eighthly, We have covenanted to endeavor a Reformation of Church Government
and discipline according to the word of God and the example of the best
Reformed Churches. Now both the Word of God, and the example of the best
Reformed Churches, leads us to a Church Government distinct from civil
Government: and the example of the best Reformed Churches does undeniably lead
us to a Church Discipline, even where he Magistrate is Christian, neither does
the word make any exception of Christian States, but contrariwise charge us
to keep the commandment and Ordinances till Christ come again.

Ninthly, The Magistrate has other work to do, and such as will take up the
whole man: and if he should take upon him the whole burden of
Church Government, the enquiring into, examining and correcting of all scandals
in the Church, surely it is more then he can discharge, or give a good account
to God of. It will be hard enough to Church Officers to do it, though they are
set apart to that service, and ex officio do watch over peoples souls, as they
that must give an account. But for the Christian Magistrate to discharge the
whole corrective part of Church Government, and to watch over the souls of all
the people; so as to take care of the purging of the Church from scandals, and
for that end to observe, examine, and judge all offenses in the Church, and to
determine that this man ought to be admitted to the Sacrament, and that man
ought not to be admitted (for that there must be a suspension of scandalous and
unworthy persons, I now take it for granted because of the Ordinance of
Parliament) as it is impossible for the Magistrate to do all this, so I believe
it will be to him durus sermo, a hard saying, to hear that he must give account
to God of all these things; and that Ministers have no more to answer for but
preaching, ministering the Sacraments to those to whom they are appointed to
give them, catechizing, visiting the sick, exhorting, admonishing, reproving,
comforting. It was a good argument against the Prelat; he assumed the
Ecclesiastical government of a whole Diocese, and could not give account to
God for so many thousands, and sometime hundreths of thousand souls. Yet Mr.
Coleman would have had the Parliament to be Church Officers to the whole
Kingdom in point of corrective Government, and the Ministry to have no part of
that government. But then I ask, How shall they answer for that Ecclesiastical
Government and administration of theirs, more then the Prelat could answer for
the Ecclesiastical Government of a whole Diocese? If it be said that the
Parliament is only to settle a rule, and to give order what is to be done, and
to commit the execution and the managing of particular cases to subordinate
Courts and inferior Officers, then no more is said then the Prelates did plead
for themselves, that they did per alium what they could not do per se. So that
such principles do tend directly to involve the Parliament in the Prelatical
guiltiness, which our Principles do avoid. Was it not another Argument used
against the Prelates, that they could not manage both Civil and
Church Government, and that an Ecclesiastical Administration could not consist
with civil power and places in the Parliament or with offices of State, any one
of these administrations (either the civil or the Ecclesiastical) requiring the
whole man.

Do not the Erastians endeavor to draw the Parliament into the very same
absurdity with which the Prelates were pressed? For if any of these two
administrations require the whole man, how can the civil Magistrate (though
Christian) take upon him the burden of Church Government, more then
Church Officers can take upon them the burden of civil-government? Philo the
Jew gives this reason why Moses did make a partition of the charge between
Joshua and Aaron, committing to the one the civil, to the other the
Ecclesiastical administration. He considered that it was impossible rightly to
take care both of the supreme civil power, and of the Priesthood, since the one
professes to care for things pertaining to God, the other for men. Philo de
charitate.

Tenthly, Ratio immutabilis facit praeceptum immutabil^. If the Apostle had
required the Corinthians to excommunicate the incestuous man, upon such grounds
and reasons as were proper to that time, and are not applicable to after times,
so as to prove the necessity of excommunication for, the like offense, then
there were some reason why excommunication should not be esteemed a perpetual
ordinance in the Church: but it is manifest that the reasons given by the
Apostle were not proper to that time, but do concern this time as well as that.
The reasons are taken 1. From the glory of God, vers^ 1. 2. He that had done
such wickedness as was not so much as named among the Gentiles, was not to be
suffered among Gods people, but to be taken away from among them; If evil be
not put away from Israel, it is a great dishonor to the God of Israel. This
first argument used by the Apostle, is like that Ezekiel. 36. 22, 23. They had
profaned the holy name of God among the Heathen, therefore God would sanctify
his great name, and make the Heathen to know that he is the Lord, when he
should be sanctified in his people before their eyes. 2. From the commission,
power, and authority which the Church of Corinth that is their Presbytery
(compare 2 Cor. 2. 6.) had to excommunicate such a^one. verse. 4, 5. In the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered together. etc. 3. From the good
and benefit of the sinner himself, that he might be ashamed, humbled,
reclaimed, mortified and saved: verse. 5. For the destruction of the Flesh, that
the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 4. From the Churches
good, that the Church might be preserved from the contagion of such sinful
examples verse. 6. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? 5.
From that which was signified and typified by the purging out of leaven from
Israel in the time of the Passover. verse. 7, Purge out therefore the old
leaven etc. 6. From the end of Christ's death, which was to purify and
sanctify, as well as to reconcile and justify his people, verse. 7. 8. For
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, Therefore let us keep the Feast,
etc. 7. From the difference which ought to be made between the foul sins of
Church Members, and others that are not Church Members: a blacker mark is to be
put upon the former, then upon the latter: and more withdrawing there must be
from a scandalous brother or professor of Christian Religion, then from a
profane Heathen, verse. 9. 10. 11.

From all which it does appear, that it is not without good reason that Martyr
and Pareus upon 1 Cor. 5. do maintain the necessity of Excommunication, under a
Christian and pious Magistrate, as well as under an Infidel and profane
Magistrate.

Eleventhly, The end and use for which Church Censures are necessary, is not
intended and endeavored, much less attained, by the government of the
Christian Magistrate. For though the Christian Magistrate punishes many (I
cannot say all) gross and scandalous sins with corporal or civil punishments:
yet to punish sin is one thing; to seek the salvation of the sinner is another
thing: so the offender his suffering of punishment and satisfying the Law of
the Land is one thing; his declaring of his repentance, and public confession
of his sin, for taking away the scandal which he has given to the Church, is
another thing. Suppose a deli^quent (whose fault is not capital by the law of
the land, for instance a Fornicator, a drunkard, a common swearer, a
Sabbath-breaker, or the like) to have suffered in his person or estate, all the
punishment which he ought to suffer, so that he has now made a civil atonement
(as I may call it) for his offense, and the Christian Magistrate has no
further to charge him with. Suppose also that he is by such corporal or civil
punishments as by a bit and bridle overawed and restrained from committing
again the like ext^rnal acts: Notwithstanding he has not the least sign of
true repentance and godly sorrow for his former foul and scandalous sins, and
he is known to be not an accuser, but an excuser of himself for those faults
and scandals. Such a one comes and desires to receive the Sacrament. Must his
poenal satisfaction to the Christian Magistrate be a sufficient poenitential
satisfaction to the Church? Here is a rock which the Er^stians dash upon,
unless they admit of a distinct Ecclesiastical Judgment, concerning the
signs of repentance in a scandalous sinner, according to which, as these
signs shall appear or not appear, he is to be admitted or not admitted to the
Sacrament.

Twelfthly, the power of binding and loosing, is not a temporary but a
perpetual power, that is, appointed by Christ to continue in his Church always
unto the end. Now this power is given only to Church Officers, and Christ has
not given the keys of discipline and the power of binding and loosing (of
which elsewhere) to the Magistrate, nay not to the Christian Magistrate, more
then to the Infidel Magistrate. Let the least hint be found in Scripture, where
Christ has given any such power to the Christian Magistrate, and I yield the
cause.

Thirteenthly, The new Testament holds out as little of the Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments under a Chri^stian Magistrate, as it does of a
Church Government under a Christian Magistrate. Shall this therefore strengthen
the Socinian Tenent, That Baptism is not a perpetual Ordinance in the Church,
and that we are not obliged by that commission which the Apostles had to
baptize? God forbid.

Fourteenthly, The German Anabaptists required an express warrant or example
in the New Testament of a Christian Magistrate, or of the sword and wars in a
Christian State, yet this has been thought no good Argument against Magistracy
and wars among Christians.

I cannot pretermit a passage of Gualther, who may seem to be opposite to me in
this present Question. Even he in his Homily upon John 9. 22. after he has
spoken of Excommunication in the Jewish Church, and in the Apostolic Churches,
he adds Et hodie e^iam disciplina Ecclesiastica opus est, quae in reforma^is
Eccles^is instituta diligenter servari debet, ne Magistratum indulgentia quae
ubique sere regnat, Evangelii doctrinam exteris suspectam reddat, and ut ipsi
quoque in officio contineantur, nec sibi quidvis in Ecclesia licere putentt.
And this day also there is need of Ecclesiastical discipline, which being
instituted in the Reformed Churches, ought to be diligently kept, lest the
indulgence of Magistrates, which reigns almost every where, should render the
Doctrine of the Gospel suspected among those that are without, and that
themselves also may be contained in their office, and may not think that any
thing they will is lawful to them in the Church.

But after all this, let me put Mr. Hussy and other Erastians in mind, that if
they do acknowledge that Jesus Christ has instituted or commanded that there
be a Church Government and power of censures distinct from the Civil
Government, when the Magistrate is Heathenish or Idolatrous, let them speak it
out, and let us agree so far. Otherwise if they do not agree in this, it is but
a blind for them to make use of this distinction, that where the Magistrate is
Christian, there is no necessity of a distinct Church Government.

I conclude with a passage of Mr. Prynne in his twelve considerable serious
Questions touching Church Government. The ninth of those Questions runs thus.
Whether the Independents challenge of the Presbyterians to show them any
National Church, professing Christ in our Saviors or the Apostles days,
before any one Nation totally converted to the Christian Faith, or any general
open profession made of it by the Princes, Magistrates, and major part of any
Nation, Kingdom, Republic, who were then all generally Pagans and Persecutors
of the Gospel, not then universally embraced, be not a most irrational unjust
demand? Sure if this hold against the Independents, it will hold as strongly,
yea more strongly against the Erastians, to prove their demand to be most
irrational and unjust, while they challenge us to show them in the
New Testament a distinct Church Government under a Christian Magistrate, or
where the State was Christian, though themselves know Magistrates and States
were then generally Pagan and not Christian: Yea there was in those days much
more of a national Church then of a Christian Magistrate.

An Appendix to the second Book, containing a Collection of some Testimonies
not cited before; And first a Testimony of King James in a Declaration of his,
penned with his own hand, signed and delivered to the Commissioners of the
Church of Scotland at Linlithgow, December 7. Anno 1585.
I For my part shall never, neither my posterity ought ever cite, summon, or
apprehend any Pastor or preacher for matters of Doctrine, in Religion,
Salvation, Heresies, or true Interpretation of the Scripture: but according to
my first act which confirms the liberty of preaching the Word, ministration
of the Sacraments, I avouch the same to be a matter mere Ecclesiastical, and
altogether impertinent to my calling. Therefore never shall I, nor ever ought
they, I mean my posterity, acclaim any power or Jurisdiction in the foresaids.
His Majesty's meaning was that he ought not to do this in prima instantia, that
is, before the person be accused, convict, or judged in any Ecclesiastical
Court. (which was the Question at that time, occasioned by Mr. Andrew Melvill
his Case) Afterward in the same Declaration it follows thus.

Christ saying Dic Ecclesiae, and one only man stealing that dint in a quiet
hole, the Act of Parliament reduces the sentence for informality and nullity
of process, not as Judges whether the Excommunication was grounded on good and
just causes or not, but as witnesses that it was unformally proceeded, against
the warrant of Gods Word, example of all Reformed Ki^ks, and your own
particular custom in this Country. A little after. I mind not to cut off any
liberty granted by God to his Kirk. I acclaim not to my self to be judge of
Doctrine in Religion, salvation, heresies, or true Interpretation of Scripture.
And after. My Intention is not to meddle with Excommunication, neither acclaim
I to my self or my Heirs power in any thing that is mere Ecclesiastical and
not (...), nor with any thing that Gods Word has simply devolved in the hands
of his Kirk. And to conclude, I confess and acknowledge Christ Jesus to be
Head and Lawgiver to the same. And what soever persons do attribute to
themselves, as Head of the Kirk, and not as Member, to suspend or alter any
thing that the Word of God has only remitted to them, that man I say
commits manifest Idolatry, and sins against the Father in not trusting
the Words of his Son, against the Son in not obeying him and taking his place,
against the holy Ghost, the said holy Spirit bearing the contrary record to his
Conscience.

Testimonies taken out of the Harmony of the Confessions of the Faith of the
(...) Churches, R^printed at London 1643.
Page 238. Out of the confession of Helvetia. FUrthermore, there is another
power of duty, or ministerial power limited out by him, who has full and
absolute power and authority. And this is more like a Ministry then Dominion.
For we see that some master does give unto the steward of his house authority
and power over his House, and for that cause delivers him his keys, that he
may admit or exclude such as his master will have admitted or excluded.
According to this power, does the Minister by his office, that which the Lord
has commanded him to do, and the Lord does ratify and confirm that which he
does, and will have the deeds of his ministers to be acknowledged and esteemed
as his own deeds, unto which end are those speeches in the Gospel: I will give
unto thee the keys of the Kingdom Matthew. 16.
of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest or loosest in earth, shall be bound and
loosed in heaven. Again, whose sins soever John 20.
ye remit, they shall be remitted; and whose sins soever ye retain, they shall
be retained. But if the minister deal not in all things as his Lord has
commanded him: but pass the limits and bounds of Faith, then the Lord does
make void that which he does. Wherefore the Ecclesiastical power of the
Ministers of the Church, is that function whereby they do indeed govern the
Church of God, but yet so as they do all things in the Church as he has
prescribed in his Word; which thing being so done, the faithful do esteem them
as done of the Lord himself.

Page 250. Out of the confession of Bohemia. THe 14th. Chapter of
Ecclesiastical doctrine is of the Lords keys, of which he says to Peter, I
will Matthew. 16.
give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and these keys are the peculiar
function or Ministry and administration of Christ his power, and his holy
Spirit; which power is committed to the Church of Christ, and to the Ministers
thereof, unto the end of the world: that they should not only by preaching
publish the holy Gospel, although they should do this especially, that is,
should show forth that Word of true comfort, and the joyful message of peace,
and new tidings of that favor which God offers, but also that to the
believing and unbeleeving, they should publicly or privately denounce and make
known, to wit, to them his favor, to these his wrath, and that to all in
general, or to every one in particular, that they may wisely receive some into
the house of God, to the communion of Saints, and drive some out from thence,
and may so through the performance of their Ministry, hold in their hand the
Scepter of Christ his Kingdom, and use the same to the government of Christ his
Sheep.

And after, Moreover a manifest example of using the power of the keys is laid
out in that sinner of Corinth and others, whom St. Paul, together with 1 Cor. 5.
the Church in that place, by the power and authority of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and of his Spirit, threw out from thence and delivered to Satan: and
contrariwise after that God had given him grace to repent, he absolved him from
his sins, he took him again into the Church to the communion of Saints 2 Cor. 2.
and Sacraments, and so opened to him the Kingdom of Heaven again. By this we
may understand, that these keys, or this divine function of the Lords, is
committed and granted to those that have charge of souls, and to each several
Ecclesiastical Societies, whether they be small or great. Of which thing the
Lord says to the Churches, Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven. And Matthew. 18.
straight after: For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there
am I in the midst of them.

Page 253. Out of the French Confession.WE believe that this true Church ought
to be governed by that regiment or disc^pline which our Lord Jesus Christ has
established, to wit so, that there be Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, that the
purity of doctrine may be retained, vices repressed. etc.

Page 257. Out of the Confession of Belgia.WE believe that this Church ought
to be ruled and governed by that spiritual Regiment which God himself has
delivered in his word, so that there be placed in it Pastors and Ministers
purely to preach, and rightly to administer the holy Sacraments: that there be
also in it Seniors and Deacons, of whom the Senate of the Church might consist,
that by these means true Religion might be preserved, and sincere doctrine in
every place retained and spread abroad: that vicious and wicked men might after
a spiritual manner be rebuked, amended, and as it were by the bridle of
discipline kept within their compass.

Page 260. Out of the Confession of Auspurge. AGain, by the Gospel, or as they
term it by Gods Law, Bishops, as they be Bishops, that is, such as have the
administration of the Word and Sacraments committed to them, have no
jurisdiction at all, but only to forgive sin, Also to know what is true
doctrine; and to reject such Doctrine as will not stand with the Gospel, and to
debar from the communion of the Church such as are notoriously wicked, not by
humane force and violence, but by the word of God. And herein of necessity the
Churches ought by the law of God to perform obedience unto them, according to
the saying of Christ, He that hears you, hears me. Upon which place the
Observation says thus. To debar the wicked, etc. To wit by the judgment and
verdict of the Presbytery, lawfully gathered together. etc.

A Testimony out of the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches in
France. Cap. 5. Art. 9. THe knowledge of scandals, and the censure or judgment
thereof belongs to the Company of Pastors and Elders.

Art. 15. If it befalls, that besides the admonitions usually made by the
Consistories to such as have done amiss, there be some other punishment or
more rigorous censure to be used: It shall then be done either by suspension,
or privation of the holy communion for a time, or by excommunication or cutting
off from the Church. In which cases the Consistories are to be advised to use
all prudence, and to make distinction betwixt the one and the other: As
likewise to ponder and carefully to examine the faults and scandals that are
brought before them, with all their circumstances, to judge warily of the
censure, which may be required.

Harmonia Synodorum Belgicarum. Cap. 14. Art. 7. 8. 9. PEccata sua natura
publica, aut per admonitionis privatae contemtum publicata, ex Consistorii
totius arbitrio, modo and forma ad aedificationem maxim accomodatis sunt
Corrigenda.

Qui pertinaciter Consistorii admonitiones rejecerit, a S. Coenae communione
suspendetur.

Si suspensus post iter atas admonitiones nullum poenitentiae signum dederit,
ad Excommunicationem procedet Ecclesia.

Melchior Adamus de vitis Germanorum Theologorum, Page 342. CUmque sub id
tempus (Anno 1545.) Fredericus Elector Palatinus, qui Ludovico successerat, de
Ecclesiarum agitaret Reformatione: composuit Melanchthon, cum evocato venire
integrum non esset, scriptum de reformandis Ecclesiis: cujus Synopsin aliquot
regulis comprehendit: Cons. Theol. page 586.
quas addimus.

Vera and salutaris gubernatio Ecclesiae Christi praecipue in his sex Membris
consistit.
PRimum, In vera and pura Doctrina, quam Deus Ecclesiae suae patefecit,
tradidit, and doceri mandavit. Gubernatio Ecclesiae in quibus consistat.
Secundo, In legitime usu Sacramentorum. Tertio, In conservatione Ministerii
Evangelici and obedientiae erga Pastores Ecclesiarum; sicut Deus vult and
postulat conservari Ministerium Evangelii, and servat ipse sua potentia and
presentia. Quarto, In conservatione honestae and pia Disciplinae retinendae per
judicia Ecclesiastica, seu jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam. Quinto, In
conservandis studiis necessariae doctrinae and Scholis. Sexto, Ad haec opus est
defensione corporali and facultatibus, ad personas, quae sunt in efficiis
necessariis, alendas.
The Irish Articles of Religion. Art. 58. NEither do we give unto him (the
Supreme Magistrate) hereby the administration of the Word and Sacraments, or
the power of the keys.

And Art. 69. But particular and visible Churches (consisting of those who make
profession of the Faith of Christ, and live under the outward means of
Salvation) be many in number: wherein the more or less sincerely according to
Christ's Institution, the Word of God is taught, the Sacraments are administered,
and the authority of the keys is used; the more or less pure are such
Churches to be accounted.

Laurentius Humfredus de Religionis conservatione and Reformatione vera. Ad
Nobilitatem, Clerum, and Populum Anglicanum. Page 23. Nec satis mirari possum
nec satis dolere, cum intellgam in his locis He wrote from Basil.
repudiari disciplinam Ecclesiasticam, and vel nullam esse vel nimis laxam, vel
non satis vigilanter administratam, in quibus tamen alioqui Religionis sincera
ef^igies cernitur: quasi Evangelium esse possit ubi non vivitur Evangelice: aut
quasi Christus laeto* carnali, voluptuario delectetur Evangelio. etc. At in
Ecclesia manner debet censura and jurisdictio, non minus quam gladius in Repub.
Page 25. Sit ergo haec prima Reformationis perfectae ratio, nostri ac
peccatorum recognitio and emendatio. Deinde severior adsit in Ecclesia
castigatio and animadversio: ut illa laxit as and remissio frnaeetur, quo minus
and levius deinceps peccetur.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK. OF Excommunication from the CHURCH. AND, Of Suspension from
the LORDS TABLE.
CHAP. I. An opening of the true state of the question, and of Master Prynnes
many mistakes and mis-representations of our Principles.
HAving now by the light of Scripture and other helps asserted a
Church Government distinct from civil Magistracy, both in the Old and New
Testament, the last part of my present undertaking shall be to vindicate the
particular Ordinances of Excommunication and Suspension, called by the
Schoolmen Excommunicatio major and minor. Of which also I have before spoken
diverse things occasionally; for I have asserted an Excommunication and
Suspension in the Jewish Church, Book 1. Chap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
The nature, grounds, reasons, uses, and ends whereof, were not proper to the
Old Testament, but such as concern the Christian Church. I have also brought
arguments Book 2. Chap. 9, 10. which conclude not only Church Government, but
Excommunication. And so much of my work is done: Nevertheless there is more
to do. Mr Prynne first in his four grand Quaeres, and thereafter in his
Vindication of the same, has argued much, both against the Suspension from the
Sacrament of a person not Excommunicated and wholly cast out of the Church, and
against some of the most pregnant Scripturall proofs for Excommunication it
self. In his Vindication he has branched forth the controversy into ten
points of difference. Two of these, viz. the fifth concerning suspension from
the Sacrament of the Passover, and the ninth concerning casting out of the
Synagogue, I have discussed before in the first Book. Where I have also
examined other assertions of his concerning the Jewish Sanhedrin, Temple,
confession of sin. The other points of difference not handled before, I am
(as the Lord will help me) now to speak to.

The first point of difference is, whether in those four Quaeres of his he
stated the Controversy aright. He is offended that I (in a Sermon of mine
before the honorable House of Commons) charged the Questionist with mistakes,
and that I did not take notice of the question concerning suspension from the
Sacrament, as he stated it. Vindic. page 3. I had reason, because he had
mis-stated it; and since it pleased him to interpose in a matter depending
between the Honorable houses of Parliament, and the Reverend Assembly of
Divines, and to publish a paper plainly reflecting upon a Petition of the
Assembly, I hope he can not think either the Assembly, or me, tied to his
stating of the question. If he will meddle with the business of the Assembly,
he must speak to it as it is. And that it may now appear how just cause I had
to charge his Queres with mistakes of the state of the question, (which he
still mistaketh) I shall endeavor a more particular and full discovery of
these his mistakes. And first, that which was desired by the Assembly was, that
such a rule may be established by authority of Parliament, as may keep off all
scandalous and notorious sinners from the Sacrament. The question was not what
Texts of Scripture do warrant this thing. It did not concern me to debate
whether the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament quoted by him, prove
suspension from the Lords Table. The controversy was of the practical
conclusion, and of establishing such a rule, as may keep off scandalous persons
from the Sacrament. If the thing be done, if the conclusion be consented to,
there is the greater liberty for men to abound in their own sense concerning
the mediums to prove it.

Secondly, and if he would needs debate what Texts of Scripture do prove the
thing, and what precept or president in Scripture does warrant it: me thinks he
had done better to have informed himself, on what Scripturall proofs the
Reverend Assembly had grounded the suspension of scandalous sinners from the
Sacrament, though not yet cast out of the Church; The proofs from Scripture
voted in the Assembly, were these. Because the Ordinance it self must not be
profaned. And because we are charged to withdraw from those who walk
disorderly. And because of the great sin and danger both to him that comes
unworthily, and also to the whole Church. The Scriptures from which the
Assembly did prove all this, were, Matthew. 7. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14, 15. 1 Cor.
11. 27, to the end of the Chapter, compared with Jude verse. 23. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Another proof added by the Assembly was this. There was power and authority
under the Old Testament to keep unclean persons from holy things, Levit. 13. 5.
Number. 9. 7. 2 Chro. 23. 19. And the like power and authority by way of analogy
continues under the new Testament, for the authoritative suspension from the
Lords Table, of a person not yet cast out of the Church. Now that which was the
strength of the Assemblies proofs of the proposition, Mr Prynne has almost
never touched, but run out upon other particulars.

Thirdly, observe that he disputes all along whether any Minister can suspend
one from the Sacrament. But this no body, that I know, asserts. The power is
given not uni, but unitati, to the Eldership, not to any one, either Minister
or Elder.

Fourthly, that which in the Preface of his Queres he undertakes to prove, is,
that Excommunication and suspension from the Sacrament, being a matter of great
moment and much difficulty, is to be handled and established with great wisdom,
caution and moderation. And his result in the close is concerning a limited
jurisdiction in Presbyteries. As these things are not denied by any that I
know, so himself manifestly acknowledges by these expressions, the thing it
self for the substance, (which yet the current of his debate runs against^)
and only questioneth concerning the bounds, cautions and limitations. God
forbid that Church Officers should ever claim an unlimited power: their power
is given them to edification, and not to destruction, and we can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8, 10. The power of censures
must not be in the power of any one man, nor in the power of any who are
themselves scandalous and worthy of censure. Aug. Tom 10. bom. 50. Nos vero a
communione prohibere quenquam non postumus, quamvis haec prohibitio nondum sit
mortalis, sed medicinalis, nisi aut spo^nte confessum, aut in aliquo sive
seculari five Ecclesiastico judicio nominatum atque convictum.
There must be no sentence of Excommunication or suspension, upon reports,
surmises, suspicions, but either upon the confession of the offense or proof
thereof by two witnesses at least. None must be excommunicated nor suspended
for money matters, debts, and such like civil causes which are not of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, but are to be Judged by the civil Judge. It must
not be for those peccata quotidianae incursionis, such sinful infirmities as
all the godly in this life are guilty of: though on the other side, the
scandalous sins meant of in this controversy, must not be restricted to such
sins only as can not stand with the state of grace. These and such like
limitations we do not only admit of, but desire to be put.

Fifthly, he goes about to clear the state of the question out of Aretius,
and cites him for what himself now undertaketh to prove. Whereas Aretius holds
Excommunication to be an ordinance of God both in the Old and New Testament,
and that it was wanting through the injury and corruption of the times, the
abuse of it in Popery having made the thing it self hateful; and the most part
in those places where he lived, loving carnal liberty so well; and taking upon
them the protection and defense of profane ones, and being so unwilling to be
brought under the yoke of Christ. For these and the like reasons, he thought it
not expedient to have that discipline of Excommunication erected at that time
in those parts; as himself gives the reasons: and Theol. probl. loc. 132.
Interea non desperandum esse libenter fateor, dabit posterior aetas
tractabiliores forte animas, mitiora pectora, quam nostra habent saecula.
he professes withal, that he does not despair of better times, when men
shall be more willing to submit to that discipline. So that this is the
question, if it shall be stated out of Aretius; Whether Excommunication, being
an Ordinance of God, ought to be settled where profaneness and licentiousness
abounds, and where the better party is like to be oppressed by the greater
party: or whether we should wait till God send better times for the settling of
it.

Sixthly, the Author of those questions makes a parallel between that power of
censures now desired to be settled in Presbyteries, and the Prelaticall tyranny,
as if this were the very power which heretofore was declaimed against in,
denied to, and quite taken away from the Prelates. Yea in the close he makes
this power now desired to be settled in Presbyteries, to be such as our very
Lordly Prelates never durst to claim. Yet Ecclesiae Anglicanae politeia in
tabulas digesta authore Richardo Cousin Tab. 5. tells me that the Episcopal
Jurisdiction did exercise it self in these censures, which were common both to
Laymen and Clergymen (as they were called.) 1. Interdictio divinorum. 2.
Monitio. 3. Suspensio vel ab ingressu Ecclesiae, vel a perceptione
Sacramentorum. 4. Excommunicatio. 5. Anathematisinius, etc. Nevertheless there
is a truth too in that which Mr Prynne says. I confess the Prelates never
durst desire that which this learned and pious Assembly has desired in this
particular. He has said it. The Prelates never durst indeed take upon them to
suspend all scandalous persons from the Sacrament; for if they had, it had been
said unto most of them, Physician cure thy self, besides the losing of many of
their party. And moreover the very Lordly Prelates never durst make themselves
to be but members of Presbyteries, nor to be subject to the admonitions and
censures of their brethren, which every Minister now must do. The Lordly
Prelate did (contrary to the institution of Jesus Christ) make himself Pastor
of many Congregations, even of his whole Diocese, and did assume sole and
whole power of Government and Church censures to himself, and his underling
officers which were to execute the same in his name. And as the appropriating
of Jurisdiction to the Lordly Prelate, so the manner and kind of his
Government, and his proceedings in Ecclesiastical censures, came neither from
Christ nor from the purest antiquity, but from the Popes Canon Law. What then
has Presbytery to do with Prelacy? as much as light with darkness, or
righteousness with unrighteousness. He that would see more of the differences
between Presbyteriall and prelaticall Government, let him read a Book Printed
in the Prelates times, entitled The Pastor and the Prelate. And the clear
Antithesis between Presbytery and Prelacy Printed at London anno. 1644. See
also what I have said before Book. 2. Chap. 3.

7. It is evident by his fourth Question, that he states the case, as if
Ministers meant to know the secrets of all men's hearts, and to be so censorious
and peremptory in their Judging as to quench the smoking Flax or to break the
bruised Reed; Thereupon he asks whether the Sacrament may be denied to a man,
if he desires to receive it, in case he profess his sincere Repentance for his
sins past, and promise newness of life for the time to come. God forbid we
be censorious, peremptory, and rigid in our judging of men's spiritual Estate;
where there is any thing of Christ, its to be cherished, not quenched. But
again, God forbid that we shut our eyes to call darkness light, or black
white. In that very place where our Savior condemns uncharitable Judgment,
immediately he adds, Give not that which is holy unto the Dogs, neither cast
ye pearls before swine Mat. 7 6. Impenitency under a scandalous sin is
discerneable either by not confessing it, or by not forsaking it. All our
present controversy is concerning a visible Church, visible Saints, visible
holiness, visible Repentance, visible fitness or qualification for the
Sacrament, that is Council. Nicaen. can. 11. Ab omnibus vero illud praecipue
observetur, ut animus eorum and fructus paenitentiae at^endatur. Quicunque enim
cum omni timore and lachrymis perseverantibus, and operibus bon^s
conversationem su^m, non ve^bis soli^, sed opere and veritate demonstran^, cum
tempus statutum etiam ab his fuerit imple^um, and orationibus jam caeperint
communicate, licebit etiam Episcopo humanius circa eos aliquid cogitare. Qui
vero indifferenter habnerint lapsum, and sufficere sibi quod Ecclesiam
introierint, arbitrantur, ipsi omnimodo tempora statuta complebunt.
of such external signs and evidences as the word of God holds out for
judging of the spiritual Estate of other men, not of such internal gracious
marks whereby a man must judge of his own spiritual Estate. And so he that
professes his sincere Repentance for his sins past, and promises newness
of life for the time to come, if there be nothing which (visibly and to the eye
of man) gives the lie to his profession and promise, (for instance, if it can
be proved that immediately before or immediately after he has professed or
promised the contrary to his companions in his wickedness, or that he still
continues in the practice of that sin) is not to be excluded as an
impenitent sinner from the Sacrament.

8. The third Quaere, as also the conclusion of all, runs upon a great
mistake, by reason of the confounding of things which are of a different
nature. There is great weigh-laid upon this, that there is as much sin and
danger to a man's soul in his unworthy and unprofitable hearing of the word, as
in his unworthy receiving of the Sacrament; and therefore Ministers may as well
refuse to Preach unto people, whom they deem unprofitable hearers, as refuse
to give them the Sacrament, because they judge them unmeet to receive it.
Whether the sin of unworthy hearing be as great as the sin of unworthy
receiving the Sacrament, I will not now debate. The A full answer to a Printed
Paper entitled four serious Questions concerning Excommunication and
Suspension etc.
Reply which was made to his Quaeries by another, has said enough to that
point. But that which I intend in this place, is (for clearing a maine
Principle which we go upon) to distinguish these two things. There are some
Ordinances appointed for the Conversion of Sinners. There are other Ordinances
appointed for the Communion of Saints. The Preaching of the word and the
hearing thereof, though it has no small influence into the Communion of
Saints, yet it is also appointed for converting and bringing in Sinners who
have no part in the Communion of Saints. The Sacrament was not appointed for
the Conversion of Sinners, but is peculiar to the Communion of Saints. The
Apostles Preached to the unbeleiving Jews in the Temple and Synagogues Act. 2.
46. Act. 3. 11. 12. Act. 5. 12. 42. Act. 9. 20. 22. 23. But it is only said of
those that gladly received the word, they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. Act. 2. 42.
The Apostles Preached also to many Heathens and Idolaters, but they admitted
none to the Sacramens till they saw such evidences as might persuade them in
the judgment of charity that they were such as might be admitted. They that
are suspended from the Sacrament, yea they that are excommunicate, are admitted
to the hearing of the word for their conversion, as the unbeleeving Jews and
Heathens were. Can any allege the like reason for admitting them to the
Sacrament? Erastus himself Consirm. These. lib. 2 p. 134. non tamen pro non
Judaeo, vel non circumciso, aut pro improbo damna^vor habeba ^ur Cogebatur
inhilominus secundum ritus patrios vivere, Sabbatum custo dire, aliaque talia
sacere. Quinetiam a Sacramento expiationis generalis, quae die 10. ^eni is
Septembris per agebatur Lev. 17. and 23. immundi nulli excludebantur.
observes that the unclean under the Law who might not eat of the Passover,
yet were not forbidden but commanded to observe the Sabbath, and the feast of
Expiation. I mention it only as an argument ad hominem. If a sinner be known
for a improfitable hearer of the word, that cannot make it a sin to me to
Preach any more to him. But if he be known to be a Dog or a Swine in reference
to the Sacrament, that will make it a sin to me if I minister the Sacrament to
him. The reason is because I am still bound to endeavor his conversion (not
knowing that he has blasphemed against the holy Ghost) but I am not bound to
give him the seal of remission of sins and salvation by Jesus Christ: yea it
were sin to give that Seal to him who is visibly and apparently incapable of
such sweet and comfortable application of Christ. I conclude that the
suspending of scandalous persons from the Sacrament, is neither only nor
principally grounded upon the sin and guilt of eating and drinking
unworthily, which will cleave to the unworthy Communicant: but rather (not
excluding the other) upon the nature of the Ordinance which is such as cannot
admit of the notoriously scandalous to receive, but that holy Ordinance shall
thereby be profaned and made Common; for what can be more contrary to the na
ure of that Ordinance and to the Institution of Jesus Christ, than to turn the
communion of Saints, into the communion of scandalous sinners; and to make that
which was instituted for the comfort of those that repent and believe, to be a
comfort and Seal of Salvation to those who are known by their fruits to have
neither Repentance nor Faith, and so to send them away with a good conceit of
their spiritual Estate, and thereby to strengthen their hearts and hands in
wickedness?

9. The Question is not whether all scandalous persons are to be excommunicated
and wholly cast out off the Church. The Assemblies Petition was not concerning
excommunicating, but concerning suspending from the Sacrament all scandalous
Persons. Yet the current of Master Prynnes Argumentation both in his Quaeries,
and in his Vindication thereof, for the most part, runs along against
Excommunication and Suspension from the Sacrament, as the Tittles likewise do
promise. Which is a fallacy d conjunctis ad divisa. And when he debateth so
much concerning excommunication and suspension, his and is either copulative or
exegeticall. If copulative, he opposes no body that I know so much as himself;
for I know none that would have all scandalous sinners suspended, to be
excommunicated also, except himself. If exegeticall, even so he is contrary to
himself, who confesses that one may be suspended from the Sacrament before he
be excommunicated. vindic. p. 50. 51. And whereas in the latter part of his
first Quaere, he would drive us to this hard choice, that either a scandalous
person must be excommunicated, or not suspended from the Sacrament; He says it
is evident by Tertullians Apology cap. 39. and lib. de poenit. that scandalous
persons were ever excommunicate and wholly cast out of the Church, not barely
sequestered from the Sacrament. Whence says he all the Canonists and Schoolmen
determine that an excommunicate person is excluded from the Church and all
public Ordinances. Let the prudent reader observe, that in stead of proving
that scandalous persons were wholly cast out of the Church, he tells us out of
the Canonists and Schoolmen, that excommunicate persons were wholly cast out
of the Church, that is, that those who were cast out of the Church, were cast
out of the Church. And for his antiquity, he has given here no small wound to
the Reputation of his skill in Antiquities. Which will more fully appear Chap.
17. Mean while, how can any that has read Tertullian or Cyprian, not know,
that some failings and falls in time of persecution, and other smaller
offenses, were not punished by excommunication, but by suspension from the
Sacrament, till after public Declaration of Repentance and confession of the
offense, the offender was admitted to the Sacrament. And for the places he
cites, I find in Tertullians Book de poenitentia much of that Exomologesis and
public Declaration of Repentance, but that all scandalous persons brought
under Church Censures were wholly cast out of the Church, I find not; In the 39
Chapter of his Apologetick there is no such thing as is alleged, but the
contrary plainly intimated, Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, and
censura divina. Nam and judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud certos de Dei
conspectu: summumque futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit,
ut a communicatione orationis, and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii
releget^r.
concerning several degrees of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and that if any
man's offense was so great, as to deserve excommunication, then he was
excommunicate and wholly cast out of the Church. And as in the Ancient Churches
there were, and in the reformed Churches there now are different degrees of
censures, according to the different degrees of offenses: so in the Jewish
Church the like may be observed, both concerning Ceremonial uncleanness, and
moral offenses. Touching the former, that Law Number. 5. 2. command the children
of Israel that they put out of the Camp every Leper, and every one that has an
issue, and whosoever is desiled by the dead, has been understood by the Jewish
Doctors respective, that is, that the, Leper was put out of all the three
Camps, the Camp of Israel the Camp of the Levites, and the Camp of divine
Majesty which was the Tabernacle: he that had an issue might be in the Camp of
Israel, but was put out of the other two. He that was defiled by the dead, was
only restrained from the Camp of divine Majesty, for which also see before
Book. 1. Ch^p. 10. And touching moral offenses, there were several Steps and
degrees in the Jewish excommunication, as De Iure nature. and Gent. lib. 4. cap.
8.
Master Seldom has observed from the Talmudists: for first a man was separate
from the Congregation for 30 days, and if thereafter he was found obstinate,
he was separate for other 30 days, and if after 60 days he did not repent,
then they passed from the lesser excommunication to the greater, that is from
Niddui and Shammatha (as he thinks) to Cherem or Anathema. The Author of the
Quaeries, while he argues in that first Quaere against the suspending from the
Sacrament of a person not excommunicated nor wholl^ cast out of the Church,
closes in this particular with them of the Separation (which I believe he did
it not intend to do;) for they in one of their Letters in answer to the second
Letter of Fr. Junius written to them, where they bring eleven Exceptions
against the Dutch Churches, one of these Exceptions was that they use a new
censure of Suspension, which Christ has not appointed. They do hold
Excommunication to be an Ordinance of Christ, but do reject the distinction of
Suspension and Excommunication, as Master Prynne does.

Tenthly, the true state of the present Question is not, whether the Parliament
should establish the power of suspending scandalous persons from the Sacrament,
as Iure divino, (nay, let Divines assert that, and satisfy peoples consciences
in it: but let the Parliament speak in an authoritative and legislative way, in
adding their civil sanction.) Nor, whether there ought to be any suspension
from the Sacrament of scandalous persons, not yet excommunicated and cast out
of the Church; and that the Elder-ship should do it; for the Ordinance of
Parliament has so far satisfied the desires of the Reverend Assembly and of
the generality of godly people, that there is to be a suspension of scandalous
persons (not excommunicated) from the Sacrament, and power is granted to the
Eldership to suspend from the Sacrament for such scandals as are enumerate in
the Ordinances of October. 20. 1645. and March. 14. 1645. Which Ordinances do
appoint that All Persons Or any Person that shall commit such or such an
offense, shall be by the Eldership suspended from the Sacrament, upon
confession of the party, or upon the Testimony of two credible witnesses. So
that in truth the stream of Master Prynnes exceptions runs against that
which is agreed and resolved upon in Parliament: and his arguments (if they
prove any thing) must necessarily conclude against that power already granted
by Parliament to Elder-ships. And now if he will speak to that point which is
in present public agitation, he must lay aside his Querees and his Vindication
thereof, and write another Book to prove that the Assembly and other godly
ministers and people ought to rest satisfied (in point of conscience) with the
power granted to Elderships to suspend from the Sacrament in the enumerate
cases, and that there is not the like reason to keep off scandalous persons
from the Sacrament for other scandalls beside these enumerate in the Ordinance
of Parliament. Nay, and he must confine himself within a nearower circle, then
so; for the Parliament has been pleased to think of some course for new
emergent cases, that the door may not be shut for the future upon the
Remonstrances of Elderships concerning cases not expressed. I know the
Gentleman is free to choose his own Theme to treat of, and he may handle what
cases of Conscience he shall think fit for the Churches edification. But since
he professes in the Conclusion of his four Questions and in the Preface
before his Vindication, and in diverse other passages, that his scope is to
expedite a regular settlement of Church Discipline, without such a power of
suspending the scandalous, as is now desired to be settled in the new
Elderships, and manifestly reflecteth upon one of the Assemblies Petitions
concerning that business, as has been said; yea the first words of his Queres
tell us, he spoke to the point in present public agitation, the case standing
thus; I must put him in mind (under favor) that he has not been a little out
of the way, nor a little wide from the mark.

And if the Question were which of these Tenants (Master Prynnes or ours,)
concerning Suspension, does best agree with the mind of the Parliament, let us
hear their own Ordinance dated March 14. 1645. the words are these: yet were
the fundamentalls and substantial parts of that Government long since settled
in persons by and over whom it was to be exercised, and the nature, extent, and
respective subordination of their power was limited and defined; only
concerning the administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, how all
such persons as were guilty of notorious and scandalous Offenses might be
suspended from it, some difficulty arising, not so much in the Matter it self,
as in the Manner, how it should be done, and who should be the Judges of the
Offense: The Lords and Commons having it always in their purpose and
Intention, and it being accordingly declared and Resolved by them That all
sorts of notorious scandalous Offenders should be suspended from the Sacrament,
Which is the very point so much opposed by Master Prynne; for the controversy
moved by him is not so much concerning the manner, or who should be the Judges,
as concerning the matter it self: he contending that all sorts of notorious
scandalous offenders should not be suspended from the Sacrament, but only such
as are excommunicated and excluded from the hearing of the Word, Prayer, and
all other public Ordinances.

Having now removed so many mistakes of the true state of the question: that
which is in controversy is plainly this; Whether according to the word of God
there ought to be in the Elderships of Churches a spiritual power and
authority, by which they that are called brethren, that is, Church members, or
Officers, for the public scandal of a profane life, or of pernicious
doctrine, or for a private offense obstinately continued in after admonitions,
and so growing to a public scandal, are upon proof of such scandal to be
suspended from the Lords Table until signs of repentance appear in them; and
if they continue contumacious, are in the name of Jesus Christ to be
excommunicate and cut off from all membership and communion with the Church,
and their sins pronounced to be bound on earth, and by consequence in Heaven,
until by true and sincere repentance they turn to God, and by the declaration
of such repentance be reconciled unto the Church. The affirmative is the
received doctrine of the reformed Churches, whereunto I adhere. The first part
of it concerning Suspension, is utterly denied by Mr Prynne, which breaks the
concatenation and order of Church discipline held forth in the question now
stated. Whether he denies also Excommunication by Elderships to be an
Ordinance and Institution of Christ, and only holds it to be lawful and
warrantable by the word of God, I am not certain. If he do, then he holds the
total negative of this present question. However I am sure he has gone about
to take away some of the principal Scripturall foundations and pillars upon
which Excommunication is builded. Yea now also it appears by his Diotrephes
catechized that he denies and opposes Excommunication it self, at least
under a Christian Magistrate.
As touching the gradation and order in the question as now stated, it is meant
positively and exclusively, that such a gradation not only may but ought to be
observed ordinarily (which Mr Prynne denies) although I deny not tha^ for some
public enormous, heinous abominations, there may be (without such degrees of
proceeding) a present cutting off by Excommunication. But this belongs not to
the present controversy.

CHAP. II. Whether Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. prove Excommunication.
THe second point of difference is concerning Matthew. 18. Mr Prynne in the first
of his four questions told us that the words Matthew. 18. 17. Let him be to thee
as an Heathen man and a Publican, are meant only of personal private
trespasses between man and man, not public scandalous sins against the
Congregation: and that it is not said, Let him be to the whole Church, but let
him be to Thee, etc. This I did in my Sermon retort. For if to thee, for a
personal private trespass; much more to the whole Church, for a public
scandalous sin, whereby he trespasseth against the whole Congregation. Yea,
it follows upon his interpretation, that he may account the whole Church as
Heathens and Publicans, if all the members of the Church do him a personal
injury, whereupon I left this to be considered by every man of understanding,
whether if a private man may account the whole Church as Heathens and Publicans
for a personal injury done to himself alone, it will not follow that much
more the whole Church may account a man as a Heathen and Publican, for a
public scandalous sin against the whole Church. Mr Prynne in his
Vindication, page 3. glanceth at this objection, but he takes notice only of
the half of it, and he is so far from turning off my retortion, that he
confirms it; for page 4. he confesses that every Christian has free power
by Gods word to esteem not only a particular brother, but all the members of
a Congregation, as Heathens and Publicans, if he or they continue impenitent in
the case of private injuries, after admonition. Now my exception against his
Quere remains unanswered. If I may esteem the whole Church as Heathens and
Publicans, when they do me an injury and continue impenitent therein: may not
the whole Church esteem me as an Heathen man and a Publican, when I commit a
public and scandalous trespass against the whole Church, and continues
impenitent therein? Shall a private man have power to cast off the whole Church
as Heathens and Publicans? and shall not the whole Church have power to cast
off one man as an Heathen and Publican? I know he understands those words, Let
him be to thee as a Heathen man and a Publican, in another sense then either
the reformed Churches do, or the ancient Churches did, and takes the meaning
to be of avoiding fellowship and familiarity with him, before any sentence of
Excommunication passed against the offender. But however my argument from
proportion will hold. If civil fellowship must be refused, because of
obstinacy in a civil injury, why shall not spiritual or Church Fellowship be
refused to him that has committed a spiritual injury or trespass against the
Church? If private fellowship ought to be denied unto him that will not repent
of a private injury, why shall not public fellowship in eating and drinking
with the Church at the Lords Table be denied unto him that will not repent of a
public scandal given to the Congregation? Are the rules of Church fellowship
looser and wider than the rules of civil fellowship? or are they straiter? Is
the way of communion of Saints broader than the way of civil communion? or is
it narrower? Peradventure he will say, that the whole Church, that is, all the
members of the Church, have power to withdraw from an obstinate scandalous
brother, that is, to have no fraternall converse or private Christian
fellowship with him. Well then: If thus far he be as a Heathen and a Publican
to the whole Church distributively, how shall he be as a Christian brother to
the whole Church collectively; If all the members of the Church severally
withdraw fellowship from him even before he be excommunicated, how shall the
whole Church together be bound to keep fellowship with him till he be
excommunicated? Instead of loosing such knots, Mr Prynne undertakes to prove
another thing, that this Text of Matthew is not mean of Excommunication or
Church censures, and that the Church in this Text was not any Ecclesiastical
Consistory (here he cites Josephus, as if he had spoken of that Text) but
only the Sanhedrin or Court of civil Justice. But though all this were true
which he says, yet there may be a good argument drawn by necessary consequence
from this Text to prove Excommunication. Which Grotius did well perceive: for
in his annotations upon the place, after he has told his opinion that
excommunication is not meant in this Text, he adds, that he has elsewhere
spoken of the antiquity and necessity of Excommunication: quanquam ad eam ex
hoc etiam loco non absurd argumentum duci p^sse, non negaverim: though I will
not deny, says he, that even from this place, the argument may be drawn to
excommunication without any absurdity. My argument aforementioned will hold
good even from Master Prynnes own exposition. Thus far I have gone upon a
consession: now to the confutation. Before I come to his reasons, I observe in
his margent a double mistake of the testimony of Scapula. First, he sends us to
Scapula to learn that (...) signifies any civil assembly or council, as well
as an Ecclesiastical Presbytery. Yes: Scapula tells us, it has in Heathen
writers a general signification, to express any Assembly called forth. But he
adds immediately, that in the writing of Christians it signifies the
assembly of such as are called to eternal life and do profess Christian
Religion. Since therefore it has not the same signification in Heathen
writings, and in the New Testament, he should have showed us where the word
(...) in the new Testament does signify a civil Court of Justice. I hope the
holy Ghost did speak so in this place as he might be understood, and to take
the word Church here, in that sense which it has nowhere else in the new
Testament, does not agree with that received maxim, That Scripture is to be
expounded by Scripture. I find indeed the word (...) used for a Civil
assembly, Acts 19. 39, 41. But as that is an Heathen assembly, so it is not the
Evangelist Luke his expression otherwise then recitative: that is, he
mentions an Heathen assembly under that name by which Heathens themselves
called it. His other mistake of Scapula, is, the citing of him for that
assertion, that the Church in this Text is not an Ecclesiastical Con sistory.
Whereas Scapula does expound the Church Matthew. 18. to be meant of the
Presbytery or College of Elders, (as Steph. Restringitur and (...) m^do (...)
ad synedrium seu Presbyterium, id est seniorum collegium, ut Matthew. 18. So
Marlora^ in Thesaur^ says that the word Ecclesia is taken prosenatu
Ecclesiastico Matthew. 18. 17.
Stephani Thesaurus does also) and having told that the word signifies the
whole Christian Church: also particular Congregations: he adds two more
restricted significations: sometimes it signifies a Christian family:
sometimes the Presbytery; for this last he cites Matthew. 18. Now I proceed to
Mr Prynnes Reasons. First, says he, this Text speaks not at all of any
public scandalous sin against the Church or Congregation, the proper object
of Church censures, but only of private civil trespasses between man and man,
as is evident by the words, If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell
him his fault between him and thee, etc. Answ. We have ever understood that
place of such trespasses, which grow public afterward by the offenders
obstinacy after admonition. Yet the trespass here meant, may be often such as
even at first is scandalous to more then one. Such a case falls under Christ's
rule here, and is not excluded. Wherein observe Durand upon the fourth Book of
the Master of Sentences Did. 19. Quest. 4. But if, says he, the sin be not
altogether secret, nor altogether known, that is, such as is known to many by
whom he may be convict, or be is ill reported of among grave persons, though
the public fame be not against him, so the procedor which Christ has set us
in the Gospel, seems to have place, to wit, that first he may be secretly
admonished, concerning his amendment; which if it profit not, that he may be
admonished concerning his amendment before those who know the fact; but if that
also do not profit, that then he may be declared to the Church. But if we
should grant that no other trespass is meant here, but a private trespass,
yet I ask, is there no private trespass but that which is civil? The
Schoolmen writing de scandalo will tell him that one brother trespasseth
against another when he scandalizeth him by any sinful example, though without
any civil injury. Nay its the greatest trespass which is committed against
the soul of our neighbor: scandal is soul murder. It is a breach of the
Law of love, not only by omission, but by commission. He that is commanded to
edify his brother, and then gives scandal to him, does he not trespass
against his brother? The like answer I return to that which he adds, that
Luke relating the same thing without any Dic Ecclesiae, Luke 17. 3, 4 puts it
out of question, if compared with Genesis 52. 31. (there is no such Scripture) 1 Samuel 25. 28. What? out of question. Does he not find scandalous sins in the two
verses immediately preceding in Luke, and thereupon its immediately added, Take
heed to your selves, if thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if
he repent, forgive him. Can not a Christian rebuke his brother who scandalizeth
him, and if he repent forgive him? Luke needed not add Dic Ecclesiae, because
he speaks of a repenting brother, not of an impenitent brother, after private
admonition. And that scandalous trespasses are understood Matthew. 18. 19. (as
Augustine, Tostatus, and many others have observed) may thus appear. 1.
Scandals are the greatest and worst trespasses, as has been said, and woe unto
the world because of offenses. Surely Jesus Christ did intend to provide a
remedy against the greatest evils, rather than against the lesser. 2. Christ
would not be Judge of civil injuries, Luke 12. 14. How can it be then supposed
that he gives here Laws concerning civil rather then spiritual injuries? 3.
Christ says, If be shall hear (not repair) thee, thou have gained (not thy
goods or thy good name, or the like, but) thy brother. Intimating, that its not
a man's own interest, but the rescuing of his brothers soul from sin and
scandal, which is here sought. Mr Prynne himself confirms it not a little,
for he takes the meaning to be of avoiding a brothers company, in the case of a
civil or private injury, if he continue impenitent after admonition. Now what
if he that has done the injury make full reparation, and all real
satisfaction to the brother injured, and yet continue impenient showing no
symptom at all of repentance, must he not by Mr Prynnes exposition be esteemed
as an heathen man and a Publican, because of his visible and scandalous
impenitency? How often has it been seen that a man was compelled by Law, or
persuaded by friends to make a real restitution and full satisfaction for a
civil or personal injury; and yet has given very great scandal by his
impenitency, not so much as confessing, but still defending and justifying his
sinful act, in his discourses? 4. The dependency upon the preceding parts of
that Chapter confirms it: from the beginning of the Chapter to this very
Text, verse. 15. Christ has been upon the doctrine of scandals, warning us not
to offend so much as one of his little ones, which he presses by diverse
arguments. 5. The Erastians and we do both agree in this, that Christ here
has a respect to the Jewish Government. Now the trespasses for which men were
excommunicate by the Jewish Sanhedrin were scandalous trespasses, such as the
despising of any of the precepts of the law of Moses, or Statutes of the
Scribes: The doing of servile work upon Easter Eve: The mentioning of the Name
of God rashly, or by a vain oath: The inducing of others to profane the Name
of God, or to eat holy things without the holy place; and the like; More of
this elsewhere, in the 24 causes of the Jewish Excommunication. 6. Mr Prynne
expounds this Text in Matthew by 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. but there the
Apostle intends the purging of the Church from scandals, whether those scandals
have any private injury in them or not. Instance in Idolatry and drunkenness,
there mentioned. 7. I can also (without yielding the least advantage to the
Erastian cause) admit and suppose that which is so much pressed both by
Erastus, Mr Prynne, and others, viz. that these words, If thy brother trespass
against thee, are spoken of a personal injury between man and man, Though I
do not grant the thing, yet I am content, even upon their own supposition, to
argue from this Text. And first, it may be answered with Aegi dius de Coninck.
de actib. supernat. Disp. 28. Dub. 8. that Christ does not speak of the case
of personal injuries, as if he meant to restrict unto such cases the order of
proceeding for gaining of the offenders soul from sin; Sed solum exempli
causa attulit tale genu^ peccati, de quo maxim poterat dubitari, an in ejus
correptione hic ordo servandus sit, and in quo difficillime servetur, ob
innatam multis cupiditatem vindictae.
but only for examples sake he brought such kind of sin, of which it might
have been most doubted, whether in the reproof thereof this order be to be
kept, and in which it can be most hardly observed, in respect of the innate
desire of revenge in many. 2. Let our opposites themselves say, whether we
ought not in conscience and duty, endeavor the gaining of an offending
brothers soul, when we see him commit a trespass against God, which is no
personal injury to our selves, as well as when the trespass is a personal
injury. 3. As this order of proceeding here prescribed by Christ, is (in the
case of a personal injury) the greatest trial of Christian love in the person
offended, so it may (by Gods blessing) be the stronger and more efficacious
upon the person offending, to conquer and overcome his spirit, while he that
might prosecute him in a legal and criminal way, comes in meekness and
love to admonish him, and to endeavor the gaining of him from sin by
repentance. Which is the observation of Chrysostom upon the place, for if he
that might demand punishment upon him, even that man be seen to be taking care
of his salvation, this most of all other things is able to make him ashamed,
and to yield. 4. If it be a civil and personal injury matterially, yet it
comes not in here under that formal consideration, but partly as a scandal to
him that has received the injury (so that Chrysostom does rightly make this
Text to hang together with that which was said before in the same Chapter
concerning scandals) partly as a soul-destroying sin upon him that does the
wrong, which does endanger his salvation: And if under such a notion private
injuries be here spoken of, then what have our opposites gained? 5. The scope
also is not civil but wholly spiritual; which Chrysostom does very well
explain. Hom. 60. in Matthew. What is it, if he shall hear thee? if he shall be
persuaded to condemn himself of sin. Thou have gained thy brother, he says
not thou bast a sufficient punishment or satisfaction, but thou have gained thy
brother. And after, He says not accuse, nor censure, nor demand punishments,
but convince, says he. The Context confirms it; for these words are added
immediately after the parable of bringing home the lost sheep. Which parable we
have also Luke 15. (where it is not applied to the reducing of such as have
done private injuries, but of Publicans and sinners who were publicly
scandalous: this I thought good to note by the way) Ammonius Alexandrinus de
Quatuor Evang. consonantia, cap. 96, 97. does together with the parable of the
lost sheep, add also the other two, of the lost penny, and the lost son,
immediately before these words, If thy brother trespass against thee etc. 6.
And suppose that the business has its rise and beginning from a personal
injury, verse 15. yet the trespass for which the man is to be held as a
Heathen and Publican, is a public scandalous sin against the Church or
Congregation, namely his neglecting to hear the Church verse. 17. for it is not
his first trespass, but his contumacy against the Church, which by this Text
is to make him esteemed as an Heathen and a Publican.

Before I leave this point, I will answer the chief Argument by which Erastus
would prove that this Text is meant only of private civil injuries: because
(says he) the trespass here spoken of is no other then what one brother may
forgive to another. I answer, both he and Master Prynne do suppose this Text
Mat. 15, 16, 17. to be parallel to that in Luke 17. 3. 4. which they take for
granted, without proof or reason. Certainly there is a great difference between
the purpose and scope of the one place and of the other. It will be replied
that even in this very Chapter Matthew. 18. the next thing which follows verse.
21. is concerning personal injuries which one brother can and ought to forgive
to another. Then came Peter to him and said, Lord how often shall my Brother
sin against me, and I forgive him? etc. To that I answer. 1. We cannot gather
from the Text that Peter did propound this question immediately after or upon
occasion of that which went before verse. 15, 16, 17, etc. where nothing is
spoken of one Brothers forgiving another. We read Luke 8. 19. Then came to him
his Mother and his Brethren, etc. yet the meaning is not that his Mother and
his Brethren came to him immediately after his speaking of the words before
mentioned by Luke in that place; for that it was not after these, but after
other words, is plain from the Harmony of the other Evangelists Matthew and
Mark. So here these words Then came Peter, may very well relate to a new
business and to another time. 2. Or if it was the same time, it might be said,
Then came Peter, that is, Peter being absent, and not having heard that which
Christ had been before speaking, he came immediately after, and did propound a
new Question. 3. Suppose also that Peter was present and heard all which had
been before spoken, yet it is much doubted among Interpreters, whence Peter had
the rise and occasion of that Question. Some think it was upon his calling to
mind those words in the rule of Prayer, even as we forgive those who trespass
against us. Others conceive the occasion of his Question was that which was
said verse. 19. Again I say unto you if two of you shall agree on earth,
supposing that agreement (and consequently forgiving of injuries) is necessary
to make our Prayers the more effectual; for my part, I think it not improbable
that whatever the occasion of the Question was, verse. 21 begins a new and
distinct purpose. Which I take to be the reason why the Arabik here makes an
intercision, and begins the eight and fiftieth Section of Matthew at those
words, Then came Peter and said, Lord how often, etc. 4. And if verse. 21. have a
dependence upon that which went before, it may be conceived thus: Christ had
said, If thy Brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone, which supposes a continuance of the former
Christian fellowship and fraternall familiarity, and that we must not cast off
a scandalous Brother as lost, or as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother.
This might give occasion to Peter to ask, Lord how often shall my Brother sin
against me, that is, scandalize me by his sin against God, (for even in Luke
17. 3. 4. that of forgiving one that trespasseth against us, is added
immediately after a Doctrine of scandals;) and I forgive him, that is, as
Grotius expounds it, restore him to the former degree of friendship and
intimate familiarity, to deal with him thus as with a Brother; Which he well
distinguishes from that other forgiving which is a not revenging. And so much
of Master Prynnes first reason.

His second reason is because the Mention of two or three witnesses verse. 16.
relates only to the manner of trying civil capital crimes (as murders and
the like) before the civil Magistrates of the Jews, etc. not to any
proceedings in Ecclesiastical causes, in their Ecclesiastical Consistories,
of which we find no president.

Answ. 1. If this hold, then the Text must not be expounded indefinitely of
civil injuries (as he did before) but of civil capital injuries, whereas
Erastus takes the meaning to be of smaller offenses only, and not of Capital
crimes. 2. The Law concerning two or three witnesses is neither restricted to
Capital crimes, nor to civil Judicatories. I appeal to the Ordinance of
Parliament dated Octo. 20. 1645. The Elder-ship of every Congregation shall
judge the matter of scandal aforesaid, being not Capital, upon the Testmiony
of two credible Witnesses, at the least. That Law therefore of witnesses is
alike applicable to all causes and Courts Ecclesiastical and civil Deuteronomy. 19.
30. One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any
sin, in any sin that he sins: at the mouth of two witnesses or at the
mouth of three witnesses shall the matter be established. 3. And the same Law
is in the new Testament clearly applied to proceedings in Ecclesiastical
causes 2 Cor. 13. 1. and again 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against the Elder receive not an
accusation but before two or three witnesses, which is not spoken to any civil
Magistrate, but to Timothy and others joined with him in Church Government.

His third reason does only beg what is in Question, that by the Church is
not meant any Ecclesiastical but a civil Court of the Jews. He needed not to
cite so many places to prove that the Jews had civil Courts. If he could but
cite one place, to prove that they had no Ecclesiastical Courts, this were to
the purpose. Not that I grant that at this time the Jews had any civil
Jurisdiction or Jewish Court of Justice; for after that Herod the great did
kill Hircanus and the Sanhedrin, (in the opinion of many learned men) the Jews
had no more any civil Jurisdiction. Now Herod the great was dead before the
time of Christ's Ministry. Others think they had some civil Jurisdiction a
while after Hircanus death. How ever he cannot prove, that at this time when
Christ said Tell the Church, the Jews had any civil Court of Justice, which
did exercise either Criminal or Capital Judgments. I have in the first Book
showed out of Buxtorf, L'Empereur, Casauhon, and I. Coch. (who prove what they
say from the Talmudicall writers) that 40 years before the destruction of the
Temple (and so before Christ said Tell the Church) the Court of civil Justice
at Jerusalem did cease. If Master Prynne make any thing of this Gloss of his,
he must prove 1. That there was no Ecclesiastical Court among the Jews. (I
have before proved that that Council of the Jews in Christ's time was an
Ecclesiastical Court, though he conceives it was merely civil) 2. That a
private civil injury might not then, nor may not now, be brought before a
civil Court, except after several previous admonitions despised. 3. That
Chists Rule, Tell the Church was antiquated and ceased, when a civil Court of
Justice among the Jews ceased. If he say that the same rule continues for
telling the civil Magistrate in case the offender prove obstinate after
admonition, then I ask. ^. how will he reconcile himself? for page 4. he says
the Church in this Text is only the Sanhedrin or Court of civil Justice among
the Jews. 2. If this Text Mat. 18. was applicable to the primitive Church
after the destruction of Jerusalem, and when there was no Jewish Sanhedrin to
go to, then the Pagan Magistracy must pass under the name of the Church, for
they had no other civil Court of Justice to go to.

One thing I must needs take notice of, that whereas he would prove here that
Tell the Church, is nothing, but, tell the civil Court of Justice among the
Jews, commonly called the Council says he, or Sanhedrin, he does hereby
overthrow all that he has been building for the Jewish Sanhedrin at that time,
had not power to judge civil, nor criminal, and least of all Capital
offenses, but only causes Ecclesiastical: The Romans having taken from them
their civil Government, and left them no Government nor Jurisdiction except in
matters of Religion. I hope Master Prynne will not in this contradict Consirm.
Thesium lib. 2. cap. 2. Quis nescit illo tempore Judaeos sub Romany vixisse,
ac praesidem eorum p^rentibus omnibus jus dicere solitum suisse? Civilem
potentiam ad se omnem f^re per^raxerant, relicta potestate ipsis de rebus
sacris judicandi, and secundum legis ceremonias vivendi. Idem lib. 3. cap. 1.
In^erim tamen pa^ebant Romany: neque in aliis rebus potestatem servaverant
integram, quam in rebus ad religionem moresque patrios pertinentibus.
Erastus. And if so, how shall his Gloss stand, that this Text is to be
understood of civil injuries yea, and of these only, for remedy whereof he
conceives that Christ sends his Disciples to the Jewish Sanhedrin? How sweetly
do his Tenants agree together?

His fourth reason is, that those words, let him be to thee as an Heathen man
and a Publican, cannot signify excommunication, because Heathen men being
never members of the Church, could never be excommunicated or cast out of it,
being incapable of such a censure. As for publicans, those of them who were
members of the Jewish Church, though they were execrable to the Jews, by
reason of their Tax-gatherings and oppressions, yet we never read in Scripture,
that they were excommunicated or cast out of their Synagogues, but contrarily,
that they went up into the Temple to pray, as well as the Pharisees, and were
more acceptable to Christ himself, etc. So likewise Sutlivius (against Beza) de
pres^yt. Cap. 9. page 57. I answer 1. by a retortion. Master Prynne p. 4.
expounds these words, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a publican, to
be meant of avoiding familiar fellowship with the Brother that has committed a
civil trespass, and keeping no more civil company with him. Now I argue thus
ad hominem. This cannot be the meaning which he gives, because Heathens being
never admitted into familiar fellowship and company with the Jews (who might
not marry nor familiarly converse with them, as himself proves page 4.) could
never be cast out of their fellowship and company, being incapable of any such
thing. If our exposition of excommunication must drive us to acknowledge that
Heathens were formerly members of the Jewish Church, his exposition of avoiding
familiar fellowship, must drive him to acknowledge that formerly the Heathens
were admitted into familiar fellowship with the Jews.

2. Those words (...), let him be unto thee, etc. do not look backward but
foreward; neither is the matching and comparing of the scandalous impenitent
Brother, with an heathen, a priori, but a posteriori, so that no comparison is
to be made between the praeterite Estate of an offending Brother, and the
praeterite Estate of an Heathen man, but between the future Estate of an
offending obstinate Brother, and the present Estate of an Heathen man.

3. Let him be unto thee as an Heathen, is as much as have no communion nor
fellowship with him in the holy Assemblies nor in the Temple; for Heathens were
not permitted to come into the Temple Ezekiel. 44. 7. 9. Act. 21. 28. whereupon
Paul is accused for bringing Greeks into the Temple and so polluting that holy
place Act. 21. 28. Heathens were excluded from Atrium Israelis, the Court of
Israel, which was without the Court of the Priests. There was without the Court
of Israel, Atrium Gentium, the Court of the Heathen, otherwise called
Intermurale, because it lay between the Temple and the utter wall mentioned
Ezekiel. 42. 20. Into this utmost Court or intermurale Heathen men were admitted
to come and worship there, according to that 1 Kings. 8. 41. 2 Chro. 6. 32.
They might not only come into the holy Land, but to the holy City, and not
only to the holy City, but to the mountain of the house of the Lord, yea, not
only to the mountain of the Temple, but within the utter Wall: yet into the
Court of Israel which was properly the first or utter Court of the Temple, they
were forbidden to enter. He that would be further satisfied that these things
were so, let him read Joseph. antiq. lib. 15. cap. 14. T^status in 1. Reg. 8.
quaest. 21. Arias Montanus de saer. fabric. page 15. Azorius Instit. moral Tom.
1. lib. 6 Chap. 53. L'Empereur Annot. in Cod Middoth cap. 2. Sect. 3.
Peradventure you will say, if it was thus, then an excommunicate person being
esteemed as an Heathen, must not g^t leave to hear the word, nor at all to
enter into the places of public Ass^molies where the word was Preached. Answ.
I will not now debate that point. Others have debated it with the Anabaptists
who hold that excommunicate persons ought not be admitted to the Hearing of the
word. Luc. Osiand. Enchirid. contra Anab. c. 6. quest. 2. but however it does
not follow upon what I have said, that excommunicate persons must be wholly
excluded from hearing of the word. First, because the places of our public
worship have no Sacramental significancy or holiness as the Temple and
Tabernacle had of old: therefore say the professors of Leyden there is not the
like reason to exclude excommunicate persons wholly from our Temples, as there
was excluding them from the Temple of Jerusalem. 2. because both Christ Io. 10.
23. and the Apostles Acts 5. 12. did use to Preach in Solomon's Porch, (
Josephus an-tiq. lib. 20. cap. 8. Suasit (popu lus) regi ut orientalem
instauraret porticum. Ea templi extima claudebat, profundae valli and augustae
imminens, etc. Opus Solomonis, regis, qui primus integrum Templum condi^it.
) This Porch so called was the great east Porch in the Intermurale, whether
Heathens were admitted, and so they did hear the word, though they had no leave
to come into the Court of Israel, there to have fellowship with or to be
esteemed and reputed among the people of God. Yea, as Master Seldom tells us de
Jure not. and Gent. lib. 3. cap. 6. some understand by Solomon's Porch act. 3.
11. and 5. 12. the very Court of the Gentiles, into which they came to worship,
which Gentiles were not withstanding forbidden by a superscription under pain
of death to enter into the Court of Israel, or into that which Josephus calls
the second Temple. Josephus does also make mention of four Porches of the
Temple; into the utmost of which (and this is certainly meant of Solomon's
porch) it was lawful for heathens to come. contra appron. l. 2.

4. For the other part, let him be unto thee as a publican, if the meaning were
no more but this avoid all fellowship and familiarity with him, it does not
hurt our Exposition: exclusion from the Temple being clearly signified by his
being as an Heathen: and avoiding of fellowship with him being in the most
emphaticall manner further expressed by his being as a publicans both these put
together do the more fully hold forth excommunication. And in this sense some
resolve the words.

5. Yet let us see how Master Prynne proves that the Publicans were admitted
into the Temple or Synagogues. He tells us that Christ received them or
conversed with them, as if the meaning had been to compare an impenitent
Brother with penitent publicans, Luke 18. 13. who drew near to Christ to hear
him Luke 15. 2. who left all and followed Christ to be among his disciples
Matthew. 10. 3. Luke 5. 27, 28. Mark. 2. 15. who justified God Luke 7. 29. who
knew themselves to be sick of soule-diseases Matthew. 9. 12, 13. These very
places cited by himself make against him. However the Question is how Publicans
were esteemed of in the Jewish Church (for that is the thing pointed at in
those words, let him be unto thee as a Publican) for that, he objecteth that
Publicans went up into the Temple to pray. If he mean that Publicans who were
neither devout Jews nor Proselytes, went up into the Temple to pray, had
access to and fellowship in the Sacrifices and Temple worship, as well as the
Jews themselves, its more than he can prove. If he mean that publicans who
were Jews or Proselytes, went up into the Temple to pray, it helps him not,
except he can prove that when Christ says, let him be unto thee as an Heathen
man and a publican, the meaning is of such a publican as was a devout Jew or
proselyte. And if so, then he had to prove that the Jews did not keep civil
company or fellowship, so much as with the religious publicans with whom they
went together to the Temple to pray and worship. This also he has to prove,
not that religious publicans (of whom Christ means not) but that impious
infamous Publicans came to the Temple.

6. That passage Luke 18. 10. concerning the Publicans go ing up to the Temple
to pray; first, it is expressly declared to be a parable Verse. 9. and
therefore can not prove the reality of the thing according to the letter, no
more than an audible conference between Abraham and the rich man in Hell can be
proved from Luke 16. 24. to the end of the Chapter, (though I believe that be a
History related parabolically, as V^ssius proves in his Theses:) far less
can a parable properly so called prove an historical narration. The meaning
may be no other but this, that if such a Publican and such a Pharisee should
go up to the Temple to pray, then the one should depart justified, and the
other not.

7. I can also grant without any prejudice to the business of Excommunication
that the Publican, yea an execrable Publican did go up to the Temple to pray.
For an excommunicate person among the Jews (as many think) so long as there
was hope of his repentance, had leave to come into the utter Court of the
Temple, yet so that they came in at the gate of the mourners, and excommunicate
persons were known by all that saw them, to be excommunicate persons. More of
this Book 1. cap. 4.

8. This very Text Luke 18. helps us. For it is said Verse. 13. The Publican
stood afar off, that is, (in the opinion of Diodati) in some remote part of
the first Court of the Temple, 1 Kings 8. 41. It is very probable (whereof see
Book 1. chap. 9. that the Intermurale or atrium Gentium is meant, which
sometime has the name of the Temple. To the Publicans standing afar off is
opposed the Pharisees standing by himself, Verse. 11. where I construct (...)
with (...) as Camero does: So Camerarius and Beza following the Syriack and
some old Greek copies: he stood apart by himself, the very custom making it
so, that the Publican should not come near him, but stand in atrio Gentium.

9. The reason why Publicans are named as hateful and execrable persons, was
not for civil respects, nor because Publicans, (for the Jews themselves did
not refuse to keep company with good and just Publicans, as I shall prove
afterward:) particularly, it was not for their Tax-gathering (a particular
mentioned by Mr Prynne, it seems to strengthen his exposition of civil
injuries) but for diverse scandalous sins and abominable profaneness,
therefore publicans and sinners, publicans and harlots, publicans and gluttons,
and wine-bibbers are almost synonyma's in the Gospel, Matthew. 9. 11. and 11.
19. and 21. 32. Murke 2. 16. Luke 5. 30. and Publicans are named as the worst
of men, Matthew. 5. 46, 47. the most of them being so reputed. From all this
which has been said in answer to his fourth reason it appears that let him
be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican, is more than he would make it, keep
not any familar company, or have no civil fellowship with him. And whereas
page 4. he says that Paul expressly interprets it so, 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11, 12. 2 Thessalonians 3. 4. Ephesians. 5. 11. Romans 16. 17. I answer out of himself, in that same
place, and page 5. Let him be to thee as an Heathen, etc. is a phrase never
used elsewhere in Scripture. How then, says he, that Paul does expressly
interpret it? Paul commands to withdraw fellowship, (and that for any
scandalous sin in a Churchmember, although it be no private injury to us, as
the places quoted by himself make it manifest) Therefore Paul does expressly
interpret that phrase Mat. 18. to be meant of withdrawing civil fellowship
only. What consequence is there here?

I come to his fifth and last reason, the words runue only, Let him be to thee
as an Heathen man and a Publican, not to the whole Church. Answ. 1. This is the
very thing he said in his first Quaere, which is answered before. I shall only
add here another answer out of Erast Cousirm. These. lib. 2. page 158. Quod uni
dictum est, dictum toti est ecclesiae. At uni dictum est ut septuagies in die
culpam deprecanti remit^at. Ergo tota Ecclesia deprecanti ignoscore debet,
quo^iescunque in die sibi ignosci petot Nulla enim justa causa proferri
poterit, cur tota Ecclesia non debeat facere in hac causa, quod singulis ejus
membris praeceptum est.
Erastus, who argues thus: One brother should forgive another seventy times in
a day, if the offending brother do so often turn again and crave pardon:
Therefore so should the Church do to a sinner that craveth pardon, even as
often as he does crave pardon. For (says he) there can be no just reason given
wherefore the whole Church ought not to do herein, what Church members ought
to do severally. If this be a good argument when Christ says, If thy brother
repent, forgive him, Luke 17. 334. (by which place Mr Prynne expounds Matthew.
18. 15.) will it not be as good an argument, Let him be to thee as an Heathen
and a Publican, therefore let him be such to the whole Church, when the whole
Church is offended by his obstinacy and impenitency?

2. Those words, Let him be to thee, cannot be restrictive. It must be at least
extended to all such as are commanded to rebuke their brother, and if he
continue obstinate to tell the Church. Now the commandment for rebuking our
brother that falls into a scandalous sin, is not restricted to him that is
personally or particularly wronged, but it is a common Law of spiritual love,
Levit. 19. 17. Yea, says Mr Hildersham, lect. 36. on Psalm. 51. Every man has
received ^ commandment from Christ, to inform^ the governors of the Church of
such a brother as cannot otherwise be reformed, Matthew. 18. 17. Tell the Church.
If it belong to every Church member to reprove a scandalous sin which his
brother commits in his ^ight or hearing, or to his knowledge, and if he
repent not, to tell the Church, then it also belongs to every Church member to
esteem him as an Heathen man and a Publican, if he hear not the Church.

3. The next words, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Hraven,
being spoken to the Apo les, and in them to other Mini^ers of Jesus Christ, do
expound the former words Let him be unto thee, etc. to be meant not of private
withdrawing of fellowship, but of a public Church censure.

4. The reason why Chri^ will have such an offender to be esteemed as an
Heathen man and a Publican, is not the offense and fault first committed, but
his obstinacy and contumacy in that offense, and his neglecting to hear the
Church. So that suppose the offense had been a private or personal injury; yet
that for which the^ offender is to be esteemed as an Heathen and a Publican,
touches the whole Church, and is a general scandal to them all, namely his
contumacy and not hearing the Church. How can it then be imagined, that Christ
would only have one Church member to esteem a man as an Heathen and a
Publican, for that which is a common general scandal to the whole Church?
Quod si hos contemn^t, indicetur Ecclesiae ejus pervicatia. Et si ne Ecclesiam
au dierit, monitus scilicet a multis, habeatur ab eis veluti ethnicus and
publicanus. Et quaecunque illi sic ligave int, ligata habebuntur in caelis, hoc
est, quos ita monitos ejecerint e suo consortio, ^i etiam apud patrem ejecti
habebuntur.
Munsterus in his Annotations upon Matthew. 18. does better hit the meaning, that
the offender is to be esteemed as an Heathen man and a Publiean, by those who
did before admonish him but were despised, that is, by the Church, whose
admonitions being despised, they ought to cast out him who had despised them.

5. And how can it be supposed, that Christ would have one and the same person
to be as a Heathen man and a Publican to one member of the Church, and yet not
to be as ^ Heathen man and a Publican, but as a brother received in fellowship
by the whole Church? Sure this were a repugnancy between the judgment of the
whole Church, and the judgment of one member of the Church: and two things
which are repugnant can not be both of them agreeable to the will of Christ.

CHAP. III. A further demonstration that these words, Let him be to thee as an
Heathen man and a Publican, are not meant of avoiding Civil, but Religious or
Churchfellowship.
I Hope I have already made it to appear that to draw Excommunication from
Matthew. 18. is not to extract water out of flint, as Mr Prynne supposes: but
that it comes as liquide from the Text, as water out of the fountain.
Wherein I am the more confirmed, because Mr Prynnes exposition of these words,
Let him be to thee as an Heathen man and a Publican, can not stand, for he
takes the sense to be no more but this, keep not any civil fellowship or
company with such a one. Now that this can not be our Saviors meaning, I prove
thus.

1. If a private man shall thus at his own hand withdraw and separate from an
offending brother, as from an Heathen man and a Publican, Martyr in 1 Cor. 5.
ult. loc. de excom. Verum si hoc pro suo arbitrio cuique permittatur, ut
facultatem habeat discedend^ and separandi se a quibus voluerit, simultates,
contentiones, and discordiae, long graviores orientur, quam si publica
excommunicatione ut^remur.
what order, peace, or good government can there be either in Church or State?
And all the odium cast upon Excommunication (as contrary to the spiritual
privileges of Christians) will fall more heavy upon his own way, which brings
any man (be he Prince, Parliament Man, Pastor, or whoever he be) under so much
slavery to the lust of any private person, that he may be by that person (and
by ten thousand persons more, in case of so many civil injuries, not amended
after complaint to the Magistrate) esteemed, avoided, and abhorred, as an
Heathen man and a Publican. So that in the issue it may fall out, that any man
how eminent or deserving soever he be in Church or State, may be looked upon as
a Heathen and a Publican by ten thousand of the people, before ever he be so
judged by any Judicature. For instance, put case that a Minister be judicially
convict to have wronged his parishioners in the matter of small tithes, and
they conceive him to persevere in the same injury, must or may each of them
flee from him as from an Heathen and a Publican? Put case a whole company
think themselves wronged in pay or otherwise by their Captain, or a whole
Regiment by their Colonel, and after complaint made find themselves not
repaired, are they therefore free to avoid all civil company with the Captain
or Colonel, and to flee from them as from Heathens and Publicans? And what if
both the Lord Major of London and many godly Ministers who have eat at his
Table, should accuse Mr. Prynne of a calumny, because of that passage in his
Book, page 12. where he says of Anabaptists, Separatists, Independents,
Presbyters or Divines, Neither of which make any conscience of not repairing to
the Lord Majors, or any other public City feast, where they are sure of good
fare, because they were certain there to meet and eat with some covetous or
other scandalous persons, with whom St. Paul probibtes them, no not to eat?
If, I say, the Lord Major should accuse Mr Prynne for slandering him and his
house with the company of scandalous persons: and if many godly conscientious
Ministers should accuse him for aspersing them, as having more love to good
fare, then conscience of avoiding to eat with scandalous persons: And if after
sentence past against Mr Prynne he should still continue impenitent and not
confess his fault in this particular? Will he allow the Lord Major, and all
the godly Ministers who have eaten at the Lord Majors table to avoid Mr Prynne
as an Heathen and a Publican? Let hm take heed whether his principles will lead
him.

2. Mr Prynne says page 4. that Let him be to thee as an Heathen and a
Publican, is interpreted by 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11, 12. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. and elsewhere
by Paul. Now that place of the Corinthians which he cites, is meant of
Excommunication, as shall be proved in due time. And verse. 12. (cited by
himself) makes it plain, that a judicial act, not a private man's withdrawing
only, is meant; for that verse speaks twice of judging, an Apostolical
judgeing, and an Ecclesiastical judging. And the best interpreters expound 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. of Church censures. Its not the case of private civil injucies
which the Apostle there speaks of, but the case of public scandal, If any
man be disobedient to the Apostolical Epistle, note that man, (...), put a
mark upon him, that is, let him be publicly censured, Let him be separated
from you, says the Syriak, and then have no company with him, and all this
that he may be ashamed, which must needs be by some public censure or black
mark put upon him.

3. Let him be to thee as an Heathen; if it be meant of keeping no civil
company, he must show us that the Jews of old were and Christians under the new
Testament are forbidden to keep civil company with Heathens and those that
are without the Church. He goes about to prove that the phrase is taken from
the practice of the Jews in that age, page 4. But how does he prove it? He
cites some places to prove that the Israelites might not marry with the
Canaanites, but he does not prove that they might not keep civil company with
any of the Heathens. There was no such favor nor fellowship permitted between
the Israelites and the Canaanites, as between the Israelites and other Gentiles
who came among them from other Lands, as Tostatus notes in Matthew. 26. quaest.
43. The reason was because God had destinat the Canaanites to utter
destruction, and that the whole Land of Canaan should be given to the children
of Israel. Only some few by special dispensation were spared as the
Gibeonites because Joshua and the Princes had sworn unto them, and Rahab with
her kindred because she saved the spies. But such extraordinary cases excepted,
the Israelites ought not to permit any of the Canaanites to live, nor receive
them though they had been willing to be circumcised as Tostatus there thinks.
However that great distance and alienation in point of fellowship between the
Israelites and the Canaanites, was not qua Heathens, but qua Canaanites,
otherwise the children of Israel had been obliged to root out other Nations as
well as the Canaanites. Yea the Law puts an express difference between the
Nations, in so much that some of them were not to be abominate, though others
were, Deuteronomy. 23. 7. Thou shall not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother:
thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his Land.
The very Canaanites themselves were by the Law, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 11. to have so
much favor as an offer of peace, which if any of their Cities had accepted,
that City was not to be cut off, but the people thereof were to be tributaries,
and to serve Israel, and so permitted to live among them.

The last of his citations makes very much against him, namely, Acts 21. 28,
29. where the Jews of Asia do accuse Paul for bringing Greeks into the
Temple. For they had seen before with him in the City Trophimus an Ephesian,
whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the Temple. Mark here Paul is
not challenged for conversing familiarly with a Greek, but only for bringing
him into the Temple; and without all doubt the malice of his adversaries did
catch at every advantage which they could have against him. I cannot but admire
how M. Prynne could cite this place to prove that the Jews might not converse
nor keep civil company with the Heathens, since it proves the very contrary,
that the Jews might have civil, but no religious fellowship with Heathens.
And whereas he adds that the Jews had no dealing or conversation with the
Samaritans, Joh. 4. 9. Luke 9. 52, 53. I answer, the reason was because the
Jewish Church had excommnnicated and anathematized for ever the Samaritans, who
being once circumcised and having received the book of the Law, did afterward
hinder the building of the house of the Lord. This Excommunication of the
Cuthites or Samaritans most solemnly performed you may find in Pirke R.
Ecclesiae, cap. 38. More of this elsewhere. Here I only touch it, to show that
this also of the Samaritans makes against him.

4. It is certain that the Jews had civil company and conversation with
Heathens. For Solomon's servants and Hirams servants were both together. 1 Kings
5. 18. 2 Chr. 2. 8. yea, 2 Chr. 2. 17, 18. Solomon numbered of strangers or
heathens in the Land of Israel, a hundred fifty and three thousand and six
hundred. Could there be so many of them and employed also in the building of
the Temple, and yet no civil company kept with them? Nehemiah in the Court of
Artaxerxes, and Daniel with his companions in the court of Nebuchadnenar had
civil company with Heathens, but religious company with them they would have
none. We find the King of Edom in fellowship with Iehoshaphat and Iehoram, 2
Kings 3. And the Merchants of Tire were permitted to come into Jerusalem, and
there to fell all manner of ware unto the children of Judah, only they were
forbidden to do it upon the Sabbath day, Nehem. 13. 16, 20, 21. L'Empereur de
legibus Ebraeorum forensibus page 180, 181. puts it out of controversy,
that in Christ's time there were many Heathens in the Land of Canaan with whom
the Jews did converse and dwell together; and that Christ found in those
places where he preached both Jews and Gentiles. Istis locis inter istos
commorabantur Gentiles, qui magistrorum placitis se astringi passi non sunt.
And a little after, Nec enim Israelitas ab alienigenarum urbibus abstinuisse,
Josephus Indicat. And that long before that time there was a mutual conversing
of Jews and Gentiles, I gather from 1 Kings 20. 34. Thou shall make streets
for thee in Damascus as my father made in Samaria, meaning for trade and
commerce.

I will here anticipate a great objection which may be made against me, from
Acts 10. 28. Ye know that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to
keep company or come unto one of another Nation. This might seem to make more
for Mr Prynnes exposition, then all the places cited by himself. But I answer,
for the better understanding of that place, first of all observe what Drusius
Quaest. and resp. lib. 2. quaest. 67. tells us out of Elias in Thesbite: The
Jews had an old law against drinking Wine with Gentiles or Heathens, Lata
videlicet eo tempore quo gentes vinum libabant in sacris, the Law was made at
that time when the Gentiles used a praelibation of Wine in their idolatrous
solemnities: whereupon the wise men of the Jews fearing lest Heathen men
should give to Jews that Wine which had been dedicated to Idols did forbid the
Jews to drink Wine with Heathens: which (as other Statutes of their wise men)
the Jews did religiose religiously observe. Mark we hence, 1. It was not a
general received custom among the Jews, in no case to eat or drink with
Heathens; else it had been unnecessary and supervacaneous to forbid the
drinking of Wine with Heathens, exceptio affirmat regulam in non exceptis. 2.
It was for a religious and conscientious reason, propter (...) idololatriae,
for fear of pertaking with Idolatry, and (...) (...) civil respects, that
they were forbidden to drink Wine with the Gentiles. The same I say of their
shunning to eat with them, for the Heathens used also a dedicating of their
meats to Idols, 1 Cor. 10. 27.

Secondly, observe Peter adds immediately: but God has showed me that I
should not call any man common or unclean: meaning, so as not to keep company
with him because of his Gentilisme or uncircumcision, or because of his eating
of meats which were unclean by the ceremonial Law, as Ludovicus de Dieu does
rightly give the meaning, understanding, not moral, but only ceremonial
uncleanness to be there spoken of; for many men under the Gospel are still to
be looked upon and avoided as morally unclean. But God had taught Peter by
abrogating the ceremonial differences of meats in the vision, that the
ceremonial Law which was the partition wall between Jews and Gentiles, was
now to be taken away: so that the Gentiles should be no longer called dogs, as
Matthew. 15. 26. neither were the Disciples to be forbidden any longer to go
into the way of the Gentiles, Matthew. 10. 5. Henc forth no man should be called
holy because of his circumcision, no man unclean because of his uncircumcision.

This being the meaning, it follows that the unlawfulness of eating and
companying with an Heathen mentioned Act. 10. 28. must not be so understood, as
if bare civil fellowship had been unlawful; but it must be understood, first,
in reference to the moral Law, that is for avoiding the danger of Idolatry in
eating or drinking that which Idolatrous Heathens had sacrificed to Idols, as
has been just now cleared. Secondly, in reference to the Ceremonial Law, or
of such fellowship as was contrary to the ceremonial Law, in eating together
with Heathens of meats legally unclean, such as were represented to Peter in
the vision, and he commanded to eat what was formerly unclean to him.
Otherwise when the Gentiles did not eat any thing which the Jews were
forbidden to eat, it was lawful for the Jews to eat with the Gentiles says
Tostatus in 2. Paral. 6. Quest. 21. So likewise Grotius de Jure Belli ac pacis
lib. 2. cap. 15. Sect. 9. where he refers the Jews their not eating with
the Heathens, to the Law of meats or the peculiaris victus which was prescribed
to the Jews. But otherwise the Law did not make it unlawful for them to eat
with any of another Nation: which he thinks is proved by Christ's own example
who took a drink of water from the woman of Samaria, being yet most observant
of the Law. That the unlawfulness of eating with the Heathens was understood
in reference to the ceremonial Law, I prove, from Gal. 2. 12. 14. Peter having
before eaten with the Gentiles, to avoid the scandal of some Jews that came
from James, did withdraw and separate himself from the believing Gentiles:
What? to keep no more any civil company with them. I hope no man will imagine
that. But the Text expounds it self verse. 14. If thou being a Jew, live
after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou
the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? This was Peter's fault, that having
formerly lived as the Gentiles, that is, eating with them all sorts of meats
freely, thinking himself liberate from the Yoke of the ceremonial Law,
afterward he withdrew and separated himself from that manner of fellowship with
the Centiles, and bound up himself to live as do the Jews, and to observe
the distinction of meats according to the Law. And in so doing, whiles he
avoided the scandal of the Jews, he gave a greater scandal to the Gentiles
in compelling them by the authority of his example to Judaize, and to think
the ceremonial Law necessary.

Thirdly, The foresaid place Act. 10. is to be understood of such fellowship as
was not merely civil, but religious and sacred: as may appear, 1. by the
exposition formerly given of these words, God has showed me that I should not
call any man common or unclean. 2. by the invitation of the men that were sent
from Cornelius to Peter who did not call him to civil but to sacred fellowship
Act. 10. 22. And they said, Cornelius the Conturion, a just man and one that
fears God, and of good report among all the Nation of the Jews, was warned
from God by an holy Angel, to send for thee into his house and to hear words
of thee. 3. Peter calls in the men and lodges them; that being a civil
fellowship, he does it freely, v. 23. but when he comes to Cornelius and those
that were assembled with him, to hear words from Peter, here was the case of
conscience, and here Peter begins to apologize v. 28. ye knew how that it is
an unlawful thing, etc. The Syriak has it thus, ye know that it is not
lawful for a man that is a Jew to join himself unto a man that is a stranger,
who is not a son of his generation: as it were intimating a religious and
Church fellowship. 4. That which gave offense to them of the circumcision at
Jerusalem. was, that they heard Peter had so gone in to men uncircumcised, that
they had also received the word of God from him Act. 11. 1. 3. And as soon as
they were satisfied in that point, that God had given unto the Gentiles
repentance unto life verse. 18. they held their Peace, and made no further
scruple concerning eating with them.

I hope I have sufficiently answered the strongest objection which can be made
against that which I did begin to prove, namely, that the Jews might and did
keep civil company and fellowship with Heathens. Which that I may now further
consirme, let it be observed with Schindlerus in lexic. pentaglo p. 297. that
there were two sorts of Proselytes among the Jews. Some that were circumcised
and received the Law of Moses; and such a one was even as a Jew, and was called
Proselytus justitiae or faederis, a righteous or a true Proselyte, or a
Proselyte of the Covenant. Others, that did only renounce ldolatry and keep
the seven precepts given to the sons of Noah, not being circumcised nor
keeping the Law of Moses, were permitted to dwell with the Jews, and therefore
such a one was called Proselytus portae or Proselytus incola, a Proselyte of
the Gate, or a Proselyte indweller, who dwelt within their Gates. See for the
same thing L'Empereur de legibus Ebraeorum forensibus page 72 Buxtorflexic.
Rabbin. p. 408. 409. Grotius de Jure belli acpacis lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 16.
Henr. Vorstius observe. ad chronol. R. Ganz. page 279. Georgius Genzius in
annot. ad Maimon. canon. Ethic. p. 91. 92. To the same purpose, Master
Ainsworth annot. in Genesis 9. 4. and on Exodus 12. 45. and on Levit. 22. 10. has
noted out of the Hebrew writers: that such of the Heathens as did observe the
seven precepts given to the Sons of Noah, though they were not circumcised,
neither did observe the Ordinances of the ceremonial Law, nor were admitted to
the holy things of the Children of Israel, yet they were permitted to cohabit
and converse with the people of God in the holy Land. And that it was so, may
be proved from Levit. 25. 6. 45. 47. (where the Chaldee has an uncircumcised
indweller) Deuteronomy. 14. 21. yea, such a one might dwell in the Priests house Lev.
22. 10. The Jews receive no Proselyte now except one that undertakes to keep
the whole Law to the least jote, as Doctor Buxtorf informs us in the place
last cited: and so they are a great deal more strict in reference to the
Gentiles then the Ancient Jews were. Notwithstanding they do without scruple
familiarly converse and keep company with Gentiles who keep not the last of the
seven precepts which bind (as they think) all the Sons of Noah, namely that
concerning the not eating of blood. How much more may we suppose that the
Ancient Jews did keep civil company and fellowship with such Gentiles as did
observe all these seven precepts? And this comparison the Jews have made
between themselves and the Gentiles in reference to the Law of Moses. It is our
inheritance, not theirs: as for them, let them observe the seven precepts. Exc.
Gem. Sanhedrin. cap. 7. Sect. 6. So that the Jews were not scandalized at the
Gentiles their not observing of the whole Law of Moses, not being circumcised,
etc. but at their not keeping of those seven precepts, which were also a part
of the Law of Moses. This to me appears to be a chief reason (if not the
reason) why the Synod of the Apostles and Elders at Ierusa. did impose upon the
Churches of the Gentiles no other burden of Jewish rites and Ceremonies, but
to abstain from blood and things strangled: they did not impose circumcision,
nor holy days, nor the like: because that which was intended was, to draw
together the believers of the Jews and the believers of the Gentiles into a
familiar conversation, that they might live together and eat together without
scandal: and this could not be, except the beleiving Gentiles should observe
the seven precepts which were given not only to the posterity of Abraham, but
to the posterity of Noah; of which precepts one did forbid the eating of blood
Genesis 9. 4. (and under that is comprehended also the eating of things strangled)
Now there was no doubt of the beleiving Gentiles their observing of the other
six precepts which the Hebrews say were observed from Adam to Noah: the first
against Idolatry, 2. against blasphemy, 3. against shedding of blood, 4.
against uncleanness or unlawful copulations, 5. against Rapine or Robbery, 6.
for executing judgment and inflicting punishment upon malefactors. All the
question was of the seventh and last against eating of blood, which the
beleiving Gentiles (though they knew it to be older then the ceremonial Law or
circumcision it self, and to belong to all the posterity of Noah, yet) knew to
be temporary and not perpetual, and so at the abrogation of the other
ceremonies, and propagation of the Gospel to the Gentiles, thought themselves
free from that, as well as other Ceremonies. On the other part, it was a
principle among the Jews, that they ought not to converse familiarly with any
of the Gentiles, except such as observe the seven precepts given to the Sons
of Noah. Wherefore the Synod of the Apostles and Elders thought good that the
beleiving Gentiles should so far condescend to the weakness of the Jews
(not fully instructed concerning Christian liberty, and the abrogation of the
old ceremonies) as to observe for a time that precept against eating blood, as
well as the other precepts given to the Sons of Noah; to the intent that the
Jews and Gentiles might Peaceably and familiarly cohabite and converse
together: for though the Gentiles did not observe the other ordinances and
ceremonies of the Jews: yet observing those seven precepts, they were free to
converse familiarly with the Jews. Schindlerus in his Lexicon pentagl. page
298. land page 1530 seems to have had the same notion; for he says the
Apostles and Elders would not impose circumcision and the keeping of the Law of
Moses, but they imposed some things not unlike to the precepts given to the
Sons of Noah. I return to that distinction of the two sorts of Proselytes.
The one had the name of Ger tzedek a Proselyte of righteousness, and Ger
berith, a Proselyte of the Covenant. The other was called Ger toschav, a
Prosclyte indweller and Ger schagnar, a Proselyte of the Gate, qui intra
portas, inter Judaeos scilicet habitabat, who dwelt within the Gates, to wit
among the Jews says Matthias Martinius in Lexic. philol. page 2922. This
Proselyte indweller was not called nor esteemed as one of the Jews, being no
Church Member, nor admitted to any religious or Church Commnnion with the
Jews, but he was still esteemed and reckoned as one of the uncircumcised
Gentiles. Yet the Jews did keep civil company and fellowship with such a one,
as with a neighbor and a inhabitant of the same City, or Land.

And if the Jews had not been free to keep civil company with Heathens or
Infidells, yet Christians are expressly allowed to do so. 1 Cor. 10. 27. If
any of them that believe not, bid you to a Feast, and ye be disposed to go,
whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake; and
Chapter 5. 10. 11. 12. the Apostle permits Christians to company and eat with
Fornicators, Covetous, Extortioners, or Idolaters, who are no ChurchMembers,
but by no means with scandalous Brethren. I do not dispute whether any more
liberty of this kind is granted to Christians, then peradventure was granted to
the Jews. Yet I am sure a great measure of the liberty of civil fellowship
with Heathens was granted to the Jews also.

It must needs follow from that which has been said, that, Let him be unto
thee as an Heathen man and a Publican, is not a casting out from mere civil
fellowship and company, but from religious and Church Fellowship. This agrees
well with that passage in Josephus contra Appionem lib. 2. Whoever (of the
Gentiles) are willing to come and live under our Law, it does freely receive
them esteeming Communion to consist not only in origination or descent, but
also in choice of life. But as for those (of the Gentiles) who come
occasionally among us, our Law does not admit them into our solemn or sacred
Assemblies, but it appoints to communicate unto them all such things as they
need, as fire, water meat, also to show them the way, and to let none of them
be unburied. (So likewise Publicans noted for impiety and injustice were
permitted to be City Members, but not owned for Church Members) Grotius de Jure
Belli ac pacis lib. 2. c. 15. Sect. 9. holds that it was lawful for the Jews,
not only to have company and commerce with Heathens, but to do them good and
to enter in League and Covenant with them, such only excepted as the Law did
accurse, namely the seven Nations in Canaan, the Amalekites, Ammonites and
Moabites. He brings among other things the example of the Asmonites, who as
they were themselves skilled in the Law, so with the approbation both of
Priests and People, they made a Covenant with the Lacedaemonians and Romans:
yea publicly prayed for them. Learned Master Seldom de Jure not. and Gent.
lib. 2. c. 3 does not only confirm what has been said before of the
Proselyti Domicilii, Heathens not circumcised nor keeping the Law of Moses, but
observing the seven precepts given to the Sons of Noah, and that such were
permitted to dwell together with the Children of Israel; but he further tells
us out of Maimonides that though when the Jewish Republike did flourish and
when they were sui Juris, no strangers were permitted to dwell among them
except such as did renounce Idolatry and keep the seven precepts, yet after the
captivity and under the Romans, the Jews did allow to themselves a common
commerce and civil conversing even with such Gentiles, as had not renounced
the Pagan or Idolatrous worship; and as for such of the Gentiles, as the Jews
did observe to be good men whom they called ex piis e Gentibus mundi, such as
Cornelius the Centurion, to whom the Jews themselves gave a good estimony of
these he says that though they were not formally admitted and received as
Proselyte indwellers were wont to be (that formal reception of Proselyti
Domicilii having ceased in those later times) yet he puts it out of doubt that
the Jews were willing that such Gentiles should dwell among them.

Add hereunto that which Gul. Vorstius annot. in Maimon. de fundam^legis cap.
5. Sect. 9. observes ou^ of Beth Joseph de Idololat. and out of aboda zara,
that a Heathen man was permitted to be Phi^tian to a Jew, provided that he
should not entice him to Idolatry: and that a Jew also was permitted to be
Physician to a Gentile, for which purpose they alleged the example of Moses
who (as their Tradition told them) did practice medicine in Egypt.

Furthermore when Master Prynne understands nothing by those words Let him be
unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publican, but avoid civil fellowship and
keep no familiar company with him, and expounds it also by 1 Cor. 5. 11. with
such a one not to eat (which he still conceives to be only meant of avoiding
civil fellowship) and by 2. Io. 10. receive him not into thy house. He is
twice out, both because the Jews did keep civil company with Heathens which
has been proved: and also because (if we believe the Jewish writters
concerning the customs of their Nation) the Rabbis or wise men among them did
not keep familiar fellowship nor civil company with the Plebeians of the Jews
themselves: they were forbidden to eat and drink with or among the Plebeians.
Maimen de fundam. legis cap. 5. Sect. 13. neither might they converse in the
paths nor come into the houses of the Plebeians. Ibid. Sect. 14. Gul. Vorstius
in his annot. page 73. adds a passage in Misua that a wise man might neither
lodge with a Plebeian nor receive a Plebeian to lodge with him. Nevertheless a
wise man was permitted to converse not only civilly but frequently with an
Heathen man, for which see Master Seldom de Jure not. and Gent. lib. 6. cap.
10. quoniam nihil mali ex Gentilium consuetudine viro scientiori im^inere
censebant. So that in Master Pryn^ sense, all the Plebeians of the Jews
themselves were as Heathens and Publicans, or civilly excommunicated by their
wise men.

Wherefore we must needs distinguish a two fold communion or fellowship among
the Jews, one civil, another Ecclesiastical; It was the shutting out from
the Ecclesiastical communion of the Jews, which Christ alludes to Mat. 18.
for beside the distinct notions of the Jewish Church and the Jew State (of
which before) Is. Abrabanel de capitc fidei cap. 6. speaking of certain
fundamental Articles which the Jewish Church did believe, says, they were
intended to be Articles of Judaisme, so that he that should believe these
should be in the communion of Israel: and Ib. cap. 3. speaking of an Article
concerning the coming of the Messiah, he moves a doubt about it, because Rabbi
Hillell who denies it, was not excluded from the communion of the Law, for the
Gema^a gives him the Title of Rabbi. When he comes to the solution of this
doubt cap. 14. he cleares Rabbi Hillell, as not denying that Article. But all
this intimates that for heresy there was a shutting out from Ecclesiastical
communion: Or that an heretical apostat Jew was unto them as an Heathen man;
and therefore they were permitted to take usury as from strangers or Heathens,
so from an apostat Jew, quia fratris nomen exuerat says Master Seldom de Jure
not. and Gent. lib. 6 c. 10. In Tzemach David edit. Hen. Uorst. page 67. it is
said that the chief of the Heretics were Tzadok and Baythos, who denying
rewards and punishments after this life, exiverunte communione (vel caetu
Israelis) they went out from the Ecclesiastical communion of Israel.

This is good reason to say of a son of Israel, if he be a son of Belial,
let him be to thee as an Heathen, that is, esteem him as profane, and as lost
as an Heathen; have no more Church communion with him then with an Heathen. And
by this time I suppose it does fully appear to the intelligent Reader that
some uncircumcised Heathens were admitted in to the civil fellowship, and some
Israelites continued not in the Ecclesiastical fellowship of ihe Jews: which
overturneth the whole strength of Mr Prynnes answer to our argument from Matthew.
18 But once more, (for I have thought good to insist the longer upon this
point, because much depends upon it.) Let him be to thee as an Heathen, does
forbid Ecclesia^icall communion, not civil company except secondarily and as a
consequent of Excommunication, and for spiritual respects and ends (as I shall
show anon) but it is not meant of abstaining from mere civil company and
fellowship: because the Jews were permitted to keep civil company and
fellowship with Heathens, even any civil company which did not encroach upon
Religion, or had appearance of an ensnarement into Idolatry, and in that
respect (as participating of Religious fellowship) became unlawful. This is
the point I have been proving, and which I will yet further prove out of Maim
mides de Idolalotria cap* 9. That one Chapter is sufficient to (...) the
present question. Thus it begins. Three days before the feasts (or holydaies)
of Heathens that worship Idols, we are forbidden to buy from them, or to sell
unto them any durable thing; to take or give any thing in lend; to take or make
payment of that which was given in lend upon writ, or pledge; but what was
given in lend upon words only, it is lawful to exact; because this seems to
be taken out of their hands. It is also lawful to sell unto them, that which
can not last, as green herbs or anything sodden; and that ever until their
holy day. You see it was lawful among the Jews to buy and sell, borrow and
lend, to make contracts, with Heathens, yea with Idolatrous Heathens; only in
some (not in all) things there was a restraint upon them, and that but three
days before the Heathen sestivities. Then follows Sect. 2. This has place in
the land of the Israelites: but in the other lands, it is not forbidden except
upon their holy day. If any man transgress, by having trade or commerce with
them, during that space of three days, it is lawful (though) to use the ware:
but if any man trade with them upon their holyday, the things are forbidden to
be used. It is unlawful also to send a gift to an Heathen man upon his holy
day: unless it be known that (...) (...) not (...) the worship of Idols,
neither ser^eth them. But if some (...) m^n upon his Holyday send a gift to an
Israelite, let him not take it from him, (...) it be suspected that h^ will be
offended. Nevertheless^ he shall not use it, until it be known that the
Heathen man does not worship Idols nor esteem them to be Gods. Observe 1. that
the things mentioned in the first Section, though unlawful to the ^ewes in
their own Land, three days before the Heath^nish (...), yet they held them not
unlawful in other Lands. 2. They held it lawfll for a Jew to send a gift to an
Heathen man, or to receive a gift from him, so that it were not upon the
Heathenish festivity. 3. Yea in some cases it was permitted to a Jew to send a
gift to an Heathen man, upon the very Heathen festivity, (to wit, if he knew
that Heathen man to be no worshipper of Idols) as likewise to receive a gift
from him (though upon the holy day) for avoiding of offense.

Sect. 4. reckons among the Heathenish festivities a day set apart by them
for coronation of a King, or in memory of a man's nativity, deliverance out of
danger, or the like. Then it is added Sect. 5. But with those Idolaters who
spend that day in mirth and gladness, eating and drinking, and observe that
day whether for custom or for the Kings honor, nevertheless hold it not for
a holy day, it is lawful to have commerce and trade. When conversing with
Heathens did not entrench upon Religion, they could do it without scruple,
even upon the Heathens good days or solemnities of joy. Then Sect. 8. Is
Israelites dwell among Heathens with whom they have made a Cov^nt, it is
lawful to sell arms to the Kings servants and to his military forces, etc. It
is unlawful to enter into a Town in which Idolatry is practiced: it is lawful
to come out of it. But if the Idol be without the Town, it is also lawful to
enter in it. If the Jews might dwell among and enter into league and covenant
with Heathens, yea enter into the Towns of Idolaters, when the Idol was not
in Town, then they held it not unlawful to have any civil company with
Heathens. It follows Sect. 11. It is lawful to go to the markets or faires of
Heathens, and to buy from them beasts, menservants, maidservants, though they
be yet Heathens: also houses fields, vineyards. Also for writing (contracts) it
is permitted to go to their judicial courts.

If it be objected that Sect. 12. does forbid an Israelite to come to the
banquet of a Heathen, which he has made for his son or for his daughter; I
answer from that very place. For lest this should be taken for a prohibition of
civil fellowship, Maimonides did add these words. Now this intervall is
appointed for Idolatry: for it is said, and one call thee, and thou eat of his
Sacrifice, and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and they go a
wboring after their Gods: citing Exodus 34. 15, 16.

From all which I conclude, that Christ's words, relating to the Jewish custom,
Let him be to thee as a Heathen man, cannot be meant (as Mr Prynne would have
them) of avoiding mere civil company and fellowship; for as much as it was
not held unlawful among the Jews to have civil company and commerce with
Heathens. Sure the Jews of our age are far from holding such a thing
unlawful.

Yea so far I am unsatisfied with Mr Prynnes interpretation, that I verily
believe (and so do some others) a part of the intendment of these words, Let
him be to thee as an Heathen man and a Publican, is to hold forth the
lawfulness, yea the obligation of performing all natural (and in diverse
cases moral) duties to a person Excommunicated: I mean that the Text does
intimate thus much. As upon the one hand the contumacious offender who will not
hear the Church, is to be used no better than an Heathen or a profane
Publican, and is not to be admitted to any Ordinance, except such as Heathens
and profane Publicans are and may be admitted unto; So upon the other hand,
let him have no worse usage and entertainment, then those very Heathens and
Publicans, unto whom all natural and some moral duties are performed,
notwithstanding they be Heathens and Publicans. For the Apostle commands
Christians to be subject even to Heathen Magistrates, servants to honor and be
subject to heathen and ungodly Masters, the wife not to depart from the husband
because he believes not. So that this rule of Christ, Matthew. 18. 17. is so
full and perfect, as to teach us, as well what fellowship is lawful with such
a one, as what fellowship is not lawful to be kept with him. I do not deny
but that (according to the ordinary rule) fellowship with an excommunicate
person in meat, drink, familiarity, and salutations, is unlawful, as well as
in the Sacrament and prayer, according to the received rule:

Si pro delictis, anathema quis efficiatur;
Os, or are, vale, communio, mensa negatur.
And the Scripture forbidding to eat with such a one, or to have company with
him, or to bid him God speed, will reach as far. Nevertheless there are
diverse excepted or reserved cases in which the performance of natural duties
unto and keeping of civil company with an excommunicate person is allowed. The
exception made from the rule is this:

Haee anathema quidem faciunt, ne possit obesse:
Utile, lex, humile, res ignorata, necesse.
Utile, as when a man seeks payment of debt from an excommunicate person.
Lex, because the law allows husband and wife to company together, though the
one of them be excommunicate. Humile, because children may and ought to do the
duties of children, and servants the duty of servants, and subjects the duty of
subjects, and vassals the duty of vassals, and soldiers the duty of soldiers,
in companying with submitting unto, honoring and obeying of their
excommunicated Parents, Masters, Kings, Lords, Commanders. R^s ignorata, when
he that companieth with an excommunicate person, does not know that he is
excommunicate. Necesse, as when a man passes through the Land or is under the
power of excommunicate persons, or some such way is drawn into a necessity of
speaking and companying with them. All which is most agreeable to this
expression, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publican, and to the
nature of Excommunication, which does not break asunder natural or moral,
but spiritual and ecclesiastical bonds. If it be asked why then are we
forbidden to eat with an excommunicate person, or to bid him God speed; I
answer, these things are not forbidden but under a spiritual notion and for a
spiritual end, that the offender may be ashamed and humbled, that others may
not be deceived by countenancing of him or companying with him, and that our
eating with him or saluting of him may not be interpreted as a conniving at, or
complying with his sins, or as a sign of Christian fellowship with a
scandalous person formerly called a brother* sinally that God may be the more
glorified, wickedness the more ashamed, others the more edified, the sinner
the more abas^d, our selves the better kept from snares by avoiding of all
appearance of evil. Otherwise setting aside these and such like spiritual
considerations and respects, I do aver that Excommunication has nothing to
do with the avoiding of civil company qua civil, that is under a civil or
politicalln otion.

Thus we have the negative part of the rule of Christ. Now to the positive
part. What is it to be as an Heathen and a Publican? He must not be worse used
in natural or civil things, yet he mu^ be used in the same manner as an
Heathen and a Publican, in spiritual things.

Wherefore, Let him be as an Heathen man, implies four things:

1. I have proved that Heathens were not permitted to come into the utter Court
of the Temple, which the children of Israel did come into, only they might
come and worship in the (...) or atrium Gentium; and when they were at any time
brought into the Temple, its challenged both by God, (...) (...) ^9. and by the
people of the Jews, Acts 21. 28. 2. H^ns, though sojourning among the children
of Israel, and dwelling within their gates might not eat of the Passover
Exodus 12. 43, 45. where the civil fellowship was allowed, partaking of the
Passover was forbidden. 3. No Heathen man, no not he that was in the Priests
house, might ca^e of an offering of the holy things, Levit. 22. 10, 13. 4. A
Sac^ifice was not accepted from the hand of an Heathen L^it. 22. 25. those that
came from a far Country to pray and worship before the Temple, if they had
brought out of their own Country, or had bought in the Land of Israel,
beasts, or Bread, or Oil, or Frankincence, or the like, and brought any of
these for an Oblation, it was not accepted from their hand as Tostatus in 2.
paral. 6. quest. 21. rightly observes. Only he collecteth from Ezra 6. 8, 10.
that an Heathen might give to the Priests money or expenses to buy Sacrifices,
and to offer them in the Temple.
Fifthly, and generally, the Heathens had no part or portion with Gods people,
Nehem. 2. 20. they were not within but without the Church, being aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. So that, Let him be
as an Heathen must reach thus far, Let him no more partake in the Ordinances
then an Heathen, have no more Church Communion with him then with an Heathen,
let him be no more acknowledged for a Church member than an Heathen. And good
reason; he has made himself as an Heathen, yea worse than an Heathen, Romans 2.
25. If thou be a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.
Yea a scandalous and profane Church member is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy
5. 8. 1 Cor. 5. 1.

This fivefold restraint of Heathens from the Temple, from the Passover, from
eating of an Offering, from bringing an Oblation unto the Lord, and generally
from all Church fellowship, did lie even upon those Heathens who did cohabit
and familiarly converse with the children of Israel, who are called proselyti
domicilii: and no Heathen man was free of such restraint, except proselyti
justitiae, who were circumcised and made members of the Jewish Church, and had
the name of Jews.

Finally, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, may have a Commentary from 1 Samuel 26. 19. where David curserh his enemies before the Lord, because they had
made him as an Heathen man: they have driven me out this day from abiding in
the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other Gods. He did not reckon
his banishment, want of civil liberties, cutting off from the civil
fellowship and company of the children of Israel, in comparison of that which
was far worse to him, and a great deal heavier to be borne, namely, that he
was rejected and repudiate from spiritual fellowship with Gods people, from
partaking in the holy Ordinances, from coming to the Sanctuary, from the
Church privileges, that his persecution was materially and substantially an
Excommunication, and qua Excommunication it was more grievous to him then qua
persecution.

I suppose it now appears that Let him be to thee as an Heathen man, is a
shutting out not from civil, but from sacred fellowship. The other branch, Let
him be to thee as a Publican, I have before said enough of it. This only I
add. There were among the Jews two sorts of Publicans: some were good and
just men, exacting no more then what was appointed them; others were unjust and
extortioners, and thereby made infamous. The former sort the Hebrews have
professed they were willing to converse civilly withal, as members of the same
Commonwealth. See L'Empereur de legibus Ebraeorum forensibus, page 272. But
when Christ says, Let him be to thee as a Publican, he means the impious and
unjust Publican only, as the same learned Antiquary there says. And so when
our Savior bids us esteem such a one not only as an Heathen man, but as a
Publican, he means that he is not only to be denied fellowship in the holy
things, but further made infamous among the people; for the name Publican is
used to signify the worst of men, Matthew. 5. 46, 47. and in the Gospel it is
said, Publicans and Sinners, Publicans and Harlots, as was noted before. So
Hierome upon Matthew. 18. 17. understands the name of Publicans secundum
Tropologiam, for such as are given to unlawful gains, deceits, thefts,
perjuries, and such like abominable wickednesses. Wherefore we must not think
that for civil respects of Tax-gathering or the like the Jews refused to
keep civil company or fellowship with the Publicans. For we read in Exc. Gem.
Sanbedrin cap. 3. sect. 3. that though he that was a shepherd, as such, was
unfit to be a witness, yet he that was simply a Publican (that is, as I. Coch.
says in his Annotation, a Publican who is not convict of exacting more then is
appointed by Law) or a Publican as a Publican is not forbidden to be witness.
Where it is also added, that the father of R. Sira had the office of a Publican
thirteen years. Hence we see that a Publican were he a Jew or Gentile,
provided he were a just Publican, his testimony had faith and credit in
Judgment; How then can it be supposed that the Jews did not so much as keep
any civil company with such a one? We must therefore understand that the Jews
refused to have any fellowship with the impious and unjust Publicans, as with
Church members, and this the Jews did because of their scandalous ungodliness
and unrighteousness.

Wherefore to be esteemed as a Publican was esteemed among the Jews,
comprehends these three things. 1. To be esteemed as the worst of men,
impious, abominable, execrable, infamous, and as it were publici odii victimae,
for so were the Publicans esteemed among the Jews. Dr Buxtorf^lexic. Chald.
Talm. and Rabbin. page 1065. tells us that where in Sanhedrin fol. 44. 2. it is
said of a certain Publican, the Gloss expounds it thus, Of a certain wicked
man. 2. Not to hold or keep with such a one, the religious Christian
fellowship, which we keep with Church members; yea, and (for religious ends,
and in spiritual respects, as was said before) not to keep with such a one, so
much as that civil fellowship which we are permitted to keep with Pagans and
unbelievers, with whom when bidden to a feast, we may go and eat together as
the Apostle expressly resolves, but with him that is called a brother when
scandalous and obstinate, (and therefore justly made as a Publican) we may not
so much as eat, as the same Apostle teaches, wherein those are ever to be
excepted, who are tied by natural relations to perform natural and humane
duties to the party excommunicate and made as a Publican, as the wife to the
husband, the children to their parents.

In both these respects, Let him be as a Publican, superaddeth somewhat, and
says more then was in that other part, Let him be as an Heathen man. The third
thing which I conceive to be meant by being esteemed as a Publican, is
coincident with was meant by Let him be as an Heathen, that is, let him be kept
that which back from communion and fellowship with the Church in the holy
things. Mr Prynne brought a parabolicall argument concerning the Publicans
going up to the Temple to pray. That devout and religious Publicans, whether
Jews or Gentiles did go up into the Temple to pray, I make no question, and
such a one is the Publican in the Parable; yea, if we mark the Pharisees own
words he speaks of that Publican as one of the best and most religious
Publicans Luke 18. 11. God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
extortioners unjust, adulterers, (...) even as this Publican, The vulgar Latin
has it velut etiam hic publicanus, as likewise this Publican, making the
publican to be one of those extortioners, unjust, adulterers. But it is a
mistake of the Text, which plainly holds forth a disjunctive, not a copulative
sense. The Pharisee is further declaring what himself was not, and the
disjunctive ^ intimates some new matter. Therefore the Syriak and Arabik has
it, neither as this publican. Erasmus, aut etiam ut hic publicanus. Arias
Monntanus, aut and ut hic publicanus. and the English, or even as this
publican. Many of the publicans were extortioners, unjust, adulterers, but the
Pharisee thought he had not said enough when he had preferred himself to these,
therefore he adds this (...), or even as this publican, which is a rising and
heightning of his speech, as if he had said, God, I thank thee that I am more
holy and righteous then the best of the publicans, who yet are not (as most of
them are) extortioners, unjust, adulterers. But that profane, unjust,
scandalous, infamous, publicans whether Jews or Gentiles, were allowed or
permitted to come to the Temple, to the Worship, Prayer and Sacrifices, among
the rest of the people of the Jews, I deny it, and Master Prynne has said
nothing to prove it. These only are the publicans meant of when Christ says,
let him be unto thee as a publican. Now this sort of publicans, if they were
allowed any thing in reference to the Temple, it was but to stand afar off in
the Intermurale or atrium Gentium as Heathens might do. If the religious
publican stood afar off, how much more the profane infamous publican? That
such as were publicly scandalous, infamous for impiety, and esteemed the worst
of men (which I have showed to be meant by let him be unto thee as a publican)
were admitted into the Temple as much as the rest of the people of the Jews,
or had fellowship with the Church in the holy things, I do not believe, I have
proved the contrary from Philo and Josephus.

CHAP. IV. A confutation of Erastus and Bilson their Interpretation of Math.
18. 15, 16, 17. as likewise of Doctor Sutliffe his Gloss differing some what
from theirs.
AS for that other Erastian Gloss upon Matthew. 18. 17. that Christ means of
going to the orthodox Magistrate being of the same true religion, (and that
this is the sense of those words Tell the Church) but if the Brother who has
done us wrong will not hear nor obey that Magistrate, then let him he unto
thee as an Heathen man and a publican, that is, thou may prosecute him, as
thou would prosecute an Heathen man or a Publican before an extrinsecall
Tribunal, such as at that time the Roman Emperors was to the Jews. See
Erastus these. 41. wherein he is followed by Bishop Bilson of the perpetual
Government of Christ's Church cap. 4. This Gloss has been justly rejected by
many learned men. The first Argument which I bring against it, is that it is
wide from the scope of the Text, yea prejudgeth and even overthrows the great
thing which is principally intended by Jesus Christ in this place, Camero
Myroth. in Math. 18. thinks it is, utterly different from Christ's intention in
this place, which is to prescribe rules to our consciences concerning the
amendment of our Brother, and the reducing of him from his sin, not to give
oeconomicall rules concerning the reparation of our injuries or losses:
Wherefore he concludes that by the Church is meant the Presbytery mentioned 1.
Tim. 4. 14. He holds also that in the new Testa. the word (...) does ever
signify an Assembly cum (...) ad religionem, with an habitude and reference to
religion. Let it be also observed with Bucerus Script. Anglic. page 40. 41.
304, 305, 306. that what our Savior directs one Brother to do toward the
gaining of another, by admonitions and reproofs, does only belong to the care
and solicitude of the salvation of his soul, and the gaining of him from
eternal death to eternal life; and this he collects from these words in the
Text, thy Brother, and thou have gained thy Brother. He does also parallel
Math. 18. 15. with Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness. Now this
as it is the surest exposition (expounding Scripture by Scripture) so it does
not concern a Judicial proceeding in the case of private Injuries, but the
Christian duty of reclaiming and saving the soul from sin.

He further observes that the thing which Christ recommendeth to every
Christian, to be done ex Charitate Christiana, is nothing else but what is
incumbent to Pastors ex officio; for Pastors ought by virtue of their public
charge and ministry to do the same thing authoritatively, which one Christian
is bidden do to another in Christian Brotherly charity, that is to admonish,
rebuke, etc.

I am persuaded were the Lord Jesus his scope and intent in this Text rightly
understood, there should need no other confutation of the Glosses given either
by Erastus or by Mr. Prynne. They restrict to the case of private or personal
injuries, and to the party injuried civilly, that which our Savior prescribes
Cartwright Histor. christi ex 4. Evang. page 354. Hoc loco (Mat. 18) notandum,
singulotum in Ecclesia civium munus esse, ut deiinquentem s^rm corpaint.
as a duty of Christian Charity, which every Church Member owes to another. It
was an impious word of Cain, Am I my Brothers Keeper? though spoken in
reference to his Brothers body and natural life; How much more sinful is it,
to say or think in reference to our Brothers soul, Am I my Brothers Keeper?
Every Christian is bound by the commandment of God to rebuke his Brother, when
he sees, hears, or knows hlm to commit sin: Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Where the
Marginall parallel in the English Bibles is Mat. 18. 15. Yea, Erastus himself
lib. 2. cap. 2. page 154. confesses that Christ does in Matthew. 18. interpret
that Law Lev. 19. So Prove. 28. 4. Such as keep the Law contend with the wicked.
We ought to hate and abhor sin by which God is dishonored (and
consequently to express our zeal against it by rebukes when it is committed
in our sight, hearing, presence, privity or knowledge) as much yea much more,
then if it were a private and personal injury against our selves Psalm. 97. 10.
Amos, 5. 15. Romans 12. 9. Psalm. 139. 21, 22. Hence it is that the Apostle
exhorts Christians to warn them that are unruly or disorderly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
13. Wherefore it is justly and truly maintained by Augustine Regul. 3 infine
Tomi primi. Durandus lib. 4. did. 19. Quaest. 3. Tostatus in Math. 18. Quaest.
29. and diverse there is, that to admonish and rebuke a Brother committing sin,
is a necessary Christian duty commanded by the word of God, whereunto
Christians are obliged by the love of God and their Neighbor: for which see
also Aegidius de Coninck de actib. supernat. disp. 28. dub. 2. and 4. And if
the offender be not reduced by more private admonitions and rebukes, the same
Law of spiritual love binds his Brother that knows his sin and
impenitency to tell the Church, as Joseph told his Father of his Brethrens
faults, Genesis 37. 2. and Joseph brought unto their Father their evil report,
that is their scandalous sins which made them to have an evil report. It is
well noted by Pareus upon the place, that the thing which Joseph did complain
of to his Father, was not his Brethrens hatred against himself, nor any
personal injury done to himself, (because their hatred of Joseph was the
effect, not the cause, of the information which he gave to his Father of their
faults) but it was their sin and scandalous life by which they brought an
evil name upon themselves and the family of their Father. Wherein he does upon
good reason justify what Joseph did, because he told not his Brethrens faults
to an Enemy but to a Father, nor for their evil, but for their good. It was
also declared unto the Apostle by them of the house of Cloe that there were
contentions among the Corinthians 1 Cor. 1. 11. So it is collected from 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. that some in the Church of Thessalonica gave notice to the
Apostle of such as walked disorderly. And as he that spares the Rod hates the
Child, so he that neglects to rebuke an offending Brother, or (when that cannot
amend him) neglects to tell the Church, does hate his Brothers soul, in so
far as he suffers sin upon him.

If these things be acknowledged for truths, we will be easily induced to
believe that the scope of Jesus Christ Math. 18. 15, 16, 17. is to teach us,
not what he permits the party injured to do toward the party injuring, but
what he commands every one that loves the soul and salvation of his Neighbor,
to do for reducing his Neighbor from a sin wherewith he is overtaken. Which
fitly agrees with Si peccaverit in te frater tuus] Eadem habentur in libro
Musar 221. quan* quam paulo aliter, Qui arguit socium debet primum hoc sacere
placide interse and ipsum solum verbis mollibus, ita ut non pude saciat eum Si
respiscit* been est ^ sin, debet eum acriter arguere, and pudefacere inter se
and ipsum. Si non respiscit, debet adhibere socios, ipsumque coram illis pudore
afficere: si nec hoc mod^ quicquam prosecit, debet eum pudesacere coram multis,
ejusque delictum publicare. Nam certe detegendi sunt Hypocritae.
that which Drusius praeter. lib. 1. on Mat. 18. 15. cites e libro Musar.
Besides, both Fathers, Schoolmen, Casuists, Commentators, Popish, and
Protestant, when they handle the Questions de correptione fraterna, they make
Brotherly rebukes to be a common duty of love which one neighbor owes to
another, and ever and anon they clear what they hold from Mat. 18. I verily
believe it is one of the wiles yea depths of Satan in perverting that Text
with the Erastian Glosses, to throw out of the Church and to drown in desuetude
and oblivion, a great and necessary duty which every Christian by the law of
love owes to the soul of his Brother with whom he converseth, which were it
conscionably practiced, I dare say, it should be a most powerful and
effectual means (by the blessing of Christ upon his own ordinance) to purge
the Church of scandals, to gain souls, and to advance holiness.

Now he that can neither be reduced by more private reprehensions nor by
public Ecclesiastical conviction, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man,
says Christ, let him be esteemed as one that has no part in the communion of
the Saints, in Church Membership, in the holy things, in the commonwealth of
Israel, in the Covenants of promise, more then an Heathen man. Which is a
spiritual, not a civil separation, according to that Gal. 2. 15. We who are
Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.

My second Argument shall be this. That which Christ says generally of any
sin whereby one Brother scandalizeth another Brother, the Erastians restrict
to private or personal injuries. And whereas Christ's rule tends to the
rescuing and saving of a sinner, their Gloss runs upon a man's particular
interest in the resarclating of a private injury. If thy Brother trespass
against thee, that is, Cum quis coram aliquo peccaverit, says Munsterus, when
any brother sins in the presence of some other. Are we not oblidged to
rebuke an offending Brother in Christian love; and to endeavor to bring him to
repentance and to save his soul; whether he has done to us any particular
injury or not: May we suffer sin upon his soul, because that sin is not an
injury to us? Let it be well observed, the thing here aimed at, is the
salvation of the offending Brother, and his turning from sin, as Grotius
rightly notes from the word (...), (which Confirm. These. lib. 3. cap. 3. p
188. Ideo dicit Christus (...) apud Math. ut intelligamus cum erroris and
iniquitatis convincendum esse, ut eam agnoscat ac deprecetur non apud nos
tantum, sed multo magis apud Deum.
Erastus also confesses from the word (...)) for in that sense is the same
word used 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. that I might gain them that are under the
Law, etc. and 1 Pet. 3. 1. they may be won by the conversation of the wives.
This (says Grotius) James does explain Chapter 5. v. 20. he which converteth the
sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide
a multitude of sins. If this then be the meaning of Christ's words, thou have
gained thy Brother: then it concerns all sins whereby we know our Brothers
soul and salvation to be in hazard. Wherefore though Grotius understand
private injuries to be that case which the Text puts, yet says he, it is
the manner of the Law of God, by one particular and more remarkable kind of
things, to intimate what ought to be done in other things according to the rule
of just proportion. And it holds more true in other sins, then in the case of
private injuries: This rebuking is necessary as well in sins which are
committed against God as in those which are committed against man, and by so
much the more its necessary in sins which are committed against God, by how
much they are heavier then sins which are committed against man, says
Tostatus in Mat. 18. quest. 93. And Grotius himself cites out of Mimus,

Amici vitia si feras faeias tua. And whereas the Erastian take much hold of
the words against thee. If thy Brother trespass against thee. I have before
answered, that any sin against God which is committed in my sight, hearing,
or knowledge, and so becomes a scandal or stumbling Block to me, is a
trespass committed against me, because he that ought to edify me does
scandalize me. So that the words against thee are added, to signify, not a
civil injury, bnt rather a spiritual injury or scandal. Augustine regul. 3.
in fine Tom. 1. applies the rule and method of proceeding mentioned Mat. 18.
to lascivious or adulterous behavior, which one Brother observing in another,
ought to admonish him, first secretly, then to take witnesses, then to tell the
Church, and if he be contumacious, de vestra societate projiciatur, let him be
cast out of your society says he, and the context carries it to any scandal
whereby one Brother scandalizeth another: whereof much was spoken in the
preceding part of the Chapter. Erastus page 154. Scopus Christi est in hoc
capite docere, quantum malum sit scandalum. The scope of Christ is in this
Chapter to teach how great an evil scandal is. Wherefore I adhere to the
resolution of Tostatus in Math. 18. quaest. 84, sive sit peccatum direct
contra deum, sive contra proximum, si fit nobis scientibus, fit contra nos, cum
nos scandalizet. Both Chrysostom and Theophilact upon Math. 18. 15. observe
this cohesion, that Christ having before spoken against those that give
scandal, now he gives a rule to the person scandalized.

Thirdly, that exposition which now I argue against, tends to make one
Scripture contradict another, and to make that lawful by one Scripture, which
another Scripture makes unlawful even some of themselves being Judges. They so
expound Matthew. 1 S. that they make it lawful (and as such allowed by Christ
himself) for a Christian to pursue his Brother for a civil injury before
Infidel or Heathnish Judges, even as he would pursue an Heathen or Infidel,
if such an one had done him the in ury. Confirm. These. lib. 3. cap 2 page 184.
Habitant nunc sub Turca and pontifice Romano fideles; Si quis assiciatur ibi a
fratre injuria, nec audire injuriosus suum coetum velit, quid aliud potest
offensus facere quam ejus implorare Judicis opem, qui facultatem habet
coercendi?
Erast, says freely (yet foully) that if a Congregation of the faithful be
under the Turk or the Pope, one of them may pursue another for an injury (when
the offender will not hearken to his own Assembly) before those Judges who are
aliens, and Enemies to the true Religion. His exposition of Matthew. 18. does
plainly lead hereunto. So says Bishop Bilson (a great follower of Erastus) in
this debate upon Matthew. 18. in the place before cited, let him be to thee as an
Heathen man and a publican, that is pursue him in those courts, where thou
would a Pagan and Publican that should do thee wrong. But how does this
agree with 1 Cor. 6. (the place which Erastus these. 41. conceives to be a
Commentary upon Matthew. 18.) does not the Apostle expressly condemn it, as
being utterly a fault that one brother went to Law with another for the things
of this life or civil causes, before the unjust and unbeleevers? Nay, let us
hear Bishop Bilson himself in that very place. Paul says he by no means
permitted them to pursue their Brethren at the Tribunals of Infidels. What
then? will they set Paul against Christ? or will they make 1 Cor. 6. contrary
to Matthew. 18. As for that whereby Erastus would reconcile this difference, it
is as good as nothing. He says page 183. that Paul requires them to refer
to arbitrators within the Church it self, only the smallest matters and things
pertaining to this life, but not crimes or weighty matters which he would
reserve to the Magistrates, otherwise he had detracted much from those to whom
he every where commands to give obedience. And so (says he) that which Paul
says is nothing but what Christ says, Tell the Church. Besides Paul himself
appealed to Caesar. let all men judge (says he) whether the Apostle would make
it unlawful to other wronged persons, which he thought lawful for himself? I
answer, 1. If it was a shame and foul scandal for Christians to pursue one
another for smaller matters pertaining to this life, how much more for crimes
and weightier matters? for then the unbeleevers might cast the heavier load of
reproaches upon the Christian religion. 2. This might have opened a door to
elude that which the Apostle so earnestly presses; for one would be ready to
say, this cause of mine is a weighty one, it is an injury and crime that can
not be born, therefore I am free to pursue it before unbelievers. Whereas the
Apostle says, Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer
your selves to be defrauded? 3. The judging of the smallest matters, and of the
things pertaining to this life, is by the Apostle opposed, not to weighty
civil injuries, but to the judging of the world and of Angels, as is manifest
by the Antithesis in the Text. But he makes no intimation of the least
distinction of civil injuries, as if some might be pursued before unbeleiving
Judges, some not: he speaks generally verse. 1. Dare any of you having a
matter against another. verse. 4. If then ye have judgments of things
pertaining to this life verse. 7. Why do ye not rather take wrong? 4. If that
which Paul says, be the same with that which Christ says Tell the Church, and
if it was Paul's mind that he who would not hearken to chosen arbitrators among
the Saints might be pursued before the unbeleiving Judges (as Erastus tells us
both here and These. 47.) then Tell the Church cannot be meant of telling the
Magistrate of the same religion; for Paul sends them to no Christian Magistrate
(because there was none such then and there) but to arbitrators chosen among
the Saints. It Is most strange to me that so acute a disputant could expound the
Telling of the Church Matthew. 18. by the reference to arbitrators 1. Cor. 6. and
yet understand the Church Matthew. 18. to be the civil Magistate. 5. There might
be subjection and obedience to the Heathen Magistrates, although the Saints
should not go to Law one against another before them 6. Paul did but appeal
from Caesar's Deputy to Caesar himself. He was drawn by the Jews before the
Tribunal of Festus (wherein Paul was a sufferer) and finding Festus unjust and
partial, and that he endeavored to deliver him to the Jews, who had a mind
to have him put to death, thereupon he appealeth from Festus to Caesar. So that
if Erastus had made the parallel right, all that he could conclude from Paul's
example, had been this, that when a Christian is drawn and compelled by his
accusers and Enemies (not being Christians) before the Tribunal of an
inferior Heathen Judge, if he there find himself in danger of his life, he may
appeal in his just defense to an higher Heathen Judge. Wherefore I yet
conclude that by the Erastian principles Christ and Paul cannot be reconciled*
These three Arguments do militate not only against Erastus and Bilson, but
likewise against Sutlivius de Presb. Cap. 9. where he gives this sense of
Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. that we ought to take heed we give no scandal in the
pursuing of injuries, and for that end ought to give admonition first
privately, then before witnesses, and in case of obstinacy in the brother that
has done the injury, to tell the Rulers of the Church (meaning the Prelates)
and if he will not hear them, then to go to Law with that Brother, as with an
Heathen or Publican. The other Arguments which are to follow, (the last
excepted) strike not at his Interpretation, but at those other Glosses, of
Erastus, Bilson, and Master Prynne.

Fourthly, this Erastian exposition makes these words, but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a publican, to be
applicable only to such Christians as live under unbelieving Magistrates, and
not to all Christians. This consequence Erastus foresaw, that it would needs
follow from his Interpretation, therefore he plainly owneth it These. 47. He
confesses that the former part concerning rebuking and seeking to gain the
offending Brother, belongs to all Christians; What a boldness is here to rent
asunder this passage of Scripture, which was uttered as it were with one
breath? And why does not the latter part also belong unto all Christians? Must
Christians that live under an Infidel Magistrate have more effectual means
and ways to use toward an offending Brother, and may they go a step further
in putting him to shame or in humbling him, then those Christians can do who
live under a Christian Magistrate? How well does this hang together? I should
have thought the balance must rather fall to this hand. But to make the
condition of those, who live under a Christian Magistrate to be more privative,
and the condition of those who live under an Infidel Magistrate to be more
cumulative, is too great a paradoxe for me.

Sixthly, Whereas they say that the way prescribed by Christ Matthew. 18. is such
as is agreeable to the Law of Moses, and they understand by Tell the Church,
Tell the Magistrate, I ask what Magistrate? If the Judges and Magistrates of
the Cities, as Bishop Bilson thinks, then he who did not hearken to those
Judges might appeal to the great Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, or the Judges
themselves might refer and transmit the case thither: so that the man was not
to be straight way accounted as an Heathen man and a Publican. But if by the
Church they understand the great Sanhedrin it self, he that would not hearken
to it was to be put to death by the Law Deuteronomy. 17. So that it had not been
agreeable to the Law of Moses, to teach that he who will not hearken to the
great Sanhedrin is to be esteemed as an Heathen man and a Publican; for this
supposes that he shall not dye but be suffered to live.

Seventhly, the Erastian principles do plainly contradict and confute
themselves. For both Erastus, Bishop Bilson, and Master Prynne hold that he
Jewish Sanhedrin in Christ's time was a temporal Magistracy and a civil Court
of justice, which had power to scourge, imprison, torture, and outlaw
offenders, yea to put to death as the first two do positively aver.
Sutliviks de Presbyteri^ Cap. 9 deindelo^uitur Christus de Ecclesia, quae
cogendi potestarem non habuit, c* j sque sententiam impunelic^it contemn^re.
Nam si cogendi po^statem habuisset, srustra i^la verba addita sunt, fi
Ecclesiam audire noluerit: nam Ecclesia coegisset, and sententiam suam
executioni mandasset. This he objecteth against the Presbytetian
Interpretation. But in truth it helps us and strongly mili tateth against the
Erastian Interpretation.
How then can it be said, If he neglect to hear the Church, etc. that is, if
he neglect to hear the civil Magistrate who has power to imprison, scourge,
torture, outlaw, yea to put him to death? Surely if he neglect to hear the
Church, does intimate that the Church has not used nor cannot use any
external coercive power. Erastus finds himself so mightily puzzled with this
difficulty, that to make out his interpretation of Matthew. 18. he confesses
These. 53. and confirm. These. lib. 2. cap. 2. the Jewish Sanhedrin had no power
under the Romans to judge of civil causes and injuries, but of things
pertaining to their religion only, Page 158. Proinde impune poterat, qui
volebat judicium Synedtii contemnere in civilibus rebus.
so that at that time (says he) a man might impune without punishment contemn
the judgment of the Sanhedrin in civil things. And thus while he seeks a
Salvo for his Gloss upon Matthew. 18. he overthrows the great argument by
which he and his followers endeavor to prove that there was no other Sanhedrin
in Christ's time, but a civil Court of justice, because say they, that
Sanhedrin had the power of the Sword and other temporal punishments.

Eighthly, observe the gradation in the Text, 1. a private conviction or
rebuke. 2. Conviction before two or three witnesses. 3. Conviction before the
Church, and the Churches declaring the thing to be an offense, and commanding
the offender to turn from his evil way. 4. If he will not hear the Church
(which implies that the Church has spoken and required him to do somewhat
which he refuses to do) then Let him be as an Heathen man and a Publican.
This last is heavier then all that went before, and is the punishment of his
not hearing the Church now this gradation is in consistent with the
Interpretation which Erastus gives; for by his own confession the Sanh drin
of the Jews at that time had not power to judge of civil causes nor to punish
any man for a civil injury, but for a matter of religion only. (yet they are
not matters of Religion, but civil trespasses which he understands to be meant
Matthew. 18.) Here is an intercision in the third step of the gradation. And if
it were an offense in the matter of religion, it had not been a greater
punishment, but a greater ease to the offender, to draw him before the Roman
tribunals, for the Romans cared for none of those things, of which the Jewish
Sanhedrin was most zealous. The gradation in the Text is as inconsistent with
Mr Prynnes interpretation; for imagine the offender to be after previous
admonitions publicly accused and convict before the Church (that is, in his
opinion) the civil Court of justice which had power to imprison, scourge,
torture, and outlaw offenders, if not to condemn, and put to death) what
should be done with such an one? can we go no higher? yes: thus it is in Mr
Prynnes sense. He that will not submit to the Magistrate, and cannot be reduced
by stripes and imprisonment, torturing and outlawing, yea peradventure by
condemnation to die the death; let this be the last remedy for such an one, Let
him be unto thee as an beathen man and a Publican, that is, withdraw familiar
civil company from him.

Ninthly, that interpretation of Erastus leans to a false supposition, namely
that the word (...) as a Publican, are meant universally of all Publicans good
or bad, or whatever they were. To prove this he takes an argument page 189,
190, 195. from the Article (...); for with the Grecians, says he, the Article
being joined to the predicate, notes the nature and consequently the
universality of the thing; whence he concludes that (...) signifies a
Publican qua Publican, and so every Publican. Now what can be the sense of
Christ's words in reference to every Publican (says he) unless this be it,
that it was lawful to pursue any Publican at a Tribunal of the Romans? I
answer, his argument goes upon a most false supposition, which I clear by the
like instances, Matthew. 6. 7. Use not vain repetitions as the Heathen do
(...). Shall we thence conclude that the Heathens as Heathens, and so all
Heathens without exception did use repetitions in prayer, or that they were all
so devout in their way as to make long prayers? Luke 15. 11. I am not as other
men are (...), extortioners, unjust^ etc. Did the Pharisee mean that every man
eo ipso that he was another man, and so the rest of the Pharisees as well as
others, were extortioners, etc. John 15. 6. he is cast forth as a branch (...).
If the rule of Erastus hold, then a branch as a branch, and so every branch is
cast out. Many such instances might be given. If in these Texts there must be a
restriction of the sense, notwithstanding of the prepositive article, so that
by Heathens we must understand devout or praying Heathens: by other men, vulgar
men, or the common sort of men; by a branch, a fruitless or withered branch.
Why shall we not also understand by (...), the profane loose or unjust
Publican, and as Grotius does rightly expound it (...) Let him be esteemed,
says he, as an Heathen man, that is, as an alien from religion, or as a
Publican; that is, if he be a Jew, esteem him as an infamous sinner, or one of
a flagitious life. Since therefore Erastus confesses page 194. that as the
office of the Publicans was lawful, so likewise many Publicans were honest,
chaste, religious, and pious men, I may safely conclude, that Let him be unto
thee as a Publican, cannot be meant universally of all Publicans. For how can
it be supposed that Christ would tacitly allow of alienation from or severity
to pious Publicans?

Tenthly, whereas the Erastians lay great weight upon that form of speech, Let
him be to thee, (not to the whole Church) as an Heathen man and a Publican,
(which is also one of Sullivius his exceptions de Presbyterio, cap. 9.) in this
also they do abuse the Text, for 1. The same offense which is a sufficient
ground to one Churchmember to esteem another Church member as an Heathen man
or a Publican, being a public and known scandal (such as is contumacy and
disobedience to the Church) must needs be a sufficient ground to all other
Church members, or to the whole Church to esteem so of him. Surely Christ would
not have contradictory judgments in his Church concerning so high a point, as
is the esteeming of a Church member to be as a Heathen man and a Publican. 2.
The Erastians herein argue no better than the Papists: Christ said to Peter, I
will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore unto Peter
alone. Peradventure Mr. Hussy was so sagacious as to prevent this objection
with his popish concession: these Keys were never given to any of the Apostles
but to Peter, says he, in his plea for Christian magistracy, page 9. It seems
he will far less stick to grant the Prelaticall argument, Timothy laid on
hands, and Titus ordained Elders, therefore each of these had the power of
ordination by himself alone. 3. It is a good observation of Luther Tom. 1.
Resolv. super propos. 13. de potest. Papae. fol. 299. in the sixteenth of
Matthew Christ begins with all his disciples, Whom say ye that I am? and he
ends with one, Unto thee will I give, etc. In the eighteenth of Matthew he
begins with one, If thy brother trespass against thee, etc. and he ends
with all, Whatsoever he binds on earth, etc. Whence he concludes that in both
these places what is said to one is said to all of them.

CHAP. V. That Tell it to the Church has more in it, then, Tell it unto a
greater number.
THere is yet another interpretation of these words invented to elude the
argument for Ecclesiastical government and censures from Mat. 18. Tell it unto
the Church, that is, if the offending brother will neither hearken to private
admonition, nor to admonition before two or three witnesses, then tell it unto
many or unto a greater company. This calls to mind Sutcliv de Presbyt. cap. 1.
Dr Sutcliffes gloss upon the word Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. that it
signifies Presbyters or Ministers non juris vinculo, sed utcunque collectos,
as if the occasional meeting of some Presbyters in Westminster Hall, or upon
the Exchange, or in a journey, or at a burial, were a Presbytery with power to
lay on hands.

That interpretation of the word Church is no better. But that I may reject
nothing without reason, I desire it may be considered, 1. Whether either in
Scripture, or in any Greek Lexicon, or in any Classick author, it can be found
that the word (...) was ever used to signify merely a greater number or
company then two or three, not called out and imbodied together for government
or worship. For my part I could never yet find where the simple majority of
the number makes the denomination of (...). I find the word sometimes (yet
very seldom) used of an unlawful assembly combining or joining together to
evil: the reason I take to be this, because they pretended to be authorized as
a lawful assembly; so Christ called Judas, friend, when he came to betray him
with a kiss. But since the word (...) Matthew. 18. 17. does signify a lawful
assembly, (as all do confess) I desire some testimony of Scripture or
approved authors, where this name is given to a lawful assembly, which was not
imbodied for worship or government, but had the name of (...) simply because of
the majority of number. Sure I am (...) is at least caetus evocatus, an
assembly called forth; and every offended brother has not from Christ the
privilege of gathering a Church. 2. If by tell it unto the Church were meant
no more but this, tell it unto a greater number, then if the offender do not
hear the Church, there must be recourse unto some others distinct from the
Church, for the more authoritative and ultimate determination, (unless it be
said that there is no remedy for offenses, but in a greater number which each
man shall make choice of) But where is their more effectual remedy, or where
will they fix the ultimate degree of proceedings? 3. When Christ says Tell it
unto the Church, and if he neglect to hear the Church, etc. whether respect be
had to the form of the Hebrews, or to the form of the Grecians, the Church
will still have a ruling power. In the old Testament, the original gives the
name Kahal, Church, (which is the word used in the Hebrew Evangel of Matthew
published by Munsterus, chap. 18. verse. 17.) and the Septuagints the name (...)
to the Elders and Rulers of Israel, as 1 Chro. 13. 2. 4. and 29. 1. 2 Chro. 1.
3. and in other places. And that which is said of the Elders, Deuteronomy. 19. 12.
I^sh. 20. ^. is said of the Congregation or Church, Number. 35. 24. Ios. 20. 6. So
Exodus 12. 3. compared with verse. 21. The Septuagints also render Kahal by (...)
Prove. 26. 26. It was not therefore to any assembly, but to an assembly of
rulers, that causes were brought in the old Testament. If we turn to the
Heathen Grecians, among them (...) had a power of jurisdiction to judge and
determine causes, as is manifest from Acts 19. 38. 39. There (...) was of two
sorts, as Suidas, Budaeus, Stephanus, and others have observed. 1. (...) and
(...), a lawful set fixed assembly, which met at ordinary diets (which is
meant in that place of the Acts last cited) It was also called (...) because of
the jurisdiction and ruling power which was seated in it. Wherein I am
confirmed by this passage of Aristotle polit. lib. 3. cap. 11. (...). for the
assembly, says he, has the government or arbitrament of all such things; He
is speaking of the choosing of Magistrates, and of craving an account of their
administration. 2. (...) which was indicted and called pro re nata, upon some
urgent extraordinary cause, and it was concio magnatum s^ve optimatum, in which
the people were not present, as in the other. It was therefore rightly noted by
Passor that Demosthenes uses the word (...) pro concione magnatum. Afterward
the Roman Senate was called (...), and sometimes (...) without an adjection.
(...) therefore among the Heathen Grecians (from whom the word came) was not
any assembly, but an assembly which had a jurisdiction or ruling power. It
shall not be in vain to add that (...) to appeal to a superior Ruler
comes from the same original verb from which comes (...).

4. The Church mentioned Matthew. 18. 17. has a forensicall or juridicall power,
as appears by that of the two or three witnesses verse. 16. which relates to
a Juridicall proceeding in the trying and punishing of offenses, as M. Prynne
has observed. Peradventure some man will say, that the two or three witnesses
here are brought in only to be witnesses to the admonition, or to make the
admonition the more effectual, and the more to be regarded, but not as if any
use were to be made of these witnesses, to prove the fact or offense it self
before the Church, if there be occasion. I answer, either it must be supposed
here that the trespass was seen or known only by him that gives the first
rebuke privately, or that it was also seen or known by those two or three
witnesses. If the former, it is much disputed among Schoolmen whether he that
rebukes his offending brother be to proceed any further than a private rebuke
for a private offense, or whether he is to stop at private rebukes, and not to
take witnesses with him (which diverse think to be unfit and disallowed, as
being an officious and unnecessary irritation of the offending brother by the
spreading of his shame, a making of a private sin to become scandalous to
others, as likewise an engaging of witnesses to assist in the admonition and
rebuke by a blind and implicit faith) for my part I shall not need here to
dispute this point: for what ever ought to be done, or ought not to be done in
this case, when the trespass is known to one only: yet in the other case when
besides him that rebukes there are two or three more which can be witnesses of
the fact or trespass committed (the trespass being yet not publicly
divulged) it can not be denied, that these witnesses of the fact are to be
brought unto and confronted with the offender, when he cannot be gained by
private rebuke, and (if need be) prove it afterward before the Church. Which I
have before noted out of Durand. And De actib. super^at. Disp. 28. D^b. 9. Item
qua^do peccatum corripiendi p^aeter me est uni vel alteri notum, etiam facile
mihi est hos post primam correp ionem adjungere mihi socios ac testes secundae
(...). Cum eni^ hi non minus quam ego ejus pecc^tum noverint, aequaliter
poterunt ipsum de hoc corripere, illudue poste^, si opus (...), coram Superior^
testari. Quare communiter omnes censent in eo casu testes ^sse adhibendos, si
prima correptio non suerit efficax. Sed tota difficultas est quando pecca^um
est mihi soli notum. Qua in re triplex est (...). Prima docet quando tunc
proximus non ^mendatur secreta me admonitione, non esse ulterius p^ogrediendum,
etc.
Aegidius de Coninck tells us (in whatsoever other case witnesses are to be
taken, or are not to be taken) in this case all do consent that witnesses are
to be taken.

Concerning the taking of witnesses, when the trespass is known to me alone,
there are three different opinions. 1. That when I have rebuked the offender
privately, and cannot gain him, I am to proceed no further, but have done my
duty and must leave the event to God. 2. That when a secret admonition is not
effectual* witnesses are to be taken, in case the offender so admonished
continue in his sin, or in case his relapse be feared and expected, that the
witnesses may observe such continuing or relapse in sin, and then assist and
join in rebuking him, and if need be (that is, in case of his contumacy) to
prove the fact before the Church. 3. That even when his continuance or relapse
in sin can not be observed, (and so can not be afterward proved by witnesses)
yet the second admonition is to be given before witn^sses, when the first
admonition given privately has not gained the offender. Of these let the
Reader judge. It Is enough for the point now in hand, that when witnesses can be
had to prove the trespass committed, they ought to be brought, first before
the offender, and then (if he continue obstinate) before the Church to prove
the fact: and they must be three, or two at the least, which I do not see how
it can be thought necessary, if we suppose that the sin is not known to any
but to me alone who give tho first rebuke; for if there must be a witness of
my second admonition, why may not one witness join with me as well as two,
when I can not have two, but one only, willing and ready to ^oyn with me. But
now a necessity of precept lies on me, that I must have two witnesses at least,
which cannot be otherwise understood, but in reference to a forensicall
proceeding afterward, if need be.

5. That interpretation which now I speak against, while it goes about to
avoid a power of Jurisdiction and Censure in this Text, it does subject him
that is reproved by another, to a heavier yoke, and brings him into a greater
servitude. For though a man be not disobedient nor contumacious unto any Court
Civil or Ecclesiastical, yet if he does not hearken to such a number, as the
party offended shall declare the case unto (being a greater number then two or
three) he must be by and by esteemed and avoided as an Heathen man and a
Publican.

6. This interpretation, as it is fathered upon Grotius, so it may be confuted
out of Grotius upon the very place. He expounds Tell it unto the Church by the
same words which Drusius cites, e libro Musar. declare it coram multis, before
many. But is this any other then (...) the many spoken of 2 Cor 2. 6? a place
cited by Grotius himself, together with (...) before all, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Now
these were acts of Ecclesiastical power and authority, not simply the acts of
a greater number. He tells us also it was the manner among the Jews to refer
the business ad multitudinem (...), to the assembly of those who were of the
same way, or followed the same rites, the judgments of which multitude (says
he) seniores tanquam praesides moderabantur, the Elders as Presidents did
moderate. He further cleares it out of Tertullian apol. cap. 39. where speaking
of the Churches or assemblies of Christians, he says: ibidem etiam
exhortationes, castigationes and censura divina etc. praesident probati quique
seniores. Where there are also exhortations, corrections, and Divine censure,
etc. all the approved Elders do preside. And is not this the very thing we
contend for?

I hope I may now conclude that Tell the Church is neither meant of the civil
Magistrate, nor simply of a greater number, but of the Elders or (as others
express it better) of the Eldership or Assembly of Elders; So Stephanus,
Scapula, and Pasor in the word (...), Calvin, Bucerus, Illyricus, Beza,
Hunnius, Tossanus, Pareus, Cartwright, Camero, Diodati, the Dutch annotations,
all upon the place. Marlorat in Thesauro in the word Ecclesia Zanchius in 4.
Praec. page 741. Iunius Animad. in Bell. Contr. 3. lib. 1. cap. 6. Gerhard loc.
theol. Tom. 6. page 137. Meisuerus Disput. de regim. Eccles. quaest. 1.
Trelcatius Instit. Theol. lib. 1. page 291. Polanus Syntag. lib. 7. cap. 1.
Bullinger in 1 Cor. 5. 4. Whittaker. de Ecclesia quaest. 1. cap. 2. Danaeus in
1 Timothy page 246. 394. These and many more understand that neither the
Magistrate nor the multitude of the Church, nor simply a great number, is meant
by the Church Matthew. 18. but the Elders or Ecclesiastical senate, who have the
name of the Church, partly, by a Syn^cdoche because they are a chief part of
the Church (as otherwhere the people or flock distinct from the Elders, is
called the Church Act. 20. 28.) partly, because of their eminent station and
principal function in the Church, as we say we have seen such a man's Picture,
when happily it is but from the shoulders upward: partly, because the Elders act in
all matters of importance, so as they carry along with them the knowledge and
consent of the Church. (And therefore according to Salmeron his observation
Tom. 4. part. 3. Tract. 9. Christ would not say, Tell the officers or Rulers of
the Church, but Tell the Church, because an obstinate offender is not to be
excommunicate secretly or in a corner, but with the knowledge and consent of
the whole Church: so that for striking of the sinner with the greater fear and
shame, in regard of that knowledge and consent of the Church, the telling of
the officers is called the telling of the Church:) partly also, because of the
ordinary manner of speaking in the like cases; that which is done by the
Parliament is done by the Kingdom, and that which is done by the common
Council is done by the City. Among the Jews with whom Christ and his Apostles
were conversant this manner of speaking was usual. Danaeus (where before
cited) cites R. David Kimchi upon Ose. 5. noting that the name of the house of
Israel is often put for the Sanhedrin in Scripture. It Is certain the Sanhedrin
has diverse times the name Kabal in the Hebrew and (...) in the Greek of the
old Testament, Which is acknowledged even by those who have contended for a
kind of popular Government in the Church. See Guide unto Zion page 5. Ainsworth
in his Counterpoison page 113.

CHAP. VI. Of the power of binding and loosing Matthew. 18. 18.
THey that do not understand Matthew. 18. 17. of Excommunication, are extremely
difficulted and scarce know what to make of that binding and loosing which is
mentioned in the words immediately following v. 18. verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Erastus and Grotius understand
it of a private brother, or the party offended his binding or loosing of the
offender. Bishop Bilson understands it of a civil binding or loosing by the
Magistrate, whom he conceives to be meant by the Church verse. 17. These do
acknowledge a coherence and dependence between verse. 17. and 18. Mr Prynne
differing from them, does not acknowledge this coherence, and expounds the
binding and loosing to be ministerial indeed, but only Doctrinall. Some
others dissenting from all these, do refer this binding and loosing not to a
person, but to a thing or Doctrine, whatsoever ye shall bind, that is,
whatsoever ye shall declare to be false, erroneous, impious, etc. Sutlivius
though he differ much from us in the Interpretation of verse. 15, 16, 17. yet he
differs as much (if not more) from the Erastians in the Interpretation of
verse. 18. for he will have the binding and loosing, to be Ecclesiastical and
spiritual, not civil, to be Juridicall, not Doctrinall only, to be Acts of
Government committed to Apostles, Bishops and Pastors: he allows no share to
ruling Elders, yet he allows as little of the power of binding and loosing,
either to the Magistrate, or to the party offended. See him de Presbyteri^ Cap.
9. and 10. So that they can neither satisfy themselves nor others, concerning
the meaning and the context.

For the confutation of all those Glosses, and for the vindication of the true
scope and sense of the Text, I shall first of all observe, whence this phrase
of binding and loosing appears to have been borrowed, namely, both from the
Hebrews and from the Graecians. The Hebrews did ascribe to the Interpreters of
the Law, Power, authority (...) to bind, and (...) to loose. So Grotius tells
us on Mat. 16. 19. The Hebrews had their loosing of an Excommunicated person,
which they called (...) See Buxtorf. Lexic. Chald. Talm. Rabbin. page 1410. The
Grecians also had a binding and loosing which was judicial. Budaeus and
Stephanus on the word (...) cite out of Aeschines (...), Quum primo suffragio
non absolutus fuerit reus (...) was the stone by which the Senators did give
their suffrage in judgment, It was either a black stone, by which they did
bind the sinner and retain his sin, and that stone was called (...): or it
was a white stone, by which they did loose remit and absolve: and that stone
was called (...): which was the thing that Tully calls Solvere crimine. So
where it is said, her iniquity is pardoned Isa. 40. 2. the 70 read (...), her
iniquity is loosed. And because there is usually some kind of expiation before
a loosing and remitting of sins, which expiation being performed the loosing
follows, therefore the Graecians called such necessary and r^quisit expiation
by the name of (...) that is, loosing: and they had their (...), they expiatory
Gods, who did chiefly take care of those expiations.

That in Scripture the power of binding, is judicial and authoritative, is
cleared by my Reverend and Learned Colleague Ma^er Rutherford in The Divine
right of Church Government page 234. 235 I add, that the word (...) unto which
Grotius sends ^s, is ^sed for that binding or incarceration which is an act of
(...) authority, as Genesis 40. 3. Genesis 42. 16. 19. 24. Number. 15. 34 Levit. 24. 12.
2 Kings. 17. 4. Isa. 42. 7. Jer. 40. 1. Ezekiel. 3. 25. It is also used for an
authoritative prohibition Number. 11. 28. my Lord Moses forbid them. Thence (...)
interdictum, a decree forbidding somewhat Dan. 6, 7, 8, 9.

As binding and loosing are Acts of authority and power, such as does not
belong to any single person or brother offended, so the binding and loosing
mentioned Matthew. 18. 18. are Acts of Ecclesiastical and spiritual authority,
belonging to the Kingdom and Government of Christ in his Church, but not
belonging to the civil Magistrate. And as the authority is Ecclesiastical and
spiritual, so it is more than Doctrinall, it is a power of inflicting or
taking off Church Censures. These two things I will endeavor to prove. 1. That
this power of binding and loosing belongs neither to private Christians nor
to civil Magistrates, but to Church Officers. 2. That this power is juridicall
or forensicall, and not Doctrinall only; that is, that Church Officers are
here authorized to bind with censures, or to loose from censures, as there
shall be cause. In both which we have Antiquity for us. Which I do the rather
observe because Erastus and Grotius allege some of the Ancients, for their
exposition of Math. 18. 18. that this binding or loosing is by the offended
brother. That which Augustine, Origin, and Theophylact say of one brother his
binding or loosing, is but spoken tropologically, and not as the literal sense
of the Text, yea, Theophylact in that passage cited by Erastus and Grotius,
does distinguish between the Ministerial or Ecclesiastical binding and
loosing, and the party offended his binding and loosing. Non enim solum quae
solvunt sacerdotes sunt soluta, sed quaecunque and nos etc. Theophylact does
also find excommunication in that Text Illam autem (Ecclesiam) si non audierit,
tunc abjiciatar, ne suae maliti^ participes faciat alios. I further appeal to
Augustine himself Epist. 75. where speaking of Excommunication and Anathema he
distinguishes it from corporal punishment, and after he has spoken of the
temporal sword he adds, Spiritualis autem paena, qua fit quod scriptum est,
Quae ligaveris in terra, erunt ligata and in caelo, animas obligat. But the
spiritual punishment, by which that thing is done which is written, What thou
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, does bind soul^. Again in his
sixth Tome lib. 1. contra adversarium legis and prophetarum ^ap. 17. Ignoscendi
autem misericors mansuetudo, etc. non ad hoc valet ut sit iniquitas impunita,
aut torpens and dormiens disciplina, quod potius obsit quam dil g ns
vigilansque vindicta. Claves quippe ^egni caelorum sic dedit Christus
Ecclesiae, ut non solum diceret Quae solveritis super terram, c^unt solu a and
in caelis: ubi apertissim e bonum, non malum pro malo reddit Ecclesia: verum
and adjungeret: Quae ligaveritis in terra erunt ligata and in caelo. quia bon^
est and vindicandi justitia. Illud enim quod ait, Si nec Ecclesiam audi^rit,
sit tibi tanquam ethn^cus and publicanus, g^avius est quam si gladio soriretur,
si flammis absumeret^r, si feris subrigeretur. Nam ibi quoque subjunxit, Amen
dico vobis quae ligaveritis super te^tam erunt ligata and in caelis: ut
intelligeretur quanto gravius sit punitus qui velut relictus est impunitus.
he does most plainly interpret Math. 18. 18. of Church discipline and binding
by Censure.

Hior. in Matthew. 18. 19, Quia dixerat, Si autem Ecclesiam non audierit, sit
tibi sicut ethnicus and publicanus, and poter^t contemptoris fratris haec
occulta esse responsio vel tacita cogitatio: si me despicis and ego te
despicio: si tu me condemnas and mea sententia condemnaberis: potestatem
tribuit Apostolis, ut sciant qui a talibus condemnantur, humanam sententiam
divina sententia roborari, and quodcunque ligatum sucrit in terra, lig^ri
pariter and in caelo. Hier. Epist. 1. ad Heliod. Absit ut de his quicquam
sinist um loquar, qui apostolico gradui succedentos, Christi corpus sacro ore
conficiunt, per quos and nos Christiani sumus. Qui claves regni caelorum
habentes, quodammodo ante Judic^i d^em judicant, etc, Mihi ante Presbyterum (
legendum fortasse Presbyterium) sedere non licet: illi si peccavero, li^et
tradere me Satanae in interitum catuis, ut spiritus salvus fit. Et in veteri
quidem lege, quicunque sacerdotibus non obtemperasset, aut extra castra
positus, lapidabatur a populo, aut gladio cervice subjecta, contemptum expiabat
c^uore: Nunc ve^o inobediens, spirituali mucrone truncatur, aut ejectus de
Ecclesia, ^abido daemonum ore discerp^tur.
Hierome both in his Commentary upon Matthew. 18. and in his Epistle to
Heliodorus, speaks of this power of binding as a judicial forensicall power
belonging to the Ministers or Officers of the Church, by which they judge and
censure offenders.

But to save my self the labor of more citations, I take help from Bishop
Bilson, of the perpetual Government of Christ's Church cap. 4. where though he
expound the binding and loosing Matthew. 18. 18. to be Acts of the Magistrate,
yet he acknowledges hat the Ancient writers lean vere much another way, and
understand that Text of the ministerial and spiritual power of
Excommunication, for which he cites Chrysostom. de sacerdotio lib. 3. Ambros. de
paenitent. lib. 1. c. 2. Hierom. in Matthew. cap. 18. Hilar. in Mat. can. 18.
Unto these I also add Isidorus Polusiota in the third Book of his Epistles,
Epist. 260. where he applies this Text Matthew. 18, 19. to this sense, that
impenitent finners are to be bound, and penitent sinners loosed, and thence
argues against the absolving of a perjured person who had not declared himself
penitent, but had purchased his absolution by a gift. Nor can I pass
Chrysostom upon this very Text, where he tells that Christ will have such a
one to be punished (...), both with a present Chastisement and with a future
punishment, or both in earth and in heaven; and would have the offender to fear
(...), casting out of the Church. He adds (...), he cuts not off immediately,
but after admonitions.

I will now proceed to a further confirmation of the two propositions before
mentioned. Touching the first, That this binding and loosing Matthew. 18. 18.
belongs nei her to private Christians, nor to civil Magistrates, but to
Church Officers, I clear it thus. There are two things by which (as Schoolmen
observe) men's souls and consciences are bound, 1. They are bound by their
sins. Prove. 5. 22. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he
shall be holden with the cords of his sins, Act. 8. 23. thou art in the bond of
iniquity. 2. Men are bound by precepts Matthew. 23. 4. They bind heavy burdens
and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's shoulders. This binding by
precept or law, some take to be meant Ezech. 3. 25. O Son of man behold they
shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, that is, thou shall in
vision see thy self bound with bands upon thee, to signify that I have
forbidden thee to be a reprover to the rebellius house. So the Chaldee
paraphrase. But thou a Son of man, behold I have put my word upon thee, as a
band of cords with which they bind, and thou shall not go forth into the midst
of them. Now in both these respects the Scripture elsewhere does ascribe to
Church Officers a power of binding and loosing. 1 In respect of sin Io. 20.
23. Whosesoever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever sin
s ye retain they are retained. It is spoken to the Apostles and their
successors in the Ministry of the Gospel. Matthew. 16. 19. I will give unto
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven. Where the power of binding and loosing is given to the
Apostles, and Grotius upon the place clears it from 2. Cor. 5. 19. 20. God
has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ. So that we find in Scripture Church Officers enabled and authorized
ex officio as the Heralds and Ambassadors of the King of Zion, to loose from
the bands of sin all repenting and beleiving sinners, and to bind over to
eternal justice and wrath the impenitent and unbeleevers. 2 They are also
authorized, dogmatically and authoritatively to declare and impose the will of
Christ, and to bind his precepts upon the shoulders of his peeple Matthew. 28.
20. as likewise to loose them and pronounce them free from such burdens, as
men would impose upon them contrary or beside the word of God 1 Cor. 7. 23. An
example of both we have Act. 15. 28. The Synod of the Apostles and Elders
binds upon the Churches such Burdens, as were necessary by the Law of love
for the avoiding of scandal, but did pronounce the Churches to be free and
loosed from other burdens which the Judaizing Teachers would have bound upon
them. Now therefore if we will expound Matthew. 18. 18. by other Scriptures (it
being the only surest way to expound Scripture by Scripture) it is manifest
and undeniable, that Church Officers are by other Scriptures enabled and
authorized to bind and loose in both those respects aforementioned. But we no
where find in Scripture, that Christ has given either to all private
Christians, or to the civil Magistrate, a Commission and Authority to bind or
loose sinners; I know a private Christian may and ought to convince an
impenitent brother, and to comfort a repenting brother, ex charitate
Christiana: But the Scripture does not say, that God has committed to every
private Christian the word of reconciliation, and that all Christians are
Ambassadors for Christ, nor is there a promise to ratify in heaven the
convictions or comforts given by a private Christian: No more then a King does
engage himself in verbo principis to pardon such as any of his good Subjects
shall pardon, or to condemn such as any of his good Subjects shall condemn:
but a King ingageth himself to ratify what his Ambassadors, Commissioners or
Ministers shall do in his name and according to the Commission which he has
given them to pardon or condemn. Besides all this, if Christ had meant here of
the brother to whom the injury was don, his private binding or loosing, not
condemning or forgiving, then he had kept the phrase in the singular number,
which Erastus observes diligently all along the Text verse. 15, 16, 17. But he
might have also observed, that verse. 18. carries the power of binding and
loosing to a plurality, Whatsoever ye bind, etc. As for the Magistrate, it
belongs to him to bind with the cords of corporal or civil punishments, or
to loose and liberat from the same, as he shall see cause according to law and
justice. But this does n t belong to the spiritual Kingdom of Jesus Christ;
for his Kingdom is not of this world, neither are the weapons thereof carnal
but spiritual. And beside the Magistrate may lawfully and sometime does bind
on punishment, when the soul is loosed in Heaven, and the sin remitted.
Again, the Magistrate may lawfully, and sometime does loose and absolve from
punishment, when a man's soul is impenitent, and sin is still bound upon his
conscience. There is no such promise that God will forgive whom the Magistrate
forgiveth, or condemn whom the Magistrate condemns. Neither has God any
where in Scripture committed to the Magistrate the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, or the word of reconciliation, as to the Ambassadors of Christ.

Binding and loosing in the other sense by a dogmaticall authoritative
declaration of the will of Christ, is not so principally or directy intended
Matthew. 18. 18. as that other binding and loosing in respect of sin. Howbeit
it is not to be excluded, because the words preceding Verse. 17. mention not
only the execution of Excommunication, Let him be to thee as an Heathen man
and a Publican; but also the Churches judgment, and determination of the case,
if he neglect to hear the Church, which words implie, that the Church has
declared the will of Christ in such a case, and required the offender to do
accordingly, but he showing himself unwilling and contumacious, as it were
saying in his heart, I will break their bands asunder, and cast away their
cords from me, thereupon the promise reaches to this also, that what the
Church has determined or imposed according to the will of Christ shall be
ratified and approved in Heaven. Sutlivius de presbyt. cap. 14. p. 107.
Apostoli religionis and fidei a Christo cognitionem acceperunt: haec enim pars
est maxima clavium quas ille Apostolis suis commisit.
Now Christ has no where given a Commission either to every particular
Christian, or to the Magistrate, to teach his people to observe all things
which he has commanded them, and authoritatively to determine controversies of
faith, or cases of conscience. As in the old Testament, the Priests lips did
preserve knowledge, and they were to seek the law at his mouth, Mal. 2. 7. so
in the new Testament the Ministers of Christ have the Commission to make known
the counsel of God.

My second proposition that the power of binding and loosing Matthew. 18. 18. is
juridicall or forensicall, and meant of inflicting or taking off
Ecclesiastical Censures; this I will make good in the next place against Mr
Prynne, who to elude the argument for Excommunication from Matthew. 18. answers
two things concerning the binding and loosing there spoken of. 1. That these
words have no coherence with, or dependence upon the former. 2. That this
binding and loosing is meant only of preaching the Gospel. Touching the first
of these, I confess if by the Church, verse. 17. be meant a civil Court of
Justice; and by those words, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen, etc. be meant
no more but keep no civil fellowship with him (which is his sense of the
Text) I cannot marvel that he could find no coherence between verse. 17. and
verse. 18. yet if there be no coherence between these verses, the generality of
Interpreters have gone upon a great mistake of the Text, conceiving that Christ
does here anticipate a great objection, and add a great encouragement in point
of Church discipline; for when the offender is excommunicated, (that is all the
Church can do to humble and reduce him) put the case he or others despise the
censures of the Church, What will your censure do? says Mr Hussy: To that
very thing Christ answers, It shall be ratified in Heaven, and it shall do
more then the binding of the offenders in fetters of Iron could do. But let us
hear what Mr Prynne says against the coherence of Text: because (says he)
that of binding and loosing is spoken only to and of Christ's disciples, as is
evident by the parallel Text of Joh. 20. 23. not of the Jewish Church.

It makes the more against him (I am sure) that its spoken to and of Christ's
Disciples, for this proves that the Church verse. 17. is not the Jewish
Sanhedrin, but the Christian Presbytery, then instituted, and afterward
erected: and that the thing which makes one as an Heathen and a Publican, is
binding of his sins upon him. And for the context, immediately after Christ
had said, If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee, etc. he
adds, Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc. The
dependency is very clear. A Christian having first admonished his brother in
private, then having taken two or three witnesses, after this having brought it
to the public cognizance of the Ecclesiastical Consistory, and after all
that, the offender being for his obstinacy excommunicate; here is the last
step, no further progress. Now might one think, what of all this? what shall
follow upon it? Nay, says Christ, it shall not be in vain, it shall be
ratisied in Heaven. And as the purpose cohereth, so that form of words, Verily
I say unto you, is ordinarily used by Christ to signify his continuing and
pressing home the same purpose which he had last mentioned, as Matthew. 5. 26.
Matthew. 6. 2. Matthew. 8. 10. Matthew. 10. 15. Matthew. 11. 11. Matthew. 18. 3. Matthew.
19. 23, 28. Matthew. 21. 31. Matthew. 23. 36. Matthew. 26. 13. Matthew. 24. 34, 47.
Mark 10. 15. and 12. 43. and 13. 30. Luke 12. 37. and many the like passages.
To my best observation, I have found no place where Christ's Verily I say unto
you, begins a new purpose which has no coherence with nor dependency upon the
former.

This coherence of the Text and the dependency of verse. 18. upon that which
went before (which dependency is acknowledged by Erastus, who perceiving that
he could not deny the dependency, fancieth that the binding and loosing is
meant of the offended brothers pardoning or not pardoning of the offender,
Confirm. These. page 157.) does also quite overthrow Master Prynnes other
answer, that this binding and loosing is only meant of preaching the Gospel,
and of denouncing remission of sins to the penitent, and wrath to the
impenitent.

Nay, That potestas clavium conoionalis is instituted in other places: but here
its potestas cl^vium disciplinalis, as is evident: First, by the coherence of
the Text, and by the taking of two or three more, and then telling of the thing
to the Church; all which intimates a rising as from one or two or three more,
so from them to the Church, which cannot be meant of one man, as has been
argued against both Pope and Prelate, for no one man can be called a Church:
neither has one man the power of jurisdiction; but one man has the power of
preaching.

Secondly, the Apostles, and those who succeed them in the work of the
Ministry have the same power of the Keys committed from Christ to them
ministerially, which Christ has committed from the father to him (as Mediator)
authoritatively. For in the parallel place, Ioh. 20. v. 21, 23. where he gives
them power of remitting or retaining sins, he says, As my Father has sent
me, even so send I you. But the Father gave Christ such a power of the Keys,
as comprehends a power of Government, and not merely doctrinall, Isa. 22. 21,
22. I will commit the government into his hand, etc. And the Keys of the house
of David will I lay upon his shoulder.

Thirdly, It may be proved also by that which immediately follows, verse. 19.
Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth etc. which
cannot be meant of the power of preaching; for neither the efficacy of
preaching, nor the ratification of it in Heaven, nor the fruit of it on Earth,
does depend upon this, that two preachers must needs agree in the same thing.
But it agrees well to the power of Discipline, concerning which it answers
these two objections. First, it might be said, the Apostles and other
Church Governors may fall to be very few in this or that Church where the
offense rises; shall we in that case execute any Church Discipline? Yes, says
Christ, if there were but two Church Officers in a Church (where no more can be
had) they are to exercise Discipline, and it shall not be in vain. Again, it
might be objected, be they two or three, or more, what if they do not agree
among themselves? To that he answers, there must be an agreement of two
Church Officers at least, otherwise the sentence shall be null; we can not say
the like of the doctrinall power of binding or loosing, that it is of no force
nor validity unless two at least agree in the same doctrine, as has been
said; two must agree in that sentence or censure, which is desired to be
ratified in Heaven, and then they binding on Earth, and unanimously calling
upon God to ratify it in Heaven, it shall be done.

Fourthly, this binding and loosing can not go without the Church, it is
applicable to none but a Church member or a Brother. So the thread of the Text
goes along from verse. 15. If thy Brother trespass against thee, and verse. 16.
thou have gained thy Brother. And when it is said, Tell the Church, it is
supposed that the offender is a member of the Church, over whom the Church has
authority, and of whom there is hope that he will hear the Church. And when it
is said, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publican, it is supposed
that formerly he was not unto us as an Heathen man and a Publican. For these
and the like reasons Tostatus in Matthew. 18. quaest. 91. and diverse others hold
that this rule of Christ is not applicable to those who are without the Church.
But if the binding and loosing be meant only of preaching the Gospel, as
Master Prynne would have it, then it were applicable to those that are not yet
baptized nor made Church members, for unto such the Gospel has been and may
be preached. The binding and loosing which is proper to a Brother or to a
Church member, must be a juridicall power of censures, of which the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to judge them also that are without?
Do not ye judge them that are within? Therefore Chrysostom Hom. 61. in Matthew.
(according to the Greek Hom. 60.) does parallel Matthew. 18. with 1 Cor. 5.
proving that this rule of Christ is not applicable to one that is without, but
only to a brother. Which Paul also says in these words, What have I to do to
judge them also that are without? But he commands us to convince and reduce
brethren, (...) and to cut off the disobedient: this he (Christ) does also in
this place. Theophylact also on Matthew. 18. notes the same restriction of this
rule of Christ to a Christian Brother.

Fifthly, this binding power is not to be made use of, till all other means
have been essayed, ante tentanda omnia says Munsterus, first a private
admonition, then before witnesses, then the matter is brought to the Church,
the Church declares and judges, the offender neglects to hear the Church,
then after all this comes the binding, which must needs be a binding with
censures; for that binding which Master Prynne speaks of, the denouncing of
the wrath of God against the impenitent, by the preaching of the Gospel, is
not, neither ought to be suspended or delayed upon such degrees of proceeding.

Sixthly, this binding and loosing is not without two or three witnesses, verse.
16. But that of two or three witnesses relates to a forensicall or judicial
proceeding, as Mr Prynne himself tells us. These witnesses may be brought
before the Ecclesiastical court, either to prove the offenders contumacy being
admonished, or to prove the scandalous fact it self, which was from the
beginning known to two or three witnesses, according to the sense of
Schoolmen, expressed in the precedent Chapter.

Seventhly, this phrase of binding and loosing is taken both from the Hebrews,
and from the Grecians. But both the Hebrews and the Grecians used these words
in a juridicall sense, as I observed in the beginning.

Eighthly, that the binding and loosing Matthew. 18. 18. is juridicall, not
doctrinall, belonging to the power of jurisdiction, not of order, is the sense
of the ancients above cited, as likewise of Scotus lib. 4. Sent. Did. 19.
Quaest. 1. art. 5. Tostatus in Matthew. 18. Quest. 113. yea the current both of
Schoolmen and of Interpreters, as well Protestant, as Popish, runs that way.
It were too long to cite all. Yea further Salmasius in appar. ad lib. de
primatu p^p. 296. understands the binding and loosing Matthew. 16. 19. Ioh. 20.
23. of Discipline. So Walaeus Tom. 1. page 92. So diverse others. From the same
places Aretius Theol. probl. loc. 133. de excom. draws Excommunication as an
Ordinance of Christ. From the same two Texts Ioh. 20. 23. and Matthew. 16. 19.
Dionysius Areop agita de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia cap. 7. sect. 7. does prove
that Christ has committed unto the Ministers of the Church (...). His ancient
Scholiast Maximus upon that place tells us, that he speaks (...) of
excommunications and separations, or (as he there further explaineth) the
judging and separating between the righteous and the wicked. Salmeron upon
Matthew. 16. 19. thinks that the latter part of that verse, And whatsoever thou
shall bind on Earth, etc. does belong to the power of jurisdiction and
censure: Hugo de S. Victore de Sacramentis lib. 1. cap. 26. does also expound
Matthew. 16. 19. of the forensicall power of Excommunication. Now if in these
places binding and loosing, remitting and retaining sins comprehend a
juridicall power of laying on or taking off Church censures; how much more must
this Juridicall power be comprehended Matthew. 18. 18. where the context and
circumstances will much more enforce this sense, then in the other two places?
this binding and loosing being also in the plural number, Whatsoever ye bind,
etc. not in the singular, as the phrase is Matthew. 16. 19. Whatsoever thou shall
bind etc. One Minister may bind doctrinally, but one alone can not bind
juridically.

Ninthly, the very doctrinall or concionall binding which is yielded by Mr
Prynne, is voyded and contradicted by the admission of known scandalous
impenitent sinners to the Sacrament: for he that is admitted to the Sacrament
is loosed, not bound; remission, not condemnation is supposed to be sealed up
to him, as is manifest by the words of the Institution, Matthew. 26. 27, 28.
Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for many for the remission of sins. So that without a power of binding by
censures, and namely by suspension from the Sacrament, one and the same
scandalous impenitent person shall be bound by the word, and loosed by the
Sacrament. Surely he that is to be bound by the word, ought also to be bound by
suspension from the Sacrament, unless we make one public Ordinance to
contradict another.

Tenthly, does Mr Prynne believe that Jesus Christ has any where given to
Church Officers a forensicall or juridicall power of binding by
Excommunication, and loosing by Absolution or receiving again into the
communion of the Church? If he does believe it, then I ask where has Christ
committed that power unto them, if not Matthew. 18? If he does not believe that
Christ has given any such power, then why does he hold Excommunication to be
lawful and warrantable by the Word of God* Most certain it is, that neither
King, nor Parliament, nor Eldership, nor Synod, nor any power on earth, may or
ought to prohibit or keep back from the Sacrament such as Christ has not
commanded to be kept back, or to bind sinners by Excommunication, if Christ
has given no such commission to bind in that kind.

Eleventhly, it may give us some light in this present Question, to compare the
phrase of binding and loosing Matthew. 18. 19. with Psalm 149. 6, 7, 8, 9. Let
the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged Sword in their hand,
to execute vengeance upon the Heathen and pnnishments upon the people. To bind
their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, To execute
upon them the judgment written: This honor have all his Saints. Which both
Jewish and Christian Interpreters refer to the Kingdom of Christ, out of
whose mouth proceeds a twoedged Sword, Revel. 1. 16. and 2. 12. (...), the
phrase used in the Greek version of Psalm 149. If it should be understood of
temporal or external victories and conquests of the Nations and their Kings,
so it was not fulfilled to the Jews in the old Testament; and the Jews do now
but in vain flatter themselves with the expectation of such a thing to come.
There are but two expositions which are most received and confirmed. The first
is, that the Saints shall judge the world together with Christ 1 Cor. 6. 2. and
then vengeance shall be executed on the wicked, and all they who would not have
Christ to reign over them shall be bound hand and foot and cast into utter
darkness. This is the sense of Arnobius upon the place, and the Jesuits of
Doway, Emmanuel Sa, Jansenius, Lorinus, Menochius go that way. The other
Exposition holds an accomplishment of the thing in this same world, and this in
a Spiritual sense, concerning the Kingdom of Christ in this world, is holden
by Calvin, Bucer, VVestmeherus, Heshusius, Gesuerus, Fabritius, and others. So
the Dutch Annotations, Augustine and Hierome, both of them upon the place, take
the sword, and the chain, and fetters to be meant of the word of God
conquering and overcomming aliens, and Heretics, and the mightiest enemies;
which others clear from Isa. 45. 14. Men of stature shall come over unto thee,
and they shall be thine, they shall come after thee, in chains they shall come
over. But because the Psalmist makes mention of a corrective or punitive
judiciary power, therefore others* add for making the sense more full, the
power of excommunication; for which Lorinus cites Bruno, and Hugo Victorinus.
Of the Protestant Interpreters upon the place, Gesnerus, applies it to the
power of the Keys, to be made use of according to that which is written Math.
18. Fabritius conceives the Text to comprehend castigationes spirituales, and
he cites Math. 16. 19. Math. 18. 18. Io. 20. 23. Heshusius clears it by the
Instance of Theodosius excommunicated by Ambrose, Master Cotton in his Keys of
the Kingdom of heaven page 53. applies it to the Ecclesiastical power of the
Keys. Bartholomaeus Coppen understands it of the spiritual rule and Kingdom
of Christ, and makes it parallel to 2 Cor. 10. 4. the weapons of our warrefare
are not carnal but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds,
verse. 6. and having in readiness to revenge all disobedience. This judiciary
Ecclesiastical power is to be executed upon all such of the nations as fall
under the Government of the Church according to the rule of Christ. And this
honor have all his Saints, that their Ministers are armed with a power. They
that follow this latter exposition will be easily induced to believe that the
binding and loosing Mat. 18. 19. is also judicial or juridicall: They that
follow the former exposition, will also observe that the phrase of binding in
Scripture, even where it is ascribed to the Church or Saints, is used in a
judiciary sense, and therefore it is most suitable to the Scripture phrase to
understand Mat. 18, 19. in that sense.

As touching that other Exposition of the binding and loosing, that the object
it is exercised about, is not a person, but a thing or Doctrine, for it is not
said Whomsoever but whatsoever ye bind: It is sufficiently confuted by *much of
that which has been said already, proving a forensicall binding and loosing
even of persons. Only I shall add these further considerations. First, the
binding and loosing are Acts of the power of the Keys, and are exercised about
the same object, about which the power of the Keys is exercised Math. 16. 19.
Now the power of the Keys is exercised about persons, for the Kingdom of
heaven is opened or shut to persons, not to Doctrines. If it be said that the
Keys are for opening and shutting, not for binding and loosing, to this I
answer with Alexr. Alensis part 4. Quaest. 20. Membr. 5. that these Keys are
as well for binding and loosing as for shutting and opening; but the Act of
binding and loosing does agree to the Keys immediately and in respect of the
subject; but the act of opening in reference to the last end. Ibid. Membr. 2.
He had given this reason why the power of the Keys is called the power of
binding and loosing, because although to open and shut be the more proper Acts
of the Keys themselves, yet nevertheless to loose and bind are the more
proper Acts in reference to those who are to enter into the Kingdom, or to be
excluded from the same; for the persons themselves which do repent, are the
subject of loosing: and they that repent not, of binding. Which is not so of
opening and shutting; for although the opening be to those that are loosed, and
the shutting to those that are bound; yet those that are loosed are not the
subject of opening (as to the manner of speaking) nor those that are bound, the
Subject of shutting. So then antecedently binding and loosing are Acts of the
power of the Keys, because a man is bound before he be shut up, and loosed
before the door be opened to him.

Secondly, that Gloss which now I despute against, does suppose one of these
two things: either that binding and loosing cannot be exercised upon the same
object at different times, and that the binding is such as can never be loosed
again; or otherwise that one and the same doctrine may be condemned at one
time, and approved at another time. Both which are absurd, and contrary to the
generality of Divines.

Thirdly, seeing the Scripture speaks of binding and loosing in reference to
persons, as corporally, so spiritually, which I have before proved. Why then,
shall persons be excepted from being the object of binding and loosing Matthew.
18?

Fourthly, that of binding and loosing Mat. 18. 18. does cohere with and is
added by occasion of that which went before, as is also before proved. If this
concerning the context be acknowledged, it will carry it to persons; for it was
an offending brother, not a false Doctrine, which was spoken of in the verses
preceding.

Fifthly, binding and loosing here does at least reach as far as retaining or
remitting of sins Io. 20. 23. but there it is Whosoever sins ye remit, etc.
They whose sins are retained, are bound.

Wherefore (...) whatsoever Mat. 18. 18. is put for (...) whomsoever, by an
Hypallage generis, many examples whereof may be given in Scripture: so (...)
Io. 1. 11. is expounded by (...): and all things that offend Mat. 13. 41.
expounded by them that do iniquity. Unless you please to understand (...),
whatsoever sins ye bind upon men or loose from off them, they shall be bound
upon them or loosed from off them in heaven.

CHAP. VII. That 1 Cor. 5. proves Excommunication and (by a necessary
consequence even from the Erastian Interpretation) Suspension from the
Sacrament of a person unexcommunicated.
MAster Prynne in his first Quaere did ask whether that phrase 1 Cor. 5. To
deliver such a one to Satan, be properly meant of excommunication or
suspension from the Sacrament only. This, he says, I did in my Sermon wave
with a rhetorical preterition. I answer for the latter part of the Quaere, I
know not the least ground, for who did ever expound it of suspension from the
Sacrament only? for the former part of it, its not necessary to be debated,
therefore for husbanding time and not to multiply Questions unnecessarily, I
said in my Sermon, that the Question ought to be whether that Chapter (not
whether that phrase) prove excommunication; and that we have a shorter way to
prove excommunication from the last words of that Chapter as Doctor Moulin does
in his Vates lib. 2. cap. 11. And if I should grant that delivering such a one
to Satan signifies either of those things which Master Prynne conceives,
that is, a bodily possession, torture, or vexation by Satan, inflicted either
by the apostolical power of miracles, or by Gods immediate permission: yet
that will not prove that it signifies no more. Therefore Peter Martyr upon the
place, thinks that the Apostles delivering of the man to Satan by a miraculous
act, and the Churches delivering of him to Satan by Excommunication, do very
well stand together. So Synop. pur. Theol. disp. 48. These. 40* and he allows
of both these expositions; and afterward in his common place of excommunication
he speaks of Gods cooperating with the Church censure, by punishing the
Excommunicate person with diabolical vexations. Sure I am an excommunicate
person may truly be said to be delivered to Satan, who is the God and Prince
of this world and reigns in the Children of disobedience. But Master Prynne
will find himself difficulted to prove that tradere Satanae 1 Cor. 5. is only
meant of a miraculous or extraordinary act, or to show how or why the Apostle
requires the Assembling of the Church and their consent to the working of a
miracle. Which (if there were no more) may discover the weakness of Master
Prynnes notions concerning delivering to Satan 6, 7, 8. But as the full debate
were long, so it were not necessary, since Master Prynne does now himself
acknowledge that the last verse of that Chapter proves excommunication,
vindic. page 2. I come therefore to the next, which he calls the fourth
difference, whether 1 Cor. 5. 11. with such an one no not to eat, be properly
meant of excommunication or suspension from the Sacrament. But (whatsoever be
properly meant by that phrase) that which his debate drives at, is, that this
verse does neither prove excommunication nor suspension from the Sacrament so
much as by necessary consequence.

But let us see whether his reasons can weaken the proof of Suspension from
verse. 11. first he says there is not one syllable of receiving or eating of
the Lords Supper in this Chapter. I answer, the question is neither of
syllables nor words but of things, and how will he prove that verse. 8. Let us
keep the feast, not with old leavon, etc. is not applicable to the Lords
Supper, I say not to it only, yet surely it cannot be excluded, but must needs
becomprehended as one part, yea, a principal part of the meaning, the better
to answer the Analogy of the passover, (there much insisted upon.) He may be
pleased also to remember that he himself page 24. proving the passover and the
Lords Supper to be the same for the substance, for proof hereof cites 1 Cor.
5. 7. and that Aretius Theol probl. loc. 80. expounds our Feast of the
Passover 1 Cor. 5. to be meant of the Lords Supper.

But he further objecteth from 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. We are all partakers of that
one Bread; if all were then partakers of this Bread, certainly none were
excluded from it in the Church of Corinth; but at the Israelites under the Law,
did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and all Drink the same spiritual Drink
though God were displeased with many of them who were Idolaters, tempters of
God, fornicators, murmurers, and were destroyed in the wilderness. 1 Cor. 10.
1. to 12. so all under the Gospel who were visible members of ^he Church of
Corinth, did eat and drink the Lords Supper to which some drunkards whiles
drunken did then resort, as is clear by 1 Cor. 11. 20. 21. Which Paul indeed
reprehends verse. 22.

Answ. 1 When Paul says, we being many are one bread and one body, for we are
all partakers of that one bread, he speaks of the communion of Saints, and
the word all can be of no larger extent then visible Saints, to whom the
Epistle is directed 1 Cor. 1. 2. and cannot be applied to visible workers of
iniquity, who continue impenitent and obstinate in so doing. As we may join in
communion with a visible Church, which has the external marks of a Church,
though it be not a true invisible Church; so we join with visible Saints to
become one body with them in external Church communion and to be partakers of
one bread with them, though they be not true or invisible Saints in the hid man
of the heart. But if these be visibly no Church, we cannot join in Church
Communion; and if a man be visibly no Saint, he ought not to be admitted to the
communion of Saints. I shall never be persuaded, that the Apostle Paul would
say of himself and the Saints at Corinth, We are one body with known
Idolaters, Fornicators, Drunkards and the like.

2 If all in the Church of Corinth, (none excluded) even drunkards whiles
drunken, and if all under the Gospel who are visible members of the Church
ought to be admitted to eat the same spiritual meat and drink the same
spiritual drink at the Lords Table, as he supposes that in the wilderness
all the Israelites did the like, who were Idolaters, Fornicators, etc. Then I
beseech you observe how Master Prynne does by all this overthrow his own
rules; for page 2. and elsewhere he tells us he would have notorious scandalous
sinners who after admonition persevere in their iniquities without remorse of
conscience or amendment to be excommunicated from the Church and from the
society of the faithful in all public Ordinances? If both in the Church of
Israel and in the Church of Corinth, all were admitted and none excluded, even
those who were Idolaters or drunkards, whiles actually such without repentance
or amendment; how can Master Prynne straiten Christians, now more then Moses
did the Jews, or Paul the Corinthians? Since therefore his Arguments drive at
it, its best he should speak it out, that all manner of persons who profess
themselves to be Christians, be they never so scandalous, never so obstinate,
though they persevere in their iniquity after admonition without amendment, yet
ought to be admitted to the Lords Table.

3 He shall never be able to prove either that those drunken persons 1 Cor. 11.
21. were drunken when they did resort to the Church, (for it was in the Church
and in eating and drinking there, that they made themselves drunk) nor yet
that the Idolaters and Fornic^tors in the wilderness their eating of the
spiritual meat and drinking of the spiritual drink mentioned by the Apostle
1 Cor. 10. was after their Idolat^ies and Fornications: But of this latter, I
have elsewhere spoken distinctly and by it self.

4 To say that all who were visible members of the Church of Corinth were
admitted, and none excluded, and to say it with a certainly is to make too bold
with Scripture. And the contrary will sooner be proved from 1 Cor. 10. 21. ye
cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers
of the Lords Table and of the Table of Devils. So much for his first exception.

His second is concerning persons (but not to the purpose) that if we look
upon the catalogue of those with whom we are forbidden to eat, not only shall
most of the Anabaptisticall and Independent Congregations, but too many
Presbyterian ministers and Elders, who are most foreward to excommunicate
others for Idolatry, Fornication, Drunkenness, must first be excommunicated
themselves for their own covetousness. Answ. Let it light where it may,
Ministers do not stand nor fall to his Judgment* but where just proof can
fasten either covetousness or any other scandalous sin upon them, its all
the reason in the world they be censured with the first. If I had fallen upon
this passage of his book without knowing the author, I had presently imagined
it to be a piece from Oxford, it calls to my thoughts so many expressions in
Pamphlets from thence, aspersing London and Westminster, as more full of
covetousness, lying, hypocrisy, then Oxford of bloody Oaths, Masses and the
like.

Thirdly, says he, it is as clear as the noone day sun, that, no not to e^t,
in this Text is no more, then not to keep company, or hold civil familiarity
with such. What? as clear as the noon day sun? let us open our eyes then to
see this meridian light; first says he, no not to eat, is interpreted in the
Text it self by not to keep company, which we find twice in the preceding
words, eating together being one of the highest expressions of outward
friendship and familiarity. Had the Apostle said simply, not to eat* this
Argument had been the more colorable, but after he had twice said, not to keep
company, to add no not to eat, M^gdeb. Cent. 1 lib. 2. cap. 4. page 275. edit.
1624 giving the sense of this very place, they say. Atque ita excludantur a
communione Ecclesiae, ut non modo arceantur ab usu sacramen: orum, sed etiam a
commercio, ne cibus quidem cum iis capiatur. Novariuus upon the place expreseth
the Apostles meaning in these words of Ambrose. Cum fraire in quo vi^ia haec
reperiuntur, non solum Sacramenta non edenda, sed nec communem escam docet, ut
erubescat quum vitatur and se currigat.
does plainly intimate that the Apostle argues from the less to the greater*
and that there is some other fellowship and company with such a one, which is
more than eating together and so much less permitted: and what is that?
(eating together being as Master Prynne says one of the highest expressions of
outward friendship and familiarity.) Must it not be communion in the holy
things, and especially the receiving such a one to the Lords Table? as if he
had said, If scandalous brethren be spots in your common, how much more in your
sacred Feasts? for which cause the mixture of scandalous persons in Church
fellowship is extremely blamed 2 Pet. 2. 13. Jude v. 12. Put case that a
Parliament man or a Divine of the Assembly were known (as God forbid) to be an
Incendiary, an active malignant, a traitor, a blasphemer, so that no raher
Parliament man or Member of the Assembly would eat or company with him, were it
not strange, if for all that such a one should be permitted to sit in
Parliament or in Assembly? Is it not as strange if the whole Church
distributively shall not so much as eat with a scandalous person, and yet the
whole Church Collectively shall eat with him, in that very action which is a
symbol of the communion of Saints? So that if I should now admit that sense,
that these words no not to eat, amount to no more then not to keep company, or
hold civil familiarity with such, (as Mr. Prynne expresses it) yet the
Argument will stand firm and strong in regard of this necessary consequence.
If a private Christian ought not to hold so much as civil fellowship with a
scandalous brother not excommunicated, much less ought the Church to admit him
to Church communion in all public Ordinances; (there being less latitude, and
the rule much stricter in this Communion than in private civil fellowship,)
and if we be forbidden to do so much as to eat with such a one at a common
meal, quanto magis convictu sacro says Pareus upon the place, how much more is
the Church forbidden to receive him to the Lords Table? for if the end of
avoiding private company with such a one be to make him ashamed, as the
Erastians themselves do confess from 2 These. 3. 14. were it not contrary to
that end to countenance and embolden him by receiving him to public Church
communion at the Lords Table? Surely the refusing of the private could not so
much put him to shame, as the admission to the public should put respects upon
him. Wherefore 1 Cor. 5. 11. as it is interpreted by Master Prynne proves by a
necessary consequence the Suspension from the Sacrament of a scandalous
Churchmember not excommunicated.

If his next reason help him not, surely his sun will go down at noon, He
cites some parallel Texts, which interpret not to eat here, of avoiding them,
turning away from and rejecting them, etc. which are no judicial acts of the
Presbytery, but moral or prudentiall acts of particular Christians. Answ.
There is a judicial Presbyteriall act, (as very many conceive) in some of
those parallel Texts cited by him 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. Tit. 3. 10. and so his proof
is no less questionable, then the thing he would prove by it. And here the
Apostle intends more then a voluntary prudentiall withdrawing of particular
Christians, even a judicial act, in the very next words, What have I to do to
judge them also that are without? do not ye judge them that are within? where
he gives the reason of what he had said before, that he had written to them not
to be mixed with scandalous brethren, permitting them to keep company with
Pagans though guity of the same faults. The reason, because Churchcensures are
only for those that are Church Members not for aliens.

After Mr Prynne has put forth his strength to prove that Excommunication or
Suspension from the Sacrament is not meant 1 Cor. 5. 11. he comes in the next
place to answer the argument drawn by consequence* If we may not so much as
eat with such a one at our own Tables, far less at the Lords Table.
Whereunto his answer is, The argument is fallacions, says he, because it
varieth in the kind of eating, the one being civil, the other spiritual; the
one private in ones own house, or another, where he has absolute freedom or
liberty to eat or not to eat with another, the other public in the Church,
etc. But all this (say I) makes our argument the stronger; for if it be sin
to a private man to eat in his own house with a scandalous brother, though
this be but a civil fellowship in which there is more liberty and less
latitude than in religious fellowship; how much more sinful is it for
Church Officers to admit such a one to Sacramental eating with the Church?

And for that first rule of his, that arguments from the less t the greater
are not conclusive, except in the same kind of action, its utterly untrue. For
the holy Scripture it self has diverse arguments from the less to the
greater, where the kind is no less different, if not more, than private civil
eating together is from public eating together at the Table of the Lord, as
Numb. 12. 14. If Miriams father had spit in her face, should she not be ashamed
seven days? how much more when God has smitten her with leprosy for speaking
against his servant Moses? H^g. 1. 4. you have built to your selves ceiled
houses, how much more ought ye to have built the house of the Lord? Ioh. 3. 12.
If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if
I tell you of Heavenly things? 1 Cor. 6. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge
Angels? how much more things that pertain to this life?

His second exception is, that they fall not b^th under the selfsame precept.
If this be a just exception against our argument, then one cannot argue thus,
Its a sin to steal a man's private goods, how much more to steal that which
is holy? Its a sin to reproach a man's name, how much more to reproach Gods
Name? These do not fall under the selfsame precept? shall such arguments be
therefore inconcludent? Whence comes all this new logic which the world never
knew before?

His third condition (let it be remembered he says, if either of these three
conditions fail, the argument is inconseqent) is, that it must be within the
compass of the same power. If it be so, how shall that hold universally true?
H^w much better is it to get wisdom then Gold? and to get understanding rather
to be chosen then Silver? By Mr Prynnes rule it must only hold true in this
case, when it falls within the compass of the same power to get both Wisdom
and Gold? However if he had apprehended out argument aright, he had perceived
that the Iesser thing, and the greater thing are both within the compass of
the same power. The Church of Corinth ought not to eat with such a one at
common Tables: therefore not at the Lords Table. For this refusing to eat with
such a one at common Tables, was by virtue of a judicial Ecclesiastical
sentence passed against the scandalous person. So that when Mr Prynne says We
have free power not to eat Bread with those at our own Tables, with whom we
have no power or liberty left us by Christ, to refuse to eat with them at the
Lords Table, and thereupon supposes that our argumentation from that Text is
one principal cause and prop of Independency, yea of separation, not only
from Sacraments, but from Churches: he does altogether misapprehend the
business. For 1. Separation from Churches is properly a renouncing of
membership as unlawful: our argument concerns the unlawfulness of a
particular act, not of a membership in such a Church. 2. The causes and motives
of separation suppose either an unlawful constitution of Churches, or an
unlawful government of Churches, or both, so far, that they who separate
hold it unlawfnll to continue their membership in Churches so constituted and
governed, or so much as to communicate and partake in the Sacrament with such
Churches, though they know no scandalous person admitted to the Sacrament. 3.
The great mistake lies in this, that our present controversy is apprehended
to be whether every particular Christian has power or liberty from Christ to
withdraw from the Sacrament, because of the admission of a scandalous person.
Whereas our Question is only of the Churches power to suspend a scandalous
person from the Sacrament, and when the Apostle verse. 9. 10, 11. forbids to
be mixed or so much as to eat with such and such scandalous members of the
Church, he means of Church Discipline and Excommunication, which he had begun
to speak of, and so he comes to show them what kind of persons Gualther
archel. in 1 Cor. 5. 11. Catalogus eorum qui debent excommunica^i. Tossanus
ibid. Quod cibum non vult sumi cum iis, pertinet id quidem ad disciplinam
excommunica^ionis. Martyr ibid. Notandum praeterea, non esse privatorum hominum
ut quisque pro sus libidine ab hoc vel ab illo, quem peccasse forte suspicatus
fuerit, sese disjungere velit. Ad commune judicium Ecclesiae pertinet. Angust.
Hom. 50 joyneth 1 Cor. 5. v. 11. with v. 12, 13. and then says, Quibus (...)
(...) oftendit non ^emere aut quomodolibet, sed per judicium ^uferondos esse
(...) ab Ecclesiae communione, ut si per judicium auferri non possunt,
tolerentur potius, ne perverse malos quisque evitando, ab Ecclesia ipse
discedens, eos quos fugere videtur vinci^t ad gehennam. The same has Bed^ upon
the place out of Augustine* So likewise Ambr^se and the Centurists before cited*
he would have to be excommunicated, and used like that incestuous man. So
Beza, Bullinger, Hunnius, Gualther, Martyr, Tossanus, and others upon the
place. And long before all these Augustine and Beda plainly expound the
Apostles words of a public Ecclesiastical Judgment, past upon one who has
either confessed his offense or is formally accused and convict thereof; and as
they conceive, that Text does not at all justify but does rather condemn
private Christians their separating from the Church, because of a mixture of
scandalons persons. I know we ought prudently and cautiously to endeavor the
avoiding of the company and fellowship of scandalous brethren, though not yet
censured in the Church, (which may be proved from other Scriptures) but that is
not the point the Apostle is here upon: he means by no not to eat
synecdochically, the whole casting off of an excommunicate person, and all that
separation or withdrawing which is commanded to be made from him, or if you
will (by a metonimy of the effect for the cause) he means excommunication it
self: and however, the words immediately following prove that a public
judicial act is intended as has been said before.

These things considered, I shall not need to be led out of my way by Mr
Prynnes descanting upon the meaning of 1 Cor. 5. 11. how far it prohibits
civil communion and eating with a scandalous Christian, being a railer or
fornicator or Idolater, etc. I confess some of his limitations, as namely,
that we may eat with such a^one in cases of expediency or when we can not
avoid it in civility nor without offense, are very lubricke, unsafe, and
ensnaring, and at best its but like that in Martials Epigramme

Difficilis, facilis, jucundus, acerbus es idem;
Nec tecum possum vivere, nec sine te.
But to treat of that case of conscience in general is not hujus loci; for
this Text speaks of not eating with an excommunicate person. Neither yet shall
I need here to examine Mr Prynnes six considerations p. 12, 13, 14. which he
wishes to be pondered by Separatists and Independents misled, (as he thinks)
by our fallacious argument: I hope he does not mistake our Question so far as
to comprehend the sinfulness of any private Christian his receiving of the
Sacrament, when and where some scandalous sinners are admitted to the
Sacrament, that private Christian not being accessory to the sin of the
Minister and Eldership in admitting those scandalous sinners.

Wherefore I will add eight counterballancing considerations to prove from 1
Cor. 5. The 13 verse he yields to be a warrant for Excommunication: yet he
(...) concerning that also, in Diotre^ catechized.
the first twelve verses thereof (all which Mr Prynne conceives can not prove
Excommunication) compared with 2 Cor. 2. an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction or
power of censures, and particularly of Excommunication.

1. There was a censure inflicted upon the incestuous man by the Eldership of
the Church of Corinth, being assembled together 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. Where read we
that ever the Church was intentionally gathered together, to cooperate with an
Apostle in the exercise of his miraculous apostolical power? But we do read
that this man's punishment or censure was inflicted upon him not by the Apostle
alone but by Many, 2 Cor. 2. 6. Erastus page 214* thinks that (...) (in our
books rendered punishment, and in the margent censure) was not
excommunication, but only sharp objurgation or reproof. To this I have
abundantly answered Book 2. chap. 9. and in Male audis page 12, 13, 14. And if
it should be granted that the man was not then excommunicate but sharply and
publicly rebuked (which indeed is the opinion of some) yet the Church of
Corinth had proceeded to excommunication, had not written to dissuade them, if
the Apostle and take them off with a Sufficit, which he neither needed nor
would have done, if they had power to do no more ^o the offender then to
rebuke him sharply. To conclude this point, M Prynne grants that 1 Cor. 5.
13. proves excommunication; and why the gathering together, verse. 4. should
not be intended for the same work, I cannot imagine? Some question there was
of old whether the Apostles meaning verse. 13. were not that the Corinthians
should put away every man out of himself the evil of sin. Which Augustine
having somewhere left in medio, does in his Retractations correct, (and Beda
upon the place out of him tells us the very same) and expound it of the taking
away of the evil man from the Church by Excommunication, because says he, the
Greek can not be rendered hoc malum, but hunc malum.

2. They who had power to receive him and forgive him, and to confirm their
love toward him, had power to cast him out and censure him; but those (...),
the Church officers of the Church of Corinth had power of the former; Therefore
of the latter. See 2 Cor. 2. 7, 8. The Apostle advises them to forgive the
offender. How to forgive him? not as man forgives a private injury: that was
not the case. Nor only by the doctrine of remission of sins applied to him
in foro conscientiae, upon evidence of his repentance: that any one Minister
might do. But the Apostle will have those many who had censured him
consistorially and judicially, to forgive him in the same manner. Which is yet
further confirmed by that (...), that confirming of their love toward him
verse. 8. (...) is ratum facere, thence comes not only (...) but (...). When
the Apostle will express a ratified or confirmed testament Galat. 3. 15. he
calls it (...). From the same word Erasmus does collect that the Apostle
speaks to them as the ordinary Judges who have power to confirm their love
to that penitent sinner in an authoritative manner. And why does the Apostle
choose a word which properly signifi^th an authoritative confirming or
ratifying of a thing, if he were not speaking of a jurisdiction and power of
inflicting and taking off again censures?

3. The Apostle upon occasion of that offenders case, puts the Corinthians in
remembrance, that they ought likewise to purge the Church from the mixture of
other scandalous sinners, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. The Chapter both begins and
ends with the case of the incestuous man and his punishment; which makes
interpreters conceive, that what is enterlaced concerning other scandalous
sinners in the Church, is to be understood of such as the Apostle would have to
be censured in the same manner as that incestuous man.

4. He instanceth in six cases, (not intending an enumeration of all the
particular cases of Excommunication) fornication, covetousness, (meaning
covetousness scandalously and grossly manifested, or practical
covetousness, for of the heart God only judges) idolatry, railing,
drunkenness, extortion. His instancing in these, tells us he intends not the
case of private civil injuries, but of scandals, yea though the scandal be
without the mixture of any civil or private injury, as in the case of an
Idolater or a drunkard.

5. And even where there is a private injury wrapped up in the bosom of the
scandal, as in railing and extortion, yet the Apostle there looks upon them
not qua injuries, but qua scandals; and in that notion, he will have not only
the party particularly interrested and injured, but the other members of the
Church also to withdraw communion from the offender; for he writes to the
whole Church of Corinth, not to keep company with such.

6. When he says, with such a one no not to ^ate, he intimates by No not some
further and greater punishment than not eating with him, as has been said
before: If not so much as eating with him, then muchlesse Church communion with
him at the Lords Table.

7. He means not of that withdrawing whereby each Christian may and ought to
withdraw familiarity and fellowship from such a notorious scandalous sinner,
whose sin is manifest before hand, that he may keep himself pure, and not
partake of another man's sin: In which case a member of one Church may
withdraw familiar conversing with a scandalous member of another Church. But he
speaks of such a withdrawing from and avoiding of the fellowship of a
scandalous Brother, as is done not by one or some few private Christians, but
by the whole Church (for he writes to the whole Church of Corinth, not to
company nor eat with such a one) I say, by the whole Church, whereof the
offender was a member: and that not without a judicial or consistoriall
sentence, verse. 12. Do not ye judge them that are within? which can not be
restricted to the judgment of Christian discretion and prudence (for so both
the Apostles and they did judge those that were without, to walk circumspectly
toward them, Col. 4. 5. and to beware of their evil.) But it is meant of
censures and punishments inflicted by many, that is, by the Presbyters of that
Church, 2 Cor. 2. 6.

8. And so I have touched upon the last consideration, which is this. That as
the fault was a scandal given to the Church, and the judgment and censure was
Ecclesiastical, not civil, so that censure for that offense was inflicted
only upon Church members, not upon unbelievers. If an unbeliever did a civil
injury to a Christian, the Christian was free to accuse the unbeliever (if he
saw it good) before the civil Magistrate, and there to seek judgment and
justice. Or the Christian was free to withdraw civil fellowship from the
unbeliever, which did him a civil injury, which I suppose Mr Prynne will
easily grant. But this way of censuring and punishing a scandalous Church
member, did not agree to an Heathen who was an Idolater, or drunkard, or
extortioner, etc. Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. Thus I have proved Church censure from
1 Cor. 5. compared with 2 Cor. 2. without laying the weight of any argument
upon Tradere Sathanae. Which I would not have to be understood, as if I yielded
to our opposites, that the delivering to Satan is not meant of Excommunication.
My meaning is only to make the shorter work of the Erastian Antithesis. The
weight of their arguments, not of ours, is laid upon Tradere Sathanae. But for
my sense of the word, I am of their opinion who interpret it of
Excommunication; and so does Gualther himself. So does the Syriack, which
reads, That you (Corinthians) may deliver such a one to Satan. If it was an
an act of the Church of Corinth, then it was a Church censure, not a miracle.
The Greek does also carry it to be an act of the Church of Corinth assembled
together. We have also some (though not all) of the Ancients for us in this
particular: as Balsamon in Canon. epist. Basilii ad Amphilo^. C^n. ^.
observes. Basil speaks of some who at that time had been delivered to Satan
for 30 years, that they might learn not to carry thnmselves filthily, yea
unnaturally, as they had done formerly: concerning whom he advises that now
after so long a time, they might be (upon their spontaneous confession of their
heinous offense) received again into the Church. Hereupon Balsamonn oteth,
Those are said to be delivered to Satan, who are separated from the communion
of Christians.

CHAP. VIII. Whether Judas received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Mr. Prynne has filled up a good part of his Vindication with the case of
Judas, as going very far in the deciding of this present contoversie. But as
Protestant writers answer the Papists in the case of Peter, that it cannot be
proved tha^ Peter was ever Bishop of Rome, but rather that he was no^; and if
he had, this cannot prove the Popes Supremacy: the like I say of this case of
Judas. M. Prynne shall never be able to prove that Judas did receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and if he could prove it, yet it shall not at
all help that cause which he maintains.

I begin with the matter of fact, whether Judas received the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, as well as the other Apostles, which is the question by him
stated. For decision whereof, I hold it necessary, first of all that these two
things be premised, concerning the harmony of the Evangelists in that matter of
Judas, the use whereof we shall see afterward. Matthew and Mark tell us
Christ's discourse of the Traitor at Table, and the discovery of Judas, before
the institution of the Sacrament. Luke has the same thing after the
institution and distribution of the Sacrament. So that either Matthew and Mark
speak by anticipation, or Luke speaks by a recapitulation; that is, either
Matthew and Mark put before what was done after, or Luke puts after what was
done before. Now that there is in Luke an (...), a narration of that after the
institution which was indeed before the institution of the Sacrament, may thus
appear. 1. That very thing which Luke places after the institution and
distribution of the Sacrament, Luke 22. 21, 22, 23. Behold the hand of him that
betrayeth me is with me on the Table. And truly the son of man goes as it
was determined, but woe unto that man by whom he is betrayed. And they began to
enquire among themselves which of them it was that should do this thing. The
very same thing do Matthew and Mark record before the institution of the
Sacrament, Matthew. 26. 21. to 26. Mark 14. 18. to 22. and it is more credible
that one of the Evangelists is to be reduced to the order of two, rather than
two to the order of one.

2. Especially considering that Luke does not relate the business of the last
supper according to that order wherein things were acted or spoken, as is
manifest by Luke 22. 17. 18. And he took the cup and gave thanks and said,
Take this and divide it among your selves. This though related before the
taking and breaking of the bread, yet it is but by an anticipation or
preoccupation, occasioned by that which had preceded verse. 16. so to join the
protestation of not drinking again, with that of not eating again the
Passover with his Disciples: therefore Beza, Salmeron, Maldonat, and others
following Augustine and Euthymius do resolve it is an anticipation, even as
Paul mentions the cup before the bread, 1 Cor. 10. 16. I know some understand
the cup mentioned Luke 22. 17. to be the Paschall cup; others, to be the cup in
the ordinary supper; but to me its plain that it was the Eucharisticall cup;
yea Mr Prynne takes it so page 25. because that which Luke says of that cup,
that Christ took it, and gave thanks, and gave it to the Disciples, that they
might all drink of it, and told them he would not drink with them any more of
the fruit of the Vine till the Kingdom of God should come; all this is the
very same which Matthew and Mark record of the Eucharisticall cup. Therefore
our Non-conformists were wont to argue from that place, that the Minister ought
not to give the Sacramental elements to each communicant out of his own hand,
but that the communicant^ ought to divide the elements among themselves,
because Christ says in that place, of the cup, Divide it among your selves.

3. Luke says not that after Supper, or after they had done with the
Sacrament, Christ told his Disciples that one of them should betray him; only
he adds, after the History of the Sacrament, what Chrst said concerning the
Traitor. But Matthew and Mark do not only record Christ's words concerning
the Traitor before they make narration concerning the Sacrament, but they
record expressly that that discourse and the discovery of the Traitor was (...),
as they did eat, Matthew. 26. 21. Mark 14. 18. Now when the evening was come he
sat down with the twelve, and immediately follows, as the first purpose
which Christ spoke of, and as they did eat, he said, verily I say unto you,
that one of you shall betray me. Which could not be so, if Luke relate Christ's
words concerning the Traitor in that order in which they were first uttered;
for Luke having told us verse 22. that Christ took the cup after Supper and
said, This cup is the new Testament, etc. adds, But behold the hand of him
that betrayeth me is with me on the Table. So that if this were the true order,
Christ did not tell his Disciples concerning the Traitor, as they did eat
(which Matthew and Mark do say) but after they had done eating. If it be said
that (...) may suffer this sense, when they had eaten, or having eaten. I
answer, the context will not suffer that sense; for they were indeed eating in
the time of that discourse, Matthew. 26. 23. He that dippeth his hand with me in
the dish the same shall betray me, Jos. 13. 26. He it is to whom I shall give a
sop after I have dipped it.

4. Musculus in loc. com. de caen. dom. page 362. gives this reason out of
Rupertus, why Lukes narration of Christ's words concerning the Traitor, is
placed by a recapitulation after the Sacrament: because Luke is the only
Evangelist who writes distinctly of the Paschall Supper, and what Christ said
at that Supper: and having once fallen upon that purpose, the connection of the
matter did require that he should immediately add the story of the
E^charisticall Supper, without interlacing that of the Traitor. Which reason
will pass for good with such as think Judas did eat of the Paschalll Supper,
and that Christ's words concerning him were spoken at the Paschall Supper, which
I greatly doubt of.

5. Mr Prynne page 18. does in effect grant the same thing that I say; for he
says, that Matthew and Mark record that immediately before the institution of
the Sacrament, as they sat at meat Jesus said unto the twelve, Verily one of
you shall betray me, whereupon they began to be sorrowful and to say unto him,
etc. He adds, that Judas was the last man that said, Is it I? immediately
before the institution, as Matthew records. But of Luke he says only thus
much, that he places these words of Christ concerning Judas his betraying him,
after the institution and distribution of the Sacrament, not before it. If it
be thus as Mr Prynne acknowledges, that Matthew and Mark record, that Christ
had that discourse concerning Judas before the institution of the Sacrament,
then most certainly it was before the institution of the Sacrament, because it
must needs be true which Matthew and Mark say. Whence ^t will necessarily
follow that Luke does not mention that discourse concerning Judas in its proper
place, and this does not offer the least violence to the Text in Luke, because
he does not say that Christ spoke these words after the Sacrament, only he
places these words after the Sacrament, as Mr Prynne says rightly. When
Scripture says that such a thing was done at such a time, it must be so
believed. But when Scripture mentions one thing after another, that will not
prove that the thing last mentioned was last done. More plainly Master Prynne
page 26, 27. tells us that the Sacrament was given after Christ had particularly
informed his Disciples that one of them should betray him, which he proves from
Ioh. 13. 18. to 28. Matthew. 26. 20. to 36. Mark 14. 18. to 22. Luke 22. 21, 22,
23. Whence it follows inevitably by his own confession, that Matthew and Mark
recording that discourse about Judas after the Sacrament, do place it in the
proper order; and that Luke mentioning that discourse about Judas after the
Sacrament, does not place it in its own place. This is the first thing which I
thought good to premise, which will easily take off the strongest argument
which ever I heard alleged for Judas his receiving of the Sacrament, namely
this, that Luke immediately after the institution and distribution of the
Sacrament adds, But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me at
the Table. If these words were not uttered by Christ in that order wherein Luke
places them (which I have proved) then the argument is not conclusive.

The second thing to be premised, is this: that the story which we have Ioh 13.
from the beginning to verse 31. concerning the Supper at which Christ
discoursed of Judas and gave him the sop, after which he went immediately out,
was neither in Bethany two days before the Passover, as the Antidote
Animadverted tells us page 5. nor yet after the institution of the Sacrament, as
Mr Prynne tells us, Vindic. page 25. herein differing either from himself or
his friend. That Supper in Bethany, the Pamphlet says, was two days before
the Passover; but some Interpreters collect from John 12. 1, 2. it was longer
before; Christ having come to Bethany six days before, and after that Supper
the next day Christ did ride into Jerusalem on a young Ass, and the people
cried Hosanna, Joh. 12. 12. the very story which we have Matthew. 21. Mark says
that two days before the Passover the chief Priests and Scribes sought how
to put Christ to death, but he does not say that the Supper in Bethany was two
days before the Passover. But of this I will not contend, whenever it was, it
is not much material to the present question, there was nothing at that Supper
concerning Judas, but a rebuking of him for having indignation at the spending
of the Alabaster box of Ointment, and from that he sought opportunity to betray
Christ: But the discourse between Christ and his Apostles concerning one of
them that should betray him, and their asking him one by one Is it I? was in
the very night of the Passover, as is clear Matthew. 26. 19, 20, to 26. Mark
14. 16, to 22. So that the story Ioh. 13. 18. to 30. being the same with that
in Matthew and Mark, could not be two days before the Passover. And if two
days before Christ had discovered to John who should betray him, by giving the
sop to Judas, how could every one of the Disciples (and so John among the rest)
be ignorant of it two days after, which made every one of them to ask Is it
I? Finally, that very night in which the Lord Jesus did institue the Sacrament,
the Disciples began to be sorrowful, and began to enquire which of them it was
that should betray him, Matthew. 26. 22. Mark 14. 19. Luke 22. 23. But if Christ
had told them two days before that one of themselves who did sit at Table with
him should betray him, surely they had at that time begun to be sorrowful and
to ask every one Is it I?

That which has been said does also discover that other mistake that the
discourse at Table concerning the Traitor, and the giving of the sop to Judas
Ioh. 13. was after the institution of the Sacrament. If it were after, then
either that in John is not the same with the discourse concerning the Traitor
mentioned by Matthew and Mark; or otherwise Matthew and Mark speak by
anticipation. But I have proved both that the true order is in Matthew and
Mark, and that the discourse concerning the Traitor mentioned by John must be
in the Evangelicall harmony put together with that in Matthew and Mark, as
making one and the same story. And if this in John had been posterior to that
in Matthew, then why does Mr Prynne himself join these together as one, page
18, 19.

These things premised, I come to the arguments which prove that Judas did not
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The first argument (which was by me touched in that Sermon so much quarrelled
by Mr Prynne) is this. It is said of Judas, Ioh. 13. 30. He then having
received the sop went immediately out. But this sop or morsel was given him
before the Sacrament, whiles they were yet eating the other Supper, at the end
whereof Christ did institute the Sacrament. Therefore Judas went away before
the Sacrament. Let us hear Mr Prynnes four answers to this argument, page 24,
25. First, says he, Judas went not out till after Supper, John 13. 2. and
Supper being ended, etc. Answ. (...) will not prove that the Supper was fully
ended. The Centurists Gent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 10. explain John 13. 2. thus,
Magna caenae hujus part peracta, A great part of this Supper being done; yea
the Greek may be as well turned thus, When they were at Supper, as the late
English Annotations have it. Ludovicus de Dieu chooses this sense. Salmeron
and others prove it from verse 4. He rises from Supper, with verse. 12* he sat
down again to Supper, and dipped the sop. Take but two like instances in this
same story of the passion, Matthew. 26. 6. (...) Now when Jesus was in Bethany,
not, after Jesus was in Bethany. Matthew. 26. 20. (...) Now when the even was
come, not, when the even was ended. His second answer, that all the other three
Evangelists prove that Judas was present at the Sacrament, is but petitio
principii. Thirdly (says he) the Sacrament was not instituted after Supper,
but as they sat at Supper. Answ. It was indeed instituted while they were
sitting at supper, or before they rose from supper, so that they were still
continuing in a Table gesture; yet the actions must needs be distinguished, for
they did not at the same instant receive the Sacrament, and eat of another
supper too. And though it be said of the bread, that as they did eat, Jesus
took bread, yet of the cup Paul and Luke say, that Jesus took it after
Supper, that is, after they had done eating; therefore certainly after Judas
got the sop and went away, at which instant they had not done eating. Neither
is there any ground at all Luke 22. 17. to prove that he took the cup during
supper, as Mr Prynne conceives. But finding no strength herein, he adds:
that some learned men are of opinion that 1 Cor. 11. 21, 22. Ter^ul. apolog.
Christ had that night first his paschall supper, at the close whereof he
instituted his own Supper. Secondly, an ordinary supper which succeeded the
institution of his own, in imitation whereof the Corinthians and Primitive
Christians had their love feasts, which they did eat immediately after the
Lords Supper: and this is more then intimated John 13. v. 2, 12, to 31, etc.
therefore Lukes after Supper he took the cup, must be meant only after the
Paschall supper, not the other Supper.

Answ. I verily believe that beside the Paschall and Eucharisticall suppers,
Christ and his Disciples had that night a common or ordinary supper, and so
think Calvin and Beza upon Matthew. 26. 20. Pareus upon Matthew. 26. 21. Fulk on 1.
Cor. 11. 23. Cartwright ibid. and in his Harmony lib. 3. page 173. Pelargus in
Ioh. 13. quaest. 2. Tossanu^ in Matthew. 26. Tolet and Maldon^ upon John 13. 2.
Iansenius cone. evang. cap. 131. and diverse others. I am very glad that Mr
Prynn^ grants it; and I approve his reason, that in the Paschall supper we read
of no sops, nor ought to dip them in. The Jews indeed tell us of a sauce in
the Passover which they call Chareseth: but I suppose Christ kept the
Passover according to the Law, and did not tie himself to rites which had
come in by tradition. I could bring other reasons to prove an ordinary supper,
if it were here necessary. But what gains Mr Prynne hereby? surely he loses
much, a^ shall appear afterward.

2. Whereas he thinks the common supper at which Christ did wash his Disciples
feet, and discover Judas, and give him the sop, was after the Sacrament, as I
know not those learned men that think as he does in this point, so ^t is more
than he can prove. The contrary has been proved from Matthew and Mark who
record that the discourse concerning Judas was while they were eating that
supper which preceded the Sacrament; so that the giving of the sop to Judas
must be before the Sacrament. But after the Sacrament both Matthew and Mark
do immediately add, and when they had sung a hymn they went out into the
mount of Olives.

3. As for that of the Corinthians, the very place cited by himself makes
against him, 1 Cor. 11. 21. for when they came together to eat the Lords
Supper, every one did (...) first take his own supper, and that in imitation
of Christ who gave the Sacrament after supper. So Aquinas, Lyra, and others
following Augustine. This taking first or before, (...). ce^. 1. lib. 2. cap.
6. cap. 384. edit. 1624. apud Corinthios invalu^rat ^lle abusus, ut an^e caenam
Dominicam inter se concertarent; and alii ibi suas coenas instruerent and
benepoti caenam Domini acciperen^.
has reference to the Sacrament; because it is spoken of every one who came to
the Lords Table, every one takes before his own supper, which made such a
disparity that one was hungry and another drunken at the Sacrament, the poor
having too little, and the rich too much at their own supper.

4. The example of the ancient Christians will help him as little. I find no
such thing in Tertullians Apologetik, as the eating of the love feasts
immediately after the Lords Supper. But I find both in the ^od. c^non. eccl.
Afri^. can. 41. Ut Sacramenta altaris (...) ni^i a jejunis hominibus
celebrentur, excepto uno die anniversario, quo caena dominica celebratur.
African Canons and in August. epist. 118. cap. 7. Sed nonnullos probabilis
quaedam ratio delectavit, ut uno certo die per annum quo ipsam caenam Dominus
dedit, ^anquam ad insigniorem commemorationem, post cibos offerti and accipi
liceat corpus and s^nguinem Domini etc. hoc tamen non arbitror institu^um, nisi
quia plures and prope omnes in plerisque locis eo die caenare consueverunt.
Augustine, and in Walafridus Strabo de reb. eccl. cap. 19. Hoc qu^que
commemorandum videtur, quod ipsa Sacrament^ quidam interdum jejuni, interdum
pransi perc^pisse leguntur. He tells us out of Socrates that the Egyptians ne^re
Alexandria, as likewise those in Thebais did often take the S^crament after
they had eaten lib^rally.
Walafridus Strabo that once in the year (and oftener by diverse) the Sacrament
was received after the ordinary meat for a commemoration of that which Christ
did in the night wherein he was betrayed. It had been formerly in use among
diver^ to take the Sacrament ordinarily after meat, till the African Council
discharged it, as Laurentius de la bar observes in the notes upon Tertullian
page 339. edit. Paris. 1580. Augustine epist. 118. cap. 5. and 6. answers
certain quaeries of Ianuarius, concerning eating or not eating before the
Sacrament. He says that Christ did indeed give the Sacrament after supper, and
that the Corinthians did also take it after supper: but that the Scripture has
not tied us to follow these examples, but left us at liberty. And upon this
ground he defends the Churches custom at that time of taking the Sacrament
fasting, for greater reverence to the Ordinance. But in this he speaks
plainly, Cum sero factum esset, recumbebat cum duodecim, and manducantibus ois
dixit* Quoniam unus ex vobis me tradet. Post enim tradidit Sacramentum.
that when Christ was eating with the Disciples, and telling them that one of
them should betray him, he had not then given the Sacrament. With Augustines
judgment agrees that Epistle of Chrysostom, where answering an objection
which had been made against him, that he had given the Sacrament to some that
were not fasting, he denies the fact, but adds, if he had done so, it had
been no sin, because Christ gave the Sacrament to the Apostles after they had
supped. (...). Let them depose, says he, the Lord himself, who gave the
communion after supper. In commemoration whereof the ancient Church (even when
they received the Sacrament fasting at other times, yet) upon the passion day
called Good Friday received it after meals, as I proved before. And this I
also add by the way, that though* Paul condemns the Corinthians for eating
their love feast in the Church, yet he allows them to eat at home before they
come to the Lords Table, as the Centurists, cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 6. page 384.
prove from 1 Cor. 11. 34. And if any man hunger let him eat at home, that ye
come not altogether unto condemnation. Casaubon Exerc. 16. page 367. edit.
Francof. 1615. thinks it was in imitation of Christ's example that those
Egyptians mentioned by Socrates did take the Sacrament at night after they had
liberally supped (...), being filled with all sorts of meats.

I conclude therefore that when Luke says after supper he took the cup, the
meaning is, after both paschall and common supper, and that there was no other
eating after the Sacrament that night, and so consequently the giving of the
sop to Judas must needs be before the Sacrament; and his going out immediately
after the sop proves that he did not receive the Sacrament.

But Mr Prynne gives us a fourth answer, which is the last (but a very weak)
refuge. The word immediately, says he, many times in our common speech
signifies soon after, or not long after, as we usually say we will do this or
that immediately, instantly, presently, whenas we mean only speedily, within a
short time. Answ. 1. This is no good report which Mr Prynne brings upon the
English tongue, that men promise to do a thing immediately, when they do not
mean to do it immediately. I hope every conscientious man will be loath to say
immediately, except when he means immediately, (for I know not how to explain
immediately, but by immediately) and for an usual form of speaking, which is
not according to the rule of the word, its a very bad commentary to the
language of the holy Ghost. 2. And if that form of speech be usual in making
of promises, yet I have never known it usual in writing of Histories, to say
that such a thing was done immediately after such a thing, and yet diverse other
things intervened between them. If between Judas his getting of the sop and his
going out did interveene the instituting of the Sacrament, the taking,
blessing, breaking, distributing, and eating of the bread, also the taking and
giving of the cup, and their dividing it among themselves, and drinking all of
it; how can it then be a true narration that Judas went out immediately after
his receiving of the sop. 3. Neither is it likely that Satan would suffer Judas
to stay any space after he was once discovered, lest the company* and
conference of Christ and his Apostles should take him off from his wicked
purpose. 4. Gerard having in his common places given that answer, that the word
immediately may suffer this sense, that shortly thereafter Judas went forth; he
does professedly recall that answer in his Cotinuation of the Harmony cap. 171.
p. 453. and that upon this ground, because Judas being mightily irritated and
exasperated* both by the sop, and by Christ's answer, (for when Judas asked Is
it I? Christ answered Thou have said) would certainly break away abruptly and
very immediately. So much of the first argument.

The second argument (which I also touched in my Sermon) was this. As Christ
said to the Communicants, Drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26. 27. and they all
drank, Matthew. 14. 23. so he says to them all, This is my Body which is broken
for you, This is the cup of the new covenant in my Blood, which is shed for
you, Luke 22. 19. 20. But if Judas had been one of the communicants, it is not
credible that Christ would have said so in reference to him, as well as to the
other Apostles. This argument Mr Prynne p. 25. does quite mistake, as if the
strength of it lay in a supposed particular application of the words of the
institution to each communicant, which I never meant, but dislike it as much as
he: The words were directed to all, in the plural. This is my Body broken for
you, etc. my Blood shed for you, etc. Mr Prynne conceives that it might have
been said to Judas, being meant by Christ, only conditionally, that his Body
was broken, and his Blood was shed for him, if he would really receive them by
faith. Jonas Schlichtingius a Socinian in his book against Meisnerus page 803.
though he supposes as Mr Prynne does that Judas was present at the giving of
the Sacrament, yet he holds that it is not to be imagined, that Christ would
have said to Judas, that his body was broken for him. And shall we then who
believe that the death of Jesus Christ was a satisfaction to the justice of God
for sin (which the Socini^ believe not) admit that Christ meant to comprehend
Judas among others, when he said this is my body which is broken for you?

Ministers do indeed offer Christ to all upon condition of believing, being
commanded to preach the Gospel to every creature, and not knowing who are
reprobates: but that Christ himself (knowing that the son of perdition was
now lost, that the Scripture might be fulfilled John 17. 12.) would in the
Sacrament (which is more applicative then the word, and particularizeth the
promises to the receivers) so speak, as that in any sense those words might be
applied to Judas, that even for him his body was broken and his blood shed; and
that thereupon the seals should be given him, to me is not at all credible;
and I prove the negative by four arguments: (though I might give many more) 1.
If Christ did in reference to Judas mean conditionally that his body was
broken, and his blood shed for him, if he would believe (as Mr Prynne holds)
then he meant conditionally to save the son of perdition whom he knew
infallibly to be lost, and that he should be certainly damned and go to Hell,
and that in eating the Sacrament he would certainly eat and drink judgment
to himself (all which Mr Prynne himself page 26. says Christ infallibly
knew) But who dare think or say so of Jesus Christ? Suppose a Minister knew
infallibly that such a one has blasphemed against the holy Ghost, (which sin
the Centurists and others think to have been committed by Judas, which could
not be hid from Christ) and is irrecoverably lost, and will be most certainly
damned, durst that Minister admit that person to the Sacrament, and make those
words applicable to him so much as conditionally; This is the Lords body broken
for you: This is the blood of the new Covenant shed for you unto remission of
sin? How much less would Christ himself say so, or mean so in reference to
Judas?

2. If Christ would not pray for Judas, but for his elect Apostles only, and
such as should believe through the word of the Gospel, then he meant not so
much as conditionally to give his body and blood for Judas. (for if he meant
any good to Judas, so much as conditionally, he would not have excluded him
from having any part at all in his prayers to God.) But Christ does exclude
Judas from his prayer, John 17. not only as one of the reprobate world verse.
9. but even by name verse. 12. giving him over for lost, and one that was not to
be prayed for.

3. Love and hatred in God and in his son Jesus Christ, being eternal and
unchangeable, (for actus Dei immanentes sunt aeterni) it follows that if
there was such a decree of God, or any such meaning or intention in Christ, as
to give his body and blood for Judas, whom he knew infallibly to be lost: and
since that same conditional meaning or intention could not be without a
conditional love of God and of Christ to Judas and his salvation: this love
does still continue in God, and in Christ, to save Judas now in Hell upon
condition of his believing, which every Christian I think will abominate.

4. That conditional love and conditional intention or meaning, could not
have place in the Son of God. For as Spanhemius does rightly argue in his
late learned Exercitations de gratia universali page 746. it does not become
either the wisdom or goodness of God to will and intend a thing upon such a
condition as neither is nor can be. And page 829. he says, that this
conditional destination or intention cannot be conceived, as being incident
only to such as do neither foreknow nor direct and order the event, and in
whose hand it is not to give the faculty and will of performing the thing.
Which can not without impiety be thought or said of God. Thus he.

The third argument (which I shall now add) is that whereby Hilarious Can. 30.
in Matthew. and Innocentius the third lib. 4. de mysterio miss. cap. 13. prove
that Judas received not the Sacrament, neither was present at the receiving of
it. Because that night while Judas was present, Christ in his gracious and
comfortable expressions to his Apostles did make an exception, as John 13. 10,
11. Ye are clean, but not all. For he knew who should betray him, therefore
said he, ye are not all clean, verse. 18. I speak not of you all, I know whom I
have chosen. So verse. 21. even as before Joh. 6. 70. Have not I chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil. But at the Sacrament all his sweet and
gracious speeches are without any such exception, This is my body which is
given for you, etc. Yea he says positively of all the Apostles to whom he gave
the Sacrament, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until
that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Matthew. 26. 29.
and this he says nnto them all, as it is clear from verse. 27. Drink ye all
of it. Again, Luke 22. 28, 29, 30. Ye are they which have continued with me in
my temptatoons. And I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed
unto me. That ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on
Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Would not Christ much more have
excepted Judas in these expressions, if he had been present, seeing he had so
often excepted him before?

As for Mr Prynnes reasons from Scripture to prove that Judas did receive the
Sacrament, they are extremely inconcludent. First, he says, that Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, are all express in terminis, that Christ sat down to eat
the Passover, and the twelve Apostles with him; that Judas was one of those
twelv^, and present at the Table; that as they sat at meat together, Jesus
took Bread, etc. that he said of the cup, drink ye all of it; and Mark says
they all drank of it.

Answ. 1. The three Evangelists are all express in terminis, that when Even
was come, Christ sat down with the twelve; as likewise that the twelve did
eat with him that night; but that the twelve Apostles were with him in the
eating of the Passover, they are not express in terminis, and I have some
reasons which move me to think that Judas did not eat so much as of the
Passover that night* whereof in the proper place. 2. And if he had been at the
Passover, that proves not he was at the Lords Supper. When Christ took the
cup and said, Drink ye all of it, it was after supper, that is, after the
Paschall supper, as Mr Prynne himself gives the sense. 3. When Mark says,
They all drank of it, he means all that were present, but Judas was gone
forth. His argument supposes that Judas was present, which being before
disproved, there remains no more strength nor life in his argument.

That which he adds page 18, 19. if it have either strength or good sense, I
confess the dullness of my conception. He would prove from Matthew and Mark
that immediately before the institution of the Sacrament, Christ told his
Disciples that one of them should betray him, and they all asked Is it I? and
that therefore certainly the Sacrament was given to Judas, because he was the
last man that said Is it I? immediately before the institution. And further
(says he) Luke places these words of Christ concerning Judas his betraying of
him, after the institution, which manifests that Judas was present at the
Sacrament. His inference is this, that seeing John averreth, Chap. 13. v. 2.
that all this discourse, and the giving of the sop to Judas was after supper,
and the other three Evangelists agreeing that Christ instituted and distributed
the Sacrament, as they did eat, before supper quite ended, it must follow that
Judas did receive the Sacrament.

Answ. 1. But how does this hang together, first to argue that Judas received
the Sacrament, because Christ's discourse concerning Judas, and Judas his
question Is it I? were immediately before the institution of the Sacrament: and
again to prove that Judas did receive the Sacrament, because Christ's discourse
about Judas was after supper ended, and after the Sacrament which was
instituted before supper ended? the one way of arguing destroys the other. 2.
For that in Matthew and Mark, that Christ discoursed of the Traitor, and that
Judas said Is it I? before the institution of the Sacrament, I confess; but
that it was immediately before the institution of the Sacrament the Evangelists
do not say, neither does he prove it. Judas went out after that discourse and
the sop, and how much of the consolatory and valedictory Sermon (which
begins John 13. 31.) was spent before the distribution of the Sacrament, who
is so wise as to know? 3. For that in Luke, I have proved that though he sets
down the things, yet not in that order wherein they were done: which is also
the opinion of Grotius upon that place. And for that John 13. 2. Supper being
ended, I have answered before.

Shall we in the next place have a heap of humane testimonies concerning Judas
his receiving of the Sacrament? I see so much light from Scripture to the
contrary, that I shall not be easily shaken with the authority of men: yet it
shall not be amiss a little to try whether it be altogether so as he would
make us believe. He says we go against all antiquity, page 18. and against
the most and best of Protestant writers, page 23. yea, that all ages have
received it as an indubitable verity that Iudis received the Sacrament, page
19. No Sir, soft a little. The truth is the thing has been very much
controverted both among the Fathers, and among Papists, and among Protestant
writers. I have found none so unanimous for Judas his receiving of the
Sacrament as the Lutherans, Gerhard. loc. com. tom. 5. page 186, 187. Petrus
Hinckelmannus de Anabaptismo. disp. 5. cap. 2.
endeavoring thereby to prove that the wicked hypocrites and unbelievers do
in the Sacrament eat the true body of Christ, and drink his true blood, yet
(as hot as they are upon it) they acknowledge it is no indubitable verity, they
cite authorities against it as well as for it. See Gerhard Harm. evang. cap.
171. Brachmand Tom. 3. page 2082. Neither do the Lutherans make any such use
of Judas his receiving of the Sacrament as Master Prynne does: for they hold
that not only excommunicated persons, but scandalous and notorious sinners,
not yet excommunicated, ought to be kept back from the Lords Table: See
Gerhard loc. com. Tom. 5. 180, 181, 182. where he proves distinctly that all
these ought to be excluded from the Lords Supper. 1. Heretics. 2. Notorious
scandalous sinners. 3. Excommunicated persons. 4. Possessed persons, furious
persons, and idiots. 5. Infamous persons, who use unlawful arts, as Magitians,
Negromancers, etc. and for the exclusion of scandalous sinners he cites the
Ecclesiastical Electorall Constitutions. L. Osiander Enchir. contra Anabap.
cap. 6. quaest. 3. tells us that the Lutheran Churches exclude all known
scandalous persons from the Sacrament. But it is strangest to me that Mr Prynne
will not give credit to some of the Testimonies cited by himself. Theophylact.
enar in Matthew. 26. says Quidam autem dicunt quod egresso Juda, tradidit
Sacramentum aliis Discipulis, proinde and nos sic facere debemus, and malos a
Sacramentis abarcere. Idem enar. in Marc. 14. Quidam dicun^ (but who they were
appears not says Mr Prynne, in any extant work of theirs) Iudam non fuisse
participem Sacramentorum, sed egressum esse priusquam dominus Sacramenta
traderet. Shall we take this upon Mr Prynnes credit, that it does not appear
in any extant work of theirs? Nay, let him take better heed what he says, and
whereof he affirms. In the next page he himself excepteth one, which is
Hilary; but except him only, he says that all the Ancients unanimously accord
herein, without one dissenting voice. But see now whether all is to be believed
that Mr Prynne gives great words for. It Is well that he confesses we have
Hilary for us. First therefore let Hilarious Can. 30. in Matthew: Post quae Judas
proditor indicatur, sine quo pascha accepto calice and fracto pane conficitur:
dignus enim aeternerum sacramentorum communione non f^erat etc. Neque sane
bibere cum eo poterat, qui non erat bibeturus in regno.
the words of Hilary be observed. Next I will prove what he denies, namely
that others of the Ancients were of the same opinion.

Clemens lib. 5. constit. Apost. cap. 13. after mention of the Paschall or
typical supper, adds these words, as of the Apostles, (...). But when he had
delivered to us the antitype mysteries (so called in reference to the Paschall
supper) of his precious body and blood, Judas not being present with us. I do
not own these eight books of the Apostolical constitutions, as written by
that Clemens who was Paul's fellow laborer, Phil. 4. yet certainly they are
ancient as is universally acknowledged. Dionysius Areopagita (or whosoever he
was that anciently wrote under that name) de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia cap. 3.
part. 3. sect. 1. speaking of the same bread, and the same cup, whereof all the
communicants are partakers, he says that this teaches them a Divine
conformity of manners, and withal calls to mind Christ's supper in the night
when he was betrayed (...). In quo caena: so Ambrose the Monk in his Latin
translation, and Iudoeus Clichtoveus in his Commentary, In which supper (for
(...) relates to (...) the supper before mentioned, and signifies the time of
supper, or after supper was begun.; so the Graecians use to say (...) to
signify in the time of sickness) the author himself of those Symbols does
most justly deprive or cast out him (Judas) who had not holily and with
agreement of mind supped together with him, upon holy things. By these holy
things he understands (it should seem) the Typical or Paschall supper, of
which Judas had eaten before, and peradventure that night also, in the opinion
of this Ancient. Iudocus Clichteveus in his Commentary says only, that Judas
did that night eat together with Christ cibum, meat, he says not
Sacramentum. This ancient writer is also of opinion that Christ did
excommunicate Judas, or as Clichtoveus expounds him, a caeterorum discipulorum
caetu aequissime separavit, discrevit and dispescuit. If you think not this
clear enough, hear the ancient Scholiast Maximus to whom the Centurists give
the Testimony of a most learned and most holy man: He flourished in the seventh
Century, under Constans, he was a chief opposer of the Monothelites, and
afterward a martyr. His Scholia upon that place of Dionysius, makes this
inference (...) (...), that after Judas had gone forth from supper, Christ gave
the mystery to his Disciples. Again, (...). Where note, that to him also,
(that is, to Judas) he (Christ) gave of a mystical bread (meaning the
unleavened bread of the Passover) and cup (meaning the cup drunk at the
Paschall supper) but the mysteries (that is, the Eucharisticall bread and cup,
commonly called the mysteries by ancient writers) he gave to his Disciples
after Judas went forth from supper, as it were because Judas himself was
unworthy of these mysteries.

Add hereunto the Testimony of Georgius Pachymeres, who lived in the
thirteenth Century: in his Paraphrase upon that same place of Dionysius, he
says that Christ himself the author and institutor of this Sacrament, (...).
Christ does cast out and separate or excommunicate most justly Judas, who bad
not holily supped together with him. For having given to him also of a
mystical bread and cup, he gave the mysteries to the Disciples alone, after be
went forth from Supper, thereby as it were showing that Judas was unworthy of
these mysteries.

By the mysteries which Maximus and Pachimeres speak of, and which they say
Christ gave to his Disciples, after Judas was gone forth., I can understand
nothing, but the Eucharisticall supper, the Elements whereof are very
frequently called the mysteries by the ancients, as has been said. And if any
man shall understand by these mysteries the inward graces or things signified
in the Lords Supper, then what senoe can there be in that which Maximus and
Pachimeres say? for Christ could as easily keep back from Judas, and give to
his other Disciples, those graces and operations of his Spirit, when Judas was
present among them, as when he was cast out. So that it could not be said that
Christ did cast out Judas in order to the restraining from him, and giving to
the other Disciples, the invisible inward grace signified in the Sacrament, as
if the other Apostles had not received that grace at the receiving of the
Sacrament, but that Iud^s must first be cast out, before they could receive it;
or as if Judas had received the inward grace, if he had not gone out from
supper. The sense must therefore be this, that Judas as an unworthy person was
cast out by Christ, before he thought fit to give the Sacrament of his Supper
unto his other Apostles.

Unto all these Testimonies add Ammonius Alexandrinus de quatuor Evangeliorum
consonantia, cap. 155. where he has the story of Iud^s his receiving of the
sop, and his going forth immediately after he had received it: thereafter cap.
156. he adds the institution and distribution of the Lords Supper, as being
in order posterior to Judas his going forth. So likewise before him Tacianus
does make the History of the institution of the Sacrament to follow after the
excluding of Judas from the company of Christ and his Apostles: which neither
of them had done, if they had not believed that Judas was gone before the
Sacrament. With all these agrees Lib. 4. de myster. Miss cap. 13. Patet ergo
quod Judas prius exiit quam Christus traderet Eucharistiam. Quod autem Lucas
post calicem commemorat traditc^em, per recapitualtionem potost intelligi: Quia
saepe ^it in Scriptura ut 'quod prius sactum sserat posterius enarretur. That
whole Chapter is sp^nt in the debating of this question.
Innocentius the third, who holds expressly that the Sacrament was not given
till Judas had gone forth: and that there is a recapitulation in the narration
of Luke. Moreover as it is evident by the forementioned Testimonies of
Theophylact that some of the Ancients did hold that Christ gave not the
Sacrament to Judas: so also the Testimony cited by Mr Prynne out of Victor
Antiochenus bears witness to the same thing: sunt tamen qui Judam ante
porrectam Eucharistiae Sacamentum exivisse existiment. But yet (says he) there
are who conceive that Judas went forth before the Sacrament of the Eucharist
was given. And with these words Mr Prynne closes his citation out of Victor
Antiochenus. But I will proceed where he left off. The very next words are
these, Sane Johannes quiddam ejusmodi subindicare videtur. Certainly John
seems to intimate some such thing. Which is more then half a consenting with
those who think that Judas went forth before the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. I shall end with two Testimonies of Rupertus Tuitiensis, In I^h 6. de
participatione autem co^po r^s and sanguinis ejus, potest aliquis opinari quod
ille (Judas) intersuerit. Sed profecto diligentius Evangelistarum natratione,
doctorumque ^nsiderata diversitate, citius deprehendi, huic quoque Sacramento
illum nequaquam inter^ Nam cum accepis^et buccellam, qua traditor designatus
est, exivit continuo.
one upon the sixth: Idem in Io. 13. Sciendum (...) o est, quia, sicut and ante
nos dictum est, si post bucellam continuo Judas ^xivit, sicut paulo post
Evangelista dicit, procul^ubio nequaquam Discipulis tunc interfuit, quando
Domirus noster Sacramentum illis corporis and sanguinis sui distribuit. Et
paulo post. Igitur exemplo Domini, tolerate quidem malos boni debent in
Ecclesia, don^c ventilabro Judicii granum a palea, vel a tritico separentur
zizan^a: (...) e^ non ^o usque indis^ eta debet esse patientia, ut indig^is,
quos noverunt, Sacrosancta Christi tradant mysteria.
another upon the thirteenth of John. The latter of the two speaks thus,
being Englished. But we must know, that, as it has been also said before us,
if Judas after the sop did go forth immediately, as a little after the
Evangelist says, without doubt, he was not present with the Disciples at that
time when our Lord did distribute unto them the Sacrament of his own body and
blood. And a little after, Therefore by the Lords example the good ought indeed
to tolerate the bad in the Church, until by the fan of judgment the grain
be separated from the chafe, or the tares from the wheat: but yet patience
must not be so far void of discerning, as that they should give the most
sacred mysteries of Christ, to unworthy persons whom they know to be such.

As for modern writers, this present question has been debated by Salmeron
Tom. 9. Tract. 11. and by Dr Kellet in his Tricaenium lib. 2. cap. 14. both of
them hold that Judas did not receive the Lords Supper. Mariana on Luke 22. 21.
cites authors for both opinions, and rejects neither. Gerhard Harm. Evang.
cap. 171, cites for the same opinion, that Judas did not receive the Lords
Supper, (beside Salmeron) Turrianus and Barradius: and of ours Danaeus,
Musculus, Kleinwitzius, Piscator, and alii complures, says he, and many others.

Add also Zanchius upon the fourth Command. Gomarus (who professedly handles
this question upon John 13.) Beza i^ Jo. 13. 30. certa videtur esse little
sententia ^ui existimant Judam institutioni sacrae caenae non interfuisse.
Beza puts it out of question, and Tessanus in Joh. 13. ita ut Judae qu^dem
laverit pedes Christus, sed postea egres^us caenae Sacramentali non
interfuerit, sicut ^ruditi multi ex hoc capite colligunt.
Tossanns tells us it is the judgment of many learned men, as well as his own.
Musculus in loc. com. de can^ Dom. p. 352. M^hi sane dubium non est, egressum
ad perficiendum traditionis scelus fuisse Judam, priusquam Sacramentum hoc a
Domino Disscipul is traderetu^.
Musculus following Rupertus, concludes that certainly Judas was gone forth,
before Christ gave the Sacrament to his Apostles. So likewise Diodati upon Ioh
13. 30. We may gather from hence that he (Judas) did not communicate of our
Saviors Sacrament.
Diodati and Grotius annot. in Mat. 26. 21, 26. Luk 22. 21. ^ch. 13. holds that
the Supper at which the sop was given to Judas, and from which he went forth,
was the common supper, and that it was before the Lords Supper, and that Luke
does not place Christ's words concerning Judas Luke 22. 21. in the proper place.
Grotius.

By this time it appears that Mr Prynne has no such consent of writers of
his opinion, or against mine, as he pretends.

As for those Ancients cited by Mr Prynne, some of them (as Origin and Cyrill)
did go upon this great mistake that the sop which Christ gave to Judas, was
the Sacrament; which error of theirs is observed by Interpreters upon the
place. No marvel that they who thought so, were also of opinion that Judas
received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; for how could they choose to think
otherwise, upon that supposition? But now the later Interpreters, yea Mr Prynne
himself having taken away that which was the ground of their opinion, their
Testimonies will weigh the less in this particular. Chrysostom thinks indeed
that Judas received the Sacrament, but he takes it to be no warrant at all for
the admission of scandalous persons: for in one and the same Homily, Hom. 83.
in Matthew. he both tells us of Judas his receiving of the Sacrament, and
discourses at large against the admission of scandalous persons. As for
Bernard Mr Prynne does not cite his words nor quote the place. Oecumenius (in
the passage cited by Mr Prynne) says that the other Apostles and Judas did
eat together communi mensa, at a common Table; But he says not at the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. That which Oecumenius in that place argues
against, is the contempt of the poor in the Church of Corinth, and the
secluding of them from the love feasts of the richer sort. Now, says he, if
Christ himself admitted Judas to eat at one and the same Table, with his
other Disciples, ought not we much more admit the poor to eat at our Tables?
Mr Prynne tells us also that Nazianzen in his Christus patiens agrees that
Judas did receive the Lords Supper together with the other Apostles. I answer,
first I find no such thing in that place. Next, those verses so entitled, are
thought to be done by some late author, and not by Nazianzen, as Io. NeW
enklaius in his Censure upon them notes, and gives reason for it. Cyprians
Sermon de ablutione pedum, as it is doubted of whether it be Cyprians, so the
words cited by Mr Prynne do not prove the point in controversy. The other
Testimony cited out of Cyprians Sermon de caena Domini, as it is not
transcribed according to the original, so if Mr Prynne had read all which
Cyprian says in that Sermon against unworthy receivers, peradventure he had
not made (...) of that testimony. The words cited out of Ambrose do not hold
forth clearly Judas his receiving of the Eucharisticall Supper. The words
cited out of Augustine epist. 162. Judas accepit pretium nostrum, are not there
to be found, though there be something to that sense. It is no safe way of
citations to change the words of Authors. This by the way. As for his other
three citations out of Augustine Tract. 6. 26. and 62. in Ioh. I can not pass
them without two Animadversions. First, the greatest part of those words, which
he cites as Augustines words, and also as recited by Beda in his Commentary on
1 Cor. 11. is not to be found either in Augustine or Beda in the places by him
cited; viz. these words: Talis erat Judas, and tamen cum sanctis Discipulis
undecin^ intrabat and exibat. Ad ipsam caenam Dominicam pariter accessit,
conversari cum iis potuit, eos inquinare non potuit: De uno p^ne and Petrus
accipit and Judas; and tamen quae pars fideli and infideli? Petrus enim accepit
ad vitam, manducat Judas ad mortem: Qui enim comederunt indigne judicium sibi
manducat and bibit SIBI, NON TIBI, etc. Of which last sentence if Mr Prynne can
make good Latin, let him do it, (for I can not) and when he has done so, he
may be pleased to look over his Books better to seek those words elsewhere,
if he can find them, for as yet he has directed us to seek them where they
are not. My next Animadversion shall be this. The words of Augustine, which Mr
Prynne alleges for Judas his receiving of the Sacrament, are these, Tract. 6.
in Joh. Number enim mala erat buccella quae tradita est Judae a Domino? Absit.
Medicus non daret venenum: salutem medicus dedit, sed indigne accipiendo ad
perniciem accepit, quia non pacatus accepit. Thus the original, though not so
recited by Mr Prynne: but that I pass, so long as he retains the substance.
Yet how will he conclude from these words that Judas received the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, unless he make Augustine to contradict himself most
grossly: for Tract. 62. in Joh. (another place whether Mr Prynne directs
us,) speaking of Christ's giving of that buccella or sop to Judas, he says, Non
autem ut putant quidam negligenter legentes, tunc Judas Christi corpus accepit:
but Judas did not at that time receive the body of Christ, as some negligently
reading do think. Which words Beda also in his Comment on Ioh. 13. has out
of Augustine. It is Augustines opinion that the Sacrament was given before that
time, at which Judas was present. That which Mr Prynne cites out of Algerus (a
Monk, who in that same book writes expressly for Transubstantiation) makes
more against him then for him. For Algerus takes the ^eason of Christ's giving
the Sacrament to Judas, to be this, because his perverse conscience though
known to Christ was not then made manifest, Judas not being accused and
condemned: so that he was a secret, not a scandalous sinner. Thus far we have
a taste of Mr Prynnes citations of the Ancients. Peradventure it were not hard
to find as great flaws in some other of those citations. But it is not worth
the while to stay so long upon it. Among the re^ he cites Haymo Bishop of
Halberstat for Judas his receiving of the Sacrament. But he may also be pleased
to take notice that Haymo would have no notorious scandalous sinner to receive
the Sacrament, and holds that a man eats and drinks unworthily qui gravioribus
criminibus commaculatus praesumit illud (sacramentum) sumere; that is, who
being defiled with heinous crimes presumes to take the Sacrament; but if he
had thought it (as Master Prynne does) the most effectual ordinance, and
readiest means to work conversion and repentance, he could not have said so.
That which Mr Prynne page 23. cites out of the two confessions of Bohemia and
Belgia, does not assert that for which he cites them. For neither of them
says that Judas did receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The Belgik
confession says an evil man may receive the Sacrament unto his own
condemnation. As for example, Judas and Simon Magus both of them did receive
the Sacramental sign. I can subscribe to all this; for it is true in respect
of the baptism both of Judas and Simon Magus. But I must here put Mr Prynne in
mind, that the thing which he pleads for, is extremely different from that
which the Belgic Churches hold. For Harmonia Synodorum Belgicarum cap. 13.
says thus, Nemo ad Caenam dominicam admittatur, nisi qui fidei Confessionem
ante reddiderit, and Disciplinae Ecclesiasticae se subjecerit, and vitae
inculpatae testes fideles produxerit. Let no man be admitted to the Lords
Supper, except he who has first made a confession of his faith, and has
subjected himself to the Church Discipline, and has proved himself by
faithful witnesses to be of an unblameable life. The other confession of
Bohemia says that Judas received the Sacrament of the Lord Christ himself,
did also execute the function of a Preacher, and yet he ceased not to remain a
devil, an hypocrite, etc. This needs not be expounded of the Lords Supper
(which if he had received, how did he still remain an hypocrite? for that very
night his wickedness did break forth and was put in execution) but of the
Passover received by Judas once and again, if not the third time. That
Chapter is of Sacraments in general, and that which is added, is concerning
Ananias and his wife, their being baptized of the Apostles. However the very
same Chapter says that Ministers must thoroughly look to it, and take diligent
heed lest they give holy things to dogs, or cast Pearls before swine. Which is
there applied to the Sacraments, and is not understood of preaching and
admonishing only as Mr Prynne understands it. Also the Book entitled Ratio
Disciplinae ordinisque Eccles^astici in unitate fratrum Bohemorum cap. 7.
appoints not only Church Discipline in general, but particularly suspension
from the Lords Table of obstinate offenders. Finally, whereas M. Prynne cites
a passage of the antiquated Common prayer Book, as it has lost the authority
which once it had, so that passage does not by any necessary inference hold
forth that Judas received the Sacrament, as D. Kellet shows at some length in
his Tricaenium.

The citation in which M. Prynne is most large, is that of Alexander Alensis
part. 4. Quaest. 11. membr. 2. art. 1. sect. 4. (though not so quoted by him)
But for a retribution, I shall tell him three great points, in which Alexander
Alensis in that very dispute of the receiving of the Eucharist, is utterly
against his principles. First, Alexander Alensis is of opinion that the precept
Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye Pearls
before swine, does extend to the denying the Sacrament to known profane
Christians; for both in that Section which has been cited, and art. 3. sect.
1. answering objections from that Text, he does not say, that it is meant of
the word, not of the Sacrament, and of Infidels, Heretics, Persecutors, not of
profane ones: but he ever supposes, that the Ministers are forbidden by that
Text, to consent to give the Sacrament to profane scandalous sinners.
Secondly, Alexander Alensis holds, that Christ's giving of the Sacrament to
Judas, is no warrant to Ministers to give the Sacrament to public notorious
scandalous sinners, though they do desire it. And thus he resolves Ib. art.
3. sect. 1. If the Priest know any man by confession to be in a mortal sin;
he ought to admonish him in secret, that he approach not to the Table of the
Lord: and he ought to deny unto such a one the body of Christ, if he desire it
in secret. But if he desire it in public, then either his sin is public
or secret. I^ public, he ought to deny it unto him; neither so does he
reveal sin because it is public: If private, he must give it, lest a worse
thing fall out. Thirdly, Alexander Alensis holds the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, not to be a converting, but a confirming and conserving Ordinance Ibid.
art. 2. sect. 2. His words I shall cite in the debating of that controversy.

CHAP. IX. Whether Judas received the Sacrament of the Passover that night in
which our Lord was betrayed.
Mr Prynne (distrusting peradventure the strength of his proofs for Judas his
receiving of the Lords Supper) betakes himself to an additionall argument page
24. All our Antagonists, says he, and the Evangelists clearly agree that
Jud^s did eat the Passover with Christ himself, as well as the other
Apostles: now the Passover was a type of the Lords Supper, etc. It seems he
had not the notes of my Sermon truly (though he endeavor to confute it) for I
did then, and I do still make a very great question of it, whether Judas did
so much as eat the Passover at that time with Christ and the other Apostles:
and I think I have very considerable reasons which make it probable that Judas
did not eat the Passover that night with Christ and the Apostles. The
resolution of this question depends upon another, whether Christ and his
Apostles did eat the Passover before that supper at which he did wash his
Disciples feet, and gave the sop to Judas (after the receiving whereof Judas
immediately went out) or whether that supper was before the eating of the
Passover. I find Gerhard. Har^ Evang. cap. 170. Quidam statuunt pedum
lotionem ips^ etiam legali caenae sive agni pasch^lis esui praemittendam esse.
some others as well as my self have been of opinion that it was before, not
after the Passover; (yea that the Jewish custom was to eat their common
Supper before the Passover. See M. Weemse his Christian Synagogue page 120.) I
find also Ammonius Alexandrinus de quatuor Evangeliorum consonantia cap. 154.
places that supper mentioned John 13. 2, 4, 12, 18. at which Jesus did wash
his Disciples feet, and when he had done sat down again, and told them that
he who was eating bread with him should betray him. Then cap. 155. he
proceeds to the story of the Paschall supper, in which he conceiv^th the sop
was given to Judas; but in this particular he did much mistake; for the sop was
given at the same supper mentioned John 13. 2, 4, 12, 18. and not at the
Paschall Supper (as M Prynne also acknowledges,) This is clear, that Ammonius
places the common supper at which Christ did wash his Disciples feet, and told
them of the Traitor, to have been before the Paschall supper. I will first tell
the reasons that incline me this way, and then answer the objections which may
seem to be against it. The reasons are these:

1. The oriental custom was to wash before meal, not after they had begun to
eat.

2. This Supper (in which the sop was given to Judas, whereupon he went away)
was before the Feast of the Passover, Joh. 13. 1. (...), meaning immediately
before the feast of the Passover, it being reckoned from the time of eating
the Paschall Lamb, and so before the Feast of the Passover, has the same
sense as Luke 11. 38. (...), the Pharisee wondered that Christ had not washed
before dinner, that is immediately before dinner. So here I undestand before
the Feast of the Passover, that is immediately before the time of eating the
Paschall Lamb, which was the beginning of the Feast of the Passover. You will
say perhaps that Christ did not eat the Passover upon the same day that the
Jews did, and so those words before the Feast of Passover, may be understood
before the Passover of the Jews, not before the Passover of Christ. I
answer, whether Christ and the Jews kept the Passover at one time, is much
debated among Interpreters. Baronius, Toletus, and diverse others hold that
Christ did eat the Paschall Lamb upon the same day with the Jews. Scaliger,
Causabon, and others hold the contrary. The question has been peculiarly
debated between Ioh. Cloppenburgius, and Ludovicus Capellus, yet so that
Capellus (who follows Scaliger and Casaubon) acknowledges that both opinions
have considerable reasons, and both are straightened with some inconveniences.
(...) de ultimo Christi paschate page 6. and 22. For my part, I shall not
contend: but admit the distinction of Christ's Passover and the Jews
Passover; yet says Maldonat upon Ioh. 13. 1. I doubt not but John understands
Christ's Passe-over; for all the Evangelists in the story of the last Supper
when they speak of the Passover, they mean Christ's Passover, and it was the
true Passover according to the Law.

3. That which makes many to think that Christ did eat the Passover before
that other Supper in which he gave the sop to Judas, is a mistake of the Jewish
custom, which as they conceive was to eat other meat after, but none before
the Paschall Lamb. Now to me the contrary appears, namely, that whatsoever
the Jews did eat before the Paschall Supper, in the night of the Passover,
was eaten before the Paschall Supper, and it was among them forbidden to eat
any thing after the Paschall Supper. Which may be proved not only by that
Talmudicall Canon (cited by D. Buxtorf in hist. instit. caenae Dom.) which
says, The Passover is not eaten except after meal: but also more plainly by
Non dimittunt (caetum comedentium) post esum (agni) paschalis cum bellariis
(Hoc est non sinunt caetum comedentium post esum agni paschalis comedere
secundarum mensatum delitias) Ibid. v^rsus finem. Comedentium caetus sic
dimittitur, ut nihil amplius cibi aut bellariorum aut similes secundarum
mensarum delitias, quae ad commessationes pertinent, illis comedere aut
quicquam bibere permissum sit: non enim in more habent post sacram hanc caenam
indulgere commess^tionibus and (...), imo ne minimum quidem* gustant.
Liber rituum paschalium lately translated and published by Rittangelius: and
by another Canon cited by Matthew. Martini^ lexic. philol. page 25 29. Nam sane
Canon paschali^ diser^e interdicebat, post poculum la^dationis, aliquid cibi
aut p^tus sumere. Interdicitur comedere aliquid post poculum hymni. Hic fuit
verus ritus celebrat^nis pascha temporibus Messiae, etc.
Martinius.

But there are two arguments which may be brought to prove that Judas did eat
the Passover with Christ and the Apostles. 1. Because that Supper at which
Judas got the sop, was after the Paschall supper, for it is said John 13. 2.
Supper being ended. Which must be meant of the Paschall supper. I answer these
words may very well be understood not of the Paschall supper, but of that other
supper at which the sop was given to Judas. And as for (...): some Greek
copies have (...) and Nonnus (...): so the sense were as Augustine expounds,
Supper being prepared and ready and set on Table. But be it (...) or (...), the
matter is not great; for there is no necessity of expounding (...), thus, when
Supper was done or ended. It may suffer other two senses. One is, that of
Augustine, when it was Supper time, or when Supper was set on Table. And this
sense is followed by A^binus Fl^us Alcuinus lib. de divinis Officiis, Artic. de
Caena Domini. Circa v^speram vero caena facta, id est parata, and ad
convivantium mensam usque perducta, non transacta neque ^inita, surgit Jesus a
caena and p^it vestimenta, etc. So likewise Mariana upon Ioh. 13. 2. tells us
that caena facta, may well be expounded, caena parata, or ante caenam, or cum
caenae tempus adesset, which he clears by the like forms of speech in other
Scriptures.

Secondly, (...) may very well be translated, when supper was begun, or when
they were at Supper, as I have before showed by like instances in the New
Testament, Matthew. 26. 6. 20. Things permanent as a house, or the like are said
to be factae, when they are ended and complete. But things which are
successive are said to be factae, when they are begun, as dies factus, not when
the day is ended, but when it is begun. So here, there can be no more proved
from the words, but that supper was begun, or they were at supper. This sense
is given by Osiander, Erasmus, ^ossanus harm. evang. part 3. cap. 1. beside the
Centuri^ts, Salmeron, and Lud. de Dieu before cited.

The other argument may be this. Matthew, Mark and Luke, after they have told
of the making ready of the Passover, add that Christ sat (...) with the
Twelve.

Ans. 1. It cannot be proved, that this is meant of sitting down to eat the
Passover; nay, it rather appears from the Text, that it was to eat that
other supper, at which the sop was given to Judas; The same discourse and
questioning concerning the Traitor, which John sets down before Judas his
getting of the sop and going out; is recorded by Ma^thew and Mark, to have
been in that first supper, unto which Christ sat down with the twelve when
even was come. Therefore Christ's sitting down with the twelve Matthew. 26. 20,
21. Mark* 14. 17, 18. ^eing spoken of that supper at which Christ told his
Disciples that one of them should betray him, and every one asked Is it I?
(which by Mr Prynnes confession was not the Paschall, but the ordinary supper.)
It follows that the sitting down with the twelve is not meant of the
Passover, but of an ordinary supper before the Passover.

2. The same words of Christ's sitting down with the twelve are expounded
(though upon other considerations) as spoken in reference not to the Paschall,
but the ordinary or common supper, by Lorinus in Psalm. 101. 6. following
Maldonat, and by Gerhard. Harm. Evang. cap 170. p. 403. Their reason is,
because according to the Law, the Passover was to be eaten standing, not
sitting: but that is more then can be proved from the Law which does not so
much as speak of standing at the first Passover. It is no necessary
consequence: they had their stav^s in their hands, ergo they were standing.
This by the way.

3. Granting that Christ's sitting down with the twelve were spoken of the
Paschall supper, yet the paschall supper being after the other supper, at which
Judas got the sop and went away (which I now suppose for the reasons
beforementioned till I see better reasons to the contrary.) It might be said,
after Judas was gone, that Christ sat down with the twelve, as well as 1 Cor.
15. 5. it is said of Christ risen from the dead, he was seen of Cephas, then of
the twelve, though he was seen only of the eleven, and Judas was gone to his
place. Which answers all that can be said from Luke 22. 14, 15.

If I have not said so much, as to put it out of all question that Judas did
not eat of the Passover with Christ and his Apostles, yet I am sure I have
cleared so much as this, that Master Prynne will not be able to prove
convincingly that Judas did eat of the Passover that ^ight with Christ.

I will conclude with the pious observation of Mr Cartwright: that it was not a
vain or idle question, which the Disciples propounded, (being commanded to
prepare the Passover) they ask, where will thou that we prepare? Luke 22. 8,
9. for Christ having commanded them, that into whatsoever City they entered,
they should enquire who were godly therein, and turn in to such, to lodge and
to eat there; They did thereby easily understand, that if in common and
ordinary eating together, then much more in this sacred feast, they must turn
in to the families of the godly, and avoid the profane; especially considering
that they who were of that household were to eat the Passover with Christ and
his Disciples, according to the Law. From this very example of the Passover he
draws an argument for keeping off all ungodly and profane persons from the
Sacrament, so far as is possible. Thus Cartwright Harm. Evang. lib. 3. page
162. The like observation Chrysostom has upon Matthew. 26. 18. I will keep the
Passover at thy house with my Disciples. He bids us mark those words with my
Disciples: not with profane or scandalous ones, but with my Disciples. To the
like purpose Titus Bostrorum Episcopus in Luke 22. has this observation. Non
manducat autem hoc pascha cum Judaeis, sed tantum cum Discipulis suis: Siquidem
Judaei, propter obstinatam incredulitatem, hoc paschate indigni erant. Yet he
eats not this Passover with the Jews, but only with his own Disciples: for
as much as the Jews, because of their obstinate incred^lity, were unworthy of
this Passover.

CHAP. X. That if it could be proved that Judas received the Lords Supper, it
makes nothing against the Suspension of known wicked persons from the
Sacrament.
I Have now done with the first part of this Controversy concerning Judas, and
have disproved that which Mr Prynne has said either for Judas his receiving of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or for his eating of the Passover. In which
particulars, though learned and godly Divines who are against the admission of
scandalous sinners to the Sacrament, are not all of one opinion, yet all look
upon it as a matter of debate, and I know none that ever cried down with
scorn and contempt the opinion of Judas his not receiving of the Sacrament,
excep^ Mr Prynne whose grounds are oftimes weakest where his assertions are
strongest.

I proceed to the second answer. Granting that Iud^s did receive the Sacrament,
that can make nothing for the admission of scandalons sinners whose
prophannesse and ungodly conversation is known, and makes their name to
stink in the Church. For Judas his wickedness was not public nor known
before he had got the sop and gone out, and left the company of Christ and the
Apostles. And moreover he who argues from Christ's receiving of Judas to the
Sacrament, when though his sin was yet secret, yet Christ knew him to be a
devil; to prove that the Eldership may and ought to admit one to the
Sacrament, whom they know to be a Judas, a Devil: may as well argue from
Christ's choosing of Judas to be an Apostle when he knew him to be a Devil, to
prove the lawfulness of the Elderships choosing of a Minister whom they know
to be a devil. But now for that point of the scandal or secrecy of Judas his
sin, let us hear Mr Prynnes reply, page 26, 27. He gives it four feet to
run upon. But the truth is, it has but two (the same things being twice
told) and those how foundered you shall see by and by.

First he says, that at the time when Christ instituted the Sacrament he
foretold the Disciples that Judas should betray him John 13. 18. to 28. Matthew.
26. 20. to 26. Mark 14. 18. to 22. Luk^ 22. 21, 22, 23. More plainly page 27.
he says, Christ did admit Judas, to eat the Passover and Sacrament with his
other Disciples, and they made not any s^ruple of conscience to communicate
with him in both, no not after Christ had particularly informed them, and Judas
himself, that he should betray him, Matthew. 26. 21. to 36.

Answ. 1. It was but just now that Mr Prynne told us, (to manifest that Iud^s
was at the Sacrament) that Luke places Christ's words concerning Iud^s, after
the Sacrament, not before it. And more expressly he told us out of John that
Christ's discourse about Judas, and his informing of the Disciples that one of
them should betray him, and his giving the sop to Judas, was after the
Sacrament, because it was after supper end^d, the Sacrament being instituted
and distributed before supper ended Vindic. page 18, 19. and 25. The same thing
which before he made to be after the Sacrament, to prove that Judas did receive
the Sacrament, the very same he now makes to be before the Sacrament, that he
may prove Judas a scandalous ^inner and a known Traitor, even before his
receiving of the Sacrament. And shall he thus abuse not only his Reader, but
the Word of God it self with palpable and gross contradictions? I shall
beseech him in the fear of God to look to it, and never more to take this
liberty to put contrary senses upon the holy Scripture, so as may seem to
serve most for his present advantage. Surely such lucubrations are not only
subitane but sinful.

2. His answer which now he gives us does clearly yield these two things: 1.
That the Discourse about the Traitor, and the giving of the sop, John 13. 8. to
verse. 28. was before the Sacrament; Now Judas having gone out immediately after
the sop, hereby Master Prynne strengthens my argument which I brought to prove
that Judas did not receive the Sacrament; which argument in this very
particular he formerly opposed. 2. He has here also yielded that these words
Luke 22. 21, 22, 23. But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on
the Table, etc. though mentioned after the Sacrament (which is the most
colorable argument for Judas his receiving of the Sacrament) yet were spoken
before the Sacrament, and that the order of time is not to be gathered from
Luke but from Matthew and Mark who record that discourse about Judas before
the Sacrament. And in yielding this, he takes off his own strongest argument,
and confirms what I have before taken pains to prove.

3. Those Divines that hold Judas did receive the Sacrament, do conceive that
those words, But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, etc. were indeed
spoken after the Sacrament, and that Luke places them in their proper place.
And so holding that the discourse about the Traitor was after the Sacrament,
they do thereby intimate that Judas was not known to be the Traitor, till
after the Sacrament. Wherefore either a man must quit the most considerable
argument for Judas his receiving of the Sacrament, or else acknowledge that
Judas was not known by the Disciples to be the Traitor till after the
Sacrament.

4. When after the giving of the sop Christ said to Judas, That thou do, do
quickly, No man at the Table knew for what intent he spoke this unto him, John
13. 28. But if Christ had particularly informed them that Judas was the
Traitor, how is it that they could have been so altogether ignorant of Christ's
intent, as to think that he was still trusting Judas with the buying of what
they had need of against the Feast, or with giving to the poor? Hence Lud.
Capellus Spicileg. in Joh. 13. collecteth that when John asked of Christ, who
it was, and when Christ said, He it is unto whom I shall give the sop, this was
but a secret conference, and the rest of the Disciples did not hear it: else
they could not have been so ignorant of it.

5. The places cited by Mr Prynne do not prove that Christ did particularly
tell and inform his Disciples that Judas (but that one of them) should betray
him. Christ made it known to John alone by the sign of giving the sop, Ioh.
13. 26. Yea Theophylact. upon Ioh. 13. thinks, that as the other Apostles
heard not what Christ said to John concerning the Traitor, so John himself
even at that instant could hardly imagine that Judas would commit so great
wickedness. Nullus ergo cog^vit, says he, no man did know it, which he
gathers from the words of John himself, verse. 28, 29. Bucerus in Matthew. 26.
23. holds the same. I know some think it was made known to all the
Disciples by that Math. 26. 25 Then Jud^s which betrayed him answered and said,
Master Is it I? He said unto him, Thou have said. But others answer that it is
not certain that Christ said this to Judas in the hearing of all the
Disciples: also that these words Thou have said, are not a clear affirmation
of the thing. Lud. Capellus Spicileg. in Matthew. 26. admits these words Thou
have said, to be affirmative of that which had been said. But he moves this
doubt: when Judas had said Is it I? he did not affirm the thing, but doubted
of it. How then did Christ return such an answer as agrees to that which
Judas had said, as if it had been a positive truth. He gives this solution,
that Christ as searcher of the heart did speak it to Judas, who was in his
conscience convinced that he was the man, and so assenteth to the truth of that
testimony of his Conscience. Now this could not be certainly known to the other
Apostles. For my part I shall not need to contend much about that: for granting
it to be a clear information to all the Disciples that Iud^s was the Traitor,
yet (by their principles who hold Judas did receive the Sacrament) this was
after, not before the Sacrament, for they make the anticipation to be in
Matthew and Mark, and the true order to be in Luke.

6. Beside that of the French Catechism, which says the impiety of Judas was
concealed, and not broken forth into the light and knowledge of men when the
Sacrament was given: take these other Testimonies, Martyr. in 1 Cor. 5. Et quod
attinet ad Judam, peccatum ejus non erat cognitum atque perspectum, nec ullo
judicio convictum. Gerhard. Harm. Evang. cap. 171. page 453, Iudae scelus
nondum erat in lucem productum, sed anim^ suo illud ad^c ela^sum tenebat. The
same he has in his common places Tom. 5. page 181. where he shows that Judas
receiving of the Sacrament makes nothing for the admission of scandalous
persons; because although Judas had gone to the chief Priests and agreed with
them, this was known to none of the Disciples, at that time, but to Christ
himself only. Nay the Testimony cited by Mr Prynne himself out of Algerus de
Sacram. makes strongly against him in this particular: Quia enim says
Algerus) Judas accusatus and damnatus non fuerat, ideo Christus conscientiam
ejus perversam, quamvis sibi notam damnare noluit. For because Judas was not
accused and condemned, therefore Christ would not condemn (openly) his
perverse conscience, though known to himself. Innocentius 3. in the place above
cited De mist. Missae lib. 4. cap. 13. after he has asserted that Judas did
not receive the Lords Supper, he adds, that if it should be granted that
Judas did receive it, this only will follow at most, that Ministers are to
admit to the Sacrament such as are not known to the Church, to be impious or
wicked, as Judas his wickedness was not at that time known to the Disciples.
Likewise both Chrysostom and Theophylact upon John 13. are clear in this,
that Judas hypocrisy was not detected to the Apostles till Christ did separate
him, and he went forth. Moreover I shall mind Mr Prynne how he himself does
apply this example of Judas in his Independency examined, page 8, 9. he argues
thus: Whether Independents refus^ll to admit such Christians who are not
notoriously scandalous in their lives, nor grossly ignorant in the principles
of Religion, to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, etc. only upon this
suspicion or apprehension, that they are but carnal men, not truly regenerated
or sanctified by Gods Spirit (though they can not certainly judge of their
present spiritual conditions infallibly known to God alone) be not a very
uncharitable arrogant, yea unchristian practice, contrary to our Saviors own
immediate example, who at the first institution of this Sacrament admitted
Judas to his last Supper, as well as his Disciples, though he certainly knew
him to be both a Traitor and a Devil. In which argumentation he himself
supposes that Judas was not notoriously scandalous, nor known to the
Disciples, (but to God and Christ alone) to be a Traitor and Devil. For
otherwise he could not in any reason argue thus against the Independents:
because if this supposition be not laid down that Judas was an unregenerate
yet not a scandalous person: then the Independents had this obvious answer,
that if his Argument prove any thing, it does conclude the admission not only
of unregenerated and unsanctified, but of scandalous persons, to the Sacrament;
whereas he brings it to prove against them, that persons not scandalous, though
unregenerate, ought not to be refused the Sacrament. And now he brings the same
thing against us to prove that scandalous persons ought to be admitted, if not
excommunicated, and desirous to receive the Sacrament. He tells us by the way of
Judas his theevish, covetous, as well as traitorous disposition John 12. 6.
both which did make him scandalous. But he might have observed, that the holy
Ghost shows plainly that in that act Judas was not a scandalous sinner in the
esteem of the other Disciples; for his theevish covetous disposition was not
known to the Disciples; yea the pretext of his care for the poor was so
plausible to them (though abominable to Christ who knew his heart) that it is
said, not only of Judas, but of the Disciples (by his instigation) they had
indignation at the wasting of that which might have been sold for much and
given to the poor, Matthew. 26. 8.

Let us now hear Mr Prynnes other answer Vindic. page 26, 27. he tells us that
though perchance the other Disciples did not know that Judas was a Traitor and
a Devil, yet Christ himself did infallibly know all this of Judas, and did
notwithstanding admit him to the Sacrament. Whereupon he beseeches all
Ministers not to make themselves wiser, holier, rigider in this point then
Christ himself.

Answ. 1. If Ministers did take upon them to suspend men from the Sacrament
upon their own private knowledge of some secret sins whereof those men are
guilty: his argument might say somewhat. But the question being of suspension
by the Eldership upon the notoreity or proof of the offense, and consis^oriall
formal conviction of the offender, he says here nothing to that point.

2. What a Minister should do when he certainly knows one of the Congregation
(not convict nor notoriously scandalous) to be a Judas, a Traitor, a Devil, I
will not now dispute. But surely Mr Prynnes reason why the minister ought to
admit such a one, is not rightly applied, Durantus de ritibus lib. 2. cap. 38.
number. 16. Ipsi tamen (Judae) corpus and sanguinem suum dedit, ne occultum
peccatorem sine accusatore and evidenti probatione, ab aliorum communione
separarot. Et insra number. 17. Nam etsi Christo nota crat Judae iniquitas, sicut
Deo: non tamen ei cognita crat co modo, quo hominibus innotescit.
for Christ did then know Judas to be a Traitor and a Devil, but how? not as
man, by sight, information, or the like, but as God and as omniscient, that is,
he knew Judas by that same knowledge whereby he knows close hypocrites in whom
no eye of man has seen any thing scandalous, but rather good and promising
signs; some of this kind no doubt are admitted to the Sacrament both among
Presbyterians and Independents, whom Christ knows to be Iudasses, because he
knows what is in man. But now for a Minister to know (not the heart and the
reins as Christ does, but) (...) some foul act which a man has done, and
some wicked profession which a man has made, though in private, and not yet
known to the world; this is a very different case from the other, and if Christ
had admitted Judas to the Sacrament, knowing him by his divine knowledge to be
a Traitor, this could not prove, that a Minister ought to admit a Traitor, whom
by his humane knowledge he knows to be such.

3. And if that which Christ did in this particular ought to be a president to
Ministers what to do in like cases: Then as Christ had a most sad and moving
discourse about the Traitor, till Judas himself was made to understand, that
Christ knew his traitorous purpose, and then he said to him, That thou do do
quickly, which Gerhard. Har. Evang cap. 172. Christus his verbis Judam quasi
excommunicat, and ex Apostolorum coll^gio disc^dere jubet, cum se totum Diabolo
tradidisset. Quod facis fac citius, id est, cum ali^ Magistro te addixeris, and
me audire pertinaciter renuas, abi ex meo and apostolorum meorum conspectu,
etc. Ambros. lib. 2. de Cain and Abel cap. 4. Quod facis fac cele^ius, quid
illud? ut quia introie^at in illum Satanas, ipse abiret a Christo. Ejicitur
itaque and excluditur, ^o quod jam cum Domino Jesu esse non posset, qui
caeperat es^e cum diabolo. Estius in lib. 4. Sent. did. 19. sect. 9. Qui^ and
ipse Christus hanc potestatem qua traduntur homines Sathanae, exercuisse
videtur, quando Iudam a suo consortio removit, atque abire jussit dicendo, Quod
facis, fac citius. Chrysostom Hom. 71. in Joh. (according to the Greek Hom.
72.) making a Transition unto that Text, That thou do, do quickly, he uses
these words, to express what Christ was at that instant doing to Judas (...)
and again, (...), Christ did separate him from the rest of the Apostles, and
cast him out. Theophy lact. upon the same place: illum divisit Domin^s and
separavit ab alils discipulis.
diverse do rightly conceive to be as much, as if Christ had said to him, Get
you gone, I have no more to do with you: He spoke it, ut a consortio suo
recederet, that he might be gone out of his company, as Ambrose takes it: and
thus did by the Sword of his mouth chase away and as it were excommunicate
Judas before the Sacrament. So should a Minister (if he see one in the
Congregation whom he certainly knows to be a Judas, and to be living in some
abominable wickedness, even whiles he comes with a professed desire to receive
the Sacrament) tell the Congregation, that he knows and sees one amongst them
whom he certainly knows to be guilty of such a particular secret horrible
sin, and (if it be possible) make the sinner himself to know by such or such
a sign, that he is the man whom he speaks of, and not to leave off powerful
checks, sharp rebukes, terrible comminations, till by the blessing of God and
the power of the word, he get such a one terrified and chased away.

4. It shall not be in vain to observe here that Gamachaeus in tertiam partem
Thomae Quaest. 64. c. 4. though he hold that Christ gave the Sacrament to Judas
(whence he argues that the Sacraments do infallibly work ex opere operato,
where no bar is put, though there be no faith nor devotion exercised in the
receiver) yet he does immediately move this objection, It is unlawful to give
the Sacraments to the unworthy, and to such as live in mortal sin. Whereunto
Respondemus id nobis revera esse illicitum, and peccare Ministros qui dant
Sacramenta indignis, quando fine scandalo denegare possunt, attamen Deum his
legibus non teneri, cum sit supremus Dominus, qui suis donis utitur, prout
voluerit, quemadmodum etiam Deus non peccat permittendo hominum peccata, imo
and ad peccati substantiam concurrendo; nobis vero, nec concurrere licet nec
permittere aliquod peccatum, quando sufficienter and moraliter id impedire
possumus.
he answers, that it is indeed unlawful to Ministers to give the Sacrament
to the unworthy, when they can refuse them without scandal (a restriction
which I suppose Mr Prynne dare not own; for if the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of the thing must be determined by the scandal, they go upon a
very slippery ground.) He adds that it is unlawful to us to follow Gods
example in giving holy things to the unworthy, as it is unlawful to follow his
example in the permitting of sin when we can hinder it. The like I find in
Alexander Alensis, Summa Theol. part. 4. Quaest. 11. membr. 2. art. 1. sect. 4.
where he moves this objection in the question, whether Christ gave the
Sacrament to Judas. Christ himself has commanded, Give not that which is holy
to dogs, etc. and it seems he would not do the contrary of that which himself
commands. Unto this objection his answer is, that this prohibition lies
indeed upon the Ministers, Dispencers of the Sacraments, but binds not Christ
himself the Lawmakers. As long therefore as we are able to prove from
Scripture, that scandalous persons ought to be keep back from the Sacrament,
and that it is unlawful for Church* officers to admit such; the Erastians do
but weakly help themselves by arguing from Christ's giving the Sacrament to
Judas. Which I have said by way of concession: for my opinion is, that Christ
did upon the matter excommunicate Judas, and that his practice in this very
particular is a pattern to us, which I hope I have made evident.

Finally, it is observed by Io. Baptista de Rubeis in his Novum rationale
divinorum officiorum lib. 1. cap. 24. that this cause of Judas does not
concern public and known scandalous persons, but secret and lurking wicked
persons, when they publicly desire to receive the Sacrament; who yet (says
he) ought to be admonished and dehorted by the Minister, that they come not to
the Sacrament: and if such a one make his desire to receive the Sacrament
secretly known to the Minister, the Minister ought to refuse him, though his
sin be yet secret, and not publicly known. Si vero peccatum est manif^stum,
tun^ vero sive in occulto sive in manifesto petat, debot ei denegare.
But if the sin be open or manifest, then whether the sinner do secretly or
openly desire to receive the Sacrament, the Minister ought to refuse him.

CHAP. XI. Whether it he a full discharge of duty to admonish a scandalous
person of the danger of unworthy communicating? And whether a Minister in
giving him the Sacrament after such admonition, be no way guilty?
Mr. Prynne page 28. stateth the seventh point in difference thus, Whether the
Minister has not fully discharged his duty and conscience if he give warning
to unworthy communicants of the danger they incur by their unworthy
approaches to the Lords Table, and seriously dehort them from coming to it,
unless they repent, reform, and come preparedly? But here he much mistakes
his mark, or hitteth it not, as may appear thus. First, what if we should
affirm it, as he does? What has he gained thereby? That the Minister has not
the power of keeping back scandalous persons: which cannot add one dram
weight to his cause. The power is seated in the Eldership, of which the
Minister is a principal member: even as Aristotle polit. lib. 3. cap. 11. tells
us that (...) is not the (...) but (...). It is not the Senator but the Senate
that does rule. But if Mr Prynne meant to conclude against the suspension of
scandalous persons not excommunicated (the thing which all along he opposes,)
he ought to have stated the point thus, Whether the Eldership has not fully
discharged their duty, etc. For every branch of this controversy concerning
Suspension (which is an act of jurisdiction and censure) must be fixed upon the
Eldership, not upon the Minister. There is a huge difference between the
Ministers personal duty, and the censure of suspension: in so much that if the
affirmative of this present question (as he stateth it) were yielded to him; it
derogateth nothing from the power of the Eldership to suspend from the
Sacrament a person not excommunicate. Secondly, in the debating of this point
he sometimes argues against the refusing or withholding of the Sacrament by
any Minister or Presbytery as page 29, 30, 31. sometimes he argues that no
Ministers private judgment or conscience ought to be the rule of his admitting
any to, or suspending them from the Sacrament, as page 32. Which is a
confounding together of two most different points. Thirdly, and if the question
should be stated of the Minister his duty, that which Mr Prynne affirms, viz.
that the Minister has fully discharged his duty and conscience, if he give
warning to unworthy communicants of the danger they incur by their unworthy
approaches, to the Lords Table, and seriously dehort them from coming to it,
unless they repent, reform and come preparedly; is erroneous and false: for
there are other necessary duties incumbent to the Minister, in this business:
as 1. he must be earnest in his prayers to God, for the conversion and
reformation of such unworthy persons, else that God would give his Spirit and
assistance to the Eldership, and others to whom the case shall be brought, that
they may faithfully do their duty in restraining such persons: or (if not so)
that God would by his own providence keep back such persons, or hedge up
their way with thorns, and make a wall, that they shall not find their paths
to come and profane the Lords Table. 2. The Minister must deal seriously with
the Eldership by informations, exhortations, and admonitions, to move them to
do their duty. 3. The Minister must give his own vote and sentence in the
Eldership against the admission of such persons. 4. If (which God forbid) the
Eldership be not willing to do their duty, but sinfully neglect it, the
Minister ought to address himself with his complaints to the superior
Ecclesiastical assemblies (as they lie in their order) that they may interpose
by their authority, to rectify the mal-administration of the Congregationall
Eldership. 5. And if it should fall out that a scandalous unworthy person
should find so much favor in the higher assemblies also, as that they shall
judge him fit to be admitted to the Sacrament; yet if the Minister know him
certainly to be a scandalous abominable person, and be also clear in his
conscience, that the matter of scandal is sufficiently proved, he must not do
an unlawful act in obedience to men, but walk by that Apostolical rule, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Be not partaker of other men's sins; Keep thy self pure. In doing
whereof, he does not make his conscience the rule of inflicting any censure and
particularly of suspending from the Sacrament (which must be done (...) by
many) but yet his conscience so sarre as it is informed and illuminate by the
word of God, is a rule to him of his own personal acting or not acting,
notwithstanding of which the offender stands rectus in curia, and is not
excluded by the sentence of any Ecclesiastical Court. I confess a Minister
ought to be very clear in his conscience, and be persuaded (not upon
suspicions, surmises, or such like slight motives, but) upon very certain
grounds, that the sentence of an Eldership, Classis, or Synod is contrary to
the Word of God, before he refuse to do the thing.

But what may be the reason why Mr Prynne is so large upon this point from page
28. to 35? I take not upon me to judge de intention operantis. But the
intentio operis is to yield somewhat in lieu of suspension from the Sacrament,
which yet shall be no Church censure nor act of jurisdiction, and so to make
the discipline of Suspension (yea and Excommunication too) to be of no
necessary use in the Church. For if it be sufficient and a full discharge of
duty, to admonish unworthy scandalous persons, not to come to the Lords Table,
unless they repent and reform, this cuts off the necessity of Censure,
whether Suspension or Excommunication. As for that admonition or warning to be
given, it is no Church censure, nor act of Jurisdiction, especially when given
by the Minister alone; for no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction can be excercised,
or Censure inflicted by any one man, how eminent soever in the Church. Yea when
it is a Consistoriall or Presbyteriall Admonition, it is not properly a
Censure, but a Degree to Censure. 1. Because Admonition does not exclude a
person from any Church privilege nor from communion in any Ordinance. And how
can one be said to be under Church censure, who still enjoys all Church
privileges? 2. If Consistoriall admonition be a binding, where is the loosing
of that bond? Every censure consistorially inflicted, must be also
consistorially taken off, upon repentance appearing in the party. These things
I do but t^uch, that I might make it appear how Mr Prynnes doctrine tends
to strip Elderships out of all jurisdiction or power of Censures. Now come we
to the particulars, wheren I do not find any great matter to insist long upon.

He first premiseth six conclusions. Supposed conclusions he may make them, but
proved Conclusions they are not. The first of them is indeed ushered in
syllogistically, but very weakly, as shall appear. The strength of his
discourse he contracteth into this argument.

Those who have a true right to the Sacrament, as visible members of the
visible Church, ought not in justice or conscience to be deprived of it, in
case they demand it, by any Minister or Presbytery.

But all unexcommunicate Christians, who are able to examine themselves, as
visible members of the visible Church, have a true right to the Sacrament, in
case they do demand it, when publicly administered.

Ergo, they ought not in justice or conscience be deprived of it, by any
Minister or Presbytery, when publicly administered, if they shall require it.

Answ. First, this is fallacia plurium interrogationum; for these words, as
visible members of the visible Church, both in the Major and Minor, clogge and
confound the argument, and patch up two distinct propositions into one.

Secondly, his Major cannot be admitted without a distinction. There is Ius ad
rem, and Ius in re. There is a remote right, or a right in actu primo, that is,
such a right, relation, or habitude as entitleth a person to such a privilege
or benefit, to be enjoyed and possessed by him when he shall be capable and fit
to enjoy it: Such is the right of a Minor to his inheritance: Such was the
right of lepers of old to their T^nts, Houses, and Goods, when themselves were
put out of the Camp, and might not (during their leprosy) actually enjoy their
own habitations: Such is the right which a man has in England to his
sequestered Estate, Lands, and Houses; he does not lose but retain his Right,
Title, Charters and Deeds (as valid in Law, and not made void or null) and may
be again admitted to the actual possession upon satisfaction given to the
State: and a huge difference there is between Sequestration, and forfeiture or
Outlawry. There is again a proxime right, or a right in actu secundo, which
rendereth a person actually and presently capable of that thing which he is
entitled unto. If Mr Prynnes major be understood of the first kind of right, I
deny it. If of the second kind of right, I admit it, and it does not help his
opinion, nor hurt mine.

Thirdly, yea himself must needs admit an exception from his major
proposition, for by his own principles, those that have a true right to the
Sacrament, as visible members of the visible Church, may be excommunicated and
so deprived, not only of the Sacrament, but of all other public Ordinances.
When he tells us here that nothing but an actual excommunication can suspend
them from this their right, he does but beg that which is in question. And if
his Argument conclude against a lesser Suspension from their right, why not
also against the greater?

Fourthly, he has not proved his minor, especially being understood of the
second kind of right, which renders me^ actually and presently capable of the
thing. He says that the Sacraments were bequeathed by Christ, to his visible
Church on Earth, and all visible members of it. Which he has not proved, and I
deny it, except it have this limitation, all visible members of the visible
Church, which are (visibly or in external profession and conversation)
qualified according to the rule of Christ, and against whose admission to the
Sacrament there is no just exception.

Fifthly, when he concludes, that no unexcommunicated Christians who are able
to examine themselves (that is, as himself has explained, who are not
naturally disabled as children, and fools: though he shall find it a very
hard task to prove, that all other unexcommunicate Christians besides these,
are able to examine themselves) ought in justice or conscience to be deprived
of the Sacrament by any Minister or Presbytery: he does upon the matter
conclude, that the Ordinances of Parliament October. 20. 1645. and March 14.
1645. authorizing Presbyteries to suspend from the Sacrament scandalous persons
unexcommunicated, are contrary to all justice and conscience. N. B.

Sixthly, as touching that limitation yielded by himself, that they must be
such as are able to examine themselves, I ask, 1. Are persons grossly
ignorant able to examine themselves? 2. Are drunken persons able to examine
themselves? 3. Are men of corrupt minds and erroneous, yea profane principles,
who call evil good, and pervert Scripture to the defending of some gross
sins, are these able to examine themselves? 4. Are those who are known that
they had never any work of the law upon their consciences to convince or
humble them ( for by the Law is the knowledge of sin) able to examine
themselves? If the answers be affirmative, then surely this selfe-examination
is not ri^htly apprehended what it is. If the answers be negative; then those
who in their address^s to the Lords Table are found ignorant, or drunk, or
defenders of sin, or presumptuous and unconvinced, and do manifestly appear
such, though they be not excommunicated, and being professed Christians, and
desiring the Sacrament, yet ought not to be admitted.

I proceed to his second conclusion, the strength whereof (so far as I am
able to gather from his discourse) may be drawn together into this Argument.
Such as in all ages, yea by the very Apostles themselves, have been deemed fit
to receive, and could not be denied the Sacrament of Baptism, ought to be
(being baptized and unexcommunicated, and willing to communicate) admitted to
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. But in all Churches from Christ's time till
this present, all external professors of Christ, even carnal persons, only
upon a bare external profession of faith and repentance, were deemed fit to
receive, and were never denied the Sacrament of Baptism (yea, says he, we
read in the very Apostles times that a mere external slight confession of
sin, and profession of the Christian faith, was sufficient to enable sinners
to be baptized Ergo, all external professors of Christ, etc. ought to be
admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Answ. 1. I retort the Argument thus. Such as have been deemed by the Apostles
and by all well constituted Churches, unworthy to be admitted to Baptism,
ought also to be deemed unworthy though baptized) to be admitted to the Lords
Supper. But all known wicked and profane livers, how able and willing so ever
to make confession of the true Christian faith, have been by the Apostles and
all w^ll con^ituted Churches deemed unworthy to be admitted to Baptism. Ergo,
all known wicked, etc. More of this afterward Chap 13. and Chap 15.

Secondly, I answer directly, I distinguish the Major, I deny the Minor. I
distinguish the Major: Those who have been admitted to Baptism ought to be
admitted to the Lords Supper caeteris paribus, if the proportion hold in the
particulars, and if they be as free of scandalous sines now when they desire to
receive the Lords Supper, as they were when they desired to receive Baptism.
He needed not make so great a matter of our suspending from the Sacrament a
person formerly deemed fit to receive Baptism. For why? the person is a
scandalous person now which he was not th^n. My limitation of caeteris paribus
he himself* must admit; otherwise how will he defend his own Principle, that
the flagicious, abominable and obstinate sinners who cannot be reduced by
Admonitions, may and ought to be excommunicated, and so to be cut off from the
Lords Supper, and all other public Ordinances, although formerly deemed sit to
receive baptism? The Minor I utterly deny as most false and as a reproach ca^
upon the Apostles themselves. Mr Prynnes Rule is so large, that Turks or
Pagans who practically live in Idolatry, common swearing, adultery,
drunkenness, murdering, stealing, or the like, and are known to live in those
abominable scandalous sins, ought nevertheless upon a mere external
slight confession of sin, and profession of the Christian faith, be
baptized. When I expected his proof from the Apostles times, he only tells us
that Philip baptized Simon Magus though he were in the gall of bitterness and
bond of iniquity, Acts 8. Yea, says he, many other who turned Wolves,
Apostates, Heretics were baptized by the very Apostles, Acts 20. 2. Tim. 3. If
he had proved that Simon Magus was known to be in the gall of bitterness and
bond of iniquity when Philip did baptize him, or that the Apostles did baptize
any (upon a slight external profession) who were then known to be Wolves,
Apostates, and Heretics, he had said more for his cause then all his book
says beside. But to tell us that some persons baptized (he might as well have
said that some persons who received the Lords Supper did appear afterward to
be in the gall of bitterness, Wolves, Apostates, Heretics, is as much as to
travel, and to bring forth nothing. For how shall ever this reach the
admission of known profane persons to the Lords Supper? That which he had to
prove was the admission (not of hypocrites, but) of known scandalous profane
persons to Baptism.

His third conclusion that it is the Ministers bounden duty to administer the
Sacraments to their people, as well as to preach and pray; no man will deny it,
so that the Ministers do it debito modo, and according to the rule of Christ:
they are stewards of the mysteries of God: moreover it is required in stewards
that a man be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4 1, 2. It is the bounden duty of
Stewards to give the childrens bread to children and not to dogs and swine.
It is not the duty of Ministers to preach peace to the wicked, and much less
to seal it to them who are known to be such.

The fourth conclusion, that the Word and Sacraments are set accidentally for
the fall and ruin, as well as for the salvation of men* makes nothing to the
purpose in hand. Whatever the secret intention of God be, and his unsearchable
judgment upon the soul of this or that man, it is no rule of duty to the
Minister or Eldership. To the Law and to the Testimony. Secret things belong to
God.

The fifth, that God only infallibly knows the hearts, and present state of
all men, is no whit nearer the point The Eldership ^udggeth of words and works,
professions and practices. By their fruits ye shall know them.

The sixth, that no Ministers private judgment or conscience ought to be the
rule of his admitting any to, or suspending them from the Sacrament, is also
wide from the controversy in hand, which is concerning the Elderships (not the
Ministers) power. Of the Ministers personal duty I have spoken before.

These six conclusions premised* Mr Prynne proceeds to prove, that a Minister
in delivering the Sacrament to a scandalous unexcommunicated person, who after
admonition of the danger, does earnestly desire to receive it, etc. becomes no
way guilty of his sin or punish^ent, in case be eat or drink judgment by
his unworthy receiving of it. His first reason, because this receiver has a
true right to this Sacrament, as a visible member of the visible Church, is the
same thing which I have already answered. His second reason, because ^e (the
Minister) has no Commission from Christ to keep back such a person, does not
conclude that the Minister becomes no way guilty etc. He had to prove that a
Minister has no commission touching this business, but only to admonish the
person of the danger. I hold there are other five duties incumbent to the
Minister. Of which before, If any of these duties be neglected, the Minister is
guilty. Whether such a person ought to be kept back is the point in
controversy, and therefore he ought not have taken the negative pro confesso.

His third reason page 33. is the same which was used by C^nfirm, These. p^g.
120.
Erastus as one of his arguments against Excommunication, that the Apostle
says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink
of that cup. 1 Cor. 11. 28. Therefore a man's fitness or unfitness for the
Sacrament, is not to be judged by others, but by himself only, and if he
judge himself fit, the Eldership has no power to exclude him. The same
Scripture is here pressed against us by Mr Prynne to prove, that if a man judge
himself fitly prepared, joins with others in the public confession of his
sins, and promises newness of life, the Minister (he should say the
Eldership) ought in point of charity to deem him so, and has no commission
from Christ to exclude him, etc. Let a man therefore examine himself, not
others, or others him.

I answer, 1. The self-examination there spoken of, is not mentioned as
exclusive: for it is not said, Let a man examine himself only. 2. Yet I can
grant it to be exclusive, it being understood of that judging of a man's self,
which prevents the judgment of God verse. 31. no man's examining of another can
do this, but his examining of himself. That which can give us confidence and
boldness before God, and assure our hearts before him, 1 John 3. 19. is not
the examination or approbation of others, but of our own conscience; for what
man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? 1 Cor.
2. 11. The Pastors and Elders of Corinth had admitted some to the Lords Table,
whom they judged sit and worthy Communicants, but God judged otherwise of them.
Therefore says the Apostle, let a man make a narrow search of his own
conscience, and not rest upon the judgment of others. 3. If it be enough for a
man to examine himself, by what warrant does Mr Prynne require more, namely,
that a man join with others in the public confession of his sins, and
promise newness of life. 4. It is not enough for a notorious scandalous sinner
to judge himself, nor yet to join with others in public confession: but he
must publicly and particularly confess his own sin, which he must do
personally, or for his own part, and others can not do it with him. 5. Tom.
10. hom. 50. Et cum in se protulerit severissimae medicinae sententiam, veniat
ad antistites, per quos illi in Ecclesia claves ministrantur, and tanquam bonus
incipi^s jam esse filius maternorum membrorum ordine custodito, a praep^sitis
sacrorum accipiat satisfaction s suae modum, ut in offe^ndo sacrificio cordis
contribulati devotus and supplex, id tamen agat, quod non solum illi p^osit ad
recipiendam salutem, sed etiam caeteris ad exemplum. Ut si peccata ejus non
solum in gravi ejus malo, sed etiam in scandalo est aliorum: atque hoc expedire
videtur utilita^i Ecclesiae, antistiti in notitia multorum, vel etiam totius
plebis agere paenitentiam non recuset.
Augustine tells us when a man has examined himself, he must also edify the
Church (which before he scandalized) by a public declaration of repentance
for his scandalous sin. 6. Mr Prynne himself Vindic. page 50. will not have
an excommunicated person, to be again received and admitted to the Lords
Supper till public satisfaction given for the scandal, and open profession
of amendment of life, accompanied with external symptoms of repentance. And
why all this examination should not be required for a prevention of
excommunication, yea of suspension, I know not.

Mr Prynnes fourth reason is, because the Minister administers the Sacrament to
that scandalous unexcommunicated person, as to a person outwardly fitted and
prepared, the inward preparation of whose heart for ought he knows may be
sincere toward God, and really changed from what it was before. I appeal to
every godly Minister, whether this can pacify or secure his conscience, that a
scandalous unexcommunicated person living in known prophannesse and
wickedness, is or may be esteemed a person outwardly fitted and prepared for
the Sacrament, yea that the inward preparation of his heart, while he is living
in gross scandalous sins, may be sincere toward God and really changed from
what it was before: and that therefore he (the Minister) in delivering the
Sacrament to a scandalous unexcommunicated person who after admonition of the
danger, does earnestly desire to receive it, as conceiving himself in his own^
heart and conscience meet to participate of it, becomes no way guilty, etc? The
Lord save me from that Divinity which holds that a scandalous person in the
Church may be admitted to the Lords Supper as a person outwardly fitt^d and
prepared for that Sacrament.

Fifthly, he argues from the holiness and lawfulness of administering the
Sacrament, and the Ministers good intention to benefit all, and hurt none by it.

Answ. The first part of this reason is a fallacy ab ignoratione Elenchi: the
point he had to prove was, that the administration of the Sacrament to a
scandalous person, is a holy lawful action. The latter part does not conclude.
A good intention can not justify a sinful action.

Sixthly, says he, because such a persons unworthy r^eiving is only
contingent and casual* no Minister or creature being able infallibly to judge,
whither God at this instant, may not by the omnipotent working of his Spirit,
etc. change both his ^eart* and his life.

Answ. 1. By this principle the Minister shall become no way guilty, if he
deliver the Sacrament to an Heathen, to an excommunicated person, for the same
reason will have place in that case as much as in this, viz. God may at the
very instant before or in the act of receiving change the heart and life of
such a Heathen or excommunicate person. 2. A scandalous profane person his
unworthy receiving, is casual and contingent in sensu diviso, but not in sensu
composit^, that is, peradventure God will give him repentance and change his
heart and his life, which done, he shall come worthily, and receive worthily:
but while he is yet scandalous and neither heart nor life yet changed, his
receiving in that estate will certainly be an unworthy receiving: for it
implies a contradiction and impossibility, to say that a man's life can be
changed while it is not changed, in sensu composit^, or that a man can be
worthy while he is unworthy. 3. It is a most sinful tempting of the Almighty
to ca^l his word behind us, and then expect the working of Omn^potency for that
whereof we have neither promise nor example in the word.

Seventhly, he argues from our Concessions that Ministers may administer the
Sacrament to masked hypocrites, and yet are not guilty of their unworthy
receiving. This he says is a yielding our objection false in the case of
scandalous persons too. But his reason is ^ust as if he had said, Ministers are
not guilty when they give the Sacrament to those who are not scandalous. Ergo,
they are not guilty when they give the Sacrament to those that are scandalous.
Or, as if he had argued thus He that harbors a Traitor whom he does not nor
cannot know to be such, is not guilty. Ergo, he that harbors a known
Traitor is not guilty.

Eighthly, (for he has given his seventh already) he tells us, that the
Minister only (...) the Sacrament, and the unworthy receiving is the receivers
own personal act and sin alone.

Answ 1. He begges again and again what is in Que^ion. 2. There is an
unworthy giving, as well as an unworthy receiving. The unworthy giving is a
sin^ull act of the Minister, which makes him also accessory to the sin of
unworthy receiving, and so partake of other men's ^innes.

The ninth concerning Christ's giving of the Sacrament to Judas is answered
before.

The tenth I have also answered before in his fourth conclusion. The Minister
is a sweet savor of Christ, as well in those that perish by the Sacrament, as
in those that are benefited by it, with this proviso, that he has done his
duty, as a faithful Steward, and that he has not given that which is holy to
dogs, else God shall require it at his hands.

Finally, he argues from 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks (not condemnation but) (...) judgment,
(meaning some temporal judgment) to himself) not to the Minister or
Communicants.)

Answ. 1. Whatever be meant by judgment in this place, certainly it is a
punishment of sin, and such a thing as proceeds from Gods displeasure: and
it is as certain that unworthy receiving makes a person liable to a greater
judgment then that which is temporal. 2. If to himself be restrictive and
exclusive in the case of close hypocrites, such as are by Churchofficers
(judging according to outward appearance) admitted to the Sacrament; yet how
will it be made to appear that the Apostle meant those words as restrictive
and exclusive in the case of scandalous and known unworthy communicants. 3.
Such a scandalous person does indeed eat and drink judgment to himself; but
this can neither in whole nor in part excuse but rather greatly aggravate the
sin of the Minister: for when a wicked man dies in his iniquity, yet his
blood God will require at the hands of the unfaithful Minister, who did
strengthen his hands in his sin.

CHAP. XII. Whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be a converting or
regenerating Ordinance.
I Had in answer to Mr. Prynns third Quaere, given this reason why profane and
scandalous persons are to be kept off from the Sacrament, and yet not from
hearing the Word: because the word is not only a confirming and comforting,
but a converting Ordinance, and is a mean appointed of God to turn sinners from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God: Whereas the Sacrament is
not a converting, but a confirming and sealing Ordinance, which is not given to
the Church for the conversion of Sinners, but for the Communion of Saints: It
is not appointed to put a man in the state of grace, but to seal unto a man
that interest in Christ and in the Covenant of Grace which he already has. Mr.
Prynne does with much eagerness contradict me in this, and argue at length the
contrary. (Which is the marrow and fatness (if there be any) in his debate
concerning the eighth point of difference) Whereby he does not only contradict
me, but himself too (as shall appear) yea and join not only with the more
rigid Lutherans, but with the Papists themselves against the Writers of the
Reformed Churches. For the very same thing which is controverted between him
and me, is controverted between Papists and Protestants. The Papists hold that
the Sacraments are instrumental^ to confer, give, or work grace; yea ex opere
operato* as the Schoolmen speak. Our Divines hold that the Sacraments are
appointed of God, and delivered to the Church as sealing Ordinances, not to
give, but to testify what is given, not to make but confirm Saints. And they
do not only oppose the Papists opus operatum: but they simply deny this
instrumentality of the Sacraments, that they are appointed of God for working
or giving grace, where it is not. This is so well known to all who have studied
the Sacramentarian controversies, that I should not need to prove it. Yet that
none may doubt of it, take here some few instead of many testimonies. I^stit.
page 301. edit. 1539. Cum hoc tantum in ministerio habeant (Sacramenta)
testificari nobis ac confirmare Dei in nos benevolentiam etc. Ut quae (...)
largiantur quidem aliquid gratiae, sed renuncient and ostendant quae divina
largitate nobis data sunt.
Calvin holds plainly against the Papists that the Sacraments do not give any
grace, but do declare and show what God has given.

He clear^ it in that chapter thus, the Sacraments are like seals appended to
writs, which of themselves are nothing, if the paper or parchment to which they
are appended be blank. Again, they are like pillars to a house which cannot be
a foundation, but a strengthening of a house that has a foundation; We are
built upon the Word, the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Again,
Sacraments are to us from God, that which messengers are which bring good news
from men, they declare what is, but do not so much as instrumentally make it to
be. These are Calvin's similes.

Decad. 5. Sermon. 7. Docuit vulgus Sacerdotum and Monachorum Sacramenta novae
legis non tantum esse signa gratiae, sed simul etiam gratiae causos, hoc est
qu^ habeant virtu^m conferendi gra^iam. And after. Sancti and electi Dei non
tum primum gratia Dei donisque coelestibus participant, cum Sacramenta
percipiunt. Etenim rebus prius quam fignis partic^pant. And after. Pro^nde in
Coena (...) non primum accipiuntur divi^a (...), sed pro acceptis aguntur
gratia. Effec^ his opinor, eviciqu^ (...) (...) (...) (...).
B^llinger confuteth the Popish doctrine concerning the Sacraments conferring
of grace, by this principle, that the Saints are justified and sanctified
before they are sealed and confirmed by the Sacraments.

Ursin. Tract. Theol. page 350. Sicut verbum est conversionis and
confirmationis organum: sic (...) Sacramenta sunorgana confirmationis etc. Non
res accipimus ideo quia signum accipimus: sed signum nobis tribuitur quia res
habemus: idque ita, ut non cur habeamus causa, sed quod eas habeamus
testimonium sit. Ibid. de Sacram. def^ns. quinti Arg. Page 557. Nos vero supra
hoc discrimen verbi and Sacramentorum non dis^imulavimus, quod fides per verbum
inch^atur: Sacramentorum usu autem confirmatur, exercetur, fovetur, augetur jam
inchoata. Sacramenta enim ne docent quidem, nedum confirmant, nisi praeeunte
verbo and addente explicationem typorum. Ideirco etiam Sacramenta iis instituta
sunt, quos Deus jam pro membris Ecclesiae a nobis vult agnosci. Inchoatio
igitur fidei ordinaria verbi propria est; confirmati^ inchoatae, Sacramentis
cum verbo communis est. Judicium de disciplina Ecclesiastica ad finem Tom. 3
page 89. Quasi non pueris jam no^um, verbum and conversis and non conversis
esse annuncia^dum, quo illi quidem confirmentur, hi vero convertantur.
Sacramenta autem iis esse instituta qui jam sunt conversi and membra populi Dei
facti.
Ursinus speaks so fully and plainly for us, that none can say more. He
distinguishes between the Word and Sacraments, as between converting and
confirming Ordinances, and argues that the Sacraments do not confer grace,
because we receive not the thing by receiving the sign, but we get the sign
because it is supposed we have the thing. Yea he speaks of it as a principle
known to children.

Wolfangus Musculus in his De Coena Dom. page 350 Quis non videt quales nos ad
mysticam hanc Domini mensam accedere oporteat? nempe non tales qui fruiti^nem
corporis ac sanguinis Domini primum in ea ^aeramus, tanquam illius adhuc
expertes: sed qui per fidem illius jam antea participes, gratiam semel
acceptam, communicatione hac Sacramentali corporis ac sanguinis Domini, and
mortis ipsius rememoratione, in cordibus nostris magis ac magis corrob^rare,
redemptorique gratias agere cupiamus.
common places says thus, Who sees not what manner of persons we must be when
we approach to this mystical Table of the Lord, to wit, not such as do therein
first of all seek the fruition of the body and blood of the Lord, as if we were
yet destitute thereof; but such as being already before partakers thereof by
faith, do desire to corroborate more and more in our hearts, the grace once
received by the Sacramental communication of the body and blood of the Lord,
and by the remembrance of his death, and to give thanks to our Rede^mer.

Adhaec praedicandum iis quoque est, qui nondum audierunt, aut certe nondum
perceperunt. Attame^ utcunque feratur impuritas con^entuum ubi verbum
praedicatur, quam Christus and Apostoli quoque tulerunt: Coenae tamen communio
(ut dixi) purior esse debet. Nam publica est eorum qui palam se Christianos
profitentur, de redemptione gratiarum actio ^ideo circa hanc, ut communionem
Christi solemmiter sancti percipiunt, ita excludendi inde sunt qui vita sua se
extra ^anc communionem esse, ma^ifesto probant.
Martin Bucer upon Matthew. 18. 17. puts this difference between the Word
preached, and the Lords Supper; that the Word may be preached to the
unconverted: but the Lords Supper may not be given to any who by their lives do
declare that they are out of communion with Jesus Christ. Which is the very
point now in controversy.

Fideles enim ante usum Sacramentorum hanc gratiam omnin^ habe^t: neque ad
Sacramentorum usum accedere debent qui ea^ gratiam pro aetatis modo non habeat,
neque admittendi sunt qui eam non habere meri^o praesumuntur.
Festus Honnius Disp. 43. These. 3. confuting the Popish opinion of the
Sacraments working or giving grace, brings this reason against it; They that
receive the Sacraments, have this grace before they receive them, neither are
any to be admitted to the Sacraments who may be justly supposed not to be
justified and sanctified.

Aretius Coment. in Mark 14. loc. 3. observes, Qui admissi sint ad istam
Coenam? discipuli solum, Who were admitted to that (eucharistical) Supper? the
Disciples only. Hence he infers: Quare mysteria haec ad solos fideles
pertinent: Wherefore these mysteries do pertain to the faithful alone: that is,
to those who are supposed to be converted and believers.

Vossius Disp. de Sacram. effic. part. poster. After he has observed two
respects in which the Sacraments do excel the Word. 1. That Infants who are not
capable of hearing the Word, are capable of the Sacrament of Baptism, and are
brought to the laver of regeneration. 2. That the Sacraments do visibly and
clearly set before our eyes that which is invisible in the Word. He adds
Quemadmodum autem Sacramenta duplici nomine praesiant verbo, itidem verbum
duobus nominibus praferendum Sacramentis. Vno quod verbum in adultis and
generet fidem, and genitam foveat atque alat: Sacramenta vero ^am non gignant,
sed tantum genitam conserve^t atque augeant. Altero quod absque verbo non
salv^mur. etc.
These. 49. other two respects in which the Word does far excel the Sacraments.
1. That the Word can both beget and confirm faith: the Sacraments cannot beget
faith in those that are come to age, but only conserve and increase it. 2.
That without the word we cannot be saved, for he that believes not is
condemned; now faith comes by hearing: but the Sacraments though profitable
means of grace, yet are not simply necessary.

The confession of the faith of the Church of Scotland in the Article entitled
to whom Sacraments appertain, says thus. But the Supper of the Lord we
confess to appertain to such only as be of the household of faith, and can try
and examine themselves as well in their faith, as in their duty toward their
neighbors. The Belgic Confession Art. 33. says of the Sacraments in
general, that God has instituted them to seal his promises in us, to be
pledges of his love to us* and to nourish and strengthen our Faith. And
Credimus and confit^mur Jesus Christum servatorem nostrum sanctae Coenae
Sacramentum ^rdinasse and instituisse, ut ea nutriat and sustentet eos, quos
jam regeneravit, etc. At vero, ad conservationem vitae sp^ritualis and c^estis,
quam fideles jam habent, Deu^ illis pane^ (...) misit etc.
Art. 35. They plainly hold that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is intended
and instituted by Christ for such as are already regenerate, and are already
quickened with the life of grace.

The Synod of Dort in their Judgment of the fifth Article of the Remonstrants
Quem ad modum autem Deo placuit opus hoc suum gratiae per predicationem
Evangelii in nobis incho^re, ita p^r ejusdem auditum, lectionem, meditationem,
adhortationes, minas, promissa, nec non per usum Sacramentorum, illud
conservat, continuat et persicit.
Sect. 14. ascribes both the inchoation and conservation of grace to the Word:
but ascribes only to the Sacraments the conserving, continuing, and
perfecting of that begun grace.

In the Belgic form of the administration of the Lords Supper (See Corpus
Disciplinae lately published by the Ministers and Elders of the Dutch Church at
London page 16.) it is said thus. Those which do not feel this Testimony in
their hearts (concerning their examining of themselves touching their
repentance, faith, and purpose of true obedience) they eat and drink judgment
to themselves; Wherefore we also (according to the Commandment of Christ and
the Apostle Paul) do admonish all those who find themselves guilty of these
ensuing sins, to refrain from coming to the Lords Table, and do denounce unto
them that they have no part in the Kingdom of Christ.

(Here follows an enumeration of diverse scandalous sins concluded with this
general, and all those which lead a scandalous life.) All these as long as they
continue in such sins, shall refrain from this spiritual food (which Christ
only ordained for his faithful people) that so their judgment and damnation
may not be the greater. Which plainly intimates that they hold this Sacrament
to be a sealing, not a converting Ordinance. And this they also signify, Ibid.
page 17. And to the end we may firmly believe that we do belong to this
gracious Covenant, the Lord Jesus in his last Supper took bread. etc.

Explic. Catech. Quaest. 67. Verbum est instrumentum Spiritus sancti, per quod
incl^oat and confirmat in nobis fidem ideoque verbum debet praeire. Sacramenta
sunt organa Spiritus sancti per quae fidem inchoatam confirmat: ideoque
Sacramenta debent sequi. Ibid. Quaest. 81. Art. 1. Sacramenta tantum sunt
instituta fidelibus and conversis, ut his promissionem Evangelii obsignent, and
fidem confirment. Verbum quidem est conversis, and non conversis commune, ut
conversi confirmentur, nondum conversi convertantur: Sacramenta vero ad solos
fideles per^inent.
Paraeus puts this difference between the Word and Sacraments; that the Word is
a mean appointed both for beginning and confirming faith: the Sacraments means
of confirming it after it is begun. That the Word belongs both to the converted
and to the unconverted: the Sacraments are intended for those who are converted
and do believe, and for none others.

And though the Lutherans make some controversy with us about the effect of
the Sacraments, yet Loc. com. Tom. 5. page 1. Per Baptismam regeneramur ac
re^ovamur: per Sacramentum Coenae alimur ac nutrimur ad vitam aeternum. In
Baptism^ praesertim Infan^um, per Spiritum S. fides accenditur: in usu sacrae
Coenae augetur, confirmatur, and obsignatur. Per Baptis^num Christo inserimur,
in quo spirituale incrementum salutari Coenae usu accipimus.
Ioh. Gerhardus does agree with us in this point, that the Lords Supper is not
a regenerating but a confirming and strengthening Ordinance, and this
difference he puts between it and Baptism.

Tom. 1. page 477. At an non per Sacramenta etiam fides and regeneratio
exhibetur? Resp. Distinguendum inter primum fidei and resipiscentiae initium,
and confirmationem ejus ac augmentum. Nemo admit^tur ad Sacramenta nisi pro
fideli and poenitente habeatur; quemadmodum verba clara sunt, Quisquis
crediderit and baptizatus fuerit. In^ntes habentur pro foederatis, ac proinde
etiam pro iis qui Spiritum fidei acceperunt, sed de hac repostea. Sic in Coena
requiritur, ut (...) probet se an sit in fide, and ut digne manducet:
infidelibus enim vel nondum credentibus nullae fiunt promissiones, ac proinde
nec obsignantur. Perperam ergo statuunt ipsa Sacramenta esse caus^ primae
regenerationis aut justificationis, tum Pontificii, tum Lutherani quidam. Sed
si fidei and regenerationis conf^atio and augmentum spectetur, recte tribuitur
Sacramentis ut causis instrumentalibus.
Walaeus asserteth both against Papists, and against some of the Lutherans,
that Sacraments do instrumentally confirm and increase faith and regeneration;
but not begin nor work faith and regeneration where they are not.

Petrus Hinkelmannus de Anabaptismo Disp. 9. cap. 1. Error 6. disputes against
this as a Tenent of the Calvi^ists. Fideles habent Spiritum S. habent res
signatas ante Sacramenta: the faithful have the holy Spirit, they have the
things which are sealed, before they receive the Sacraments. Brochmand. System.
Theol. Tom. 3. de Sacram. Cap. 2. Quaest. 1. condemns this as one of the
Calvinian errors: Sacramenta non esse gratiae conferendae divinitu^ ordinata
media: that Sacraments are not instituted and appointed of God to be means of
conferring or giving grace. Which he says is the assertion of Zuinglius, Beza,
Danaeus, Musculus, Piscator, Vorstius. The Lutheran opinion he propounds ibid.
quaest. 6. that the Sacraments are means appointed of God to confer grace, to
give faith, and being given to increase it. Esthius in Sent. lib. 4. did. 1.
Sect. 9. stateth the opinion of the Calvinists (as he calls us) thus,
justificationem usu Sacramenti esse priorem, obtentam nimirum per fidem qua
homo jam ante credidit sibi remitti peccata; Sacramentum vero postea adhiberi,
ut verbo quidem promissionis fides confirmetur: elemento vero ceu sigillo
quodam diplomati appenso eadem fides obsignetur; atque ita per Sacramentum
declaretur testatumque fiat hominem jam prius esse per fidem justicatum. This
he says is manifestly contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, from
which (says he) the Lutherans do not so far recede as the Calvinists.
Gregorius de Valentia in tertiam partem Thomae Disp. 3. Quaest. 3. punct. 1.
thus explaineth the Tenent which he holds against the Protestants concerning
the Sacraments giving of grace. Sacramenta esse veras causas qualitatis gratia,
non principales, sed instrumentales: hoc ipso videlicet, quod Deus illis utitur
ad productionem illius effectus, qui (...) gratia, tamet si supra naturam seu
efficacitatem naturale^ ipsorum.

The Papists dispute indeed what manner of casuality or virtue it is by which
the Sacraments work grace, whether Phisica, or Ethica; whether infita, or
adsita. In which questions they do not all go one way. See Gamachaeus in
tertiam partem Tho. Quest. 62. Cap. 5. But that the Sacraments do work or give
grace to all such as do not ponere obicem, they all hold against the
Protestants. They dispute also whether all the Sacraments give the first grace,
or whether Baptism and Penance only give the first habitual grace, and the
other five Sacraments (as they make the number) give increase of grace. But in
this they all agree, that habitual grace is given in all the Sacraments of the
New Testament: the Thomists hold further, that the very first grace is de facto
given in any of the Sacraments. See for the former Becanus Theol. Schol. part.
4. Tract. de S^cram. Quaest. 7. Omnia Sacramenta ^ovae legis s^mper conferunt
gratiam habitu^lem seu (...), non ponentibus obicem, ac proinde gratia
habitualis est communis quidam esfectus om^ium Sacramentorum: Est communi^
sententia.
Becanus, for the latter Tannerus in Thomam. Tom. 4. Disp. 3. Qaest. 3. Dub. 5.
^mo omnia Sacramenta de facto nonnunquam possunt ex opere operato (how much
more if there be also opus operantis) confer^e primam gr^am. Haec est sententia
magis pia and probabilior; quam docet S. Thomas etc. eandem communiter
sequuntur T^omistae. He confirms it thus. Quia quaedam Sacram^nta per se
pro^riesolum instituta ad dindam prima^ gratiam, tossunt conserre (...). Ergo
etiam per se instituta ad honc toterunt confer primam etc. Atque hoc etiam
sensu admitti potest quod nonnulli dixeru^t, omnibus Sacramentis sub ratione
saltem generica Sacramenti novae Legis, etsi non specifica, per se co^venire ut
gratiam primam conferant.
Tannerus.

You will say peradventure* that Protestant Writers hold the Sacraments to be
1. Significant or declarative signs. 2. Obsignative or confirming signs* 3.
Exhibitive signs, so that the thing signified is given and exhibit to the
soul. I answer, That exhibition which they speak of, is not the giving of grace
where it is not (as is manifest by the before quoted Testimonies) but an
exhibition to believers, a real effectual lively application of Christ and of
all his benefits to every one that believes, for the staying, strengthening,
confirming, and comforting of the soul. Chamierus contractus. Tom. 4. lib. 1.
cap. 2. Docemus ergo in Sacramentorum perceptione effici gratiam in fidelibus:
and hactenus Sacramenta dicenda efficacia. Polan. Syntag. lib. ^. cap. 49.
says the visible external thing in the Sacrament, is thus far exhibitive, quia
bona spiritualia per eam fidelibus significantur, exhibentur, communicantur and
obsignantur. So that in this point Habenti dabitur is a good rule. For unto
every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him
that has not shall be taken away even that which he has. Maith. 25. 29. Our
Divines do not say that the Sacraments are exhibitive Ordinances, wherein grace
is communicated to those who have none of it, to unconverted or unbeleeving
persons.

By this time it may appear (I suppose) that the controversy between us and
the Papists concerning the effect of the Sacraments (setting aside the opus
operatum, which is a distinct controversy* and is distinctly spoken to by our
Writers, setting aside also the casualitas phisica and insita, by which some of
the Papists say the Sacraments give grace, though diverse others of them hold
the Sacraments to be only moral causes of grace) is thus far the same with the
present controversy between Mr. Prynn and me, that Protestant Writers do not
only oppose the opus operatum, and the casualitas physica and insita, but they
oppose (as is manifest by the Testimonies already cited) all casuality or
working of the first grace of conversion and faith in or by the Sacraments,
supposing always a man to be a believer and within the Covenant of grace
before the Sacrament, and that he is not made such, nor translated to the state
of grace in or by the Sacrament. This the Papists contradict, and therein Mr.
Prynn joyneth with them. When Bellarmine brings an impertinent Argument: The
Sacraments (says he) have not the same relation to faith which the Word has:
Nam verbum Dei praecedit fidem, Sacramenta autem sequuntur, saltem in adultis.
The Word of God does go before faith, but the Sacraments follow after it, at
least in those who are of age. Dr. Ames Bell. enerv. Tom. 3. lib. 1. cap. 5.
corrects his great mistake or oblivion. Hoc illud est quod nos docemus:
Sacramenta confirmare fidem per verbum Dei prius ingeneratam, saltem in
adultis. This (says he) is that which we teach, that the Sacraments confirm
that faith which was first begotten by the Word of God, at least in those who
are of age.

Mr. Prynns assertion is* that the Lords Supper is a converting, as well as a
sealing Ordinance; for clearing whereof h^ premiseth two distinctions. There
are two sorts both of conversion and sealing, which he says his Antagonists to
delude the vulgar have ignorantly, wilfully, or injudiciously confounded.
Whether such language beseems a man fearing God, or honoring them that do fear
God, let every one judge who knows any thing of Christian moderation. See now
if there be any reason for this grievous charge. First (says he) there is an
external conversion of men from Paganism or Gentilisme to the external
profession of the faith of Christ. This (he says) is wrought by the Word or by
Miracles, and effected by Baptism in reference to infants of Christian
Parents. But how the Baptism^ of such Infants is brought under the head of
conversion from Paganism to the external profession of Christ, I am yet to
learn. Secondly says he, There is a conversion from a mere external formal
profession of the Doctrine and Faith of Christ, to an inward spiritual
embracing and application of Christ with his merits and promises to our souls,
by the saving grace of Faith, and to an holy Christian real change of heart and
life: In this last conversion, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not only a
sealing or confirming, but likewise a regenerating and converting Ordinance as
well as the Word.

He might upon as good reason have made a third sort of conversion from a
scandalous and profane life to the external obedience of the will and
commandments of God. But all this is to seek a knot in the rush; for there is
but one sort of conversion which is a saving conversion, and that is a
conversion from nature to grace, from sin to sanctification, from the power of
Satan to God, whether it be from paganism, or from profaneness, or from an
external formal profession. Now that conversion which Mr. Prynn ascribes to the
Sacrament is a true sanctifying and saving conversion. The other conversion
which he ascribes not to the Sacrament, is not a saving conversion, for the
external conversion of men from Paganism or Gentilisme to the external
profession of the faith of Christ, without the other conversion to an inward
spiritual embracing of Christ, does but make men seven*fold more the children
of Hell. So that Mr. Prynn has more opened his sore when he thought to cover
and patch it.

The other distinction which he gives us, is of a twofold sealing. But by the
way he tells us that Baptism and the Lords Supper are termed Sacraments and
Seals, without any Text of Scripture to warrant it. Hereby as he gratifieth
Faustus Socinus de Coena Dom. Tract. brev. terum, quod omnes fere opinantur,
hoc ritu, quem Sacramentum appellant, confirmari saltem fidem nostram, ne id
quidem verum censeri debet; cum nec ullo sacro testimonio comprobetur, nec ulla
ratio sit, cur id fieri possit. Quomodo enim potest nos in fide confirmare id
quod nos ipsi facimus, quodque licet a Domino institutum, opus tamen nostrum
est. Smalc. Disp. 12. de Coena. Vox Sacramenti in hac significatione barbara
vel saltem sacris liter is incognita est, ^b hominibus vero otiosis, qui
ceremoniis hujusmodi nescio quid praeter sacram Scripturam superstiti^sum aut
eti^m Idololatricum ex part, (...) non sunt (...), ad (...) dolum (...).
the Socinians not a little (who will not have the Lords Supper to be called
either seal or Sacrament, but an obediential act and a good work of ours, and
tell us that we make the Lords Supper but too holy to delude the vulgar) So he
corrects all Orthodox Writers, Ancient and Modern. The Apostl^* describes
Circumcision to be (...) a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11.
Whence Divines give the name of seals to all Sacraments Recte autem (says
Aretius Theol. Probl. Loc. 76.) speciebus imis and intermediis generibus eadem
^ssignantur in definiendo genera. Circumcision is a seal, therefore a Sacrament
is a seal: as well as this, Justice is a habit, therefore virtue is a habit.
Man is a substance, therefore a living creature is a substance. And further, if
Circumcision was a seal; the Lords Supper is much more a seal; as we shall see
afterward. The honorable Houses of Parliament, after advice had with the
Assembly of Divines have judged this point (which Mr. Prynn so much
quarrelleth) to be not only true, but so far necessary and fundamental, that
in their Ordinance of October 20. 1645. for keeping back the ignorant and the
scandalous from the Sacrament, this truth, That the Sacraments are seals of the
Covenant of grace, is enumerate among those points of Religion, which all
persons who shall be admitted to the Lords Supper ought to know, and of which
whosoever is ignorant shall not be admitted to the Lords Supper. I hope Mr.
Prynn shall not be willing to fall within the Category of ignorant persons, and
such as ought not be admitted to the Sacrament: which yet by that Ordinance he
must needs do; if he will not know the Lords Supper to be a seal of the
Covenant of grace. Wherefore though he leans much that way, both here, and
page 30. yet I shall expect he will rectify himself in this particular. His
words are these. There is a double sealing (if we admit this Sacrament or
Baptism to be seals, though never once styled seals in any Scripture Text) And
in the Margent, they are termed Sacraments and seals of the Covenant, without
any Text to warrant it. Now Quaeritur whether Mr. Prynn does know that the
Sacraments are seals of the Covenant of grace; and if he does not know this,
whether does not the Ordinance strike against him. And now to return, the word
(...), that is, a Seal; (which makes most to our present purpose) is a
Scripture word. As for the Word Sacrament, we need not seek it in Scripture,
because it is a Latin Word, and there is not either in the Hebrew or Greek (the
languages in which Scripture was written) any word which properly, closely and
fully answers to the Word Sacrament. Sure we have the thing Sacrament (though
not the name) in Scripture. Peradventure Mr. Prynn is the more afraid of the
Word Sacrament, because some derive it a sacrament which suteth not so well to
his notion of a converting Ordinance.

Well: But what are nis two sorts of sealing? 1. A visible external sealing of
the pardon of sin and Gods promises in the blood of Christ to our outward
s^nces. 2. An internal invisible sealing of them by the Spirit, working in, by
the Word and Sacraments to our souls. In the first sense (he says) this
Sacrament is a seal to all receivers, even to those who are scandalous and
unworthy, who receive only the outward Elements. Again this first kind of
sealing (says he) seals all Gods promises and a free pardon of all our sins
only conditionally, if we truly repent, lay hold on Christ etc. The second
which is an absolute sealing, he grants to belong only to worthy penitent
believing receivers. Who does now delude the vulgar? When the Lords Supper is
called a sealing Ordinance; did ever any man understand this of a sealing to
our outward senses only, or of receiving the outward Elements and no more? Who
can mistake the thing so far as to think that Christ has instituted and
ordained this Sacrament to be a mere external seal and no more? When he grants
that in the second sense this Sacrament is a seal, only to worthy, penitent,
believing receivers, who receive the inward invisible grace, as well as the
outward signs: He grants that which I require, that is, that it is a sealing
Ordinance intended for worthy penitent believing receivers, not for the
scandalous and unworthy. God forbid we should make a sealing Ordinance to be an
empty Ordinance. The truth is, his first kind of sealing without the second, is
no sealing, yea worse then no sealing. Where there is no charter, how can there
be a sealing, except we seal blank paper? and as we shall hear anon from
Chrysostom, we have not so much as the seal, except we have that which is
sealed. I know it will be answered, there is somewhat to be sealed even to the
scandalous and unworthy* that is, the pardon of all their sins conditionally,
if they truly repent, believe, lay hold on Christ. In this very place Mr. Prynn
tells us, that all Gods promises and a free pardon is sealed, even to
scandalous and unworthy receivers conditionally; that is, as he explicates
himself page 37. upon condition that they become penitent and believing
receivers. But then (say I) he must upon as good reason grant, that the
Sacrament may be given to Pagans and Turks, at least the first day of preaching
the Gospel to them; May it not be said to Pagans and Turks, that if they repent
and believe on Christ, they shall have pardon of sin? Here is the thing to be
sealed in Mr. Prynn's opinion. What then should hinder the sealing? He shunneth
to call the Sacrament a converting ordinance in reference to Pagans; and now
behold his principles will admit the giving of the Sacrament even to Pagans as
a sealing Ordinance, how much more then as a converting Ordinance?

We have now heard his two distinctions, which if they have given any clearing
to his assertion, it is such as is little to his advantage. I will now premise
some distinctions of my own to clear that which I hold.

1. The Question is not de potentia Dei absoluta, Whether God by his
omnipotency can give the first grace of conversion in the instant of receiving
the Sacrament. But the Question is of the revealed will of God, and the way of
the dispensation of grace made known to us in the Gospel, which must be the
rule to us to walk by. A peradventure it may be, and who knows but the
scandalous sinner may be converted, is no warrantable ground to go upon in this
case, as Mr. Prynn would make it page 47. for we may as well adventure to delay
repentance, upon a peradventure it may be. There is an example in the
New Testament of one who got repentance and mercy at his end, and if we believe
the Hebrews and diverse Christian Interpreters; there is another example of the
same kind in the Old Testament, which is the example of Achan. Whereas there is
no example in all the Scripture of any converted by the Sacrament. But if a
thing be contrary to the revealed will and commandment of God (as both these
are, the delaying of repentance, and the admission of scandalous persons to the
Sacrament) we may not dare to go upon peradventures. To the Law, and to the
Testimony. Search the Scriptures. If the Word do not show us any thing of
conversion by the Sacrament, we must not think of any such thing.

2. We must distinguish between the Sacrament it self, and those things that do
accompany the Sacrament, powerful preaching, exhortation, prayer, or the like
before or after the Sacrament. Put case a sinner be effectually converted by a
Sermon or a prayer, which he hears at the Ordination of a Minister, will any
man therefore say that Ordination is a converting Ordinance? So if by most
serious powerful exhortations, convictions, promises, threatenings, by prayer,
by Christian conference by reading or meditation before or after the Sacrament,
the Lord be pleased to touch the Conscience and convert the soul of an
impenitent profane wicked liver, nothing of this kind can make the Sacrament a
converting Ordinance.

3. We must distinguish even in conversion between gratia praeveniens and
subs^quens, operans and co-operans, excitans and adjuvans, or rather, between
habitual and actual conversion. Habitual conversion I call the first infusion
of the life and habits of grace; actual conversion is the souls beginning to
act from that life and from those habits. The first or habitual conversion in
which the sinner is passive, and not at all active, it being wholly the work of
preventing, exciting, quickening grace, is that which never is to be looked for
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is enough to overthrow that
opinion, that scandalous impenitent sinners (having an external formal
profession, but known by a wicked abominable conversation to be dead in sins
and trespasses, in whom the holy Ghost has never yet breathed the first breath
of the life of grace) may be admitted to the Lords Supper (if they desire it,
not being excommunicated) upon hopes, that it may prove a converting Ordinance
to them. As for gratia subsequens co-operans and adjuvans, by which the sinner
(having now a spiritual life created in him and supernatural habits infused in
his soul) is said actually to convert, repent, and believe. I consider even in
this actual conversion, repenting, believing, these two things. 1. The
inchoation. 2. The progress of the work. Where the work is begun, if it were
but faith like a grain of mustard seed, and where there is any thing of
conversion which is true and sound; the Sacrament is a blessed powerful means
to help forward the work. But I peremptorily deny that the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper is appointed or instituted by Christ as a regenerating converting
Ordinance, as well as the word, or as a means of beginning actual, much less
habitual conversion.

4. When I hold the Lords Supper not to be a converting but a sealing
Ordinance, the meaning is not as if* I believed that all who are permitted to
come to the Lords Table are truly converted, or that they are such as the seals
of the Covenant of Grace do indeed and of right belong unto (for we speak of
visible Churches and visible Saints) But my meaning is that Christ has
intended this Sacrament to be the childrens read only (though the hired
servants of the house have other bread enough and to spare) and he allows
this portion to none but such as are already converted and do believe: and that
they who are the ministers of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God ought
to admit none to this Sacrament, except such as are quallified and fit (so far
as can be judged by their profession, knowledge, and practice, observed and
examined by the Eldership according to the rules of the Word, no humane court
being infallible) to have part and portion in the communion of Saints, and to
receive the seals of the Covenant of Grace, at least that they may not dare to
admit any man whose known and scandalous wickedness continued in without
signs of repentance, says within their heart, that there is no fear of God
before his eyes.

These things premised (which are to be remembered by the Reader, but need not
be repeated by me as we go along) I proceed to the Arguments which prove my
assertion, that the Lords Supper is not a converting but a sealing Ordinance.
And thereafter I shall answer Mr. Prynns Arguments brought to the contrary.

CHAP. XIII. Twenty A^guments to prove that the Lords Supper is not a
converting Ordinance.
First,

THat which is an institute significant sign, to declare and testify the
being of that thing which is thereby signified, is not an operating cause or
mean which makes that thing signified to begin to be where it was not. But the
Sacrament is an instituted sign to declare and testify the being of that
thing which is thereby signified. Ergo,

This is an Argument used by Chamier. contract. Tom 4. lib. 2. cap. 9. Quia ut
efficientia toto genere suo differt a significatione: ita diversa ratio est
instituendi in st^umenta efficientia, and significantia etc. 2. prob.
inductione. Quia nulla signa sive miraculosa, sive alia sunt efficientia.
Polanus Synt. lib. 6. cap. 49. Elementum Sacramentale significat, testatur, and
obsignat ^redentibus rem verbo Dei promissam, eam autem nequaquam causat,
efficit, aut producit.
Protestant writers against Papists. The Sacraments being by their definition
Signs, are not causes of that which they signify, neither are the things
signified the effects of the Sacraments. Wherefore the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper being a sign of our spiritual life, faith, union with Christ, and
remission of sins, is not instituted to convey these spiritual blessings to
such as have them not. Significancy is one thing, efficiency another. You will
say by this Argument there is no grace exhibited nor given to believers
themselves in the Sacrament.

Answ. Growth in grace and confirmation of Faith is given to believers in the
Sacrament, which the significancy hinders not, because the Sacrament does not
signify nor declare that the receiver has much grace and a strong faith; but
that he has some life of grace and some faith. The very state of grace or
spiritual life, regeneration, faith and remission of sins are signified,
declared, testified, and sealed, but not wrought or given in the Sacrament. The
strengthening of faith and a further degree of communion with Christ is not
signified in the Sacrament, I mean, its not signified that we have it, but that
we shall have it, or at most that we do then receive it. So that believers may
truly be said to receive at the Sacrament a confirmation or strengthening of
their faith, or a further degree of communion with Christ: but it cannot be
said that the very Sacramental act of eating or drinking, being a sign of
spiritual life and union with Christ (as that which we have, not which we shall
have, or at that instant receive) is a mean or instrumental cause to make a man
have that which it testifies or signifies he has already. There is no
evasion here, for one who acknowledges the Sacrament to be a sign, declaring
or showing forth that we have faith in Christ, remission of sins by him, and
union with him. Mr. Prynn must either make blank the signification of the
Sacrament a part ante, though not a part post, or else hold that the
signification of the Sacrament, is not applicable to many of those whom he
thinks fit to be admitted to receive it.

Secondly, That which necessarily supposes conversion and faith, does not work
conversion and faith. But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper necessarily
supposes conversion and faith. Ergo.

The proposition is so certain, that either it must be yielded, or a
contradiction must be yielded: for that which works conversion and faith,
cannot suppose that they are, but that they are not. Therefore that which
supposes conversion and faith, cannot work conversion and faith, because then
the same thing should be supposed both to be and not to be. The Assumption I
prove from Scripture. Mark. 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved. Act. 2. 38. Repent and be baptized. verse. 41. Then they that gladly
received his word were baptized. Act. 8. 36. 37. And the E^nuch said, See here
is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou
beleevest with all thin^ heart (...) may. Act. 10. 47. Can any man forbid
water that these should not be baptized which have received the holy Ghost as
well as we?

Now if Baptism it self (which is the Sacrament of our initiation) supposes
(according to the tenor and meaning of Christ's institution) that the party
baptized (if of age) does actually convert and believe, and (if an infant)
supposes an interest in Jesus Christ and in the Covenant of grace (for if he
be a child of an Heathen or an Infidel although taken into a Christian Family,
yet the Synod of Dort. Sess. 19. advises not to baptize such a child, till it
come to such age as to be instructed in the principles of Christian Religion.)
How much more does the Lords Supper, necessarily, by Christ's institution,
suppose that the receivers are not unconverted and unbeleeving persons? The
previous qualifications which are supposed in Baptism, must be much more
supposed in the Lords Supper.

Thirdly, That which gives us the new food, supposes that we have the new
birth and spiritual life, and that we are not still dead in sins and
trespasses. But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper gives us the new food. Ergo
it supposes we have the new birth. The proposition I prove thus. Synops. Pur.
Theol. Disp. 43. These. 35. Duo tantum esse and non plura (Sacramenta)
affirmamus: quoniam unum est initiationis, seu regenerationis, alterum
nutritionis seu alimoniae. So Matthias Martinius lexic. Philol. page 3272.
makes this distinction between baptism and the Lords Supper: that is a
Sacrament of initiation and ^doption: this of confirmation and ^urishment.
A man must first be born by the new birth, before he can be fed with the new
food: and how can a man eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, and yet
be supposed not to have a spiritual life before that act, but to get a
spiritual life in that very act? Does a man get life because he eats and
drinks, or does he not rather eat and drink because he lives? The Assumption is
a received and uncontroverted truth. And hence do Divines give this reason why
we are but once baptized, but do many times receive the Lord Supper; because
it is enough to be once born, but not enough to be once nourished or
strengthened. See the Belgic confession. Art. 34. and D. Parei Miscellanea
Catechetica page 79. I shall strengthen my Argument by the Confession of
Bohemia Cap. 11. The Sacraments cannot give to any such (which before was not
inwardly quickened by the holy Ghost) either grace or justifying and quickening
faith, and therefore they cannot justify any man, nor inwardly quicken or
regenerate any man's Spirit: for faith must go before. And after. For if a dead
man or one that is unworthy do come to the Sacraments, certainly they do not
give him life and worthiness. etc. See the Harmony of Confessions printed at
London 1643. page 280. 281. To what end then is the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper instituted? For that, see the Confession of Belgia Ibid. page 320. We
believe and confess that Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior has instituted the
holy Sacrament of his Supper, that in it he might nourish and sustain those
whom he has regenerated and ingrafted into his Family, which is the Church.
Both these Chapters did Mr. Prynn cite in the Question of Judas (which yet
prove not what he affirms in that point, as I have noted before) but it seems
he did not observe these passages, which make directly against him in this
Question of conversion or conferring of grace by the Sacrament. I add also Mr.
Pemble in his Christian disections for receiving the Sacrament. The Sacrament
says he is appointed for our nourishment in grace; where we grow not by it, it
is a sign this food was not digested but vomited up again Polan. Synt lib. 6.
cap. 56. He holds that omnes illi qui scandala praebent and non resipiscunt
serio, a mensa Domini sunt arcendi. 1. Quia si infideles and impoenitentes ad
Coenam Domini admitterentur, profanaretur foedus Dei, tam communicando Symbola
foederis iis quibus Deus nihil promittit, quam usu^pando Symbola sacra sine
fide and resipistentia. 2. Quia polluerent and contaminarent eibum and potum
consecra^um, quem Christus non destinavit nisi suis domesticis and fidelibus
etc. 6. Quia incredulos and manifest impios Christus prohibuit admitti ad
sacram Coenam: nam instituit illam solis fidelibus.
Where faith, repentance, thankfulness, and obedience are not increased, there
Christ crucified was not remembered. But how can there be any nourishment in
grace, or any increase of grace in those who come to the Sacrament, without the
first grace, or in the state of unregeneration?

Fourthly, That Ordinance which is instituted only for believers and justified
persons, is no converting but sealing Ordinance. But the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is instituted only for believers and justified persons. Ergo. The
Proposition has light enough in it self; for converting Ordinances do belong
even to unjustified and unconverted persons. Therefore that which is instituted
only for believers is no converting Ordinance. All the Question will be of the
Assumption, which I shall the rather confirm, because it is the very principle
from which Polanus and others argue for the suspension of scandalous persons
from the Lords Table. Now I prove the Assumption thus. Every Sacrament, even a
Sacrament of initiation, is a seal of the righteousness of Faith. If
Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith. Romans 4. 11. then
Baptism (which has succeeded to Circumcision) is also a seal of the
righteousness of faith, and that more fully and clearly then Circ^mcision was:
and if Baptism be a seal of the righteousness of faith, much more is the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper a seal of the righteousness of Faith; which is
also proved by Mat. 26. 28. For this is my blood of the new Covenant, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins. Chrysostom on Romans 4. considering
those words verse. 11. a seal of the righteousness of Faith, has this
meditation upon it, that a Sacrament is no sign, no seal, except where the
thing is which is signified and sealed (...), For of what shall it be a sign,
or of what shall it be a seal, when there is none to be sealed. (...). For
(faith he) if it be a sign of righteousness, and thou have not
righteousness, neither have thou the sign. If therefore a Sacrament be a seal
of the righteousness of faith, then it is instituted only for believers and
justified persons, because to such only it can seal the righteousness of
faith. Upon this ground says Ubi supra page 395.
Ursinus that the Sacraments are to the wicked and unbeleevers no Sacraments:
which agrees with that Romans 2. 25. If thou be a breaker of the Law, thy
Circumcision is made uncircumcis^on.

Fifthly, The Apostle argues that Abraham the father of the faithful, and
whose justification is as it were a pattern of ours, was not justified by
Circumcision, or (as Aquinas confesses upon the place) that Circumcision was
not the cause but the sign of Justification. Romans 4. 9. 10. 11. We say that
faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. How was it then reckoned?
When he was in Circumcision or in uncircumcision? Not in Circumcision but in
uncircumcision. And he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised Bullinger
Decad. 5. sermon. 7. Quis praeterca i^de non colligat, nos qui filii Abrahae
sumus, non alia ratione justificari, quam p^trem justifica^um constat, ac
Sacramenta nostra in nobis non aliud ^fficere, quam quod in ille (...)? (...)
cum eadem sit ratio Sacramentorum veterum and nostrorum.
If Abraham the father of the faithful, got not so much as the Sacrament of
initiation, till after he was justified and sanctified, how shall we think of
receiving, not only the Sacrament of initiation, but the Sacrament of
spiritual nourishment, while unjustified and unsanctified? And if God did by
his Word make a Covenant with Abraham, before he received Circumcision the seal
of that Covenant, must it not much more be supposed, that they are within the
Covenant of grace, who eat and drink at the Lords Table, and consequently, that
those who are children of disobedience and wrath, and strangers to Christ and
the Covenant of Grace (apparently and manifestly such, though not professedly)
ought not to be admitted to the Lords Table under color of a converting
Ordinance, it being indeed a seal of the Covenant of grace.

Sixthly, That Ordinance which is appointed only for such as can and do
rightly examine themselves concerning their spiritual estate, regeneration,
repentance, faith, and conversation: is no converting Ordinance. But the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an Ordinance which is appointed only for such
as can and do rightly examine themselves concerning their spiritual estate,
regeneration, repentance, faith, and conversation. Ergo, it is no converting
Ordinance. The reason of the Proposition is, because unconverted persons cannot
nor do not rightly examine themselves concerning their spiritual estate,
regeneration, etc. For such are a generation pure in their own eyes, and yet
not washed from their filthiness. Proverb. 16. 2. and 21. 2. and 30. 12. and
the natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned, But he that is spiritual judges all things. 1 Cor. 2.
14. 15. The carnal mind is enmity against God. Romans 8. 7. The Assumption is
proved by 1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that bread and drink of that Cup. This self-examination (Interpreters say) must
be concerning a man's knowledge, Synops. pur. Theol. Disp. 45. Th^s. 83. Dignus
ejus usus praeeu^te probatione sui cujusque definitur: scilicet an sit in fide
2 Cor. 13. 5. and s^ria resipiscentia afficiatur, secundum illud Pauli, Probet
vero seipsum homo. etc.
repentance, faith, and conversation. The Apostle expounds himself 2 Cor. 13.
5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith: prove your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates, or counterfeit, and
unapproved. This self examination, as it is requisite at other times, so
especially before our coming to the Lords Table; and an unconverted man can no
more do it truly and rightly (according to the Apostles meaning) then he can
convert himself. And here that which Mr. Prynn did object, makes against
himself; the Apostle says, Let a man examine himself, not others; for the
examination there spoken of belongs to the Court of a man's own Conscience, and
to the inward man says Martyr upon the place, not to the Ecclesiastical Court.
But a natural unconverted man may possibly examine others and epsy a mote in
his brothers eye, he cannot in any right or acceptable manner examine his own
Conscience, nor go about the taking of the beam out of his own eye. Ursinus
Tract. Theol. page 650. edit. 1584. Ad Coenam Domini autem nulli nisi adulti,
qui and probare seipsos possunt, and hanc probationem confessione and vita
ostendant. Quid porro de his faciendum qui vitam Christianis indignam agunt?
Ecclesiastica disciplina coercendi sunt.
He therefore who either cannot through ignorance, or does not through
impenitency and hardness of heart, examine himself, and is known to be such a
one by his excusing, justifying, or not confessing his scandalous sin, or
continuing in the practice thereof, ought not to be admitted to that holy
Ordinance which is instituted only for such as can and do humbly and soundly
examine themselves, and consequently not intended for unconverted impenitent
persons.

Seventhly, That Ordinance unto which one may not come without a wedding
garment, is no converting Ordinance. But the Supper of the Lord, the marriage
feast of the Kings son, is an Ordinance unto which one may not come without a
wedding garment. Ergo. The Proposition has this reason for it. If a man must
needs have a wedding garment that comes, then he must needs be converted that
comes; for whatever ye call the wedding garment, sure it is a thing proper to
the Saints, and not common to unconverted sinners, and the want of it does
condemn a man into utter darkness, Matthew. 22. 13. The Assumption is clear from
Matthew. 22. 11. 12. When the King came in to see the Guests, he saw there a man
which had not on a wedding garment. And he says unto him, Friend, how came
thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? and he was speechless. If he had
been of Mr. Prynns opinion he needed not be speechless; for Mr. Prynns
divinity might have put this answer in his mouth. Lord I thought this to be a
converting Ordinance, and that thou would not reject those that come in
without a wedding garment, provided that here at the marriage feast they get
one. But we see the King condemns the man for coming in thither without a
wedding garment.

Eighthly, That Ordinance which is not appointed to work faith is no converting
ordinance. But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not appointed to work
faith. Ergo. The proposition must be granted, unless a man will say that
conversion may be without faith. The Assumption is proved by Romans 10. 14. men
cannot pray if they do not believe, and they cannot believe if they do not hear
the Word, v. 17. So then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God. If faith comes by hearing, then not by seeing; if by the word, then not
by the Sacrament.

Ninthly, That Ordinance which has neither a promise of the grace of
conversion annexed to it, nor any example in the Word of God of any converted
by it, is no converting Ordinance. But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper has
neither a promise of the grace of conversion annexed to it, nor is there any
example in all the Scripture of any ever converted by it. Therefore it is no
converting Ordinance.

Tenthly, That Ordinance whereof Christ would have no unworthy person to
partake is not a converting Ordinance. But the Lords Supper is an Ordinance
whereof Christ would have no unworthy person to partake. Ergo. The proposition
I prove thus. It is not the will of Christ that converting Ordinances should be
dispensed to no unworthy person (for else how should they be converted) but
only he has forbidden to dispense unto unworthy persons such Ordinances as
belong to the Communion Saints. The Assumption I prove from 1 Cor. 11. 27.
Whosoever (though otherwise a worthy person and one converted to the state of
grace) shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. v. 29. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning
the Lords body. If the unworthines of that particular act, in respect of the
manner of doing it, make a man so guilty and liable to such judgment, how much
more the unworthiness of the person that eats and drinks? For a man's state,
the course of his life, and the frame of his Spirit, is more then one single
act. This therefore does prove that he that is an unworthy person (if he come
to the Lords Table) does eat and drink unworthily (Whence is that where the
Apostle says verse. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, the Syriack
Interpreter has it, he that eats and drinks thereof being unworthy, or
indignus existens:) Which may be also gathered from the interweaving of verse.
28. between verse. 27. and verse. 29. He that eats and drinks, not having before
rightly examined himself, eats and drinks unworthily. But he that is an
unworthy person, and comes to the Lords Table unworthily and unpreparedly, eats
and drinks not having before rightly examined himself. Ergo. What of that? will
you say. Magdeb. Cent. lib. cap. 4. page 278. Indigne eos uti docet (Paulus)
qui sine vera poenitentia and fide accedunt. etc. Oecumenius upon 1 Cor 11.
fixes the sin of eating and drinking unworthily upon the Corinthians, in
regard of their contempt of the ^ poor, and their other sins: supposing all
such to eat unworthily who are under any wickedness unrepented, when they come.
Much to the point. Every unconverted and unregenerate person is an unworthy
person (as the Scripture distinguishes worthy persons and unworthy) and comes
unworthily and unpreparedly (if he come while such) to the Lords Table;
Therefore such a one if he come, eats and drinks unworthily, and so eats and
drinks judgment to himself. De Tempore Scrm. 244. Et cum nullus homo velit cum
^unica sordibus plena ad Ecclesiam convenire, nescio qua Conscientia cum anima
per luxuriam sit inquinata, praesumit ad altar accedere: non timens illud quod
Apostolus dixit: Qui enim manducat Corpus and sumit sanguinem Domini indigne,
reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini.
Augustine argues promiscuously against those who come unworthily, and those
that eat and drink unworthily, and applies the Apostles words of eating and
drinking unworthily, to all who come with polluted souls, such as all
unconverted have. And Gualther, Martyr, and other Interpreters upon the place,
the Centurists also in the place last cited, reckon those to eat and drink
unworthily, who come without the wedding garment, and without faith, and
holiness of conversation, which intimates that they who live unworthily, do
also eat the Lords Supper unworthily, which is most plainly intimate in the
Directory page 50. where ignorant, scandalous, and profane persons are warned
not to come to that holy Table, upon this reason, because he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself, which necessarily
implies that unworthy persons and profane livers, if they come to the
Sacrament, are not converted, but sin more in eating and drinking unworthily. I
conclude therefore that the prohibition of eating and drinking unworthily does
necessarily imply a prohibition of unconverted, unregenerate, impenitent
persons, to come to the Lords Table, and by consequence that it is no
converting Ordinance.

Eleventhly, That Ordinance which is Eucharistical and consolatory, supposes
that such as partake of it have part and portion in that thing for which thanks
are given, and are such as are fit to be comforted. But the Lords Supper is an
Ordinance Eucharistical and consolatory. Ergo. The Proposition needs no other
proof but the third Commandment; Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in vain. Shall a man be called to give thanks for redemption,
reconciliation, and remission of sins, and to take comfort in Jesus Christ,
even while he is such a one of whom God has said, There is no peace to the
wicked: High talk becomes not a fool. Psalm. 33. 1. Rejoice in the Lord O ye
righteous, for praise is comely for the upright. Psalm. 50. 14. 16. Offer unto
God thanksgiving etc. But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to
declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth.
Zuinglius Tom. 2. de vera and falsa Religione cap. de Sacram. Coena Dominica
d^nus experimentum, quod morte Christi fidamus, quum gratulantes and laeti
adsimus in eo coe^u, qui Deo gratias agit pro beneficio redemptionis.
The Assumption is acknowledged among all; for as it has the name (...), so is
the nature of it. It is also a consolatory Ordinance, in which we are called to
spiritual joy and gladness, it being a feast of fat things full of marrow, and
of wines on the lees well refined. At this Ordinance of the holy Supper Christ
spoke many a sweet and consolatory word to the disciples, and did not rebuke
them nor chide them, as he had done at other times. Is it not then a healing
slightly of the malady of impenitent unconverted sinners, yea a betraying of
their souls to bring them to joy and comfort and thanksgivings and songs of
praise, to eat of the marrow and fatness, and to drink of the rivers of
pleasure which are in the house of God, when we ought rather call them to
weeping and to mourning, to make their peace with God, and to flee from the
wrath to come?

Twelfthly, That Ordinance unto which Christ calls none but such as have
spiritual gracious qualifications, is not a converting but a sealing Ordinance.
But the Lords Supper is an Ordinance unto which Christ calls none but such as
have spiritual and gracious qualifications. Ergo.

The Proposition I hope needs no proof, because unconverted persons dead in
sins and trespasses, have no spiritual gracious qualifications. The Assumption
may be proved by many Scriptures. If of any Ordinance, chiefly of this; it
holds true that Christ inviteth and calls none but such as labor and are
heavy laden, Matthew. 11. 28. such as are athirst for the water of life, John
7. 37. Isa. 55. 1. such as have the wedding garment, Matthew. 22. 12. such as
examine themselves 1 Cor. 11. 28. such as are Christ's friends, Cant. 5. 1. Eat
O friends, drink yea drink abundantly O beloved.

Thirteenthly, That Ordinance which is instituted for the Communion of Saints,
is intended only for such as are Saints, and not for unconverted sinners. But
the Lords Supper is an Ordinance instituted for the Communion of Saints, and of
those who are members of the same body of Christ 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. compared
with 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ergo.

Martin Bucer de Regno Christi lib. 1. cap. 7. conceives that this Sacrament
does so far belong to the Communion of Saints, that wicked and unworthy persons
are not only to be kept back from partaking, but from the very beholding or
being present in the Church at the giving of the Sacrament: which yet is more
then we have affirmed.

Fourteenthly, If Baptism it self (at least when ministered to those that are
of age) is not a regenerating or converting Ordinance, far less is the Lords
Supper a regenerating or converting Ordinance. But Baptism it self (at least
when ministered to those that are of age) is not a regenerating or converting
Ordinance. Ergo.

The ground of the Proposition is, because Baptism has a nearer relation to
regeneration then the Lords Supper, and therefore has the name of the laver of
regeneration. The Assumption I prove thus. 1. Because we read of no persons of
age baptized by the Apostles, except such as did profess faith in Christ,
gladly received the Word, and in whom some begun work of the Spirit of grace
did appear (I say not that it really was in all, but somewhat of it did appear
in all.) 2. If the Baptism of those who are of age be a regenerating
Ordinance, then you suppose the person to be baptized an unregenerated person
(even as when a Minister first preaches the Gospel to Pagans, he cannot but
suppose them to be unregenerated:) But I believe no conscientious Minister
would adventure to baptize one who has manifest and infallible signs of
unregeneration. Sure, we cannot be answerable to God if we should minister
Baptism to a man whose works and words do manifestly declare him to be an
unregenerated unconverted person. And if we may not initiate such a one, how
shall we bring him to the Lords Table?

Fifteenthly, If the Baptism even of those who are of age must necessarily
precede their receiving of the Lords Supper, then the Lords Supper is not a
converting but a sealing Ordinance. But the Baptism even of those who are of
age must necessarily precede their receiving of the Lords Supper. Ergo.

The Assumption is without controversy, it being the order observed by Christ
and by the Apostles, and by all Christian Churches. The Proposition I prove
thus. 1. Hutterus Disp. 17. de Coena Dom. These. 1. Sacramentum initiationis
novi Test. puta Baptisinum, ordine convenientissimo excipit Sacramentum
confirmationis, quod est sacra^ssima Coena Domini and Servatoris nostri Jesu
Christi: tum ob causas alias, tum quod ea est fidei nostrae, in baptismo nobis
collatae, respectu nostri infirmitas, ut nisi subinde confirmetur, mo^ penitus
fatiscat and intereat.
What better reason of the necessity of this precedence of Baptism, than that
Baptism is the Sacrament of regeneration, the Lords Supper the Sacrament of
our spiritual nourishment, and one must be borne before he eat and drink. 2.
The Apostle says Gal. 3. 27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. Romans 6. 4. We are buried with him by Baptism into death.
Col. 2. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God. Therefore if the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper be intended only for the baptized, then it is intended only for
such as are supposed to have put on Christ, are buried and raised again with
him through faith, and consequently, it is not intended for unconverted persons
to convert them, but for converted persons to confirm them.

Sixteenthly, The Method of the parable of the forlorn Son makes very much
against Mr. Prynns opinion. The Lord is indeed ready to forgive, and has
compassion upon the poor sinner, and falls on his neck and kisseth him, and
says to his servants, Bring forth the best robe and put it on him, and put a
ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, and bring hither the fatted calf, and
kill it, and let us eat and be merry. Luke 15. 20. 22, 23. And this is done in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, more especially and more manifestly then in
any other Ordinance. But when? not while the man is yet playing the prodigal,
wasting his substance with riotous living, nor yet while he is filling his
belly in a far Country with the husks which the Swine did eat. But it was when
he came to himself, when he came to his Father and said, Father I have sinned
against Heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.
Then, and not till then, does the father bestow upon him the best robe and the
fatted calf. For this my son was dead (says the Father) and is alive again,
was lost and is found. Had the best robe and the fatted calf been given him
before he repented and came to himself, he had (belike) been so much the more
careless of coming home to his father. But we see these love tokens, this
feast, and this mirth, is for entertaining a poor penitent, not for converting
an impenitent sinner.

Seventeenthly, I shall draw another Argument both out of the Directory for the
public Worship of God throughout the three Kingdoms, and out of Mr. Prynn
himself. Thus it is. That Ordinance from which the Minister in the Name of
Christ ought concionaliter or Doctrinally to excommunicate all impenitent
profane persons, is not a converting but a sealing Ordinance. But the Lords
Supper is an Ordinance from which the Minister ought in the Name of Christ
concionaliter or Doctrinally to excommunicate all impenitent profane persons,
Ergo.

The Proposition arises from this ground, we ought not to dehort impenitent
profane men from converting Ordinances, but rather exhort them to come and
partake thereof. The Assumption I prove, First, from the Directory in the head
of the Lords Supper, which speaks of the Minister thus, Next, he is, in the
Name of Christ on the one part to warn all such as are ignorant, scandalous,
profane, or that live in any sin or offense against their knowledge or
Conscience, that they presume not to come to that holy Table, showing them that
he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself. And on the other part he is in especial manner to invite and encourage
all that labor under the sense of the burden of their sins, and fear of
wrath, and desire to reach out unto a greater progress in grace then yet they
can attain unto, to come to the Lords Table. Is it not here held forth as the
will of Christ, that no profane impenitent unconverted person ought or may
come to the Lords Table, but only such as have somewhat of the work of grace
in them? But let us hear Mr. Prynn himself. The seventh difference which he
stateth between his Antagonists and himself page 28. is this. Whether the
Minister has not fully discharged his Duty and Conscience if he give warning
to unworthy Communicants of the danger they incurr by their unworthy approaches
to the Lords Table, and seriously dehort them from coming to it, unless they
repent, reform, and come prepared.

If this be a right stating of that difference (and if it be true which Mr.
Hussy in his Epistle to the Parliament page 7. says, that it is a very great
and dangerous sin, if they come without repentance, faith, and charity, wherein
the Minister must instruct his people publicly and privately.) Then I suppose
that Mr. Prynn will not deny that a Minister ought in duty and conscience to do
all this, to admonish a scandalous unworthy person, and seriously dehort etc.
Only he contends that the Minister is not bound in duty and conscience after
all this to keep back such from the Sacrament. Well: I take for the present
what he grants: and even by that I prove the Lords Supper is no converting
Ordinance; for if it were. 1. How dare any Minister seriously dehort any
unworthy person from approaching to it? May we forbid sinners to use the means
of their conversion, especially if they be such as are not excommunicated nor
cast out of the Church, and do desire to receive the Sacrament? (which are the
cases often put by Mr. Prynn.) 2. How can the Minister warn such persons not to
come to the Sacrament unless they repent, reform, and come prepared? If it be
not a sealing Ordinance intended only for such as do repent and reform, the
Minister may not say so. 3. And otherwise the sense were this, that such
persons ought not to come to a converting Ordinance, unless they be converted;
for to repent, reform, and come prepared, are things which none can do who are
not converted. Finally* By Mr. Prynn his principles, we may as well* yea
rather, dehort men from coming to hear the Word unless they repent and
reform. For page 44. he says that the Sacrament is as converting, yea a more
humbling, regenerating, converting Ordinance then the Word. Which if it be so,
then we may more warrantably and with less danger to the souls of those who do
not repent and reform, dehort them from coming to the Word, then from coming
to the Sacrament.

Eighteenthly, That Ordinance which is not communicable to Heathens or Pagans,
nor to excommunicated Christians, for their conversion from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan to God, from the state of sin to the state of
repentance, is not a converting Ordinance. But the Lords Supper is such. Ergo.

The Reason of the Proposition is, because converting Ordinances are
communicable to Heathens: and thence proceeded the general Commission to preach
the Gospel to every creature, and to teach all Nations Matthew. 28. 19 Mark 16.
15. which accordingly the Apostles did, Romans 10. 18. Col. 1. 6. And if the
Sacrament be a converting Ordinance for known impenitent scandalous profane
persons within the Church, what reason is there imaginable why it is not also a
converting Ordinance for Heathens, Pagans, Turks, Jews? Or where have we the
least hint in Scripture that an Ordinance which may convert the prophanest
unexcommunicated person within the Church, cannot convert both Heathens and
excommunicated Christians?

The Assumption I prove from Mr. Prynns own acknowledgement, page 38. though
the Sacrament says he must not be administered to Heathens, to whom the Gospel
may and must be preached, before they believe and profess Christ: yet it must
be administered to them as well as Baptism, after their belief and profession
of Christ. Where he clearly grants both Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, to be only sealing and confirming (not converting) Ordinances to
Heathens, and therefore not communicable to them, till after they believe and
profess Christ.

Nineteenthly, That Ordinance which is not communicable nor lawful to be
administered to any known impenitent sinner under that notion, but only as
penitent sinners, truly repenting of their sins past, is not a converting but a
sealing Ordinance. But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is such. Ergo.

The Proposition I prove thus. A converting Ordinance may be administered to
known impenitent sinners under that notion, or looked upon as such, wallowing in
their blood and filthiness. Yea a converting Ordinance qua converting, is not
(nor indeed can be) administered to penitent sinners qua penitent, or looked upon
as truly converted. For as every effect is in order of nature posterior to its
cause, so a converting Ordinance being the instrumental cause of conversion,
regeneration, and repentance, it must needs be supposed that conversion and
repentance does not in order of nature precede but follow after the
administration of the converting Ordinance.

The Assumption is granted by Mr. Prynn page 37. The Minister (says he) does
not (I suppose he will also say ought not) administer the Sacrament to any
known impenitent sinners under that notion, but only as penitent sinners,
truly repenting of their sins past, and promising, purposing to lead a new life
for the future. Therefore yet again by some of his own principles, the
Sacrament is not administered as instrumental to the first conversion of
scandalous unworthy persons in the Church: for where there is in any Ordinance
an instrumental causality toward the conversion of a scandalous person, that
Ordinance must needs be administered to that person under the notion of an
unconverted person, and the effect of conversion looked upon as consequent, not
as antecedent.

The twentieth Argument and the last is this. As I have before showed that Mr.
Prynn in holding the Sacrament to be a converting Ordinance, unto which
unregenerate impenitent and unbeleeving persons (not being excommunicated)
ought to be admitted, does join issue with Papists, and dissenteth from the
Protestant writers in a very special point, and that the controversy draws
very deep: So I will now make it to appear that he dissenteth as much from the
Ancients in this particular. Dionysius Areopagita de Eccles. Hierarch. Cap. 3.
Part. 3. speaking of the nature of this Ordinance of the Lords Supper, tells us
that it does not admit those scandalous sinners who were in the condition of
penitents, before they had fully manifested their repentance, much less
profane and unclean persons in whom no sign of repentance appears; (...),
not admitting him who is not altogether most holy. Just in Martyr Apol. 2. lets
us know that in his time the Lords Supper was given to none, but to such a
person as was looked upon as a believer, and washed in the laver of
regeneration, and lived according to the rule of Christ. Chrysostom Hom. 83.
in Matthew. Augustine de side and operibus Cap. 18. Isidorus Pelusiota lib. 1.
Epist. 143. and others might be here added. But I shall bring their full
testimonies chap. 17. where I will show Antiquity to be for the suspension of
scandalous persons unexcommunicated. Beside these, I add also Si itaque in me
manet, and ego in illo, tunc manducat, tunc bibit. Qui autem non in me manet,
nec ego in illo, and si accipit Sacramentum, magnum acquirit tormentum. Et
infra. Ad altar Dei invisibile (quo non accedit injustus) ille pervenit, qui
ad hoc praesens justificatus accedit.
Beda upon 1 Cor. 11. who tells us both out of Augustine and Prosper, that none
ought to come to the Lords Table but a justified person, and such a one as
abides in Christ and Christ in him. Isidorus de Ecclesiast. offic. lib. 1.
Cap. 18. citing the Apostles words, He that eats and drinks unworthily,
adds. Hoc est enim indigne accipere, si eo tempore quis accipiat, quo debet
agere poenitentiam.
For this is to receive unworthily, if any man receive at that time in which he
should be repenting. The same words has Rabanus Maurus de Instit. Cleric. lib.
1. cap. 31. Which plainly shows us that in their Judgment, the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper does suppose conversion and repentance to be already wrought,
and if it be not wrought, the receiving is an unworthy receiving.

Moreover that the Lords Supper was not anciently esteemed a converting
Ordinance, but a sealing Ordinance, supposing conversion, is more then apparent
by the distinction of Missa Catechumenorum and Missa fidellum: and by that
proclamation in the Church before the Sacrament, Sancta Sanctis, the sense
whereof Durantus de ritibus, lib. 2. cap. 55. number. 15. gives out of
Chrysostom and Cyrill, that Sancta Sanstis was as much as to say: Si quis non
est sanctus, non accedat: If any man be not holy, let him not approach. Or as
if it had been said to them, The Sacrament is a holy thing, sancti and vos cum
sitis sancto Spiritu donati; and seeing you also are holy, the holy Spirit
being given unto you; atque ita sancta sanctis conveniant, and so holy things
agreeing to holy persons. If the Lords Supper be a holy thing intended only
for holy persons, then (sure) it is no converting Ordinance.

I might also cite diverse Schoolmen against Mr. Prynn in this particular. I
shall instance but in two for the present. Scotus in lib. 4. Sent. did. 9.
Quaest. 1. proves from 1 Cor. 11. 27. that it is a mortal sin for a man to
come to the Sacrament at that time when he is living in a mortal sin; and that
he who is not spiritually a member of Christ, ought not to receive the
Sacrament, which is a sign of incorporation into Christ. Alexander Alensis
part 4. Quaest. 11. Membr. 2. Art. 2. Sect. 2. says thus. As there is a double
bodily medicine (curativa and conservativa) one for cure, another for
conservation, so there is a double spiritual medine, to wit (curativa and
conservativa) one for cure, another for conservation; repentance for the cure,
the Eucharist for conservation. etc.

CHAP. XIIII. Mr. Prynne his twelve Arguments brought to prove that the Lords
Supper is a converting Ordinance, discussed and answered.
IT shall be now no hard business to answer Mr. Prynns twelve Arguments,
brought by him to refute my assertion, that that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is no converting Ordinance. See Vindic. page 41. to 45.

First he tells us we grant that moral carnal Christians, and all such as are
not convicted of scandalous sins, are to be admitted to the Sacrament.
Thrrefore doubtless (says he) it is and was intended by Christ for a
converting Ordinance to all such as these, to turn them from their evil ways,
and work saving grace within their hearts, since it can have no other proper
primary effect in such. Certainly God and Christ bestow no Ordinances upon men
in vain; therefore their intentions in instituting this Supper, even for such
visible, moral, unregenerate Christian, as well as real Saints, must
necessarily be for their conversion, not their confirmation and sealing only.

Answ. Lapsus in initio mali augurii est. He confounds here things most
different. 1. He confounds our admitting of Communicants, with Gods intention
to do good to their souls: and his Argument runs upon this mistake, that God
intends good to the souls of all who come to the Lords Table, though wicked
close Hypocrites; and since this good cannot be sealing only, it must be
conversion. But it is neither sealing, nor conversion, nor any good at all
which God intends by that Ordinance to them that perish: yet it is not in vain:
for he himself tells us page 34. that even in these, the Minister administering
the Sacrament, is a sweet savor to God, who has appointed the Sacrament
secundarily and contingently, to be a means of aggravating men's sins and
condemnation, to magnify his justice. 2. There is a most dangerous mistake in
that which he says of the intentions of God and of Christ. If he mean of what
God intends or purposes in the Council of his own will, that in this sense
God intends the conversion of those that perish, is to make void and
frustraneous the decree, will, and intention of God, which is gross
Arminianisme and Jesuitisme. But if he mean finis operis, the proper end for
which the Sacrament was instituted, and the good which the Word of God tells us
we ought to seek, and may through the grace of God find in the Sacrament: Then
in that sense, to say that Christ's intention in instituting this Sacrament was
for conversion of moral unregenerate Christians, is merely a begging of what is
in question. The like I say of that proper primary effect of the Sacrament in
such. If he mean the proper primary effect decreed in the secret counsel of
God, he myres himself in Arminianisme. If he mean the proper primary effect of
the Sacrament in respect of its own nature, this is but petere principium. 3.
All who pretend right to the Sacrament are either visible Saints, qualified
according to the rule of Christ, and such as the Eldership (examining their
profession and practice according to the rules of the word) judges fit to be
admitted to the Sacrament; or they are not such. If they be such, then the end
and use of the Sacrament in reference to them, is to be a sealing Ordinance.
for the Eldership judges and supposes them fit to be sealed and confirmed, so
far as they can understand, and in that capacity do admit them: God only being
able to judge close Hypocrites. If they be not qualified, as I have said, then
we do not grant that they ought to be admitted.

His second Argument has no strength at all. All Ordinan^es which strengthen
grace do more or less begin or beget it, and the Directory it self calls the
Sacraments means of grace page 52. What then? The Directory calls this
Sacrament means of grace, because by it Christ and all his benefits are applied
and sealed up unto us, and we are sealed up by his Spirit to an assurance of
happiness and everlasting life. But (says he) why may not the Sacraments
convert as well as confirm. I have given many reasons for it. If he could prove
that what confirms does also convert, why did he not do it? If he could not
prove it, why brings he a strong affirmation instead of an Argument? As for
that which he adds, that the Lords Supper is received not once as Baptism,
but frequently. For this very end, that those who often fall into sin through
infirmity, may likewise by this Supper often rise again, be refreshed,
comforted, and get strength against their corruptions and sins: and is it not
then a converting as well as a confirming Ordinance? What a wavering is here?
Is the raising, refressiing, and comforting of those who often fall through
infirmity, the conversion or first grace which now we dispute of? Or whether
does he not here yield the cause? For the refreshing and comforting and
strengthening of those that fall through infirmity, is the effect of a
confirming not of a converting Ordinance. And in this sense Divines have given
a reason, why we are but once baptized, but do often receive the Lords Supper,
because Baptism is the Sacrament of our initiation, the laver of regeneration;
(I mean not that which has been called Baptismal regeneration, fancied to be
common to all the baptized, but I mean that which is wrought in and sealed to
the Elect baptized) the Lords Supper is the Sacrament of our spiritual
nourishment and strengthening: and it is enough to be once born, once
regenerate, but we must be often nourished and strengthened.

His third Argument is this. The very receiving of the Sacrament even in
^nregenerate persons, is accompanied with such things as are most effectual to
convert. As 1. With a previous external serious examination of their own hearts
and estates between God and their own Consciences. 2. A solemn searching out of
all their open or secret sins and corruptions, past or present, accompanied
with a serious particular private confession of them, a hearty contrition and
humiliation for them etc. 3. Pious soul ravishing meditations etc. which make
deep temporary impressions on their hearts 4. Flexanimous exhortations,
admonitions, comminations, directions, prayers by the Ministers in the
Congregation, before, in, and after this duty. Whereupon he leaves it to
every man's Conscience to judge whether this Sacrament is not more likely to
regenerate and change their hearts, and lives, then the bare Word preached, or
any other Ordinance.

Answ. 1. Here is a lump of wild, uncouth, and most erroneous Divinity. Who
ever heard of an external examination of men's hearts between God and their own
Consciences? Or 2. That unregenerate persons can and do seriously examine their
own hearts, and search out all their sins with a hearty contrition and
humiliation for them? etc. Or 3. That deep temporary impressions on their
hearts are most effectual to convert and regenerate (for he does enumerate all
these as particulars most effectual to convert.) Or 4. That in the very
receiving of the Sacrament, men hear the Ministers prayers in the Congregation.
5. That this Sacrament is more likely to regenerate then the bare Word preached
(I suppose he means not the word without the Spirit (for nobody holds the bare
word in that sense to regenerate) but preaching without other concurring
Ordinance) or any other Ordinance. Which if it be, he cannot choose but allow
to give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to excommunicated persons, and to the
unbaptized, whether Heathens or Jews, being of age, and desiring to receive it.

Secondly, If all the whole Antecedent part of his Argument were granted, the
consequence is naught: for this must be the consequence, If examination of men's
hearts, the searching out of all their sins, confession, contrition, prayers,
vows, meditations, exhortations, which do accompany the Sacrament, be most
effectual to convert and to beget grace, then the Sacrament is a converting
Ordinance. Which consequence he will never prove. Put the case that
self-examination, confession, prayers, vows, meditations, exhortations, at the
calling of a Parliament, at the going out of an Army, at the choosing of
Magistrates or Ministers, at the death of Parents, friends, etc. prove
effectual to conversion; Shall we therefore say that the calling of a
Parliament, the going out of the Army, the choosing of Ministers or
Magistrates, the death of Parents or friends, are converting Ordinances?

His fourth Argument alone is syllogistical (I wish all his Arguments
throughout his whole book had been such, that the strength or weakness thereof
might the sooner appear) That Ordinance where^n we most immedietly converse
with God and Christ, and have more intimate visible sensible communion with
them, then in any other, is certainly the most powerful and effectual Ordinance
of all others, to humble, regenerate, convert, and beget true grace within us.
etc. But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper by our Antagonists own confession is
such. Ergo.

Answ. 1. I retort his Argument against himself. That Ordinance wherein we most
immediately converse with God and Christ, and have more intimate communion with
them then in any other, is a sealing, confirming, but not a converting
Ordinance. For they who are converting have not such intimate communion and
immediate conversing with God and Christ, as they who are already converted and
do walk with God as Enoch did and are filled with all joy and peace in
believing, Romans 15. 13. even with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.
8. The daughters of Jerusalem being sick of love for Christ, yet are far from
that communion with him, which his Spouse longer acquainted with him did enjoy,
therefore they ask at her, whither her beloved was gone that they might seek
him with her. Cant. 6 1. Has the child fed with milk more communion and
conversing with his father, then the son come to years, who eats and drinks
at his fathers Table? Do we not see often a servent convert like Apollos, whom
an Aquila and Priscilla must take and expound unto him the way of God more
perfectly. Act. 18. 25, 26.

2. I deny his Proposition as he frames it, for the plain English of it is
this; If it be a sealing, comforting, confirming Ordinance, then it is a
converting Ordinance, which I clear thus. He takes his Medium from his
Antagonists concession, for they accord (says he) that we have more immediate
communion with God in this Ordinance then in any other, for as much as in this
Sacrament Christ is more particularly applied, and the remission of our sins
more sensibly sealed to us then in any other Ordinance: from whence I thus
infallibly conclude against these opposites. Then follows his Argument, which
is no other then a putting of the converted in the condition of the
unconverted, or the unconverted in the capacity of the converted* or to prove
it converts, because it seals.

3. If this Sacrament be the most powerful and effectual Ordinance of all
others, to humble, regenerate, convert, and beget true grace: it will follow
that we ought (at least may) give the Sacrament not only to the most ignorant
and scandalous within the Church, but to Turks, Pagans, Jews, and to
excommunicated persons, as I said before.

4. He challenges his Antagonists for crying up and magnifying this Sacrament
above the Word preached, and by way of opposition tells them that he has in
some former Tractates proved Gods presence and Spirit to be as much, as really
present in other Ordinances as in this. Vindic. page 37 yet now I see no man
who does so much as himself, magnify the Sacrament above the Word.

5. Whereas he brings this proof for his Major Proposition: because the
manifestation, revelation, and proximity of God and Christ to the soul, is that
which does most of all humble and convert it. If this hold true in the
generality as he propounds it, then the Spirits of just men made perfect and
glorified, are converted by the revelation and proximity of God and of Christ,
whereof they have unconceaveably more then the Saints on earth. But neither in
this world does the manifestation and revelation of God and of Christ, prove
conversion and regeneration to be in fieri at that instant when God so
manifests and reveals himself, which is the thing he had to prove. I give
instance in diverse of those Scriptures cited by himself: Gods revealing of
himself to Job, chap. 38. and 42. to Isaiah, chap. 6. Christ's manifesting of
his power to Peter, Luke 5. was after, not at their conversion, so that Psalm.
148. 14. But heteregeneous impertinent quotations of Scripture are usual with
him: I am sorry I have cause to say it. Some other Scriptures which here he
cites may be expounded of Gods proximity to us, and ours to God in Conversion,
Isa. 55. 6. Zeph. 3. 2. Ephesians. 2. 17. Iam. 4. 7. But that this kind of proximity
which does convert, is in the Sacrament, he has supposed, but not proved.

His fifth Argument is taken from the converting power of the Word: that which
makes conversion by the Word is the particular application of Christ and the
promises. Now the Sacrament does most particularly and effectually apply Christ
and the promises unto every Communicants eyes, ears, heart, and soul, far
livelier then the Word preached.

Answ. 1. This is a mere fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter:
and easily discovered. The Sacrament applies Christ, but to whom? not to the
unconverted and unbeleevers (for that were to give a seal without a charter)
but to those that are supposed to be converted and believers. He had this to
prove, That the Sacrament does apply Christ's death, passion, and merits to
unconverted persons, and to unbeleevers, yea to their heart and soul. 2. That
the Sacrament does apply the death, passion, and merits of Christ to the
Communicants ears, and that far livelier than the word preached, is to me a
riddle which I think will trouble Mr. Prynn himself to expound. 3. A great
controversy there has been about the orall or corporal manducation of the
body of Christ in the Sacrament. But Mr. Prynn out-runneth here all
Ubiquitaries in the World, for he has said no less then that every
Communicant eats spiritually and by faith the body of Christ, even
unconverted persons, for he says, that this Sacrament does most particularly,
fully, lively, and sensibly apply the promises, yea the death, passion, and
merits of Christ unto EVERY Communicants eyes, ears, HEART and SOUL. Which is
plainly universal grace to all who ever received this Sacrament (and so to
Judas, according to his principles) and to all who ever shall receive it. 4.
Whereas he would confirm this which he says, by his Antagonists Confession; I
do not think he can give any conscientious account of that word. Who said it,
or where? He must needs hold universal grace, hold it who will. 5. Here lies
the strength of his Argument: The Word converts by applying Christ, therefore
the Sacrament, which does more lively apply Christ to every Communicant, must
be a converting Ordinance. Which necessarily implies, that all who receive the
Sacrament are converted. Yea if application infer conversion, as the effect
of the Application, the Saints and Believers themselves must be again
constituted in the first Article of Conversion, and transition from the estate
of nature and unregeneration. 6. The Application of Christ in the Word unto
Conversion, is a thing of another nature than the Sacramental application of
Christ, and therefore like effects ought not to be ascribed unto these
Ordinances: For the Application of Christ made in the Word preached to the
unconverted to convert them, is per influxum Physicum, by a most efficacious
life-giving influence, as when Elisha applied himself to the Shunnamites dead
child, or like that Ezekiel. 16. 6. John 5. 25. and 11. 43. But this manner of
influence or causality is denied to the Sacrament by many of the Schoolmen and
Papists themselves. So much of his fifth Argument which I thought to answer in
two words, if the many absurdities in it had given me leave.

His sixth Argument is this, All grant that God does as effectually convert by
the eye as by the ear. All grant. I deny it. and I verily believe he can
produce very few Authors (if any) for it. He ought not to speak so great words
without good warrants, which here I am sure he has not. Well: but he will
prove the thing it self. First he tells us of the book of Nature, and of the
Creatures, by which we are instructed etc. But either he means that the very
book of Nature can and does effectually and savingly convert to Faith in Christ
and to true sanctification, or not. If the affirmative, then the Heathens who
lived and died in Paganism had sufficient means and helps to conversion and
faith in Christ: (for those Pagans had the book of the Creatures to instruct
them, as is expressed in some Scriptures cited by himself) and so there may be
salvation and the means thereof without the Church. If this be not his meaning,
but that the book of Nature instructs us concerning many things of God, yet
does not teach us to know Christ and all things necessary to salvation, far
less does effectually and savingly convert: then he has said nothing to that
point which he had to prove. 2. He says that all the Sacrifices of the old
Law, and Circumcision, and the Passover did teach Gods people who participated
of them, or were present at them, by the eye, and were converting Ordinances,
as all do and must acknowledge.

Answ. Here is another tinckling Cymbal. Do all acknowledge that the Sacraments
of the Old Testament were converting Ordinances? There can be no rational
account given hereof. Certainly our Writers before cited, and diverse others
who deny the Sacraments of the New Testament to be converting Ordinances,
never meant to admit that the Sacraments of the old Testament were converting
Ordinances. 2. How Circumcision did teach by the eye those who did participate
of that Ordinance, and so Infants, is another riddle. 3. If Sacrifices under
the Law had been converting Ordinances, yet that cannot be a just parallel to
Sacraments, except seeking to make the Lords Supper a converting Ordinance we
convert it self into a Sacrifice for sin, as Papists do. But neither does he
offer the least color of reason to prove that all the external Sacrifices of
the old Law were converting Ordinances, which here he affirms. The Apostle
speaks otherwise of the Legal Sacrifices, which he says could not make him
that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience: Heb. 99. and
therefore calls all those rites carnal Ordinances, verse. 10. for though they
were spiritual in respect of their signification and typifying of Christ, and
sealing the Covenant of grace to the faithful in the Old Testament, yet they
were not spiritual in regard of their giving of grace or working conversion or
purging the Conscience, for they had no such operation nor effect.

Fourthly, Mr. Prynn confirms his present Argument by the miracles of the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, which (says he) converted thousands without
preaching, did convert and regenerate men by the eye without the ear. For proof
whereof he cites abundance of Texts of Scripture which do not prove what he
says, nay some of them prove the contrary.

Some of the Scriptures cited, do not prove conversion and regeneration by
miracles, but either confirmation as John 2. 11. after the miracle, it is
added, and his Disciples believed on him. Or some preparatory initial work
before regeneration, as that John 3. 2. Mr. Prynn will hardly prove that
Nicodemus was already regenerated at that instant, when he knew not what
regeneration was: Or that those John 2. 23. who believed on Christ when they
saw his miracles at the feast, had any more then a temporary faith, it being
said of them, that Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all
men. Act. 2. 12. Luke 5. 25. 26. tell us of some who at the sight of miracles
were stricken with fear and amazement, and gave glory to God, which proves not
that miracles did convert, but convince. The like I say of 1 Kings 18. 38. 39.
Other Texts cited by him make express mention of the Word as a mean of the
conversion which was wrought, as John 4. 50. the man believed the Word that
Jesus had spoken, and this was before the miracle. John 7. 31. many believed,
but they heard Christ preach verse. 14. So John 11. 45. those Jews who believed
on Christ after they had seen the miracle, did also hear that which Christ
said, yea their believing is mentioned as an effect of their hearing, verse. 41.
42. So Act. 6. 8. Stephen did indeed great miracles, but the multiplying of the
number of the Disciples, is referred to the Word, verse. 7. Act. 8. 6. it is
expressly said, And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things
which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. Qua fide has
Mr. Prynn cited this very Text to prove that men were converted by miracles
without the Word, by the eye without the ear. Some other Scriptures by him
quoted prove only a popular confluence and the multitudes following of Christ.
Having seen his miracles as John 6. 2. and 11. 47. 48. Matthew. 15. 30. 31. For
the people were inclined to hearken to doctrine by miracles, which moves
natural men to flock together to see strange things says Mr. Hussy. Plea for
Christian Magistracy, page 30. which he is pleased to clear by peoples flocking
to a Mountebank. Other Texts which he cites, speak of miracles, but not a
syllable of conversion or regeneration wrought by miracles, as Act. 15. 12.
Act. 19. 11. 12. Among the rest of the Texts he cites John 6. 26. Ye seek me,
not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were
filled. And hence forsooth he will prove that miracles did convert and
regenerate men. I had not touched these particulars, were it not that I desire
Mr. Prynn himself in the fear of God may be convinced of his making too bold
with the Scripture in citing and applying it very far amiss: and that for the
future his Reader may be wary, and not take from him upon trust a heap of
Scriptural quotations, such as often he brings.

In the fourth place, he tells us, That the things we see with our eyes do more
affect, and beget deeper impressions in our hearts, then the things we hear. He
means (I think) do more effectually convert, for so he makes the Application,
that the very beholding of Christ's Person, passion, without the Word, were the
most effectual means of working contrition, conversion, etc. Well: What is his
proof? He cites Christ's words to his Disciples, Blessed are your eyes for they
see: (without adding the rest, and your ears, for they hear) and Simeons words,
Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, as if forsooth either Simeon or the Apostles
had been converted and regenerated by the seeing of Christ's person. He cites
also Luke 23. 46, 47, 48. as if all who (beholding Christ's passion and death)
smote upon their breasts, had been by that sight converted and regenerated.
That the things we behold with our eyes, if they be great or strange things
work deep impressions, there can be no doubt of it. But that the hearing of
great things may not work as deep impressions, or that seeing without hearing
does convert and regenerate, has been strongly affirmed by Mr. Prynn, but not
yet proved.

I proceed to his seventh Argument which is this. The most melting
soul-changing meditation is the serious contemplation of Christ's death and
Passion. No meditation comparable to this, to regenerate and convert a carnal
heart. And is not this effectually represented to our eyes, hearts, in this
very Sacrament in a more powerful prevailing manner then in the Word alone.

Answ. That which he had to subsume and prove is, that this Sacrament works
in a unregenerate carnal heart such soul changing meditations of the death and
passion of Christ, as it never had before (the soul having never before been
regenerate) Which being the point to be proved, why did he not prove it, if he
could? No doubt the Sacrament is a most powerful mean to beget in the hearts of
believers and regenerate persons most humbling and melting meditations
concerning the death of Christ. But that it begets any soul changing or
regenerating meditations in those in whom the Word has never yet begun the
work of regeneration and conversion; I do as much disagree in this, as I agree
in the other.

The eighth Argument which he brings is from comparing the Sacrament with
afflictions. Our own corporal external afflictions are many times without the
Word the means of our repentance and conversion unto God, etc. Then much more
the Sacrament, wherein the afflictions of Christ himself are so visibly set
forth before our eyes.

Answ. 1. It is a very bad consequence, for the strength resolves into this
principle, an unregenerate carnal man will be more affected and moved with the
representation of Christ's afflictions, than with the feeling of his own
corporal afflictions. 2. Affliction does not convert without the Word either
going before or accompanying it (unless we say that Pagans or Turks may be
converted savingly by affliction before ever they hear the Word.) Psalm. 94. 12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest and teach him out of thy Law. Job.
36. 9. 10. 11. And if they be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of
affliction. Then he shows them their work and their transgression that they
have exceeded. He opens also their ear to Discipline, and commands that
they return from iniquity. Behold conversion by afflictions, but not without
the Word. While Mr. Prynn goes about to prove that afflictions convert without
the Word, the first Text he cites is Psalm. 119. 67. 71. where express mention
is made of the Word.

3 As for Manasseh his conversion 2 Chronicles. 33. 11. 12. it was wrought by the
means of affliction, setting home upon his Conscience that Word of God
mentioned in the verse imediatly preceding, which says and the Lord spoke to
Manasseh and to his people, but they would not hearken. Let him show the like
instance of the conversion by the Sacrament of such as would not hearken to the
Word, and I shall yield the cause. The Word is express, that affliction is one
special powerful mean of conversion, but it no where says any such thing of
the Sacrament. 4. It was also incumbent to him to prove that afflictions do
convert without the Word, not only at such times and in such places as do
sequester a person from the liberty of hearing the Word preached, but also when
and where the Word is freely enjoyed. Otherwise how far is he from concluding
by Analogy the point he had to prove? which is, that an unregenerate person
living under the Ministry of the Gospel, and being an ordinary hearer, never
converted by the Word, may nevertheless (according to the dispensation of the
grace of God revealed in Scripture) be converted by the Sacrament received?

His ninth Argument is this. That Ordinance whose unworthy participation is a
means of our spiritual obduration, must by the rule of contraries when worthily
received, be the instrument of our mortification, conversion, salvation. But
the unworthy receiving of the Sacrament is a means etc.

Answ. 1. This Argument does necessarily suppose, that an unconverted,
unmortified, unworthy person, while such, may yet worthily receive (and so by
that means be converted) the contrary whereof I have demonstrated in my tenth
Argument. 2. If the Sacrament be not worthily received, without repentance,
faith, and self-examination (for which cause men are dehorted to come, except
they repent etc.) then there is perfect nonsense in the Argument, for to say
that the Sacrament when worthily received is the instrument of conversion, is
as much as this; The Sacrament is an instrument of conversion to those who are
already converted. 3. That rule of Contraries is extremely mis-applyed. The
rule is Oppositorum, quatenus talia, opposita sunt attributa, Contraries have
contrary attributes. Vide Kekerm. System. log. lib. 3. cap. ^0.
The comparison must be made secundum differentias quibus dissident, Otherwise
that old fallacy were a good Argument. A single life is good, therefore
Marriage is evil; Virginity is pure, therefore Marriage is impure: Whereas
Marriage and single life are not opposed in the point of good and evil, purity
and impurity, but in the point of immunity from worldly cares and troubles. So
it is a bad consequence (at least against us) unworthy receiving of the
Sacrament is an instrument of obduration, Ergo Worthy receiving of it is a mean
of conversion. For we hold that worthy receiving and unworthy receiving are not
opposed in point of conversion, but in point of sealing: the worthy receiving
seals remission and salvation: the unworthy receiving seals judgment. But Mr.
Prynn still takes for granted what he had to prove; viz. That this particular
is one of those differentiae quibus dissident ista Opposita.

Come on to his tenth Argument. Its taken from the ends for which this
Sacrament was ordained. 1. The keeping in memory Christ's death. 2. The
ratification and sealing of all the promises and Covenant of grace unto the
receivers souls. 2. To be a pledge and symbol of that most near and effectual
communion which Christians have with Christ, and that spiritual union which
they enjoy with him. 4. To feed the communicants souls in assured hope of
eternal life. 5. To be a pledge of their resurrection. 6. To seal unto them the
assurance of everlasting life. 7. To bind them as it were by an oath of
fidelity to Christ, Whereupon he asks how it is possible that this Sacrament
should not both in Gods intention and Christ's ordination, be a converting as
well as a sealing Ordinance, since that which does seal all these particulars
to men's souls, etc. must needs more powerfully persuade, pierce, melt, relent,
convert an obdurate heart and unregenerate sinner then the Word it self?

Answ. 1. His Argument may be strongly retorted against himself, diverse of
these ends of the Sacrament being such as are incompetent and unapplicable to
obdurate and unregenerate sinners: How did he imagine that even to such as
these, the Sacrament does ratify and seal to their souls all the promises and
Covenant of grace, they not having yet closed with Christ in the Covenant? Or
how will he make it to appear, that this Sacrament is a pledge of a most near
union and communion with Christ, even to those who are yet far from any union
with Christ? Or how shall they be fed in hope and sealed in assurance of
everlasting life, who are yet under the curse of the Law and state of
condemnation? Surely Master Prynne granting here that the Sacrament is ordained
of Christ to seal, and that it does seal all these particulars to men's souls,
does thereby yield the whole cause. For that which does seal all these
particulars to men's souls, most certainly does not convert, but presuppose
conversion. 2. If this Sacrament be by Gods intention a converting Ordinance,
and Gods intention being by him distinguished from Christ's ordination, whether
does it not necessarily follow both from this and from his first Argument (unto
which this gives more light) that God did in the secret counsel of his Will
intend and decree the Conversion of the flintiest heart and obdurest spirit, as
he speaks; and that either this effect is wrought by the Sacrament in the
flintiest heart and obduratest spirit (which I believe he dare not say) or that
Gods decree and intention is frustrate? 3. And if the Sacrament must needs more
powerfully persuade, pierce, melt, relent, convert an obdurate heart and
unregenerate sinner then the Word it self; how then can he either seclude
Pagans, or dehort impenitent unworthy persons from the Sacrament?

His eleventh Argument is the grossest and palpablest petitio principii of any
that ever I met with, and to be offered to none except such as cannot
distinguish between that which is affirmed, and that which is proved. First he
tells us what true conversion is, and then asks if any thing be so prevalent to
effect this as the Sacrament. This therefore I pass.

His twelfth and last Argument is an appealing to the experience of Christians.
But a part of his appeal is of no use; that is, Whether this Sacrament does not
strengthen against corruptions and tentations, which does not touch this
present Controversy. It is as little to the purpose which he says of
conversion by preparations to the Sacrament, which may be by the Word, Prayer,
etc. But that many thousands of converted Christians will experimentally
affirm, that the receiving of the Sacrament was the first effectual means of
their conversion, yea, that they had not been converted had they been debarred
from it for their former scandalous sins, I do as confidently deny it as he
affirms it: and if any who has been a scandalous liver, whose heart was
never yet turned, humbled, broken, changed by the Word, nor by any other mean
of grace, should affirm that his very receiving of the Sacrament did
effectually convert him, I durst not herein give credit to him. For to the Law
and to the Testimony; If they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them. And whereas he concludes, For shame therefore
disclaim this absurd irreligious paradox, for which there is not the least
shadow of Scripture or solid reason: I shall wish him for shame to disclaim
this and many such like expressions more bold and arrogant, then either prudent
or conscientious. And the intelligent Reader who considers my twenty
Arguments for that which he calls so absurd, and my Answers to all his twelve
Arguments, will easily judge where the shame and irreligiousnesse will lie. If
at his door, let him look to it. Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccin^a nigra leguntur.

All that he adds page 45, 46, 47, being at best rhetorical, not rational,
and a superstructure upon that foundation, that the Lords Supper is a
Converting Ordinance; it needs no battering, but falls of it self, the
foundation being taken away. And as we ought not nor cannot without sin suspend
scandalous sinners from the Sacrament, if it be a Converting Ordinance (upon
which supposition also both the Advice of the Assembly of Divines, and the
Ordinance of Parliament concerning Suspension from the Sacrament, were most
sinful and unlawful) So if it be not a converting but a sealing Ordinance
(which I hope is now luce clarius) there needs no other Argument for the
suspension of scandalous sinners living in gross reigning sins, but this, That
the end and use for which this Sacrament was instituted, is not conversion
which these need, but sealing and confirmation, of which they are incapable,
they being such as ought to be kept back a signis gratiae divinae, as Divines
speak. For how shall these that in words profess God, but in their works deny
him, be sealed with the seals or marked with the marks of the favor and grace
of God? Most certainly this Question concerning the nature, end, and use of the
Sacrament, casts the balance of the whole Controversy concerning Suspension:
which I have therefore been the larger upon.

And whereas Master Prynne concludes, page 47, with a large citation out of
Lucas Osiander Enchir. contra Anabapt. cap. 6. quaest. 3. for that he shall
have this return. First, all that Osiander there says, is brought to prove
this point against the Anabaptists, quod et si unum aut alterum videamus in
Ecclesia aliqua flagitiosum, propterea neque secessionem faciendam, neque a
sacris congressibus, aut Coena Domini Christiano abstinendum. That although in
some Church we see some one or other flagitious person, yet a Christian is not
therefore either to make a separation, or to abstain from the sacred Assemblies
or the Lords Supper. Which is not the Question now agitated between us.
Secondly, after that passage cited against us, Master Prynne might have taken
notice of another passage which makes against himself. Where the Anabaptists
did object to the Lutheran Churches, their admitting of scandalous persons to
the Sacrament, Osiander denies it: for (says he) although we cannot help
hypocrites their coming to the Lords Table; nos tamen scienter neminem
admittimus, nisi peccatores poenitentes, etc. Yet we admit none willingly,
except penitent sinners who confess their sins and sorrow for them. Thirdly,
Osiander, ibid. Quaest. 2. holds Excommunication to be an Ordinance of God,
and groundeth it upon Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. Therefore Master Prynne must seek
another Patron then Osiander.

And now the nature of the Ordinance being cleared, there needs no more to
confute Master Prynne in that which he makes the eighth thing in controversy
between him and his Antagonists, namely, Whether Ministers may not as well
refuse to preach the Word to such unexcommunicated, gross, impenitent,
scandalous Christians, whom they would suspend from the Sacrament. Certainly it
is not lawful but commanded as a duty to preach both to the converted and to
the unconverted, without excluding the most scandalous impenitent sinners
whosoever. But the Lords Supper being (according to its institution and the
mind of Jesus Christ) a sealing or confirming Ordinance only, it cannot
without a violation of the Institution be given to known impenitent scandalous
persons. Other particulars in his Debate concerning this eighth point of
difference, which do require any Answer, I will take occasion to speak unto
them in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Whether the admission of scandalous and notorious sinners to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, be a pollution and profanation of that holy
Ordinance; And in what respects it may be so called?
MAster Hussy in his Plea, page 2. does very much mistake his mark, when in
opposition to what I had said concerning the polluting of the Sacrament by the
admission of the scandalous, he tells me out of Beza, that the Sacraments
remain effectual to the good, though evil men come to them: and thereupon
concludes, that the Sacrament is holy and pure to the believer,
notwithstanding the unpreparednesse of the wicked: Which is not the thing in
question: much less is it the Question, Whether there be any such thing as a
pollution of the Sacrament: for this Master Coleman has yielded (though before
he quarrelled that phrase of polluting the Ordinances) giving instance in the
using of Cheese instead of Bread, Male dicis, page 12. But the true state of
the Controversy may be laid open in these few distinctions.

First, as Scotus in lib. 4. Sent. Did. 3. Quaest. 2. distinguishes two sorts
of things which may be called necessary to a Sacrament; necessarium
simpliciter, and necessarium aliqualiter: the former he calls that without
which the Sacrament is no Sacrament: the later, that without which they that
give the Sacrament cannot avoid sin, or the want whereof makes the Ministry
guilty; so do I distinguish two sorts of pollution of the Sacrament, one which
makes the Sacrament no Sacrament, but a common or unhallowed thing to those
that do receive it, as (for instance) if the Sacrament were given by those that
are no Ministers, o^ to those that are no Church, or without the blessing and
breaking of bread: Another which makes the ministration of the Sacrament hic
and nunc, and with such circumstances to be sinful, and those that do so
administer it to be guilty: and so whatsoever is done in the ministration of
the Sacrament contrary to the revealed will of God, is a pollution of that
Ordinance. The present Question is of the later, not of the former.

Secondly, some wicked men by their receiving the Sacrament do only draw
judgment upon themselves, and these are close hypocrites: Others by their
receiving of the Sacrament do involve not themselves only, but others also
into sin and Gods displeasure; and these are scandalous notorious sinners.

Thirdly, the sin of those who pollute the Sacrament by using it contrary to
the nature and institution of it, may be the sin of others, and those others
accessory to such pollution of the Sacrament two ways: either it is the sin of
the whole Church, none excepted, so that none that communicates then and there
can be free of the sin, as where the bread is elevated and worshipped, all the
communicants are eo ipso that they join in the Sacrament then and there,
partakers of the sin of bread-worship, though perhaps some of them do not join
in the act of worshipping the bread, but have done what they could to prevent
or hinder it. Or it is the sin only of so many as have not done what they
ought and might have done for observing the Institution, rule and example of
Jesus Christ. And of this sort is the sin of communicating with scandalous and
profane men. If private Christians have interposed, by admonitions given to the
offender, and by petitions put up to those that have authority and power for
restraining the scandalous from the Lords Table, they have discharged their
consciences, and may without sin communicate though some scandalous members be
admitted: for such persons sin in taking the Sacrament, but worthy communicants
are not partakers of their sin. But if Church Officers who have a charge and
authority from Jesus Christ, to receive none whom they know to be unworthy,
profane and scandalous, shall not withstanding admit such persons, they are
thereby partakers of their sin, so that their receiving, or rather polluting of
the Sacrament, is imputed not to themselves only, but to the Church Officers
who had authority to keep them back, and did it not.

Fourthly, the suffering of a mixture of known wicked persons among the godly
in the Church, does sometime defile us with sin, sometime not. It does not
defile us, when we use all lawful and possible remedies against it, and namely,
when we exercise the Discipline of Excommunication, and other Churchcensures,
says Augustine, lib. contra Donatistas, post collationem, cap. 4. Tom. 7. But
it does defile us, and we do incur sin and wrath, when the means of redressing
such known evils are neglected, indisciplinata patientia (it is Augustines
word) so to bear with wicked men, as not to execute discipline against them,
that certainly makes us partakers of their sin. I mean in a reformed and well
constituted Church, where the thing is feasible. But where it cannot be done,
because of persecution, or because of the invincible opposition either of
authority, or of a prevalent profane multitude, in that case we have only this
comfort left us, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness;
and, in magnis voluisse sat est.

Fifthly, neither does this Question concerning the pollution or profanation,
or abuse of the Sacrament, concern those peccata quotidianae incursionis, such
sins of infirmity as all the godly, or at least the generallay of the godly,
are subject unto and guilty of, as long as they are in the world (for then the
Sacrament should be polluted to all; for, Who can say, I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from my sins?) but only gross and scandalous sins, such as
make the Name of God and the profession of Religion to be evil spoken of and
reproached, those roots of bitterness which spring up, whereby many are like
to be defiled; those that are guilty of such sins, and have given no evidence
of true Repentance, if they be received to the Sacrament, it is a profaning of
the Ordinance.

Now that the admission of scandalous and notorious sinners to the Sacrament in
a reformed and constituted Church, is a profanation or pollution of that
Ordinance, may be thus proved.

First, Paraeus upon the 82 Question in the Heidelberg Catechism, where it is
affirmed, that by the admission of scandalous sinners to the Sacrament, the
Covenant of God is profaned, gives this reason for it, Because as they who
having no Faith nor Repentance, if they take the s^als of the Covenant, do
thereby profane the Covenant; so they who consent to known wicked and
scandalous persons their taking of the seals, or to their coming to the
Sacrament, do by such consenting make themselves guilty of profaning the
Covenant of God (for the doer and the consenter fall under the same breach of
law) yea, so far do they sin by such consenting, as that they do thereby
acknowledge the children of the devil to be the children of God, and the
enemies of God to be in Covenant and to have fellowship with God. He
distinguishes these two things, who ought to come to the Sacrament, and who
ought to be admitted. None ought to come, except those who truly believe and
repent: None ought to be admitted, except such as are supposed to be believers
and penitent, there being nothing known to the contrary. If any impenitent
sinner take the Sacrament, he profanes the Covenant of God. If the Church admit
to the Sacrament any known to live in wickedness without repentance, the
Church profaneth the Covenant of God.

Secondly, that Ordinance which is not a converting but a sealing Ordinance,
which is not appointed for the conversion of sinners but for the communion of
Saints, is certainly profaned and abused contrary to the nature, institution,
and proper end thereof, if those who are manifestly ungodly, profane,
impenitent, and unconverted, be admitted to the participation thereof. But the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not a converting but a sealing Ordinance, etc.
which I have proved by infallible demonstrations. Ergo.

Thirdly, That use of the Sacrament which is repugnant and contradictory to the
Word truly and faithfully preached in the name of Christ, is a profaning of
the Sacrament. But to give the Sacrament to those who are known to live in
gross sins without repentance, is an use of the Sacrament which is repugnant
and contradictory to the Word truly and faithfully preached in the Name of
Christ. Ergo.

I suppose no man will deny, that if we truly and faithfully preach the Word,
we may and ought to pronounce and declare such as live in sin impenitent and
unconverted, to be under Gods wrath and displeasure as long as they continue in
that estate. Be not deceived says the Apostle, neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. See the like
Ephesians. 5. 5, 6, 7. Whence it is, that doctrinally we warn the ignorant and
scandalous, and all such as live in known sins without repentance, that they
presume not to come and profane that holy Table. Of which Ministers are
appointed by the Directory to give warning. How then can we by giving the
Sacrament to such as these, give the lie to the Word? Z^ch. Ursin. Judicium de
disciplina Ecclesiastica. Tom. 3. page 806. Haec enim Dei voluntas non erit in
aeternum, ut Ecclesia Christiana alicui gratiam Christi and remissionem pec
catorum, annun ciatione verbi divini deneget, and eidem exhibitione
Sacramentorum spondeat.
For what other thing shall we do; if those whom the Word pronounces to have
no part in the Kingdom of God nor of Christ, shall be admitted as well as the
Godly to eat and drink at the Lords Table, while known to continue in the
committing of their damnable sins, or while it is known that they have not
repented of the uncleanness, and fernication, and lasciviousness which they
have committed? 2 Cor. 12. 21. What is this but to absolve in the Sacrament
those who are condemned in the Word, and to open the Kingdom of Heaven in the
Sacrament unto those on whom the Word shuts it?

Fourthly, That use of the Sacrament which strengthens the hands of the
wicked, so that he turns not from his wickedness, is an abuse and
profanation of the Sacrament. But the giving of the Sacrament to any known
profane impenitent person is such an use of the Sacrament as strengthens the
hands of the wicked, so that he turns not from his wickedness. Ergo.

I appeal to the experience of all godly and faithful ministers, whether they
have not found it a great deal more difficult to convince or convert such
profane men as have been usually admitted to the Sacrament, then to convince
or convert such as have been kept back from the Sacrament? No marvel that such
profane ones as have usually received the seals of the Covenant of grace, and
joined in the highest act of Church Communion, live in a good opinion of their
souls estate, and trust in lying words, Have we not eaten and drunken at thy
Table? The Sacrament, The Sacrament, as of old The Temple, The Temple. Mr.
Prynn thinks, that the Minister has fully discharged his duty and conscience,
if he give warning to unworthy Communicants of the danger they incur by their
unworthy approaches to the Lords Table. Vindic. page 28, 29. But he may be
pleased to receive an answer from himself, page 43. The things we see with our
eyes do more affect and beget deeper impressions in our hearts, then the things
we hear. The Word preached is Verbum audibile, the Sacrament is Verbum
visibile. How shall profane ones be persuaded by their ears to believe that
whereof they see the contrary with their eyes? they will give more credit in
Mr. Prynns own opinion to the visible Word, then to the audible Word.

Fifthly, If it were a profanation of the Sacrament of Baptism to baptize a
Catechumene, a Jew, or a Pagan professing a resolution to turn Christian, he
being manifestly under the power of abominable reigning sins, and being still a
profane and wicked liver, although he were able to give a sound and Orthodox
Confession of Faith: then it is also a profanation of the Lords Supper to
admit unto it abominable and profane livers. But it were a profanation of the
Sacrament of Baptism etc. Augustine lib. de fide and operibus cap. 18. tells
us, that the Church did not admit whores and such other scandalous persons to
Baptism. Et nisi egerint ab his mortuis operibus poenitentiam, accedere ad
Baptismum non sinuntur. And except they repent (says he) from these dead
works, they are not suffered to come unto Baptism. Diverse Arguments he brings
in that Book for this thing, as 1. That Peter says ( Act. 2. 38.) Repent and
be baptized. 2. That the Apostle Heb. 6. 1, 2. joyneth repentance from dead
works with Baptism. 3. That John preached the Baptism of Repentance. 4. That
fornicators, adulterers, thieves, etc. shall not inherit the Kingdom of God:
therefore such as are known to live in these sins without repentance ought not
to be baptized. 5. He argues from 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. etc. Now I offer this
Quaere. Shall an abominable wicked life, murder, adultery, swearing, cursing,
lying, or the like keep back a man from so much as entering into the visible
Church by the door of Baptism, and shall not the like abominations keep back a
man from Fellowship with the Saints at the Lords Table? Is there more evidenc^
of Saintship required in those who come to be baptized, then in those who come
to the Lords Table? If there be, let our Opposites speak it out, and open up
the riddle. If there be not, then how can their Tenent avoid the profanation
of the Lords Table?

Sixthly, That Ordinance which is profaned by admitting Infants and Idiots who
can make no good use of it, is much more profaned by admitting abominable and
known profane persons who make a very bad use of it. But the Lords Supper is
profaned by admitting Infants and Idiots who can make no good use of it. Ergo.

Mr. Prynn page 29. yields that children, fools, and distracted men, are by a
natural disability made incapable of receiving the Lords Supper, because unable
to examine themselves, to which (says he) not withstanding they have been
admitted in some Churches. In what Churches fools and distracted men have been
admitted to the Lords Supper, I should have willingly learned from him, for as
yet I know not any such thing Children I know were sometime admitted by the
Ancients who did afterward discover their own great error in that particular.
However, He yields as I take it, children and fools to be incapable of the
Lords Supper. And why? because unable to examine themselves, in regard of
natural disability. But where there is no disability in the natural faculties,
may not a sinful disability which a man has drawn upon himself (as ignorance,
drunkenness, corrupt and atheistical opinions, presumptuous excusing or
defending of sin) make him unable to examine himself? Shall men that are unable
to examine themselves be admitted to the Sacrament, because not disabled by any
natural disability? Sure this was far from Paul's thoughts when he delivered
that rule concerning examining our selves before the Sacrament. Whoever they be
who are unable to examine themselves, whether naturally or sinfully, much more
they who manif^stly appear unwilling to examine themselves, if they be admitted
and allowed to come to the Lords Supper, it is a high and ha^nous profanation
of that Ordinance. Wherefore to prosecute my Argument, Why do we exclude
Infants and Idiots? because (...) Apostle says, Let a man examine himself, and
so let him (...) Bread, and drink of that Cup: but Infants and Idiots (...)
examine themselves. Now a positive profanation of the Sacrament, is worse then
a negative profanation of it: abuti is more then non been uti. We know that
profane impenitent sinners will not only make no good use of the Sacrament,
nor examine themselves aright, but will abuse it to the worst use that can be,
even to slatter themselves in their wickedness, and to harden themselves in
sin and impenitency. Mr. Prynn will tell us, we know not but God may convert
such at the Sacrament. But there is not the least hint in all the Word of God
of any impenitent sinner converted by the Sacrament. And beside, it is as easy
for God to give an Idiot or distracted man his right wits, and to illuminate
him with a self-examining knowledge and light in the very instant of
approaching to or sitting down at the Table; And if a possibility, a per
adventure it may be, and who knows but it may convert and do them good; be a
warrantable ground for Ministers to administer the Sacrament to profane and
scandalous persons as Mr. Prynn holds, page 47. why shall not the same ground
be as warrantable for admitting Idiots.

Seventhly, If the Temple was polluted and profaned by the coming of profane
and abominable persons into it, then is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper also
profaned by such persons their participation of it. But the Temple was polluted
and profaned etc. The reason of the consequence in the Proposition is, because
as the Temple had a Sacramental signification of Christ, and a certain
Ceremonial holiness, as well as the Lords Table, so it will be dur^s sermo
(and I presume none of our Opposites will adventure to say it) that such
profaneness as did of old keep back men from the Temple, cannot now exclude
them from the Sacrament.

The Assumption is largely proved in the first Book, both from Scripture and
from Jewish writers. That one place Ezekiel. 23. 38. 39. (beside diverse others)
clears it. Moreover this they have done unto me: they have defiled my
Sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths* For when they had
slain their children to their Idols, then they came the same day into my
Sanctuary to profane it. You see the Temple was profaned and polluted, not
only by those that were ceremonially unclean, but by Idolaters and Murderers
when any such presumed to come into the Temple.

Eighthly, I desire the scope of that place Hag. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. may be
considered. The Lord is teaching his people, that a thing legally holy, could
not by the touch thereof sanctify that which by the Law was common and not
holy, yet he which was legally unclean, did defile whatsoever he touched, yea
though it were legally holy. So is this people, and so is this Nation before
me, says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands, and that which they
offer there is unclean. The legal holiness and uncleanness were significant
ceremonies to teach the people the hecessity of moral holiness, and the evil
or danger of moral uncleanness: Hence God himself argues from the significant
ceremony to the morality, so as the place holds forth by necessary plain
consequence these three propositions. 1. The ceremonial uncleanness did
signify the moral uncleanness, and the effect of the former did signify the
effect of the latter. 2. Unholy persons are not sanctified by their approaching
to, or joining in holy Ordinances: but he that is filthy will be filthy still,
and he that is unjust* unjust still. If God do not give them his Spirit to
sanctify them, the Ordinances cannot do it. 3. Yet unholy persons, while such,
do defile holy Ordinances, and that by moral as well as by ceremonial
uncleanness: therefore the people themselves, and every work of their hands
being evil, the Lord for that cause reckons their sacrifices to be unclean.
Did profane persons defile the Sacrifices of old, and do they not defile our
Sacraments? Nay, I should think this, much more then that, there being more of
the communion of Saints in our Sacraments, then in their Sacrifices.

The ninth Argument which alone may conclude the point, shall be taken from
Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine. If the Sacrament be a holy thing, and if profane
scandalous impenitent sinners be dogs and swyne, then to give the Sacrament to
such, is to profane and pollute the Sacrament, and indeed no better but worse
then to give pearls to swine. Mr. Prynns* reply vindic. page 39. does not take
off this Argument. For without any proof, he restricteth to certain particulars
that which the Text says generally both of the things and of the persons.
First for the things, He says the Text is principally intended of not
preaching the Gospel to such, so that we must seclude them from the Word as
well as from the Sacrament. But I ask, is it meant only of the Word? He has
not said so, nor will (I think) say so. Erastus himself page 207. confesses it
is meant also of the Sacraments. The Text says not, the holy thing, and the
pearl, but holy things, pearls. It must therefore be understood respective.
Some are so vile, and so abominably prodigiously profane, blasphe^ous,
mockers, persecuters, that I ought not to preach to such, but to turn away from
them to others, according to Christ's direction, and the Apostles example.
Others are such as I may preach unto, yet ought not to pray or give thanks with
them, nor to admonish them (and much less give them the Sacrament) Others I
may admonish and pray with them, yet ought not to give them the Sacrament. And
all these by reason of that rule, Give not that which is holy to dogs, etc. So
that we are not bound up by this Text, either to seclude men from the Word, or
otherwise from no holy: thing. Next, The Argument holds a fortiori, from the
Word to the Sacrament. For says Explic. Catech. q^aest* 84. Si enim Christus
hoc di xit de verbo audibili* quod ta^men institutum est conversis, and n^n
convers^s vel convertendis: (...) magis (...) dic^uy d^ verbo visibili hoc est
de Sacrame^tis, quae tantum conversis sunt institut^.
Pareus. If Christ said this of the Word, which is common to the converted and
to the unconverted, how much more must it be said of the Sacraments, which are
instituted only for such as are converted.

As for that sort of persons which the Text speaks of, Master Prynne (following
Erastus, lib. 3. cap. 3.) says that these dogs and swine are only such
Infidels and Heathens, who refused to embrace the Gospel, and harbor the
Preachers of it: Or pers^cutors of the Gospel, and of the Ministers of it: Or
open Apostates from the Christian faith which they once embraced. And he cites
diverse Scriptures, which he says do expressly determine it. But he observes not
that the most which those Scriptures prove, is, that such men as he speaks of
are dogs and swine, which is not the Question: That which he had to prove, is,
that the dogs and swine which Christ speaks of, are only Infidels, or
persecutors, or apostates from the Christian faith. This ONLY he has boldly
averred, but shall never prove it. It is one thing to prove that Infidels,
persecutors and apostates are dogs and swine, another thing to prove that
there are no other dogs and swine. That which the Apostle Peter says, of such
as having escaped the pollutions of the world, and known the way of
righteousness, do afterward turn aside from the holy Commandment, namely, that
such do with the dog ^eturn to the vomit, and with the sow that was washed to
the wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2. 18, 20, 22. does belong to all scandalous
and backsliding Christians, whether they be such in doctrine or in life only;
and is generally so applied by Divines. Erastus himself, page 207.
understands that vomit and puddle, 2. Pet. 2. to be the sinful pleasures of
the world, relabuntur (says he, glossing upon the place) ad voluptates
moresque hujus seculi. And Solomon says the same thing generally of an ungodly
wicked person, Prove. 26. 11. As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool
returns to his folly. Nor is it to be forgotten that the Apostle using the
words of Epimenides, calls the Cretians evil beasts, Tit. 1. 12. because they
professed to know God, but in their works* denied him, being impure,
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Wherefore the precept Matthew.
7. 6. is rightly applied by Isidorus Pelusiota, lib. 1. Epist. 143. to the
denying of the Sacrament to all persons of an unclean conversation,* as well as
to Jews and Heretics. So Chrysostom does apply this Text to the excluding of
known unworthy men from the Sacrament; and this he does, Homil. 1. de
compunctione cordis, as I remember. And Hom. 83 in Matthew. he has these words
to the same purpose. If thou had a clear fountain committed to thy keeping,
to be kept clean by thee, would thou let filthy swine come and puddle in it?
how much more the fountain of the Blood of Christ? Where by filthy swine he
understands all unworthy and scandalous persons whatsoever, as is evident by
that which follows, and by that also which went before, where he gives instance
of the scandals in life and conversation. And upon the Text it self, Matthew. 7.
he applies it to a suspension of all such as were not acknowledged for visible
Saints, not only from receiving but from beholding the Sacrament. Hence was
that in the ancient Church, Sancta Sanctis; at which word all others were
dismissed before the receiving of the Sacrament, who were not accounted visible
Saints. Hence came the distinction of duplex missa, that is, duplex dimissio.
Missa catechumenorum, and missa fid^lium. When the Catechumens were dismissed,
then also together with them were dismissed all scandalous persons who had
scandalized the Church, except such Penitents as (having now in a great measure
satisfied the Church Discipline, and manifested their repentance publicly,
according to certain usual degrees of public declaration of repentance) were
permitted to behold the giving and receiving of the Sacrament, after the
Catechumens were gone (which yet themselves were not admitted to partake of,
till they had gone through all the degrees, and finished the whole course of
publicly manifesting Repentance; only in the danger of death they were
permitted to receive the Sacrament, before that course was finished, if they
should desire it.) Then last of all, after the Sacrament, was the missa
fidelium, the dismission of the faithful.

Augustine, lib. de fide and operibus, cap. 6. so applies the prohibition of
giving holy things to dogs, that he thence argues against the administration
of Baptism to persons living in adultery (although such as have embraced the
Orthodox Doctrine) which is also the scope of that whole Book. Now if persons
of a profane Conversation, though orthodox in their Judgment and Profession,
be such dogs as ought to be refused Baptism when they desire it, surely they
are also such dogs as ought to be refused the Lords Supper.

Moreover, the only seeming advantage which Master Prynne catches, is from
the word dogs (which yet is no advantage; for that is applied generally to
wicked and profane persons in the Scriptures above cited* and so Revel. 22.
15.) but he shall do well to observe the word swine too: for (as Grotius upon
the place, following Chrysostom, does make the distinction) the dogs are such
as bark and contradict; the swine such as do not bark and contradict, but by an
impure life (says he) declare how little esteem they have of the holy things.
Which difference (as he conceives) the Text it self does hint: for it
mentions not only the turning again to rent, which is the dogs part, but
the trampling of Pearls under feet, which is the swines part.

Finally, this Argument from Matthew. 7. has gained so much upon (8) Page 107.
Sermo noster de illis est, qui crimen agnoscunt and con^itentur: qui
emendationem promi^tunt: qui Sacramentis recte cum cae^eris u^i, quantum
judicare nos possumus, desiderant.
Erastus himself, lib. 3. cap. 3. that he restricteth himself to the admission
of such only to the Sacrament as acknowledge and confess their fault, promise
amendment, and desire to use the Sacraments rightly with the rest, so far as we
are able to judge. Which concession will go far.

CHAP. XVI. An Argument of Erastus (drawn from the Baptism of John) against the
excluding of scandalous sinners from the Lords Supper, ^xamined.
THe strongest Arguments of Erastus drawn from the Old Testament, I have before
discussed. Another Argument of his which deserves an Answer (for I take him in
his greatest strength) is this. John Baptist (says he) did baptize all, none
excepted, who came to him to be baptized; yea, even the Pharisees and Sadduces,
whom yet he called a generation of Vipers.

Answer. 1. They that were baptized by John, did confess their sins, and
profess Repentance; and Page 12.
Erastus himself brings in John Baptist speaking to those Pharisees on this
manner. I do not see into your hearts, but he that comes after me, has his
fan in his hand, and will separate the chaff from the wheat: so that though ye
may deceive me with a feigned repentance, yet you cannot deceive him. Hereupon
Erastus concludes, that the Ministers of the Gospel ought not to deny the
Sacraments to those that profess repentance, and ought not take upon them to
judge of men's hearts whether they do truly and unfeignedly repent. Medina in
tertiam partem, quaest. 38. Verum cum non sit idem, agnoscere se peccatorem,
and con^iteri peccata sua, recte intelligimus cos sua peccata saltem majora
indicasse, and confessos esse D. Johanni, sic^t and Act. 19. multi creden^ium
dicuntur venisse ad Paulum confitentes and annuntiantes actus suos.
Now all this makes for the suspension from the Sacrament of all such as do
not confess their sins, nor profess repentance for the same: The drunkard
that will not confess his drunkenness, the unclean person that will not
confess his uncleanness, the Sabbath-breaker that will not confess his
breach of the Sabbath, are by this ground to be excluded; and so of other
scandalous persons. We are not to judge of men's hearts*, but we are to judge of
the external sign^s of repentance, whether sin be confessed, and repentance
declared by some hopeful signs or not.

2. Neither does his argument fully reach admission to the Lords Table, where
some further and more exact proof must be had of ones fitness and
qualification for the communion of Saints. Even those that are of age when they
are baptized are but Incipientes: when they come to the Lords Table they are
proficientes: There is some more required in proficients, then in Novices and
beginners: as there is more required to fit one for strong meat th^n for milk.

3. It is also a question whether those Pharisees that came to the baptism of
John were indeed baptized of him In Matthew. 3. quaest. 64. So Salmeron* Tom. 4
Part. 1. Tract. 5. Narrantur venisse ad Jo^annem and ad baptis^um su^m. Non
^onstat autem an baptisati su^rint: n^m Luc.* 7. dicuntur sprevisse consilium
Dei in seme^ ipsos, non baptisati a Johanne.
Tostatus tells us some think they were not baptized, and they prove it from
Luke 7. 29 30. And all the People that heard him and the Publicans justifie^
God, being baptized with the Baptism of John. But the Pharisees and Lawyers
rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.
There is a controversy whether th^se be the words of our Savior Christ, or of
the Evangelist Luke. But there can be no controversy of this, that the
Pharisees and Lawye^s were not baptized of John, but the people and the
pu^licans were. Which may very well be extended to those Pharisees of whom we
read Matthew. 3. 7. For the holy Ghost having said of the people, that they were
baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their sins, he says no such thing of
the Pharisees, but only that they came to his Baptism (whether to see the
fashion and the new Ceremony, or whether with an intention to be baptized)
after which we read no more but that John gave them a most sharp admonition,
and called them a generation of vipers, and told them that they should not
glory in being Abraham's children: Whereupon it may seem they went away
displeased and unbaptized. But when I compare the Evangelists together, that
which appears to me to be meant Matthew. 3. 7. concerning many of the Pharisees
coming to the Baptism of John, is that they were sent from Jerusalem with a
message to ask John, Who art thou? For they who were sent upon that message
were of the Pharisees, John 1. 24. and they were sent to Bethabara beyond
Jordan where John was baptizing, John 1. 28. and a part of John's answer to them
was, I baptize with water, but there stands one among you whom ye know not:
etc. John 1. 26. In both passages John speaks of him that was to come after
him, whom he prefers before himself. In both, he professes that he could do
no more but baptize with Water or Ministerially. In both, he says he was not
worthy to unloose the latchet of Christ's shoe. So that many of the
circumstances do agree with the story, Matthew. 3. and the other circumstances
are not inconsistent. In the other Evangelists it is, I baptize you with water:
But that proves not that the Pharisees who were sent to John, were baptized,
for Luke does plainly apply those words to the people Luke 3. 15. 16. 18. But
when the Pharisees asked John, Why baptizest thou etc. the answer to them was
not I baptize you with Water, but I baptize with Water. Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap.
10.
The Centurists think that the Pharisees who were sent from Jerusalem to John
to ask him Who art thou? John 1. were not sent from any good esteem which was
had of John, but from malice, and an intent to quarrel with him. This they
prove because John says to them O Generation of Vipers, who has forewarned
you to flee from the wrath to come? Which insinuates a coincidency of these
two stories related Matthew. 3. and John 1. Tom. 4. part. 1. Tract. 15.
Salmeron thinks that message was sent to John out of honor and respect to
him, and he endeavors to confute the Centurists, but among all his answers he
does not aver (which had been his best reply, if he had thought it probable)
that those words O Generation of Vipers, were not spoken to the Pharisees that
were sent from Jerusalem to John. Yea Ibid. Tract. 6.
Salmeron himself does in another place observe diverse coincidencies between
the story of that which passed between John, and the Pharisees that came to his
baptism; and the story of that which passed between John and the Pharisees that
were sent to him from Jerusalem.

4. Erastus argues from the admission of a generation of Vipers to Baptism,
to prove the lawfulness of admitting a generation of Vipers to the Lords
Supper. But I argue contrariwise. Such persons as desire to be received into
the Church by Baptism, if they be profane and scandal us persons, ought not
to be baptized but refused baptism, as Augustine proves in his Book De Fide
and Operibus. Therefore profane and scandalous persons ought much less be
admitted unto the Lords Supper. Of which Argument more before. I conclude with
the Cent. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. Nequaquam margaritas any porcos proi^cit: non
quoslibet temere ad Baptismum admisit, sed consitentes peccata sua, hoc est,
exploratos, and agentes poenitentiam tantum: con^umacos vere, ac defensores
suarum impietatum aut scelerum, reprobavit.
Centurists. John did not cast pearls before swine: he did not admit rashly any
that would to Baptism, but such as confessed their sins, that is, only such
as were tried and did repent, but the contumacious and the defenders of their
impieties or crimes he did reject.

CHAP. XVII. Antiquity for the suspension of all scandalous persons from the
Sacrament, even such as were admitted to other publik Ordinances.
MR. Prynn in his first Quaere would have us believe that in the primitive
times scandalous sinners were ever excommunicated and wholly cast out of the
Church, and sequestered from all other Ordinances, as well as from the
Sacrament; And since (says he) in the primitive times (as is evident by
Tertullians Apology cap. 39. De poenitentia lib. and others) scandalous
persons were ever excommunicated and wholly cast out of the Church (extra gregem
dati) not barely sequestered from the Sacrament. But for further clearing of the
ancient discipline concerning suspension, I have thought good here to take
notice of the particulars following.

First, That great Antiquary Observat. lib. 1. cap. 1. Nam eorum in lapsos
Judicium ad Eucharistiam referri nequit, quibus post aliquod tempus omnia cum
(...) fratribus volunt esse communia, praeter Eucharistiam, cui enim cum
fidelibus supplicationes facere and orare liceret, is ad omnia quae eram in
societate Christiana, una excepta Eucharistia, jus habere censebatur.
Albaspinaeus, proving that Church communion or fellowship was anciently larger
than partaking of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; he proves it by this
Argument, because many of those who had scandalously fallen, were admitted to
communion with the Church in prayer and all other Ordinances, the Eucharist
only excepted.

Next, It is well known to the searchers of Antiquity, that there were four
degrees of public declaration of repentance, (...): Which the Latins call
fl^us, auditio, substratio, consistentia: After all which followed (...), the
participation of the Sacrament, which they were at last admitted unto, and is
therefore mentioned by some as the fifth degree, though (to speak properly) it
was not poenal, nor any degree of censure as the other four were. First, The
penitent was kept weeping at the Church door, beseeching those that went in to
pray for him: thereafter he was admitted to hear the Word afar off among the
Catechumens: In the third place there was a preparatory reconciliation or
reception into the Church, with prayer and imposition of hands, which being
done, the man was in some sort admitted into Christian fellowship, and
acknowledged for a brother, yet after the Word and Prayer. he went forth with
the Catechumens before the Sacrament. But there was a fourth degree after all
this; he might stay in the Church, and see and hear in the celebration of the
Sacrament, after the Catechumens and the three first sort of penitents were
dismissed, yet still he was suspended from partaking of the Sacrament, for a
certain time after he was brought to this fourth and last step: Albaspinaeus
Observe. lib. 2. Observe. 25. Quod si quaeratur quam ob rem antiqui quartum illum
gradum posuerint etc. Nulla potest c^ngruentior commodio^ que (...) ratio, quam
quae ex reverentia ac Religiene petitur, qua adversus, sanctam Eucha^istiam
fe^ebantur: detetestabile q^ippe Deo and hominilus, non solum existurabant
hominem, vel levissima macula inquindium, aut maculae nebula ^ffusum, ad
E^haristiam accedere, sed etiam periculosum absolutes poeni^entes eam tangere
and a^ectare, quo^ ^on satis sancti and sanctificati censebantur, quibus tanta
res committeretur.
So cautious were those Ancients in admitting of men to the Sacrament, till
they perceived lasting, continuing, clear, and real evidences of true
repentance. Three of the degrees abovementioned are found in the Canons of the
Council of Ancyra. and of the Council of Nice, namely the three last. The first
which did not admit a man so much as into the Church to the hearing of the
Word, as it was afterward added, so it is not so justisicable as the other
three. But here is the point I desire may be well observed, that of old in the
fourth and fifth, yea in the third Century, Causabon Exerc. 1^. page 397. edit.
Francof. 1615. (...) igitur c mysteriis Genti^m vox accepta, appellabatur
statio inter fideles: ibi poenitentes duos persape annos agebant; quod ad
caetera ejusdem conditionis cum fidelibus; neque jam cum Catechumenis exibant;
sola participatione mysteriorum caeteris fra^ribus inferiores.
men were admitted not only to the hearing of the Word, but to prayer with the
Church, who yet were not admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Conc. Ancyr. Can. 16 De his qui irrationabiliter versati sunt sive versantur.
Quotquot ante vicesimum ae^atis suae annum, tale crimen commiserint, quindecim
annis exactis in poenitentia, communionem mereantur orati^num. Deinde
quinquennio in hac communione durantes, tunc dentum oblationis Sacramenta
contingant. Discutiatur autem vita eorum, quales tempore poenitudinis
extiterint. etc.
The Council of Ancyra held about the year 308. Can. 16. appoints some
scandalous persons to show public signs of repentance for 15. years, before
they be admitted to fellowship with the Church in prayer: and for 5. years
thereafter to be kept off from the Sacrament.

Conc. Nicaen. can. 11 Duobus autem annis iidem sine oblatione in oratione sola
participent populo.
The Council of Nice does plainly intimate the same thing, That some were
admitted to Prayer, but not to the Sacrament. The different steps of the
reception of those that had fallon may be likewise proved from Conc. Arelat. 2.
Can. 11. Si qui vero dolor victi and pondere persecutionis negate and
sacrificare compulsi sunt, duobus annis inter Catechumenos: triennio inter
poenitentes habeantur a communione suspensi. Of these Poenitentes we read also
in Codice Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae Can. 43. and Can 102. And it is certain
they were admitted to the Word, and some to Prayer, but not to the Sacrament,
till the Church was abundantly satisfied with the signs and proofs of their
true repentance.
the Council of Arles.

I. Mich. Dilherrus Lib. 2. Electorum Cap. 1. After the mention of those (...)
does observe that as Antiquity did go too far, so the later times have fallen
too short. And this is a chief cause why Christian Religion does hear very ill
among many, because Ecclesiastical Discipline has waxed cold Et causa non est
postrema cur apud multos pessime audiat Christianismus: quod disciplina
Ecclesiastica refrixerit.
So much by the way.

This of the several degrees of Penitents. I shall yet further insist upon,
because this alone will prove that we have Antiquity for us. Vide apud Theod.
Balsam. Can. Greg. Thaumat. Can. 11. Fletus seu luctus est (...) p^rtam (...):
ubi peccato^em stantem opo^tet fideles ingredientes orare ut pro se precentur.
Auditio est intra portam in porticu, uhi oportet eum qui peccavit stare, usque
a^ Catechumenos, and illinc egredi. audiens enim, inquit, scriptaras, and
doctrinam, ejiciatur, and precatione indignus censeatur. Subjectio autem seu
substiatio est, ut intra Templi portam stans cum Catechumenis egrediatur.
Congrega^o seu consistentia est, ut cum fidelibus consistat, and cum
Catechumenis non egrediatur: ^ostremo est participatio Sacramentorum.
Gregorius Thaumaturgus in his Canonical Epistle concerning those who in the
time of the incursion of the Barbarians, had eaten things sacrificed to Idols,
and had committed other scandalous sins; does plainly distinguish these five
things thus. (...), The weeping is without the gate of the Church, where the
sinner must stand, beseeching the faithful that come in to pray for him.
(...), The hearing is within the Gate in the Porch, where the sinner may come
no nearer then the Catechumens, and thence go out again. etc. (...), The
substration is that standing within the Church door, he go forth with the
Catechumens. (...), The consistency is that he stand still together with the
faithful, and do not go forth with the Catechumens. (...), In the last place
the participation of the holy Mysteries or Sacrament. He that will read the
Epistles of Basilius magnus to Amphilochius will find these five degrees more
particularly distinguished, applied to several cases, and bounded by distinct
intervalls of time. It were too long to transcribe all: Vide apud Theod.
Balsam. Canonic. Epist. Basilii ad Amphil. Can. 4. Oportet autem non eos
(Trigamo^) omnino arcere ab Ecclesia, sed dignari auditione duobus vel tribus
annis: and postea permitti quidem consistere, seu in fidelium esse
Congregatione, a boni tamen communione abstinere, and sic postquam poenitentiae
fructum ullum ostender^nt, communionis loco restituere. Ibid. Can. 61. (...),
anno a sola Sacramentorum commun^one arcebitur. Ibid. Can. 82. Qui autem sine
necessitate suam fidem (...). cum duobus annis defleverint, and duobus annis
audiverint, and in quinio in substratione fuerint, and in duobus aliis (...)
sine oblatione in orationis communionem suscepti extiterint, ita tandem
condigna scilicet poenitentia ostensa, in corpo^is Christi communionem
recipientur. The like see Can. 56. Can. 64. Can. 66. Can. 80.
I shall only give you some most plain passages to prove that there was in
Basils time a suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper alone, or that
a man was suspended from the Sacrament, when he was not suspended from hearing
and praying among the faithful.

For further confirmation of the same thing, read Conc. Ancyr. Can. 4. Can. 5.
Can. 6. Can. 7. Can. 8. Can. 9. Co^t. Nican. Can. 11. Can. 12. Can. 13. Can.
14. I do not mean to approve the too great severity of this ancient Discipline,
nor do I hold it agreeable to the Will of Christ, that such as give good signs
of true Repentance, and do humbly confess and really forsake their sin, having
also made public declaration of their Repentance to the Church for removing
the public scandal, ought notwithstanding of all this, to be suspended from
the Sacrament when they desire to receiv^ it. For the Word does not warrant the
suspending of scandalous sinners from the Sacrament, until such a set
determinate time be expired, but only till they give sufficient evidence of
Repentance. But setting aside this and such like circumstances, the thing it
self, the suspending of a scandalous person from the Sacrament, who is not nor
ought not to be suspended from assembling, hearing, and praying with the
Church, is the Will of Christ, as I have proved, and was the commendable
practice of the Ancient Church, which is the point I now prove against Mr.
Prynne.

The Council of Ancyra Can. 5. 16. does also appoint the time of suspension
from the Sacrament to be made shorter or longer, according as the signs of
true Repentance should sooner or later, more or less appear in the offender.
So does the Council of Nice Can. 12. And the Council of Carthage held under
Honorius and Theodosius the lesser. Can. 46.

If any man shall obj^ct against me and say; Peradventure the Penitents before
spoken of, were only such as did manifest their repentance after
excommunication, and these several degrees aforementioned, were but the
degrees of their reception or admission into the Church, so that all this shall
not prove the suspension from the Sacrament of persons not excommunicated. I
answer, he that will think so, will be found in a great mistake: and my
Argument from Antiquity will yet stand good, for suspending from the Sacrament
persons not excommunicated. For first, neither do the Canons of the Councels of
Ancyra, and Nice, nor of Gregorius Thaumaturgus and Basilius magnus, nor yet
the Commentators Zonaras and Balsamon, apply these five degrees above mentioned
to persons who had been excommunicated, but they speak generally of persons who
had committed scandalous sins, and afterward were converted and appeared
penitent: for instance, those who did backslide and fall in time of
persecution, as multitudes did under Licinius and other persecuters, when they
converted and professed repentance, they were received again into the Church by
certain steps and degrees, some more, some fewer, according to the quality of
their offense; No man that has searched antiquity will say that all who did
fall in time of persecution were excommunicated for that offense, nor yet that
they were all put to the (...), to the weeping at the Church door, but yet all
of them, even those whose offense was least (as the Libellatici who had taken
Writs of protection from the Enemy or Persecuter) were put to the (...) or
consistentia, which was a suspension or abstention from the Sacrament, even
when the person was admitted to hear and pray with the Church. Wherefore the
degrees aforementioned were degrees of receiving into the Communion of the
Church scandalous persons professing repentance.

Secondly, The 61. Canon of Basil to Amphilochius speaks thus. He that has
stolen, if repenting of his own accord he accuse himself, shall be for a year
restrained from the Communion of the holy Mysteries only. But if he be
convict, the space of two years shall be divided to him unto substration and
consistency: then let him be thought worthy of the Communion. Will any man
imagine that a penitent thief accusing himself, was excommunicated? It is more
then manifest that here was a suspension of an offender not excommunicated. For
as soon as the offense was known by the offenders accusing of himself, he was
suspended from the Sacrament alone for a year, and then admitted to the
Sacrament. Yea he that was convict of theft, was not by this Canon
excommunicated, nor yet put either to the (...), or to the (...), but only to
the third and fourth degrees.

Thirdly, By the 13th. Canon of Basil to Amphilochius, he that had killed
another though in a lawful war, was (for the greater reverence to the
Sacrament) suspended for three years; and by the 55. Canon, he also that killed
a Robber was suspended from the Sacrament. I do not justify these Canons, but
only I cite them to prove, that by the Ancient Discipline Persons not
excommunicated were suspended from the Sacrament: for no man can imagine that a
Soldier shedding blood in a lawful war, or a man killing a Robber on the high
way was therefore excommunicated.

Fourthly, The eighth general Council called Synodus prima and secunds, held
about the year 869. in the thirteenth Canon, speaking of certain turbulent
Schismatics (not being of the Clergy as the Canon speaks, but Laics or
Monks) appoints this censure, (...), Let them be totally or altogether
separated from the Church. Which intimates that there was a lesser degree of
being separated or suspended from communion with the Church. Zonaras upon that
Canon does so understand it, and distinguishes a double (...) (...).
For it is also a separation (says he) to be excluded or restrained from the
receiving of the Divine Mysteries only. But there is another separation, which
is to be cast out of the Church, which the Canon calls a total separation, as
being the heavier or greater Censure. Which is the very same distinction with
that which was afterward expressed under the terms of major and minor, the
greater and lesser excommunication. For which also I shall give you another
proof as clear and older too, taken from the 61. Canon of the sixth general
Council, where it is decreed that those who resort to Magicians, Charmers,
Fortune Tellers, and such others who profess curious and unlawful arts, shall
fall under the Canon of six years separation. But as for those who per^ist in
such things, and do not turn away nor flee from these pernicious and Heathenish
studies, (...), We appoint them to be altogether cast out of the Church. Mark
the gradation in the Canon, and the (...). And hear Balsamon his explanation
upon it. Note from this present Canon (says he) that he who sins and
converteth, obtains favor, (...), and is punished in a lesser measure; But
he who persevereth in the evil, and is not willingly reduced to that which is
better, (...), is greatly punished. For here also he that comes and
confesses the sin, is to be punished with six years segregation: but he that
persevereth in the evil (...), is to be east out or expelled from the Church:
add what he had said before, (...), and shall not thenceforth converse with
the Orthodox. Which intimates as plainly as any thing can be, that there was
an (...) a segregation or sequestration used in the ancient Church, which was a
lesser censure than casting out of the Church and from the company of
Church Members. Zonaras seems to understand the Canon otherwise. (for he
says nothing of the offenders converting and confessing his sin before the six
years segregation; but that for the offense it self (committed, not confessed)
a man was segregated six years, and afterward if he did not repent but continue
in the offense, that then he was to be cut off, and cast out of the Church:
wherein as I take it, he did explain the mind of the Council, better then
Balsamon. However in that point which I now prove, they are most harmonious,
namely concerning a greater and lesser excommunication. Wherefore also the
Fathers of this Synod (says Zonaras) did ordain those who do such a thing,
(...), to be segregated for six years, etc. (...), but if they continue
therein, to be also cut off from the Church.

Fifthly, To suppose that there were no Poenitentes in the Ancient Church but
such as were Excommunicati, were a greater error then that it should need any
Confutation. Yea there were some poenitents who did of their own accord
confess their offenses which could not have been otherwise known but by such
voluntary confession: and those says Zonaras Annot. in Conc. Carth. Can. 46.
were most properly called Poenitents, I hope no man will imagine that such were
excommunicated. But so it was that all the Poenitents (even such as had neither
been excommunicated nor yet forensically convict by proof of scandal, but did
voluntarily confess and convert) were for some season kept back from the
Sacrament, as is manifest by that instance given out of Basilius magnus, of
theft voluntarily confessed, for which notwithstanding the offender was for a
year suspended from the Sacrament.

Sixthly, It is manifest that there were several degrees of censure upon
Bishops and Presbyters. They were sometime suspended from giving the Sacrament,
and as it were sequestered from the exercise of their Ministry, which
suspension or sequestration is sometimes called (...), to be separate,
sometimes (...), to be sequestered from communion, to wit in the exercise of the
Ministry, or (...), not to minister There was a higher censure then this,
which was deposition or degradation, called (...), the honor or degree of
Presbytership to be taken away; Basils phrase is (...), they are deposed from
their degree. These two censures, a suspension or sequestration from the
Ministry, and a total deposition from the Ministry are distinguished by the
eighteenth Canon of the Council of Ancyra, and the sixteenth Canon of the
Council of Nic^, compared with the fifteenth Canon of those called the
Apostles, (which certainly were not the Apostles, yet are ancient) See also
Zonaras in Can. 11. Apost. Likewise both him and Balsamon in Conc. Nic. Can.
16. Again there was something beyond all this, which was excommunication or to
be wholly cast out of the Church, a censure sometime not inflicted when the
former were: For a Minister might be suspended, yea deposed from his Ministry,
yet permitted to communicate or receive the Sacrament among the people, as is
plainly determined Can. 15. Apost. and Can. 32* Basilii ad Amphil. If there
were such degrees of censure appointed for Bishops and Presbyters, how shall we
suppose that there was no less censure for Church Members then
excommunication? For (...) to a Minister, and (...) to one of the people, were
parallel. Whence it is that you will often find in the ancient Canons, and
namely of the sixth general Council, He that commits such a fault, if he be
one of the laity, let him be segregated, if one of the Clergy, let him be
deposed. As therefore a further censure after (...) might fall upon a minister;
so a further censure after that (...) might be inflicted upon one of the people.

I have now made it to appear that the Practice, Discipline, and Canons of the
ancient Church, are for us in this present controversy about suspension from
the Sacrament. In the next place I will produce particular Testimonies of
Fathers. I shall take them as they fall to my hand without any curious order. I
begin with Isidorus P^lusiota who flourished about the year 431. or (as others
say) 440. In the first Book of his Epistles, Epist. 143, to Thalel^us he
disswadeth from giving the Sacrament to three sort of persons. 1. To Jews. 2.
To Heretics, of both which he says that they had once received the doctrine
of truth, but did after return with the dog to the vomit. 3. To persons of a
profane and swinish conversation. Margaritas item ne ante porcos projiciamus,
divino interdict^ prohibemur, hoc est ante e^s qui in vitiosis affectibus
volutantur, ac porcinum vitae genus sequuntur: ne forte conculcent eas pedibus,
nimirum in sceleratis suis studiis divino nomini contumeliam inferentes: and
conversi disrumptant vos.
Unto all or any of these he holds it unlawful to give the Sacrament, and that
because of a divine prohibition, Give not holy things to dogs, neither cast ye
pearls before swine. And he concludes thus, (...). For says he the giving of
the mysteries to such persons, is unto those who contemptuously give them, a
breach out of which they are not awaked.

Dionysius Areopagita (whom I do not take to be that Areopagite converted by
Paul* Act. 17. But certainly he is an Ancient Writer as is manifest by the
Scholia upon him, written by Maximus who flourished about the year 657. He is
also cited by the sixth general Council, and by some ancient writers) de
Ecclesiastica Hierarchia cap. 3. part. 3. Sect. 6. 7. having spoken of the
exclusion of the Catechumens, Energumens, and Penitents from the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, though all these heard the word read and preached, he adds
that unclean, carnal, profane persons in whom Satan reigns by sin, are
worse, and ought much less to be admitted to the Sacrament, then those who
were bodily possessed of the devil. These therefore (unclean and profane
persons) as the first, and much rather then those (Energumens) let them be
suspended or sequestrate by the judicial or discriminating voice of the
Minister: for it is not permitted unto them to partake of any other holy thing,
but the Ministry of the Word, by which they may be converted. For if this
heavenly celebration of the divine Mysteries, refuse or repel, even penitents
themselves (although they were sometime partakers thereof) (...), not admitting
him who is not altogether most holy, etc. (for that most pure voice does also
restrain those who cannot be joined and knit together with such as do worthily
communicate in those divine mysteries) surely the multitude of those in whom
vile lusts and passions do reign, is much more profane, and has much less
to do with the fight and communion of these holy things. The old Scholiast
Maximus upon that place says thus, Note that he reckons together with the
Energumens those that continue without repentance in the allurements of bodily
pleasures, as fornicators, lovers and frequenters of unlawful plays, such as
the divine Apostle having mentioned, does subjoyn with such a one no not to
eat. Where Mr. Prynn may also note by the way how anciently 1 Cor. 5. 11. was
applied, so as might furnish an argument against the admission of scandalous
persons to the Sacrament. Let us also hear the Paraphrast Pachimeres upon the
place. For if the celebration of the divine mysteries refuse even those who are
in the very course of repentance, not admitting such, because they are not
thoroughly or wholly purified and sanctified, as it were proclaiming it self
invisible and incommunicable unto all who are not worthy to communicate, (...),
much more they who are yet impenitent are to be restrained from it.

If you please to search further, take but one passage of Cypr. lib. 3. Ep. 14.
Na^ cum in mi^oribus peccatis agant peccatores poenitentiam justo tempore, and
secundum disciplinae ordinem a l exomologesin veniant, and per manus
impositionem Episcopi and Cleri jus communicationis accipiant; Nunc ^udo
tempore, persecutione adhuc perseverante, nondum restituta Ecclesiae ipsius
pace, ad communicationem admittuntur, and (...) nomen ^orum, and nondum
poenitentia acta, nondum exomologest facta, nondum manu eis ab Episcopo and
Clero imposita, Eucharistia illis datur, cum scriptum sit, Qui ederit l'anem
aut biber^t Calicem Domini indigne, reus erit Corporis and sanguinis Domini.
Cyprian, which speaks plainly to me for suspension from the Sacrament, for he
sharply reproves the receiving to the Sacrament such persons as were not
excommunicate (for if they had, most certainly he had mentioned that as the
most aggravating circumstance) but having committed smaller offenses, had not
made out the course of public manifesting their repentance according to the
discipline of the Church.

If we shall require more, we have a most plain Testimony of Iustine Martyr,
telling us that at that time they admitted none to the Lords Supper except
those only who had these three qualifications. 1. They must receive and
believe the Doctrine preached and professed in the Church. 2. They must be
washed or baptized unto the remission of sins and regeneration. 3. They must be
such as live according to the rule of Christ.

Just. Marty^ Apol. 2. (...).
His words are these. This food is with us called the Eucharist, which is
lawful for none other to partake of, but to him that believes those things to
be true which are taught by us, and is washed in the laver for remission of
sins and for Regeneration, and lives so as Christ has delivered or commanded.

g Walasridus Strabo (a diligent searcher of the Ancients (c) De rebus Eccles.
cap. 17. Unde etiam criminum foeditate capitalium, a membris Christi deviantes,
ab ipsis Sacramentis Ecclesiastico suspenduntur judicio. Et infra. Sciendum
enim a sanctis Patribus ob hoc vel maxim constitutum, ut mortaliter peccantes
a Sacramentis Dominicis arceantur, ne indigne ea percipientes, vel majore reatu
involvantur, ut Judas, etc. Vel ne (quod Apostolus de Corinthiis dicit)
infirmitatem corporis and imbecillitatem, ipsamque mortem praesumptores
incurrant. Et ut a communione susperst, terrore ejus exclusionis, and quodam
condemnationis Anathemate compellantur, studiosius poenitentiae medicamentum
appete^e, and avidius recuperandae salutis desideriis inhiare.
which were before him, and of the old Ecclesiastical Rites) who died about the
year 849. mentions this suspension from the Sacrament, as an Ecclesiastical
censure received from the Ancient Fathers: and he gives three reasons for it,
to prove that it is for the sinners own good to be thus suspended. 1. That he
may not involve himself in greater guiltiness. 2. That he may not be chastened
of the Lord with sickness and such other afflictions as the profanation of
that Sacrament brought upon the Corinthians. 3. That being terrified and
humbled, he may think the more earnestly of repenting and recovering himself.

It was truly said that this discipline was received from the Ancient Fathers,
which as it appears from what has been already said, so the Testimony of
Chrysostom must not be forgotten. He in his tenth Homily upon Matthew
expounding those words Matthew. 3. 6. And were baptized of him in Jordan,
confessing their sins: notes that the time of confession belongs to two
sorts of persons: to the profane not yet initiated; and to the baptized: to
the one that upon their repentance they might get leave to partake in the holy
Mysteries: to the other that being washed in Baptism from their filthiness
they might come with a clean Conscience to the Lords Table. His meaning is,
That neither the unbaptized nor scandalous livers though they were baptized,
might be admitted to the Lords Table, whereupon he concludes: Let us therefore
abstain from this l^ud and dissolute life. Tempus quidem confessionis, aeque
and lotis baptismate, and illotis prophanisque incumbit: illis quidem ut post
patentia criminum vulnera poenitentia inter veniente curentur, and ad sacra
Mysteria redire mereantur: his vero ut ablutis in Baptisino maculis, ad
Dominicam mensam munda jam Conscientia accedant.
The Latin Translation rendering the sense rather then the words, speaks more
plainly. But there is a most full and plain passage of Chrysostom in his 83.
Homily upon Matthew, near the end thereof, where he says of the Lords Supper,
Let no cruel one, no unmerciful one, none any way impure, come unto it. I speak
these things both to you that do receive, and also to you that do administer.
Even to you this is necessary to be told, that with great care and heedfulnes
you distribute these gifts. There does no small punishment abide you, if you
permit any whose wickedness you know, to partake of this Table: for his blood
shall be required at your hands. If therefore any Captain, if the Consul, if he
himself that wears the Crown come unworthily, restrain him, which to do thou
have more authority then he has. And after. But if you say how shall I know
this man and that man? I do not speak of those that are unknown, but of those
that are known. I tell you a horrible thing, it is not so ill to have among you
those that are bodily possessed of the Devil, as these sinners which I speak
of, etc. (...).
Let us therefore put back not only such as are possessed, but ALL WITHOUT
DISTINCTION WHOM WE SEE TO COME UNWORTHILY, etc. But if thou thy self dare
not put him back, bring the matter to me, I will permit no such thing to be
done. I will sooner give up my life, than I will give the body of the Lord
unworthily; and sooner suffer my blood to be poured out, than give the Lords
blood unworthily, and contrary to my duty ((...)) to such as are horribly
scandalous. He concludes that this discipline is medicinal and profitable in
the Church, and that the keeping back of the scandalous, is the way to make
many worthy Communicants.

Can any man imagine that all such unworthy persons were excommunicate and
wholly cast out of the Church? Do not all Chrysostomes Arguments militate
against the admission of any scandalous and unworthy person known to be such?
says he not, that all simply or without distinction whom they perceived to
come unworthily were to be put back? If only excommunicate persons were kept
back from the Sacrament, what needed all this exhortation to those that did
administer the Sacrament to be so careful, cautious, and heedful, whom they
would admit? And if none were to be excluded from the Sacrament but those that
were branded with the public infamy of excommunication, what needed this
objection to be moved, how shall I know such?

Moreover, Both Cyprian and Ambros. lib. 2. de offic. cap. 27. cui titulus: De
be* nignitate and quod excommunicatio tardius sit exerenda; says thus Sic
Episcopi affectus boni est ut (...) sanare infirmo^, serpentia auserre ulcera,
ADURERE ALIQUA NON ABSCINDERE: postremo quod sanari non potest, cum dolor
abscindere.
Ambrose do most plainly and undeniably hold forth different degrees of Church
censures, and Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 1^ or according to Pamelius his Edition
Epist. 62. Quod si poenitentiam hujus illiciti concubitus sui egerint, and a se
invicem recesserint, inspiciantur interim Virgins ab obstetricibus diligenter,
and si Virgins inventae fuerint, accepta communicatione ad Ecclesiam
admittantur, hac tamen interminatione ut si ad eosdem masculos postmodum
reversae suerint, aut si cum eisdem in una domo and sub eodem tecto simul
habitaverint, GRAVIORE CENSURA ejiciantur, nec in Ecclesiam postmodum facile
recipiantur. Si autem de eis aliqua corrupta fuerit deprehensa, AGAT
POENITENTIAM PLENAM.
Cyprian is most full and clear concerning a suspension from the Sacrament of
persons not excommunicated nor cast out of the Church. For answering a case of
Conscience put to him concerning certain young women whose conversation and
behavior with men had been scandalous and vile, he resolves that so many of
them as did profess repentance, and forsake such scandalous conversing and
companying together, if they were still Virgins, were to be again received to
communicate with the Church (namely in the Sacrament from which they had been
kept back) with premonition given to them, that if they should after relapse
into the like offense, they should be cast out of the Church graviore censura
with a heavier censure: but that if they were found to have lost their
Virginity, they should make out the whole course of public Declaration of
repentance, and so not be so soon admitted to, but longer susspended from the
Sacrament.

Add hereunto a passage in Aug. lib. contra Donatist. post collationem cap. 4.
Ita sane ut nec emendationis vigilantia quiescat, corripiendo, degradando,
excommunicando, cae^erisque coe citionibus licitis atque concessis, quae salva
unitatis pace in Ecclesia quotidie fiunt, secundum praeceptum Apostolicum
charitate se^vata, qui dixit, Si quis autem non obaudit verbo nostro. etc.
Augustine plainly intimating that at that time, beside reprehension,
degradation, and excommunication, there were other censures daily used in the
Church according to the Apostles commandment, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 15. He is
speaking of the mixture of good and bad in the Church, and that wicked men may
be in some sort suffered in the Church, provided (says he) that the discipline
of Excommunication, and the other usual censures in the Church be not
neglected, but duly executed where it is possible. But what were those other
censures, if not the suspension of scandalous and profane persons (not
excommunicated) from the Sacraments: I appeal for further proof hereof to one
passage more of Augustine de fide and operibus cap. 18. Meretrices and
hist^iones and quilibet alii publicae turpitu dinis professores, nist solutis
out di^uptis talibus vinculis, ad Christi Sacramenta non permittun^ur accedere:
qui utique secundum istorum sententiam omnes admitterentur, nisi antiquum and
robustum morem sancta Ecclesia retineret ex illa scilicet liquidissima verita^e
venientem, qua cer^um habet, quoniam qui talia agunt, Regnum Dei non
p^ssidebunt.
Whores, Stage Players, and others whosoever they be that are Professors of
public filthiness, except such bonds (of Wickedness) be loosed and broken,
are not permitted to come unto the Sacraments of Christ: which forsooth
according to their judgment (that is such as would have profane persons
baptized as well as others) should be all admitted, unless the holy Church
should retain the ancient and vigorous custom, which comes from the most
clear truth, by which she has it for certain, that they who do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Whence it will certainly follow, that all who were excluded from the Lords
Table were not excommunicated persons: For first, The Church did keep back such
scandalous persons upon this ground, because those who are known to live
without repentance in any of those sins, of which the Apostle says that they
who do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, are not fit to be
admittrd unto the Sacrament (for this were to give the Seals of salvation to
those whom the Word pronounces to be in a state of damnation.) Secondly,
Augustine is there confuting the opinion of some (whom he calls Fratres qui
aliter sapiunt, Brethren who otherwise understood themselves well) whose
Principles did admit to the Sacraments all unclean and scandalous persons:
which cannot be meant of excommunicated persons; For there was never any such
opinion maintained in the Church, that all excommunicated persons ought or may
be received to the Sacrament. Lastly, Lest his meaning should be restricted to
the Sacrament of Baptism only, (of which principally and purposely he
treats in that Book) he speaks in the plural of the Sacraments of Christ.

Observe also these passages of Gregory called the great, Epist. Lib. 2. Cap.
65. Sicut exigente culpa, quis a Sacramento communionis digne suspenditur, ita
insontibus nullo modo talis debet irrogari vinaicta. Ibid. Cap. 66. Et si in
vestra cognitione cujusquam ^um facinorosi criminis reum esse patuerit, tunc ex
nostra auctoritate non solum Dominici Corporis and Sanguinis communione
privatu^ fit, verum^tiam in Monasterium ubi poenitentiam agere debeat,
retrudatur. And so much for Antiquity in this Question.

CHAP. XVIII. A Discovery of the instability and looseness of Mr. Prynn his
Principles, even to the contradicting of himself in twelve particulars.
I Shall not need to insist upon his tenth point of difference Vindic. page 49.
nor upon his four following Quaerees and Conclusion, in all which there is no
new material point, but a repetition of diverse particulars spoken to and
debated elsewhere. As touching that hint of a new Argument page 56. Consider
the Parabl^ of the marriage of the Kings son, where the King sent forth his
servants to invite guests to the wedding Supper, who gathered together ALL they
found, both BAD and good, that the wedding might be furnished with guests.
Matthew. 22. 1. to 11. I answer, 1. Some understand here by the bad verse. 10.
those who had formerly (before they were called and brought home by the Gospel)
been the worst and most vicious among the Heathens, so that the words both bad
and good make not a distinction of two sorts of Christians or Church Members,
but of two sorts of Heathens not yet called, some of them were good, some of
them bad comparitively, that is, some of them much better then others, some of
them much worse. So Grotius, and long before him Hierome and Theophylact upon
the place. 2. Others (as Bucerus, Tossanus, Cartwright, In Matthew. 22. Neque
enim apertos ac palam malos, Apostoli aut ulli sancti Evangelii praecones
congregare, and Ecclesiae communioni per Sacramenta aggregare potuerunt aut
congregarunt, quod tales a communione Ecclesiae tanquam pestes illius sint
arcendi, sed congregarunt opertos ac^ectos, quos quia sub ovina pelle sunt lupi
and sub externa fidei and vitae ^bristianae specie, internam fraudem ac
impietatem tegunt (atque ita vere bonis exterius pares, imo interdum superiores
apparent) idcirco ab Apostolis aliisque Evangelii praeconibus dignosci non
potuerunt. etc.
Gomarus) understand by the bad, close Hypocrites who appear good so far as the
Ministers and Officers of the Church are able to judge of them. These by a
Synecdoche of the Genus for the Species may be understood by the bad. And so
the Text will not comprehend scandalous and known profane persons. That
Synecdoche generis, is often used in Scripture, is proved by Sal. Glassius
Philolog. sacrae lib. 5. Tract. 1. Cap. 14.

3. I throw back an Argument from the same Parable against himself, for the
King shows his servants that he will have unworthy persons kept back from the
marriage feast, verse. 8. Then says he to his servants, the Wedding is ready,
but they which were bidden were not worthy, Luke 14. 24. For I say unto unto
you, that none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper. The King
makes it also known that he allows none to come in to this Marriage Feast,
except such only as have the Wedding garment (or as the Syriak Wedding
garments) upon them. All which is inconsistent with Mr. Prynns principles
concerning the admission of known scandalous unworthy persons to the Sacrament,
as to a converting Ordinance.

4. And if all must be brought in or let in to the Lords Supper, both bad and
good promiseuously and without distinction, then it should follow that the
Ordinances of Parliament concerning the suspension of all sorts of scandalous
persons from the Sacrament are contrary to the Will of Christ: And that Mr.
Prynn himself in yielding ^ag. 50. and elsewhere, that scandalous impenitent
obstinate persons ought to be not only suspended but excommunicated, does
yield what his Argument concludes to be unlawful. And so I come to that which I
have here proposed, viz. the instability and looseness of Mr. Prynns
principles in this controversy.

By comparing diverse passages together, I find that he does profess and
pretend to yield the Question, which yet he does not yield really and indeed.

First, It is to be observed that he deserteth Erastus and that party in the
point of Excommunication. For in the vindication of his four Questions page 2.
he readily yields that gross notorious scandalous obstinate sinners, who
presumptuously persevere in their iniquities, after private and public
admonitions, without remorse of Conscience or AMENDMENT, may be justly
excommunicated from the Church, the society of the faithful, and all public
Ordinances, after due proof and legal conviction of their scandalous lives: and
that 1. Cor. 5. 13. warrants thus much. The Antidote animadverted by P. in the
first page yields that excommunication is an Ordinance of God. And indeed 1
Cor. 5. 13. does not only warrant excommunication as lawful, but enjoin and
command it as necessary; for the Apostles words are praeceptive and peremptory:
Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person. The thing was not
indifferent, but necessary and such as could not without sin be omitted.
However Mr. Prynn his asserting from that place that it may be, is a deserting
of the Erastian party.

2. In the 50. page of his vindication he professes that his Antagonists do
contend for that which he grants them with advantage. They would have
scandalous sinners suspended from the Sacrament. He will have them not only
suspended from the Sacrament, but excommunicated from all other public
Ordinances.

3. He confesses ibid. that in some cases a person not excommunicated may be
suspended from the Sacrament.

But whatever his Concessions may seem to be, they are really as good as
nothing. For 1. He will have none to be suspended from the Sacrament except
such as are ripe for excommunication, and against whom the sentence of
excommunication is ready to be pronounced as persons incorrigible. 2. He
admits no suspension from the Sacrament till after several solemn previous
public admonitions, reprehensions, rebukes contemned or neglected. See both
these page 50. Whence you see that with Mr. Prynns consent all the votes of
Parliament concerning several causes of suspension from the Lords Table, shall
be of no use to Presbyteries, until after a long process of time, and after
many previous public admonitions, So that if one in the Congregation commit a
notorious incest or murder a day or two, or a week before the celebration of
the Sacrament, and the thing be undeniably certified and proved before the
Eldership, yet the Eldership cannot suspend such an abominable scandalous
sinner from the Sacrament, hac vice: but must first go through all those
preparatory steps which are necessary and requisite before excommunication.

Well: but after all those public previous admonitions, shall the sentence of
excommunication follow? Nay, here also he will have Presbyteries to go through
a very narrow lane: for in the same place he thus describes the persons whom
he would have to be excommunicated; They are scandalous, obstinate, peremptory,
incorrigible, notorious sinners, who desperately and professedly persevere in
their gross scandalous sins, etc. But I beseech you, what if they persevere in
their gross scandalous sins neither desperately nor professedly? Must they not
then be excommunicate? Shall not the offender be cast out of the Church after
clear proof of the offense, and several previous public admonitions contemned
or neglected? Must we wait till the adulterer profess that he will persevere
in his adultery; and till the blasphemer profess that he will persevere in his
blasphemy? Nay further, What if the offender do neither (...) nor actually
persevere in his gross scandalous sin? Put case he that has blasphemed once
do not blaspheme the second time: and that he who grossly and scandalously
profaned the Lords day, did it but once, and has not done it again since he
was reproved. Must this hinder the sentence of excommunication, when that one
gross scandal is not confessed, nor any sign of repentance appearing in the
offender?

Moreover whereas Mr. Prynn in his fourth Quare, and in several places of his
Vindication seems to allow none to be admitted to the Lords Table except such
as profess sincere repentance for sins past, and promise newness of life for
time to come. If we expound his meaning by his own expressions in other places,
that which he grants bordereth upon nothing: for page 13. speaking of
scandalous sinners their admission to the Sacrament, if they profess sincere
repentance for their sins past, and reformation of their lives for time to
come, he adds, as all do at least in their general confessions before the
Sacrament, if not in their private meditations, prayers, etc. and a little
after he says, that all who come to receive, do always make a general and
joint confession of their sins before God and the Congregation etc. And then he
adds page 14. Yea I dare presume, there is no receiver so desperate, that
dares profess when he comes to receive, he is not heartily sorry for his sins
past, but resolves to persevere impenitently in them for the future, though
afterward he relapse into them, as the best Saints do to their old infirmities
etc. I know the best Saints have their sinful infirmities, but whether the BEST
do relapse to their OLD infirmities may be a Question. And however he does open
a wide door for receiving to the Sacrament all scandalous sinners not
excommunicated, if they do but tacitly join in the general Confession of sins
made by the whole Church, or do not contradict those general Confessions, and
profess impenitency and persevering in wickedness, though in the mean time
there be manifest real symptoms of impenitency, and no confession made of that
particular sin which has given public scandal. Wherefore I say plainly with
the Professors of Leyden, Synops. Pur. Theol. Disp. 48. These. 35. The
administration of this censure of suspension from the Lords Table has place in
these two different cases, either when one that is called a Brother has given
some heinous scandal of life or Doctrine, who after admonition does indeed by
word of mouth profess repentance, but yet does not show the fruits meet for
repentance, that so the scandal might be taken away from the Church: or when he
does not so much as in words promise or profess repentance, etc. Martin Bucer
has a notable speech to this purpose de Regno Christi, lib. 1. Cap. 9. To hold
it enough that one do profess by Word only repentance of sins, and say that
he is sorry for his sins, and that he will amend his life, the necessary
signs and works of Repentance not being joined with such profession, It is the
part of Antichrists priests, not of Christ's.

In the next place it is to be taken notice of, how palpably and grossly Mr.
Prynn contradicts himself in diverse particulars: Which being observed, may
peradventure make himself more attentive in writing, and others more attentive
in reading such subitane lucubrations. The particulars are these which follow.

1. Vindicat, page 17. he says, the Confession of sin which was made at the
Trespass offerings, was not to the Priest, Classis, or Congregation, but to
God alone. 1. In the very same page he says, None were kept off from making
their atonement by a trespass offering, if they did first confess their sins
to God, though perchance his confession was not cordial, or such as the
Priests approved, but external only in show. I beseech you how could it be at
all judged of, whether it was external and only in show, if it was made to God
alone? Nay, if it was made to God alone, how could it be known whether he had
confessed any sin at all; and so whether he was to be admitted to the trespass
offering or not? 2. Vindic. page 50. He freely grants That ALL scandalous,
obstinate, peremptory, incorrigible, notorious sinners, who desperately and
professedly persevere in their gross scandalous fins, to the dishonor of
Christian Religion, the scandal of the Congregation, the ill example and
infection of others, after several solemn previous public admonitions,
reprehensions, rebukes, contemned or neglected, and full conviction of their
scandal and 2. Vindic. page 57. Certainly the speediest, BEST and ONLY WAY to
suppress ALL kind of sins, schisms, to reform and purge our Churches from ALL
SCANDALOUS OFFENSES, will be for Ministers NOT to draw out the sword of
Excommunication and suspension against them, which will do little good, but the
sword of the Spirit, the powerful preaching of Gods Word, and the sword of the
Civil Magistrate. impenitency, may and OUGHT TO BE EXCOMMUNICATED, suspended,
etc. If this be the best and only way to suppress sin, and to reform and purge
the Churches, How is it that some scandalous sinners may and ought to be
excommunicated? 3. Vindic. page 50 Where the f^ct is notorious, the p^oofs
(...), the sentence of excommunication ready to be pronounced against them as
persons impenitently scandalous and in^orrigible, ^erchance the Presbytery or
^l ssis may order a suspension from the Sacrament, or any other Ordinances,
before the sentence of excommunication solemnly denounced if they see just
cause. 3. Yet all along he disputes against the su pending from the Sacrament
of a person unexcommunicated, and not suspended from all other public Ord
nances and society of Gods people. And page 50. arguing for the right of all
visible members of the visible Church to the Sacrament, he says that nothing
but an actual excommunication can suspend them from this their rig^t. 4.
Vindic. page 17. He says that a particular examination of the Conscience, and
Repentance for sin, is no where required in Scripture of such who did eat the
Passover. And herein he distinguishes the Trespasse-offerings, and the
Passover, that in bringing a trespass offering men came to sue for pardon,
and make atonement, and that therefore confession of sin was necessary. But in
the Passover 4. Ibid. page 24. He says that the Passover was the same in
substance with the Eucharist under the Gospel, wherein Christ was spiritually
represented and received, as well as in the Lords Supper. But how can this be,
if repentance for sin was not necessary in the Passover, and if it was only a
commemoration of a by* p^st temporal mercy in sparing the first born of the
Israelites? there was r^ atonement etc. but ONLY a commemoration of Gods
infinite mercy in passing over the Israelites first born when he sl^w the
Egyptians. 5. Vindic. page 18. He says that immediately before the institution
of the Sacrament, Christ told his Disciples that one of them should betray him,
and that Judas was the last man that said Is it I? immediately before the
Institution. And page 27. he says. That the other disciples did eat the
Sacrament with Judas, after Christ had particularly informed them and Judas
himself, that he should betray him. 5. Yet page 25. He reckons that very
thing to have been after the Institution of the Sacrament: for to that
Objection that Judas went out before Supper ended, immediately after he
received the sop, whereas Christ did not institute the Sacrament till after
Supper: he makes this answer, that the dipping of the sop (at which time Judas
said is it I?) was at the common Supper, which (says he) succeeded the
Institution of the Sacrament, so that the Sacrament was instituted after the
Paschal, not after the common Supper. And page 19. He argues that Judas did
receive the Sacrament upon this ground, that all this discourse and the giving
of the sop to Judas was after Supper ended; but Christ instituted and
distributed the Sacrament (at least the bread) as he sat at meat, as they were
eating, before Supper quite ended. 6. Vindic. page 42. Speaking of ungodly
scandalous sinners, he plainly intimates that the receiving of the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper is more likely to regenerate and change their hearts and
lives then the Word preached. And in that same page, he holds that this
Sacrament is certainly the most powerful and effectual Ordinance of all others
to humble, regenerate, convert. The like see page 44, 45. and page 52. Yea no
doubt many debosht Persons have been really reclaimed, converted, even by their
access and admission to the Sacrament. 6. Page 57. He ascribes the power of
godliness in many English Congregations to powerful preaching, and says, that
this sword of the Spirit, the powerful preaching of Gods Word, and the sword of
the Civil Magistrate, are only able to effect this work, to suppress all kind
of sins, schisms, to reform and purge the Churches. If this be the
speediest, best, and only way to suppress all kind of sins, schisms, to
reform and purge our Churches from all scandalous offenses, as he there says,
and if the Word and the Magistrate are only able to effect this work; How is
it that the Lords Supper does change men's hearts and lives, and that more
effectually then any other Ordinance? Again page 37. he says, he has in other
Treatises of his proved Gods presence and Spirit to be as much, as really
present in other Ordinances, as in this of the Lords Supper. How then makes he
this Sacrament to be the most powerful and effectual Ordinance of all others,
to humble, regenerate, convert? 7. Page 40. He makes the Sacrament to be a seal
to the senses of unworthy persons, but not to their souls; In this latter
sense he says it is a seal only to worthy penitent believing receivers. 7.
Yet Page 44, 45. the strength of his tenth Argument lies in this, that the
Sacrament seals unto the Communicants souls, yea to the flintiest heart, and
obduratest spirit, the promises, an union with Christ, assurance of everlasting
life, and therefore in regard of the sealing of all these particulars unto men's
souls, must needs convert an obdurate unregenerate sinner. Which Argument were
nonsense if it did not suppose the Sacrament to seal all these particulars
even to the souls of unregenerate sinners. Mark but these words of his own;
since that which does seal all these particulars to men's souls, and represent
them to their saddest thoughts, must needs more powerfully persuade, pierce,
mels, relent, convert an obdurate heart* and unregenerate sinner, etc. 8.
Vindic. Page 28. He admits that a Minister ought in duty and Conscience to
give warning to unworthy persons of the danger of unworthy approaching to the
Lords Table, and seriously dehort them from 8. Page 46. He tells us of an old
error in forbidding drink to those who were inflamed with burning fevers,
which Physicians of late have corrected by suffering such to drink freely. He
desires that this old coming to it unless they repent, reform, and come
prepared. error of P^isicians may not enter among Divines; for as drink does
extinguish the unnatural heat which else would kill the diseased, so feverish
Christians burning in the flames of sins and lusts ought to be permitted freely
to come to the Lords Table, because they need it most to quench their flames.
Do these now repent, reform, and come prepared? Yet here he makes it a sin to
forbid them to come to the Lords Table. Though he applies it against
suspension: yet the ground he goes upon makes it a soul murdering sin, so
much as to dehort them from that which they need most to quench the flames of
their lusts. 9. Vindic. Page 37. I answer, First* That the Minister does not
administer the Sacrament to any known impenitent sinners under that notion, but
only as penitent sinners, truly repenting of their sins past. The meaning of
which words cannot be that the Minister gives the Sacrament to known impenitent
sinners, while known to be impenitent, and yet he gives the Sacrament to those
known impenitent sinners, not as impenitent, 9. This as it casts down what
himself has built in point of the converting Ordinance (for if the Sacrament
be not administered to any known impenitent sinners, under that notion, but
only as penitent, then it does not work but suppose repentance and conversion
in the receivers, and so is not a converting Ordinance to any receiver:) So
also it is inconsistent with what himself adds in the very same place.
Secondly but as penitent: which were a mighty strong Bull. But the meaning bust
needs be, that the Minister gives the Sacrament to such as have been indeed
formerly looked upon as impenitent sinners, and known to be such, but are now
when they come to the Sacrament looked upon under the notion of penitent
sinners, and that the Minister gives the Sacrament to none, except only under
the notion and supposition that they are truly penitent. says Mr. Prynn, He
(the Minister) us^h th^se words, The body of Christ which was broken, and the
blood of Christ shedd for you, etc. not absolutely, but conditionally only, in
case they receive the Sacrament worthily, and become penitent* and believing
receivers, as they all profess themselves to be* just so as they preach
repentan^e and remission to their Auditors; Therefore the case is just, the
same in both (the Word preached and the Sacrament) without any difference: Here
Christ is offered in the Sacrament, as well as to the Word, and accordingly the
Sacrament administered to known impenitent sinners under that notion, and as
still known to be impenitent upon condition that they become penitent. 10.
Vindic. Page 52. It being only the total exclusion from the Church and all
Christian society (not any bare suspension from the Sacrament) which works both
shame and remorse in excommunicate persons, as Paul resolves, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
1 Cor. 5. 13. compared with 1 Cor. 5. 1. to 11. 10. Yet Vindic. page 4. and 10.
he denies that either 1 Cor. 5. 9. 11. or 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. can amount to any
Excommunication or exclusion from the Church, and expounds both these places of
a private withdrawing of Civil Fellowship, without any public judicial Act or
Church censure. 11. In his Epistle to the Reader before his Vindication, he
disclaimeth that which some conceived to be his opinion, viz. that the
Ministers and elders of Christ's Church, ought not to be trusted with the power
of Church censures, or that all of them are to be abridged of this power: and
professes that these debates of his tend only to a regular orderly settlement
of the power of Presbyteries, not to take from them all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction due by divine right to them, but to confine it within certain
definite limits. 11. Diotrephes catechized, page 7. It is the safest readiest
way to unity and Reformation, to remit the punishment of all scandalous
offenses to the civil Magistrate, rather then to the pretended disputable
questioned authority of Presbyteries, Classes, or Congregations. 12. Vindic.
page 2. He agrees with his Opposites that scandalous obstinate sinners after
proof and conviction, may be justly excommunicated from the Church etc. And
that 1 Cor. 5. 13. warrants thus much etc. So that thus far there is no dissent
on either part. Remember the present controversy which he speaks to, is
concerning excommunication in England, and so under a Christian Magistracy. 12.
Diotrephes catechized, page 9. 10. He plainly intimates that 1 Cor. 5. 13. is
no satisfactory Argument for the continuance and exercise of Excommunication in
all Churches, and where the Magistrates be Christian. And that those who press
this Text, may as well conclude from the very next words, 1 Cor. 6. 1. to 9.
that it is unlawful for Christians to go to Law before any Christian Judges
now, etc. Where by the way it is also to be noted, that he should have said
before any heathen judge^. Otherwise the Argument cannot be parallel.

I shall now close with four Counter-Quaeries to Mr. Prynne.
1. Since diu deliberandum quod semel statuendum, which is a received maxim,
approved by prudent men, and God himself, as his Epistle to the Reader says;
whether was it well done to publish his subitane lucubrations (as himself in
that preface calls them) and upon so short deliberation to engage in this
public and litigious manner against the desires of the Reverend and Learned
Assembly, especially in a business wherein it is well known the hearts of
godly people do generally go along with them?

2. Whether Mr. Prynus language be not very much changed from what it was in
the Prelates times: seeing Vindic. page 7. he has these words, our opposites
generally grant, etc. citing only Cartwright? And are the old non Conformists
of blessed memory, now Opposites? Where are we? I confess as he now stands
affected, he is opposite to the old non-Conformists, and they to him. For
instance. Mr. Hildersham Lect. 5. on Psalm. 51. holds that all open and
scandalous sinners should do open and public repentance, and acknowledge their
scandalous sins in the Congregation, otherwise to be kept back from the holy
Communion. And while Mr. Prynn pleads that Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. is not
meant of a Presbytery or of any Church-censure, he manifestly dissenteth from
the Nonconformist, and joyneth issue with Bpp. Bilson de gubern. Eccl. c. 4.
and Sutlivius de Presbyterio cap. 9. pleading for Prelacy against Presbytery.

3. Seeing the business of excommunication and sequestration from the
Sacrament, now in public agitation, is a matter of great moment, much
difficulty, and very circumspectly to be handled, established, to prevent
pro^anation and scandal on the one hand; and arbitrary, tyrannical, papal
domineering power over the Consciences, the spiritual privileges of
Christians, on the other. (These are his own words in the preface of his
Quaeries) whether has he gone in an even path to avoid both these evils? Or
whether has he not declined to the left hand, while he shunned the error of
the right hand! Whether has he not so gone about to cure the heat of the
liver,* as to leave a cold and phlegmatic stomach uncured? And whether does he
not trespass against that rule of his own last cited, when he advises this
as the best and only way to suppress all kind of sins, and to reform and
purge the Churches of this Kingdom, that the sword of excommunication and
suspension be not drawn, but only the sword of the spirit, and the sword of
the Magistrate? Vindic. page 57. Finally, Whether in this Kingdom there be more
cause to fear and apprehend an arbitrary, tyrannical, papal domineering power
over the Consciences of Christians, (where Church discipline is to be so
bounded by authority of Parliament, that it be not promiscuously put in the
hands of all, but of such against whom there shall be no just exception found,
yea are or shall be chosen by the Congregations themselves, who have also
lately abjured by a solemn Covenant, the Popish and Pre^atical Government?) Or
whether we ought not to be more afraid and apprehensive that the Ordinances of
Christ shall hardly be kept from pollution, and the Churches hardly purged from
scandals, there being many thousands both grossly ignorant, and grossly
scandalous?

4. I desire it may be (upon a review) seriously considered, how little truth,
wisdom, or charity there is in that suggestion of Mr, Prynn, page 57. that the
lives of the generality of the people are more strict, pious, less scandalous
and licentious in our English Congregations* where there has been powerful
preaching, without the practice of Excommunication or suspension from the
Sacrament, then in the Reformed Churches of France, Germany, Denmark, or
Scotland, for which I appeal to all Travelers, etc. I confess it is a matter
of great humiliation to the servants of Christ, that there is occasion to
exercise Church discipline and censures in the Reformed Churches: yet this is
no other then what was the condition of the Apostolic Churches. 2 Cor. 12.
21. I fear says the Apostle l^st when I come again, my God will humble me
among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not
repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they
have committed. And this is not the only Testimony concerning scandals and
disorderly walking in those primitive Churches. But as for those who are so
rigid in their censures against the government of the Reformed Churches, I
answer to them as Hierome did of the Montanists. They are rigid, Rigidi autem
sunt, non qu^ and ipsi pejora non peccent: sed hoc inter nos and illos
interest, quod illi erubescunt confiteri peccata, quasi justi: nos dum
poenitentiam agimus, facilius veniam promer^mur.
not to the end that themselves also might not commit worse sins; but this
difference there is between them and us, that they are ashamed to confess
their sins, as if they were righteous: We while we repent, do the more easily
obtain mercy. Mr. Prynn and others of his profession are not very willing that
such an Ecclesiastical discipline be established in England, as is received and
settled in Scotland and other Reformed Churches. But if once the like
sinsearching, sin-discovering, and sin-censuring discipline were received and
duly executed in England, then (and not till then) such comparisons may (if at
all they must) be made, between the lives of the generality of the people in
England, with those in other Reformed Churches, which of them is more or less
licentious and scandalous.

A Testimony of Mr. Fox the Author of the Book of Martyrs, taken out of a
treatise of his printed at London, 1551. entitled De Censura Ecclesiastica
Interpellatio J. Foxi, the eighth Chapter of which Treatise is here translated
out of Latin into English. What the are chief obstacles hindering
Excommunication?
THat the thought and care of excommunication has now so far waxed cold almost
in all the Churches, is to be ascribed (as appears) unto three sorts of men.
The first is of those whose minds the wealth of this world and high advancement
of dignity do so lift up, that they are ashamed to submit the neck to the
obedience of Christ. What (say these) shall that poor fellow lay a yoke on me?
What, should I be subject to this naughty and rude Pastor? But let go, good
Sir* your vain swelling empty words; how rude soever he be, yet if he be your
Pastor, you must needs be a sheep of the flock, whom if he does rightly
instruct, so much the more dutifully you must submit. But if otherwise, it is
the fault of the man, not of the Ministry; To those at least yield thy self to
be ruled, whom thou know to be more learned. But go to, thou which can not
suffer a man to be thy Pastor, to whom then will thou submit thy self? unto
Christ himself (thou say:) very well forsooth. This then is of such
importance, that Christ for thy cause must again leave the heavens, or by his
Angels or Archangels feed and govern thee, whom these mean men the Pastors do
not satisfy: But what if it so pleased the Lord by these mean Pastors, as thou
call them, to cast down and conf^und all the highest statelynesse and pride
of this World, even as of old by a few and comtemptible Fishers he subdued not
only the high and conceited opinion of Philosophers, but even the Scepters of
Kings also? Now what will thy boasting magnificence say? But hear what Christ
himself says of them, whom thou from thy high loftiness look^st down upon as
unworthy. He that despises you despises me (says he.) And moreover who so
despises Christ, despises him from whom he is sent, and who said unto him,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: Ask of me and I will give thee
the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost ends of the earth for thy
possission: Thou shall rule them with a rod of iron, and break them in pe^ces
like a p^tters vessel. Wherefore seeing thou do acknowledge so great a Lord,
so many ways above all Majesty whatsoever can be named; let it not be grievous
to thee (my brother whosoever thou art, or with how great power soever thou art
highly advanced) laying aside thy high looks and pride, to be humbled under his
mighty hand; And do not think it a light matter (whereas thou entertainest with
so great applause and honorable respect an earthly Kings Ambassadors) that
thou should disdain the Ambassadors of him, who alone has power over all
Kings and Lords. If thou yeeldest unto a mortal Physician thy wounds to be
handled, yea to be cut also, and to be burned and seared (if need be) how
comes it, that thou can less endure the same thing also in the curing of
the diseases of the soul from the spiritual Physician, especially seeing in so
many respects better is the health of the soul then of the body? Nor do thou so
account any whit in this regard to be impared of thy honor, if unto thy Bishop
or Pastor, yea rather herein to Christ thou be subjected. Yea contrariwise, so
account as the thing is indeed, that there is no true glory but in Christ and
in his sheepfolds; that none do more prosperously reign, then they which every
way do serve him, without whom as there is no glory, so is there no safety and
salvation. Neither let it seem disgraceful to thee, what so many ages ago the
most high Monarchs of the world and most potent Emperors have done before thee:
amongst whom Philip, as he was the first of all the Emperors who was made a
Christian; so I meet with no other more famous example, and more worthy of all
men's imitation. He willing to be present at the solemn Assemblies of the Church
on Easter, and to communicate of the Sacrament* when as yet he was judged not
worthy of admission; It is reported that Fabian the Bishop withstood him,
neither did receive him before he confessed his sins, and stood among the
Penitentiaries. What would those our proud giants, fighters against God do
here, if they had stood in the like condition and high place? But this no less
mild then most mighty Emperor was nothing ashamed (forgetting in the mean while
his Imperial Majesty) of his own accord to submit himself to the obedience of
his Pastor, undergoing every thing whatsoever in the Name of Christ was imposed
upon him. O truly noble Emperor, and no less worthy Bishop! But these examples
in both are too rare amongst us this day.

Another* sort is of those which would be Christians but in name and title
only, they promise an honest enough show of Christian profession; they dispute
both learnedly, and every where with great endeavor, of Christ; they carry
about in their hands the Gospel; they frequent sacred Sermons; have cast off
all superstition; they feed with the perfect; they marry, eat, and are clothed,
so as they hold no difference either of times or of places. Finally, Whatsoever
is pleasing in Christ they take and stiffely hold. But if ye look into their
life, they are Epicures, Wasters, Ravenous, Covetous, Sons of Belial; Not
Christ's servants, but slaves of their belly; who according to the Satyrist,
think virtue to be but words, as the wood to be but trees. And of these there
is a great store every where, who seeing only for their belly they follow
Christ, they leave nothing undevised and uninterprised to hinder
Excommunication, that so they may the more freely satisfy and serve their own
lusts. So the Covetous man fears that his Covetousness be called in
question, which he will not forsake. The Adulterer, he that buyeth or sells
men into slavery, the dycer, the whoremonger, the drunkard would rather his
intemperance to be concealed. So the Robber, the Murderer, the Incendiary is
afraid to be laid open or made known. So he that delights to be fatted and
enriched with the damages of the Common* wealth, is unwilling to have any
bridle to curb and restrain him: The Cheater that with false wares beguileth
the people; the seller that with unjust gain outeth counterfeit wares; the
deceiver who cozeneth and circumventeth his Neighbor. Last of all whosoever
are thus affected that they savor or follow nothing but their belly, their
ambition, and the purse, they do not willingly endure that their liberty of
sinning should be stopped to them.

Moreover after these, others not much unlike them, come into the same account,
which out of some places of Scripture perversely wrested, if they find out
ought that may flatter their affections, hence forthwith do they promise a
wicked liberty of sinning to themselves and others, whence follows a very great
corruption of life, together with injury of the Scripture. While these men are
not sufficiently shaken and stricken with the sense of their sin, and force the
Scripture violently wrested to defend and maintain their perverse affections,
from which Scripture it had been meet to seek all medicines of their vices. But
little do these men in the mean while consider how dear it cost Christ, which
they make so small account of. They do not mark and weigh how horrible a thing
sin is before God, which no otherwise could be expiate and purged but by the
death of his only begotten Son; which has utterly rui^ated not whole Cities,
but Kingdoms also and Monarchies.

Which things if these and all other Epicures did more diligently think of, it
would come to pass I suppose, that neither the custom of sin would so much
like them, and withal the matter it self would so far draw them, that more
willingly they would have recourse unto these so many ways wholesome remedies of
the Church, as unto the only medicine of man's life.

FINIS.

