Glorifying of God, The Just Tribute of a Thankful People,

Discovered and Pressed in a SERMON Preached December 2. 1697. BEING The Day of
Thanksgiving For the PEACE.

Genesis 22. 14. (...)

Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with Fear, and Rejoice with Trembling.

1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Ye are not your Own; Ye are Bought with a Price: Therefore
Glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit which are God's.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC VIII.

PSALM. L. Ver. 15. latter part. I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
IN this Psalm the Prophet Admonishes the Persons of his time of God's Coming
to them, to Judge their Religion and Profession. And here he shows, That the
Worship that Pleases him Consists not in External costly Legal Sacrifices,
Ver. 8, -- 13. but must chiefly be Moral and Spiritual Worship; which he sets
down in Three Branches.

I. True Thankfulness of Heart, Ver. 14. begin.

II. Performance of Vows to the Most High, Ver. 14. latter part.

III. Calling on God in Straits, and Honoring Him with Praises for
Deliverances, in the Text. Where we have observable Four Things:

1. Here is supposed, That a Time of Trouble or Danger may Befall God's faithful
Servants.

2. In such a Case it is expressly required as a Great Duty, that they Invoke
God's Name, and commend themselves to his Majesty by Ardent Prayer; Call upon
me in the day of Trouble.

3. Here is a gracious Encouragement given for so doing; I will Deliver thee.

4. A Duty subsequent to such Deliverance; or, one Main End God aims at in his
Delivering, viz. That the Delivered should Honor God with their Praises.

Now Glorifying of God upon Delivering Us, being the Chief Work of This Day,
which God has been pleased to make to be a Day of Solemn Thanksgiving for
Wonderful Mercies, I shall principally endeavor the Opening and Enforcing the
said Great Duty of Glorifying God our Deliverer: And therefore shall speak unto
no more Truths as General Heads of Discourse, than the same makes needful, and
they are these Three;

1. That a Time of Straits, or Day of Trouble and Danger, is the usual. Lot of
God's People in this World.

2. That God takes his Time to Deliver his People from Perilous Straits and
Troubles.

3. It Is the Duty of his People to Glorify God, whenever he is graciously
pleased to Deliver them.

I shall be short on the First of these, as only making use of it, as a
Necessary Foundation to the Other Two that follow upon it.

Troubles and Adversities, more or less, belik^ the true Church of God, and its
faithful Members here.

The Apostate World is an Inhospitable Place to the Heirs of Heaven. God's
Faithfullest Subjects are the World's Greatest Non-conformists; and for
sticking Romans 12. 2.
to their Allegiance to Christ, their Sovereign, they are sure to Procure the
World's Enmity. For not Complying with a Wicked World's evil Customs, nor
Falling in with its base Lusts and Interests, they will not fail more or less, to
suffer Trouble from it, as Evildoers, 2 Timothy 2. 9. The Holy Ghost tells us,
that He that is Upright in the way, is an Abomination to the Wicked, Prove. 29.
27. And our Savior told his Disciples, John 15. 19. That were they of the
World, [Ungodly or Infidels] the World would love his Own; [love them for being
like Them] but because they were not of the World, but he had Chosen them, [i.
e. Effectually Called them (in pursuance of his Decree of Election) out of the
World, [from a Conformity to it in Judgment, Affection, and Conversation]
therefore the World hated them.

It Is Here that Jacob has a Time of Trouble, Jo. 30. 7. and the Seed of Jacob
are often troubled on every side, 2 Cor. 4. 8. The Church is here in a Militant
State; The Wicked plotteth against the Just, etc. Psalm 37. 12. He watches the
Righteous, and seeks to slay him, Ver. 32. Whence it comes to pass usually,
That every one that departs from Iniquity, makes himself a Prey, Isa. 59.
15. So that (in short) all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, may reckon on
Persecution and Trouble. Afflictions and Sufferings are so much the common Lot
of the Righteous, that though they may have some Fair Days and short Refreshing
Seasons, yet Foul Weather and Storms frequently attend them from the raging
Seas of swelling Wickedness, Pride, and Envy. And, as Julian told the
Christians when they Complained of his Cruelties, (...), That it was their
Profession to endure Tribulation; so the very Course and Trade of the Christian
Life is a suffering One.

Instances hereof are innumerable. Wellknown are the Stories of Abel's Murder
by Cain, (the Devil's Patriarch, as Tertullian calls him) and of the various
Distresses of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, those Blessed Patriarchs, who
were sorely harrassed from Country to Country, having their Lives filled up
with Troubles and Perils. We read of Job's Dunghill, and Daniel's Den of Lions,
and Jeremia^s Dungeon. We know what bitter Complaints Holy David, the Darling
or Beloved of the Lord, (as his Name imports,) often made with respect to his
Calamitous Estate, Psalm. 57. 4. Psalm. 59. 2, 3. 1 Samuel 20. 3. Psalm. 69. 2.

You are not to learn what cruel Usage Isra^ had in Egypt; nor what a Fight of
Afflicti^^ the Church endured in aftertimes from Sem^ charib, Nebuchadnezzar,
Antiochus, etc. We know how sadly it cried out long since, Wherefore hidest
thou thy face, and forgettest us affliction, and our oppression? For our soul
is bowel down to the dust, our belly cleaves to the earth. Psalm. 44. 24. In
short, The Churches Ca^^ upon the account of Sufferings and Adversities is one
while compared to a Valley of dead and dry Bones, Ezekiel. 37. 2. And another
while her Sorrows are set forth by those of Women i^ Travel. For This it is,
that she is likened to a Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2. 2. To a poo^ Turtle-dove
amidst a Multitude of Enemies, Psalm. 74. 19. and to a silly Bird in the
Fowler's Snare, Psalm. 124. 7.

Well; but does the Lord always look on in Silence, and behold the Perils of
his Servants with an unconcerned Eye? No, he will Plead his People's Cause, and
Break their Enemies to pieces like a Potter's Vessel. Which brings me to the

II. Truth or Proposition,

That God takes his Time of Delivering his People from Trouble or Danger.

As he Kills, so he Makes Alive: As he Wounds, so he Heals the wound of the
daughter of his People, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. He holds their soul in life, and
suffers not their feet to be moved, [or fall into utter Ruin (as their
Enemies design and hope)] Psalm. 66. 10. He proves and tries his Children as
silver is tried. He brings them into the net, and lays afflictions upon
their loins [by his Providential Disposals, brings them into Straits and
Dangers on every side] He causes men to ride over their heads, so that they go
through fire, and through water; but he does not Abandon them in this their
heavy Plight, but watches over them for their Good, and brings them out into
a wealthy place, [even into a state of Liberty and Prosperity] Psalm. 67. 10,
11, 12. Though he suffers his Servants to lie for a time in an afflicted and
contemptible Condition, suffering great Hardships, and running many Dangers,
yet he takes his Day to bring them into a more beautiful, desirable, and
amiable State, as we read in Psalm. 68. 13. Though ye have li^n among the pots,
ye shall be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with
yellow gold. He delivers them out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand
of the unrighteous and cruel man, Psalm. 71. 4. Jer. 30. 7. Jacob shall be saved
out of his Season of Trouble. And though many be the afflictions of the
righteous, yet the Lord delivers him out of them all, Psalm. 34. 19.

Because of the Isaiah 43. 4.
Love God bears unto his People. They have such an Interest in his
Affections, as that, though he will use Enemies as his Rod to Correct them for
their Iniquities, (which endanger their Souls, and dishonor his Great Name)
yet he will also Hos. 14. 14. Jer. 31. 3, 4.
heal their backslidings, and turn away his anger from them, and build them up,
and set them in safety. On the account of his singular Affection for them, God
styles himself his People's Rock, Deliverer, Buckler, High Tower, Horn of
Salvation; and is as a Wall of ^ech. 2. 5. Isaiah 27. 3.
Fire about them, and has a watchful Eye upon them, and undertakes to keep
them Night and Day, lest any hurt them.

He is also their Covenant-God, and They his Deus and Natura and Foedere
Gratiae ad Benefaciendum proclivis. Jun. in Mat. 16. 18.
Vovenant People; by which Covenant he ingageth to have Common Friends and
Common Enemies with his People, Genesis 12. 3. Isa. 4^. 2, 3.

Moreover, his People's Cause is God's Cause, and Their Reproaches, are God's
Reproaches, and Their Enemies God's Enemies, Psalm. 74. 22, 23. God is hated in
his People. It Is God's Holiness and Interest that is opposed in the Opposition
made against the Church. The Original Cause is Malignity against the Holy
Sinhating God, Romans 1. 30. It Is in the Church God has put his Name; His People
are They that uphold it in the World; among Them is his Image; therefore his
Church's rising is His Glory, and her Reproach is His Dishonor. Therefore Malo
in nos Murmur hominum quam in Deum: Bonum est mihi si Deus dignetur me uti pro
Clyp^o. Bern. de consid.
the Lord, their Head in Heaven, is sensible of the Wrongs done his Members on
the Earth: and accordingly takes them as done to Himself, Wherefore he will
plead the Cause of his Oppressed Servants, and not suffer the Rod of the wicked
to rest always on their Back. And that too, because

Lastly, The Power of their Enemies depends wholly on God's Will. Wicked Men
are but Tools and Instruments in God's Hand to do his Pleasure. He Bounds their
Actions, and Measures out the Corrections of his People by them. He says to
the Rage of Enemies, what he does to the Waves of the Sea, Hitherto shall thou
come, and further shall not pass, Job 38. 11. He makes the wrath of men to
praise him, and the remainder thereof he restrains, Psalm. 76. 10. Cruel Foes
work on according to their own wicked Principles, but God overrules all their
Councils, Motions, and Operations, to the doing his Work, the bettering of his
People, and the glorifying his Name. Their Power is only for God's Holy Ends.
God Raises them up, and Casts them down again, even as it seems good unto
him. So then the Lord appoints Salvation, [Isa. 26. 1.] and he commands
Deliverance for his Jacob, [Psal. 44. 4.]

But IId. What are the Times or Seasons in which God usually Appears for the
Delivering of his People?

The Scripture shows us, that One Time of God's Appearing against his Enemies
for his Church, is, When the Enemies are grown Proud and Insolent against the
Lord Himself, and presume to carry all before them; As if the Church were even
in their Power to destroy Her, as they please, and that there were no help (as
they said of David, Psalm. 3. 2.) in her God for her. Thus when Edom was waxen
so proud as to boast of it self as if it were a Match for Heaven, and was in
its Haughtiness violently carried out against Jacob, God presently lays Edom
low, and vouchsafes deliverance to his People, making the House of Jacob to
possess their possessions, Obad. 3, 4, 10, 17. So God's Judgments fell on the
Prince of Tire (with other Heathen Enemies) when he had set his heart as the
heart of God; and thereupon followed Freedom for God's people from Vexation by
them, Ezekiel. 28. 6. etc. 24. etc. And this was the Time of God's redeeming his
Church from Babylon, when the Insulting King of Babylon (who had carried away
his People captive) instead of giving that Praise he owed for all his
Successes, did daily blaspheme God, as if he wanted Power to save his People
out of his Hands, Isa. 52. 5, 6. compared with Ezekiel. 36. 20, 23. At such a
Season as this, when Enemies bea^ themselves high and stout before the
Almighty, God takes his Time to ease his endangered People, and assert his own
Sovereignty to the Teeth of his Foes, that All Daring Nimrods and Proud
Lucifers may know that the most high God alone rules in the Kingdoms of men.

Further, When the Enemies grow Outrageous Genesis 15. 16.
and Insatiable, as in other Sins, so particularly in their Cruelty against the
Church of God; when Exodus 3. 7. -- 10. Isa. 36. and 37. 4, etc.
they are gotten to a Fullness and Ripeness in their Transgressions against God,
and nothing will satisfy them short of the utter Ruin of his Cause and People,
God Usually arises to Rescue his People, and Crush his Foes. We read how the
Church has very often suffered very great Oppression and hard Bondage from
many Enemies, and God has permitted their Foes to carry it with an High Hand
over them for a long Season before he has Redeemed them. But if ever they
begin to attempt the utter Subversion of his People, he has never failed to
show his Jealousy and concerned Care for them. Thus when Pharaoh from
Oppressing them, advances toward the Destroying them, and his Rage against them
grows Boundless; When he first thirsts for the Blood of all the Israelites
Male-Children (therein striking at the Root of the Church) and presently after
vowing the Satisfaction of his Lusts in the slaughter of the Body of the People
too, God by a Miracle Delivered his Church, and with his Vengeance made the
enemies to sink as lead in the mighty waters; 15th and 18th Chapters of Exodus.

Thus when Haman's Malice contrived the Destruction of the whole Body of the
Jews; and Nothing less than the total Extirpation of Root and Branch was aimed
at, the Divine Arm interposed between the Bloody Decree and the Execution, to
the Salvation of the Jews, and the Overthrow of their Enemies.

Again, God looks down from the Height of his Sanctuary, regarding and
succouring his Afflicted People, when their Enemies and Sufferings have well
humbled and refined them. So says God in Is. 10. 12. As soon as I have
performed my whole work on Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, [that is, Chastened
them to True Humiliation and Reformation] I will punish the fruit of the stout
heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks. And thus the
Promise of God's Deliverance in general runs, That whenever his people's
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, etc. He will remember his Covenant, and the
Land, Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42.

Another Time of God's Appearing for his Cause and Church, is, when his People
are so greatly affected with, and for the Distresses of Luke 18. 5, 6, 7, 8.
the same, that they give God no rest, but with a right Spirit of Prayer Ply
the Throne of Grace Day and Night for God's avenging his Elect on their Enemies.

Indeed, God has bound himself by Promise to Hear and Deliver, when thus
sought unto; Genesis 29. 12, 13, 14. And agreeably has commanded Persons Thus to
pray in Zion's behalf, Isa. 62. 6, 7.

And it is observed, That God usually pours out a Spirit of Prayer upon his
People more than at Other Times, Then, When he is intending a Deliverance for
them. And the Church knew this to be so sure a Sign of God's rising for his
Afflicted Church, that they ventured to make a Prophetical Conclusion out of
the Spirit of Prayer poured forth upon them, That so it would be, in Psalm. 102.
13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Zion. But how are they sure of it? The
Set Time is come. How know they that? For thy Servants take pleasure in her
Stones, and favor the dust thereof, verse 14. [that is, have great Affection
to it, though Ruinous, and passionately pray to have it Rebuilt.] Thy Servants
are Compassionate; they are full of Pity, and pour out their Souls, and mourn
to Thee for the sake of Zion's Rubbish and Desolation, and therefore surely
thou will now come and save; Thou will regard the prayer of the destitute, and
not despise their prayer when thou buildest up Zion, and appearest in thy
glory; Verses 16, 17. God will have the Building up of Zion to be the Fruit of
his People's Prayers. And thus the Heavy Dooms denounced by God's Command
against Hadrach, Damascus, Tire, and Zidon, [Destructive Enemies of God's
People] are foretold to take place then, when the eyes of all Israel are
toward the Lord [for Help,] Zach. 9. 1, 2. We read that the Romans, once in a
Great Distress, took the Weapons out of the Temple of their God, and with them
got a glorious Victory over their Enemies. And truly many a Foil have the
Sanctuary Weapons of Prayer given the Church's and our Enemies. Yea, what if I
say, That the Morning Star is not a more Infallible Argument of the Day
approaching, than a Spirit of right Prayer poured out on his People, is an
Argument of some Signal Mercy approaching them? The Wonderful Victory given our
King at the Boyn, whereby Ireland was Rescued from Cutthroat French and Irish
Papists, falling out at the Time of the General Fast in Scotland, is a Late
Glorious Instance hereof. Nor will the Lord do any Great Things for his
Servants without the Preceding Awakenings of the Graces of his Spirit in them
by their Believing, Seeking to him, and humble Waiting on him, It Is greatly
Remarkable how Two Years since many Numerous Congregations in an Extraordinary
and Unusual Manner, without Any Call from Authority or Foresight of any such
Impending Evil to enforce them thereunto, most Religiously kept many Days of
Solemn Prayer close after one another, to seek God for his Church in General,
and our King and Parliament (then sitting) and Nation in Particular. And lo
what followed? God graciously inclined a ready Ear, and within a few Days
amazingly Surprised and Rescued us both by a Wonderful Discovery of a
Diabolical Assassination designed against the Life of our Sovereign, and
thereby to Overthrow the Protestant Interest and Religion throughout Europe.

God has not (says the Psalmist) despised nor abhorred the afflictions of the
afflicted; neither has he did his face from him. But when he cried unto him,
he heard, Psalm. 22. 23.

And indeed the General Time of God's delivering his People, is, when Nil nisi
Vota supersunt, when they have even nothing left on their part but Prayer to
help them. For in the

Last Place, He commonly comes with Salvation, when all Earthly Helps fail
them, and they can have no Dependence on an Arm of Flesh, but are reduced to
the very brink of destruction. When he sees their power is gone, and there is
none left [to succor them]; then will the Lord judge his people; [i. e. Plead
their Cause, Protect and Save them]; Deuteronomy. 32. 36. So 2 Chronicles. 20. 12, etc.

When the Church is brought as near to Ruin, as a Lamb sticking between the
Teeth of a Lion, is near to being Devoured; or a Bird fallen into the Net, is
near catching; or a Brand is to burning, when thrown into the Fire; even then
does God step in, and take the Prey out of the Teeth, and break the Net of the
Fowler, and snatch his Church out of the fire, Psalm. 124. 6, 7. Zach. 3. 2. Am.
4. 11. The Ship is first full of Waves; and Lazarus dead and buried; the Three
Children actually thrown into the Fiery Furnace; and Daniel gotten into the
Lions Den, before the Lord appears for their Salvation, Matthew. 8. 24. Dan. 3.
14. Chapter 6. 22. God rescueth his Servants from the very ruins of death,
Ezekiel. 37. 7, 10, 11. And in Psalm. 102. The Church professed her bones to be
burnt up like an hearth, her belly cleaved to the dust, she was as a forsaken
Pelican, and destitute when God came to show Regard unto her, where the Hebrew
word (...) translated Destitute, signifies either the Shrub of a Broken Tree,
or the Heath that grows in the Barren Wilderness, and such was God's Church
then. When the City of Leyden was so long and strictly Besieged by the Duke of
Alva, that they were forced for their Sustenance to search the Dunghils, and
boil old Leather, etc. and were come to such a Desperate Extremity, that the
Duke began in the Language of Blasphemy to Threaten and Insult over them, That
very Night the Lord turned the Winds, and the Tide swelled, and the Waters came
in and Forced him to Raise the Siege. Peter lay fettered in Prison, and the
next Morning was to be Executed; and yet God by an Angel preserved him. The
Time that God ordinarily chooses to show himself their Savior, is, when the
State of his People looks to be come to such an Irrecoverable Ruin, as that
they must of necessity perish if he do not save them. The Almighty's
Deliverance often comes in the most Unlikely Time. When Sense is at a loss, and
Carnal Reason is puzzled: In the Mount he is seen; When the Knife is lifting
Cum duplicantur Lateres venit Deuteronomy.
at the Throat; when all Hope is cut off; Then (...), God's Sovereign Arm
appears beyond all hope or thought, Is. 33. 7, 8, 9.

And so we come in the IIId Place, to Consider of the Ways, or Manner how God
is wont to deliver his Church and Servants.

And truly if we trace the Footsteps of the Most High in the Work of Execution
on his Enemies, and of Salvation toward his People, we shall be forced to say
as in Psalm. 77. 9. That his way has been in the Sea, and his paths in the Is
64. 1. Cant. 2. 8. Neh. 1. 3.
great waters, and his footsteps were not known. In leading on his people like
a flock, he has traveled in the greatness of his strength, sometimes removing
Mountains out of their way, making them flow down at his presence; and
sometimes skipping over them; and sometimes his way has been in the whirlwind,
and in the great storm. In short, He has ever acted in this Matter in Ways and
Manner most Glorious to, and Expressive of his Great Name, most Advantageous
and Comfortable to his own Servants, and fullest of Shame and Confusion to his
Enemies.

And First, One way he takes to Rescue his Servants, is, By laying Restraints,
and causing sudden Changes on the Spirits of their Adversaries. Thus it was in
Jacob's Cause, with respect to his Enraged Brother. Esau's Malice was stirred,
and his Power great enough to cut off Jacob with all appertaining to him; but
upon Jacob's Prayer to God for his appearing on his behalf, Lo! Quantum Mutatus
-- God's Awing Hand seized on him, and so effectually checked his Bloody
Intention, that when he met his Brother, he could not so much as give him an
Ill word. But Jacob saw his face as if he had seen the face of God. So well was
Esau (seemingly at least) pleased with him; Genesis, Chapters 32 and 33. Thus
God held in Israel's Envious Neighbors from Attempting the least Hurt against
them at a Time when they might easily have Ruined them. At other Times they
were watchful enough for all Advantages to Invade their Land, being spitefully
Set against them; But now, when, on God's Command, the People, and all the
Males, leave their Habitations to go to Worship at Jerusalem, they do not once
Offer to make any Inroads into their Country, when there was Nothing in second
Causes to hinder them. So Readiness Revengeful Spirit against David, which had all
the Force of Interest to Support it, suffers such a wonderful and sudden
Change, that of a Persecutor he becomes a Justifier of David, Acknowledging
David's Innocence, and his own Guilt. 1 Samuel 24. 17. etc. And in like wonderful
manner was Jehosophat rescued from Destruction; for when the Enemies in Battle
had espied him, they presently compassed him about, so as he had no likely way
of Escaping, but God (says the Text) moved them to depart from him. 2 Chronicles.
18. 30, etc.

God sometimes (again) Preserves his Endangered People, By Infatuating or
Defeating the Counsels of their Foes. Hence Enemies often Fail in their
Mischievous Designs, because they act like very Fools in the Management of
them. So Herod in Designing the Death of our Savior [his Feared Competitor in
the Kingdom] went a very simple way to work [though he was naturally a Else our
Savior had not called him Fox.
Crafty Person]; for instead of sending some of his own Tried Friends or
Servants, or going himself in Person to find him out, and cut him off, he
commits the whole Affair to such as were mere Strangers to him, and of whose
Trustiness he could not have the least Assurance. And as much Infatuated were
the Egyptians in Entering into the Red Sea after the Israelites to Destroy them
there, when they saw the Israelites God opening it miraculously for the
Rescuing his said People from them. So the Divine Oracles tell us, How for the
saving of his People from Oppressors, he can make Princes fools, and the wise
Counselors of Persecuting Princes to become brutish, Isa. 19. 11, 12, 20. And
as in Job 12. 16, 17. He leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the
Judges fools. And it is not seldom that he causes the wisdom of the wise to
perish, Is. 29. 14. and his Enemies to fall by their own Theodoret. Hist. l 3.
c. 20.
Counsel; as Julian did before the Persians, by Advising the Burning of his
Ships, the better to Provoke the Valor of his Soldiers.

Again, as by Infatuating of their Counsel, so likewise by Defeating of Good
Counsel, he Preserves his Maliced Servants from the Rage of their Cruel Foes.
An Instance of this we have in Absalom, who Consulting with his Great Ministers
how to Act in the Pursuit of David so as to make sure of him, had his Eyes held
from Discerning the best Counsel given him by Ahitophel, which would certainly
have answered his Design in the Ruining his Excellent Father the King; and so
Followed the worst Advice to his own Overthrow, and his Father's Escape.

One while he keeps his People safe from the Designed Ruin by Causing Timely
Discoveries of their Enemies Plots against them. Thus Israel was Preserved from
a Mighty Enemy by their having Disclosed to them the Secret Counsels of the
King of Syria, that was Preparing Mischief against them, 2 Kings 6. 10. And
Paul's Life was Secured by the Discovery of a Conspiracy against it, Acts 23.
14, etc. So the Powder Treason was happily Put by through a Strange Discovery
in the very Nick of Time, when the Match and the Powder had well nigh Met. So
our Present Sovereign, and these Nations with him, had as Wonderful a
Deliverance from the Intended Hellish Assassination two Years ago, by making
some of its Abettors to become its Detecters in the very Juncture of Time, when
the Miscreants were full ready to Give the Accursed Blow.

Another while he Protects his Cause and People by Turning their Enemies Plots
and Attempts against Themselves, and to the Advantage of his Church, Snaring
the Wicked in the Work of their own Hands, and taking them i^ their own
Craftiness, Job 5. 12, 13. Psalm. 9. 15, 16. So Haman's Conspiracy against the
Jews, and Daniel's Enemies Plots against him Rui^^d themselves only, but turned
to the Good of these whom they were Intended to Destroy, Esth. 8. 6, 7. Pharaoh
Feared Israel would Grow too Mighty, and therefore Oppressed them to Hi^der
their Increase; but this made them both Stronger, and More Numerous. Thus
Bloody Max^ntius, to Destroy Pious Constantine and his Army, Made a False
Bridge over Tiber, where Constantine was to Pass; But in his Hasty Flight,
Forgetting his own Treachery, and (...) Eusebius. Pamphil. Ecclesiastic. Histor.
l. 9. c. 9. p. 358, 359. Edit. Paris. 1659.
Passing Th^^ Way, was Himself with his Soldiers Drowned by the same Mea^^ In
like manner Charles the Fis^ his D^signing the Utter Ruin of the Protestant
Party in German, by Disinheriting the Duke of Sa^ny, and Keeping the Landgrave
of Hesse in Perpetual Imprisonment, was the Very Occasion of the Confederacy of
Smalcald, which almost Drove Charles out of Germany, and Established the
Protestant Party in the Liberty of their Religi^ Thus the Methods Used by the
Two Late Kings and their Ministers, to Settle Popery and Sla^^ in these
Kingdoms, has by God's Ove^ Ruling Hand been a Means of both Freeing Us from
the said Fearful Evils, with the Contrivers of them, and of Establishing to us
also our True Religion, Rites, and Liberties, with Greater Advantages than
before.

So has the Church's Preservation from Time Judges 14. 14.
to Time been a Good Interpretation to Sampson's Riddle, Out of the Eater came
forth Meat, and out of the Strong came forth Sweetness. It Is Bloody Foes
Desperate Attempts against it have in the Issue been no more Pernicious unto
it, than His was to Phereus Jason, when he Run at him with his Sword, who
instead of Killing him, as he hoped, only Opened an Incurable Impostume, and
Thereby Saved his Life.

Again, It pleases God sometimes to Step in between his Church and Danger, by
Diverting the Enemies through some or other Urgent Emergency. When Saul in the
Pursuit of David had at last Lodged him in a Place whence he could not Escape,
and was just ready to Fail on him; Lo! a Messenger comes to him all in have to
Call him off to Defend his Country against the Philistines, who had just then
Invaded it; 1 Samuel 23. And Sennacherib was Taken off from Hezekiah and his
People in the same Manner, 2 Kings 19.

So Vile Julian being Resolved to Cut off all Gr^g. ^at. Orat. 4. in Julian.
the Christians, was Compelled to Go first against the Persians, by whom the
was Quite Overthrown. And This Way did God Stop Charles the Fifth from
Persecuting the Protestants, even by the Turks. Breaking into Hungary. Thus the
Overruling Hand of God sometimes Orders the Wicked to be a Ransom for the
Right^ous, Prove. 21. 18. The Lord will Give Men for them, and People for their
Price, Isa. 43. 3, 4. Prove. 11. 8.

At Other Times, he Quells the Rage of his Enemies by Striking them with
Amazing Terrors, and Confounding them with Pannick Fears. So he Saved his
People of Old once from the Syrians, by Scaring and Scattering them on an Empty
Sound, 2 Kings 7. 6. And again from the Midianites, whose Vast Army a Poor
Dream of one of their own Number so Affrighted, and whose Terror the Pitiful
Noise of Broken Potsherds so Aggravated, that they Turned their Swords against
one another, Judge. 7. 1, 3. And Remarkable to this Purpose is the Vengeance His
Death was Precationis Opus, non Morbi, says Socr. Schol l. 1. c. 15. Cambd.
Elis.
God Took on that Sore Plague of the Church, Arius; for Causing a Sudden
Consternation of Mind to Seize him, he went a-side to Ease Nature, but Died
Miserably by Emptying out his Bowels. A like Terror and Fear Overthrew the
Germans in their War against the Hussites of Bohemia; and the Spaniards at
Zutphen in the Low Countries, Anno 1586. Under the Conduct of Germanus here in
Britain, who Arch. Usser. de Britan. Eccles. Primoid.
Came over from France to Subdue the Pelagian Heresy (then Prevailing amongst
us) against a Mighty Army of Saxons and Picts, the Britains Prevailed only by
the three Times Pronouncing the word Hallelujah: Which Voice Ecchoing and
Redoubling from the Acclamation of his Followers among the Mountains, nigh to
which the Enemies had Encamped, Frighted them, and Won the Conquest; upon which
it was Called Victoria Hallelujatica. And how likewise did the Spirits of the
Late King, and his Formidable Army, Sink, and their Hearts Melt away like
Grasshoppers before the Su^, according to the Expressions in Nah. 2. 10. Chap.
3. v. 17.

Further, Sometimes God's Servants are Preserved by the Lord's sending a Spirit
of Division among their Enemies that Sets them one against another. Thus
oftentimes of Old Israel was Preserved from their Malicious Enemies by God's
making their Enemies [like those terrigenae fratres] to Fall foul upon one
another, 2 Chronicles. 20. 22. 1 Samuel 14. 20. So Charles the Fifth, and Francis the
French King, after a Mutual Agreement to Root out Lutheranism, Fell together by
the Ears, by which Means the Church Got some Halcyon Days. And I find an
Historian making it his Observation, That the Little Religious City of Geneva
had certainly been Ruined long since, had it not been Environed by so very Many
Enemies.

Again, One while he Inspires some of his own Servants with a Preternatural
Courage for the Confounding and Overthrowing their Enemies. As Great Numbers of
them could not Stand before Jephthah, Sampson, etc. Zach. 4. 7. Not by Power,
or by Might, but by my Spirit, says the Lord. And was not our Present
Sovereign's Unexampled Bold Attempt, and Glorious Success at the Boyn, a Late
Instance in this Kind?

Another while, he Imploys the Glorious Angels above to Deliver Mittis
Unigenitum, immittis Spiritum, and ne quid vacet in coelestibus ab opere
sollicitudinis, Angelos mittis in Ministerium. Bern.
his People. So in Daniel's, Elisha's, Peter's, Hezekiah, and his Peoples
Wonderful Preservation, 2 King's 6. Chron. 32.

Sometimes, he Honors the Unlikeliest of Means and Contemptibliest of
Creatures both from Above and Below with a Share in this Great Work.

From Above; Thus he calls forth the Posse Comitatus Coeli Aerii to Defend his
People. As the Stars are Commissioned to Fight against Sisera, and Discomfit
the Philistines; those Heavenly Bodies by their Influences Raising Winds,
Thunders and Lightening, for the Scattering and Destroying the Power of the
Enemy, Judge. 5. 20. 1 S^^^. 7. 10. So Hailstones from Heaven Assist Joshua and
Israel against the Five Kings of the Amorites; the Stones killing more than did
the Sword, Josh. 10. 11. Remarkable (and Worthy the Notice of our Socinians) is
that Unusual End which the Heretic Olympius Came to, being Smitten with Fiery
Darts from Heaven, after having Vented his Blasphemy against the Trinity. A For
which the Poet cries out,
Sudden and Mighty Wind from Heaven Drove back on their own O nimium Dilecte
Dco, cui militat Ether,
Heads the Showers of Arrows, which Eugenius the Tyrant's Soldiers Et conjurati
veniunt ad classica Venti.
Shot against the Christians Claud.
under the Good Emperor Theodosius. No less did the Divine Arm Appear for Us in
this kind in the Time of the Spanish Invasion, at what time the Fire, Wind and
Water so Victoriously Assisted us against the Enemies, that the same Furnished
their General at his Return (after their Defeat) with this Excuse, That his
Master sent him not to Combat with Elements, but with Men. And in like manner
the Winds alone strangely Preserved our Coasts and Ships some Years since, when
the French Came on us e^re we were Prepared for them; when the said Element
first kept them off till we were Ready for them, and then Helped us further in
giving them a M^morable Overthrow. From Below also; as

How unlikely a Thing was it that Gideon the least of the Family with only
three hundred most Their taking Water with their Hands being a Nat^ral ^ign of
F^ar, as Josephus says.
Timorous Fellows without ever striking a Stroke, with mere Lamps, Pitchers,
and Trumpets in their Hands, taking their Posts, Compassing in the Enemy,
Blowing with their Trumpets, and Crying out, The Sword of the Lord, and of
Gideon, should Rout and Destroy an Invincible Army, Judges 17. What was a
Shepherd to Bring Israel out of Egypt? What a Shepherd's Boy with a Sling and
Stone in it to Overthrow Goliath, who Defied Whole Armies?

What shall we say to the Most Despicable Insects, and Petty Animals, their
Listing themselves too as Auxiliaries in the Church's Cause? As when Frogs,
Flies, Locusts, and Water Confound at first, and at last Overthrow Oppressing
Pharaoh and his huge Army?

Also, we find the Immediate Hand of God sometimes suddenly Arresting, and
Amazingly Disabling the Instruments of Ruin from Effecting their Mischief.
Thus, if Jeroboam Attempts to lay hold on God's Prophet, he shall not be able
to Accomplish it through the Withering of his Hand, 1 Kings 13. So was Famous
Basil Rescued from Banishment by the Almighty's Striking the Right Hand of the
Emperor Valens with such Sore Trembling, when he should have Signed his
Sentence of Banishment, That nullu^^ Hist. Tripart.
apicem complere potuit; he was not able to Write one Letter of his own Name.
Thus in Queen Marry's Days, one Justin Gilford going up Stairs to Mistress
Roberts's Chamber to Compel her to go to Mass, was Surprizingly Seized and
Stopped with a Violent Fit of the Gout, that Tormented him so sorely, as Extorted
from him an Oath never to Trouble her more. Once again, and I will add but this
more, viz.

Lastly, He will sometimes Change and Alter the very Course of Nature, rather
than suffer his Servants to Perish. Thus, the Fire shall not be able to Burn,
(witness the Three Children) nor the Water to Drown, (as in Jonah's Case, who
was kept Alive, by being buried Alive).

God be so Chary of his People, that he will even Work Wonders but he will save
them amidst, and from the greatest Straits and Dangers; then we may Infer them
to be the most Excellent Ones of the Earth. If he will Rebuke the Greatest of
Kings^ for their sakes, and give People for their Price and Ransom, surely
they ought to be well Esteemed of in their Places; though (alas) the envious
purblind World will see no Beauty or Comeliness in them, for which they should
be Desired.

Again, has God such a Peculiar Regard to, and Care for his Church, and the
Members of it, in the Greatest of Calamities that may come upon the Earth, then
None can Truly Serve the Lord for Naught, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Job 1. 9, 10. The
Almighty's Power Protects well here, and his Infinite Grace Rewards well
hereafter All that diligently seek and serve him.

Furthermore, Let all Persons whatever that Oppose themselves to, and are
carrying on any Designs against God's Church and Servants, take Gamaliel's
Counsel, Refrain from Opposing the same; for they cannot be overthrown; and in
fighting against them, they fight even against God, Acts 5. 38. Know ye it for
your good, oh, Persecuting Malignants of all sorts, That though God's Flock be
but a little One, and his holiest Servants like the Pauperes Lugdunenses, the
poor Folk of Lions, seem a Weak and Despicable Body, yet they will prove a
burdensome Stone, and a Cup of Poison to their Enemies. You will not only lose
your Labor in Fighting against them, but be guilty of Conspiring against your
own Souls, Zach. 12. 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 37. 12, 13. Even the Mighty Behemoths and
Levi^thans, that Prey on Sea and Land; the Insatiable Potentates of the Earth
shall be Meat for God's People, Psalm 74. 14. Behold, All that Devour my People
shall be Devoured; All that Spoil them shall be a Spoil; and All that Prey on
them, I will give for a Prey, Jer. 30. 16. Though the Devices in your Hearts be
never so many, Crafty, or [Conceited by] Strong, yet the Counsel of the Lord
that only shall stand, Prove. 19. 21. And there is no Wisdom, nor Understanding,
nor Counsel against him; and therefore though you take Council together, it
shall Come to Naught; though ye speak the word, it shall not stand; for God is
with his Servants, Prove. 21. 30. Isa. 8. 10. Believe it in Time, That This is
the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, That no Weapon Formed against them
shall Prosper, Isa. 54. 17. God has Appointed to them Salvation for Walls and
Bulwarks, Isa. 26. 1. So that when Salvation it self can be Destroyed, the^ may
you who are Opposers of God's Ways hope for a Successful Issue of your
Undertakings. Repent you in Time of your Desperate Folly, and Submit your
selves to Christ's Scepter, for he will Reign till he has made all his Enemi^^
his Footstool.

Further, Here is Strong Consolation and Encouragement to God's Servants under
Troubles and Pressures, or in Prospect of such. They have no Ground of Fear or
Desponding at all. The very Gates of Hell [all the Power and Policy of the
Devil and his Angels] shall never Prevail to the Ruining of but one of the
Living Members of Christ's Body. The Epiph^nema of Moses unto them, in his
Blessing of Israel [Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto Deuteronomy. 33: 29.
Thee, O People, saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy Help, and the Sword of
thy Excellency,] may be Applied to the whole Church, and every sound Member
thereof, in all Times and Ages of the World. O you greatly in Favor with the
Lord, whose Hearts and Ways are right before him; know you that your
Covenant-God has Engaged to be your Strength in time of Trouble, and Bound
himself to be with you in the Water, and the Fire, and to keep you that nothing
really Hurt or Worst you. Though Enemies and Dangers, Afflictions and Troubles
of Various sorts should come thick on the Neck of one another; though one Deep
call to another, and there be no Visible. Humane Help Left, yet you may
Cheerfully Trust in the Lord, and Safely Stay your selves on your God. Yea, be
Encouraged to Wait on him, if happly he Delay for some time. The hour and power
of Darkness must have its Time. The Waves may Beat the Ship, and Fill it too,
and yet Jesus will awake soon enough to Still the Tempest. God's Help comes
often in Extremity. In Zach. 4. 2. The Candlesick of the Church has seven Pipes
and seven Lamps, signifying God's having seven Pipes to Convey Succor and
Mercy to his Church, and seven Lamps whereby to Discern its Straits, i. e. his
Providence for their help, is as Vas^ as his Omniscience and Knowledge of their
Needs.

Again, As the Text and Doctrines tell us, That God takes a time to Deliver his
Church in General from Distressing Troubles and Dangers: So this Day witnesses
that he has taken his Time to Deliver Us in Particular from Manifold felt, and
Many More Feared Sore Straits and Calamities, and therefore Bespeaks our
Blessing, Praising, and Honoring of Him.

And this brings me to the Third and Principal Proposition, or Doctrinal
Conclusion in our Text.

That it is the Duty of Delivered Kingdoms or Persons, to Glorify God their
Deliverer.

In speaking to This, I shall first Explain this Great Duty of Glorifying God:
And Secondly, Enforce it. And Thirdly, Apply it.

Now, the Word in the Original for Glo^fying, is (...) (in Pihel, where Dagesh
^^creases the Signification) thou shall very gre^^ Honor me; from (...) (in
Kal) signifying to be Weighty and Honored. And the Hebr^^ Noun, (...)
answers to the Greek, (...) ^ the Hebrew Verb does to the Greek, (...) which
is rendered by three Words Glorifico, honorifico, and clarifico.

Glorificare, honorificare, and clarificare, tria quidem verba, sed res una,
quod Graece dictatur, (...). Aug. I. cont. sem Arian. c. 23.

Apud Graecos, (...), apud Hebraeos, (...) unum verbum ^^ sed nos pro Lat.
Ling. proprietate Honorem posuimus. Hier^n. ^^ Malach. c. 1. p. 291.


aimin^ at one and the same thing. And in the Fi^^ place, it signifies to Think
and Esteem; and ^^ the next, to Celebrate, render Illustrious, and ^ Honor and
Reverence unto.

Sometimes it is Attributed to God; Thus, he Glorified Christ in his Humane
Nature, wh^^ Subjecting all his Enemies under his feet; he Raised him from the
Grave, and took him ^^ into Heaven, Placing him at his Right Han^, and thereby
Manifesting him to be His S^^, and the Only Mediator and Savior of the World?
So likewise does he Confer Honor and Glory on Us; enriching us with Gi^^^ and
Graces various ways; dignifying us with Grace Here, and Glory Hereafter, Psalm.
149. 4. Romans 8. 30.

Otherwise it is Attributed to Men, who are said, and Required to Glorify God,
as in our Text with other places. And here know, That God is Glorified by Men
two Ways, Actionly and Passively. The Latter Way God gets Glory to Himself by
an Infinitely-Wise Overruling All, even the very Worst Actions and Rebellious
Ways of Men, and Making them Subservient to His Own Holy Ends and Counsels; and
so by Working Good out of Evil, sets forth the Glory of his Great Power and
Wisdom. As a Physician's Skill is discovered and honored by Conquering the
Malignity of a ^ost desperate Disease. In this Passive Sense, Men are but an
Occasion of God's being Glorified.

But then in the Former Way God is Glorified Actively by Men, When they Chiefly
Intend and Aim at His Glory in the Things they do, and the Course of Life they
lead. When the Honoring and Pleasing of God, does take up the Greatest and
Best Part of their Thoughts, Cares, and Endeavors in All their Duties and
Concerns with both God and Men.

Here Note, That God has not ever the more real Glory by any thing we can Do
for him, or Yield unto him: Nor can he Want any thing from his Creatures who
Receive their All from Him. (...), Non ut Naz. in Orat. The Honor given God is
not reip^a, vere, and (...); but Testimonio and Agnitione, and ita solum, (...).
gloriae aliquid accedat Deo. We Glorify him not by Adding unto him, but by
Receiving from him, and his Glorious Perfections. In our Discharge of this
Duty, there is not the ^ast Accession made to either God's Greatness or
Happiness. But only an Acknowledging, Loving, and Declaring him as he is.
Glorifying of God, is but the Giving God his Own, viz. The Reverence of the
Inward and Outward Man, according to that Worth and Weight of Excellency that
is in the Divine Majesty. We are to Bring Honor to his Great Name, or Ma^^ it
Glorious by Acknowledging Him with o^^ Hearts Inwardly, and with our Words and
D^^ Outwardly, to be such an one as he has ^^vealed himself, that so our
selves and other may thereby Become truly Wise, and Good and Happy. For he will
be Honored in o^^ Minds, by our Tongues, and in our Way an^ Course of Life.
But to be more Particular and Express, in order to make it still more Plain Know

I. We are to Glorify God in our Hearts b^ Entertaining such Conceptions and
Estimation o^ Him, and of his Works and Word, and When ever Relates to him, as
are Suitable to his Excellent Majesty, and Infinite Perfections. We must not
Entertain any Low, Mean, Unequ^^ Thoughts of so Glorious a Being. But ever
Conceive of him according to his Peerless Eminence as being Superlative in
Power, Knowledge, and Goodness, and so to be Feared, Loved, and Trusted above
All. Yield him therefore that Internal Reverence and Practical Est^^ that is
Becoming him, who is the End of the whole Creation, and the Pleasing of whose
Wa^ ye are Chiefly to Intend in All that ye A^^ Have, and Do. Also be seriously
Affected with the Agreeable Awful Apprehersions of such an ^^ comprehensible
Being. And see that as All your Thoughts and Apprehensions of his Wonderful
Perfections be Worthy of them, so that they be Lively and Influential, Working
up All the Counsels, Affections, and Purposes of the Heart to an Agreeableness
to the said Perfections.

So Behold, Believe, Consider, and Embrace the Divine Excellencies, as they may
have a Proper, and Peculiar, and Distinct Effect [suitable to every one of
them] upon the Heart and Spirit. Let a Good Image of God's Glorious Attributes
be so Received and Entertained in your Hearts, as that you may Answer the same
with suitable Affections. Let God's Wonderful Excellencies be Imprinted within
you. As v. g. So Conceive of his Goodness as to Enkindle in you a Superlative
Love unto him, and Cheerful Resolution for his Service, and to Prevent
Distrustfulness of his Providence. Let the Apprehensions of his Greatness
Impress on you an Holy Fear of Him, and Steady Confidence in Him according to
the Tenor of His Covenant and Promises. Let the Thoughts of his Omniscience and
Wisdom be such as to beget a Cheerful Resting and Entire Acquiescence in His
Determinations and Disposals. Let the Consideration of His Justice Keep you
from Transgressions against His Law, and Comfort you in your Way of Piety, and
Support you against the Unjust Dealings of the Wicked. So Behold His Holiness
as to Admire and Imitate it. And let the Apprehensions of His Truth Fix and
Quicken you for an Heavenly Life, because God's Commands are Serious, and His
Threatenings and Promises Real and True. In short, God is to be Honored in our
Minds, by such Admiring Thoughts of him, as may Raise and Cherish such
Dispositions of Mind, as may Bear a Due Proportion to the Name of God in All
his Perfections, Relations, and Works; and may Well Become Us as His Creatures,
Subjects, Lovers, and Beneficiaries, who Owe Our All unto Him.

II God is Honored with the Tongue, when He is Praised, and Blessed by it. Our
Lips must both Benedicere and Laudare, Praise and Magnify God upon the Account
of his Admirable Perfections, and Bless and Thank Him for his Gracious Goodness
and Benefits; and Perform Both with a lively Sense of His Goodness and
Excellency Impressed on our Hearts. We are to speak forth the Glory of His Name,
by Declaring and Extolling His Infinite Greatness, Goodness, and Felicity. And
This God Accepts as One Way of Glorifying him. In the End of our Psalm, He that
Offers Praise Glorifieth me. And so agreeably, (...), etc.
Chrysostom. on our Text, Expresses himself thus, God calls not for our Honoring
him, as standing in need of Glory from us; for how should he need it, who is
Himself the God of Glory? But he Intends That we by Hymns of Thanksgiving
should Commemorate his Kindness.

So Basil Interprets the Glorifying of God to mean (...) Basil. de Spir. S. c.
23. l. 2. p. 200.
(...), our Relating his Wonderful Works in the best Manner we are able. And
Theodoret Expounds it, by (...); as Theophilact does, by (...), by singing
Hymns to God, and giving Thanks unto him. Thus we are taught to Extol God with
our Tongues, Psalm. 66. 17. And Praise the Name of God with a Song, and Magnify
him with Thanksgiving, Psalm. 69. 30. Thus the Prophet in Psalm. 107. 8. Wishes
men to Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and Declare his Wonders to the
Children of Men. And let the Redeemed of the Lord say, That his Mercy Endures
for ever, Verse 2. Great is the Lord, and Greatly to be Praised, and his
Greatness is Unsearchable. One Generation shall Praise his Works to Another,
and Declare his Mighty Acts, Psalm. 145. 3, etc. Who can say, What Great Praise
and Blessing That Adorable Goodness and Mercy does Deserve which Runs
throughout the Whole World, and is the Life, and Hope, and Happiness of them
that Fear God? Oh, how Great is his Goodness to them that Fear him! Psalm. 31.
10. And therefore, How Great should be the Acknowledgments made him? Oh, Praise
the Lord therefore in the Congregation of the Saints: Let Israel Rejoice in him
that Made him: Let the Children of Zion be Joyful in their King: Let the Saints
be Joyful in Glory: Let the High Praises of God be in their Mouths, Psalm. 149.
1, 2, 5, 6.

III. We must Glorify God in Nec Verbo tantum vel Ling^d, sed Opere, and
Veritate exhibeamus nos Gratos ei, qui Graciarum Actionem magis quam Dictionem
a nobis exigit, gratiarum Dominus Deus noster. Born. contr. Ingratid. p. 377.
our Way and Course of Life. And that is Done, When we so Order our Ways, as to
show our selves in our Places Like unto God. That Devotedness to the Most High
may Appear in our Whole Conversation; and our Lives may Represent God's
Glorious Perfections. We Ought to live after so Heavenly and Excellent a
Manner, as to Hold forth the Divine Virtues, [1 Pet. 2. 9.] and Manifest the
Impressions that God's Attributes have Made on our Hearts; as, for Instance,
Our Ways should Declare the Lord's Infinite Knowledge by Great Circumspection
in our Walking; and Hold forth his Majesty's Transcendent Greatness by
Awfulness before Him, and Humble Tr^^^ in Him; and Magnify His Holiness by
Purity and Strictness; and Show forth His Goodness by Superlative Love unto
him. But, more Particularly, We are to Honor God in our Course of Life.

1. By Making His Glory our Chief Aim in Al^ that we Do, 1 Cor. 10. 31. In All
our Purposes and Enterprises we must so Behave our selves, as Men may See That
No Carnal End^ or Interests are our Ends or Governing Principles. But that
God's Honor is More unto us than the Whole World; and that His Interest in All
Things, and above All Things, is Regarded by us; and That the Pleasing of Him
by Living to His Glory, is the Principal Design and Main Scop^ of All our
Concerns and Affairs, and the Management of them.

2. We must Glorify God in our Lives, by Conforming and Submitting Our Wills to
God's Will, both His Regulating Will of Precept, and Disposing Will of
Providence.

As it is the Great Honor of a Prince, that his Subjects Duly Observe his Laws,
and Live (...) Good Subjection to their Sovereign; so it is an Honoring of our
God, for Us His Creatures to Move after our Creator's Will, and Regulate all
our Concerns and Actions by His Royal Si juxta ^irtutis Normam conversamur,
Glorificatur Deus ab his qui nos co^spiciunt. E^thymius ad cap. 6. Mat.
La^^^. When Nothing Contents us, though never so Grateful to Flesh and Blood,
but what our M^ker's Word and Will Allows us; and when we Refuse Obedience to
no Branch of Duty, though most Difficult, if known to be Commanded; but
stadiously Frame all our Doings by Gospel Rules. When (I say) we seek such a
Compliance of our Wills with the Will of God, we Own His Sov^reign Authority,
and Honor His Punishing and Rewarding Justice, and Walk (as it is Enjoined us)
Worthy of him unto all Pleasing.

So again, To be Willing to be at God's Finding, and Contented with What He An
Heathen's Son could say to his Earthly Father, Tibi, Pater, me Dedo; quidvis
Oneris impone, Impera: I Give my self to Thee, O my Father, Enjoin What thou will, I will Do it; Lay on what thou please, I will Bear it.
Chooses for us; to Prefer His Interest and Glory to Our own Ease and Outward
Satisfaction; to Desire rather to have our Lives, Friends, Trials, and Comforts
at His Disposal, than Our own, as Believing His Will to be always Good and
Infinite Love it Self, and therefore Chooses ever what is Best, is Another
Branch of this Excellent Duty of Glorifying God Contained in Our Will's
Conformity to God's Will. We Give Glory to God by a Sincere Submission both to
His Law and Providence (to his Will Discovered in both of these).

3. By Living Holy Thankfulness to God our Savior and Benefactor. And This is
done, (1.) By Cheerful Yielding and Conscerating our Whole Man, Body (...)
Chrysoft. in Psalm. 114.
and Soul to His Excellent Service. By Renouncing All other Lords and Masters,
with their Contrary Interests and Services, and Impropriating our Selves to
God's Holy Use alone. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Ye are not your own; therefore Glorify
God in your Body; and in your Spirit, which are God's. We being Wholly and
Solely of and from God, and from nothing else, should Honor Him by being
Wholly and Solely at His Beck and Command, and f^^ nothing else. All our Parts
and Powers should be Piously Employed, and Exercised only in Ways of Purity.
(2.) By Converting and Improving All the Blessings also, which our Bountiful
Delivering God has Bestowed on us, for the Furthering the Service of his Holy
Name. As God gives us Leave to Draw out the Sweetness and Help of Deliverances,
and other Mercies, for (...) own Comfort and Refreshment: So His Chief^^^ End
in them all, is, That He may have the Honor and Glory of them, by their
Improveme^^ to His Service. Not Attending to the Lord's Goodness and Aim in our
Enjoyments, but Valuing and Using Outward Mercies of Peace, Safety, Estate,
Friends, etc. only as Provision for, and to the Service of the Flesh, and the
Satisfaction of Sensual and Inordinate Desires, is wretchedly to Pervert the
Divine Bounty, and to Affront and Dishonor God with His own Gifts. But Looking
on, and Esteeming His Favors as Necessary Provision for our Duty in the Way to
Heaven, and Enjoying and Using them as Helps in the Serving of God, and Saving
our Souls, is to Answer the End of the Bounteous Author, and truly to Glorify
him by them. (3.) By Paying or Living up to the Religious Vows that we m^^^ in
our Times of Straits and Dangers. In the Ver. preceding our Text, Offer unto
God Thanksgiving, and Pay thy Vows unto the most High, Job 22. 27. Thou shall
make thy Prayer unto him, [in evil-days] and he shall Hear thee, and th^^ shall
Pay thy Vows. When under Pressing Fears we Invoke God, we are apt to Engage our
Selves in a more than Ordinary Solemn Manner to Thankfulness, if God will
Appear for us; Wherefore as the Blessing Received on such Vows and Invocation
do strongly Oblige us to Pay what we so Solemnly Promised: so a right Payment
of the Same is a right Thank-Offering and Expressive of God's Praises and
Honor. Thus Thought and Acted Holy David, Psalm. 56. 12, 13. Thy Vows are upon
me, O God; I will Render Praises unto Thee; for thou have Delivered my Soul
from Death. And Psalm. 66. 11, 12, etc. Thou Broughtest us into the Net; Thou
laidst Affliction upon our Lions; thou causedst men to Ride over our Heads; We
went through Water, and through Fire, (e'n the very Case of these Kingdoms
the other Day) but thou broughtst us out into a Wealthy Place; [i. e. into a
State of Liberty and Prosperity] therefore I will go into thy House with
Burnt-Off^rrings, I will Pay thee my Vows, which my Lips have Uttered, and my
Mouth has Spoken, when I was in Trouble. (4.) By Frequent Due Attendance on
All the Parts of God's Worship, and Performance of Religious Duties, and all
Devotional Work unto Him in a truly Reverent and Spiritual Manner. The Lord
putting an End to the Jewish Sacrifices, by which He was Honored of Old,
Instituted in their stead the Attending on His Holy Ordinances, Praying,
Preaching, Hearing, Sacraments, as Spiritual Sacrifices, Acceptable through
Christ, to be in the Christian Church Acknowledgments of Our Homage unto Him.
So the Holy Spirit tells us, That the Honor Due to God's Name cannot be All
Paid Him without Worshipping the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, [His Glorious
Sanctuary the Place of His Holy Ordinances and Worship] Psalm. 29. 2. Th^^ Holy
David Knew and Did his Duty, in Psalm 116. beginning, Having Received a Great
Deliverance from God, he Professed, That ^e would thenceforth Devote himself to
the Worship and Service of God, Ver. 9. I will Walk before the Lord in the Land
of the Living; for so much the Phrase of Walking before the Lord does Import.

4. We must Honor God with our Lives, By being Zealously Active for His
Interest, and the Cause of Christianity in the World. As the Tree is made for
Fruit, so are Non solum Nobis Nati aut Renati s^mus.
We Created, Redeemed, and Sanctified for Doing Good in serving our Generation
according to the Will of God, our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, Acts 13.
36. Our Christianity, which is our Absolute Devotedness to God in Christ,
Bespeaks our Honoring of God in Furthering the Good and Welfare of Others, as
the Chief Trade and Business we Live for. In Giving up our Names to Christ, we
Disclaim being any more our own, and are Listed for the Public Service, and
Receive our Charge, Gal. 6. 10. To do Good unto All Men as we have Opportunity,
Especially unto them who are of the Household of Faith. God is Dishonored, and
the Public Wronged by Persons Carrying on Selfish, Narrow, Private Interests
and Ends of their own. We are as Stewards Entrusted by God with many Gifts,
Talents, and Opportunities for His Use and Honor; and therefore areto make
them all Tributary and Subservient to His Glory by a Zealous, Prudent Trading
with them for the Promoting His Kingdom and Holiness in the World to the Utmost
of our Power, 1 Cor. 12. 7. 1 Pet. 4. 10. We must not therefore Live to or for
our selves; but as always Preferring the Common Good before our own, and as
Seeking our own in the Common Welfare, Despising Selfish Regards for the
Benefit of Others. Thus to Do will be to Imitate, like Dear Children, our
Heavenly Father, who is Good, and does Good to All, making his Sun to Rise, and
his Rain to Fall on the Evil, and on the Good; and to Act like our Blessed
Savior, who Pleased not himself, but Spent his Life in Going about and Doing
Good, Romans 15. 3. Acts 10. 38. God has Ordained the Fruitful Lives of
Christians to be a Means for the Winning over of Sinners, and Glorifying His
Great Name in the World. And they that are not Zealous to Do Good, as well as
to Get Good have not the Peculiar Nature of Christ's Flock and Members, Titus
2. 14.

5. By not being Ashamed of Persecuted Christianity, but Openly Appearing for
the Lord and His Cause against All Opposition. When we will not Deny our
Savior to Escape Shame or Suffering, but Vindicate His Great Name, and Own,
and Honor His Ways, as Fearless^y Trusting in Him amidst all Dangers. In such
an Evil Time, Christ is ill Spoken of, and Dishonored by the Reproaches of the
Scoffing and Persecuting Malignants; but Glorified by the Fortitude and
Fidelity of them who Patiently Suffer Reproach for his sake, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
Such, as with Paul, make it their Care to Magnify the Lord in their Bodies,
whether it be by Life or Death, [Phil. 1. 20.] Who can Deny their Carnal
Selves, and Worldly Interests, and Cheerfully Undergo Losses, Crosses, and
Wants, that Touch the Flesh, and Suffer even Death it self, that they may not
Blemish their Holy Calling, but Pay an inviolate Obedience to God's Commands,
do so Confess and Glorify their Lord before men, that Christ has Promised to
Confess and Honor them before his Father, in the Day of Glory, Matthew. 10. 32.
Luke 9. 26.

6. By Walking Orderly and Uprightly in out several Relations, Callings, and
Conditions. God has Placed and Ordered every one in the World in their
Particular Stations, and by his Word and Providence Appoints them their Work,
that so in their said several Capacities and Relations (which are the Sphere of
their Activity) they may Serve the Common Good. Accordingly God and Religion
are Honored by us in them, when we are not only Contented with the Places
Providence has Assigned us, but do Faithfully Discharge all the Relative Duties
of them by Studiously Endeavoring to Promote the Holiness and Happiness of the
Societies whereof we are Members. As (for Instance) when Masters and Parents
Walk in their Houses with a Perfect Heart, and Instruct, Govern, and Guide
their Families, so as they may be a Means to Command their Children and their
Households, after them to Keep the Way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. And when
Children and Servants Honor, Love, Serve, and Obey their Parents and Masters,
in their Places, as doing the same unto God in them, Ephesians. 6. 1, 5, 9. Col. 3.
20, 21. 1 Pet. 2. 18. When Husbands Walk in Love to their Wives, Guiding them
in Knowledge, and Holiness; and Wives live Piously, Obediently, and Peaceably.
When Neighbors so Perform their Offices of Love and Help to one another, as to
Provoke each other to Love and to Good Works; When Ministers Carefully Oversee,
and Skilfully and Duly Feed their Flocks, being Ensamples unto them in
Holiness, Peace, and Self-Denial, as Longing for, and Earnestly Seeking the
Conversion and Salvation of Souls: And, lastly, When Magistrates, and All in
Power and Authority (either as Supreme or Subordinate Governors) Zealously Use
their Power and Authority for God, from whom they have it, by Discountenancing
in those under them Whatever Tends to God's Dishonor, and the making Men
Miserable; and Promoting by All Due Means the Service of God, and the Happiness
of Men; When Rulers Set themselves to Advance Christ's Kingdom, by Impartially
Administering Justice, for the Protecting of Innocence, and Punishing and
Preventing of Wickedness, Violence, and Disorder, as well as by Beautifying and
Fortifying of Goodness by their own Personal Piety and Temperance, they Act as
God's Ministers, Appointed by Him, for the Terror of Evildoers, and the Praise
of them that Do Well. And by such their Providing that Persons under them may
Live a Peaceable and Quiet Life in all Godliness and Honesty, they truly
Represent, and Highly Honor their Supreme Master and Heavenly King. When (I
say) All Persons in their Proper Places, and Distinct Relations thus Endeavor
to Fill them up by Doing the Business Allotted to them in the Same, they Credit
Religion, and Glorify God.

And thus too will and must God have Honor Done him by us in All our Callings,
and every Estate and Condition of Life, even by Diligence and Faithfulness in
our Employments; Abhorring Idleness, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Pride, Contention,
and Evil Speaking, and being Strictly Ju^ and Sincere in all our Concerns with
all Men, ever Doing by Others as We would be Done by, Giving every Man his
Dues, and Parting with our Own Right for the Sake of Love and Peace, or, when
our neighbor's Greater Good Calls for it.

Once again, as Tradesmen must Honor God by their Righteousness; So as God
has Distributed to every Man, as the Lord has Called every 1 Cor. 7. 17.
Man, so let him Walk, and Act in, and according to his Circumstantiated
Condition, as v. g. If Wealthy, let him Glorify God by Humility, and being Rich
in Good Works. If Poor, by Patient Submission, Uprightness, and Diligence. If
in Honor, by Making it Subservient to the Honor of Religion, etc.

7. By Industriously serving the Cause of Love, and Peace among All that are
Worthy of the Christian Name. God is Love, and Dwells in them, and they are
his Children, and Christ's Disciples, whose True Practical Effectual Love to
All True Christians Appears in all the Course of their Life; 1 John 4. 7, 11,
12. John 13. 35. We are all Required, as much as in us Lies to Live Peaceably
with All Men, 1 Cor. 1. 10. And (Romans 15. 5.) To be like Minded One toward
Another, according to Christ Jesus, i. e. to have so much Grace and Charity as
to make us Imitators of Christ; and of the Love and Condescension of Christ;
and to Bear with Others, and Do by them, as we would be Born with, and Used our
selves. And for what should this be? Why v. 6. That we may with one Mind, and
one Mouth, Glorify God. Dividers in the Kingdom of Christ Disserve Him who is
the Prince of Peace, and only Serve their own Bellies, and Fleshly Interest in
some Carnal Design; Romans 16. 17, 18. Wherefore the Holy Ghost's Warning, v. 17.
should be Regarded, viz. Of Marking Such as Cause Divisions, and Offenses
contrary to the Doctrine Taught, and Avoiding them (in their Sinful Dividing
Offensive Ways.) Quarrels, and Discords, and Factious Divisions in the Members
of the Church are Scandalous and Reproachful to the Christian Cause: But His
Disciples Living in Love and Concord, as One in him, Greatly Glorifieth Christ,
and His Gospel. Live therefore in an Abhorrence of Love-Killing, and Dividing
Opinions and Ways, Shunning all the Causes and Means of Hatred. But Love, and
Pursue all the Good Causes and Means of Love and Peace.

8. By being Abundant in Acts of Mercy and Beneficence. God Entrusts Persons
with Estates and Wealth, as the Stewards of His Bounty to Communicate to such
as are in Want.

Wherefore, Visiting the Sick, Feeding the Hungry, Clothing the Naked,
Ministering to the Necessities of the Saints, are an Odor of a Sweet Smell, a
Sacrifice Acceptable, well-Pleasing to God, Heb. 13. 16. And such a Free
spending of what God gives us, is Called by the Holy Ghost an Honoring of the
Lord with our Substance, Prove. 3. 9.

9. We must Glorify God our Glorious Deliverer, by Placing our Whole Hope and
Trust in Him for time to Come, Engaging his Presence with us, and Blessing on
us, by Serious Prayer^ So did David Resolve; Because he has Inclin^^ his Ear
unto me, therefore I will Call on him as long as I live. And in Isa. 26. 4. We
are hidden to Trust in the Lord for ever, for that in the Lord Jehovah is
Everlasting Strength.

It was the Sin of Israel of old, That they Forgot the Wonders God had Wrought
for them. And should we that have seen His Wonderful Works of Mercy toward us,
Suffer Future Difficulties or Dangers to Disarm Us of our own Experiences, and
God's Promises; Should the Sen^^ and Strength of his Great Mercies and
Deliverances Stay but a little time with us, and be i^ Forgotten by us, on the
Approach of New Evils, we should Greatly Dishonor, and Provoke the Lord. Let
us Practically Acknowledge This Great Truth, That God's Hand is not Shortened.
Let an Holy Remembrance of his Wonderful Appearings for his People and Us in
times pa^^ Keep us in the Faith, and Love, and Fear of His Majesty; and Beget a
Constant Dependence on Him, by Faith and Prayer; And thus to De, Glorifieth
Him; for that Herein we Acknowledge Him to be the Great Disposer of All things;
We Confess his General and Special Providence, and Put Humble Confidence in the
Same; and O^^ and Honor every Letter of His Name, and Article of His
Prerogative, Ascribing All Kingdom, Power and Glory to Him, Believingly
Acknowledging his Right of Government, and His Power and Goodness to Give what
we can Need, and to Protect us in our Ways.

10. By Living Cheerfully, and with Greater Peace and Delight in the Service of
God, than Others Do in any other Way or Course. As it Dishonors a Master to
have such as Serve him to Do their Work, and Go about Dejectedly, and with an
Heavy Heart, as if their Service were an Hard and Unprofitable One: So it
Honors Christ and Religion, when we so Live by Faith on the Promises in the
Midst of All Exercises and Tribulations, as to Rejoice in Hope of the Glory of
God; and Comfort our Selves and one another with this, That we shall for ever
be with the Lord, Romans 5. 3, 5. Under All the Troubles, and Crosses, and the
Heavy Fights of Afflictions that Christians can Meet with in this World, both
from without, and from within, their Gracious Lord (whom they Serve) has
Provided Plentiful Consolations, and Sufficient Matter of Joyous Hope for them.

And therefore All Bearing the Christian Name should Fear Reproaching their
High Calling, or Bringing a Scandal on the Ways of God, by Walking
Uncomfortably, and in a Dejected Manner, as if they did not Act on Safe
Grounds, as if the Consolations of God were but Small, and Christ were not to
be Trusted, though he has said, He will make All things Work together for
their Good; and Will Never Leave them, nor Forsake them.

O Christians, Live up to your Excellent Principles and Glorious Expectations,
by Giving the World to See that the Kingdom of your Lord in you Consists in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and that The Peace of God
which Passes All Understanding [the Peace which you have in your Souls in
God's Love to you, which is of Inestimable Value, and beyond all Notional
Knowledge] does keep your Hearts and Minds, through Jesus Christ [doth as a
Garrison Keep your Affections from Disturbance, and your Judgments from Error;
notwithstanding All Pressing Trials, through the Grace of Christ] Phil. 4. 7.
And that, as the Sufferings of Christ Abound: So your Consolation also
Abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5. Show others that in your Faithful Serving of
God you Find and Receive That (in and from Him) of Solid Peace, Supporting
Hope, and Joyous Trust, that is not Attainable in any Worldly Way.

And now having Opened the Duty, I Come to Enforce it, by Showing the Equity
and Reasonableness of it; And so

I. We Ought Thus to Glorify God, Because the Manifestation of his Glory was
God's Ultimate and Highest End in his Making the World, and All Creatures
therein, Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has Made All things for himself; i. e. for his
Glory; and accordingly Every Creature, Animate, or Inanimate, with all the
Wonderful Praesentem refert quaelibet Herba Deum.
Works of God in Heaven, and Earth, do in their Kind Yield Glory to God, Psalm.
19. 1. Psalm. 148. 3, 4, 7, 8. etc. They Represent His Glorious Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and so Objectively Afford the Matter and Occasion of it, but Man was
in a Special Manner Designed and Framed to Gather up the Honor and Praises of
God from the rest of the Creatures, and Actually to Give them unto Him. Our
Rational Souls are Made and Fitted for the Considering, Admiring, and Extolling
the Excellencies of God, as Visible in all His Works. The Great Name of God our
Maker is so Deeply Engraven in our Nature, even in all our Parts and Powers;
Our Noble Faculties of Understanding, Will, and Executive Power, are so Suited
and Adapted for God's Service, that the Honoring of Him, in the Serving of His
Will, does Preserve, and Perfect our Excellent Nature and Reasonable Souls; in
so much, that All we Are, and Have, is Nothing Worth, but for God, and His
Service: As all the Parts and Motions of a Clock are good for nothing but to
Tell the Hour of the Day. Such therefore as Debase
their Noble Faculties to Serve their Fleshly Lusts, and Carnal Pleasures, are
most Absurd and Monstrous, and Act a Villainous and Unnatural Part.

II. This also was His End in Redeeming the World. Out of an Apostate, Revolted
State, God has by His Son Redeemed us to Himself, that we might Serve him in
Holiness and Righteousness all our Days, and Give Him the Praise and Glory of
his Grace, Luke 1. 15. Ephesians. 1. 6, 12, 14. So, You are Bought with a Price,
therefore Glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's, 1 Cor.
6. 19, 20.

III. What else but this is God's Aim in the Sanctifying Operations of His Holy
Spirit? As All his Works must Praise the Lord: So Especially His Saints are to
Bless him, Psalm. 145. 10. Tho it be Due unto him from all the Parts of the
World; yet Praise Waits for God only in Zion. None but the Members of His H^^
Church have it in Readiness for Him, Psalm. 65. 1 We are Sanctified to become a
Peculiar People zealous of Good Works, and a Royal Priesthood to Offer and Show
forth the Praises of Him this has Called us out of Darkness into Marvell^^
Light, Heb. 13. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. God Mak^^ Persons Holy and Good, that they
may be Fruitful in Good Works, and Live to His Glory in Doing Good in their
Duties to Him, themselves, and others. And the Meaning and Significati^^ of
Sanctification, and Holiness, is but only The Giving God his Due.

IV. This likewise is God's Chief End in all his Acts of Bounty, and Kindness,
and Mercis^ Dispensations of Providence toward us. He Expects to be Exalted
and Honored by us for his Gracious Dealings with us, in all our Succo^s and
Deliverances. Let the Lord be Magnified, who has Pleasure in the Prosperity of
his Servants, Psalm. 35. 27. So, in our Text, says God, I will Deliver Thee,
and thou shall Glorify Me. According to the Chald. Paraphr. it runs Ut Honorem
exhibeas mihi.
The thou may give Honor to Me. God's End in Deliverances and other Mercies,
is, That we should thereupon, and therewithal Give Him His D^ Glory. Psalm. 59.
16, 17. I will Sing of thy Power, yea I will Sing aloud of thy Mercy in the
Morning for thou have been my Defense and Refuge in the day of my Trouble. Unto
Thee, O my Strength, will I Sing; for God is my Defense, and the God of my
Mercy.

Well then, Creating, Redeeming, Sanctifying, Upholding and Delivering-Mercy
and Goodness, Challenges and Requires us to Glorify God. To which I might Add,
that He being very Jealous of His Glory, as also, it being All the Homage and
Tribute He Expects from us, for All He has Made us, Given to us, Done for us,
and further Promises to us, we should Readily, Diligently, Thankfully,
Continually and with our Utmost, even with All our Soul, with All our Thought,
with All our Might [cum omni Valde nostro] Yield it to Him.

Improve the Whole of what we have Heard concerning the Lord's Gracious
Delivering of us, and His Expecting Returns of Thankfulness to the Glorifying
His Name; And

I. It may Serve for Conviction and Reproof against All those amongst us, who,
instead of being Thankful for the Wonderful Appearances of the Almighty, in
the Rescuing these Kingdoms from accursed Idolarty, and Slavery, and in
Preserving the Lives, Properties, and Religion of All True Protestants in them,
have been Grieved at their Heart for, and with an Implacable Opposition
Endeavored to Hinder the Progress and Accomplishment of so Glorious a
Deliverance. O the Vile Malignity of their Natures, and Poisonous Disposition
of their Unhallowed Hearts, who ('it is like) would never have been so Base, and
Viper-like, had not God been so very Kind and Merciful! It Is sad, that any of
the Offspring of those Miscreants, Sanballat and Neh. 2, 10.
Tobiah (who were Grieved Exceedingly, that there was but a Man that Came to
Seek the Welfare of the Children of Israel) should be Found among us. Yet such
there be, whose Spirits are Troubled, and Hearts Fret, and Rage for the Welfare
of God's Cause among us. We read in Ez. 8. That among the Abominations which
the Lord Showed the Prophet, One was a Company of W^men that Sat Weeping for
Tammuz, even for the Loss of their Shameful Idol. So these Grieu^ to Part
with the Sorest Plague on the True Church of God, an Idolatrous Tyrant, that,
Jeroboa^ like, would have Forced Us on Sin and Miser^. Some tell us, That
Aromaticall Smells, that are Refreshing to All others, will Drive Tigers into a
Rage. And Oecumenius Writes that the Fragrantia Unguenti boni Columbam Vegetat,
Scarabaeum Necat.
Fragrancy of Precious Ointment, which is Wh^^some for Doves, does yet Kill the
Beetle. To like to such Tigers and Beetles, do they Express themselves, who
under the Name of Protestants, and Professing the Reformed Religion, Repine as
the Re-establishment of the Protestant Cause and Interest, and the Depression
of those whose Principles Constrain them to Seek the Utter Ruin of the Reformed
Religion upon Pain of Damnation. The Lord in Mercy Convince such Dangerou^^
Deluded Souls, and Effectually Heal and Cure their too Serpentine-like Natures.
My only Counsel to them, is, To Repent of this their Imligious Perfidiousness,
lest they outdo the Vile Traitor Judas; for even he, after he had Betrayed
his Master, seeing What was done, Repented him.

II. I Apply it for Advoie and Caution. As God's Own People of old were too
Prone to Misbehave Deuteronomy. 6. 10. 11, 12. chapter 8. 10, 11.
themselves upon the Receiving of Great Mercies, and therefore were Warned by
God, a^ such times, to Take heed and Beware; so it is too Easy for Us who have
not Walked so Closely with God under Afflictions, when the Rod was on our Back,
as we should; it is (I say) but too Easy for us to Forget our selves and our
God, when our Condition Seems more Safe. Wherefore, let us Look Well to our
selves, lest, after God's having Glorified His Power and Goodness in Showing Us
Manifold and Rich Mercy, both Positive, and Privative, We do not Dishonor His
Great Name by Sinning against Him hereupon. Let us Fear the Provoking Sin of
Ingratitude, and Giving the Lord Evil Requitals for All His Kindness. See we
that we Reproach not the Lord and His Goodness, either in Thought, Word, or
Deed. Let not our Hearts Dishonor him by Forgetfulness, or Unworthy Thoughts
of God, and His Benefits, by being Listed up with Pride, Arrogating to our
Selves God's Glory, by Security and Discontentedness, or Unsuitable
Affectedness to his Grace.

Let not our Tongues Offend against Him by D^nying Him his Praises, by Speaking
Irreverently of His Majesty, or Diminutively of His Favors, or, as
Depreciating and Dishonouring his Holy Name, Ordinances, and Servants, or by
Murmuring.

Nor let us Lead our Lives Reproachfully before Him, by Debasing the Divine
Bounty to the Gratifying a Fleshly Course, and Pleasing our Lusts by Growing
Wanton, or Riotous; or any ways Diverting God's Blessings to Other Ends than
for which they are Given.

III. By Way of Exhortation. Consider Wha^ Great Things He has Done for you,
and Giv^ unto the Lord the Honor Due unto his Name, Psalm 29. 1, 2.

And here now, Who can Set forth, either i^ Number, or Weight, the Exceeding
Goodness of the Lord to Us, which we are most Thankfully to Commemorate This
Day and Live henceforth to the End of our Days to His Honor? O what Catalogues
of Most Valuable Mercies might be Readily Presented to us! How Many have we in
Common to these Three Kingdoms with other Kingdoms? How Many in Common with the
Kingdom which has been Privileged above All Others that we Know of? How Many
in Common with the Places of our Abode, and the S^cieties to which we Belong?
And how Many Uncommon and Distinguishing Ones Peculiar to our Selves, both in
Soul and Body, in our Families, and Relations, Callings, and Conditions? What
Deliverances too, (beside Other Benefits) and those Public, and Private, upon
both Civil and Spiritual Accounts! Deliverances (I say) which are not Single
Favors, but Every One of them a Comprehensive, Mother Blessing, ^ Saving us
from Manifold Evils to Much God; and such are those that we are to Own and
Bless God for after a Solemn Manner, viz.

His Rescuing Us from the Enslaving Tyran^y of a Bigoted Papist, and
Overthrowing his Fumidable Army of Popish-Irish-Cut-throats.

His Driving hence the Soul-Destroying Idolatry of a Bloody Religion.

His Filling the Throne with a Warlike Prince of Unexampled Zeal and Succor
for the Tr^^ Religion; and Preserving Him Safe amidst the I^numerable Perils of
Private Plots, and Open War.

And now at last Crowning of Him to be the Instrument of a Long-Desired Peace,
for the Security of our Religion, Liberties, and Properties, that are Restored
to Us with Great Advantages.

With All of These, that are Each of them Most Fruitful Blessings, full of
Goodness, and Pregnant with Various Reviving Mercies, are we Covered, and
Compassed round about; as the Earth is with the Environing Heavens; and should
not such Divine Grace well Affect Us Heavenward? But further, let us View them
in their Amiable and Greatening Circumstances; and so, if we Consider the
Excellent Needfulness, Convenience, and Seasonableness of them; to what a Low
Ebb our Hopes and Helps were Brought; and under what Provoking Guilt, and
Offenses against Heaven, the Lord thus Appeared for us. Could we Behold what
Excellent Wisdom, how Glorious Power, what Free Goodness, how Exceeding Great
Compassions, what Wonderful Patience, and Long-Suffering the Lord has Displayed
in Working out this our so Great and Multiplied Salvation; with What Thankful
Hearts, Raised Affections, Praising Tongues, and Eminently-Fruitful Lives
should we Set our selves to Bless, Extol, Serve, and Magnify our Good God,
Casting on Him the Glory of All! What we Are, the Lord has Made us; What we
Enjoy, is the Gift of his Free Bounty, Fetched by his Mighty Arm as out of the
Fire, and Handed to Us from the very Jaws of Ruin.

The Lord has Gone before Us in the Greatness of his Strength; has been Jer.
14. 8.
the Hope of our Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of Trouble; Psalm. 72.
4.
Who has Judged the Poor of our People, and Saved the Children of the Needy,
and Broken in pieces o^^ Oppressors; Psalm. 72 14.
he has Redeemed our Soul from Deceit, and Violence; and Precious has our Blood
been in his Sight. Even he Jer. 10. 10.
the Only True and Living God, the Everlasting King, at whose Wrath the Earth
does Tremble, and whose Indignation the Nations are not able to Abide, has
Looked on Us in our Low Estate, Saved Us from Job 5. 15, 20.
the Power of the Sword. Job 5. 12.
Disappointed the Devices of our Crafty Enemies; so that their Hands could not
Perform their Enterprise; and does now Abound toward us in Riches of Goodness,
and Forbearance, and Long-suffering Purposely to Lead us to Repentance. O
therefore let us Duly O^^ Him, Rightly Mention his Holy Name, and Show forth
All his Praises. Let us Break off o^^ Iniquities by Repentance, and Turn unto
the Lord with all our Hearts, and not feignedly. Let us study What to Render
unto the Lord for all Hi^ Benefits. And according to the Model of Tru^
Thankfulness [though alas too short and lam^] that has been Set before you,
always Strive to your Utmost, with Heart, Lip, and Life; with All you Are,
Have, Meet with, and Can D^, to Yield unto the Lord the Glorious Honor of his
Majesty, and of his Wondrous Works, Psalm. 145. 5.

And to Provoke Us to such a God-Glorifying Course, Know we, and Consider well*

1. That we are no True Christians, nor will God so Account of us, if we Do it
not.

Taking the Name of the Lord upon us, without Living after His Example (who
spent his Days in John 17. 4.
Glorifying His Father, and Acts 10. 38.
Going about ^^d Doing Good) or Doing His Holy Will, or Following the Conduct
of His Spirit, will Avail us Nothing. Then only are we Christians in Truth,
when our Souls are Renewed, Our Hearts Withdrawn from Vanity, Wills Subdued to
God, and our Whole Man Absolutely Devoted to the Honoring of God in Christ.
Believe it, To be a Christian indeed, is a Very Great and Serious Business; a
Business, which will not be Done with a Careless Mind, or a Slothful Unresolved
Soul, nor with the Thoughts and Hours which Pride and Vanity can Spare, and
which are the Leavings of Fleshly-Lusts and Pleasures. And Persons will One Day
Find that Christ will not be Put off with Vain Complements; or Reward Any, who
under His Livery, Pleased the Flesh, and Served the World.

2. What ever Mercies and Gifts God Bestows on Any, He Expects to Receive
again with Usury. The 19. Luke 12, 13, 23. Deserves your Serious and Lasting
Consideration. The Lord Keeps Account of What ye Have, and will have a
Reckoning with you, to See What Work you have been Minding, and whether you
have Served His Interest with what you had, or Pro^^gally, Wasted it on that of
the Flesh. If you have Wealth, Interest, and Power, and you Succor not the
Poor, do not Right, and Protect the Distressed, and Promote the Cause of God
and the Common Good; But Job 29. 12.
Ye Refuse to D^liver the Poor, that Cry; and the Fatherless, and him that has
none to Help him; If ye Isa. 58. 7.
Dra^ not forth your Soul to the Hungry, etc. If you Decline Ezekiel. 18. 16.
Loosing the Bands of Wickedness, and Undoing Heavy Burdens to let the
Oppressed G^ Free. i. e. if you will not Honor God with H^ Own, nor be the
Instruments of His Beneficence to Others, nor as Faithful Stewards Improve the
Talents, He has Entrusted you with, to Holy Uses and Ends, You Will be Cast and
Ruined in the Great Day of Account. Live not, therefore, as if it were enough
to Do No Harm, and say, as the Slothful Servant, Here is thy Talent which I hid.

3. It Is most Excellent and Honorable Work the Lord Calls you to herein. And
Christianity, surely, is a most Noble Thing, when it Requir^s and Makes Persons
to be so Like unto the Holy God; It Is Work, and Business being but to Represent
God's Glorious Perfections, and by the Light of Holy Living to Show forth, and
Recommend the Divine Majesty to a Darkenel World: as a Candle Lights what Way
so-ever it Goes. It Instates us into God's Family, and Imploys us in that
which is the Work, yea, the very Glory of Heaven it self. Shall a Creature be
Called forth to the Honoring his Maker; and a Mean Worm be said to Glorify
God? O, who can Conceive of the Glory and Honor hereof? We Read Psalm. 78. 25.
How Man did Eat Angel's Food; but we are Called to Angel's Work.

4. The Neglect of this Duty Forfeits All our Mercies, and Lays us open to All
Miseries whatever, Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48.
Because thou Servedst not the Lord thy God with Joyfulness, and with Gladness
of Heart for the Abundance of All Things: Therefore shall thou Serve thine
Enemies, which the Lord shall Send upon thee, in Hunger, and in Thirst, and in
Nakedness, and in Want of All things; and he shall Put a Yoke of thy Neck, etc.
This Text was Greatly Verified on our Selves in the two Late Reigns, until the
Happy Revolution under our Present Gracious Sovereign, the Lord Making us to
Feel that, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
He will be no Longer with a People than they are with Him, and that He will
Forsake Them, when They Forsake Him. Where Mic. 2. 7. Hos. 2. 9.
Religion Decays, States or People cannot Thrive.

5. A Good Discharge of this Duty is the only Way to Put an Utter End to our
Remaining Fears and Troubles, and Make us Happy here and hereafter. Isa. 4. 5.
Upon the Glory there shall be a Defense. The A Bishop of Magdenburg hearing
the Duke of Saxony was Preparing War against him, fell to Reforming his Church,
and amending what was amiss. And being asked by one of the Duke's Spi^s, if he
did not hear what the Duke was intending against him, because he made no
Defensive Preparation. He said, Year; but Ego curabo Ecclesiam and Deus pro me
pugnabit: I Will take care of my Charge, and the Defense of me belongs to God. On
the tidings of which, the Duke disbanded his Forces. Luther. Expos. in Isa. 30.
15.
Reformation and Holy Living of a Kingdom or Persons, is Meant the Glory; that
Being indeed the Excellency and Glory of them (God and his People being both
Glorious in Holiness); Now upon this Glory God Promises a Defensive-Shelter. A
greeably, the Lord has Engaged to Make that People's Enemies to be at Peace
with them, who in their Ways Please and Honor Him, Prove. 16. 7.) Nor can the
Mightiest Force of the most Formidable Enemy Do any Hurt against those who Keep
in with God, and have Him on their Side, as in Isa. 8. 9, 10. and Isa. 54, 1^
Whosoever shall Gather together against thee, sh^l Fall for thy Sake. Without
God there is. Litt^^ Hope; but Against Him there is Certain Rui^. Yea further,
as Evil will be Prevented: so All Good will be Obtained by Giving the Lord his
Due Honor. Hag. 2. 19. From this Day forward will I Bless Thee, viz. from the
Day that they Took Care of the Temple. Thus 2 Chronicles. 7. 11.
A^ that Came into Solomon' s Heart to Make in his own House; and the House of
the Lord he Pros^^rously Effected; Carrying on God's House with his own he
Prospered in his Way. 1 Chronicles. 29 12, 14.
Both Rich^^ and Honor Come of Thee, and in thy Hand it i^ to Make Great, and
to Give Strength unto All. And his Promises of Blessing, both for Th^^ Life,
and That to Come, are Made to Tr^^ Godliness. All Blessednesses [according to
the Hebrew, (...)] are Due to him that Shuns God. Reproaching Courses, and
Delights in God's La^, Psalm. 1. 2, and Ver 3. Universal Good Success Attends
him. God Metes out to Persons in their own Measure; and Makes their Outward
Estate to Carry Proportion to their Inward. As ^^ Rise or Fall in our Respects
to the Lord, accordingly shall we be Made, either the Head, or the Tail, among
the Nations. The Stories of Joseph, Judge. 6. 11. Psalm. 78. 70. Job 42. 12.
Psalm. 113. 7, 8.
Moses, David, Gideon, Job, Daniel, etc. Show us how God will Raise from the
very Thr^shing-Floor, from the Sheepfold, and the Dunghill, those Poor and Needy
Ones, who Signally Honor Him to Set them among Princes, and to Make Them
Inherit the Throne of Glory. As, Contrarily, He Abaseth such as Refuse him His
Glory, by Hurling Some out of their Kingdoms, and Throwing Down Others from
their Principalities, and Great Dignities, turning them to Graze with Oxen, to
Teach them that the Most High Rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and will ^e had in
Reverence, and his Name Sanctified by All People. To Draw then to a Conclusion,
know ye That it Lies much on the Inhabitants of our Kingdoms (under God)
Whether such Good Beginnings of Mercy, as we Commemorate this Day, shall have
an Happy End and Progress, or a. Sudden and Doleful Conclusion. And I must
Profess my Serious Thoughts and Belief hereof, has Wrought within me, a
Posture of Soul much-Like to that of Eli's of 1 Samuel 4. 13.
old, When he Sat on a Seat by the Way-side Watching to Hear Tidings of his
People's Welfare, his Heart Trembling the mean while for the Ark of God [the
Pledge of his Gracious Presence.]

O Christians, I must tell you, That as our Outward Deliverances, and All other
Temporal Mercies, are very Imperfect Things, and being but Means to Greater
Matters, the Interest of God, and the Good of Souls, can be of no Further
Significancy, or Advantage to us, than as they Further us in God's Service; so
the Diverting of them to Other Uses, contrary to the Design, and Honor of the
Lord, may Easily Draw down Fiercer Indignation, and much Sorer Judgments, from
Heaven, on Us, than we ever yet Felt or Suffered, according to Ezra 9. 13, 14.

Believe it, Brethren, (and so may All England with you) That the Lord will be
Lord over us, and will Rule us, either as Subjects, or Rebels. If by God's
Establishing the Kingdom in the Hands of our Gracious King His Heart (with
Jehosaphat's) shall be Lifted up in the Ways of 2 Chronicles 25. 16.
the Lord; and All our People shall Set their Hearts to Glorify their God, who
has thus Wonderfully Delivered them; the Lord will Rejoice over us, to Do us
further Good, as having his Hand upon them for Good that thus seek him. Ezra 8.
22.
But on the other Hand, if we will not Conside the Operation of God's Hands,
nor Advance the Honor of his Name, and the Welfare of Christ's Kingdom by the
Blessings he Gives us to that Josh. 24. 20.
End, He will Turn and Do us Hurt, and Consume us after that he has Done us
Good. I Close All therefore with my most Hearty Wishes, That We may All, from
the Highest to the Lowest, be Strong (in Holy Purposes) and very Courageous to
Serve the Cause of God, and the Public Good with Absolute Resolution, as
firmly Believing, That them that Honor God, He will Honor; and they that
Despise Him, shall be Lightly Esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

FINIS.
Page 42. Line 12. after for it, add

Here then let All among us, who in these Times of Common Danger, have
Perfidiously Enriched themselves by the Spoils of the Public, and made
themselves Great by Robbing the Nation, do their part, and come forth, with
Achan, and Give Glory unto the Lord, by making Josh. 7. 19. Luke 19. 8.
Confession, and, with Zacheus, full Restitution. Their Sin is Villainous, and
Crying; every such Offender being not only the Agent Mr. Baxt. Dir.
of the Devil. but his Image (that Wicked Spirit making it his Business to
Undo Men, and bring them into Distress and Misery). 'Twas Treachery against
the Whole State, Endangering the Public Peace, the Safety of the Government,
and the Souls and Bodies of Men, by Tempting those, that were less able to bear
such Oppressions, into Discontents, Sedition, and Insurrections. Let therefore
the Guilty in this kind know, That it is a Determined Case in Divinity, that
such Unlawful Wealth ought to be Restored with all Damages; and that there
cannot be a just Compensation made for such Wrong, but according to the
Proportion of the Guilt, and the Loss compared together. St. Austin tells them,
Non Remittitur Peccatum ni^^ Restituitur ablatum. Aug.
That Without Restitution, they can have no Remission; and the Holy -- Movet
C^rnicula risum, Furtivis nudata coloribus. -- Hor.
Spirit assures them, that How Great soever they may now look in the Kingdoms
of Man, they shall be Least (and not thought worthy of a place) in the Kingdom
of God.

The Author's Absence has occasioned these Errata to Escape the Press: As for
Pointing, and other small Literals, the Reader is desired to pass 'em by.

PAge 4. l. 24. r. Sennacherib. p. 5. l. 20. r. Affliction. ib l. 29. r. Ps.
66. p. 6. in Marg. r. Hos. 14. 4. Ps. 12. 5. p. 7. l. 26. r. Counsels. p. 10.
l. penult. r. Arising p. 14. l. 18. r. (...). p. 16. l. 4. r. Jehoshaphat. p.
18. in Marg. r. (...). p. 19. l. 30. r. he was. p. 21. l. ult. r. 2 Chronicles. p.
23. l. 16. r. Judges 7. p. 24. l. 5. r. Justice. p. 25. l. 27. r. Conceitedly.
ib. l. 31. r. Counsel. p. 27. l. 16. r. Doctrine. p. 35. l. 27. r.
Consecrating. p. 37. l. 5. r. Blessings. p. 38. l. ult. r. and Prudent. p. 44.
in Marg. Ps. 116. 2.


