THE INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH IN Christian Piety, Taken out of the Sacred
Scriptures, and Holy Fathers; Divided into Five Parts.

WITH A very profitable Instruction for Meditation, or Mental Prayer.

By CHARLES GOBINET Doctor of Divinity, of the House and Society of SORBON,
Principal of the College of PLESSIS-SORBON.

The last Edition in French, now rendered into English.

Ut detur Parvulis astutia; Adolescenti scientia and intellectus.

Prove. 1. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on
the Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.

A DEDICATORY PRAYER TO THE SON of GOD.
TO Thee, O Savior of Souls, according to my Duty and Desire, do I Consecrate
this Work. It came from Thee, and it ought to return to Thee. And in Offering
it to Thee, Paral. 29.
I restore a thing which by all manner of Titles appertains to Thee. They are
Thy Divine Words which are here used, and those with which Thou wast pleased to
inspire one of Thy greatest Servants. Thy Grace has assisted me to Compose
them by particular Aids which I have received from Thee in this small Labor.
That fervent Zeal which Thou wast pleased so frequently to manifest for the
Salvation of young Souls, when Thou wast upon Earth, has given Birth to this
Design; and the Hope I had of Thy Succor, has given me the Confidence to
undertake it. Let not my Misery stop the Effects of Thy Bounty, nor hinder Thy
pious Instructions from producing in Souls the Fruit they ought to bring forth.
Divine JESUS! Animate with Thy Holy Spirit the Words of this Book. Cause them
for whom it is made, in Reading it, to acknowledge the strict Obligations they
have to Serve Thee, and the earnest Desire thou have of their Salvation. Speak
to their Hearts at the same time that these Letters inform their Eyes, and
inspire them by the Motions of Thy Grace, with the Documents they shall here
find for their Salvation. It behooves Thee now rather than at any other time,
to make the Effects of Thy Mercy appear upon young Souls. Tempus faciendi
Domine, Psalm. 118.
dissipaverunt legem tuam. The greatest part abandon Thee, when they should
begin to Serve Thee. They forget that solemn Promise they made Thee at Baptism,
and the inestimable Favors they have received from Thy infinite Goodness. O
Divine Savior! Let not the Souls be lost which thou have Redeemed with Thy
precious Blood, and for the Salvation of whom Thou have testified so great
Love. Reserve them for Thy Service; Hinder them from bending their Knees before
Baal, and from being destroyed by the Infection of this perverse Age. Make that
Zeal which Thou had for the Salvation of Youth, revive in Thy Priests; and
grant me the Grace, which I most humbly beg, to be able to employ faithfully
therein, my Pains and Labors for Thy Glory.

The PREFACE to the READER.
THIS Book, dear Reader, has no great need of a Preface; and if I give you one
here, it is only to tell you that I had no Design to make it. Prefaces are
necessary to advertise the Reader, either of the Design of the Author, or of
the Occasion which gave beginning to the Work, or of the Order and Method that
is observed therein, or of the Profit that may be reaped, or of some such like
thing. As for my Design, it is no other than what the Title of the Book does
bear, viz. To instruct Youth in Piety. This is all my Aim and Pretense. The
Occasion which made me undertake it was, because being called to the Conduct of
Youth, I endeavored to make my self capable of so important an Employment, and
correspond with the pious Intentions of that Company which gave me the Honor of
that Charge. Now in laboring to Instruct my self, I found that what I had
prepared for my self, might serve for the Instruction of Youth, if it were
reduced into Method: And this also might be most useful to me, because it is
most certain, that the best way to Learn, is to Teach. I have therefore
disposed of it into the Method you see, wherein I treat of Five things, which
seemed to me necessary to give young People an entire Instruction in Piety,
viz. 1. The Motives which oblige them thereto. 2. The Means they ought to
employ to obtain it. 3. The Obstacles and Difficulties which occur therein. 4.
The Virtues which are proper for it. 5. The Importance of making a good Choice
of a State of Life, and the Means to perform it as one ought. Which is a
Subject little known amongst young People, and less practiced.

As to the Profitableness of this Book, dear Reader, it is not my Part, but
yours to judge of it. The End for which it is Composed, which is the
Instruction of Youth, will make you esteem it useful. The Matter of it, which
is chiefly taken out of the Sacred Scripture and Fathers, will cause you to
make the same Judgment. If the Method I have observed seem easy to you, it
will give the final Decision.

In fine, I Write for young People: For them have I Composed this Work, and
particularly for them whom God has pleased to commit to my Conduct. If others
more advanced in Age take the pains to Read it, I desire they would peruse it
with the Spirit of Charity, excusing what they find defective in it, and
receiving kindly what they shall find good. But you, dear Reader, for whom I
Write, I exhort you to advantage your self by this small Labor which I have
given you, for your Salvation. I call you in this Instruction by the Name of
Theotime, which signifies Honor of God; because I consider you in that State,
or at least in the Will to arrive there. Read it then with this Spirit and
Desire. Read it to be instructed therein concerning your Salvation, and to
learn therein betimes what you are to do during the whole course of your Life,
that is, to Serve him to whom you ow all. And lastly, that you may receive a
certain and assured Profit, I demand of you Two things.

First, That you Read it with three Conditions; With a desire to Learn, With
Attention, And in Order, that is, one Part after another.

Secondly, That you would consider, that it is not I who speak to you, but God,
by the Divine Instructions he has given us in the Sacred Scripture, and in the
Writings of the holy Fathers. Read it therefore with all the Respect which is
due to that adorable Master; and in these Sacred Fountains search for true
Wisdom, without which all the rest is but Folly. Happy are you if you search it
as you ought, and if you can one-day say with one of the wisest of Mortals,
That you have searched for Wisdom during your Youth, Eccl. 5.
and that having seriously applied your self to the Enquiry, have found it, and
made progress therein, you will, as he did, give all the Glory to God, who is
the Author thereof. Danti mihi sapientiam dabo gloriam; And you will receive
the Advantage, which will continue with you for all Eternity.

The Approbation.
WE underwritten Doctors of Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, do Testify,
That we have Read a Book Entitled, The Instruction of Youth in Christian Piety,
Composed by M. Charles Gobinet, also Doctor, and Principal of the College of
Plessis-Sorbon; wherein the Author has Collected all the necessary Maxims for
the Education of Youth in the Science of Salvation. The Devotion which it
inspires is Solid, the Sentiments Catholic, and the Morality very Pious and
Profitable. Paris June 12. 1655.

Charmolue. Le Blond. Minindre.


The Division of the Book.
PART I. OF the Reasons and Motives which oblige Men to apply themselves to
Virtue in their Youth. PART II. Of the necessary Means to acquire Virtue during
Youth. PART. III. Of the Obstacles which divert young People from Virtue. PART
IV. Of the Virtues necessary for young People. PART V. Of the Choice of a State
of Life.
The Table. PART. I.
OF the Reasons and Motives which oblige Men to apply themselves to Virtue in
their Youth. Page 1. Chap. 1. Of the End for which Man is created. ibid. Chap.
2. Of our Vocation to the Grace of Baptism. Page 8. Article 1. Of the
Excellence of the State of a Christian, and of the Favor God has bestowed on
him whom he has called to this State. Page 9. Artic. 2. Of the great
Obligations of a Christian. Page 12.
Chap. 3. That God requires, and singularly accepts the Service of young
People. Page 16. Chap. 4. That God particularly loves young People, and takes a
delight to bestow upon them many Favors. Page 19. Chap. 5. That they who
Consecrate not themselves to God in their Youth, offer him a most heinous
Injury. Page 25. Chap. 6. How God has an Aversion for wicked young People.
Considerable Examples upon this Subject. Page 29. Chap. 7. That Salvation
ordinarily depends on the time of Youth. Page 36. Chap. 8. That those who have
followed Virtue in their Youth, conserve it easily all the remainder of their
Life. Page 39. Chap. 9. Proofs concerning the same Subject, by notable Examples
taken out of Sacred Scripture, of those who having been Virtuous in their
Youth, have continued so all their Life; and chiefly of those who have resisted
in great Occasions. Page 44. Chap. 10. That those who have been addicted to
Vice in their Youth, are very difficultly corrected, and it often happens that
they never amend, but miserably Damn themselves. Page 52. Chap. 11. Examples
upon the precedent Subject. And first of those who have corrected the Vices of
their Youth, but yet with very great Difficulties. Page 57. Chap. 12. Examples
of those who have never amended the Vices of their Youth. Page 66 Chap. 13. Of
the great Evils. which spring from the wicked Life of Youth. Page 72. Artic. 1.
The First Evil, viz. Death, which the Sins of Youth hasten to very many. ibid.
Artic. 2. The Second Evil which springs from Sins committed in Youth, Blindness
of Mind, and Obdurateness in Vice. Page 76. Artic. 3. The Third Evil, The loss
of many fair Hopes. Page 78. Art. 4. The Fourth Evil springing from the Sins of
Youth, The Excess of Vice amongst Men. Page 82
Chap. 14. That the Devil uses all his Endeavors to move young People to Vice.
Page 84. Chap. 15. The Conclusion of all that has been said above. Page 88.
PART II.
OF the necessary Means to acquire Virtue during Youth. Page 94. Chap. 1.
Wherein true Virtue consists. Page 95. Chap. 2. That to acquire Virtue, we must
desire it. Page 98. Chap. 3. Of Prayer, the Third Means to acquire Virtue. Page
100. Chap. 4. That they must love and seek after Instructions. Page 103. Chap.
5. Of the necessity of a Guide in the Way of Virtue, and particularly during
Youth. Page 105. Chap. 6. Of Confession, and first of a General Confession.
Page 110. Chap. 7. Of ordinary Confession. Page 115. Important Advices
concerning Confession Page 118.
Chap. 9. Of Holy Communion. Page 122. Chap. 10. An Advice for Communicating
well. Page 124. Chap. 11. Of Morning Prayer. Page 127. Chap. 12. Of Evening
Prayer. Page 131. Chap. 13. Of Assisting devoutly at the Holy Sacrifice of the
Altar. Page 134 Chap. 14. Of Labor and Employment of Time. Page 136. Chap. 15.
Of the Knowledge of ones self, very necessary for young People. Page 138. Chap.
16. Of the Reading of pious Books. Page 143. Chap. 17. An Advertisement
concerning bad Books. Page 147. Chap. 18. Of pious Conversation. Page 150.
Chap. 19. Of Devotion to the Blessed Virgin and S. Joseph. Page 153. Chap. 20.
Of Devotion to the Angel-Guardian, and to the Saint of ones Name. Page 159.
Chap. 21. Of keeping of Feasts, and particularly of Sundays. Page 163. Chap.
22. Of being present at Divine Service. Page 170.
PART III.
OF the Obstacles which divert young Persons from Virtue. Page 181. Chap. 1.
The First Obstacle of the Salvation of Youth, the want of Instruction. Page
182. Chap. 2. The Second Obstacle, the too much Indulgence of Parents, their
ill Example, and the bad Instruction they give their Children. Page 185. Chap.
3. The Third Obstacle of the Salvation of Youth, the Untractableness of young
Persons. Page 189. Chap. 4. The Fourth Obstacle, Inconstancy. Page 194. Chap.
5. The Fifth Obstacle, A Shame to do Good. Page 197. Chap. 6. The Sixth
Obstacle, wicked Company. Page 200. Artic. 1. How hurtful it is. ib. Artic 2.
How there are two things hurtful in wicked Company, Discourse and Example. Page
204. Artic. 3. Of four sorts of wicked Companions which must be avoided. Page
206.
Chap. 7. The Seventh Obstacle of the Salvation of Youth, Idleness. Page 209.
Chap. 8. The Eighth Obstacle, Impurity. Page 215. Artic. 1. That the Sin of
Impurity is the greatest Enemy of Youth, and Damns more than all other Vices
together. Page 216. Artic. 2. Of the sad Effects of the Sin of Impurity. Page
218. Artic. 3. Examples of the miserable Death of those who were addicted to
the Sin of Impurity. Page 225. Artic. 4. Remedies against Impurity; And first,
that this Sin must be resisted at the beginning. Page 230. Artic. 5. That we
must avoid the Causes of Impurity. Page 233. Artic. 6. Other particular
Remedies against Impurity. Page 239.
Chap. 9. Of Temptations. Page 242. Artic. 1. What Temptation is, and of the
Means to know whether one has sinned in a Temptation. Page 243. Artic. 2. That
one cannot avoid being tempted, and that we must be provided betimes to resist
Temptations. Page 245. Artic. 3. Considerations to fortify the Mind in
Temptations. Page 247. Artic. 4. How we must behave our selves in Temptations.
Page 252. Artic. 5. Of some Artifices by which the Devil deceives Men in
Temptations, and principally young Men. Page 255. Artic. 6. Of two considerable
Faults which ordinarily happen to young Persons in Temptations. Page 259.
Artic. 7. What is to be done after the Temptation is conquered. Page 263.
Artic. 8. Considerable Examples to teach us how we must encounter with
Temptations. Page 264.
Chap. 10. Particular Obstacles to rich young Persons. Page 269. Chap. 11.
Particular Obstacles to Noble Persons. Page 274. Chap. 12. Particular Obstacles
of young Incumbents, or such as have Benefices without Cure. Page 279. Chap.
13. Advice to Parents upon the same Subject. Page 284.
PART IV.
OF the Virtues necessary for young Persons. Page 289. Chap. 1. That young
People ought to propose to themselves the Imitation of our Lord Jesus in his
Youth. Page 290. Chap. 2. Of the Fear of God. Page 294. Chap. 3. Of the Love of
God. Page 296. Chap. 4. Of the Love of Parents. Page 300. Chap. 5. Of other
Persons whom young Men ought to honor. Page 305. Chap. 6. Of Tractableness.
Page 307. Cap. 7. Of Obedience. Page 308. Chap. 8. Of Chastity. Page 309. Chap.
9. Of Shamefacedness. Page 312. Chap. 10. Of Modesty. Page 315. Chap. 11. Of
Modesty in Words. Page 320. Chap. 12. Of other Vices of the Tongue, and
particularly of Swearing. Page 322. Of Detraction. Page 326. Of Injuries and
Reproaches. Page 327. Of Sowers of Discord. Page 329. Of Lying. Page 330.
Chap. 13. Of Sobriety. Page 333 Chap. 14. Of Meekness and Anger. Page 337.
Remedies against Anger. Page 341.
Chap. 15. Of Peace with our Neighbor, against Quarrels and Enmities. Page 344.
Chap. 16. Of Pardon of Injuries, against Revenge. Page 348. Chap. 17. Of the
Love of our Neighbor. Page 353. Chap. 18. Of Fraternal Correction, or of the
Obligation of hindering the Ill of another, when one can. Page 357. Chap. 19.
Of Friendships. Page 365. Chap. 20. Of Sports and Recreations. Page 369. Chap.
21. Of Liberality, against Covetousness. Page 372. Chap. 22. Of Humility. Page
377.
PART V.
OF the Choice of a State of Life. Page 384. Chap. 1. How important it is to
make a good Choice of a State of Life. Page 385. Chap. 2. Of the Faults that
are ordinarily committed in this Choice. Page 388. Chap. 3. Of the Means to
choose well a State of Life. And First, That a good Life during Youth, is a
Means highly necessary to succeed in this Choice. Page 392. Chap. 4. That to
succeed well in the Choice of a State of Life, it is most important to think of
it before one be in the Time of Choosing. Page 397. Chap. 5. Of the Means which
must be employed, when one deliberates on the Choice of a State of Life. Page
399. Chap. 6. What is to be done when a Man is upon the point of choosing his
State. Page 401. Chap. 7. Of the Qualities those ought to have of whom Counsel
is to be taken for the Choice of a State of Life. Page 406. Chap. 8. Whether
Parents are to be hearkened to in this Choice. Page 408. Chap. 9. Of the
different States of Life, and first of the Ecclesiastical State. Page 411.
Artic. 1. Of the greatness of the Obligations and Dangers of an Ecclesiastical
State. Page 412. Artic. 2. Of the Vocation to an Ecclesiastical State. Page
417. Artic. 3. Of the Preparation necessary for an Ecclesiastical State. Page
420. Artic. 4. The Conclusion of the precedent Chapter. Page 424.
Chap. 10. Of a Religious State. Page 429. Artic. 1. What a Religious State is;
What its Obligations, its Advantages, and Dangers are. Page 430. Artic. 2. What
is to be done to know whether one be called to Religion. Page 433. Artic. 3.
That a Man must take time to know whether he be called to Religion. Page 437.
Chap. 11. Of the diverse States of a Secular Life. Page 440. Artic. 1. Of the
Condition of the Great, and of those who Govern others. Page 441. Artic. 2. Of
the Offices of Justice, and Magistracy. Page 451. Artic. 3. Of a Court Life.
Page 456. Artic. 4. Of the Profession of Arms. Page 459. Artic. 5. Of other
Conditions of a Secular Life. Page 467.
Chap. 12. Of the State of Marriage. Page 470. Artic. 1. What we must know of a
Married Life. Page 471. Artic. 2. The necessary Dispositions for a Married
State. Page 474. Artic. 3. The Conclusion of the foregoing Chapter. Page 483.
Chap. 13. Of a Single Life. Page 486. Chap. 14. Most important Advices for
young Persons, who begin to enter into the World. Page 492. Advice 1. That the
time of issuing out of Youth, and entering into the World, is the most dangerous
of all the Life, and many are shipwreckt therein. Page 494. Adv. 2. That the
chief care of young Men, who enter into the World, ought to be to conserve the
Sentiments and Practices of Piety which they have observed in their Youth. Page
497. Adv. 3. That young Men must fly carefully wicked Company, and particularly
that of young vicious Persons of their Profession. Page 499. Adv. 4. That they
must apply themselves quickly to some Labor, which may employ their Time, and
make them avoid Idleness, which is then most dangerous, and more than at any
other time. Page 500. Adv. 5. That young People ought to have a care of
avoiding three ordinary Causes of their Ruin at that time, Play, Wine, and
Impurity. Page 502. Adv. 6. That they must avoid at that time, Irresolution
concerning the State they ought to choose, and after the Choice, not easily, nor
without great reason, change. Page 503. Adv. 7. That young Men ought to foresee
the Dangers and Obligations of their Profession, and firmly purpose to avoid
those Dangers, and acquit themselves of their Obligations, and live in their
Profession like virtuous Men, and according to God. Page 505. Adv. 8. That they
must accustom themselves betimes not to be ashamed of Virtue, nor of performing
the Actions thereof. Page 506. Adv. 9. That they must have a care to embrace a
solid and real Virtue, and not an apparent and deceitful Piety. Page 507. Adv.
10. That young Persons ought to fix themselves more and more in the solid
Sentiments of Faith and Religion. Page 511. Adv. 11. That they must be strongly
settled in the Christian Maxims, opposite to those of the World. Page 514.
Chap. 15. Christian Maxims. Page 516. Maxim 1. That we are not created for
this present Life, but for Heaven. ibid. Max. 2. That the most important Affair
which we have in this Life, is our Salvation. ib. Max. 3. That Salvation is not
obtained without Pains and Labor. Page 517. Max. 4. That our chiefest care in
this Life must be to please God, and live in his Grace. ib. Max. 5. That we
cannot be in the Grace of God, without having a constant Resolution never to
offend him upon any score. Page 518. Max. 6. That Sin is the greatest Evil
which can befall a Man. ib. Max. 7. That the worst of all Misfortunes, is to
die in Mortal Sin. Page 519. Max. 8. That this Misfortune happens to many, and
to those who think not of it. ib. Max. 9. That we must think frequently on
Death, Judgment, and Eternity. Page 520. Max. 10. That we must serve God for
himself, and by Love. ib. Max. 11. That we must have a Rule of our Actions, and
that this Rule ought to be the Law of God, the Example and Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, and not the World, nor the Example of others, nor Custom. Page 521.
Max. 12. That the World is deceived in all its Judgments and Maxims. Page 522.
Max. 13. That to be united only to God, we must contemn Earthly things. Page
523.
Chap. 16. Of Perseverance. Page 524.
The Table of the Treatise of Meditation, or Mental Prayer. ARTICLE 1.
WHat is it to Meditate? Page 533. Artic. 2. That without Meditating it is hard
to effect our Salvation. Page 534. Artic. 3. That Meditation is not an
Invention of Man, but of God. Page 535. Artic. 4. That Meditation is not so
difficult as many conceive it. Page 537. Artic. 5. That Meditation may be
rendered facil. Page 538. Artic. 6. That young Persons may Meditate, and that
they have need of it. Page 539. Artic. 7. A Confirmation of the two former
Truths out of the Sacred Scripture. Page 541. Artic. 8. Of the great Benefit of
Meditation. Page 544. Artic. 9. The Method of Meditation. Page 547. Artic. 10.
The Subject on which we must Meditate. Page 553. Artic. 11. Another easy and
profitable Subject of Meditation. Page 557. Artic. 12. The Practice of
Meditation. Page 561. Artic. 13. Some Advices concerning Meditation. Page 566.
Advice 1. ibid. Advice 2. Page 567. Advice 3. Page 571. Advice 4. Page 573.
Conclusion. Page 574.
THE INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH IN Christian Piety.
PART I.
Of the Reasons and Motives which oblige Men to apply themselves to Virtue in
their Youth.
CHAP. I.
Of the End for which Man is Created.
MOTIVE I.
AMongst all the things whose Knowledge is necessary for Man, The End for which
Man is Created, is his first necessary Knowledge.
that which first and before all he ought to understand, is the End for which
he is placed in this World. Because, being a Reasonable Creature, he ought to
act for a final End, in the Enjoyment whereof he seeks his Happiness and
Felicity. Now he cannot act for this End, without a Knowledge of it, which
raises in him a Desire, makes him search and employ Means to arrive there. A
Man who knows not his last End, is scarce distinct from a Beast, because he
regards only things present, things material, and sensible, after the manner of
Bruits, and in this is more miserable than they; inasmuch as they find in these
material things the Felicity they are capable of: And he, instead of finding
his Repose, encounters with nothing but Disgusts, and the Source of a vast
number of Misfortunes.

From the ignorance of this last End spring all the Disorders and Corruption of
Men's Lives; because forgetting their heavenly Beginning, and the noble and
divine End for which their Creator had destined them, they absolutely stop at
the enjoyment of the Pleasures of this mortal Life, without raising their
thoughts or desires higher, living upon Earth as if they were made for the
Earth.

And as it would be a thing which would move compassion, to see a Child born of
Royal Blood, ordained by his Birth one day to wear a Crown and Scepter, being
bred up amongst Peasants, ignorant of his Extraction, to apply himself wholly
to Till the Earth, to bound all his Pretensions within the Limits of getting a
miserable Livelihood with the Sweat of his Brow, without having the least
thought of the high Fortune for which he was born: So it is a thing much to be
deplored, to see Men who are the Children of Heaven, destinated by God to reign
there eternally with him, live in an entire forgetfulness of that End, for
which they are Created, and setting all their Affection upon Earthly things,
miserably deprive themselves of that Beatitude which the Bounty of their
Creator has prepared for them.

For this Reason, dear Theotime, resolving to exhort you to embrace Virtue in
your Youth, I propose unto you first, and before all things, what you are, and
the End for which you are Created, to banish that so common and dreadful a
forgetfulness amongst Men, that knowing your last End, you may ardently aspire
to it, and begin betimes to perform what lies in you to make you worthy, and
arrive there.

Recollect your thoughts then, Reflection upon Three things.
dear Child, and reflect upon Three things: Who you are, Who made you what you
are, And for what End.

First, I. What Man is.
You are a Man, that is a Creature endowed with Understanding and Reason,
composed of a Body, whose Structure is admirable, and of a Reasonable and
Intellectual Soul, made to the Image of God. You are the most perfect of all
visible Creatures.

Secondly, II. Who made Man.
You were not made by your self, for that is impossible; You have received from
another all that you have, and from whom have you received it, but from him who
has Created Heaven and Earth, and who is the Author of all things? It is he
who has formed your Body in your Mothers Womb, and who has created your Soul.
You are the Work of a God; and besides the Father you have upon Earth, you have
another in Heaven, to whom you owe all that you have.

Thirdly; III. Why God made Man.
For what End did God make you? Be attentive, Theotime; For what End think you
did God place you in this World? Was it to enjoy the Pleasures and Contentments
of this Life, and of the Senses? To heap up Riches? To acquire Glory and
Reputation amongst Men? Nothing less. You have a Soul too noble to be destined
to such wretched and perishable things: Pleasures are changed into Pain, Riches
perish, and Glory vanishes away. Is it to continue a long time upon Earth, to
find there your Happiness, and to look for nothing after this Life? If it be
so, there is no difference betwixt you and Beasts. Does not this so noble a
Soul which God has bestowed on you, endowed with Understanding, Will, and
Memory, capable to know all things, clearly manifest that you were created for
a higher and more honorable End? Does not this Figure of the Body you bear,
the Stature erect, the Head on high, and Eyes raised toward Heaven, (a Figure
opposite to that of Beasts, which looks only upon the Earth) teach you that you
are not made for the Earth?

Pronaque cum spectent Animalia caetera Ovid Metaph. terram
Os Homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad Sidera tollere Vultus.
And whereas others see with down-cast Eyes,
He with a lofty Look did Man endue,
And bad hi^ Heavens transcendent Glories view.
Beasts are made for the Earth, they there find their Happiness, and for that
reason they regard nothing but the Earth: But you, dear Theotime, you are
Created for Heaven; that is the Place of your Habitation, as it is that of your
Origin; your Soul came from Heaven, and it ought to return thither.

But what find you in Heaven, that can render you happy? Will it be the sight
of the Firmament, with all those beauteous Stars? Of the Sun, Vas admirabile
opus excelsi. Eccles. 43.
that admirable Vessel, that excellent Work of God? And of all that is
Wonderful and Great in Heaven? Not at all. All these things are not capable to
effect your Felicity, God has esteemed them too mean for you; he made them for
your Service, not to be the Object and Cause of your Happiness. In a word,
Consider all that is in the Universe, and all those vast and wonderful things
which God has Created, all this is not able to accomplish your Beatitude, and
God has not made you for any of these things.

For what then? For nothing less than himself, to possess and enjoy him in
Heaven. He has not judged the most beauteous of his Creatures worthy of you;
he has given himself to be the Object of your Happiness. Nimirum ad imaginem
Dei facta anima rationalis, caeteris omnibus occupari potest, repleri omnino
non potest; capacem Dei quicquid Deo minus est non implebit. S. Beru. in
Declama.
For this reason he communicated to you a Soul, formed to his Image, capable to
possess him, and which by reason of this Capacity is never content nor
satisfied with the Possessions and Delights of this Life, as every one sensibly
finds by Experience.

You were not then made for Creatures, dear Theotime, but for the Creator. Your
last End is not the enjoyment of Created things, but of God himself. You were
Created to be Happy by the possession of a God in Heaven, Oculus non vidit, nec
auris audivit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, quae praeparavit Deus iis qui
diligunt illum. 1 Cor. 2.
and to reign with him in a Felicity incomprehensible to Human Understanding:
And this for all Eternity, that is, for a Time which shall never end, and shall
continue as long as God himself. This is the most noble End for which you are
designed; This is the Inheritance which your Celestial Father has prepared for
you; This is the End for which he has Created you, and at which the Creation
of all this visible World, which was framed for your sake, does aim.

This being so, convert your thoughts now upon your self, to make reflection
upon Two things.

First, What have you done hitherto in order to that blessed End for which God
has designed you? Two important Reflections upon the last End.
Have you aspired thither with all your Heart? Have you endeavored to make
your self worthy? Alas, perhaps as yet you have not had a serious thought of
it; perhaps you are far removed from it by a Life full of Sins, imitating the
generality of Men, who turn their Backs to that happy Country to which their
Heavenly Father calls them. O Blindness of Men, how great art thou! O my dear
Child, how do I deplore your Misfortune, if you be of that number!

Wherefore consider in the Second place what you have to do from henceforth, in
order to obtain that happy End for which you are Created. How long will it be,
that you will think so little of your dear Country! How long will you forget
Heaven, O you Child of Heaven! O Man, S. Pet. Chrysol. Sermon. 71. O homo, quid
tibi commune cum terris, qui confiteris tibi genus esse de coelis? ergo
coelestem vitam monstra in habitatione terrena: quia si quid in te gesserit
terrena cogitatio, coelo maculam, coelesti generi injurium intulisti.
(says S. Peter Chrysologus) what have you common with the Earth, you who
acknowledge your self of a Heavenly Extraction, when you say, Our Father which
art in Heaven? Manifest therefore a Celestial Life in an Earthly Habitation; If
you live otherwise, you stain your noble Stock, and offer a great Injury to
your Heavenly Origin. Conclude then, dear Theotime, and make here a holy
Resolution to aspire to that happy End for which you were Created, and to
labor carefully to make your self worthy, by a Life not degenerating from that
of the Child of God, designed to possess Heaven, and God himself, entirely
flying Sin, the only Obstacle which can divert you from it, and destroy you for
ever.

CHAP. II.
Of our Vocation to the Grace of Baptism, and the Obligations thereof.
MOTIVE II.
AFTER you have known the End for which God has Created you, Means to come to
the last End or necessary Knowledge.
you must understand the Means he has appointed to obtain it, which consists
in the Favor he has done you, in making you a Christian, and withdrawing you
by the Grace of Baptism, from the universal Destruction of Mankind caused by
Sin.

Here, Theotime, you ought to apply a serious Attention, to comprehend the
greatness of this inestimable Benefit, which is a Business of vast Importance
to be known in your Youth, to avoid the ordinary Misfortune of Christians, the
greatest part of whom are absolutely ignorant of what it is to be a Christian,
and of what that Name and State obliges them to. This is the cause why they are
so undeserving, leading a Life altogether contrary to the Sanctity of their
State, and why they are misfortunately lost in the Vocation wherein alone they
might be Saved.

For this reason I beseech you in the Name of God, to read attentively this
Chapter, which I shall divide into two Articles.

ARTICLE I.
Of the Excellence of the State of a Christian, and of the Favor God has
bestowed on him whom he has called to this State.
YOU are a Christian, Theotime, What it is to be a Christian.
by the Grace of God; but do you understand what this is, and what you are in
this Quality? Take notice of it, and learn to know the great Favor God
bestowed on you, upon the Day of your Baptism.

By the Baptism which you have received, you are washed from Original Sin, by
the Merits of the Qui dilexit nos and lavit nos a peccatis nostris in sanguine
suo. Apoc. 1.
Blood of Jesus Christ; withdrawn from the universal Curse of Mankind incurred
by Sin, Eramus natura filii irae sicut and caeteri. Deus autem qui dives est in
misericor dia propter nimiam charitatem suam qua dilexit nos, convivificavit
nos in Christo. Ephesians. 2.
delivered from the Power of the Devil. You have been made the Omnes filii Dei
estis per fidem in Christo Jesu. Gal. 2.
Son of God, the Disciple of Jesus Christ your Savior. You have acquired God
for your Father, Jesus Christ for your Magister vester unus est Christus. Matt.
23.
Master, your Instructor, your Example, and for the Rule of your Life; The Holy
Church for your Mother, and Tutress; The Angels for your Guardians, the Saints
for your Intercessors. You have been made the Templum Dei estis, and Spiritus
Dei habitat in vobis. 1 Cor. 3.
Temple of God, who dwells in you by Grace, the Haeredes regni quod promisit
Deus diligentibus se. Jacob. 2.
Inheritor of his Eternal Kingdom, from the right and hope whereof you were
fallen for ever, and you are reduced into the secure way to arrive there, being
made a Member of Jesus Christ, and of his Church, out of which there is no
Salvation, and wherein you are now Illuminated with the Light of the Faith of
Jesus Christ, Instructed with his Doctrine, Nourished with his precious Body and
Blood, assisted with his Grace, Furnished with all the necessary Means for your
Salvation. O God, how Noble, and how Honorable is the State of a Christian!
What Acknowledgments, Theotime, ought you to render to Almighty God, who has
heaped upon you such vast Benefits!

To comprehend better the greatness thereof, consider yet that which follows.

1. Three important Considerations.
God was not at all obliged to show you that Kindness, but it is a pure Effect
of his Mercy, and of the Immense Love he has born you. It Non ex operibus
justitiae quae fecimus nos; sed secundum misericordiam suam salvos nos secit
per lavacrum regenerationis Spiritus Sancti, quem effudit in nos abunde per
Jesum Christum Salvatorem nostrum. Ad Tit. 3.5.
was not (says the Apostle S. Paul) for our good Works, but by his Mercy that
God has saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly by Jesus Christ our Savior.

2. Without this Grace which God has given you, you could never have been
Saved: For there is no Salvation without Faith, and without the Profession of
the Christian Catholic Religion. Where would you have been, if God had not
showed you this Mercy?

3. He has not done this Favor to thousands of Men who live in Pagan
Countries, in the Darkness of lgnorance and Sin: Nor to so many Heretics, who
although they be Baptized as you, yet live in Error separated from the true Faith
of the Catholic Church, Columna and firmamentum veritatis. 1 Timothy 3.
which is the Pillar and Prop of Truth. Why were not you of that number? Why
has God made you to be born in a Christian Country rather than others, and in
the Bosom of the Catholic Church, where you are Instructed in the Divine
Mysteries, and things necessary for your Salvation? Where have you merited this
Favor? What Happiness is it for you, dear Theotime, to have had a Trial of so
great Bounty of our God? Beati sumus, O Israel, Baruc. 4.
quia quae Deo placent manifesta sunt nobis. O how Fortunate are we by the
Mercy of God, which has called us to the knowledge of his Divine Mysteries, and
Adorable Will! He has not showed this Kindness to all the World: Non fecit
taliter omni nationi, and judicia sua non manifestavit eis. Ps. 147.
And why has he done it to us rather than others? O dear Theotime, how is it
possible that we should not fix our Affection upon a God who has loved us so
much?

Learn here from a Christian King the Esteem you ought to have for your
Vocation. St. Lewis King of France, had such a Value for the Favor God showed
him in making him a Christian, that he not only preferred it before his
Kingdom, as in effect it is infinitely above, but having been Baptized in the
Cast of Poissy, he would bear that Name, and be called Lewis of Poissy, and in
that manner Signed his Letters and Dispatches, esteeming that Title more
glorious than that of the King of France. Magis se membrum esse Ecclesiae quam
in terris regnare gaudebat. Aug. l. 5. de Civ. Dei c. 20.
And S. Augustine speaking of the Emperor Theodosius, says, That he accounted
himself more happy for being a Member of the Church, than for being Emperor of
the World. These Great Men, Theotime, knew how to value the Grace of
Christianity, according to its real worth.

ARTICLE II.
Of the great Obligations of a Christian.
IF the Vocation to Christianity be so high a Favor, Three great Christian
Obligations.
what are the Obligations of it? Doubtless very great, and far others than what
the generality of Christians imagine. Be attentive, Theotime, and learn what
your Profession obliges you to.

It obliges you to believe firmly, First Obligation of Christians.
all that God has revealed to us by his Son Jesus Christ, which is comprised
in Four Heads; viz. The Mysteries of Faith, The Maxims of Virtue which he
Preached, The Recompense of the Good, And the Punishment of the Wicked. You
received Baptism only upon this Condition. The Priest, before he Baptized,
demanded of you, Do you Believe the Father, the Son our Savior and Redeemer,
and the Holy Ghost? And you have answered by the Mouth of your Godfather,
Credo, I Believe. But remember that this Faith ought to be Firm, Generous, and
Efficacious. Firm, Three Conditions of Faith.
not doubting of any thing that ought to be assented unto. Generous, not being
ashamed to make Profession of it before Men. Efficacious, living according to
the Verities you believe, as we are about to say, and not by your Actions
giving the Lie unto your Faith; Qui confitentur se nosce Deum, factis autem
negant. Tit. 1.
imitating many Christians, who, as the Apostle says, Confess Jesus Christ with
their Mouth, and deny him by their Works.

The Profession of Christianity obliges you to renounce the Devil, Second
Christian Obligation.
and all his Works. This is also a Condition with which you were received to
Baptism. The Priest asking you, Abrenuntias Satanae and omnibus pompis ejus,
and omnibus operibus ejus?
Do you Renounce the Devil, and all his Pomps, and all his Works? And you have
answered, Abrenuntio, I Renounce. O Theotime, have you ever reflected upon this
Renunciation, and do you understand well what it is? It is a solemn Profession
which you have made, not to Serve any more the Devil, nor follow his Pomps,
that is, the false Appearances of Earthly Goods and Pleasures, by the love of
which he endeavors to seduce and destroy Men; and to fly from all his Works,
which are the Works of Darkness and Sin. It is a Profession which you have made
in the Hands of the Church, in the sight of Angels, and wherein, In qua
professione non hominibus, sed Deo and angelis ejus conscribentibus, dixistis
renuntio, renuntiate non solum vocibus sed etiam moribus, non tantum sono
linguae sed actu vitae. S. Aug. l. 4. de Symbolo ad Catechum. c. 4.
as S. Augustine says, you have made a Renunciation, not speaking to Man, but to
God, and the Angels, who are Witnesses and Depositaries of your Word, and who
carefully keep it in Heaven. You are obliged to observe this Renunciation which
you have made; you have abjured the Devil by your Words, you must also abandon
him by your Life and Actions, if you will not be accounted a perfidious Person,
and a Fugitive. Alas, Theotime, have you done so? But at least, Will you do it
for the future? Is it possible that you should return to that Enemy, which you
have so solemnly renounced. Aug. ibid.
Quid tibi cum pompis Diaboli, quibus renuntiasti? Quid tibi cum pompis
Diaboli, amator Christi?

The Profession of a Christian obliges you to live in Virtue, Third Obligation
of a Christian.
and Innocence, flying Sin more than Death. To admonish you of this Obligation,
the Priest, after he had Baptized you, Clothed you with a white Garment,
speaking these Words; Receive this white Garment, Accipe vestem candidam, quam
immaculatam perferas ante thronum Dei.
which you shall carry without Spot or Stain before the Judgment Seat of God:
To make you remember by that exterior Whiteness, and by those Words, to
conserve diligently the Beauty, and interior Purity which your Soul had then
received by the Grace of Baptism. O Theotime, meditate well upon these Words,
and call to mind what will befall you at the Judgment of God, if you defile
that Innocence by a Life full of Sin. This white Robe with which you have been
Clothed, will condemn you in that dreadful Day; The Priest who has Baptized
you, will rise up against you, and demand of God, Vengeance for the Abuse you
have offered to the Grace of your Baptism.

I shall recount to you for this purpose a memorable Action of a Deacon of
Carthage called Murita, toward the Judge Elpidophorus an Arian, who having been
received by him at the Font of Baptism, had renounced afterward the Catholic
Faith. This holy Deacon being Cited before that wicked Judge, to give an Account
of his Faith, carried with him the white Garment with which he had Clothed him
in his Baptism, and exposing it to the view of all, spoke to him these Words,
with which he drew Tears from all that were present; Victor Vticensis lib. 3.
persecut. Vandalorum. Haec sunt linteamenta, Elpidophore, Minister Erroris,
quae te accusabunt, dum majestas venerit Judicantis, custodiente diligentia mea
ad testimonium tuae perditionis, ad demergendum te in abyssum putei
sulphurantis, haec te immaculatam cinxerant de Font surgentem, haec te acrius
persequentur, flammantem gehennam cum caeperis possidere.
Behold, O Elpiphodorus, Minister of Error, the white Garment, which will
accuse you before the Divine Majesty, at the Day of Judgment. I have carefully
preserved it to be the Proof of your Apostasy, and to precipitate you into the
abyss of Hell: It served you as an Ornament when you came from Baptism, washed
and cleans'd from your Sins; and it shall serve to make you suffer more
sensibly the Eternal Flames.

CHAP. III.
That God requires, and singularly accepts the Service of young People.
MOTIVE III.
AFTER the precedent Considerations, Three Considerations to oblige Men to
Serve God in their Youth.
I pass to others yet more particular, to convince you of the most strict
Obligation you have to Consecrate your self to God in your Youth. The first
which I advance is, That God earnestly desires to be Served by you in that Age,
and that the Service of young People is particularly agreeable to him. I shall
make clear this Truth by Three Reasons.

First, First Reason.
Because the Time of Youth is the Beginning of Life. Now it is certain, that
amongst all things God demands particularly the First and Beginnings. He
ordained for this reason in the ancient Law, that the First Fruits of all
things that grew should be Offered to him: He would have amongst the Fruits,
the First that was gathered to be Presented to him; Amongst Beasts, the First
to be Offered in Sacrifice to him; And amongst Men, the Eldest Sons to be
Presented in his Temple to Serve there, permitting them afterward to be
Redeemed; showing by this Institution, that although all things did equally
appertain unto him, yet he had a special Esteem for the First, as those which
above all others were due unto him, and which he required in Title of
Acknowledgment. Whence it evidently follows, That the Time of Youth being the
beginning and first part of our Life, God demands it particularly, and would
have it Presented unto him, to be faithfully Employed in his Service.

Secondly, Second Reason.
The Time of Youth is most pleasing to God, because properly speaking,
according to the natural Order of things, it is the most innocent part of Life,
and least corrupted by Sin: Because in that Time one has not so full a
knowledge of Evil, nor so much ability, and occasion to perform it: Ones
Judgment is not prejudicated by the false Maxims of the World, nor his Manners,
nor Inclinations depraved by the Infection of the Wicked. Besides, the Grace
received in Baptism being yet fresh, renders that Age more agreeable to God, at
least in the Person of those, who by a Life full of Sin, trample not under
their Feet that Grace, and Robe of Innocence.

But take notice, Theotime, I have said, That that Age is less corrupted,
commonly speaking, and according to the natural Order of things; yet it is but
too true, that many times much Corruption is found therein; but this against
the Order Nature has established, which has given to that Age for its
Portion, a Simplicity of Mind, and Innocence of Manners; and those are so much
more culpable, who by their Malice and Depravation, corrupt what Nature had
rendered as it were consonant to it, learning Wickedness, and running after it,
in an Age where Nature her self taught nothing but Simplicity and Innocence.

The Third Reason which declares that God particularly desires to be Served by
you in your Youth, Third Reason.
dear Theotime, is, That it is the Time where you have the most occasion to
make appear that you love God sincerely: For it is the Time of the first
Temptations, wherein you begin to be moved to renounce his Love, and Service.
You are tempted by your own Passions, which are then in their prime violence:
Invited by those of your Age, who often solicit you to Wickedness, either by
their Example or by their Discourse: Provoked by the Enemy of your Salvation,
who uses all his Endeavors to withdraw you from the Service of God, and secure
himself quickly of your Person. So that this Time may properly be called the
Time of Combat, and Trial; wherein you show you love God with a constant and
real Affection, if you courageously resist those first Assaults. Gubernator in
tempestate dignoscitur, in acie miles probatur. Delicata jactatio est cum
periculum non est: conflictatio in adversis probatio est veritatis. S. Cypr.
lib. de Mortalitate.
It is but a small thing to be Generous in Time of Peace, to have Courage when
one is not Attackt, not to commit Wickedness when one is not Tempted; But to
resist Evil, and fly from Sin in the Time of Temptation, and in the Age where
one finds the greatest danger of being ruined, is a real Proof of true Virtue,
and an assured Mark that one loves God above all things.

These Reasons, Theotime, make appear, that God has a special Affection for
the Service of young Persons, which being employed in the flight of Sin, and
Service of God, are the most agreeable that can be Offered unto him. And, as a
Learned Author says excellently well, Qui hac aetate se domant, and Deo se
sociant, offerunt Deo Hostiam viventem, Deo placentem, immaculatam. Hugo a
Sanct. Vict.
those who in this Time of Youth overcome themselves, resisting courageously
the Temptation of Sin, to Consecrate themselves entirely to the Service of God,
Offer in their Youth a continual Sacrifice, wherein they Present to God a
living Victim, and a most agreeable Offering to God without Spot, since they
have a horror for the uncleanness of Sin, and make a perfect Oblation in all
Points. O Theotime, retain well this Truth in your Mind, and never forget it.

CHAP. IV.
That God particularly loves young People, and takes a delight to bestow upon
them many Favors.
I SAY moreover, Theotime, Fourth Consideration to Serve God in Youth.
that God not only earnestly desires to be Served by you in your Youth, but
loves you in that Age with a particular Kindness, and takes a delight to bestow
upon you more Favors at that Time than in any other, to assist you to Serve
him, and to attract you to it more powerfully. This Verity is no less certain
than the former; See how I Prove it.

God is pleased with his Favors particularly to assist Three sorts of Persons;
The Weak, The Simple, that is, those who have least knowledge of Evil; And the
Humble. The Weak, because there the force of his Grace does most appear. Deus
non projiciet Simplicem, nec porriget manum Malignis. Job 8.
The Simple, because having less knowledge of Evil, they ordinarily put the
least Impediments to the Grace of God, who, as the Sacred Scripture says, Cum
Simplicibus Sermocinatio ejus. Prove. 3.
Rejects not the Simple, as he stretches not out his Hand to assist the
Wicked. The Humble, because as the chief Obstacle of the Grace of God is Pride,
so the best Disposition to obtain it, is Humility, according to that Saying of
Scripture, Deus superbis resistit, humilibus autem dat gratiam. Jacob. 4.
God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble.

Now these Three Qualities ordinarily occur in Youth; There is found in Youth
the most Weakness, not only of Body but Mind, the Judgment not being as yet
well formed by Knowledge and Experience, nor the Will sufficiently fixed against
Impressions contrary to its Good. There is in Youth more Simplicity, having
less knowledge of Evil, and less discernment than in a more advanced Age. There
is also in Youth more Humility, which is as it were natural to that Age, which
is framed to be Subject and Obey; and if Pride be found, as it happens but too
often, in young Minds, it is by an extreme Corruption, which subverts the Order
of things, and destroys Nature her self. Hence it manifestly follows, That God,
who is delighted to make his Bounty appear toward those who have most need of
it, and render not themselves undeserving, is pleased to communicate many
Favors to young People, and to cherish them with good Thoughts and Desires,
and all other Assistances of his Grace, when they oppose not him by their
wicked Life, and make not themselves unworthy, by corrupting the Innocence of
their Age with the malice of their Mind, and by the multitude of their Sins.

For Confirmation of this Truth, there needs no other Testimony than
Experience, which makes it appear most manifestly. Alas! Theotime, how many are
there, who advancing forward out of Youth, find in themselves a great Change,
not being partakers any more of so many Favors as they received in their
Youth? Then holy Inspirations were frequent, good Desires, and pious
Resolutions were familiar to them; they had an aversion and apprehension of
Evil, Goodness was agreeable to them, Virtue was sweet and facil to them. But
now they find that all these things are changed; Inspirations more rare, Sin
causes in them a less horror; Devotion becomes cold, and sometimes totally
extinct, by a sad alteration, which makes them with much reason regret the Time
past, and Favors lost, which those Words of Job, Quis mihi tribuat ut sim
juxta menses pristinos, secundum dies quibus Deus custodiebat me, sicut sui in
diebus adolescentiae meae quando erat omnipotens mecum. Job 29.
Who will show me the kindness that I may see again the Time past, and the
State wherein I was in my Youth, when God was with me by the assistance of his
Grace?

S. Augustine did very notably Experience this Change in his own Person, as he
himself acknowledges in his Confessions; for he says, That being Vidisti Deus
meus! quo motu animi and qua fide baptismum Christi tui, Dei and Domini mei
flagitavi a pietate matris meae and matris omnium Ecclesiae tuae. Aug. l. 1.
Confess. c. 19.
fallen into a Sickness when he was yet a young Youth, he demanded Baptism with
very great Earnestness and Devotion, which was deferred him for some particular
Reasons. Neque desiderabam in illo tanto periculo baptismum tuum, and melior
eram puer, quando illum de materna pietate flagitavi, sicut jam recordatus and
confessus sum. Ibid. lib. 5. cap. 9.
And that in another great Distemper which he had about Thirty Years of Age, he
never thought of asking for it. O Theotime, I beseech God that this Change and
Sorrow never befall you: But it happens to many, and shows clearly the Love God
bears to young Persons, and the Favors he bestows upon them, which he does not
withdraw from them, but when they contemn them, and make themselves unworthy.

But if you will yet have a convincing and demonstrative Proof of the
particular Love God bears young People, consider what the Son of God did upon
this Occasion whilst he was in the World. Besides that he would become himself
a Child, and pass through all the Degrees of Age, of Infancy, of Childhood, of
Youth, he being able to dispense with himself, and become a perfect Man from
his first Entrance into the World, how often did he during his Life, testify
his Love and Tenderness for that Age? Matthew. 19. Marc. 10. Luc. 18.
The Gospel recounts in many places, how he frequently called to him little
Children, and commanded they should be permitted to approach to him; He was
displeased when they were never so little hindered from drawing near him, saying
that it was to them that the Kingdom of Heaven did appertain; Sinite parvulos
venire ad me, talium est enim regnum coelorum. Et complectens eos, and imponens
manus super eos, benedicebat eis. Marc. 20.
He embraced them with an admirable Tenderness, and sent them not back till he
had imposed his Hands upon them, and given them his holy Benediction.

The most notable Cures he wrought were of young People; Amat Christus
Infantiam, quam and animo suscepit and corpore: amat Christus Infantiam,
humilitatis magistram, innocentiae regulam, mansuetudinis formam. Aug. Scrm. 8.
de Epiph.
Such was the Son of the King, who was ready to expire, in John Chap. 4.
Another who was tormented with the Devil, Mat. 17. The Servant of the
Centurion, and the Daughter of the Cananean.

Of the three Dead which he raised to Life, two were very young, viz. the
Daughter of Jairus, and the Son of the Widow of Naim; and the third, who was
Lazarus, was not in Years. Of the twelve Apostles, he loved particularly the
youngest, which was S. John.

Lastly, What greater Proofs can we bring of the Love Jesus Christ bears young
People, than the Two which I shall speak of?

The First is the Assurance he has given, Qui susceperit parvulum talem in
nomine meo, me suscipit. Mat. 18.
that all the Favors which shall be bestowed upon them, shall be accounted as
done to himself. He (says he) that receives a Little One in my Name, receives
Me.

The Second is that dreadful Menace which he afterward uttered against those
that Scandalize the Little Ones, that is, who make them fall into any Sin. Qui
autem scandalizaverit unum de pusillis istis qui in me credunt, expedit ei ut
suspendatur mola asinaria in collo ejus, and demergatur in profundum maris.
Mat. 18.
If any one (says he) Scandalize the Little Ones who believe in Me, it were
better a Millstone were tied about his Neck, and he cast into the bottom of the
Sea. Was not this a great Token of the singular Affection Jesus Christ bore to
young Souls, since he speaks with so much Zeal and Indignation against those
who contribute the withdrawing them from his Service?

These, dear Theotime, are convincing Proofs of the Love God has for you in
your Youth. After these Assurances you have had thereof, can you refuse the
Love and Service he demands of you in this Age? Doubtless you cannot without an
extreme Ingratitude, and without offering him a most enormous Affront, as we
are about to see.

CHAP. V.
That they who Consecrate not themselves to God in their Youth, offer him a
most heinous Injury.
THIS Truth evidently follows out of the Two former; Fifth Consideration to
Serve God in Youth.
for if it be true as we have manifested, That God desires and demands
particularly the Service of young People, and has an extreme Love for that
Age, on which he bestows very singular Favors to assist it, and invite it to
his Service; It follows, The Injury that is done to God by not Serving him in
that Age
That to refuse him the Service he desires, and requires with so much Justice,
and not to answer the Love he testifies to Youth by so many Favors and
Benefits, is to offer him a most heinous and enormous Affront. But because this
Verity is of such Consequence, that it can never be sufficiently inculcated, I
shall make you see it more distinctly by the Three following Considerations,
which I beseech you to Examine well.

First, First Reason of this Injury.
Not to Consecrate the Time of Youth to the Service of God, is to take away a
certain and assured Time, which you may give him, to reserve him an uncertain,
which you are not sure to have, and which is not in your power, viz. the Time
to come. This is the First Degree of the Injury you offer to God. You promise
God to Serve him when you are older. Who has told you that you shall live a
long time? If you are not certain to be alive to Morrow, how are you sure to
live Ten Years hence? There are more who die before Twenty or Twenty five Years
of Age, than after. Now if you have no assurance to live a long time, is it not
a great Injury you do to God, to promise him the Time to come, which you have
not, nor is in your power, and refuse him the Time present, which you enjoy?
What think you, Theotime, does not he deride God, who acts in this manner? and
does he not evidently manifest that he has no true Will to Serve him,
deferring to Consecrate himself to him in a Time which perhaps may never come?

Secondly, Second Reason.
You not only reserve an uncertain Time for God, but take away the better to
give him the worse. For refusing to Serve God, and apply your self to Virtue in
your Youth, which is, as we said before, ordinarily less depraved by Vice, and
most favored by Kindnesses from God, you reserve to your self a Time wherein
all things conspire to hinder you, and render you unfit for Good, and the
Exercise of Virtue. The Inconveniences of the Body which daily are caused, the
Inveterate Vicious Habits wherein you will be Engaged, the Perplexity of
Worldly Affairs, the Solicitude of Temporal Things, the Spirit and Maxims of
the World, which you have Embraced. Totus mundus in maligno positus. 1 John 5.
The World, which (as S. John says) is entirely plunged in Vice and Corruption,
which breaths after nothing but Pleasures, Covetousness, Pride, and has no more
thought of Salvation and Eternity, than if there were no such thing at all.

All these things will bring an incredible Impediment to your Salvation, and
will absolutely divert you from the Service of God, if you prevent not them in
good time, by applying your self in your Youth to the Flight of Sin, and to the
Practice of Virtue. Judge then of the Injury you do to God, deferring to Serve
him in a Time where you shall have so many Hindrances, and not resolving to
Serve him another where you have so many Means and Advantages. Doubtless this
is a grievous Injury; Yet this is not all, take notice of that which follows.

That which fully concludes the Enormity of the Injury offered to God, is,
Third Reason.
That not intending to Serve him in your Youth, you will give him nothing but
the remainder of Sin, delaying to Serve him till after you have passed your
Time merrily in your Youth, satisfied all your Passions, and followed the
wicked Inclinations of your Age; So that the Time you reserve, is but the
remnant of what you have employed in Sin, and Service of the Devil.

Do you comprehend, Theotime, the heinousness of this Injury, and the Indignity
with which you treat your God, and your Creator? Nescitis, quia Templum Dei
estis, and Spiritus Dei habitat in vobis. 1 Cor. 3.
Your Soul is made to be the Temple and Dwelling of God, and you will not allow
it him, till after you have a long time prostituted it to the Devil for his
Retiring-place, and after you have defiled it with a vast number of Crimes. All
your Life ought to be Consecrated to the Service of God, and you will Employ
the first and better Part in the Service of the Devil, reserving to God only
that which would be no more useful to Sin. Can there be an Indignity equal to
this? What would you say of a Man that would Serve up to the Table of a Prince,
nothing but the Remainders and Scraps of Dogs, and Swines-meat? This you would
say were horrible; and have not you a horror for the same thing, which you
perform far more criminally toward God, keeping for his Service only the
Remainders of your Passions, which you have brutishly satisfied during your
Youth? Is not this a horrible Affront you offer to God? Offertis super altari
meo panem pollutum. Mal. 1.
If God complained so much of those of the Old Law, because they Offered upon
his Altar profane and unclean Bread; what Complaints will he not make of you,
who shall Offer unto him only the Remnant of your Life, defiled with all sort
of Impurity? If he lays a Curse upon him who retains the better Part for
himself, and Presents the worst to him in Sacrifice; Maledictus dolosus qui
habet in grege suo masculum, and votum faciens immolat debile Domino. Ibid.
Cursed (says he) is the Deceiver, who chooses the Lame to make an Offering of
it to God; What Maledictions ought not you to stand in dread of, you who not
only Sacrifice to him the worst, but make it your Design to give him nothing
but the remainder of what has served to the Pleasure and Disorder of your
Youth? I would to God we had not seen so many Effects of this Curse of God upon
many young People, as we take notice of every Day, by dreadful Accidents,
sudden Deaths, rejecting of God, obdurateness in Vice, and many other
Misfortunes, which are the Effects of Thy just Choler, O Almighty God! by which
Thou daily Punishest those who offer Thee this Injury, who forget Thee in their
Youth to follow their wicked Inclinations, and who would not Serve Thee but
after they had Served Sin, their Passions, and the Devil.

CHAP. VI.
How God has an Aversion for wicked young People. Considerable Examples upon
this Subject.
AFTER what we have said, Sixth Consideration, the Anger of God against vicious
young Persons.
there is no need of Proving this Proposition, which is a necessary Consequence
from the Three former: For how can it be but that God should have an extreme
Aversion for those, who contemn the Honor he does them, in particularly
desiring their Service; who are not moved with the Love he bears them, and who
on the contrary treat him with so much Indignity and Contempt as we have shown?
God has an Aversion for all Sinners, as he himself has said; Odio sunt Deo
impius and impietas ejus. Sap. 14.
Aversor Impium, I detest the Wicked. But this Aversion is greatest against
those, to whom he has testified most Love and Benevolence, and who unworthily
abuse it. Love offended is changed into Indignation, and Bounty contemned and
ill treated, becomes a merciless Fury.

That this is so, besides these Reasons which clearly demonstrate it,
Experience makes it appear with undoubted Certainty, by the Effects which God
frequently shows, of that Aversion he has for vicious young People. I shall
recount here Four very notable Examples, all taken out of the Sacred Scripture,
that no one may doubt of them, and that from these one may give a Judgment of
others.

The First Example is of the Two Children of Judas the Son of the Patriarch
Jacob. This Man had Seven Children, the Two elder whereof were Wicked and
Vicious. Behold what the Scripture says of the First, Genesis 38.
whose Name was Her; Fuit quoque Her nequam in conspectu Domini and ab eo
occisus est. Her, the eldest Son of Judas, was wicked in the sight of God, and
his Life was taken away by him. And immediately after it is said of the Second,
named Onan, that God struck him with Death, for a Sin of Impurity which he had
committed, which the Scripture in that place calls Detestable. Idcirco
percussit eum Dominus eo quod rem detestabilem faceret; God struck him with
Death, because he had done a detestable Action. This Sin, although detested by
God himself, and chastis'd with so Exemplary a Punishment, by a deplorable
Misfortune, is but too common amongst Youth, upon which it draws the Divine
Indignation either visibly or invisibly.

The Second Example is of the Two Children of the High Priest Heli, 1 Reg. 3.
and 4.
called Ophni and Phinees. These Two young Men were Employed by their Father in
the Ministry of the Temple and Sacrifices, wherein they behaved themselves very
ill, committing great Irrevrences in the Temple, and high Injustices toward
the Faithful, who came to Offer their Sacrifices to God, requiring from them,
by an insatiable Avarice, more than justly was their due: Insomuch that the
Sacred Scripture says that they were the Porro filii Heli filii Belial,
nescientes Dominum.
Children of Belial; so it calls those whom it would signify to be very
wicked, and absolutely ruined: For Belial is as much as to say, Absque jugo,
having lost the Fear of God, and the remembrance of their Duty; and it adds
that their Erat ergo peccatum puerorum grande nimis coram Domino.
Sin was very enormous in the sight of God. Their Iniquity drew upon them so
great an Indignation of God, that he sent by a Videbis aemulum tuum in Templo,
in universis prosperis Israel, and non erit senex in domo tua omnibus diebus,
pars magna domus tuae morietur cum ad virilem aetatem venerit.
Prophet to tell the Father, too negligent in Correcting his Children, That he
would take a Revenge which should serve as an Example to all Posterity; That he
would exclude his Family from the High Priesthood to give to another; That the
greatest part of his Offspring should die in the Flower of their Youth, and
should not arrive at a perfect Age; And that his two Sons, Ophni and Phinees
should die both in one Day, and that all their Race should Juravi domui Heli
quod non expietur iniquitas domus ejus, victimis and muneribus usque in
aeternum.
bear for ever the Marks of their Iniquity, which should never be Expiated by
Victims and Sacrifices.

All this happened as he had foretold. A little while after Ophni and Phinees
were killed in a Defeat of the Philistians. On the same Day the Father hearing
the News of their Death, fell down backward, broke his Head, and died upon the
Place. Many other Misfortunes happened that Day, and amongst others, the Ark of
the Testament was taken by the Enemies; And all the rest of the Prediction was
fulfilled a little after.

The Third Example is of Amnon, 2 Reg. 13.
the eldest Son of David. The Scripture recounts but one wicked Action of his,
yet one so black and detestable, that it necessarily supposes many others; it
being certain, that a Man never ascends on a sudden to the height of Impiety,
and that great Crimes are the Effect of a Soul abandoned by God for her
precedent Sins. This young Prince having permitted his Heart to be overcome
with unchaste Love, lets himself be carried away in such a manner, that this
brutish Passion, which ordinarily moves to heinous Extremities, and enormous
Crimes, making him lose the most inviolable Laws of Nature, excited him to love
unchastly his own Sister; whereupon, when he could not obtain her Consent to
such an abominable Proposal, he adds Force to Passion, committing in one only
Action two most enormous Crimes, Violence and Incest.

But the Divine Justice did not wait long, before it made appear what a Horror
it had for the Crimes and wicked Life of this young Prince: For, two Years
after he was killed by his own Brother Absalom, who had concealed this Revenge
in his Heart all that time. O God, how terrible are thy Judgments!

The Fourth, which is of Absalom, 2 Reg. 13 and 14.
the Third Son of David, who was no better than his Brother Amnon. He had a
proud, dissembling, revengeful, and highly ambitious Mind, having a mighty
Esteem for himself, and his own Beauty, which by report of Scripture was
extraordinary. The first wicked Action which the Scripture relates of him, but
which must needs have been preceded by many others, is the Murder of his
Brother Amnon, which was an abominable Crime. For this Action he was cast out
of his Father's Favor, and banished from him for the space of five Years,
after which he was recalled, and admitted to his Favor again. He was scarce
returned to his Father's Court, when he begins to devise a famous Rebellion
against him: And having by his Addresses gained the Affection of the People, he
departs to a little Village, where he causes himself to be Proclaimed King.
After this he takes up Arms against his Father, constrains him to fly from the
City of Jerusalem, and pursues him with a strong Army, which he had raised to
deprive him of his Crown. What will the Divine Justice do here? Will it be
insensible of the Wrongs of such a degenerate Child? Hearken, Theotime, to what
the Sacred Scripture relates. David seeing himself brought to such Straits by
his Son, was obliged to make Head against him, and oppose him. He sets in order
the small Forces he had with him, sends them to Fight, gives him Battle.
Absolom's Men, though far more in number, are Defeated.

In this Discomfiture (O the Divine Judgments!) it happens that Absalom
endeavoring to save himself by Flight, was carried under a great Oak, and as
he wore his Locks very long, his Hair by a strange Accident, and particular
Permission of God, was so strongly entangl'd in the Branches of the Tree, that
the Mule he rode on could not carry him away, but continuing his Course, left
him hanging by the Head, without being able to disengage himself. David's
Soldiers seeing him in this Condition, came and ran him through with a Lance, and
killed him immediately, although David by an incredible Bounty, sending them to
the Battle, had expressly forbidden them to offer any hurt to his Person.

O Divine Justice! Thou show most clearly that Thou do not wink at the
Iniquities of wicked Children; and although Thou deferrest for a time the
Chastisement they deserve, to give them leisure to Repent, Thou afterward
punishest most severely their Obstinacy in Sin, and the Affront they offer to
Thy Goodness, with which Thou expectest their Repentance.

Behold, Four Examples out of the Sacred Scripture, which evidently manifest
how God has an Aversion for vicious young People; The same Scripture might
furnish us with many others. Ancient Histories are all full, and daily
Experience produces but too many Examples in these Times.

Take notice of one thing worthy of Consideration; An important Remark.
That in the Four precedent Examples are contained Three forts of Sins, which
render young People particularly odious to God, and which are the most ordinary
Causes of their Ruin. In the First and Third, the Sin of Impurity. In the
Second, the Contempt of Religion and Holy Things; to which may be referred the
Abuse of Ecclesiastical Benefices by young Incumbents, who many times draw upon
themselves and their Families, the Divine Malediction. In the Fourth, the
Contempt of Parents, and Rebellion against Fatherly Authority.

CHAP. VII.
That Salvation ordinarily depends on the Time of Youth.
WHAT we have said in the Four last Chapters, Seventh most important Motive
which obliges young People to Virtue.
has discovered unto you the Obligation you have to Serve God in your Youth,
by the Respect you owe to the Desire he has thereof, and for the Love he bears
you. A Respect which you cannot resist, without offering him a most heinous
Injury, and incurring his Aversion and Displeasure. Now I would make you know
the same Obligation by the Interest of your Salvation, and show you clearly,
that your Salvation has an extreme, and almost entire dependence on the Life
you lead during your Youth.

I would to God, Theotime, you, and all those of your Age, would comprehend
well, and never forget this Truth, which is unknown to the greatest part of
Men, the ignorance whereof causes the Ruin and Damnation of many. I wish all
Men understood, that the immense Eternity of Happiness or Misery, which expects
them after this Life, depends upon this first Time, which all the World
despises, and which the most part employs wickedly.

To convince you of this Verity, I shall produce the Sentiment of the Sacred
Scripture, that is, of the Holy Ghost himself, who brings such express
Testimonies, that it is impossible to doubt of it.

For why does it in so many places advertise young People to think of their
Salvation betimes, and to apply themselves to Virtue in their Youth, except it
were to show, that that Time is a Time of great Importance for their Salvation?

Why does it say in Ecclesiastes Memento Creatoris tui in diebus juventutis
tuae, antequam veniat tempus afflictionis. Eccles. 12.
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, before the Time of
Afflictions com^, and the sad and discomfortable Years approach? From whence
comes it, that it assures us in the Proverbs, That the Adolescens juxta viam
suam etiam senuerit, non recedet ab ea. Prove. 12.
young Man shall continue even until his old Age in the Way he has once
entered; that is, the manner of Life which he has begun? Wherefore does it say
by the Prophet Jeremy, That it is Bonum est homini cum portaverit jugum ab
adolescentia sua. Thren. 3.
good for a Man to carry his Yoke from his Youth; that is, to addict himself to
Virtue, and to bear the pleasing Yoke of Gods Commandments?

Why in Ecclesiasticus does it exhort young People so powerfully to Virtue, by
those excellent Words, able to win the most insensible Hearts? Son, Fili, a
juventute tua accipe doctrinam, and usque ad canos invenies sapientiam, quasi
is qui arat and seminat, accede ad eam, and sustine bonos fructus illius: in
opere enim illius paululum laborabis, and cito edes de generationibus illius.
Quam aspera est nimium sapientiae indoctis hominibus, and non permanebit in
illa excors. Quibus autem cognita est, permanet usque ad conspectum Dei. Eccl.
6.
receive Instructions from your Youth, and you shall find Wisdom even to the
end of your Life: Approach unto it as he who would Cultivate the Earth, that
is, with Care and Labor, and expect the pleasing Fruit which it will bring
you. You will labor a little to obtain it, but soon after you will taste of its
admirable Fruits. It Is true, Virtue is hard and difficult, but it is only to
those who are insensible and vicious. But those who have once known it well,
find it pleasing, and never part with it any more, and it will continue with
them even to the last accomplishment of their Salvation in Eternal Glory. And
all the rest of that Chapter is but a continual Exhortation to young People to
become Virtuous.

Wherefore in the Twenty fifth Chapter does it say, Quae in juventute tua non
congregasti quomodo in senectute tua invenies? Eccl. 25.
That it is impossible to find in old Age, what was not laid up in Youth?

And Lastly, Amongst the Books of Sacred Scripture, why was there one expressly
made for the Instruction of Youth, which is that of Proverbs? Does not all this
manifestly discover that the Holy Ghost would give Men to understand, that the
Time of Youth is of extreme Consequence, and the greatest Part esteem it not:
And that all Happiness and Misfortune of Men, whether in this Life or in the
next, depends ordinarily on that Time well or ill bestowed; It being commonly
most certain, that those obtain their Salvation, who in their Youth are bred up
in the Fear of God, and Observation of his Commandments; And that those who
have not been Educated in that Fear of God, or who cast it from before their
Eyes, to follow Sin with more Liberty, do misfortunately Perish.

All this Truth is raised from those Two Foundations, whereof the First is,
That those who have followed Virtue in their Youth, continue easily therein all
the remainder of their Life. And the Second, That on the contrary, those who
have given themselves over to Sin, at that time do very hardly correct
themselves, and most frequently are never withdrawn. We shall discover these
two Truths more amply in the following Chapters.

CHAP. VIII.
That those who have followed Virtue in their Youth, conserve it easily all the
remainder of their Life.
EXperience makes this Proposition so evident, Eighth Motive.
that it is accounted a thing most certain in the Sentiment of the Sacred
Scripture and understanding Men. To make you more sensible of it, I shall
discover unto you the Reasons thereof, relying upon both those Authorities.

The First is, That Habits gotten in Youth, are conserved a long time, and are
not easily lost.

This is clear in the Holy Scripture. Prove. 22.
The young Man will not leave in his old Age, the manner of Living he has once
begun, that is, very rarely. It is incredible how powerful the first
Impressions are, and how deeply the first Habits are rooted in young Souls. The
first Impressions of young Minds (says S. Jerome) are very hardly defaced; S.
Jero. Epist. ad Laet. Difficulter eraditur quod rudes animi perbiberunt:
lanarum conchylia quis in pristinum candorem revocet? recens testa diu and
saporem retinet and odorem quo primum imbuta est.
Wool which has once taken its first Tincture, does not easily lose it to
return to its former Candor; And an Earthen Vessel keeps long the Smell and
Taste of that Liquor wherewith it was first Seasoned. For this Reason the
Scripture says, Thren. 3.
That it is good, that is to say, very important, for a Man to addict himself
to Virtue in his Youth; Because having acquired it in that Time, it is easily
conserved the remainder of ones Life: As it says in that other place, Eccl. 6.
Receive Instruction in your Youth, and you shall find Wisdom even unto the end
of your Life.

S. Bernard says, S. Bern. lib. De ordi. vitae. Multi senes diu viventes, and
nihil proficientes, quia nullas sibi in opportuno tempore divitias congregarunt.
That we need not seek any other Causes why we see so many old Men full of
Vices, and destitute of all sorts of Virtues, but because they acquired them
not in their Youth, which is the proper Time for it. Senectus eorum qui
adolescentiam suam honestis artibus instrukerunt, and in lege Domini meditati
sunt, aetate fit doctior, usu certior, processu temporis sapientior, and
veterum studiorum dul^issimos fructus metit. Jerome. Epist. ad Nepot.
And S. Jerome describing the excellent Qualities of the old Age of those who
applied themselves to Virtue in their Youth, says, That they become more
Knowing by their Age, more Assured by Experience, more Discreet by the Process
of Time, and gather the agreeable Fruits of the ancient Labors of their Youth.

The Second Reason is, because Youth is the Time of most violent Temptations,
which being overcome, we easily surmount all others.

The Temptations of Pleasure are without question the most violent; Inter omnia
Christianorum certamina, duriora sunt praelia castitatis, ubi quotidiana pugna,
and rara victoria. S. Aug. Sermon. 250. de temp. Quem tormenta non vicerant,
superabat voluptas. Jer. in vit. Paulin.
they sometimes conquer those whom Torments could not overcome. Now although
these Temptations are common to all Ages, yet nevertheless it is most certain,
that they are ordinarily more strong and frequent in Youth, which, as
Adolescentia multa corporis bella sustinet, and inter incentiva vitiorum, and
carnis titillationes quasi ignis in lignis viridibus suffocatur. S. Jerome.
Epist. ad Nepot.
S. Jerome says, is a continual Combat of Chastity; and being environed with the
Occasions of Sin, and urged by the Provocations of the Flesh, it suffers very
much to conserve its Purity, like Fire that is almost choked with green Wood
heaped upon it.

But when by the Succors of Divine Grace, which, as we have shown above, are
greater and more abundant in Youth, as the Temptations are more frequent and
impetuous, one has gained the Victory in these first Encounters, it happens
soon after, that with less difficulty he surmounts all the others which are to
be undergone the whole Course of his Life, Militia est vita hominis super
terram. Job 7.
which according to Sacred Scripture, is a perpetual Combat.

The Reason is, Because Temptations diminish according to the proportion that
they are overcome; Divine Grace increases, Habenti dabitur and abunddabit. Mat.
25.
by how much better use is made of it; and a Heart accustomed to conquer,
yields not easily, since it daily acquires new Forces by its Victories. Sampson
being Exercised by Fighting with a Lion, became unconquerable by his Enemies;
And David having in his Youth surmounted Lions and Bears, he afterward, though
but yet young, overthrew the Giant Goliath, the Terror of the Host of Israel,
and was never overcome after in all the Battles he was Engaged in.

O dear Theotime, if you knew the Repose, and Tranquillity they enjoy, who have
behaved themselves gallantly in the Combats of their Youth, the desire of
partaking of that Sweetness would powerfully encourage you to resist them with
all your vigor! Learn it from the Holy Ghost by the Mouth of the Wiseman:
Son, Investiga illam and manifestabitur tibi: and continens factus ne
derelinquas eam: in novissimis enim invenies requiem in ea, and convertetur
tibi in oblectationem, and erunt tibi compedes ejus in protectionem
fortitudinis, and bases virtutis. Eccl. 6.
says he, seek Wisdom, and you shall find her; and when you have found her,
never part with her; you will find in her the Repose of your whole Life; And
after some Trouble she may have given you, she will be changed into Contentment
and Joy; Her Chains by which she will bind you to the Service of God, will
serve as a powerful Protection, and a solid Groundwork to raise Virtue on.

I adjoyn the Third Reason, which is, That God augments his Graces, and
multiplies his Benedictions upon those who have happily conquered in their
Youths, to conserve them in the good Path they were entered into by his Grace.

I cannot manifest this Truth unto you better, than by producing the Assurance
which God himself gives you in the Sacred Scripture. Our Lord, says the
Wiseman, Dominus dat sapientiam, and ex ore ejus scientia and prudentia,
custodit rectorum salutem, and protegit gradientes simpliciter. servans semitas
justitiae and vias sanctorum custodiens. Ibid.
gives Wisdom, and from his Mouth issues Prudence and Science. And he not only
gives her, but takes care to conserve her; for it is he who guards the
Salvation of the Just, and protects those who walk in Virtue. He adds
afterward, Si intraverit sapientia cor tuum, and scientia animae tuae
placuerit, consilium custodiet te, and prudentia servabit te, ut eruaris a via
mala, and ab homine qui perversa loquitur, etc. ut eruaris a muliere extranea,
quae mollit sermones suos, etc. ut ambules in via bona and calls justorum
custodias.
Son, if Wisdom enter into your Heart, and Science please you, he speaks of the
Science of Virtue, Counsel and Prudence will preserve you, delivering you from
the Road of Vice, from the Company of the Wicked, and from the Enticements of
immodest Women, maintaining you in the Path of Virtue, and in the Way of the
Just.

There are a great number of like Passages in Sacred Scripture, which assure us
of that singular Protection and Assistance of God toward those who follow
Virtue in their Youth, and it is easy to confirm them by Examples of the same
Scripture.

CHAP. IX.
Proofs concerning the same Subject by notable Examples, taken out of Sacred
Scripture, of those who having been Virtuous in their Youth, have continued so
all their Life; and chiefly of those who have resisted in great Occasions.
THE First Example I shall produce, First Example, of Joseph. Genesis 37.
is that of Joseph, who was the Model of Virtue in his Youth. He being but Six
Years of Age, hated Vice in such a manner, that the wicked Example of his
Brothers could never corrupt his Innocence; and on the contrary, not being able
to endure their bad Deportment, he gave notice thereof to his Father Jacob. The
greatness of his Virtue, for which he was singularly favored by God, and
tenderly loved by his Father, procured him the Enmity of his Brothers, even to
such a height, that they sought nothing less than totally to destroy him.
Having been one Day wandering in the Fields, they conspired together to murder
him; but having a horror to dip their Hands in his Blood, they resolved to let
him down into an old Cistern, with intent to permit him there to die. This poor
Child not being able to overcome the Cruelty of his Brothers by his Prayers and
Tears, was constrained to suffer it, putting all his Confidence in God, who
never deserts those who love him. In this he was not deceived; for his inhumane
Brothers moved with the horror of so barbarous a Crime, changed their first
Resolution, and drawing their Brother out of the Cistern, resolved to sell him
to Merchants, who then passed by; these carried him into Egypt, where he was
sold to a Lord of that Country. Joseph being with his Lord, continued in his
first Virtue, living in a perfect Innocence, by which he brought with him the
Blessing of God upon the House of his Master, who soon understood his Merit,
and took a great Affection to him.

Behold how Joseph spent the first part of his Youth, that is, until the Age of
Twenty or Two and twenty years; and see what follows after that, and how he
passes the rest of his Life; wherein I take notice of Three remarkable
Occasions, where his Virtue was powerfully tried.

The First was about that Age where he received the most violent Attack that
Chastity was ever able to undergo, Genesis 39.
being solicited by hy his Masters Wise, to consent to a detestable Adultery;
but the Fear of God wherein he had been bred up, gave him such a horror of that
Crime, that all the Prosecution and Violence of that unchaste Woman, could never
stagger his Chastity, who since has served as an Example to all Ages.

From this Temptation he fell into another greater: For this wicked Woman not
being able to compass her impious Design, accuses him for having attempted her
Chastity, imposing falsely upon him the Crime which she her self was guilty of.
The Master provoked with this Report, caused him to be bound and cast into
Prison, where he continued until he was of the Age of Thirty years. This was a
rude Temptation, and a Shock that might easily have overturned a Virtue of no
long standing; to be accused and counted guilty of a Crime which he abominated,
and to suffer Punishment for it as if he had committed it. But Joseph continues
immovable in his first Virtue; and as he had learned Patience in his Youth by
the Persecution of his Brothers, he suffered this with an admirable Meekness,
comforting himself in the satisfaction of his Innocence, of which he had God
for Witness and Protector: And God, who had always been with him, leaves him
not on this Occasion; but as the Sacred Scripture says, Descenditque cum illo
in foveam and in vinculis non dereliquit eum, donec afferret illi Sceptrum
regni. Sap. 15.
he descended with him into the Cistern, assisting him with his Grace, and
wonderfully delivering him as he did presently after.

To these two Trials succeeds the Third, yet greater. This was the high
Prosperity to which he was raised: For having Interpreted Pharaoh's Dream by
the Knowledge God gave him of Things to come, Genesis 41.
this King not only delivers him out of Prison, but makes him the Chiefest of
all his Kingdom, over which he gave him a general Charge, with an absolute
Power to dispose of all things according to his Will, and with a Command to all
his Subjects to Obey him as himself. In this high Degree of Fortune, which
ordinarily dazles Men's Eyes, and where mean Virtues are lost and quickly
ruined, Joseph remains firm in his former Virtue always like himself. The
forgetfulness of God, Pride, Covetousness, Revenge, which are accustomed to
attend upon high Fortunes, could never prevail upon his Mind. Having occasion
to revenge himself of his Brothers, who came into Egypt to make their Provision
during a severe Famine, he not only refuses to do it, but receives them with
such Tenderness, and Testimonies of Affection as draw Tears from those who read
the Account the Scripture gives of it. He governs himself in his Charge with so
much Justice, Genesis 45.
that never any made Complaint of his Conduct; And on the contrary, the
Egyptians did Honorably acknowledge him for their Deliverer being freed from
Want during a Seven-years Famine, by his eminent Prudence, which purchased for
him in those Countries, the Name of The Savior of the World. He persever'd
thus in Virtue and Fear of God, in the midst of his Grandeurs, from the Age of
Thirty, when he was raised to that Fortune, even to the Age of an Hundred and
ten, wherein he died. O Theotime, reflect well upon this Example, and learn
from it, what, a Virtue acquired in Youth is able to do.

I should content my self with this Example, if that which follows were not
also admirable to discover the same Verity. It is of Toby, the Father of young
Toby, of whom the Scripture reports things full of Admiration, which he
performed first in his Youth, and afterward in the remainder of his Life. See
what it says.

Toby was a young Man of the Tribe, and City of Nephthali; Second Example, of
Toby, Tob. 2. Cumque esset Junior omnibus in tribu Nephthali: nihil tamen
Puerile gessit in opere. Denique cum irent omnes ad vitulos aureos. quos
Jeroboam fecerat Rex Israel, Hic solus fugiebat consortium omnium and pergebat
in Jerusalem ad Templum Domini, and ibi adorabat Dominum Deum Israel, omnia
primitiva sua, and decimas suas fideliter offerens. Haec and his similia
secundum legem Dei puerilus observabat.
and although he were the youngest of all those of his Tribe, yet nothing of
Youth or Childishness appeard in his Actions. And when all others went to
Sacrifice to the Golden Calf of Jeroboam King of Israel, he alone flying the
Company of them, went to Jerusalem to the Temple of God, and there Adored the
God of Israel, Offering to him faithfully all his First Fruits and Tenths. He
performed these things, adds the Scripture, and many other such like, according
to the Law of God, being yet very young.

O the admirable Life, Theotime, of a young Man, who acted nothing Childish,
that is, nothing contrary to Virtue; who permitted not himself to be carried
away by the Torrent of ill Example, continuing in the Service of God, when all
others withdrew themselves from it. A Youth spent so virtuously, could not but
be followed by a perfect and a Saintly Life, as you shall see.

Toby being come to Man's Age, In captivitate positus viam veritatis non
deseruit.
was sent into Captivity by the Assyrians, with all his Countrymen, to the
City of Ninive: Being there, he departed not from the Path of Virtue which he
had so happily entered in his Youth.

For First, Et cum ederent ex cibis Gentilium, Ipse custodivit animam suam and
nunquam contaminatus est in escis eorum.
As he had learned in his Youth to resist the wicked Examples of others, he
permitted not himself to be corrupted in his Captivity by the Example of his
Countrymen, who eat licentiously the Meat of Gentiles, which the Law of God
forbad them.

Secondly, Having received from the King of the Assyrians, whose special Favor
he had gained by the reputation of his Virtue, Permission to go freely through
all his Kingdom, he went to Visit all those who were in Captivity, Pergebat
ergo ad omnes qui erant in captivitate and monita Salutis dabat eis.
and gave them Admonishments concerning their Salvation, Exhorting them to
continue faithfully in the Service of God.

Thirdly, The Affliction of the Captived Israelites being become more severe,
he daily went to Visit and Comfort them, Distributed amongst them what he was
able to give them, Fed the Hungry, Clothed the Naked, and had a particular
Care, with an unparalleled Charity to Bury all the Dead he found,
notwithstanding the Displeasure of the King, which he had incurred by that
Action, even to the danger of his Life. But what is yet more admirable, is the
Patience with which he endured the most sensible Affliction of Blindness, which
befell him by an unexpected Accident in the Fifty sixth Year of his Age. One
Day as he returned to his House, wearied with the Burial of many Dead, he
chanced to fall asleep under a Wall, from the top whereof the Dung out of a
Swallows Nest fell upon his Eyes, and took away his Sight. This was doubtless a
very great Affliction, and a most rigorous Trial; but he supported it with so
admirable a Patience, that the Sacred Scripture compares it to that of Job: And
that which is most considerable is, that it attributed the Cause thereof to the
Piety and Fear of God wherein he had lived in his Youth. Behold what it says;
Hanc autem tentationem ideo permisit Deus evenire illi, ut posteris daretur
exemplum patientiae ejus sicut and sancti Job: Nam cum ab insantia sua semper
Deum timuerit, and mandata ejus custodierit, non est contristatus contra Deum,
quod plaga caecitatis evenerit ei; sed immobilis in Dei timore permansit, agens
gratias Deo omnibus diebus vitae suae.
Now God permitted that this Temptation should befall him, to give to Posterity
an Example of his Patience, as of that of holy Job: For whereas he always
feared God from his Youth, and kept his Commandments, he complained not against
God for the Affliction of Blindness which he sent him, but continued immovable
in the Fear of God, giving him Thanks all the Days of his Life. O how admirable
is the Effect of a Virtue which has always increased with Age! Sexagenarius
lumen recepit; reliquum vero vitae in gaudio fuit; and cum bono profactu
timoris Dei porrexit in pace. Tob. 14.
He was delivered from that Affliction Four Years after, and lived to the Age
of 110, when he died in peace, after he had made, as the Scripture takes
notice, a continual Progress in the Fear and Service of God. Thus, Theotime, do
they Live, thus do they Die, who have spent their Life virtuously in their
Youth.

I cannot finish this Chapter, Third Example, of Eleazar.
which is already too long, without bringing a Third Example in the Person of
that great Martyr of the Old Testament, Eleazar, 2 Machab. 6.
He was an ancient Man, very Venerable for the number of his Years, but yet
more for his Virtue wherein he had lived from his Infancy. When King Antiochus
Persecuted the Jews, to make them Renounce their Religion, and the Adoration of
the true God, this holy Man was Apprehended to be constrained thereto by force
of Torments, which could never make his ancient Piety to stagger. And when some
of the Standers by exhorted him to obey the Persecutor, at least in exterior
show and appearance to free himself from the Torture; The Scripture says, that
he took into Consideration the Dignity of his Age, At ille cogitare caepit
aetatis ac senectutis suae eminentiam dignam and ingenitae nobilitatis
canitiem, atque a puero optimae conversationis actus.
which was grown gray in Virtue, not having committed any thing yet unworthy of
his Extraction, and of a true Son of Abraham, and the Religious Life he had led
from his Infancy; and having reflected on these things, he immediately Answered
with an invincible Courage, That he would rather Die, than consent to such a
criminal Action: And presently his Torments were redoubled, and he suffered
Death with an incredible Patience.

Learn, dear Theotime, from this Example and the precedent, what a Virtue
acquired in Youth is able to do, when settled by a continual Exercise of good
Actions; and labor to be such now, as you would wish to be all the remainder
of your Life.

CHAP. X.
That those who have been addicted to Vice in their Youth, are very difficultly
Corrected, and it often happens that they never Amend, but miserably Damn
themselves.
O Theotime, Ninth Motive, the great Importance of Living well during Youth.
that I had a Pen that were able to Engrave this important Truth more deeply in
your Heart than in Brass or Marble, and make you perfectly comprehend the great
and dreadful Difficulty with which he Corrects himself who has led a wicked
Life in his Youth.

A Difficulty so great, that it is almost impossible sufficiently to express
it; and on the other side so general, that we cannot consider it attentively,
without being touched with a lively Sorrow, seeing so vast a number of
Christians, and principally of young People, who groan under the tyranny of a
vicious Habit, which being contracted in their Youth, and increased with Age,
leads them to Perdition; from whence if it chance they recover, it is with
incredible Pains and Combats, and by a manifest Miracle of Divine Grace. Learn,
O dear Theotime, to avoid this Danger, and endeavor to comprehend the
greatness, either entirely to prevent it, or quickly to withdraw your self, if
you be already engaged therein.

This so great a Difficulty springs from three Causes. The First is the
incredible Power and Force of a wicked Habit, which being once rooted in the
Soul, cannot be plucked up but with great trouble. All Habits have commonly this
Quality, that they continue a long time, and are very hardly destroyed. But
amongst others, wicked Habits are such as adhere more strongly, and are not so
easily changed: Because it is far more difficult to corrupt Nature to raise it
self to Good, than to do Evil. Hence it comes that the Scripture says, Perversi
(...) cile corrige^tur, and (...) rum infinitus est numerus. Eccles. 1.
That the Wicked are hardly Corrected, which makes the number of Fools, that
is, of Sinners, to be infinite.

But amongst wicked Habits, those which are contracted in Youth are the
strongest, and with most difficulty overcome: For the Passions, which are the
Instruments of Vice, not being moderated in that Time by Virtue, increase with
Age, and increasing, augment and fortify Vice, giving it daily new Forces,
which render it at length unconquerable.

For this Reason the same Scripture having a Mind to express the force of a
vicious Habit, contracted in younger Years, delivers a Sentence which young
People ought to have frequently before their Eyes. Job 20.
Ossa ejus implebuntur vitiis adolescentiae ejus, and cum eo in pulvere
dormient; The Wicked shall be filled with Vices from his Youth, and they will
follow him to his Grave: That is, the Vices and ill Inclinations of Youth
become so deeply and strongly rooted in the Soul, that all the remainder of his
Life is sensible of them, and oppressed with them, and they continue even until
Death, as we daily see.

And the Cause thereof is very evident; for Vice which has once gotten
possession of a Soul, increases and strengthens the Passions; the Passions
corrupt the Judgment, and make it conceive that Good which is Evil, esteem Evil
that which is Good: The Judgment perverted corrupts the Will, which is carried
blindly to Sin, and from thence proceeds all the remainder of Wickedness;
because, as S. Augustine says, Ex voluntate perversa facta est libido, and dum
servitur libidini, facta est consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non refistitur,
facta est necessitas. Aug. lib. 8. Confess. cap. 3.
The Will depraved, settles its Affection, and takes Pleasure in Ill. Pleasure
produces a Custom, and a Custom not resisted, becomes a Necessity. And when a
Soul is arrived at this Point, she is out of hopes of Amendment; because as
another Author adds, Actio consuetudinem parit, consuetudo necessitatem,
necessitas mortem. S. Isid.
Necessity is the Mother of Death.

The Second Cause of this great Difficulty, is the Diminution of the Divine
Grace: For as God augments his Favors to those that humbly receive them, and
make use of them for their Salvation; so he diminishes them to those who abuse
and contemn them. Now if he treat Men in this manner, it seems that he more
ordinarily deals so with young Men; on whom as he bestows many Favors when
they worthily dispose themselves, as we have said above, so he withdraws his
Kindnesses from them when they abuse them, as we have made appear by the
Experience of those, who having been favored with particular Obligations from
God in their Youth, are presently after sensible of a great diminution of those
Favors, occasioned by the ill use they have made of them.

God himself threatens this by a Prophet, when he speaks thus; In illa die
deficient adolescentes in siti qui jurant in delicto Samariae.
Young People shall perish with Thirst, who Swear in the Sin of Samaria: That
is, who make Profession of Adoring the Idols which the City of Samaria Adores.
This Thirst is not only a Corporeal, but a Spiritual Thirst, and the want of
Divine Grace, of which it is spoken immediately before. Mittam famem in terram,
non famem panis neque sitim aquae, sed audiendi verbum Dei.
I will send a Famine upon the Earth, not a Famine of Bread, nor a Drought of
Water, but of the Word of God.

The Third Cause is the Power and Dominion of the Devil, which is enlarged
according to the measure that vicious Habits are increased, Sins multiplied,
and Divine Favors diminisht. It is the proper Effect of Sin, which making a
Soul lose the Grace and Protection of her Creator, to subject her to the
Dominion of the Devil, and engage her more and more in that misfortunate
Slavery, according to the proportion that she continues in Vice. O Theotime!
who can sufficiently express the deplorable State of a Soul reduced to that
Servitude, under the Tyranny of her mortal Enemy, who employs all his Engines
and Devices to destroy her without recovery; suggesting all the Temptations to
her, which might move her unto Sin; furnishing her daily with new Occasions of
Destruction, diverting her from those that might withdraw her from Disorder,
casting her headlong from Sin to Sin, from one Vice to another, until such time
that her Iniquities being come to a Head, she by the utmost Effect of the
Divine Choler, is abandoned to her Eternal Perdition.

Thus does this cruel Enemy treat those whom he has under his Power, and that
by a just Permission of God, who rejects in this manner those who withdraw
themselves from his Service and Friendship, and who refusing to submit
themselves to his Commands, and to the plenty of his Favors and Benedictions,
most justly merited to be abandoned to that cruel Master, who breaths nothing
but their Destruction, and will never Servietis diis alienis die ac nocte qui
non dabunt vobis requiem. Jerem. 66.
cease to persecute them, till he has precipitated them into Eternal
Damnation. O Theotime, how misfortunate are all those who are fallen into this
deplorable Slavery! but yet more miserable those, who being engaged therein,
think not of sighing after their Deliverance.

CHAP. XI.
Examples upon the precedent Subject; And First of those who have Corrected the
Vices of their Youth, but yet with very great Difficulties.
IF this Truth be made manifest by Reason, it is yet more certain by
Experience, which might furnish us with as many Examples thereof, as there were
ever Persons who followed Vice in their Youth, and by the Divine Mercy were
recalled from it. I shall content my self to produce one of the most
considerable, which is that of St. Augustine. The Example of S. Augustine.
We have in the Person of this Saint, the most memorable that Antiquity could
supply us with, to show clearly how difficult a thing it is to Correct Vices
contracted in Youth. I shall recount what he himself says of it, in the
Narration he gives in his Confession, by a particular Inspiration of God, to
teach all young People to be wise by his Example, and to advertise them to
avoid the Dangers and Rocks whereon he was misfortunately shipwrackt, and
prevent that Misery wherein the wicked Life of his Youth had totally engaged
him, if God had not withdrawn him by an Effect, or rather a Miracle of his
Divine Mercy, which he has not shown to many others.

He says First, Lib. 1. Confess. cap. 10.
That he spent his Childhood in all the wicked Inclinations that Age was
capable of, disobeying his Parents and Masters, Cap. 12. and 13.
having an Affection for nothing but Play; flying Labor, refusing to Learn,
not attending to those things which were profitable, Et tamen ego, Deus meus,
libenter haec didici, and delectabar miser, and ob hoc bonae spei puer
appellabar. Cap. 16.
but only to those which were delightful and dishonest, wherein he took a
singular Pleasure; extraordinary subject to Lying, addicted to little Thefts,
and to all the Malice a Mind was capable of in that Age. He passes thus his
Youth until the Age of Sixteen.

These first Inclinations, as it usually happens, were followed by other far
greater Disorders. Being come to Sixteen Years of Age, Cap. 19.
that Mind which had not been restrained in the first disordinate Excesses of
its Nature, Lib. 2. cap. 1.
carried him to all the Vices his Age was apt to receive. Ubi eram, quam long
exulabam a deliciis domus tuae, anno illo sexto decimo aetatis carnis meae, cum
accepit in me sceptrum, and totas manus dedi ei, vesania libidinis licentiosae
per dedecus humanum, illicitae autem per leges tuas. Cap. 2.
He says it himself, and he says it with Sighs and Lamentations, That
Sensuality and Lascivious Passions did so powerfully seize on his Heart in that
Age, that they plunged him into all the Sins of Impurity, even to such a
height as is not fit to be expressed; so that neither the Fear of God, nor the
discreet Corrections of his Mother, nor the Infamy of Sin, nor any other
Consideration, could any way bridle him in that first Disorder; but on the
contrary he became so ungracious, that he not only lost all shame for Vice,
Praeceps ibam in tanta caecitate ut inter coaetaneos meos, puderet me minoris
dedecoris, quando audiebam eos jactantes flagitia sua and tanto gloriantes
magis, quanto magis turpes essent. Cap. 3.
but took a pride in it, and was ashamed not to be accounted as vicious as the
most depraved.

He began this Life when he was returned from his Studies in his Father's
House, where he dwelt a whole Year; After that, he was sent to Carthage to
finish his Studies, where he continued the same manner of Life till the Age of
Nineteen.

Here, Theotime, A considerable Remark for young Men.
you shall take notice by the way, of four or five Causes of this Corruption of
S. Augustine in that Age.

The First, Idleness, wherein he spent his Sixteenth Year in his Father's
House, Ubi sexto illo decimo anno interposito otio ex necessitate domestica
feriatus ab omni Schola, cum parentibus esse caepi, excesserunt caput meum
vepra libidinum, and nulla erat eradicans manus. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
at his return from his Studies, which is a Time very dangerous for young
People, as we shall show hereafter.

Secondly, Cum interea non fatageret idem pater qualis crescerem tibi, aut quam
castus essem, dummodo essem disertus. Ibid. Volebat enim illa, and secreto
memini ut monuerit cum solicitudine ingenti ne fornicarer. Qui mihi monitus
muliebres videbantur quibus obtemperare erubescerem. Ibid.
The little Care his Father took for his Salvation and Manners, concerning
himself little that his Son should be Virtuous, so that he became Learned and
Eloquent, as it happens to many Fathers.

Thirdly, The Contempt of the Admonitions of his Mother, who knowing her Sons
Mind, exhorted him continually not to permit himself to be carried away by the
Excesses of Impurity, but to no Effect.

Fourthly, Quid dignum vituperio nisi vitium? ego ne vituperarer, vitiosior
fiebam, and ubi non suberat, quo admisso aequarer perditis, fingebam me fecisse
quod non feceram, ne viderer abjectior quo eram innocentior; and ne vilior
haberer quo eram castior. Ibid.
The wicked Examples of those of his Age so much prevailed upon his Mind, that
he endeavored to be more Impious, to the end he might be more like unto them;
and when he saw himself surpassed by them in Wickedness, he feigned some
Naughtiness which he had never committed, fearing to be contemned, by how much
he appeared less Vicious than others.

Fifthly, Relaxabantur etiam mihi ad ludendum habenae, ultra temperamentum
severitatis, in dissolutionem affectionum variarum. Et in omnibus erat caligo
intercludens mihi, Deus meus, serenitatem veritatis tuae, and prodibat tanquam
ex adipe iniquitas mea. Ibid. Cap. 5.
The great Liberty his Parents gave him for Play and Recreations, as he himself
also takes notice.

These Causes cast him into Vice, and cherished him in his Disorders the space
of Three Years, after which he began to open his Eyes, and acknowledge his
Misery. It is here, Theotime, where you shall know the great Difficulty with
which one withdraws himself from the Vices of his Youth.

Being Nineteen Years of Age, he conceived very effectual thoughts of his
Salvation, which God raised in him by reading Ille vero Liber mutavit affectum
meum, and ad teipsum, Domine, mutavit preces meas ac vota, ac desideria mea
fecit alia.
a Book of Cicero, whose Title is Hortensius, containing an Exhortation to
Wisdom.

The reading of this Book, as he himself says, changed presently his Mind and
Inclinations, and made him convert his Thoughts upon God, and alter his
Desires. Viluit mihi repent omnis vana spes, and immortalitatem sapientiae
concupiscebam aestu cordis incredibili. Et surgere jam caeperam ut ad te
redirem. Quomodo ardebam revelare a terrenis ad te? Lib. 3. cap. 4.
He began to contemn temporal and perishable Goods and Pleasures, and to aspire
with an incredible Longing after the Beauty of Wisdom, which never perishes.
And from that Time he began to depart from Vice, and to return to God with a
most ardent Desire. Who would not have believed, but that these good Motions
would have been soon followed by a perfect Conversion? But alas, Theotime, what
is not a wicked Habit contracted in Youth able to do! Vice and wicked
Inclinations had so seized upon his Heart, that although these Thoughts of his
Conversion were very strong, and that he used all his Endeavors to recover
himself from that Puddle of Dirt wherein he was plunged, yet he continued
therein not only a Day, a Month, a Year, but from the Nineteenth to the
Thirtieth Year of his Age: And the Vices contracted in Three Years of his
Youth, kept him in Slavery Twelve whole Years. During which Time he not only
remained in his former Disorders, but fell into others yet greater: For as
Immodesty leads to Error and Blindness, he lapsed into the Heresy of
Manichaeus; wherein he continued Nine Years, joining to his Heresy the
continual keeping of a Concubine; in which State he lived from his first
Corruption, until the Time of his Conversion.

Being about Thirty Years of Age, he thinks more seriously of his Conversion
than formerly, as he describes it in the Sixth Book Chap. 11. But hearken,
Theotime, with what trouble he purchased his Design.

After that first Thought, Cum haec dicebant and alternabant hi venti, and
impellebant huc atque illuc cor meum, transibant tempora, and tardabam converti
ad Dominum Deum and deferebam de die in diem vivere in te, and non deferebam
quotidie in meipso mori.
he remained yet above Two Years in his wicked Life, deferring daily, as he
says himself, to be Converted unto God, and to seek in him the Life of Grace,
not reflecting on the Death he caused in himself by his depraved Life. He ought
to have employed much Time in curing his Understanding, and rooting out the
Errors and Ignorances which yet remained of his Life past, as he describes them
in the Seventh Book, and convincing himself of the necessity of his Conversion.

His Understanding being overcome, Et non erat jam ulla excusatio, qua videri
mihi solebam propterea me nondum contempto saeculo servire tibi, quia incerta
mihi esset perceptio veritatis, jam enim and ipsa certa erat, ego autem adhuc
terra obligatus, militare tibi recusabam, and impedimentis omnibus sic timebam
expediri, quemadmodum impediri temendum est. Lib. 8. cap. 5. Et ego ad me quae
non in me dixi? quibus sententiarum verberibus non flagellavi animam meam, ut
sequeretur me conantem post te ire, and renitebatur? Recusabat and non se
excusabat. Consumpta erant, and convicta argumenta omnia. Remanserat muta
trepidatio; and quasi mortem reformidabat restringi a fluxu consuetudinis, quo
tabescebat mortem. Cap. 7.
and his Will not yet submitting, the vicious Habits did in such a manner
possess his Heart, that they made him fear his Amendment more than his Life, as
he himself testifies. He should have rooted out the Vices one after another,
Ambition, Covetousness, Impurity. Ambition and Covetousness were soon banished
out of his Soul, but that misfortunate Impurity kept yet a firm possession.

He was so enslaved therewith, Mihi displicebat quod agebam in saeculo, and
oneri mihi valde erat; non jam inflammantibus cupiditati^us, ut solebant, spe
honoris and pecuniae, ad tolerandam illam servitutem tam gravem. Sed adhuc
tenaciter colligabar ex femina. Lib. 5. cap. 1. Putabam me miserum fore, si
feminae privarer amplexibus. Lib. 6. cap. 11.
that he thought he should never have been able to have got his Liberty,
accounting it an extreme Misery to be deprived of those ignominious Pleasures,
which are the source of all Misfortunes.

And Lastly, The difficulty of his Conversion was so great, that after many
Combats, which he underwent in his Soul during the space of Fourteen or Fifteen
Years, after the Solicitude, Prayers and Tears of his pious Mother, who had
followed him by Sea and Land, from her own Country to Carthage, from Carthage
to Rome, from Rome to Milan, to withdraw him from his Disorders, and gain him
to God, to whom next to God he is indebted for his Salvation. After the
powerful Exhortations of his best Friends, after many Conferences with the
great S. Ambrose, and with other Persons eminent for Virtue and Learning; after
all the powerful interior Motions of Divine Grace, for his entire Conversion,
he must have the Miracle of a Voice from Heaven, which cries aloud to him,
Toll, lege; Toll, lege; Take and Read, Take and Read; Admonishing him to open
the New Testament which he had by him. He takes it, and having opened it, found
these Words of the Apostle, by which the Holy Ghost wrought in his Soul her
entire Conversion, and perfect Reconciliation; Romans 13. Ver. 13.
Non in comessationibus and ebrietatibus, non in cubilibus and impudicitiis,
non in contentione and aemulatione; sed induimini Dominum Jesum Christum, and
carnis curam ne feceritis in desideriis; Not in Banquetings and Drunkenness,
not in Beds and Wantonness, not in Strife and Emulation; but put on our Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh in Concupiscences. O God, is
it possible that the change of a Soul should be so difficult! and that Vices
contracted in Youth, should cost so much Pains, and so many Remedies to cure
them!

This is not yet all, O Theotime; S. Augustine being absolutely Converted, was
not at all freed from the precedent Difficulties: For although he never returned
back after his Conversion, in consequence whereof he performed an exact
Penance, and lived a very Saintly, and altogether Angelical Life; Nevertheless
he was sensible a long time after of Adhuc vivunt in memoria mea talium rerum
imagines quan ibi consuetudo mea fixit. Lib. 10. cap. 30.
the Remainders of his former Life, and of frequent and very violent
Temptations; which being caused by the old Habits of his Youth, gave him much
Trouble and Exercise, to conserve himself in Holiness, according to the Account
he has given in the Tenth Book of his Confessions, and in the others
following, where he describes the different Temptations with which he was much
tormented.

O Theotime, read over and over again this Example, consider attentively
therein all the Particularities, and see to what Extremity a vicious Habit of
Youth, not resisted in time, is able to carry one. Fly the Danger where this
Saint was like to perish, and where many make daily deplorable Shipwreck of
their Souls.

There is yet the Example of Manasses in the following Chapter, and that of S.
Jerome. Page 3. Cap. 9. Art. 8.

CHAP. XII.
Examples of those who have never Amended the Vices of their Youth.
AS in a Shipwreck, where a Ship is broken by a Tempest, there are always many
who perish, and very few who save themselves by Swimming or otherwise. Thus in
the Shipwreck of Virtue, which many fall into in their Youth, the number of
those who are entirely destroyed therein is very great, and of those who escape
very small.

You will understand the smalness of this Number, when you shall know,
Theotime, that in all the Holy History, a thing almost incredible, there is
found but one only Example, in the Person of Manasses King of Juda, the Account
whereof I shall give you hereafter; and that for this one it produces a vast
number of others, who were miserably Shipwreckt in the Storm, and are dead in
the Vices of their Youth; some having lived a long time after, others being
snatched away by Death in the prime of their Age. I shall here recount you some
Examples.

First, of all the Kings of Israel, who to the number of Nineteen Reigned over
the Ten Tribes of Israel, after the Division that was made of that Kingdom from
that of the Tribe of Juda, after the Death of Solomon, there was not one but
was extremely wicked from his Youth, nor any that was Converted before his
Death.

And although the Scripture does not make express mention at all of the Life of
their Youth, nevertheless it gives us sufficiently to understand that they were
wicked in that Age, saying of each of them absolutely, that they were vicious,
and not reporting of them one Action of Virtue, except of one, viz. Jehu, of
whom it recounts some good Works which he performed at his beginning, although
afterward he was perverted like the rest.

Amongst the Kings of Juda, who Reigned to the number of Nineteen after
Solomon, there were Six who were good; that is, Asa, Josaphat, Osias, Joathan,
Ezechias, Josias, and all the others were wicked. Those who were good, began
from their Youth, and continued such all their Life; the greatest part of those
who were vicious, began their Wickedness in their younger Years, and were never
changed.

Thus it is said of King Ochosias, That he began to Reign about Twenty two
Years of Age, and was wicked, an Imitatator of the Idolatry of impious Achab
King of Israel, who was taught by his Mother Athalia, Sister of that wicked
King; And he Reigned but a Year, at the end whereof he died in his Wickedness.

It is said of Achaz, 4 Reg. 6.
That he was Twenty Years of Age when he began to Reign; and that he applied
not himself to Good, 2 Para. 28.
and to the Service of God, but to follow the Examples of the Idolatrous Kings
of Israel, and that he far surpassed them in Naughtiness, wherein he died after
he had persever'd in Wickedness the space of Sixteen Years.

Amon Reigned at the Age of Twenty two, 4 Reg. 21.
and became an Imitator of the Vices of his Father Manasses, but not of his
Repentance, and died in his Sins at the end of Two Years, 4 Reg. 23.
Murdered by his Domestics.

Joachim began at the Age of Twenty five, 2 Para. 36.
and Reigned Eleven Years; during which Time he was wicked like his Father's,
and died in his Iniquities, without being lamented by any one, Non plangent
eum, vae frater, vae soror! non concrepabunt ei; vae Domine, vae inclyte,
Sepultura asini sepelietur, putrefactus and projectus, extra portas Jerusalem.
Jerem. 22.
and also deprived of the Honor of a Sepulcher, according to the Menace of the
Prophet Jeremy.

His Son Jechonias having Succeeded at the Age of Eighteen, 4 Reg. 24.
Reigned but Three Months, at the end whereof he deserved for his Sins to be
brought under the Subjection of Nabuchadonosor, and sent into Babylon, where he
died a long time after.

Sedecias, 4 Reg. 24. and 25.
the last of the Kings of Juda, being come to the Crown at the Age of Twenty
one, was also wicked like his Predecessors; and having persever'd in his
Iniquities the space of Eleven years, he drew upon himself and his People the
utmost Effect of the Revenge which God had threatened the Jewish Nation with
for a long time: For in the Ninth Year of his Reign, the City of Jerusalem was
Besieged by Nabuchadonosor King of Babylon, and after Two Years Siege it was
Taken, Sacked, and put to Fire and Sword, the Temple Ransackt and Burnt; those
of the People who had escaped the fury of the Sword or Famine, were sent into
Captivity. And he flying with his Children, was taken, and brought before the
proud King; who after having received him with Expressions of Fury and
Indignation, caused his Childrens Throats to be cut before his Face, and
afterward pulled out his Eyes, and made him be sent Captive into Babylon,
where he died miserably, undergoing the just Punishment of his Iniquities.

We must add to these Examples those which we have recounted in the Sixth
Chapter, being that all those of whom we spoke in that place, are dead in their
Sins, and by Sins begun in their Youth.

These Examples are very common in Sacred Scripture, the contrary are there
very rare; and as I have said, we shall find but one only in the Old Testament,
who was truly Converted after he had lived wickedly in his Youth, viz.
Manasses, and that by so strange a Means, that it manifests more clear than
Day, the dreadful Difficulty with which one Corrects the wicked Inclinations of
his younger Years.

This Prince having lost his Father Ezechias, 4 Reg. 21.
one of the most pious Kings of Juda, at the Age of Twelve Years, was Inheritor
of his Crown, but not of his Virtues: For blotting out of his Mind presently
the holy Examples, and wise Documents he had received from him, he addicts
himself to all sorts of Vices and Impieties, such as the Scripture recounts.
His Iniquities went on increasing until the Fifteenth, or according to others,
till the Two and twentieth Year of his Reign, wherein God sent him an extreme
Affliction. He was taken by the Assyrians in the City of Jerusalem, sent
Captive into Babylon, laden with Irons and Chains, cast into a frightful
Prison, where he was daily afflicted with a vast number of Miseries and
Persecutions.

Being reduced to this extremity of Misery, he began to open his Eyes, and call
upon him in his Afflictions, whom he had forgotten in his Prosperity. He
acknowledged his Iniquities, and begged Pardon for them with a truly contrite
Heart, and by the force of Tears and Prayers obtained from God his Deliverance:
After which he did Penance for his Sins, and lived in Holiness all the
remainder of his Life, even to the Age of Sixty seven, when he died.

St. Jerome adds to this History a very remarkable Particularity, which he took
out of the Tradition of the Hebrews: For Explicating what the Scripture says in
general Terms, Qui posteaquam coangustatus est, oravit Dominum Deum suum.
Hieron. in ques. Heb. in Paral.
That Manasses being oppressed with Affliction, had recourse to God, he says
that it was in the Extremity of a frightful Death, to which he was exposed. He
should have been put to Death in a great brazen Vessel, pierced with many
Holes, set upon a hot Fire; which heating the Vessel, and penetrating it on
every side, should consume that miserable Prince by its Flames; by so much the
more cruel, as it was tedious in duration. He was shut up in this Vessel, and
the Fire kindled under him. In this dreadful Representation of Death, this
misfortunate Prince applied not himself to God, but first to the Idols which he
had adored; so strangely was he blinded with his former Sins. But when he
perceived that it was to no end to invoke their Assistance, he called to mind a
Sentence of the Sacred Scripture which he had often heard from his Father in
his Youth, by which God promised his Succors Dum quaesi eris Dominum Deum tuum
invenies eum, si tamen t^^o cord quae ieris and tota tribulatione animae tuae.
Deuteronomy. 4.
to those who had recourse to him in their Tribulations, and converted
themselves to him with all their Heart, and had a great Sorrow for their Sins.

He presently raises his Heart to God with Sighs and Lamentations, and begs of
him his Deliverance with such a Contrition for his Sins, that God showed him
Mercy, and not only delivered him from that frightful Death, but from his
Slavery, and made him return to Jerusalem, where he spent the rest of his Life
after the manner I have already touched. See here, Theotime, a Conversion after
a wicked Life of Youth, but a Conversion purchased at a dear Rate.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the great Evils which spring from the wicked Life of Youth.
THE greatest of Evils is that whereof we speak, Tenth Motive which obliges
young People to Virtue.
viz. The loss of Salvation and Eternal Ruin, which befalls many by the Sins
of their Youth; it being certain, that Sins committed in that Age, are the
original Cause of Damnation to many. But besides that, there are many others
issuing from the same Fountain, which are necessary to be known, dear Theotime,
to the end that knowing them, you may conceive a greater horror of the Cause
which produces them.

ARTICLE I.
The first Evil, viz. Death, which the Sins of Youth hasten to very many.
I put in the first place Death hastened, which happens to many young Persons
in punishment of their Sins.

I do not mean that all those who die in the Flower of their Age, die in
punishment of the Sins they have committed, nor also that all those who follow
Vice in their Youth, should be punished with an untimely Death.

I know very well, that the Pious sometimes depart in the prime of their Youth,
and that this Death is a Recompense of their Virtue, and an Effect of the Love
God bears them, according to that Testimony of the Sacred Scripture, in the
Book of Wisdom; If the Just, says the Wiseman, Justus si morte praeoccupatus
fuerit in refrigerio erit placens Deo factus dilectus, and vivens inter
peccatores transsatus est. Raptus est ne malitia mutaret intellectum ejus, and
ne fictio deciperet animam illius; facinatio enim nugacitatis obscurat bona,
and inconstantia concupiscentiae transvertit sensum sine malitia, consummatus
in brevi explevit tempora multa; placita enimerat Deo anima illius, propter hoc
properavit Dominus educere illum de medio iniquitatum. Sap. 4.
be prevented by Death, he will find therein Repose, and Salvation; his Virtue
having rendered him agreeable to God, made him purchase his Love, and merit to
be taken out of this World, where he lived amongst Sinners. God withdrew him
betimes, lest Corruption should slip into his Mind, and his Soul be deceived
with the false appearance of the Vanity and Pleasures of the World, which
delude Men, and make them love those things which are most opposite to their
Salvation.

I know also very well, that there are many Sinners who live a long time, and
who grow old in the Vices they had contracted in their Youth, Dan. 13.
like to him whom Daniel calls by that Name, Inveterate dierum malorum, O thou
that ard old in a wicked Life; and that the hastened Death of the Just, who
died in the Flower of his Age, condemns, as the Wiseman says, Condemnat autem
justus mortuus vivos impios, and juventus celerius consummata longam vitam
injusti. Sap. 4. Sicut vita mala quanto magis fuerit prolongata, tanto magis
delinquentibus multiplicat poenam; sic vita bona quamvis hic brevi tempore
terminata sempiternam conquirit been viventibus gloriam. Vita igitur mala
immaturos acerbosque senes demergit in Tartarum, vita vero bona defunctos
juvenes maturos perducit ad regnum. S. Fulgen. Epist. 2. cap. 3.
the long Life of the Wicked: Because this is made worthy of Heaven in a small
time he lived, and the long life of those who served only to multiply their
Crimes, and increase their Damnation.

But I say that it is also most true, that many die in Youth in punishment of
their Sins, and that the Sins of that Age advance the Death of many. The
Scripture expressly shows this in many places, it alleges a vast number of
Examples, and daily Experience makes it appear most evident.

Job speaking of the Wicked, says that Antequam dies ejus impleantur, peribit
and manus ejus arescent; laedetur quasi vinea, in primo flore botrus ejus, and
quasi oliva projiciens florem suum. Job 23. Ver. 3, 2.
He shall perish before the number of his Days be accomplished, and shall be
like a Bunch of Grapes, which a blasting Wind nips in its Flower, or like an
Olive whose Bud breaking forth, is stricken with a Tempest.

Solomon in his Proverbs says, Timor Domini apponet dies: anni impiorum
breviabuntur. Prove. 10. v. 25. Quasi tempestas transiens non erit impius. v. 2.
ibid.
The Years of the Wicked shall be shortened, and the Sinner shall be like a
Storm which passes in a moment. Ne impie agas multum, and noli esse stultus,
ne moriaris in tempore non tuo. Eccl. 7.
In his Ecclesiastes Chap. 7. he admonishes you to have a care, not to abandon
your self to Sin, nor to be of the number of the Unwise, that is of Sinners,
lest you should die in a time not designed for you, that is, sooner than you
should have done, according to the natural Course of your Life.

And in the Eighth Chapter he desires by a just Indignation, Non sit bonum
impio, nec prolongentur dies ejus, sed quasi umbra transeant, qui non timent
faciem Domini. Eccl. 6.
that the Wicked should receive no Good, nor his Days be prolonged, and that
all those who have no Fear nor Respect for the Majesty of the All-seeing God,
and who are so bold as to offend him before his Face, and in his Presence,
should pass like a Shadow which has no substance, and which perishes in a
moment.

All these Expressions are clear in Scripture, and the Effects are there yet
more evident; See the Examples we have brought in the precedent Chapter, in the
Persons of Ochosias, Amon, Joachim, and Sedecias. In the Sixth Chapter, in the
Persons of the Children of Juda and Heli, and in that of Amnon and Absalom.

And although we had no other Proofs of this Verity, the Examples we daily see,
do but discover it too clearly. How many young People do we see die, some by a
burning Fever, or such like Malady; Others in a Quarrel, or some wicked
Encounter; Others in Duels, which now reign so freely; Others killed in War;
Others by certain dreadful and unexpected Accidents? All these Deaths, which
are but too frequent, are the Effects of the Divine Anger against young People,
who contemn his Favors, and refuse to Serve him in the Time wherein they are
obliged to it. O Theotime, have a dread, lest these Punishments should befall
you.

ARTICLE II.
The Second Evil which springs from Sins committed in Youth, Blindness of Mind,
and Obdurateness in Vice.
Corporal Death is not the only, nor the saddest Effect of the Sins of Youth;
that which they cause in the Soul by interior Blindness, and Obdurateness in
Evil into which they cast her, are no less common, yet far more deplorable, and
dreadful. Super mortuum plora, defecit enim lux ejus, and super fatuum plora,
defecit enim sensus. Eccl. 22. Luctus mortui septem dies; fatui autem and impii
omnes dies vitae illorum.
We must lament the Dead, says the Wiseman, because he loses the light; but
we must lament a Sinner, because he has lost his Judgment: The Sorrow for the
Dead ought to continue but Seven Days, that is, a small time, but we must
lament a Sinner all the space of his Life. For how can we consider without
Tears and Sorrow, so great and universal a Misfortune, which we see in many
young People, whom the Sins of their Youth bring to a prodigious Obdurateness,
which abandons them to Vice without any restraint? Obdurateness of Youth in
Vice.
The multitude of those is innumerable, who after having spent the prime time
of their Youth in the Disorders of Sin, and principally in those of Impurity,
become insensible of their Salvation, blind in their proper Interest, obdurate
in Evil, contemning the most wholesome Admonitions, glorying in their Iniquities,
scoffing at all the Good they see performed by others, and having no other
thought than to take their Pleasures, and follow all the Motions of their
depraved Inclinations, running thus blindly on their Perdition, so that nothing
is able to withhold them. O Theotime, is not this a deplorable Misfortune? But
I wish to God it were not so frequent as it is great. S. Augustine had notably
experienced it, in his own Person, as he himself reports in his Confessions;
where he deplores his Misfortune with Words which are able to move the hardest
Hearts, and which deserve to be here cited at length, to teach young People how
they ought to fear the misfortunate Effect of the Sins of Youth.

Exhalabantur nebulae de limosa concupiscentia carnis and scatebra pravitatis,
and obnubilabant atque offascabant cor meum, ut non discerneretur serenitas
dilecsionis a caligine libidinis. Utrumque in confuso aestuabat and rapiebat
imbecillam aetatem per abrupta cupiditatum, atque mersabar gurgite flagitiorum.
Lib. 2. Conf. cap. 2.
That lascivious Concupiscence of the Flesh, and boiling of my Youthful Blood,
exhaled such Clouds into my Mind, that they overspread it with great
obscurities, and in such a manner cast a Mist over it, that it could not
discern the Serenity of chaste Love, from the Darkness of impure Lust. Both of
these raising turbulent Motions in me, dragged my frail Youth into the
Precipice of all sort of Concupiscence, and plunged it into the Gulf of
Wickedness.

And afterward he adds, Obsurdueram stridore catenae mortalitatis meae, poena
superbiae animae meae and ibam longius a te, etc.
That the brutish Passion of immodest Love, was a Chain which kept him bound,
and that the Noise of this Chain continually moved and agitated, had made him
interiorly Deaf, and hindered him from harkening to any thing that admonished
him for his good; like a Beast strongly Chained up, the motion of whose Chain
did hinder it from hearing the Noise which was made about it. And that which is
yet very remarkable is, that this Deafness was a Punishment of the Pride of his
Soul, contracted by the Disorders of his Life, wherein he continually banished
himself from God, plunging himself more and more in the Abyss of Vice.

Behold, dear Theotime, whether the Sins of Youth lead one, and whither yours
will infallibly bring you, if you withdraw not your self entirely, and that in
good time.

This Subject of Blindness and Obdurateness in Vice, caused by the Sins of
Youth, and particularly by the Sin of Impurity, deserves a longer Discourse;
but it shall be more amply Treated in Part 3. Chap. 8. Art. 2. whither I send
you.

ARTICLE III.
The Third Evil, the loss of many fair Hopes.
This Evil is too visible, and there needs no other Proof than daily
Experience. How many young Souls do we see, who give fair Hopes by the
excellent Qualities wherewith they are endowed, who might make themselves
capable of some great Action, and one day succeed in some considerable
Employment, where God might be Honored, and the Public considerably Served,
who go and destroy themselves at the Entrance, and coming to be misled in
Youth, make themselves unfit for Noble Enterprises, for which they seemed to be
born, and frequently become idle Companions, and absolutely unuseful; like to
some Trees, all covered with Blossoms in the Spring, which a nipping Frost
blasts and makes unfruitful all the rest of the Year.

This happens not only to those to whom the Sins of Youth either hasten Death,
or bring an Obdurateness in Vice, as we have said, but also very frequently to
those who are withdrawn from Sin after the first Disorders of their Youth, who
having lost by Idleness, which ordinarily accompanies Sin in that Age, the most
precious Time of all their Life, are made incapable of any thing, and unuseful
for what is good. Or if they have not absolutely lost that Time, they are
become by their reiterated and multiplied Sins, unworthy of the Employments
they were capable of, and to which God had designed them.

Comprehend this well, Theotime, and that you may comprehend it better, take
notice of what follows, viz. That God by his Providence designs young People to
different Conditions, wherein he would Employ them for his Service and their
Salvation; but upon this Condition, that they render themselves fit by their
Labor during their Youth, and also make not themselves undeserving by their
Sins. From whence it falls out, that when they addict themselves to Vice, and
forget God in their Youth, God in punishment of their Sins excludes them from
those Employments to which they were called, and he had appointed for them in
his first Intention.

This Truth is grounded upon Sacred Scripture; when God promised to David the
Kingdom of Israel, for himself and his Posterity, it was upon this Condition,
Si custodierint filii tui testamentum meum, Psalm. 131. Ita tamen si
custodierint filii tui vias meas. 2 Par. 6. Ita duntaxat si custodierint quae
praecepi eis. 2 Par. 3.3.
That he and his Offspring should live in the Observance of his Commandments.

A little while before he had taken away the Honor of Priesthood from the
Family of the High Priest Heli, because he and his Children were become
unworthy by their Sins. Although in his first Intention he had appointed Loquens
locutus sum ut domus tua ministraret in conspectu meo in sempiternum; nunc
autem absit hoc a me, sed quicunque honorificaverit me glorificabo eum, qui
autem contemnunt me, erunt ignobiles. 1 Reg. 2.
that the Priesthood should always remain in that Family, but with this
Condition, that they should not render themselves unworthy: The words are very
clear in the First Book of Kings, Chap. 2.

This Procedure appears most evident in the Case of Saul first King of Israel.
God had given that Kingdom to him, and to his Family, but upon Condition, that
they should particularly observe his Commandments. It happened that this Prince
transgressed the Orders of God in two Occasions amongst others, in consequence
whereof he was rejected from the Kingdom which God had prepared for him.

The First was, when being one Day in his Camp, pressed by his Enemies to
Engage in a Battle, he Offered Sacrifice, not expecting the arrival of the
Prophet Samuel, who had forbidden him Enterprising any thing before his Return.
The Sacrifice was scarce ended, when the Prophet came and Dixitque Samuel ad
Saul, Quid fecisti? stulte egisti, nec custodisti mandata Domini Dei tui, quae
praecepit tibi, quod si non fecisses, jam tunc praeparasset Dominus regnum tuum
super Israel in sempiternum, sed nequaquam regnum tuum ultra consurget. 1 Reg.
13.
said to him, What have you done? you have done foolishly, you have not kept
the Commandment of the Lord your God which he had commanded you; for the Lord
had lately Established your Kingdom upon Israel for ever. But now your Kingdom
shall not continue.

The Second Occasion was, when having overcome the Amalecites, he spared the
Life of their King, and preserved their Flocks and all their Riches, against
the Command God had given him not to spare any thing, but to consume all with
Fire and Sword. Samuel comes and reproaches him for his Disobedience, and
declares unto him on the Part of God, that he should be no more King of Israel.
Pro eo quod abjecisti sermonem Domini, abjecit te Dominus ne sis Rex. 1 R. 15.
Because, says he, you have rejected the Word of God, he has also rejected
you, so that you shall be no more King.

Learn from these Examples, Theorime, that God sometimes designs Men to
Employments which their Sins hinder them from obtaining, An important Advice.
or continuing a long time in them after they have gotten them. And be assured,
that if you live wickedly in your Youth, you have great reason to fear that God
will reject you from that Condition to which he had designed you, and that you
shall never atchieve any thing considerable, God refusing you the Honor to be
Served by you when you shall be at a fit Age, as you have neglected to Serve
him in your Youth.

ARTICLE IV.
The Fourth Evil springing from the Sins of Youth, The Excess of Vice amongst
Men.
This Evil will seem to you at present incredible, but you will understand it
clearly when you have made the least reflection upon it.

For First, If it be true, as we have shown, that the Vices of Youth are very
hardly Corrected, it follows, that a great part of the Corruption we see
amongst Men, springs from that which they had contracted in their younger Years.

Besides, it is certain that bad Children become wicked Pathers, and wicked
Fathers make their Children vicious: As they have lived in Disorder during
their Youth, they concern themselves but little that their Children should be
Educated in the Fear of God; and thus Corruption is communicated, and passes
from Father to Son by a continual Succession.

Now if this Proposition be verified in the greatest part of young Persons, it
is sound more evident in those who are called to Study; of whom it is true to
say, that their wicked Life causes the greatest part of the Sins and Disorders
of the World; because they are the Men that attain to Dignities, whether
Ecclesiastical or Secular; wherein they behave themselves according to the
Inclinations and Habits they had learned in their Youth, and according to the
first Impressions they received. Now when they comport themselves ill in these
Conditions, the Evil stays not at their Persons, but descends to many, viz. to
those they ought to Govern, Instruct or Edify; who instead of receiving from
them the Examples of Virtue, gather nothing but the Imitation of their Vices,
and the Corruption of their Manners.

In a word, I say, Theotime, that vicious Students become First in the Church
wicked Priests, Ignorant, Unprofitable to God and his Church, and frequently
Scandalous, Idle, Covetous, Worldly and Debaucht Incumbents; Pastors incapable
of their Charge, who acquit themselves very badly of it, to the great Detriment
of the Salvation of Souls. In the Nobility, Gentlemen Proud, Quarrelsom,
Duellers, Immodest, Blasphemous, Libertines. In the the Courts of Justice, base
Judges, Corrupted, Acceptors of Persons, and who commit many Injustices for
Money, Favor, or Fear, through the Ignorance or Rashness with which they give
Sentence; Advocates that are Wranglers, Impostors and Cheaters. In the Civil
State, Magistrates incapable of their Charges, little careful of their Duty,
who see Vice and hinder it not. And from the Corruption of these Four sorts of
Persons springs the Depravation of the People, and the overflowing of Vice in
the World.

Consider attentively, O dear Theotome, all these four Evils one after another,
and learn by their greatness how important a thing it is for you to addict your
self to Virtue in your Youth.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Devil uses all his Endeavors to move young People to Vice.
IN fine, Eleventh Motive to Serve God in Youth.
Theotime, that I may make you comprehend, how important a thing it is for you
to addict your self to God in your Youth; there remains that I should tell you,
That the Devil, that sworn Enemy of Men's Salvation, fearing nothing more than
to see you Virtuous in your Youth, employs all his Endeavors to gain you to
him, and all those of your Age, that he may destroy you presently after without
recovery.

This Truth is a very manifest Consequence from all that we have said before.
The Attempt of the Devil to destroy young People.
That cursed Fiend, who studies nothing but to rob God, as much as he can, of
the Honor due to him, and Men of the Happiness prepared for them, knows very
well, that to incline Youth to Vice, is the means to take away from God the
first and greatest Acknowledgment which Men owe him. He knows in the Second
place, how much a wicked Life of Youth is injurious to God, as we have
manifested above: And moreover, he understands very well, that there is no
other more certain way to fill the Earth with Iniquities, and to Damn all
Mankind. This is the reason why he employs all his Industry to deprave the
Innocence of Youth, as the first Source of Salvation, and of all the Blessings
of the World. He knows well, that to empoison the Waters of a Fountain, it is
sufficient to cast Venom into the Spring, which communicates it easily to all
the Brooks: And that to Conquer a Realm, it is sufficient to gain the chief
Places which give Entrance into all the rest of the Country.

This misfortunate Fiend understands well how to put in practice the Malice he
taught to Pharao, Exodus 1.
to whom he suggested the destruction of all the Male Children of the
Israelites in their Cradle, that so he might exterminate and root out that
People of God.

He Exercises daily both the Malice and the Cruelty of Nabuchodonosor, 1 Reg.
21.
who having taken King Sedecias with his Children, at the Sacking of Jerusalem,
caused the Childrens Throats to be cut before the Fathers Face, and satisfied
himself to pluck out afterward the Father's Eyes, and to let him live. Thus
this cruel Enemy employs all his Malice to murder the Children by Sin, and
strives to blind interiorly the Fathers, that they may not see, or not be
sensible of the loss of their Children, nor deliver them from the Danger
wherein they are.

The same King returning into his Country, Parvuli ejus abierunt in
captivitatem ante faciem tribulantis. Thren. 1. Idcirco ego plorans, and oculus
meus deducens aquas, quia long factus est a me consolator convertens animam
meam; facti sunt filii mei perditi, quoniam invaluit, inimicus. Audite universs
populi and videte dolorem meum. Virgins meae and juvenes mei abierunt in
captivitatem. Ibid. Quos educavi and enutrivi, inimicus consumpsit cos. Cap. 2.
proud and puffed up with his Victories, carried for the fairest part of his
Triumph, the young People of the City of Jerusalem, which he sent Prisoners
before him, as it is said by the Prophet Jeremy: And he left nothing in that
desolate City more to be lamented or mourned for, than the deplorable loss of
the young People, which the same Prophet bewails above all its other
Calamities; some being destroyed by the Sword, others cruelly snatched away,
and sent into a barbarous Captivity.

Thus, dear Theotime, this detestable Fiend, who, as the Scripture says, is
established King over all the Proud, has no greater reason insolently to
triumph over the Holy Church; than for the multitude of young People which he
keeps in Salvery by Sin. And this pious Mother accounts no Ruin more deplorable
than that of her dear Children, which that Enemy snatches from her in their
younger Years, some by one Vice, others by another; and almost all by the Sin
of Impurity, which is the strongest Chain by which he Fetters them, Exercising
thus continually the Rage he has conceived against her from her Nativity, and
the immortal War he has sworn to wage against all her Children, according to
the Revelation made to St. John in the Apbcalyps. Apoc. 12.


Lastly, This War of the Enemy of Mankind against young People, is a thing so
manifest, that the same St. John writing to the Faithful, and congratulating
every Age for the Blessings which were most proper to them, makes a particular
Congratulation to young People, for the Victory they have gained over that
Enemy, as be those who are most persecuted. Scribo vobis adolescentes, quoniam
viciltis malignum; Scribo vobis juvenes, quoniam fortes estis, and verbum Dei
manet in vobis, and vicistis malignum. 1 Job. 2.
I write to you, young Men, says he, because you have conquered the malignant
Spirit; I write to you young People, because you are valiant, and the Word of
God has remained with you, and you have over come the Enemy.

O dear Theotime, happy are all those young People to whom with truth we may
say, that they have conquered the Enmy of their Salvation. I represent unto you
here the War he wages against those of your Age, that we may congratulate you
in that manner; and that by the Persecution he raises against you, you may know
First, how necessary it is that you should be Virtuous in your Youth, since the
Devil endeavors so powerfully to divert you. Secondly, with how much Courage
you ought to resist the Attempts of that cruel Enemy, who seeks your
Destruction with so much Fury. How is it possible you should not stand in
horror of that Enemy of your Salvation? and that you should not stand more in
dread of letting your self be overcome by that detestable Enemy, who seeks all
ways to destroy you for ever, than of Death it self?

CHAP. XV.
The Conclusion of all that has been said above.
IT is time to put an end to this First Part; Reed attentively this Chapter.
and in Recapitulating all that we have said, to represent to you in short, the
great Obligations you have to addict your selves to Virtue in your Youth.

Certain it is then, Theotime, that it is of no light Consequence that you
should be Virtuous in your younger Years, and that the good or evil Life of
Youth is not Child's Play, nor a thing that deserves little Care or Regard, as
the greatest part of the World thinks; but that it is a Business of great
Importance, the Consequence whereof is founded upon all that is most high and
sacred in the Interests of the Service of God, and Salvatiion of Men.

1. Above Chap. 1.
You are obliged to Serve God in your Youth, by reason of the Acknowledgment
you owe to him as to your Creator, and as to your Sovereign Master, for the
Being you have received from him, and by reason of the most sublime and
excellent End for which he has Created you, having made you for nothing less
than to possess him eternally in Heaven, after you have faithfully Served him
upon Earth.

2. Chap. 2.
By reason of the vast Favors he has bestowed upon you, by Calling you to
Christianity, and to the true Religion out of which there is no Salvation.

3. Chap. 3, 4.
Because the Service of young People is singularly pleasing to God, since he
loves them with a particular Affection, and is pleased to confer many Benefits
upon them.

4. Chap. 5.
Because you cannot refuse him your Service, without offering him a very
heinous Injury.

5. Chap. 6.
By reason he has an incredible Aversion for wicked young People.

6. Chap. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Because your Eternal Salvation has a great dependence upon the Life you lead
in your Youth: So that if you set your Affection upon Virtue in your younger
Years, you will easily conserve it all the remainder of your Life; and if you
follow Vice, you cannot withdraw your self but with very great difficulty, and
perhaps not at all.

7. Chap. 13.
By reason of the heavy Misfortunes which spring from the wicked Life of Youth,
untimely Death, Obdurateness in Sin, the loss of many fair Hopes, and the
overflowing of Vice amongst Men.

8. Chap. 14.
And Lastly, Because of the Persecution which the Devil raises against young
People, whom he continually endeavors to withdraw from the Service of God, and
cast betimes into Disorders, that he may destroy them without recovery.

After all these Reasons, I demand of you, Theotime, whether now you have any
cause to doubt what you have to do? Are not these Considerations powerful
enough to convince you absolutely of the Obligation you have to addict your
self to Virtue in your Youth? And if you be convinced thereof, what do you
mean? What is your Design and Resolution for the future? Perhaps hitherto you
have not comprehended the greatness of this Obligation, but now understanding
it clearly, what Judgment ought you not to expect from God? Job 24. Ipsi
fuerunt rebels lumini.
If you be rebellious to the Light, and act as those Impious in the Scripture,
who say to God, Depart from us, Qui dixerunt Deo recede a nobis, Scienti am
viarum tuarum nolumus
we will not receive the knowledge of thy Ways.

The Sacred Scripture recounts, that the Jews being returned from the Captivity
of Babylon, 2 Esdras 8.
the Prophet Esdras caused the Book of the Law to be publicly Read unto them,
from whence they had received no Instruction for the space of the Seventy Years
of their Captivity.

That People had scarce begun to understand the Law, when they fell a Weeping
most bitterly, and made the Air to refound with their Cries and Lamentatious:
So that the Priests and Levites who Read the Law, were more Employed to stop
their Tears, and Comfort them, than to Instruct them. This poor People did
miserably deplore their Misfortune of being ignorant of their Duty and
Obligation to the Service of God, and of being so far removed as not to come to
the knowledge thereof.

O dear Theotime, I beseech the Divine Goodness by his Grace to work the same
Effects in your Heart. After reading the Truths I have represented to you, is
it possible that you should not be touched with the force of Truth, and your
own Salvation? And that after reading all these Reasons, which show you the
strict Obligations you have to the Service of your Creator, you should shut the
Book without making any reflection upon your self, or upon your Resolutions,
for the future? I conjure you by the Honor and Respect you owe to God, by the
Love you owe to his Son Jesus Christ your Gracious Savior; by the Affection
you ought to have for your Eterna! Salvation: I conjure you, I say, that you do
not read these Truths unprofitably; and that when you have read them, you do
not cast the Book out of your Hands, until you have made a full Resolution to
hink seriously on your Salvation, and to Correct your past Life by a Holy and
Virtuous one, if it has been Disorderly.

It is here, dear Child, where you must open your Eyes to see your self, and
deplore your past Offenses, and the Blindness which has produced them, saying
with S. Augustine, Vae, vae tenebris meis in quibus jacui! Vae caecitati illi in
qua videre non poteram lumen coeli! Vae praeteritae ignorantiae meae quando non
cognoscebam te Domine! Gratias tibi ago illuminator and Redemptor men's, quoniam
illuminasti me, and cognovi te; sero te cognovi veritas antiqua, sero te
cognovi veritas aeterna. Solli. cap. 33.
We, woe, be to the Darkness wherein I have lay'n; Woe be to the Blindness which
has hindered me from seeing the Light of Heaven; Woe to my past Ignorance,
wherein I knew not Thee. I give Thee Thanks, O God, whom I acknowledge to be my
Illuminator and Redeemer, because Thou have Illuminated me with Thy Grace, so
that now I know Thee. I have known Thee too late, O Ancient Truth; I have known
Thee too late, O Eternal Verity.

Here it is that you must hearken to the Voice of your Eternal Father, who
calls you to him. To day, says the Prophet, if you hear his Voice, harden not
your Hearts. You must return to him with much Confusion, for having so much
abused his Goodness, and behaved your self like an ungracious Child toward so
pious a Father; deploring from the bottom of your Heart your Ingratitude and
Infidelity, with those excellent Expressions of S. Bernard; Ipse patrem se
exhibuit mihi, sed non ego vicissim illi filium; quanam front attollo jam
oculos ad vultum patris tam boni tam malus filius! Pudet indigna gessisse
genere meo, pudet tanto Patri vixisse degenerem. Exitus aquarum deducite oculi
mei, operiet confusio faciem meam. S. Ber. Sermon. 16. in Cant.
God by his Bounty has been pleased to show himself a Father toward me, but I
have not carried my self like a Son toward him; With what Face can I raise my
Eyes toward Heaven, to so good a Father, having been so undutiful a Child! I
blush to have committed Actions unworthy of my Extraction. I have a Confusion
for my Life past, because I have so much degenerated from so good and holy a
Father. Weep, mine Eyes, and turn your selves into a Fountain of Tears, and let
Confusion overshade my Countenance.

O happy Tears, dear Theotime, Quae secundum Deum tristitia est, Poenitentiam
in salutem stabilem operatur. 2 Cor. 7.
a blessed Confusion, which coming from God, and performed according to his
Will, has wrought in you a holy Penance, and will put you into the Path of
Eternal Salvation, and happily conduct you in the Path of Virtue, which I shall
immediately discover unto you by the Assistance of his Divine Grace.

The End of the First Part.
THE INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH IN Christian Piety. PART II.
Of the necessary Means to acquire Virtue during Youth.
WHEN the holy Man Toby had appointed his Son to go to the City of Rages, Tob.
4, and 5.
to his Friend Gabelus, he commanded him at the same time to seek the Means to
perform that Voyage, and endeavor to find a Guide to conduct him thither
securely. The good Child setting himself to comply with his Duty in obeying the
Orders of his Father, meets by a special Providence of God, with the Angel
Raphael, in the Habit of a Traveller, who promised to conduct him in his
Voyage, and to bring him back safe and sound, all which he per formed exactly.

Thus, dear Theotime, having showed you the Indispensable Obligations you have,
to put your self in the Way of Virtue in your Youth, I tell you now, that you
ought to learn, and know perfectly the Means, which are necessary to perform
securely that so important a Voyage.

I shall discover them to you in this Second Part; and if you shall carefully
enquire after them, God will send his Angel to conduct you in the Way, and
assist you with his Grace happily to arrive at the End of them.

CHAP. I.
Wherein true Virtue consists.
THE First Means to acquire Virtue, First Means, the knowledge of true Virtue.
is the knowledge of real Virtue, and the discerning of solid Piety from that
which is false and imaginary.

Many seem to love Virtue, Many sorts of false Virtue.
who are far from it, because they love not Virtue as it is in its self, but as
they represent it to themselves in their Mind, every one forming it to his own
Idea, and according to his own Inclination: For some think themselves Virtuous,
when they are not of the number of the Wicked. Others place Virtue in
abstaining from certain Vices, for which they have a kind of aversion, although
they are subject to others which are no less criminal in the sight of God.
Others esteem themselves when they are addicted to some Actions of exterior
Piety, although on the other side they wholly neglect the interior regulation of
their Conscience, which is ordinarily defiled with mortal Sins. And all these
are so much more to be lamented, as they imagine themselves to be in a good
Way, when they are absolutely out of it; and thinking to arrive by that Course
at the Port of Salvation, they find themselves at length Traveling in the
direct Way to Perdition, verifying in that respect, that Saying of Solomon, Est
via quae videtur homini recta, and novissima ejus ducunt ad mortem; There is a
Way which to a Man seems straight, and the end of it leads to Death.

Virtue, Theotime, does not depend upon the Esteem of Men, it is the Work of
God; from him then must we learn its Rule, there being none but he who can
prescribe it as it is to be followed.

Hearken then to what he himself speaks of it in the Sacred Scripture, True
Virtue consists in the Fear of God.
and he will teach you how Wisdom, that is, Virtue, consists in fearing God,
and flying absolutely from Sin, Dixit homini, timor Domini ipsa est sapientia,
and recedere a malo intelligentia. Job 28.
and that he has thus Instructed Man in his Creation. Then, says Job, that
is, in the beginning of the World, God said to Man, The fear of God is true
Wisdom, and perfect Understanding consists in departing from Sin.

He teaches the same thing by the Kingly Prophet, by whom he gives you this
general Rule for Virtue, Psalm. 36.
Declina a malo, and fac bonum; Fly from Evil, and perform Good.

Wise Solomon in like manner informs you with the same Truth, Finem dicendi
pariter omnes audiamus. Deum Time, and mandata ejus observa, hoc est enim omnis
homo. Eccl. 12.
Fear God, says he, and observe his Commandments, for in that is all Man; in
that consists the Perfection of Man, for that he was born, that is his last End
and absolute Felicity.

In fine, the Sacred Scripture acknowledges no other Wisdom or Piety than the
Fear of God, which it calls Initium Sapientiae Timor Domini. Prove. 11.
The beginning of Wisdom.

Now this Fear is not that which is purely servil, which apprehends more the
Punishment than the Detestation of Sin; but it is an amorous Fear of the
Children of God, which makes them hate Sin because it displeases God, and love
Good, because it is agreeable to him. Like the Fear and Respect a young Godly
Child bears his Father, which makes him fearful to offend him, and seek
diligently all Means to please him generally in his Actions.

So that, Theotime, according to the Maxims of the Divine School, true Virtue
consists in the Fear of God, which punctually, and for the love of him produces
the observation of the Commandments, and which causes a fear and detestation of
offending God above all things, and seeks the Means to please him. This alone
ought to be accounted Virtue, and that which is not directed by this certain
and infallible Rule, is to be esteemed false Piety.

CHAP. II.
That to acquire Virtue, we must desire it.
THE knowledge of a thing is not sufficient to acquire it, Second Means, The
desire of Wisdom.
we must love and ardently desire it. Love is the Primum mobile, or First Mover
of our Actions; Love animates the Enterprises, and makes them succeed. If this
be certain in all other things we undertake, it is yet more infallible in
Virtue; because the love and desire of Virtue is one part of Virtue it self,
and a very powerful Means to attain to it.

It is the Means the Wiseman gives you, dear Theotime, and which he himself
made use of with very good success. In the Sixth Chapter of the Book of Wisdom,
he says, Clara est Sapientia and quae nunquam marcescit, and facile videtur ab
his qui diligunt Eam, and invenitur ab his qui quaerunt Illam: praeoccupat eos
qui se concupiscunt ut illis se prior ostendat. Sap. 6.
That Wisdom is a thing which cannot be hidden, nor be subject to Corruption,
nor to be easily lost out of the sight of him that seeks her; for, She is
quickly perceived by those who love her, she prevents those who desire her, and
goes before to manifest her self to them. But hearken how he himself made use
of these Means in his Youth, and learn to conform your self to that Divine
Original.

He says in the Seventh Chapter, That having considered the common Misery of
Men, who are all born in Weakness and Ignorance, he began to sigh after, and
earnestly desire this Wisdom, and to be freed from these Afflictions. Propter
hoc optavi and datus est mihi sensus. Invocavi and venit in me spiritus
Sapientiae, and praeposui illam regnis and sedibus: Divitias nihil esse duxi in
comparatione illius, nec comparavi illi lapidem pretiosum; quoniam omne aurum
in comparatione illius arena est exigua, and tanquam lutum aestimabitur
argentum in conspec^u illius, venerunt autem mihi omnia bona pariter cum illa,
and innumerabilis honestas. Sap. 7.
For this reason, says he, I wished, and received Understanding and Prudence; I
demanded by my Prayers the Spirit of Wisdom, and it was bestowed upon me; I
made more account of her than of Kingdoms and Thrones: Riehes I esteemed as
nothing in comparison of her, neither did I compare Precious Stones to her; for
all Gold is but a little Gravel in respect of her, and all Silver shall be
accounted but Clay before her; and all good things came to me together with
her, and innumerable Riches through her Hands.

Having afterward described the Beauty and Wonders of Wisdom, he adds in the
Eighth Chapter, Hanc amavi and exquisivi eam a juventute mea, and quaesivi
Sponsam mihi eam assumere, and amator sum factus formae ipsius: proposui ergo
hanc adducere mihi ad convivendum, sciens quoniam mecum communicabit de bonis,
and erit allocutio cogitationis and taedii mihi. Sap. 8.
I have loved, says he, this Divine Wisdom from my Youth, and sought her; I
desired to have her for my Spouse, such love had I for her Beauty; and
renouncing the affection to all mortal and perishable Creatures, I have
proposed to take her into my Company, knowing she would counsel me good things,
and comfort me in Cares and Griefs; wherein true Felicity consists.

O what an excellent Example, Theotime, is this, to make you understand how
necessary the desire of Virtue is, and how effectual to purchase it. Learn then
by following this Pattern, to set your Affection on Virtue, and ardently to
desire it; Persuade your self, as it is most certain, that there is nothing
besides it that is desirable in the World, nothing that can worthily satisfy
your Love but it alone, nor nothing that can render you happy and contented;
and that without it you will always be miserable both in this Life and in the
next.

CHAP. III.
Of Prayer, the Third Means to acquire Virtue.
THIS is the great Means to attain to Virtue, Third Means, Prayer.
and that without which it is impossible to acquire it. It is not sufficient to
desire it, we must search for it with all diligence; and that we may
successfully seek for it, we must go to the right Fountain, and demand it of
him who is the Author of it, and bestows it on those who beg it as they ought,
according to that Expression of the Scripture, Si quis indiget Sapientia,
postulet a Deo qui dat omnibus affluenter. Jac. 1.
If any one wants Wisdom, let him demand it of God, who gives it abundantly to
all.

This is the Means which wise Solomon employed with that arden desire of
Wisdom, whereof we have even now spoken, and by this Course he obtained all
that he wished for: Haec cogitans apud me and commemorans in cord meo, etc.
circuibam quaerens ut mihi illam assumerem; puer autem ingeniosus eram, and
sortitus sum animam bonam, and cum essem magis bonus veni ad corpus
incoinquinatum, and ut scivi quoniam aliter non possum esse continens, nisi
Deus det, and hoc ipsum erat summa sapientia scire cujus esset hoc donum, adii
Dominum and deprecatus sum ex totis praecordiis meis. Sap. 8.
For in the same place he says, that after he had considered all the
Perfections of Wisdom, he conceived such an ardent love for her, that he
applied himself always to find her; and that in favor of the Innocence of his
tender Age, during which time he had conserved both Soul and Body exempt from
the Corruptions of Youth, he obtained from God that Favor, to know that Wisdom
is a Gift of God, and that he could not acquire it, unless God gave it him; and
that he had no sooner understood this Truth, but he addressed himself to that
Author of all Wisdom; and that he requested him with all the strength of his
Heart in the manner we shall tell you presently.

Besides, this excellent Example, the Scripture also furnishes you with that
of the wise Author of Ecclesiasticus, who recounts hus the Means he made use of
in his Youth to acquire Virtue: Cum adhuc junior essem, antequam oberrarem,
quaesivi sapientiam palam in oratione mea, ante tempus postulabam pro illa, and
usque in novissimis inquiram eam, ambulavit pes meus iter rectum, a juventute
investigavi eam, manus meas extendi in altum, and in sapientia mea luxit anima
mea and ignorantias meas illuminavit. Eccl. 51.
When I was yet young, and in the first innocence of my Age, I sought Wisdom in
demanding her of God by my Prayers; I have asked for her early, and I will
search for her even to the end of my Life; I have departed from Vice to seek
her from my Youth; I have lifted up my Hands toward Heaven, and my Soul has
acknowledged her ignorance, has sighed after the Wisdom which God communicates
to Men, and he has vouchsafed to illuminate my Darkness, and bestow upon me
that so much to be wished for Wisdom.

This is the way these great Men took to acquire Wisdom. The Scripture proposes
them to all young People as the Model they ought to imitate to attain her, and
I would to God they were imitated by many.

But for you, Theotime, who by the Grace of God aspire to that Wisdom, it
behooves you to imitate them, and follow the way they have shown, begging daily
of God with all the ardor of your Affection this Wisdom, which removes
Ignorance, banisheth away Sin, and leads by the Path of Virtue to real
Felicity, by offering to him from the bottom of your Heart that excellent
Prayer of Solomon.

Domine mifericordiae, qui fecisti omnia verbo oris tui; da mihi sedium tuarum
assistricem Sapientiam, and noli me reprobare a pueris tuis, quoniam servus
tuus sum ego and filius ancillae tuae, homo infirmus and exigui temporis, and
minor ad intellectum judicii and legum: Mitte Illam de coelis sanctis tuis and
de sede magnitudinis tuae, ut mecum sit, and mecum laboret, and sciam quid
acceptum sit apud te, scit enim illa omnia and intelligit, and deducet me in
operibus meis sobrie, and custodiet me in sua potentia, and erunt accepta opera
mea. Sap. 9.
O God of mercy, who have created all things with thy Word; I most humbly
beseech thee, that thou would bestow upon me some ray of thy Divine Wisdom
which accompanies thee in Heaven. Cast me not out of the number of thy
Children. Vouchsafe to acknowledge that I am thy Servant and thy Creature, a
Man weak and mortal, and incapable of comprehending by my self thy holy
Precepts. Send me from Heaven, and from thy Seat of Majesty, thy Divine Wisdom,
that she may be with me, and labor with me; and that by her holy Inspirations
I may know thy Will to fulfill it; And that she may conduct me in all my Actions
according to the Rule of thy Commandments, and conserve me by her Power, that I
may may have the happiness to please thee in all the Actions of my Life.

With this Prayer, or some such like it, if you say it as you ought, you will
obtain all that you shall demand: But remember, that it must have these Three
Conditions that it may be efficacious; Three Conditions of Prayer.
It must be Humble, Fervent, and Perseverant. Humble, acknowledging that you
cannot obtain Wisdom or Virtue, but from God alone. Fervent, to demand her with
a most fervent Desire. Perseverant, to beg her daily, as there is no Day
wherein the Divine Grace is not necessary, to conserve or increase her.

CHAP. IV.
That they must love and seek after Instructions.
BEsides the Means of Prayer, Instruction is also necessary: Fourth Means,
Instruction.
For there is none but God who can give Wisdom; yet ordinarily he does not
bestow it but by the Ministry of Men, by whom he is pleased we should be
conducted in the Path of Virtue, inspiring by his Grace our Hearts with his
holy Truths, at the same time that Men teach us on their Parts by their Words.
For this reason has he established in his Church Pastors and Doctors, as the
Apostle says, to teach Men Divine Verities, and conduct them in the Way of
Salvation.

Now if Instruction be necessary for all Men, it is yet most of all for young
Persons, who by reason of their Age have little knowledge of the Maxims of
Wisdom, and less Capacity to know themselves.

It is not then sufficient for you dear, Theotime, that you daily beg Wisdom
and Virtue from Almighty God, you must love and seek after Instruction and
Direction in the Way, by them who understand it.

This Desire of Instruction is so necessary for Virtue, that it is the
beginning thereof, according to that saying of the Wiseman, The beginning,
says he, of Wisdom is a real Desire of Instruction.

And Lastly, that you may be fully convinced, read attentively this excellent
Exhortation which he has made you concerning it, in Chap. 6. of
Ecclesiasticus; Fili, Si attenderis disces, and si accommodaveris animum tuum
Sapiens eris, si inclinaveris aurem tuam excipies doctrinam, and si dilexeris
audire sapiens eris; in multitudine presbyterorum sapientum sta, and prudentiae
illorum in cord conjungere, ut omnem narrationem Dei possis audire and
proverbia laudis non te effugiant. Eccl. 6.
Son, says he, if you attentively hearken to them who can Direct you, you will
learn; If you bring thither a tractable Spirit, you will become wise; If you
shall readily give ear to good Instructions, you will receive Knowledge, and if
you love to hear Others, you will attain to Wisdom; Wherefore have a care to
Converse with wise Men, desire their Company and discreet Discourses; that you
may understand them when they speak of God, and not be deprived of those
excellent Truths you ought to learn from their Mouths.

Now there are many ways by which we may receive Instructions for Virtue and
Salvation. As Preaching, Books of Piety, of which we shall speak hereafter. But
that which is most necessary for you, is the particular Conduct of a wise and
virtuous Person, who may teach you the Way of Virtue. For this reason the
Wiseman adds to the former words; Si videas Sensatum, evigila; and gradus
ostiorum illius exterat pes tuus. Ibid.
If you know an understanding Man, be diligent to seek after his Knowledge, and
frequently visit him.

CHAP. V.
Of the necessity of a Guide in the Way of Virtue, and particularly during
Youth.
THIS Means, Theotime, Fifth Means. the Conduct of a Guide.
is the most important of all those which can conduct us to Virtue; It is the
Guide who can make all others succeed, and without whom it is almost impossible
you should usefully employ them. The Way of Salvation and real Wisdom is a Road
unknown to you, you have need of a Guide to Direct you. This is a certain Maxim
of the Sacred Scripture and holy Fathers.

Si caecus caeco ducatum praestet ambo in foveam cadunt Mat. 15.
If one blind Man lead another, says the Son of God, they will both fall into
the Ditch. How much more if one blind Man lead himself in a Way he knows not.
Vae soli, quia cum ceciderit non habet sublevantem se. Eccl. 4.
Woe be to him who goes alone, says Solomon, because if he fall he has no one
to help him. For this reason in the Proverbs he often admonishes young Persons
Ne innitaris prudentiae tuae. Prove. 5.
Not to trust to their own Conduct: for he is unwise who relies upon his own
Judgment. Qui confidit in cord suo stultus. Prove. 28.

Via stulti recta in oculis ejus, qui autem sapiens est audit consilia. Prove. 2.


It is the property of Fools to believe themselves, and the wise Man hearkens
to counsel. Good Toby Instructing his Son, gave him this Advertisement among
others; Consilium semper a sapiente perquire. Tob. 4.
Seek always Counsel from a wise Man. Ecclesiasticus has already said above,
That when you see a prudent and understanding Man, you must take great care to
receive his Instructions, and to be frequently with him. But above all, take
the Counsel he gives you in Chap. 37.

Cum viro fancto assiduus esso, quemcunque observantem timorem Domini
cognoveris, cujus anima sit secundum animam tuam, qui cum titubaveris in
tenebris condolebit tibi. Eccl. 37.
Converse, says he, constantly with a pious Man, whom you know to have the fear
of God, whose Mind has a sympathy with yours, that is, who mutually love one
another, and who will compassionate your Misfortune, if you chance to trip in
the dark; giving you assistance that you fall not, or raising you if you be
fallen. By this you see not only the necessity of a Guide in the Way of Virtue,
but the Qualities he ought to have, clearly expressed; viz. That he is to be a
virtuous Man; That he have an Affection for the Salvation of him whom he
Directs, and one who may support him when he is in danger of falling, and by
consequence, that he have Prudence and Knowledge requisite for that Design.

St. Jerome following these Maxims of Sacred Scripture, gives the same Counsel
to young Men desirous to advance themselves in Virtue. Mihi placet ut habeas
sanctorum contubernium, nec ipse te doceas, and absque doctore ingrediaris viam
quam nunquam ingressus es: statimque tibi in partem alteram declinandum sit,
and errori pateas, plusque aut minus ambulans quam necesse sit; ne aut currens
lasseris, aut moram faciens obdormias. S. Jer. Epist. ad Ruffinum.
My Advice, says he, is, that you Converse with Men of Piety. Be not your own
Master, nor enter a Way unknown to you without a Guide, lest you should mistake
your Rode, and perish in your wandering; or going faster or slower than need
requires, you be tired with your haste, and so return, or fall asteep in your
Journey. This is then, dear Theotime, a very important Admonition, which after
St. Jerome and the Fathers, I give you here.

Make choice of a discreet and virtuous Confessor, to whom commit the Conduct
of your Conscience: Let him be a Person who is able to Direct you in the Path
of Virtue, who is able to Teach you the true Maxims of Piety; Discover to you
the things you ought to perform, and those you must avoid; Reduce you into the
Way when you are gone out of the Road; Raise you when you shall fall; Advertise
you of the Dangers you are likely to run into; Teach you how to resist
Temptations, and cure your ill Habits; Encourage you in Virtue; Awake you when
you are sleepy in the Way, and withhold you from running too fast, lest you
should fall from your first Zeal and Fervor into Remissness, and from
Remissness into Vice, which easily happens to young People. These are the
Benefits you will receive from your Director, and you will have need of him for
all these things.

For this Effect declare unto him from time to time your Conscience, Practice.
let him know clearly your State, conceal nothing of your interior Inclination,
have a great Respect for him, as for a Man by whom God Speaks to you and
Directs you; Put a confidence in his Conduct and Counsels, hearken attentively
to his Admonitions, be exact in putting in practice his Advices, give him an
Account of the Use you have made of them; A remarkable Advice.
Be not ashamed to discover unto him all your Sins; and chiefly have a care of
falling into the fault of many, who having committed a greater Sin than
usually, go to Confess themselves to another, out of a foolish Shame they have
to declare their Sins to their ordinary Confessor. To do this, is to render the
Conduct of a Ghostly Father entirely unprofitable, and to take the way to fall
into many Sins, and at the end to be utterly lost. No, no, Theotime, you must
bear toward your Confessor the Confidence of a Child toward his Father, of a
sick Person toward his Physician, to discover all that is within you equally
both good and bad.

But to find this so necessary a Director, you must demand him of God: Beg of
him from the bottom of your Heart, that he make you meet with a good one, and
without question he will comply with your Request. Ask also the Counsel of some
prudent and virtuous Person, and when you have found him, change him not easily
without necessity; and if he chance to fail you either by Death or change of
Dwelling, or otherwise, make choice readily of another.

O h eotime, how happy would you be, if you lived in this manner; you would
walk with assurance in the Path of Salvation, and would advance very much
therein; whereas going without a Guide, you will always be in danger of
straggling out of the Way and being lost.

Call to mind one remarkable thing, 4 Reg. 12. 2 Paral. 24.
which the Scripture recounts of King Joas. That King had been Educated by the
High Priest Joiada in the Fear of God, A considerable Example.
Instructed in his Law, and Directed in the Way of Virtue from the Age of Seven
Years till after Forty; During all this time he lived holily, and the Scripture
attributes the Cause to the Conduct of that pious Man. 4 Reg. 12. Fecitque Joas
rectum coram Domino cunctis diebus quibus docuit eum Joiada Sacerdos.
Joas, says the Scripture, carried himself virtuously all the time that he was
Instructed by Joiada the High Priest. But he did not continue always in that
State: For Joiada being Deceased, that misfortunate Prince being no longer
restrained by the good Corrections and prudent Counsels of his Religious
Master, gave himself over to Licentiousness, and to the Disorders of a wicked
Life; by which he drew upon himself many Disasters, and a miserable Death,
which God sent him presently after. This Example will teach you what value you
ought to set on a good Master in the Way of Virtue.

CHAP. VI.
Of Confession, and first of a General Confession.
PEnance being a Sacrament Instituted by Jesus Christ to blot out the Sins of
Christians, Sixth Means, a General Confession.
and to restore them to the Grace of God. There is no question but it is a very
prositable Means, and necessary to acquire Virtue and Sanctity, which ought to
begin by the cleansing ones self from Vice.

Now to the end this Means may prove more profitable to you, I advise you to
begin with a General Confession of all your Life; And this for Three Reasons.

First, Because it frequently happens, that the precedent Confessions were
invalid: As when one has concealed therein any mortal Sin, which falls out but
too often to young People; or when one Confesses himself with too little
Preparation, without Sorrow for his Sins, and without Resolution of Amendment.
In these Cases a General Confession is necessary.

Secondly, Because although one see not an evident Invalidity in the former
Confessions, yet nevertheless there is reason to have some doubt, because of
many Defects with which they ordinarily abound, through the Negligence of
Penitents, who Confess themselves with very little Preparation, almost without
any Sorrow, and without any Amendment. The General Confession supplies these
Defects, and when it is well performed, secures the Conscience.

Thirdly, If it be not at all necessary, it will be always very profitable; for
Three great Benefits you will receive thereby: The one is in respect of your
Self, the other on your Confessor's side, and the Third in regard of God.

First, In respect of your Self, bringing your past Life before your Eyes, it
makes you know how far you are removed from the Way of your Salvation; humble
your self before God in the acknowledgment of your Misery, take notice of your
depraved Inclinations to correct them, conceive a desire of Amendment, and
dedicate your self entirely to Almighty God.

Secondly, On your Confessor's side; It serves to give him a perfect knowledge
of your Conscience, that he may better Direct you, and give you Advice
according to your Necessity.

Thirdly, And in fine, in regard of God, it will avail to merit from him more
abundant Favors for your perfect Conversion, which he will communicate to you
by so much more Cor contritum and humiliatum non despiciet Deus. Psalm. 50.
as he shall see you humbled before him, and penitent for your Offenses.

To perform well this Confession, see what you are to observe.

First, The End of a General Confession.
Let the Mark or But at which you aim, be the amendment of your Life, and
withdrawing your self from Sin, to put your self absolutely in the Way of
Virtue.

Secondly, Preparation.
Prepare your self Seven or Eight Days before; and during that time, employ
your self in Two things. 1. Call to mind your Sins. 2. Conceive a great Sorrow,
and a firm Resolution to change your Life.

To accomplish the first, employ some time every Day to Examine your self,
following the Order of the Commandments of God and of the Church, and upon the
Seven Capital Sins. For the greater facility make use of some Book of
Confession, and write down every Day what you shall take notice of.

But let your Labor be chiefly about the Second Part, viz. Contrition;
Contrition.
which is the most necessary and most difficult; Second Means to obtain
Contrition.
and that for which one is ordinarily least prepared. Here we must employ, 1.
Prayer to obtain it of God. 2. The Reading of things which may cause a horror
for Sin, and a desire to Serve God; But this must be a fervent Prayer, and a
serious and attentive Reading.

Withdraw your self once or twice a day into a private Place, and there
prostrate your self before God, beseeching him humbly and ardently, that he
would bestow upon you a Heart and Grace to apprehend perfectly the grievousness
of Sin, and the Injury it offers to his infinite Goodness, and to have a true
Contrition for them, and absolutely depart from them by a serious Repentance,
and a perfect Change of your Life.

Afterward apply your self to the Reading of some Book which may discover to
you the horror of Sin, and the importance of retiring your self from it. You
will find many; I advise you chiefly to make use of Granado's Memorial in the
First Part, where he has an excellent Preparation for a General Confession:
Read that, or some other which you have, with much Attention, taking every time
one or two Chapters only, which you shall read often, and meditate attentively
upon them, endeavoring to stir up by the things you read, a hatred for Sin, a
horror for having committed it, deploring your Misery, and demanding of God
Pardon for your Offenses, and Grace to free your self from them.

The Day of your Confession being come, after having begged of God the Grace to
perform well this Action of so great importance, approach to the Sacrament with
a profound Respect, with a great Recollection of Mind, and with much Sorrow of
Heart for having offended God. Accuse your self of your Sins humbly and
plainly: After your Accusation, protest to your Confessor, that you detest them
with all your Heart, and principally by reason of the infinite Goodness of God,
whom you have heinously offended; that you humbly beg Pardon, and are resolved
to die rather than offend him any more; entreating him that he will Instruct
you in the necessary Remedies against Sin, that you may fall no more, and the
Means from thenceforward to live in Virtue and the Fear of God. This being
done, hearken attentively to what he shall say, not thinking of any thing else.
And when you shall be upon the point of receiving Absolution, recollect your
Spirit within you, and humbling your self profoundly before God, renew all the
Sorrow you might have had for your Sins, and implore his Mercy, that he would
Absolve you in Heaven at the same time that the Priest Absolves you on his part
upon Earth.

O blessed Day, Theotime, wherein you are freed from the State of Sin, and
Power of the Devil, to be admitted into the number of the Children of God, and
for ever to Serve him faithfully.

But have a care to make this Confession profitable, and not to forget it
presently, as it happens to many, who afterward scarce ever think of it, and
so return to their former Life. Have a care to renew daily in the Morning the
Sorrow for having offended God, and the Resolution you have made not to
Displease him any more upon any account whatsoever.

CHAP. VII.
Of Ordinary Confession.
THAT Confession is not only a very profitable Means, but absolutely necessary
to keep Man in the Path of Virtue, is a Truth made manifest by Experience,
which discovers, That those who practice not frequently this Divine Remedy,
relapse soon into their first Distempers, and into the Sins they had forsaken.
So that, Theotime, you must hold it for an undoubted Maxim, That if you have a
true Design to live in Virtue, you must frequently approach to the Sacrament of
Penance; and if not, you will never be difengag'd from Vice, not from the Way
of Perdition; which I shall clearly discover by the following Reasons.

First, First Reason.
Because although you may be some time without falling into mortal Sin,
nevertheless without frequent Confession you cannot avoid a great number of
other Sins, which being multiplied and neglected, lead to mortal Sin.

Secondly, Second Reason.
Without frequent Confession you may be secretly engaged in wicked Habits,
which you will not believe to be such, and will be exposed to many dangerous
Occasions, from which you cannot guard your self, unless you be Admonished. Now
you cannot be Advertised, but by often discovering your Conscience to a
discreet Confessor, who will take notice of them, and give you warning to avoid
them.

Thirdly, Third Reason.
It is impossible that you should continue a long time without being assaulted
by Temptations, and principally against Chastity: Now I maintain, that it is
impossible you should resist them without frequent Confession. Do what you
will, if you make not often use of this Remedy, you will infallibly be subdued,
Experience will make you see it. He that neglects Help, will fall into
Sickness, and from Sickness come to Death.

Fourthly, Fourth Reason.
Confession, Theotime, is a Help and Remedy against Sin. 1. Because it being a
Sacrament, it gives Grace to resist it. 2. Because it makes us renew the
Detestation of Sin, and the Resolution not to commit it any more. 3. Because
the Admonitions of the Ghostly Father in Confession awake the Penitent, and
encourage him anew to fly from Sin, and to be faithful to God. 4. Because the
Penitent declaring his Temptations to his Confessor, learns from him the Means
to resist them; yea, this only discovering the Temptations, is an effectual
Remedy to overcome them. The malignant Spirit fears nothing so much as to be
discovered; He is a Serpent which hides himself when he would bite, and flies
away when he is perceived; He is a right Thief, who has no mind to appear in
open day; and he has no greater Policy to destroy young Souls, than to make
them be silent in the Affairs of their Conscience, and to hinder them from
manifesting to any one the State of their Soul, to the end, that in this
pernicious Silence they may find no Help to resist their Temptations, nor Means
to withdraw themselves from their Vices. Peccatum proditum cito curatur, crimen
vero tacendo ampliatur; vitium si patet fit ex magno pusillum, si latet, fit ex
minimo magnum. S. Bern. Sermon. de interiori domo, cap. 37.
Sin (says S. Bernard) is soon cured when it is declared; but it increases by
silence; If one discover it, from great it becomes little; and if one conceal
it, of little it becomes great.

After these Reasons I doubt not, dear Theotime, but that you are fully
convinced of the necessity of Confessing often; and being this is an Affair of
great Consequence, and a Man commits many Faults therein, I have many Advices
to give you, which I beseech you read attentively, and take notice of them well.

Important Advices concerning Confession.
First, First Advice.
Confess your self at least once a Month, without failing therein. If you have
frequent Temptations, you ought to Confess oftener, and principally at the time
wherein you perceive the Temptations begin to assault you most strongly. Fake
notice well of this Advice, for it is of great importance, and for want of
practicing it, many relapse miserably into Sin.

Secondly, Second Advice.
Have a care of falling into that Offense of many, who never think of
Confessing themselves, but when they have yielded to a Temptation. It is a
deplorable Abuse by which the Devil misfortunately seduces many Souls: For what
a great folly is it, not to apply ones thoughts to a Remedy, till after he is
fallen into a mortal Distemper, when it might have been prevented by Help in
time? according to the Counsel of the Wiseman, Eccl. 15.
Ante languorem adhibe medicinam; Apply the Remedy to prevent the Distemper.

Thirdly, Third Advice.
Have a care also of another greater Fault of those, who having been subdued by
a Temptation, instead of quickly raising themselves, and having recourse to the
Sacrament of Penance, permit themselves to yield to all Occasions, neglecting
to Confess themselves, whether for fear, remissness, or negligence of their
Salvation, until the Occurrence of some great Feast obliges them thereunto.
This Abuse is common amongst young Persons, and the Cause that many fall back
after good Resolutions, and often relapse presently after into Vice. We must
not lose Courage for having fallen, but raise our selves presently, and make
use of that Slip for our Advantage, and stand better on our Guard for the
future.

Fourthly, Fourth Advice.
Confess your self usually to your ordinary Confessor as often as you can; so
that nevertheless if you find him not, you go to another, and let not his
Absence be the Cause of your failing to Confess your self, when there is a
Reason for it.

Fifthly, Fisth Advice.
Be assured that the Devil will use all his Endeavors to hinder you from
Confessing often; he will oppose all Obstacles imaginable: Sometimes he will
make you believe it is too much trouble, sometimes that you are not
sufficiently prepared, sometimes that you have no need; at another time he
makes some Business fall out; oftentimes he will raise up some Disgust against
Confession; sometimes, and very frequently, he will endeavor to withdraw you
from it by a certain foolish Shame, which he is accustomed to stir up in those
of your Age, by which he makes them blush to perform Acts of Piety. A thousand
other Impediments will he suggest to hinder you from so prositable and
necessary a Means of your Salvation. But in the Name of God, Theotime, pass by
all these Hindrances, and look upon all those Thoughts, which aim at
withdrawing you from Confession, as Temptation of the Devil.

Now to Confess well, endeavor to observe diligently that which follows.

1. Means to Confess well.
Examine your Conscience the best you can concerning Sins to which you are most
inclined.

2. After Examination stir up in your self a Sorrow for having offended God,
and beg Pardon of him with all your Heart.

3. Approach to Confession with much Respect and Modesty, representing to your
self that you are going to appear before God, as before your Judge, to implore
his Mercy; And if you be obliged to expect, before you can be Confessed, keep
your self in an humble and modest Posture, Praying or Reading some good Book.

4. Declare your Sins humbly and plainly, making your Confessor understand them
clearly. There are some who Confess but half their Sins, and expect that the
Confessor should ask the rest; This is a great Abuse, which frequently makes
the Confessions null, and Sacrilegious.

5. Have a great care never to conceal a mortal Sin in Confession through Shame
or otherwise. That is a very heinous Offense, which often happens to young
Persons, and particularly for certain Sins of Impurity, which they dare not
discover, by a misfortunate Bashfulness, which makes them frequently commit
great Sacrileges, and keeps them in a continual State of mortal Sin. O
Theotime, never fall into that Disaster by which the Devil seduces, and
miserably destroys young Persons.

6. Seek not by your Confessions to be esteemed by your Ghostly Father, but to
be cured of your Sins, and directed by him in the Way of Salvation.

7. Having made your Confession, give ear attentively to the Admonitions of
your Ghostly Father, and to the Advice he shall give you, and imitate not many,
who think of nothing but calling to mind their Sins, while the Confessor speaks
to them; Have a care of this Fault, for it is common, and makes one lose almost
all the Fruit of Confession.

8. Before your Ghostly Father gives you Absolution, and also whilst he shall
pronounce it, beg Pardon of God for your Sins with much Sorrow and Regret for
having committed them, with a firm Resolution, by the assistance of his Grace,
to endeavor to Amend. You must detest mortal Sins as infinitely opposite to the
Goodness of God, and your Salvation; and for others you must be sorry, because
they are displeasing to God, and always have a Resolution to correct them in
your self as much as you can.

9. Perform your Penance punctually and devoutly.

10. Accustom your self on the Day of your Confession, to make Reflection upon
the principal Sins into which you have fallen, that you may amend them: Call to
mind also the Advices your Ghostly Father shall have given you, and purpose to
put them in Practice.

CHAP. IX.
Of Holy Communion.
OUR Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ had so great a desire of our
Sanctification and Eternal Happiness, that he was not satisfied with the
Institution of the Sacrament of Penance, wherein he left Power to his Apostles
to remit our Sins, but by Incomprehensible Excess of his Love, he has left us
the most Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, wherein he really gives himself
for the Nourishment of our Souls, to conserve them in the Life of Grace, to
cure them of their Distempers, to strengthen them in their Weaknesses, and
conduct them happily unto Life Eternal.

From whence it follows, That the Holy Communion is a necessary Means for those
who aspire to Virtue, and that those who have a true desire of their Salvation,
ought to make themselves worthy to approach frequently unto it. Nisi
manducaveritis carnem filii hominis, and biberitis ejus sanguinem, non
habebitis vitam in vobis. Joh. 6.
Unless you eat, says he himself, the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
Blood, you shall have no life in you.

It is from this Living Fountain of Divine Graces, dear Theotime, from whence
you may abundantly draw all the Favors and Virtues that are necessary for you.
You seek after Wisdom, and here you receive the Eternal Wisdom in his proper
Person. You desire Purity, and here you receive Purity it self. You want Force
to conserve Virtue amidst the Dangers and Impediments of this Life, and you
receive here the Author of all Graces, who can defend you against every thing
that opposes it self to your Salvation.

This being so, you must approach to it frequently, and not refuse the Grace of
this Divine Savior, who with such an admirable Love gives himself to you. Now
he evidently manifests that he has no desire of his Salvation, who neglects so
effectual and wholesome a Means, which contains nothing less than the Author of
Salvation.

Although a general Time for Communion cannot be prescribed, because it depends
upon the particular State of every one, yet I shall tell you, that it is
seasonable to Communicate ordinarily once a Month. If you confess oftener than
once a Month, as we have said above, may be sometimes expedient for you, you
shall take the Advice of your Ghostly Father concerning Communion, who
sometimes will counsel it, when he sees you profit thereby, and have an earnest
desire to approach thereunto: Sometimes also he will think it convenient to
defer it till another time, to prepare your self the better for an Action of
such high Consequence.

Now being that all the Fruit of Communion depends upon Communicating with
requisite Dispositions, these are the Advices you shall observe to Communicate
well; mark them carefully, and read them every time you come to Communion.

CHAP. X.
An Advice for Communicating well.
PRepare your self the best that is possible. First thing to be done to
Communicate well.
Beg of God in your Morning Prayers, and the Night before, the Grace to prepare
your self to Receive him worthily. All the Morning keep your Mind much
recollected, by reflecting upon the great Action you are about to perform, and
say often within your self that which David said when he made the Preparations
for the Building of a Temple for God. Grande opus est, 1 Par. 29.
non enim homini praeparatur habitatio, sed Deo. It is a great Work wherein one
prepares a Dwelling not for Man, but for God. It is Jesus Christ, Theotime,
true God, and true Man, for whom you prepare an Habitation in your Soul, you
must then prepare one worthy of him.

Be diligent to go to the Church to offer your Prayers to God, Second.
and Confess your self; wherein you shall ask of your Confessor, whether he
think it convenient you should Communicate, and if he judge it fit, you shall
prepare your self in this manner.

Take about half an Hour before Communion, Third Preparation for Communion.
wherein recollecting your thoughts within your self, you shall perform that
which follows. 1. Humble your self profoundly before our Lord Jesus Christ,
acknowledging your self unworthy to receive him; Unworthy by reason of his
Greatness and Sanctity; Unworthy by reason of your own Sins. Ergone credibile
est, ut habitet Deus cum hominibus? Is it therefore possible (said Solomon,
having built the Temple) that God should dwell amongst Men? 2. Beg of him
Pardon for your Sins, which make you unworthy to Receive him. 3. Implore his
Grace to Receive him worthily, that is, with a pure Conscience, with a lively
Faith, with a profound Humility, with an ardent love of his Goodness, and with
an inviolable Resolution to Serve him all your Life. If you know any Prayers
for Communion, say them, but with Attention and Feeling.

The time of Communion being come, leave all your vocal Prayers, approach
modestly to the Altar, with your Eyes cast down, not looking on one side or the
other, nor pressing to come first, but letting the Crowd pass, if there be any.
Being upon your Knees, Adore our Lord from the bottom of your Heart; and after
having said the Confiteor, and Domine non sum dignus, with a true Sentiment of
your own unworthiness, with a firm Faith, and most profound Humility, Receive
the God of Heaven, and the Savior of your Soul.

Being retired from the Altar, say not presently your Vocal Prayers upon your
Book, but entertain your self some time inwardly with your Savior which you
enjoy within you. 1. Adore him profoundly. 2. Admire his Goodness, to come and
Visit you himself, saying to him that which St. Elizabeth said to the B.
Virgin, Whence proceeds this honor, Et unde hoc mihi, ut veniat matter Domini ad
me? Luc. 1.
that my God comes to visit me? Acknowledge that you are undeserving that
Favor. 3. Demand Pardon for your Sins, and Sorrow for having offended God, who
gives Himself to you with so much Love and Bounty. Protest to him, Diligam te,
Domine, fortitudo mea, Dominus firmamentum meum, and refugium meum, and
liberator meus. Psalm. 17.
that you will always love him, and never separate your self from him again. 4.
Represent unto him the Necessities of your Soul, begging of him the Graces you
have most need of, to resist Temptations, to avoid wicked Company, and
Occasions of offending God, and ruining your self, and to cure your depraved
Habits. 5. Give him thanks for the Favor he has done you, in admitting you to
receive him; and in acknowledgment of his Benefit, offer him your Soul, your
Powers, your Life, all that you have, and all you can do to Love and Serve him
for ever. All this must be performed in a short time, but with much servor.

Return modestly from the Church, and make all the rest of the Day relish of
this pious Action. Be extreme modest in all you do; Be present at the Sermon
and Evensong, if you can, and employ some Hours in reading good Books. Converse
not much with others, except with pious Persons. Entertain your self with
Religious Discourses, and let this be your chiefest Recreation all that Day.

CHAP. XI.
Of Morning Prayer.
COnfession and Communion are very essicacious Means to acquire Virtue, Ninth
Means, Morning Prayer.
but they become unprofitable and of small effect, unless they be accompanied
with these which follow: Morning and Evening Prayer, Assisting devoutly at the
Holy Sacrifice of the Altar, Employing ones Time in the knowledge of ones self,
Reading good Books, and pious Conversations, are Means so necessary for Virtue,
that Respiration and Nourishment are not more needful for the support of the
Corporal Life, than these things are necessary for the Conservation of Piety,
which is the Life of the Soul.

I begin with Morning Prayer, which the Wiseman, amongst the Means he assigns
to obtain Wisdom, recommends so effectually unto you. Cor suum tradet ad
vigilandum diluculo, ad Dominum qui fecit eum and in conspectu altissimi
deprecabitur, aperiet os suum in oratione, and pro delictis suis deprecabitur.
Eccl. 39.6.
He shall give his Heart to watch in the Morning for God his Creator, and he
will offer up his Deprecations to the most High. He will open his Mouth in
Prayer, and implore Pardon for his Sins.

I would to God this excellent Document were deeply engraven in the Minds of
Men, and principally of young Persons, as one of the most important to live in
Virtue. If you truly aspire to Virtue, dear Theotime, you will have a great
care to practice this Instruction, which is one of the most necessary you can
receive.

We own unto God all our Actions, but chiefly the first in the Morning; it is
that which is most agreeable unto him, it is by that we consecrate others unto
him: By it we attract the Divine Blessings upon all our Works, and collect the
Divine Grace for all the Day; As the Israelites in the Desert gathered in the
Morning the Manna of Heaven which maintained them all the Day.

And that which is most remarkable in that Manna, is, that those who failed to
gather it in the Morning, found it not presently after, because it was melted
at the rising of the Sun, whereof the Scripture gives this excellent Reason,
viz. That God who made it Rain every Morning, caused it to be dissolved with
the first Beams of the Sun; Quod enim ab igne non poterat exterminari, statim
ab exiguo radio solis calefactum tabescebat, ut notum omnibus esset, quoniam
oportet praevenire solemn ad tuam benedictionem, and ad ortum solis to adorare.
Sap. 18.
To teach all Men, that they ought to prevent the Sun in Praising God, and
Adoring him in the Morning.

But remember, Theotime, to perform this Action in the manner the Wiseman
prescribes to you; for he would not have it a constrained, negligent and
undevout Prayer, but a Prayer with the quite contrary Qualities: He says, that
The wise Man will give his Heart (that is, will apply his Will and Affection)
to watch in the Morning for God his Creator; that is to say, will give his
first Thoughts to God, to Adore him as his Creator, and give him Thanks for all
his Benefits, will offer his Supplications in the sight of the most High; that
is, will consider the Greatness of God, to whom he speaks, and in the Presence
of whom he is, and considering the infinite Grandeur of the Majesty of God,
will attentively offer his Prayers to him, and humbly, with great Modesty, and
with a most profound Respect, begging of God Pardon for his Sins, and ardently
sighing after his holy Favors.

To put in Execution these Instructions, Practice.
have a care to practice that which follows. Every Morning, as soon as you are
up, cast your self upon your Knees in some place a little retired, and there,

1. Adore God from your Heart, acknowledging him for your Sovereign Master and
Creator, and looking upon him as one from whom you receive all that you are, or
have.

2. Give him Thanks for all the Benefits you have received from him; for the
Favor of your Creation, of your Redemption by the Merits of his Son Jesus
Christ, of making you a Christian, a Child of the Catholic Church, of
Instructing you with the necessary Truths for your Salvation, and of other
particular Benefits which you shall take notice of in your self.

3. Humbly implore his Pardon for all the Sins of your Life past, by which you
have so much offended his Bounty, and abused his Favors.

4. Beg of him the Grace to employ that Day in his Service without offending
him; Make a Resolution rather to die than consent to a mortal Sin; Purpose to
avoid the Occasions, and endeavor to foresee those which may happen that Day,
to the end you may be armed against them.

5. Offer all the Actions of the Day to him, and beseech him that he would
bless them, inspire you, and direct you in all your Works, that you do nothing
but by and for him.

Recommend your self to the Blessed Virgin, to your good Angel, and to your
Patron. Perform all this in a small time, but with much fervor; and be assured,
Theotime, that if you be diligent in this Exercise, you will find the Truth of
the Wiseman's Expression, who says, that Qui mane vigilaverint ad me, invenient
me. Prove. 8.
They who watch for her in the Morning, shall find her.

CHAP. XII.
Of Evening Prayer.
IF it be a Business of Importance to begin well the Day, Tenth Means, Evening
Prayer.
it is of no less to finish it perfectly. In the ancient Law God had not only
commanded a Sacrifice for every Morning, but also for every Night, to teach us,
that as we ought to Adore him in the beginning of the Day, so we owe him our
Acknowledgment at the end of the Day.

The principal part of this Action is the Examen of Conscience, The Advantages
of Examen of Conscience at Night.
which is a thing wherein you ought not to fail, if you seriously desire to
advance in Virtue. 1. It is a powerful Means to cure ill Habits, to avoid the
relapse into Sin, or readily to clear ones self of them. 2. It helps to
discover the Faults one has committed to amend them, and preserve ones self
from them, to continue a hatred of mortal Sin, and a Will not to commit it any
more. 3. Without this Exercise we fall into many Offenses, which being
neglected lead us to mortal Sin; we are lulled asleep in Sin, without a desire
or thought of freeing our selves. 4. By this Exercise, ordinary Confessions are
made more easy and frequent, we amend our Lives, we prevent an unprovided
Death, we prepare our selves for Death, Judgment, and Eternity; And it is in
this Action that we excellently well practice that admirable Document of the
Wiseman; Ante judicium interroga teipsum and in conspectu Dei invenies
propitiationem. Eccl. 18.
Before Judgment Examine your self, and you will find Mercy when you are in the
sight of God.

Have a care then, Theotime, daily to perform this so holy and important an
Exercise, wherein take notice of the Order you shall observe.

At Night being upon your Knees before you go to Bed,

1. Adore God, and give him Thanks for all his Favors, and particularly for
having conserved you that Day, and preserved you from Misfortunes which might
have befallen you.

2. Beg of him the Grace of seeing the Sins you have committed that Day, to
demand Pardon of him, and amend your Life.

3. Examine your Conscience concerning the Sins you most ordinarily fall into.
For this effect, pass over in your Memory the principal Actions you have done
from Morning till Night, and take notice of the Faults you may have committed
therein. Recollect your self, whether you have had any Temptations that Day;
Examine how you have behaved your self in them, whether you have readily
resisted them, or with negligence. Take notice of what Company you have been
in, and whether at the same time you have acted any thing indecently, either by
giving ill Example in Word or Deed; or not hindering others wicked Actions, when
you might divert them. Consider whether you have employed well your time all
day, or unprofitably lost it, and so of the rest.

4. After you have taken notice of the Sins you have committed, stir up in your
self a Sorrow for them, humbly beg Pardon of God for them, make a Resolution to
correct your self the Day following, and keep them in your Memory to Confess
them at your first Confession.

If amongst these Sins there should be any that by misfortune were mortal, O
God, Theotime, rise not up from your Prayers till you have abundantly deplored
your Misery, and conceived an extreme Regret for having so grievously offended
so holy and adorable a God. Beg of him Pardon with all the the Contrition of
your Heart, and protest unto him that you will Confess it as soon as possible,
and to Morrow if you can.

5. Recommend unto God your Soul and your Body; Desire him that he will
Preserve you from all Misfortunes that Night, and principally from Sin. Offer
your Prayers to the Blessed Virgin, your Angel-Guardian, your Patron, and all
the Saints together. An important Advice.
And as at the beginning of the Day you demanded of God the Grace to Live well,
so at the end remember to beg of him the Grace to Die well. The End we make of
every Day, is an Image of the End we shall one Day make of our Life. Finish
therefore every Day as you would one Day finish your Life.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Assisting devoutly at the Holy Sacrifice of the Altar.
THE most holy and adorable Sacrifice of the Altar, Eleventh Means.
is the greatest of all our Mysteries, and the most excellent Action of our
Religion: It is a Sacrifice which our Savior Jesus Christ has Instituted,
wherein by the real Oblation of his Body and Blood. 1. We give God the greatest
Honor he can receive. 2. We worthily return him Thanks for his Benefits. 3. We
render him propitious to pardon our Offenses. 4. We obtain his Graces and
Favors; And that which the ancient Law did by four sorts of Sacrifices, we
perform, and that more perfectly, by this alone, which is altogether
Latreutick, that is, Honoring God; Eucharistick, that is, Thanksgiving;
Propitiatory, Rendering God Favorable; and Impetratory, Obtaining Graces from
him.

They who are present at this Holy Sacrifice, partake of these four sorts of
Effects, and receive great Advantages thereby, supposing they Hear it as they
ought.

To Assist at it therefore as we ought, Three things are necessary, Attention,
Respect, and Devotion. Attention, To have the Mind present, and attentive to
the Divine Action. Respect, To be present with a great Modesty as to the
Exterior, and a profound Reverence of the Soul at this adorable Sacrifice, at
which the Angels themselves Assist with fear and trembling. Devotion, Not to
Hear it negligently and by custom, as many times we do, but on Design to
partake of the four Effects of this Sacrifice, viz. To give him Thanks for his
Favors; To implore his Mercy for our Sins; To demand Favors, and chiefly that
of Converting our Selves entirely to him; And to live for ever in his Service.

Endeavor then, Theotime, to be present daily as much as you can, at this
sublime Sacrifice; but be mindful to be present with the three Dispositions we
spoke of, Attention, Respect, and Devotion. There are many different Ways
prescribed to Assist devoutly at this Holy Sacrifice; but supposing you be
present with these three Conditions, and perform therein those four Things we
took notice of, Adoring God there profoundly, Begging Pardon of him, Rendering
him Thanks for his Favors, and Imploring his Grace for your felf and others;
This is the most profitable Method you can follow.

These Four Things ought to be performed principally after the Consecration,
until Communion; and for the time that goes before Consecration, you may employ
it in reciting some Prayers, or if you be capable in following the Priest, in
all he shall say or do in every part of the Sacrifice: That is, in begging
Pardon of God with him during the Introit and Kyrie eleison, making humble Suit
to him during the Prayers, harkening attentively to the Epistle and Gospel,
representing unto your self Jesus Christ who speaks unto you, endeavoring to
keep in your Memory what Instruction you receive from his holy Word; At Credo
making Profession of Faith with the Priest, at the Offertory Offering with him,
at the Preface when he says Sursum corda, raising your Heart to God to keep you
more attentive, and disposing your self to Adore our Savior at the
Consecration, and performing the Four Things we have spoken of.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Labor and Employment of Time.
IT is not sufficient to begin well, Twelfth Means.
and piously end the Day in the manner we have said; we must also employ it
profitably in some virtuous Labor, there being nothing so contrary to Virtue,
nor more a Friend to Vice than Idleness, principally in young Persons, as we
shall show you hereafter, Part 3. Chap. 7. Wherefore, Theotime, if you
sincerely desire to live in Virtue, you must add this Means to the former, and
be persuaded that to live virtuously, it is absolutely necessary for you to fly
Idleness, and bestow your Pains faithfully in the Employment of your Condition.

Hearken to me, Son, says the Wiseman, Audi me, fili, and ne spernas me, and in
novissimo invenies verba mea; in omnibus operibus tuis esto velox, and omnis
infirmitas non accedet tibi. Eccl. 31.
and contemn not my Admonitions, and you will find how profitable they will be
to you in the end. Be prompt and diligent in all your Works, and by this you
will avoid all sorts of Infirmities. Idleness causes many Distempers of the
Body, which weaken its Forces; it heaps up many ill Humors, which corrupts it:
But it brings many more, and far more dangerous, to the Soul, which it makes
apt to receive all manner of Vices; For as Exercise is necessary for the Health
of the Body, so Employment and Labor are needful for the Health of the Soul;
for it is impossible to conserve it without that Means.

Have a care then, Theotime, Practice.
diligently to employ your self every Day in the Labor of the Condition wherein
God has put you: Look not upon it as a thing troublesome, painful, or tedious,
but as an Exercise bestowed on you by God, to employ your self therein
faithfully, and as a necessary Means of your Salvation, to avoid Idleness,
which is the Mother of all Vices, and the Cause of the Ruin of young People.
Offer it to God every Morning; and when you begin, beseech him he would give a
Blessing to it, and that it may succeed to his Glory and your Salvation.

Now if this Advice be necessary in all the Conditions wherein the Lives of
different Men are spent, it is most of all necessary in the Profession of
Students. If you are called thereto, you ought to employ your self therein more
faithfully than in any other Condition; not only because God has placed you in
that Exercise, and that it is a Means to avoid Idleness; but also because if
you be negligent in this State, you lose the Time proper to learn in, which is
that of Youth, which you can never repair: You lose the Occasion of rendering
your self capable of any Employment, as we see it daily happens to many, who
having lost their Time during their Studies, continue slothful and unprofitable
all the rest of their Life, and many times become vicious and wicked. O
Theotime, you ought to make a great Scruple of losing this so precious a Time:
You shall give an exact account thereof at the Judgment of God. Si quis
ignorant, ignorabitur. 1 Cor. 14. Qui vitat discere, incidet in mala. Prove.
17.16.
The ignorant shall be uuknown, and he who refuses to learn shall fall into
many Misfortunes.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Knowledge of ones self, very necessary for young People.
AMongst all the Means which conduce to Virtue, Thirteenth Means.
the Knowledge of ones self is one of the most important. And it is so
necessary, that it is impossible to attain to Virtue without it. For this
Reason it has always been so much recommended by Authors who have written of a
Christian Life; And the Pagans themselves have always had it in much Esteem,
having received as an Instruction come from Heaven, these two Words, which were
written upon the Gate of the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, (...), Know thy self.

By this Knowledge is to be understood a serious and frequent Reflection which
one makes of himself, to take notice of the Inclinations of the Soul, the
Passions which bear dominion there, the Vices which spring up or increase, that
he may correct them with convenient Remedies, according to the measure that he
perceives them.

This Knowledge is necessary for all Men, and for want of exercising our selves
therein, the greatest part of them remain all their Lives subject to many
Vices. But it is chiefly necessary for young Persons, because they are in an
Age wherein their Passions begin to spring; in which Time it is very important
to observe them and stop them, for Two Reasons.

1. Because they are more easy to be cured in their beginning, and stifled in
their birth, than corrected when they are become stronger.

2. Because following that most judicious Remark of St. Ambrose. Tunc maxim
insidiatur adversarius, quando videt in nobis passiones aliquas generari, tunc
fomites movet, laqueos parat. Ambr. lib. 1. Off. c. 4.
The Devil tempts Men most violently at that time, when when he sees some
Passion arising in their Soul; for it is then, says this Great Man, that he
excites most of all the Causes, and lays Ambushes to engage them more therein.

For this Reason, dear Theotime, I exhort you to Exercise your self in this
Knowledge of your self, as in a thing which is infinitely necessary; or to say
better, it is not I who recommend this Means, it is the Holy Ghost himself who
gives it in that excellent Instruction in the 37th Chapter of Ecclesiasticus,
by the Mouth of the Wiseman; Fili, in vita tua tenta animam tuam, and si fuerit
nequam, non des ei potestatem. Eccl. 37.
Son, examine your Soul all your Lifetime; and if you find her inclining to
Evil, give her not liberty: He gives the Reason in another place; Anima nequam
disperdet eum, qui illam habet. Eccl. 6.
Because a Soul which has a propension to Wickedness, will destroy him who
possesses her. And in the 18th Chapter he gives us to understand what it is
Not to give liberty to our Soul, viz. Not to follow her Motions and depraved
Inclinations, but carefully to repress them. Post concupiscentias tuas non eas,
and a voluntate tua avertere. Si praebes animae tuae concupisccentias ejus,
faciet te in gaudium inimicis tuis. Eccl. 18.
Run not, says he, after your Concupiscence, and divert your self from your
Affection; this is to be understood when it is evil. If you give to your Soul
all she desires, she will make you yield unto your Enemies, who will rejoice at
your Destruction.

So that according to the Judgment of the Wiseman, we must know in our Youth
the Inclinations of our Soul, that we may repress them when they are wicked. It
is the first Knowledge we must learn, and to which we must in good time apply
our Studies, that we may practice it all our Life. It is the Science of
Sciences, without which all other are of no Advantage: For what does it profit
us to know all things, and to be ignorant of our selves? A te tua consideratio
inchoet, ne frustra extendaris in alia, te neglecto. Quid tibi prodest si
universum mundum lucreris, te unum perdens? Eetsi sapiens sis, deest tibi ad sa
pientiam, si tibi non fueris; Quantum vero ut quidem senserim ego, totum
noveris, licet omnia mysteria noveris, lata terrae, alta coeli, profunda maris,
si te nesciens, eris similis aedificanti sine fundamento, ruinam, non
structuram faciens. S. Bern. l. 2. de Consideratione, c. 3.
Begin your Study with the Knowledge of your self, says S. Bernard. It is in
vain to extend your Knowledge to things which belong not to you, neglecting
your self. What does it advantage if you gain the whole World, and lose your
own Soul? Whatsoever Wisdom you possess, if it be not so for your felf, the
greatest part of Knowledge is wanting. Although you should know all the highest
Mysteries of Faith, and all the Secrets included in Nature, if you know not
your self, you are like to him who builds without a Foundation, preparing a
Ruin rather than an Edifice. And it befalls them who neglect this Knowledge of
themselves, as it did that Philosopher, who being attentive to the
Consideration of the Stars, fell into a deep Ditch, for want of looking to
himself, and made himself the Object of Laughter to his Spectators.

Be careful then, dear Theotime, to Exercise your self in the Knowledge of your
self, and in moderating your Affections: Learn in time to understand that you
must not follow all the Motions and Inclinations of your Soul, but that there
are many which you must resist with all your Power by the Grace of God. To
attain to this Knowledge and Moderation, you must perform Three Things.

1. Practice.
Accustom your self to make Reflection upon your self, to take notice of your
Inclinations, and the Vices to which you are subject; you will daily see some
Passion or Vice, which bears dominion more than others, either Pride, Choler,
Love of Pleasures, or the like. You will discover others which spring up from
time to time, and which will increase, unless you carefully repress them.
Sometimes it will be an Unaptness to learn, and Disobedience; Sometimes Cursing
and Swearing; at other Times Discord and Revenge, and so of others. When you
shall thus discover them, permit them not to grow up: Principiis obsta, sero
medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
The Motions unto Ill at first withstand,
The Cure's too late, when Vice has got Command.
Endeavor quickly to apply the Remedies; in the Third and Fourth Part you will
find them against every one of these Vices.

2. Being that we discover not clearly enough our Constitution in the Knowledge
we have by our selves, in our Youth, seek to be Admonished of your wicked and
dangerous Inclinations, by those who know you, and particularly by your Ghostly
Father; give credit easily to what he shall tell you, and labor to correct your
self.

3. Above all, be diligent in demanding of God frequently the Grace to know
your self, and to reform the Evil which is in you. O God, Deus meus illumina
tenebras meas. Psalm. 17.
illuminate the darkness of my Soul, that I may know all that is in me
displeasing to thy Divine Majesty, and that I may amend it by thy Grace. Offer
frequently unto him that excellent Prayer of St. Augustine, O God, Noverim me,
noverim te. Noveris te ut Deum timeas, noveris ipsum ut aeque ipsum diligas. S.
Ber. 37. in Cant.
let me know my self, and know thee. These, Theotime, are the two Knowledges
chiefly necessary, that of your self, and that of God. The First produces
Humility and Amendment, which is the beginning of Virtue. The Second produces
Charity and the Love of God, which is the top and height of Perfection.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Reading of Pious Books.
THE wise Man will seek the Wisdom of the Ancients, Fourteenth Means, Reading
good Books. Sapientiam omnium antiquorum exquiret sapiens and in prophetis
vacabit. Eccl. 39.
and will apply himself to the reading of the Prophets, that is, of holy
things. It is another Means which the Wiseman assigns you, very necessary, and
extreme useful to acquire and conserve Virtue.

We become not Learned but by the Study of Science; and we become not virtuous,
but by our Application to Virtue. We have shown above, that Instruction is
necessary to learn Virtue; Now we cannot receive Instructions by Documents of
Masters only, but also by Reading of Books. We are not always near our Pastors
and Directors, to learn from them the Way of Virtue. Their Instructions, their
Admonitions, their Exhortations, their Counsels, continue but for a time in our
Memories; we easily lose them, if they be not maintained and renewed by the
Reading of Books, and Meditation upon holy Things.

For this reason the Wiseman in Ecclesiasticus Chap. 6. after he had said, that
to acquire Wisdom, we must hearken to the Documents of the Wise, adds this
other Means as necessary, viz. Et si dilexeris audire sapiens eris, cogitatum
habe in praeceptis Domini, and in mandatis illius assiduus esto. Eccl. 6.
That we must Study and Meditate upon the Law of God. Cast your thoughts, says
he, upon the Precepts of God, and meditate carefully upon his Commandments.

Charity, Theotime, is a Fire which must necessarily be sustained by good
Thoughts and pious Affections: If this Nourishment be taken away from her, she
becomes weak, and at length entirely extinguished; if that fail not, she is
enflamed, and daily increases. Now the Sources of these Thoughts and Affections
is the reading of pious Books, which serves as an Instrument of Divine Grace to
inspire us with them.

It was by this that God wrought that admirable Conversion of S. Augustine,
Example.
which was begun by the reading of a Book called Hortensius, Treating of
Wisdom, as he himself recounts in the Third Book of his Confessions, Chap. 4.
it was advanced by the Relation of the Conversion of two Courtiers, who had
been Converted by the reading of the Life of S. Antony, and in fine was
perfected by the reading of the New Testament, which a Voice from Heaven
commanded him to read, saying, Toll, lege; Take and read.

It was by this that he wrought that wonderful Change of S. Serapion, whom the
reading of the Gospel moved so strongly, that he left all his Goods, and having
given them to the Poor, even to his wearing Clothes, he went through the Streets
with with a New Testament under his Arm, saying, Ille me spoliavit; This is
that which has stripped me. O the great force of pious Reading! How is it
possible that so holy a Means, and so powerful for the Conversion of Souls,
should be so much neglected as it is?

But it is not sufficient to read, A fruitful way of Reading.
we must read profitably: For this effect have a care to observe in your
Reading these following Conditions.

1. Read not for Curiosity, and only to content your Mind, but out of a desire
to learn to live well; and to make your Reading more profitable, remember to
begin it ordinarily with a small elevation of your Mind to God, Revela oculos
meos, and considerabo mirabilia tua. Da mihi intellectum and scrutabor legem
tuam, and custodiam illam in toto cord meo. Psalm. 118.
by which you shall beg of him the Grace to learn something for your
Instruction.

2. Oras? Loqueris ad sponsum: legis? Ille tibi loquitur. S. Jer. ad Eusto.
Read with much Respect, considering that it is God who speaks to you in your
Book. Christum alloquimur cum oramus; illum audimus cum divina legimus oracula.
S. Amb. lib. 1. Offic. cap. 20. Sit tibi vel oration assidua vel lectio. Nunc
cum Deo loquere, nunc Deus tecum. S. Cypr. Epist. ad Donat.
It is a Consideration of the holy Fathers, who say, when we Pray, we Speak to
God; and when we Read, he Talks to us.

3. Read not many Books, but only two or three well chosen, which may be proper
to stir you up to Virtue, and which may afford you the Means: As Augustin's
Confessions, the Imitation of Christ, the Introduction to a Devout Life, the
Guide to Sinners Composed by Granado, or some other, acording to the Advice of
your Confessor.

4. Fortuita and varia lectio and quasi casu reperta non aedificat, sed reddit
animam instabilem, and leviter admissa levius recedit a memoria. S. Bern. de
vita solitaria ad Fra. de mont. Dei.
Read in Order, that is, beginning at the beginning, and continuing until the
end, otherwise the Reading will be but little profitable to you.

5. Read but little at a time, and that slowly and attentively; make reflection
upon the things you read, endeavor to draw some good Resolution from thence,
and beg of God the Grace to put it in execution.

6. Read often, that is, either every Day, or sometimes in the Week, chiefly
upon Sundays and Feasts.

7. Content not your self for having read a Book once over, but peruse it
often. If you read it not for Curiosity, but to learn Virtue, you will find
that the second Reading will be more profitable than the first; you will
comprehend more easily your Book, you will retain it better, and put it in
practice with more advantage.

CHAP. XVII.
An Advertisement concerning bad Books.
WHEN I exhort you to read good Books, I advertise you at the same time to fly
absolutely wicked ones, which we may call the Plague of Minds, next to which
there is nothing more pernicious to young Persons.

It is one of the most effectual Means the Devil has invented to corrupt
Minds, and which almost always succeeds. He has raised up an infinite number
of all sorts, in all Languages, in all Times, and still devises new ones. The
greatest part are disguised with the appearance of Learning or Eloquence, or of
some ingenious Invention; and are by so much more dangerous, as under these
Vizors they conceal a mortal Poison, which is deeply imbibed in the Soul. Young
Persons read them with Pleasure and earnestness, and easily remember them:
Discourses pass, but Books still remain in their Hands; they have time to
meditate on them, and softly digest the Venom they inspire.

The Effects are always pernicious and mortal; for some produce in the Mind
Error, and Darkness; others pervert the Judgment, corrupt good Inclinations,
making one judge that good which is wicked, and account that wicked which is
good. Others teach Vice, excite Passions, inflame Concupiscence, enkindle
dishonest Love in the Hearts of the most chaste; and there is none which leaves
not behind it much cause to be sorry for reading it.

These Books are pernicious to all Men, but they are most of all hurtful to
young Persons, being they are more apt to receive the ill Impressions they make
in the Mind; and they ought to avoid them as the Productions of the Devil, and
as a detestable Poison which Hell vomits upon Earth to infect, and destroy
Souls.

1. These are all Heretical Books, which teach Errors in Faith, and which
combat the Truths received by the Church.

2. All wicked Books, which convert Religion and pious Things into Derision;
which blame the Ceremonies, and received Customs thereof; which scoff at
Persons Confecrated to God, as Priests and Religious. Those which abuse the
Sacred Scripture by wicked and profane Applications.

3. Lascivious and immodest Books, which wage open War against Chastity.

4. Books which treat of Love, although they be not uncivil in Words; Such are
most of the Latin and French Poets, and the greatest part of Romances. These
Books are more dangerous than those of the Third sort, because those openly
teach Wickedness, and easily breed an aversion of themselves, in Souls which
have yet the Fear of God; but these not seeming to be publicly naught, attract
the Mind by their fair Discourses, and by the sweetness of the Things they
treat of, by which delighting the Senses, they inflame the Heart with impure
Love.

Fly all these Books, Theotime, Practice.
as Inventions which the Devil has found out to destroy you. You can scarce
ever read them without a mortal Sin; for you either entertain evil Thoughts, or
expose your self to the evident danger of entertaining them. If you have any of
these Books, keep them not, absolutely part with them, notwithstanding any
Resolution you have made not to read them: Curiosity will tempt you and
overcome you at the end; it is a Serpent which when you think the least on it,
will give you a mortal Wound.

Say not that these Books are well Composed, that the Discourse is Eloquent,
that you learn there to Speak well, and many excellent Things: For I shall
answer you with S. Augustine, that all this is but a false Pretext; Non omnino
per hanc turpitudinem verba illa commodius discuntur, sed per haec verba
turpitudo ista confidentius perpetratur. S. Aug. lib. 2. Confess. cap. 16.
and that by these wicked Books we learn not to Speak well, but only to become
bad, and commit Vice with less restraint. I tell you, you may draw Eloquence
from other Places than from those corrupted Fountains; and that that Eloquence
or Science is misfortunate, which cannot be acquired, but by the loss of ones
Soul and eternal Happiness.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Pious Conversation.
THERE is yet a most important Means to acquire Virtue, viz. to Converse with
virtuous Persons. Nothing has so great power over the Mind as Example, whether
good or bad. Man is naturally inclined to Imitation, and to act that which he
sees others do. Now if Example has such an influence over the Mind, it is
principally in Conversation, where it has so much more force, by how much it
is entertained nearer, and more frequently. And if it have so much power over
Men, it has a wonderful influence upon young People, as we see by Experience.

For this reason one of the most important Advices which can be given to those
who aspire to Virtue, and particularly to young Persons, is that of pious
Conversation.

It is there, Theotime, where Virtue is instilled into the Mind with Pleasure.
The Example of others makes secret, but strong Impressions, which frame the
Soul to Piety, without perceiving it. A Man insensibly embraces their Judgments
and Maxims, learns to speak and act like them, and believes it his Duty to do
what he sees others perform. A noble Spirit blushes to see it self overcome by
its Companions: And it is a sign of a wicked Disposition, and of a Mind totally
abandoned by God, when the Example of others does not move it, and that it
persists in Vice amongst the Examples of Virtue.

This most powerful Means is also taught by the Wiseman in Ecclesiasticus,
Chap. 9. Treat, says he, with the Wise and Prudent; let the just and virtuous
Persons be your familiar Companions. The reason of this Counsel is given in the
Proverbs; because Qui cum sapientibus graditur sapiens erit. Prove. 13.
He who converseth with the wise, will become wise.

Now there are two sorts of virtuous Persons with whom you ought to converse.

1. Endeavor to Associate your Self with discreet Persons, who surpass you in
Age as well as in Wisdom and Virtue. It is the Advice of the Wiseman in the
words I cited now, and also in Chap. 6. where he says, In multitudine
presbyterorum prudentium sta, and sapientiae illorum ex cord conjungere. Eccl.
6.
Frequent the Company of ancient wise Persons, and seriously follow their
wisdom; That is, take pleasure in their Society, and advantage your self with
their wise Discourses, and good Examples. St. Ambrose gives the same Advice to
young People in his Offices, where he says, Plurimum itaque prodest unicuique
bonis conjungi. Adolescentibus quoque utile ut claros and sapientes viros
sequantur, quoniam qui congreditur sapientibus sapiens erit, etc. Et ad
instructionem bonis jungi, plurimum proficit, and ad probitatis testimonium,
ostendunt enim adolescentes eorum se imitatores esse quibus adhaeserint, and ea
convalescit opinio quod ab his vivendi acceperint similitudinem cum quibus
conversandi hauserint cupiditatem. S. Ambr. Lib. 2. Offic. cap. 20.
That it is very profitable for young Persons to follow wise Men, because it
assists them much to learn Virtue, and give some Proof of their integrity. And
that young Persons conversing with wise Men, show that they imitate those with
whom they associate; and it is judged that they form their Lives according to
theirs with whom they keep Company.

2. Converse with those of your Age and Profession, whom you know to be
addicted to Virtue: Their Example will make a great Impression upon your Mind,
and will delightfully draw you to their Imitation: Have a care then to make a
good Choice, practicing exactly that excellent Advice of St. Jerome to Nepotian;
Associate, Tales habeto socios quorum contubernio non infameris. Non ornentur
vest sed moribus, nec alamistro crispent comas, sed moribus pudicitiam
polliceant^r. S. Hier. Epist. ad Nepo^^an.
says he, your self with those, whose Conversation may give no blemish to your
Reputation, and who shall be better adorned with Virtue than with Garments, and
who delight not in Curling their Hair, but who shall promise Modesty and
Integrity. Keep Company with such, love their Conversation, take notice
frequently of their Modesty, of their Piety, of their virtuous Actions, and
endeavor to imitate them by a holy and blessed Emulation, which will not
permit you to be last in the Service of your Creator.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Devotion to the Blessed Virgin and S. Joseph.
THIS, Theotime, Sixteenth Means.
is one of the last Means which I assign you; but it is also one of the most
effectual and delightful, to make you live and increase in Virtue, viz. The
Devotion to the Blessed Virgin.

Next to God, and the most adorable Humanity of his Son Jesus Christ, it is she
whom we must chiefly Honor and Love, by reason of that most sublime and
excellent Dignity of the Mother of God, which raises her above all Creatures
God has ever created.

By her we may receive all the Assistance which is necessary for us. She is
most Powerful in respect of God, to obtain from him all that she shall demand
of him. She is all Goodness in regard of us, to apply her self to God for us.
Being Mother of God, he cannot refuse her Request; being our Mother, she cannot
deny us her Intercession, when we have recourse to her. Our Miseries move her
Heart, our Necessities urge ger, the Prayers we offer her for our Salvation,
bring to us all that we demand: And St. Bernard has the boldness to say,
Sileat misericordiam tuam, Virgo beata, si quis est qui invocatam te in
necessitatibus suis sibi meminer it defuisse. S. Ber. Sermon. 4. de Assumpt.
That never any Person invoked that Mother of Mercy in his Necessities, who
has not been sensible of the Effects of her Assistance.

Since the Blessed Virgin has so much Goodness and Mercy for all Men, we may
say she has a very particular one for young People, whose Frailty she knows to
be the greatest, and Necessities most urgent, chiefly for the preservation of
Chastity, which is most of all assaulted in that Age, and of which she is a
singular Protectress. Histories are full of Examples of Saints, who have
conserved this great Virtue in their Youth, by the Assistance of this Queen of
Virgins; And the Experience thereof does daily discover many who have gained
great Victories, by the recourse they have had to her Intercession, and who
have happily advanced themselves in Virtue under her Protection and Conduct.

Be therefore Devout to the Blessed Virgin, dear Theotime; but in the Name of
God let it not be the Devotion of many, who think themselves to be Devout to
the Blessed Virgin, in offering ordinarily some Prayer to her, more by Custom
than Virtue; and on the otherside do not care horribly to displease her by a
Life replenished with mortal Sins, which they commit without any scruple. O
God! what Devotion is this to desire to please the Mother, and daily crucify
the Son, trample his Blood under their Feet, and contemn his Grace and
Friendship? Is not this to be an Enemy both to Son and Mother?

O dear, Theotime, your Devotion to the Blessed Virgin must not be like that,
True Devotion to the Blessed Virgin.
it must be more generous and more holy; and to speak plainly, if you will be a
true Child, and a sincere Servant of the Blessed Virgin, you must have a care
to perform Four things.

1. Have a great apprehension of displeasing her by mortal Sin, and of
afflicting her Motherly Heart, by Dishonoring her Son, and destroying your
Soul; and if you chance to fall into that Misfortune, have recourse readily to
her, Non aspernatur affectum praedulcem ingens desiderium inundationem
lacrymarum, assiduitatem precum quorumlibet etiam peccatorum, Si tamen laverint
a malitia cor. S. Ber. Sermon. 1. Super Salve Regina.
that she may be your Mediatrix to reconcile you to her Son, extremely provoked
by you. She is the refuge of Sinners as well as of the Just, on Condition they
have recourse to her with a true desire of converting themselves, as S. Bernard
says.

2. Love and imitate her Virtues, and principally her Humility and Chastity.
These two Virtues amongst others, have rendered her entirely pleasing to God:
Agnoscit certe, and diligit diligentes se, and prope est in veritate
invocantibus se, praesertim his quos videt sibi conformes factos in castitate
and humilitate. Ibid.
She loves them singularly in her Children, and is delighted to assist with her
Favors those whom she finds to be particularly inclined to those Virtues,
according to the same Saint.

3. Have recourse to her for things needful for your Salvation; and for that
end offer to her daily some particular Prayers, say your Beads or the little
Office sometimes in the Week, perform something in her Honor on every Saturday,
whether Prayer, Abstinence, or Alms; Honor particularly her Feasts with
Confession and Communion.

4. Be mindful to Invoke her in Temptations, and in the Dangers you find your
self in of offending God. You cannot show your respect for her better, than by
applying your self to her in these urgent Necessities, and you can find no
Succor more prompt and favorable than hers. It is the Counsel of St. Bernard;
Si insurgant venti tentationum, si incurras scopulos tribulationum, respice
stellam, voca Mariam: In periculis, in angustiis, in rebus dubiis, Mariam
cogita, Mariam invoca. Non recedat ab ore, non recedat a cord. Et ut imperves
orationis ejus suffragium non deseras conversation is exemplum. S. Bern. Eom.
2. Super missus est.
If the Winds of Temptations be raised against you, if you run upon the Rocks
of Adversity, lift up your Eyes toward that Star, Invoke the Blessed Virgin.
In Dangers, in Extremities, in doubtful Affairs, think upon the Blessed Virgin,
call upon the Blessed Virgin, let her not depart from your Mouth, nor from your
Heart: And that you may obtain the assistance of her Intercession, be sure to
follow the Example of her Conversation.

If you perform this, you will have a true Devotion to the Blessed Virgin, you
will be of the number of her real Children, and she will be your Mother, under
whose Protection you shall never perish. Keep well in memory that excellent
Sentence of S. Anselm, who presumed to say, That as it is necessary he must
needs perish, who has no Affection to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and who
forsakes her; So it is impossible he should perish, who has recourse to her,
and whom she regards with the Eyes of Mercy.

I shall make an end with an excellent Example which I shall produce for a
Proof of this Verity. A Remarkable Example. Revelation, c. 13.
S. Brigit had a Son who followed the Profession of a Soldier, and was bred up
in the Wars, and died therein, she having heard the News of his Death, was much
concerned for the Salvation of her Son, dead in so dangerous a Condition; and
as she was often savored by God with Revelations, of which alone she has
Composed a Book, she was assured of the Salvation of her Son by ensuing
Revelations. In the first the Blessed Virgin revealed to her, that she had
assisted her Son with a particular Protection at the Hour of his Death, having
strengthened him against Temptations, and obtained all necessary Favors for him
to make a holy and happy End. In the following she declared the Cause of that
singular Assistance she gave her Son, and said it was in Recompense of his
great and sincere Devotion he had testified to her, during his Life, wherein he
had loved her with a very ardent Affection, and had endeavored to please her
in all things.

This is, Theotime, what a real Devotion to the Blessed Virgin did merit for
this young Man, and for many others: She will be as prevalent for you, if you
have a Devotion for her; if you love and honor the Blessed Virgin as she ought
to be loved and honored, in the manner we have spoken of.

But in speaking of the Devotion of the Blessed Virgin Mary, The Devotion to S.
Joseph very profitable to young Persons.
I cannot pass by that of her dear Spouse, the glorious S. Joseph. This great
Saint having had the singular Happiness to be chosen to have the Care and
Guardianship of the Son of God in his Infancy and Youth, it must needs follow
that he will be favorable to young Persons, and cherish them tenderly in that
Age, which he saw sanctified by the Son of God. He has Served him in all the
Necessities of his Life, to which he was pleased to submit himself for our
Love: He freed him from the Persecutions of his Enemies, he bred him up in his
Infancy, governed him in his Youth; He saw him submit himself to his Commands;
He was a domestic Witness and Admirer of the Graces and Virtues he made appear
from Day to Day in his tender Years; as the Sun discovers his Light according
to the proportion he rises higher.

Ought we not to believe that this Saint, who has had so much Familiarity with
Jesus Christ when a little Child, affects with a singular tenderness the
Children of Jesus Christ, and particularly those who endeavor to conform
themselves to that Divine Youth, by the imitation of his Virtues, and that he
should be their Protector and Intercessor to him.

Fix your Affection, Theotime, upon this good Saint, and honor him with a
particular Respect: Take him for your Patron, and for the Protector of your
Purity. Pray to him daily with much confidence, and above all in your
Necessities, and you will receive wonderful Succors. Demand of him by the Care
he had of the Divine Infancy of Jesus Christ, that he would preserve your Youth
in the Dangers of your Salvation; and that he would aid you to conserve in your
Soul that Divine Savior, as he was employed once to guard him when he was in
the World.

CHAP. XX.
Of Devotion to the Angel-Guardian, and to the Saint of ones Name.
GOD affects us so tenderly, Seventeenth Means, Devotion to the Angel-Guardian.
that he gives to every one of us an Angel for our Guardian, employing by an
incomparable Goodness his most perfect Creatures in our Service, and those
celestial Spirits which are created incessantly to Contemplate him, and
continually to Serve him in Heaven, to attend also upon us. O Theotime, how
great is the Bounty of God, to depute no less than a Prince of his Court to the
Conduct of a poor Servant: And, as S. Bernard says excellently well, not to be
content to send his Son Mittis ei unigenitum tuum, immittis Spiritum tuum,
promittis etiam vultum tuum, and ne quid in coelestibus vacet ab opere
sollicitudinis nostrae, beatos illos spritus propter nos mittis, in ministerium
custodiae nostrae deputas, jubes nostros fieri paedagogos. S. Bern. Sermon. 12.
in Psalm. Qui habitat.
to us, to give us his Holy Spirit, to promise the enjoyment of him himself in
Heaven, so that there should be nothing in Heaven which should not be employed
for our Salvation, he sends his Angels to contribute thereto their Service; he
appoints them for our Guardians, he commands them to be our Masters and
Conductors.

Bear a particular Honor and Love to him whom God has given you. He is always
near to conduct and guard you, he inspires you with good thoughts, he assists
you in important Affairs, he fortifies you in Temptations, he diverts many
Misfortunes from you which otherwise would befall you, whether temporally or
spiritually; and he continues these good Offices by how much more you have
recourse to him. What is it that you owe not to such a Conductor, to such a
Defender?

Angelis suis mandavit de te. Quantum debet hoc verbum infer reverentiam,
afferre devotionem, confer fiduciam? Reverentiam pro presentia, devotionem
pro benevolentia, fiduciam pro custodia. Ibid.
S. Bernard says, that the guarding of our good Angel ought to inspire us with
Three things, Respect, Love, and Confidence. Respect for his Presence, Love or
Devotion for the Good Will he has for us, and Confidence for the care he has
of our Protection and Preservation.

1. In quovis diversorio in quovis angulo, Angelo tuo reverentiam habe. Tu ne
aude, illo praesente, quod vidente me non auderes. Ibid.
Show then, Theotime, a great Respect to your Angel; and when you shall be
tempted to any wicked Action, call to mind his Prefence, and be ashamed to do
that before him, which you would not dare to commit before a virtuous Person.

2. Love him tenderly, and recommend your self to him daily. Beseech him that
he would direct your Actions, and protect you from the Misfortunes of this
Life, and above all from Sin, which is the greatest Misery.

3. Remember to have recourse to him in all your Necessities, and principally
in two Occasions amongst others.

The first is, when you deliberate, or undertake any important Affair, wherein
you have need of Counsel and Assistance. Demand of your good Angel to conduct
you in that Affair, so that you undertake it not, except it be according to the
Will of God, for his Service and your Salvation, and that he will assist you
happily to finish it. Quid sub tantis custodibus timeamus? nec superari nec
seduci, minus autem seducere possunt, qui custodiunt nos in omnibus viis
nostris. Fideles sunt, prudentes sunt, potentes sunt, quid trepidamus? tantum
sequamur eos, adhaereamus eis. Ibid.
This Means is very efficacious to make your Businesses to succeed well; it is
impossible they should not prosper under so good a Guide, who is most faithful,
wise, and powerful.

The Second is, when you are assaulted with any Temptation, and are in danger
of offending God. Quoties gravissima cernitur urgere tentatio, and tribulatio
vehemens imminere, invoca custodem tuum, doctorem tuum, adjutorem tuum in
opportunitatibus, in tribulatione. Ibid.
When you see, says S. Bernard, a great Temptation which urges you, or a
violent Tribulation which approaches you, Invoke your Guardian, your Teacher,
to wit, him who assists you eflectually in your Necessities. This Remedy,
Theotime, is very powerful in all Temptations, and especially in those which
combat Chastity, of which the Angels are Lovers, and particular Protectors, as
being a Virtue which render Men like unto them, and which makes them imitate
upon Earth their most pure and celestial Life. From whence it happens, S. Amb
Hom. 3. de Virginitate.
says St. Ambrose, that it is no wonder if Angels defend chaste Souls, who lead
upon Earth a Life of Angels.

Next to your good Angel, Devotion to our Patron.
Honor particularly your Patron. The Names of Saints are given us at Baptism,
that they may be our Protectors and Intercessors to God, Debent enim aliquid in
nobis de suis recognoscere virtutibus, ut pro nobis dignentur Domino
supplicare. S. Aug. Ser. 39. de Sanct.
and that by their Prayers, and the Example of their Virtues, we may acquit our
selves worthily of the Obligations of a Christian Life, whereof we make
Profession in Baptism. Honor and love him whose Name you bear, recommend your
self daily to him, and that you may certainly obtain his Assistance, remember
to imitate his Virtues.

CHAP. XXI.
Of keeping of Feasts, and particularly of Sundays.
THE Celebration of Feasts is also a Means which marvellously avails toward
the gaining of Virtue, when it is well observed according to the Intention of
God and the Church. The prime Institution of Feasts.
These are the Days which are given to Men to attend to the Service of God, and
the sanctification of their Souls, which being well employed, cause them to
make a great progress in the way of Salvation.

Their Institution is as ancient as the World, at the beginning whereof the
Scripture says, that God having created all things in Six Days, gave his
Blessing to the Et benedixit diei septimo, and sanctificavit illum, quia in
ipso cessaverat ab omni opere suo. Genesis 2. Memento ut Diem Sabbati sanctifices.
Levit. 23.
Seventh, and sanctified it in memory of the accomplishment of his works. He
afterward gave a new Commandment thereof, when he gave the Law to the People
of Israel, to whom he prescribed the manner how he would be Honored by them on
that Day. He adds also other Days there, which he would have employed in
acknowledgment of his most signal Benefits, and for the sanctification of his
People.

This Institution has been continued, augmented, and perfected in the new Law,
continued by the sanctification of the Seventh Day, except only that it was
transferred to the Day next after the Sabbath of the Jews, Dies Resurrectionis
dominicae tantis divinarum dispositionum miraculis est consecrata, ut quicquid
est a Domino insignius constitutum in hujus diei dignitatem sit gestum. S. Leo
Epist. 81.
the Day of the Resurrection of our Lord, of the Coming of the Holy Ghost, and
of many other Mysteries. Increased by many Feasts to Honor the Mysteries of our
Redemption, and the Favors God has bestowed upon the Blessed Virgin and the
Saints. Perfected as to the manner of Celebrating them, which is far more
elevated, more spiritual, and more perfect than in the old Law, which, as the
Apostle says, Nihil ad perfectum adduxit lex. Heb. 7.
brought nothing to perfection.

This Perfection does not consist in the material Sacrifices, In what the
sanctification of Feasts consists.
as in that Law, nor in a sole abstaining from Corporal and Servile Works, as
the generality of Christians esteem it; Offerre spirituales hostias
acceptabiles Deo per Jesum Christum. 1 Pet. 2.
but it requires an Interior and Spiritual Worship, which is performed by
Praising God, Thanksgivings, Prayers, Contrition, reading pious Books, and
other like good Actions, which are the Sacrifices God expects from us now.

And, as Learned Origin says very well, Si desinas ab omnibus secularibus
operibus, and nihil mundanum geris, sed spiritualibus operibus vaces, ad
Ecclesiam convenias, lectionibus divinis, and tractatibus aurem praebeas, and
de coelestibus cogites, de futura spe sollicitudinem geras, venturum judicium
prae oculis habeas, non respicias ad praesentia and visibilia, sed ad
invisibilia and futura; haec est observatio Sabbati Christiani. Origenes Hom.
23. in Numeros.
The Observance of the Christian Sabbath consists in leaving all Corporal
Affairs, to apply our selves to those of our Salvation; to go to Church, to
hear the Divine Word, to think upon Heaven, to aspire to Glory, to call to mind
the last Judgment, forgetting things present, to employ our thoughts upon
eternal.

An Observance which not only Celebrates a Feast upon Earth, but in Heaven to
the Angels, who rejoice; and to God himself, to whom, as the same Author says,
Est magna Festivitas humana salus. Ibid.
the Salvation of Men is a great Feast.

Such a Celebration of Feasts as this, is a great Means to acquire Virtue, and
make it visibly increase; and it is particularly for this end that it is
commanded. For this reason I admonish you here, Theotime, to acquit your self
worthily thereof; and not permit your self to be carried away by the Example of
many, who profane Holy Days, which some spend in temporal Employments and
Affairs, without respect or distinction as the most profane. Others pass them
in Idleness, and vain Recreations, as if Feasts were Instituted for nothing
else but Divertisements, not considering that if it be commanded to rest from
corporal Works these Days, it is to apply the Mind to pious Things; and that to
perform it so, is to observe the Feast carnally, Observa diem Sabbati, non
carnaliter, non Judaicis deliciis, qui otio abutuntur ad nequitiam, melius
utique tota die soderent quam tota die saltarent. Aug. in Psalm. 32.
as S. Augustine says, and after the manner of the Jews, who abuse the repose of
the Holy Days by committing Evil, and who would be less culpable, in Tilling
the Earth all day, than in spending it in Jollities. Others busy themselves on
Sundays in bad Actions, as in Debauchery, in Drunkenness, in immodest Words, in
Quarrels, in Sights, in Plays of Hazard, and other like Disorders, which change
the Feasts of God into the Solemnities of the Devil, and which afford a Subject
of Joy Viderunt eam hosts and deriserunt Sabbata ejus. 1 Thren. 1.
to those wicked Spirits, as they are the Object Solemnitates vestras odit
anima mea. Isa.
of abomination to God, according to the Testimony of the Sacred Scripture.

Be not therefore of the number of all those, The first thing that ought to be
done on Sundays.
who abuse so holy and necessary an Institution; spend your Time religiously
upon Holy Days in the Service of God, and sanctification of your Soul,
according to the Intention of God and his Church.

1. Being that the greatest Hindrance of the Sanctification of Feasts is Sin,
Not to offend God.
have have a care not to offend God on those Days; for although Sin ought at all
times to cause a horror, yet it is more criminal on that. Certum est, quia qui
peccat, and agit diem peccati, non potest agere diem festum. Ibid. Orig. number.
15.
He who sins (says Origin) Celebrates a Feast of Sin, and not a holy Day of
God. If the Fault of him who gathered a few Sticks upon the Sabbath was judged
so great, that he deserved to be stoned to death by the Commandment of God
himself; what Crime will it be to violate the Sanctity of a Sunday with a
mortal Sin? If a servil Work, which is not bad of it self, is esteemed contrary
to the Holiness of a Sabbath, how much more a Sin, which infinitely dishonors
God which profanes the Sanctity of his living Temple, and which is the most
servil of all Actions? because by servil Works we Serve but Men, and by Sin we
render our selves the Servants of Sin, and Slaves of the Devil, according to
that Sentence of the Son of God, Joh. 8.34. Servi estis ejus cui obeditis, sive
peccati ad mortem, sive obedientiae ad justitiam. Romans 6. A quo quis superatus
est, hujus es servus. 2 Pet. 2.
Qui facit peccatum servus est peccati; and after him of his Apostle.

2. Examine carefully your Conscience upon Sundays, and purge the Sins of the
past Week by Contrition, and good Works, and frequently by receiving the
Sacraments.

Approach to them as often as you can upon these Days, but particularly when
you have the least doubt of being in the Grace of God; never fail of that in
this Occasion. You would not upon a Feast Day appear before the Eyes of Men
with sordid and torn Clothes; on the contrary you Dress your self more decently
for Respect to the Day; and dare you appear before God on the same Day with a
Soul defiled with Sin? We adorn more richly the Altars and material Temples to
Honor God on those Days, and will you permit your Soul, the living Temple of
God, to remain in a State which infinitely displeases him, and causes a horror
to him? Quid prodest honestatis formam praeferens cultus exterior, si interiora
hominis aliquorum sordeant contaminatione vitiorum. S. Leo. Ser 3. de Quadrag.
To what (says S. Leo) do all the exterior Ornaments serve, if the interior be
full of Corruption, and Sin? Keep well in mind that Sentence of S. Augustine,
which says, Qui nec castitatem custodit in corpore nec puritatem tenet in
mente, quoties sanctae Solemnitates adveniunt, in corpore videtur habere
gaudium, in cord non celebrat nisi luctum: quale enim gaudium conscientia illa
habere potest, in cujus anima multis vitiis occupata magis Diabolus probatur
habitare quam Christus? S. Aug, Sermon. 255.
That he who does not conserve Chastity in his Body, and Purity in his Mind,
only Celebrates a Feast of Sadness and Mourning upon holy Days. He gives the
reason of it, because it is impossible he should partake of real Joy, whose
Conscience reproaches him with the thought, that his Soul is inhabited by the
Devil, and not by Jesus Christ. Consider attentively this Reason.

3. In the Third place, be careful upon Sundays and solemn Feasts, to be
present at the Divine Office which is performed in the Church. St. Augustine in
his Confessions acknowledges the Profit he received from thence after his
Conversion. Cum reminiscor lacrymarum quas sudi ad cantus Ecclesiae tuae, in
primordiis recuperatae fidei meae, and mane cum moveor non cantu, sed rebus
quae. cantantur, magnam instituti hujus utilitatem rursus agnosco. Aug. lib.
10. Confess. cap. 33.
He says, That at the beginning he was sensibly moved with the Singing of the
Church, which softning his Heart, drew from him abundance of Tears: And this
Profit was also greater and more solid, when he began to be touched more
feelingly by the sublime Sense of the Song, than by the Song it self. This
Profit will befall you, if you be present at the Office of the Church, not to
Discourse, to Laugh, to Look upon those who pass, to Salute all the World, to
See and to be Seen, as it happens to many by a sad and deplorable Abuse, but
with all the Respect due to the House and Presence of God, with a great
interior Modesty, with a Mind recollected and very attentive to pious Things.

4. Hear sometimes the Word of God in Sermons, Discourses, Exhortations, and
Instructions, which are made in the Church upon Sundays and solemn Feasts. In
your particular Employments at sometime on those Days apply your self to the
Reading of some pious Book, profitable for your Salvation. Converse with devout
Persons, and seek their Conferences. Let your Recreations be more moderate on
those Days, and always accompanied with a Modesty agreeable to the Sanctity of
the Day.

In fine, Employ the Repose of holy Days in thinking upon the Relinquitur
Sabbatismus populo Dei, festinemus ingredi in illam requiem. Heb. 4.
Eternal Rest they represent, unto which you must earnestly aspire, and in
meditating on the great and happy Respice Sion civitatem solennitatis nostrae.
Isa. 33.
Solemnity which shall be Celebrated in Heaven, where the Sight of God filling
the Blessed with immortal Joy, will keep a Feast which will never have an end,
and which will endure for all Eternity. It is principally on these Days,
Theotime, that we must say with the Prophet, Quam dilecta tabernacula tua,
Domine virtutum! concupiscit and deficit anima mea in atrio Domini. Beati qui
habitant in domo tua Domine; in saecula saeculorum laudabunt te: Beatus vir
cujus est auxilium abs te; ascensiones in cord suo disposuit, in valle
lacrymarum in loco quem posuit. Psalm. 83.
How amiable are thy celestial Habitations, O Lord! my Soul does sigh after
them even unto Death. Happy are those who dwell in thy House, who Sing there
eternally thy Praises; and blessed is he, who by the assistance of thy Grace,
disposes in his Heart the Means to mount from this Valley of Tears, to that so
desirable a Dwelling.

CHAP. XXII.
Of being present at Divine Service.
I Add here this Subject, because it helps much for the Celebration of Feasts,
whereof I have spoken, and is a powerful Means to conduct men to a solid Piety;
wherefore I have a mind to give you a necessary Instruction, which you may make
use of all your Life.

Now to give you an Account of this from the beginning, The first Institution
of Parishes.
you must know, that the Apostles, after the Ascension of the Son of God,
having changed the Sabbath of the Jews into the First Day of the Week, to be
dedicated to the Service of God, and to the sanctification of Souls,
established on that Day the Assemblies of the Faithful, where every one should
be duly present, to Pray in common, to hear the Divine Word, to assist at the
Celebration of the Divine Mysteries, at the Participation of the Sacraments,
and at the gathering of Alms, which was there performed for the assistance of
Christians in necessity.

The Acts of the Apostles give us the Marks of this Institution, and S. Paul in
his First Epistle to the Corinthians, Chapter 16. where by the Words Una autem
Sabbati, cum convenissemus ad frangendum panem. Act. 20, Per unam Sabbati
unusquisque apud se seponat recondens quod ei placuerit. 1 Cor. 11. Una Sabbati
dominica Dies est. S. Ambr. hic. Ego Joannes fui in Spiritu dominica die. Apoc.
1.
Vna Sabbati, One of the Sabbaths, is understood the First Day of the Week,
which was called from thence the Day of our Lord, as S. John calls it in the
Apocalypse.

And as to the Assemblies of that Day, the Tenth Canon of the Apostles speaks
clearly, ordaining that Omnes fideles qui convenient in solemnitatibus sacris
Scripturas Apostolorum and Evangelium audiant. Qui autem non perseveraverit in
oratione usque dum Missa peragitur, nec sanctam Communionem percipiant, velut
inquietudinem Ecclesiae moventes, convenit Communione privari. Can. 10. Apost.
all Christians who were gathered together in the Church on solemn Days, should
hear there the Sacred Scriptures, and the Gospel, and be there present at the
Prayer, even until the end, and there Communicate. St. Ignatius, Cotemporary
with the Apostles, makes mention thereof in his Epistle, and other ancient
Authors; but above all, S. Justin Martyr, who lived in the Second Age in the
Year 150, and Tertullian, who came 30 Years after.

The First, in the Second Apology he made for Christians, describes distinctly
all that was performed in those Assemblies, which is the same that is now done
at the Parish Mass. See what he says of it; Et Solis qui dicitur die omnium qui
vel in oppidis vel ruri degunt, in eundem locum conventus fit, and commentarii
Apostolorum, aut scripta Prophetarum, quoad tempus fert; leguntur deinde
lectore quiescente, Praesidens oratione populum instruit, and ad imitationem
tam pulchrarum rerum exhortatur. Postea surgimus simul omnes, and preces
fundimus: and precibus peractis, panis offertur and vinum and aqua, and
Praepositus quantum potest, preces and gratiarum actiones fundit, and populus
fauste acclamat, Amen. Et distributio and communicatio fit oblatorum unicuique;
absentibus autem per Diaconum mittitur; caeterum qui copiosiores sunt and
volunt pro arbitrio suo quod visum est contribuant, and quod ita colligitur
apud Praepositum de ponitur, atque ille opitulatur pupillis and viduis and his
qui propter morbum aut alium casum egent, quique in vinculis sunt and
peregrinis, and ut verbo dicam, indigentium is omnium curator est. S. Justin.
Apol. 2.
On the Day which is called Sunday, there are assembled all those who live in
the Town or Country, and there are read the Book of the Apostles, or the
Writings of the Prophets, according as time permits. After the Reading, he who
Presides makes a Discourse, by which he Instructs the People, and Exhorts them
to Practice those excellent things which were read: Afterward we all rise, and
offer our Prayers to God. These things being finished, there is an Oblation
made of Bread, Wine and Water, the Celebrant continuing his Prayers and
Thanksgiving, the People answering by their Acclamations, Amen. Then is
performed the Distribution and Communication of the holy Mysteries to every one
present. Lastly, those who are more wealthy, give their Alms, which are
gathered, and sent into the Hands of the Superior, who employs them to the
Necessities of the Poor, of whom he is to take a care.

Tertullian in his Apologetick, Chap. 36. says, Coimus in coenam and
congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manufacta precationibus ambiamus orantes; haec
vis Deo grata est. Coimus ad literarum divinarum commemorationem, si quid
praesentium temporum qualitas aut praemonere cogit, aut recognoscere. Certe
fidem sanctis vocibus poscimus, spem erigimus, fiduciam figimus, Disciplinam
Praeceptorum nihilominus inculcationibus densamus. Ibidem etiam exhortationes,
castigationes censura divina. Nam and judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud
certos de Dei conspectu, summumque suturi judicii praejudicium est. Si quis ita
deliquit ut a congregatione, and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii
relelegetur. Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
That the Christians assembled together in Companies, forming as it were a Body
of an Army, wherein by their Prayers they encounter with God, to whom this kind
of violence is very pleasing. In these Meetings something of Scripture is read,
which serves to nourish Faith, to raise Hope, and strengthen the Courage of the
Faithful. There are made necessary Exhortations and Admonitions to every one;
And also when any one had committed a Fault that deserved Chastisement, he was
punished by being excluded from the entrance into these holy Places of
Assemblies, which was accounted one of the greatest Punishments. Afterward he
speaks of Alms which are there given for the Relief of the Poor and Afflicted.

Concerning which we must take notice, that during the Three first Ages of the
Church, wherein She lived amongst Persecutions, it frequently happened that the
Christians had not any appointed Places, at least public, wherein to make their
Congregations, but performed them in private Houses, or often in secret. But
after it pleased God to give Peace and Liberty to the Church under Christian
Emperors, they began boldly to build Churches, where the Faithful assembled on
Sundays and Feasts, under the Conduct of a Pastor, who was given them to have a
care of their Souls.

It was then when the use of Parishes and of the Parochial Mass on these holy
Days became to appear in its luster; and since that time it has always been
conserved in the Churches, and recommended to the Faithful with much care, as a
thing necessary for the Service of God, and the Salvation of Souls, for the the
Instruction of People, and Conduct of Manners; and to conserve the Order and
Discipline of the Church, it has been also commanded as a thing of Obligation.

This appears in the greatest part of Councils, as well General as Particular,
which have been held since, and lately in the Council of Trent, which renewing
and relying upon the former, in the 22th Session, Orders Bishops to Moneant
etiam eundem populum, ut frequentes ad suas parochias saltem diebus dominicis,
and majoribus festis accedant. Council. Trid. Sess. 22. Moneat Episcopus populum
diligenter teneri unumquemque Parochiae suae interesse, ubi commode id fieri
potest. Sess. 24. cap. 4.
advertize their People to go frequently to their Parishes, at least upon
Sundays and solemn Feasts, and to constrain them thereto by Ecclesiastical
Censures. And in the 24th Session it Ordains also, That Bishops carefully
admonish their People, that every one is obliged to be present at the Parish,
to hear there the Word of God, when it can be performed without considerable
Inconvenience.

This is the Institution of Parishes and Parochial Masses; from whence it is
easy to gather Three things, from the ignorance of which does spring the
Contempt which is offered to them, viz. their Antiquity, End, and Obligation.

They are as ancient as the Church her self. Their End, to Govern the Christian
People with Order, and Ease, every one having his proper Pastor to watch over
his Salvation, and every Pastor his Church, which is as it were his Flock,
where the Sheep are assembled to receive their Spiritual Sustenance, the cure
of their Distempers, Instructions and necessary Admonitions; briefly, to hear
by his Voice, that of the Sovereign Pastor of Souls, whose Place he represents.
And as to the Obligation, it is sufficient to manifest by the End of that
Instruction so necessary for the Salvation of Souls, and Decrees of Councils so
often repeated, make it appear that it is very strict, and that without a great
and just Cause, one cannot be therein dispensed.

Things being thus, is it not a thing worthy of astonishment, to see so holy
and necessary an Institution neglected and despised after such a manner, that
it seems as if Parishes were but for a few of the meaner sort, for aged Men,
and young Girls? and that Christians should now adays contemn a thing, the
privation whereof was heretofore a Punishment for the greatest Crimes.

This Contempt befalls many for different Reasons. Some do it out of a pure
want of Devotion, which makes them apprehend the length of the Parish Mass upon
a Day dedicated to Piety, and seek a short one that they may employ the
remainder of the Holy Day in Idleness, in Vanities and Recreations. What shame
is it for Christians to make so little account of the sanctification of Feasts,
of the Ordinances of God and of his Church, and of their own Salvation, that
they should rather choose miserably to spend the time of the Service of God in
Fooleries, than to employ it in the Divine Honor, and the sanctification of
their Souls, and to learn something for their Salvation? It is a deplorable
Disorder which made St. Augustine say, Observemus diem dominicam and
sanctificemus illam. Videamus ne otium nostrum vanum sit: Sed a vespera diei
Sabbati usque ad vesperam diei dominici sequestrati a rurali opere atque ab
omni negotio, soli divino cultui vacemus. Nullus se a sacra Missarum
celebratione separet, neque otiosus quis domi remaneat; caeteris ad Ecclesiam
pergentibus, neque in venatione se occupet and diabolico mancipetur officio
circum vagando campos, and sylvas, clamorem and chachinnum ore exaltans, non
gemitum and orationis verba ex intimo pectore ad Deum proferens. Aug. Sermon. 251.
that those who employ thus the holy Time of Sundays, are fettered and enslaved
to the Service of the Devil, when they ought to addict themselves to Prayer,
and to lament for their Sins in the sight of God from the bottom of their
Hearts.

Others despise this Obligation by a secret Pride, which makes them affect a
certain Liberty to go where they please on those Holy Days, a Liberty which is
rather a Licentiousness, and a Rebellion to the Orders of the Church, O
libertas servitute omni servitior! quae me pessime addicat superbiae servituti;
plus timeo dentes lapi quam virgam Pastoris: Advertens nimirum cruenta bestia
quae circuit quaerens quem devoret, elongatam custodiam; heu statim incidit in
praesumptorem. S. Bern. Epist. 4.
and which S. Bernard says is to be a Servant of the greatest sort of Slavery;
because by this Liberty flying the Sight and Conduct of their Pastor, they
wander, and fall to be a Prey for Wolves, that is, into a great disorder of
Life; the Devil never having more advantage to seize upon a Soul, than when she
is not directed nor observed by any one, as the same Saint takes notice.

There are others who excuse themselves by reason of their Affairs; But it is a
very strange thing, that Christians, who have no Affair of greater Importance
than their Salvation, after they have employed all the Week in temporal
Occupations, should not allot the Sunday, which God has reserved for his
Service to the Divine Worship, and Salvation of their Souls. This Excuse is
very common, but not to be allowed, neither will it be accepted in the sight of
God. I would gladly ask those Persons, whether they pretend to be exempt from
the Sanctification of the Sunday? God has given Six Days to Men to Labor, he
would have us rest upon the Seventh Day, to apply our selves entirely to
religious Actions, and particularly to Three; To give him Honor, To sanctify
our Souls, And to Meditate upon the eternal Repose which we must purchase in
this Life. I demand, where is that ceasing from Labor, and that application to
pious things? and whether this be to sanctify a Holy Day, or rather employ it
totally in Business, except the time of a short Mass, oftentimes heard with a
Mind full of distractions? I beseech those who live thus, to make the following
Reflection, and consider well that Admonition of S. Austin, in the place which
I have already cited, where he says, Ideo a sanctis patribus nostris
constitutum est Christianis and mandatum ut in solemnitatibus sanctorum, and
maxim in dominicis diebus otium haberent and a terreno negotio vacarent, ut
paratiores and promptiores essent, ad divinum cultum cum non haberent quod eos
inde retardaret incommodum, relinquerentque eo tempore terrenam sollicitudinem
quo facilius possent Dei intendere voluntatem. Inde ipse Dominus per Prophetam
dicit, vacate and videte, quoniam ego sum Deus. At hi qui diversis curis ac
negotiis implicati hanc sententiam Dei spernunt, timeo quod in futuro judicio
illis januam Domini pulsantibus, Dominus respondeat. Amen dico vobis, nescio
vos, discedite a me omnes qui operamini iniquitatem, and qui modo Deum quaerere
negligunt, ab ipso tunc respuantur. Aug. Sermon. 251.
Christians are commanded to repose upon Festival Days, and principally upon
Sundays, to be the better disposed to the Service of God, and to cease upon
those Days from temporal Affairs, that they may apply themselves more easily to
God, as he himself exhorts us by that Saying of the Prophet, Cease from Labor,
and consider that I am God; but those who by the Embroilment of Cares and
Affairs, contemn this Exhortation of God, and refuse to apply themselves to
holy Things, give us a great reason to doubt, that at the Day of Judgment, when
they shall knock at the Gate, it will be answered them, I know you not, be gone
from hence, you who work Iniquity; and that thus they shall be then rejected by
God, as they were negligent in searching after him, when it was in their power.

In fine, there are others who absent themselves from their Parishes on Sundays
and solemn Feasts, under pretense of Piety, some saying that they have more
Devotion elsewhere than in the Parish; others by reason of some Congregation or
Confraternity which hinders them from being present there; others have their
Ghostly Father somewhere else.

But the First ought to know, that the sensible Devotion is not always the most
solid, it having frequently more of Imagination than of Truth; and what they
say they have, which makes them neglect and depart from the Orders of the
Church, is not a Devotion, but rather an Illusion.

Concerning the Second, I maintain, that it is an Abuse to prefer the Works of
Counsel before those of Obligation; and that God loves Obedience better than
Sacrifice; that is, the Works commanded, better than the Devotions which come
from our proper Inclination: And that it is a strange thing, that there being
so many other times in the Week, and on the Feasts themselves to satisfy their
free Devotions, one should employ therein the Days, and even Hours, which are
dedicated to the Duties of the Parish.

To the Third I answer, that it were often better for them to have their
Confessor in the Parish, although it were only to practice Submission, and give
good Example in this Action. But if for good and solid Reasons they Confess
themselves to others, which they ought to do as often as is possible by the
Advice of their Pastor, they ought to manage their time so well, that this
freedom which is allowed them, may not hinder them from assisting at the Parish
upon Holy Days, and giving there the Example and Edification which the Church
requires of them.

For Conclusion, Theotime, I exhort you to be faithful and diligent in your
Parish Church, and not to absent your self for any of the Reasons I have
spoken. Consider her as your Mother, who has brought you sort to Jesus Christ
by holy Baptism, and Educated you in Christianity: She is charged with the care
of your Soul, she must answer for you to God, she must conduct you during your
Life to the Point of Salvation, and assist you at the Hour of Death. Love her
tenderly as a Child loves his Mother, be obedient to her, receive from her your
spiritual Sustenance of Doctrine, and of the holy Sacraments; walk under her Eye
and Government, with Respect and Confidence; receive from others all the
assistance you can, but expect from her your principal Conduct, and be zealous
to follow that great Advertisement of the Apostle, Obedite Praepositis vestris
and subjacete eis: Ipsi enim pervigilant quasi rationem pro animabus vestris
reddituri, ut cum gaudio hoc faciant, and non gementes, hoc enim non expedit
vobis. Heb. 12.
Obey your Superiors, and be subject to them, for they watch over you, as being
to give an account of your Souls, that they may perform their Duty with joy,
and not with sorrow, for that is not convenient for you.

The End of the Second Part.
THE INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH IN Christian Piety. PART III.
Of the Obstacles which divert young Persons from Virtue.
IT is not sufficient for him who Conducts another in a Voyage, to show him the
Way he must keep, and the Means he must make use of to arrive at the Place
assigned; he must also advertise him of the Dangers he will Encounter in the
Way, and arm him against all Obstacles which may retard or hinder the happy
Success of his Voyage. Thus the Angel Raphael, of whom we have spoken above,
did not content himself to guide young Toby, but secured him from the Obstacles
which presented themselves to him in the Way; and amongst others, from the
Monster he met with upon the brink of the River Tigris, from which he not only
protected him, but caused him to reap a great Advantage by it.

For this reason, dear Theotime, after having showed you the Way to Salvation,
and the Means you ought to practice to acquire Virtue in your Youth; it is
necessary I should discover unto you the Impediments you shall find in the Way.
This is what I shall perform in this Third Part, wherein I shall lay open the
Causes which are accustomed to destroy those of your Age, in withdrawing them
from Virtue, and casting them into Vice; and I shall show you the Means how to
preserve, and even advantage your self very much by them for your improvement
in Virtue.

CHAP. I.
The first Obstacle of the Salvation of Youth, the want of Instruction.
THE first Hindrance of the Salvation of young Persons, is Ignorance, or want
of Instruction. We must know a Good, that we may love it; and to know it, it is
necessary we should be Instructed therein, we not being able to our selves to
learn it, who bring nothing with us into the World but Ignorance and Sin. God
says by his Prophet, that Propterea captivus ducuts est populus meus, quia non
habuit scientiam. Isa. 5.
his People were sent into Captivity, because they had not Science; that is,
the Instruction and Knowledge of their Salvation. And the Wiseman says, that
Ubi non est scientia animae, non est bonum. Prove. 19.
where there is no Science, there is no good for the Salvation of Souls.

This Impediment is great, and it is the first Fountain of the corruption of
Youth. It is by so much more to be deplored, as it is common and extended to
many; it being certain, that the greatest part of Youth is lost for want of
Instruction, and not being solidly Trained up in the Maxims of Virtue. Fathers
neglect to Instruct their Children in true Piety, and bestow all their Care in
Educating them in Vanity, in Pleasures, in the love of Earthly Goods, and in
the Maxims of the World. Masters employ often the greatest part of their Labor
to advance their Scholars in Learning, and very little to make them understand
the Science of Salvation; Children concern themselves little to be Instructed,
and frequently fly Instruction all they can; which is the reason why they
continue in Ignorance, in wicked Habits, and are lost without remedy.

For the Proof of this Verity, I shall recount you here two Examples quite
contrary. Quis enim hominum non extollebat laudibus tunc patrem meum, quod
ultra vires rei familiaris suae impenderet fillo, quidquid etiam long
peregrinanti studiorum causa opus esset? cum interea non satageret idem pater
qualis crescerem tibi; aut quam castus essem, dummodo lessem disertus, aut
potius desertus a cultura tua Deus! qui es unus verus, and bonus Dominus agri
cordis mei. Aug. lib. 2. Conf. cap. 3.
S. Augustine in his Confessions deploring the Corruption of his Youth,
attributes a great cause of it to the want of Instruction, and to the blindness
of his Father, who using all Endeavors to advance his Son in his Studies, and
make him Learned and Eloquent, neglected in the mean time the most necessary
thing, viz. the Care of his Manners, and of his Instruction in Virtue, without
which all Science could but serve to render him more displeasing to God, and
more removed from his Grace.

On the contrary, the Scripture making a recital of the generous Action of
chaste Susanna, who chose rather to expose her self to the false Accusations of
those two infamous old Men, and to be prosecuted to Death, than to Sin in the
sight of God, by consenting to a detestable Crime, which those wretched Men
solicited her to, attributed the Cause of this holy Action to her Piety, and to
her Instruction received from her Parents; the Words it makes use of are
remarkable: Joachim accepit uxorem nomine Susannam, filiam Helciae, pulchram
nimis and timentem Deum; parents enim ejus cum effent justi, erudierunt filiam
suam secundum legem Moysi. Dan. 13.
She had the fear of God, because her Parents being just, had instructed her
according to the Law of Moses.

O dear Theotime, Practice.
have a care of this Obstacle, as of one of the greatest Impediments of your
Salvation; love and seek Instruction. And if God has bestowed upon you Parents
or Masters, who are solicitous to put you into the Path of Virtue, give him
Thanks for this incomparable Favor, and use your Endeavor to advantage your
self thereby. But if your Parents have not sufficient care of your Instruction
in Virtue, seek after it your self by the Means we have pointed at above in
Part 2. Chap. 3, 4, and 5. and call to mind often that excellent Sentence of
Solomon, Cor sapiens quaerit doctrinam and os stultorum pascitur imperitia.
Prove. 15.
A wise Heart seeks Instruction, and the unwise is pleased with Ignorance.

CHAP. II.
The Second Obstacle, the too much Indulgence of Parents, their ill Example,
and the bad Instruction they give their Children.
IT is but too true, that the Ruin of Children springs most commonly from the
Fault of Parents, who are wanting in this great Obligation God has imposed
upon them, of Educating them in his Fear, and disposing them to Virtue.

Now there are four Defects which Parents may be guilty of in this Obligation,
which most frequently are the Cause of the Corruption and Ruin of Children.
Four Faults Parents may commit in the Instruction of their Children.
1. When they neglect to Instruct them in the knowledge of Virtue and their
Salvation. 2. When they are too Indulgent in their Place, giving too much
Liberty, and not Correcting them when they do ill. 3. When they give them bad
Example by their Actions. 4. When they suborn them in things contrary to Piety.
We have spoken above of the First Defect.

As to the Second, it is not to be imagined how common this Fault is amongst
Parents, and how it daily destroys Children, appears by Experience. The
greatest part of fathers and Masters affect their Children with a foolish and
blind Love, which regards nothing but the present and sensible Good of their
Children, and are afraid to give them the least trouble, by keeping them within
the Bounds of Virtue by a discreet Admonition, or by a reasonable Correction;
they choose rather to leave them in their wicked Inclinations, which for want
of Correction increasing with Age, make them wicked and vicious for all the
remainder of this Life, and miserable after this Life for all Eternity.

Misfortunate Parents! who by this sort of Mildness precipitate themselves with
their Children, into the deep Pit of Wickedness; like those foolish Animals,
which kill their young ones by the vehemence of embracing them. Blind Fathers,
who see not that this Mercy you show to your Children, is the greatest Cruelty
you can exercise in your Condition; and you would not be so cruel, if you took
away their Life with your own Hands; it being certain, that by this Inhumanity
you would but destroy their Bodies, whereas by your Mildness you cause the ruin
of their Souls, and the eternal loss of their Salvation. The time will come
wherein your Children will lay their Curses on you, will require of God revenge
against you, and will accuse you as the Authors of their Misfortune; witness he
who being Condemned to Death, cried out aloud, It is not the Judge, but my
Mother, who is the Cause of my Punishment.

Your culpable Meekness will one day draw upon you the Curse of God, and also
upon your Children. Upon your selves, because you have neither Instructed nor
Corrected them, when they stood in need. Upon your Children, because they made
use of your Indulgence, to give themselves over to vice and Disorder.

See the Example of the High Priest Heli recounted above, and learn from that
terrible Punishment God laid upon him, what you ought to expect: For all the
Miseries which besel as well him as his Children and his whole House, and for
their first and principal Source, the great Indulgence he had toward his
Children, not Correcting them for their Sins: This is the Testimony God himself
gives thereof; I will judge, says he, the House of Heli, Praedixi quod
judicaturus essem domum ejus, propter iniquitatem, eo quod noverat indigne
agere filios, and non corripuerit eos. 1 Reg. 3.
by reason of his Iniquity, because having knowledge of the wicked Life of his
Children, he has neither reprehended nor corrected them.

I cannot sufficiently exaggerate this Fault of Parents, Theotime, to raise in
you so great a horror as it deserves. Practice.
It is to admonish you, if God has bestowed upon you wise and virtuous
Parents, who have had a great care to Instruct you in Virtue, to Reprehend you
when you were faulty, that you acknowledge the Obligation you owe to God, and
make good use of this high Favor, by rendering your self pliable, and easy to
be Instructed by their Admonitions. But on the contrary, if your Parents,
forgetful of their own Duty and your Salvation, fail to reprehend you when you
commit any Misdemeanor, have a great care lest you be ruined by their
misfortunate Indulgence. Beg of God very earnestly that he would change their
Disposition, and give you Masters who would supply their Defect, and take
notice of your Actions to redress them, when you shall wander never so little
out of the Path of Virtue.

I say the same, if your Parents be not only negligent in reprehending you, but
what is yet worse, if they give you ill Example, teaching you, as it often
happens, by their Actions, to love the Pleasures of this Life, to desire Riches
without measure, to affect Vanity, to be Proud, Ambitious, Choleric, seeking
Revenge, not suffering the least Injury, Immodest in Words, addicted to
Feasting, to Drunkenness, to Impurity, and other like things. And yet more, if
they be so miserable as to teach you by their Discourses, one or many Vices,
approve or praise them when you have committed them. O God, dear Child, stand
in fear of all these Occasions, you cannot be in a greater danger of your
Salvation; and having recourse to God, beseech him that he would illuminate you
to discern Good from Evil, that he would strengthen your Mind against the bad
Impressions you shall receive, and not be destroyed by their Fault, who ought
to be the first who should contribute to your Salvation.

CHAP. III.
The Third Obstacle of the Salvation of Youth, the Vntractableness of young
Persons.
SAint Jerome says excellently well, Saepe magister peccat, saepe discipulus,
and nonnunquam patris vitium est, nonnunquam filii, ut male erudiatur. S. Hier.
in cap. 6. Michaeae.
That although the depravation of Children springs often from the Parents, and
Masters Pault, yet it very frequently proceeds also from the Childrens
Wickedness, who will not receive Instruction, and this Fault is called
Vntractableness.

This Untractableness is a want of submission to the Conduct of others, or a
secret Presumption of ones self, by which one will not be informed of the Truth
he ought to know, nor receive Advice in those things he ought to do, nor be
Reproved and Corrected when he has erred, nor Exhorted to Good when he has done
amiss.

This Vice is one of the worst Qualities a Mind can be infected with. A very
bad Quality of the Mind.


For if we regard its Causes, it proceeds from Pride, Its Causes.
which makes them contemn all that comes from another, or from Obstinacy, or
Confidence in their own Judgment, or from a too great Lightness of Mind, which
considers nothing, and which makes them despise the most important things.

If we consider its Effects, Its Effects.
it infallibly causes the Corruption and Ruin of those who are infected with
it, being it takes away all Means of Correction or Amendment; for how should
one do Good, if he will not know it? How correct his Faults, if he will not be
rebuked? The Sick who will acknowledge his Distemper, and rejects the Remedies
for it, is out of hope of any Cure.

For this reason the Sacred Scripture in many places, and principally in the
Proverbs, where it Instructs more particularly young People, speaks so
effectually against this Vice, as being one of the greatest Obstacles of their
Salvation, and exhorts so frequently young Persons willingly to receive
Instructions, Counsels and Admonitions.

As for Instructions, it says, That Sapientiam and disciplinam qui abjicit,
infelix est. Sa. 3.
he who rejects Wisdom and Instruction is misfortunate. Sapiens cord praecepta
suscipiet, stultus caeditur labiis. Prove. 10.
The Wise receives Precepts in his Heart, and the Unwise cannot endure
Instruction. Cor iniqui inquirit mala; cor autem rectum inquirit Scientiam.
Prove. 27.
The Heart of the Wicked seeks Evil, and the Heart of the Just searches after
Science. Vidisti hominem sapientem sibi videri? magis illo spem habebit
insipiens. Prove. 26.
There is more Amendment expected from a Fool, than from him who thinks himself
Wise.

As for Counsels it says, That Via stulti recta in oculis ejus, qui autem
sapiens est, audit consilia. Prove. 12.
the Fool thinks all well that he does, but the Wise hearkens to Counsels. Qui
confidit in cord suo stultus est, qui autem graditur sapienter, ipse
salvabitur. Prove. 28,
He who confides in his own Heart, that is, in his own Mind and Conduct, is a
Fool; and he who walks wisely shall be saved. Audi consilium and suscipe
disciplinam, ut sis sapiens in novissimis tuis. Prove. 19.
Give ear, says it, to Counsel, receive Instruction, that you may be Wise at
the end of your Days.

What does it not say of Reprehensions? It says, That Qui diligit disciplinam.
diligit scientiam; qui autem odit increpationem, insipiens est. Prove. 12.
he who loves Discipline, loves Science, and he who hates Reprehension is a
Fool. Non amat pestilens eum qui se corripit, nec ad sapientes graditur. Prove.
15.
The wicked does not love him who reproves him, neither does he seek the
Conversation of the Wise. Qui abjicit disciplinam, despicit animam suam; qui
autem acquiescit increpationibus possessor est cordis. Ibid.
He who has rejected Discipline, despises his own Soul; he who yields to
Reprehensions, possesses his Heart. Vir impius procaciter obfirmat vultum suum;
qui autem rectus est, corrigit viam suam. Prove. 12.
An impious Man never blushes, but the Just corrects his Ways. Cor durum male
habebit in novissimo. Eccl. 3.
An obdurate Heart will make a wicked End. Qui increpationes odit, morietur.
Prove. 15.
He who hates Reprehension, shall die.

But above all, take notice what it says in the 29th Chapter of the Proverbs.
Viro qui corripientem se dura cervice contemnit, reprentinus ei superveniet
interitus, and eum sanitas non sequetur. Prove. 15.
A sudden destruction which never shall be repaired, will befall him, who
obstinately contemns Correction. What can be said more to show the greatness of
this Impiety, and raise an apprehension of the heinousness of it?

Wherefore, Theotime, have a care of this Vice, as of one of the greatest
Impediments of your Salvation; acknowledge it if you be infected with it, and
use all the Endeavors possible to be cured, and to get a tractable Mind, which
loves to be Instructed, Counseled, Reproved, and Exhorted to Good. Now to
obtain it, this is what you must do.

1. Beg daily of God this Spirit, and demand it earnestly, as a thing most
important, and on which all our Good depends.

2. Keep always in your Mind that excellent Advertisement of wise Solomon; Nunc
ergo, fili mi, audi me, and ne recedas a verbis oris mei: ne gemas in
novissimis, and dicas; cur detestatus sum disciplinam, and increpationibus non
acquievit cor meum, nec audivi vocem docentium me, and magistris non inclinavi
aurem meam? Prove. 5
Son, hearken to me, and depart not from my Counsels, lest at the end of your
Life you be constrained to lament, and be sorry for your Vntractableness,
saying, Why have I refused to be Directed? Why have I not willingly received
Corrections? Why have I not hearkened to the Voice of those who have Instructed
me, and why am not I made Tractable and Obedient to my Masters? But alas,
Theotime, it will be too late to be sorry then, when it shall have happened to
you, and when there will be no remedy.

3. Persuade your self, A most important Advice for young Persons.
that you are in an Age full of Ignorance, subject to many Failings, wherein
you are not able to Conduct your self, but that you necessarily stand in need
of the Directions of others; which consist in Instructions, Counsels,
Reprehensions, and Exhortations. And in a word, that during your Youth,
Tractableness and Submission to the Instruction of others, is so necessary,
that on that Virtue depends your good Education, your Advancement in Virtue,
your Happiness in this Life, and your Eternal Salvation in the next.

4. Love to be Instructed in Virtue, and be inclined to learn Good willingly of
any one. Ask Counsel freely, even in those things, Fili fine consilio nihil
facias, and post factum non poenitebit. Eccl. 32.
wherein you think you have sufficient understanding. O what an excellent Maxim
is that, to do all things with Counsel! It is the Maxim of the Wiseman; Son, do
nothing without Counsel, and you will not repent when the Work is done.

Be not offended when you are reproved for your Faults. Grande peccatum est
odisse corripientem, maxim si te non odio, sed amore corripiat. S. Hieron. in
cap. 5. Amos.
It is a great Sin (says S. Jerome) to hate him who reprehends you, principally
if the Correction proceeds from the Love he bears you. Defend not your self
obstinately, it is the sign of a great Pride; but on the contrary, yield humbly
to a Reproof, acknowledge your Fault, and endeavor to amend.

5. Remember, that Tractableness does not only consist in willingly receiving
Instructions, Counsels, Reprehensions, and Exhortations, but also in
advantaging your self by them, and putting them in practice.

For Conclusion, I shall give you that excellent Saying of S. Jerome; Bonum est
obedire majoribus, parere praeceptis: and post regulas Scripturarum vitae suae
tramitem ab aliis discere, Nec praeceptore uti pessimo, scilicet praesumptione
sua. Hieron. Epist. ad Demetriadem de virg. servanda.
It is good to obey your Elders, and to follow the Orders of Superiors, and
after the Rules of Scripture, learn from others the Path of Life which you
ought to follow, and make not use of a very ill Master, viz. your own
Presumption.

CHAP. IV.
The Fourth Obstacle, Inconstancy.
IF Untractableness be very common amongst young People, Inconstancy in Good is
yet more frequent, and it puts a very great Impediment to your Salvation. Some
young Spirits are found tractable and pliable to receive Instructions,
Counsels, and Admonitions, but there are few who are firm and constant to
observe them well.

They have a Spirit subject to change, which adheres to all sorts of Objects,
lets it self be carried away by all its first Motions, be tossed by diverse
Passions, which permit it not to continue long in the same course. They are
scarce able to make one solid Resolution, chiefly in that which concerns
Virtue, much less form or Exercise it when it is made, the first Occasion
carries them away, and makes them forget all their good Designs.

If Inconstancy be not corrected in good time, it puts a great Obstacle to the
Salvation of young People, and absolutely hinders them from learning Virtue.
Seed cannot take root in a moving Sand, nor Virtue in a light Mind, which
changes upon all Occasions.

For this reason the Wiseman gives you that admirable Advertisement, Theotime;
Non ventiles in omnem ventum, and non eas in omnem viam. Esto firmus in via
Domini. Eccles. 5.
Turn not at every wind, go not into every way, be firm in the way of our Lord.

This Inconstancy in God springs principally from three Causes.

1. From a Levity natural to that Age, Three Causes of Inconstancy.
which renders young Persons inconstant in all their Actions. They are
changeable in all their Inclinations, in their Thoughts, in their Designs, and
in their Resolutions; hence it comes that they are so inconstant in Good.

2. It springs from this, that they are not solidly convinced of the Importance
of their Salvation, and of the necessity they have of addicting themselves to
Virtue in their Youth.

3. It comes from the want of Conduct, and from this, that they not being
capable to Conduct themselves, take not the Counsel of others for the guidance
of their Life, or if they take it, it is but for a short time, they soon reject
it, abandon themselves to the Motions of their inconstant Mind.

For the cure of this Inconstancy, there is to be applied a Remedy to these
three Causes.

First then, Its Remedy.
Theotime, endeavor to correct in your self as much as you can, that natural
Levity of your Age, which makes you subject to mutation in the greatest part of
your Actions. Be constant in all that you perform; change not easily your
Resolutions, your Enterprises, nor your Employments, except with Reason and
Counsel: In a word, govern your self by Reason, and not by Fancy and Caprichio.

Secondly, Labor to fix your Mind in Piety by good Thoughts, and frequent
Reflections on your Salvation, and on the necessity you have to live virtuously
in your Youth; the reading of the First Part of this Book will serve for that
end.

Thirdly, An important Advice.
Submit your self to the Conduct of a wise Confessor; Follow his Counsels, and
the Rule of Life he shall prescribe to you; Give him an Account of your Actions
from time to time, that he may set you in a good Way when you are out of it;
Perform nothing, of how little consequence soever, without his Counsel, or that
of some other prudent Person.

But above all, beg of God frequently, that he will bestow upon you a Mind
constant in its good Resolutions, and fix you in Piety by the Conduct of his
Grace. Perfice gressus meos in semitis tuis, ut non moveantur vestigia mea.
Psalm. 16.
God, direct my Steps, that is, my Actions, in the Path of thy Commandments,
that I may never wander out of it. Have often before your Eyes that excellent
Sentence of the Wiseman; Homo sanctus in sapientia manet, sicut sol, stultus ut
Luna mutatur. Eccl. 27.
A religions or pious Man continues fixed in Virtue, like the Sun, which never
loses his Light; but the Fool, that is, a Sinner, changes like the Moon, which
is not constantly in the same State.

CHAP. V.
The Fifth Obstacle, A Shame to do Good.
AMongst the Means the Devil has invented to pervert Souls, there is none
which he makes a greater advantage of, to keep them securely in Vice than a
Shame to do Good; a Shame by which he deplorably seduces Men's Minds, and
principally young Persons; who being by the tenderness of their Age more apt to
receive the Impressions of Fear and Shame, give Occasion to that miserable
Spirit, Omne malum aut pudore aut timore natura suffudit. Tertul. in Apol.
maliciously to abuse their Facility, and natural Shamesac'dness to make them
conceive that Shame and Confusion in respect of Piety and Virtue, which was
only made for Sin.

For this effect he puts into their mind these false and vain Imaginations,
viz. The Means the Devil uses to raise Shame in young Persons.
That Virtue is contemned amongst Men, That they are little esteemed who follow
it, That if they should apply themselves to do well, they should be despised,
yea, even mocked at. He actually represents unto their thoughts the Contempt and
Scoffs of others; and by these Artifices he withdraws them from the Way of
Virtue, stopping and stifling in them by this foolish Shame, all the good
Thoughts and Desires they had conceived concerning their Salvation. And
sometimes this misfortunate Shame gets such powerful possession over their
Minds, that they not only blush to do Good, and appear Virtuous, but even glory
in their Vices, and have a kind of Confusion not to be as Wicked as the most
Vicious; as it happened to S. Augustine, who deplores his Misfortune and
Blindness in this Point, in the Second Book of his Confessions, Chap. 3. We
shall relate his Words in the following Chapter.

If this pernicious Shame has taken possession of your Mind, you must account
it for one of the greatest Obstacles of your Salvation; and if you labor not in
good time to over come it, it will infallibly destroy you. Now to conquer it,
arm your self against it with these Reflections.

1. Remedy.
Why do you blush? Are you ashamed of Virtue and the Service of God, Dilectio
Dei honorabilis sapientia. Eccl. 1.
than which there is nothing more Honorable in the World? You account it a
Glory to Serve a Prince upon Earth, and will you blush at the Service of the
King of Heaven, your Sovereign Lord, to whom you owe all that you are? What
strange Blindness is this! But take notice, that one never blushes, except it
be for some thing which is either Wicked or Indecent, or too abject or unworthy
of ones Self: So that if you are ashamed of Virtue, you put it into the rank of
one of these; What an Indignity is this!

2. Before whom do you blush? Before the Wicked, whose Judgment is absolutely
perverted, who judge that to be wicked which is good, and that good which is
wicked, having no other Rule for their Opinion than their depraved
Inclinations. If they contemn you, it is because they hate Virtue, and those
who follow it. Execratio peccatori cultura Dei. Eccl. 1.32. Detestantur stulti
eos qui fugiunt mala. Prove. 13.20. Ambulans recto itinere and timens dominum
despicitur ab eo qui infami graditur via. Prove. 14.2.
The Service of God is an Execration to Sinners, says the Wiseman. Fools detest
those who fly from Vice. It is ordinary, that he who walks in the Path of
Virtue, and fears God, should be despised by the World and wicked Persons, who
follow the infamous Track of Vice. If the Esteem of Men move you, why seek you
not after the Esteem of wise and virtuous Men, who respect and honor you when
you do well?

3. Call to mind that dreadful Menace which the Son of God gave to all those
who blush at his Service; Qui erubuerit me and sermones meos, hunc filius
hominis erubescet, cum venerit in majestate sua. Luc. 9.
He who shall be ashamed of me, and my words, I will be ashamed of him when I
shall come in glory; that is, he will not acknowledge them for his. Remember
that fearful Confusion which at the Day of Judgment will cover the Face of
those who have blushed in this Life at the Service of God, when their Sins
shall be exposed to the view of the whole World; and that for the Shame they
had for Virtue. Dabo vobis in opprobrium sempiternum and ignominiam aeternam
quae nunquam oblivione delebitur. Jer. 23. v. 40.
they shall be abandoned to an eternal Disgrace and Confusion, which shall
never be blotted out of the memory of the Angels and Saints, as the Scripture
testifies.

O dear Child, demand frequently of God, Practice.
that he would strengthen your Mind against this Misfortune, which is nothing
but the pure Imagination of a weak Spirit. Accustom your self betimes to
perform good Works freely, without regarding what others speak or esteem of
them. Despise their Contempts, and mock at their Scoffs, and reflect what a
great Folly it is to prefer the Esteem of Men before your Eternal Salvation;
and to please a small number of lewd Men, not to value the Displeasure of all
wise Persons, of all the Saints in Heaven, and of God himself. Weigh well this
Reflection.

CHAP. VI.
The Sixth Obstacle, Wicked Company.
ARTICLE I.
How hurtful it is.
O dear Theotime, how should I rejoice, if I had Eloquence enough to make you
comprehend, and all those of your Age understand the greatness of this
Impediment of your Salvation, and clearly set before your Eyes the multitude of
young People who are daily ruined by wicked Company.

It is in this where ordinarily the Devil sets his Snares for Youth; A Snare of
the Devil for young People.
and those whom he could not destroy either by the want of Instruction, or by
the Indulgence of Parents, or by the Untractableness of their Minds, or by
Inconstancy, or by a Shame of doing well, he perverts by frequenting ill
Company. Their Discourses, their Examples and bad Conversations, serve him as
Instruments to corrupt the most holy, and subvert the State of a good
Conscience; and frequently by one of these Means he has bred great Disorders in
Souls, which were almost ignorant of Sin, and had conserved Virtue amidst the
most dangerous Occasions.

O God! is it possible that this malignant Spirit finds no Instruments more
powerful to destroy Men, than Men themselves? nor to make use of as Servants
and Ministers to execute against their own Brethren, the Rage he has conceived
against them, and the Design he has laid to draw them, together with himself
into Eternal Damnation? I know not whether I should most deplore, those who
contribute by their Discourses or Examples to the ruin of others, or those who
suffer themselves to be perverted by them for want of flying and avoiding their
Conversation, more than those infected with the Plague.

Concering the First, Noli cibo tuo perdere pro quo Christus mortuus est. Romans
14.
are not they sadly miserable, to destroy by their Conversation those for whom
Jesus Christ has Died? as if it were not sufficient to damn themselves,
Errantes and in errorem mittentes. 2 Timothy 3.
but also to be the cause of Damnation of their Brethren; to be the Author of
their Depravation, and of an infinite number of Sins which they commit; to be
the Instruments of the Malice of the Devils, and perform by themselves the
Office of that detestable Fiend, which is to move Men to Sin, and precipitate
them into hell. Vox sanguinis fratris tui clamat ad me de terra. Genesis 4.
Sanguinem ejus de manu tua requiret. Ezech. 3.
Wretched Cain, you shall answer for the Souls of your Brethren; the voice of
their Blood which you have spilt, that is, of their Salvation which you have
ruined, cries to God for Vengeance against you; he will seek for it from your
hands, you must render him an account of it, Soul for Soul. Vae homini illi per
quem scandalum venit. Matthew. 18.
Woe, woe, says the Son of God, to that Man by whom Scandal happens.

And as for the others, are not they much to be deplored, to permit themselves
thus misfortunately to be abused, and perverted by the Conversation of the
Wicked? which often befalls them after they have been well advertised, that
there is nothing more dangerous for Youth than wicked Company; that that is the
Rock where many are irreparably Shipwreckt, and also frequently when they had
made Experience of it themselves, to the great detriment of their Salvation.
After all this, not to avoid these Precipices, but to go wilfully without fear
into these Companies, which they ought to shun more than Death it self, O God!
what a deplorable Blindness is it.

I conjure you in the Name of God, dear Theotime, to have a care of this
Impediment of your Salvation, and not thus miserably lose your self for want of
Precaution; Or to speak more properly, it is not I who make this Exhortation to
you, but the Holy Ghost. Hearken to the Prophets, who cry out to all those who
desire to be saved; Retire, retire, depart from Sinners, Pollutum nolite
tangere. Isa. 12.
touch not that which is unclean. Fugite de medio Babilonis and salvet
unusquisque animam suam, Jer. 51.
Fly from the midst of Babylon, and let every one apply his thoughts to the
Salvation of his Soul.

Give ear to the Wiseman, who exhorts you with a Fatherly Affection; Fili mi,
si te lactaverint peccatores, ne quiescas eis, si dixerint veni nobiscum, ne
ambules cum eis. Pro. 1.
Son, if Sinners entire thee, consent not: If they say, Come with us, O my
Child, walk not in the way with them, restrain thy foot from their path; for
their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood. And afterward he says, Ne
delecteris in semitis impiorum, nec tibi placeat malorum via. Fuge ab ea, ne
transeas per eam, declina and desere eam. Ibid. cap. 4.
Take not pleasure to follow the wicked, nor be delighted with the ways of the
impious; fly from them, and walk not in that road, decline and depart far from
it.

ARTICLE II.
How there are two things hurtful in wicked Company, Discourse and Example.
The same holy Spirit does admonish you, that there are two things in the
Conversation of the Wicked which we must stand in dread of, their Discourse and
Example.

As for the Discourses, S. Paul the Apostle cries out aloud to all, Nolite
seduci, corrumpunt mores bonos colloquia prava. 2. Cor. 15.
Permit not your selves to be seduced; for wicked Discourses corrupt good
Manners. Prophana autem and inani-loquia devita, multum enim proficiunt ad
impietatem. 2 Timothy 2.
Avoid ( says he to Timothy) the profane Discourses of the Impious, for they
advance Wickedness. Lingua ignis est universitas iniquitatis, inflammat rotam
nativitatis nostrae inflammata a gehenna. Jacob. 3.
S. James says, that The Tongue is a Fire, which being enkindled from Hell,
inflames Souls with Sin. Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum. Psalm. 5.
David says, that The Mouth of Sinners is an open Sepulcher, from whence issue
noisome Stenches to infect Souls. Acuerunt linguas suas sicut serpentis, venenum
aspidum sub labiis little. Psalm. 139.
That the Wicked have a Tongue of a Serpent, and carry the Poison of Asps in
their Lips; by which they envenom those who give attention to them.

Now if the Vicious sometimes forbear their wicked Discourses, their Example
never fails to make strong Impressions. Qui seligerit picem inquinabitur ab ea:
and qui communicaverit fuperbo induet superbiam. Eccl. 23. Noli esse amicus
homini iracundo, ne discas semitas ejus. Prove. 22. v. 24. Qui cum sapientibus
graditur, sapiens erit. Amicus stultorum similis efficietur. Prove. 13.
He who touches Pitch, says the Wiseman, shall be defiled, and he who
converseth with a proud Man, will be infected with Pride. Contract not
Friendship with an angry and choleric Man, lest you initate his Example. He
who converseth with the wise will become wise. A Friend of Fools, that is, of
Sinners, will be like unto them. Example has an incredible force upon the
Minds of young Persons, and principally to incline them to Evil. The Friendship
that is contracted with the Wicked brings Complacence, and Complacence invites
to Imitation. O nimis inimica amicitia, and seductio mentis; nulla lucti mei
causa, nulla ulciscendi libidini, sed cum dicitur eamus, faciamus, and pudet
non esse impudentem. S. Aug. lib. Conf. 9.
O, Friendship, what a great Enemy art thou ( says S. Augustine) to the good of
Souls! O blindness of Mind, which caused us to commit Wickedness only by
Imitation, and to please others, when they said, Come, let us do some bad
Action, and I was ashamed not to be Impudent.

And in fine, A considerable Example what bad Company can do.
Theotime, that you may clearly see the height of Disorder to which evil
Company may bring young Men, hearken to what the same Saint reports of himself,
deploring the miserable State to which he was reduced by that Means.

Praeceps ibam tanta caecitate ut inter coaetaneos meos puderet me minoris
dedecoris, cum audiebam eos jactantes flagitia sua and tanta gloriantes quanto
magis turpes essent, Et libebat facere non solum libidine facli, verum etiam
laudis. Quid dignum est vitu peratione nisi vitium? Ego ne vituperarer,
vitiosior fiebam. Et ubi non suberat quo admisso aequarer perditis, fingebam me
fecisse quod non feceram, ne viderer abjectior quo eram innocentior, and ne
vilior haberer quo eram castior. Ecce cum quibus comitibus iter agebam
platearum Babiloniae, and volutabar in coeno ejus tanquam in cinnamomis and
unguentis preciosis. Lib. 2. Confess. cap. 3.
I went, says he, headlong into Vice with such a Blindness, that amongst those
of my Age I blushed not to be as wicked as they, when I heard them glory in
their Sins, and brag by so much more, as they were more impious. And I had a
mind to commit Evil not only for the Pleasure of the Action, but out of a
desire to be Praised. What is there in the World but Vice which deserves to be
blamed? and I was so depraved, that I sought to be more vicious, lest I should
be blamed: And when I could not equal the most impious of my Companions in
Wickedness, I feigned Sins which I never did, lest I should be accounted more
contemptible, as I was more innocent, and lest I should be esteemed less
infamous, as I appeared more chaste. See with what sort of Companions I
conversed, when I travailed in the misfortunate Path of Babylon, that is, in
the wicked Life of my Youth, in the stinking Dirt wherein I wallow'd, as if I
had rolled my self in precious Odors, and sweet Perfumes.

This was the deplorable State to which wicked Company had brought S. Augustine
in his Youth; a State out of which he could not be drawn but with wonderful
Difficulties, and by a particular Miracle of Divine Grace, as we have shown
above. Part 1. Chap. 12.

ARTICLE III.
Of Four sorts of wicked Companions which must be avoided.
First, Libertines.
Theotime, abhor the Company of those who make open profession of Vice, as
impious Persons and Libertines; and of all those who seek not to conceal the
greatest Vices, as Impurity, Swearing, Drunkenness, but glory in them. Qui
laetantur cum male fecerint and exultant in rebus pessimis. Prove. 2.
They who rejoice, says the Wiseman, at their wicked Actions, who take pleasure
in their greatest Sins, who scoff at Virtue, and who endeavor to corrupt you,
and allure you to them.

2. Lewd Diseourses.
Fly as from the Plague those who scoff at Virtue, who solicit you to Sin, or
who entertain you with lewd Discourses contrary to Virtue, although they appear
not openly vicious in their Persons. Wicked Discourses are always prejudicial,
from which side soever they come; they constantly produce the same Effect,
which is to introduce Sin into the Soul of him who wilfully gives ear.

3. Dissemblers.
Avoid the Company of some who Dissemble more, and yet are no less dangerous,
who will not solicit you openly to Sin, but divert you from the Exercise of
Virtue, as from Prayer, from frequenting the Sacraments, from reading good
Books; who tell you those things are neither convenient nor necessary for you;
that they are not proper for you at this time, that you have something else to
do; and instead of these entertain you only with vain Discourses of Pleasures
and Pastimes, of the Hopes of the World, of Vanities and Grandeurs. These
Conversations, Theotime, are very hurtful, although they seem not so; for they
attack Virtue in the Root, and secretly destroy it.

Fly the Company of idle and lewd young People, Idle young Persons.
who have no Employment, or comply very ill with that wherein they are engaged.
Their Example will bring you to Slothfulness, they will induce you to it by
their Discourses, they will persuade you to leave your Employment and Labor,
and pass your time in Merriment; They will teach you to love a Play, to haunt
Tipling-houses, to frequent Balls and Comedies; And from this Idle Life they
will cast you into Disorders. Observe well this Advice, and assure your self
absolutely, that there are no Companions more dangerous for you than they.

For Conclusion, Theotime, remember one thing, That sooner or later the Divine
Vengeance will surprise the Wicked, whether visibly or invisibly. In synagoga
peccantium exardebit ignis, and in gente incredibili exardescet ira. Eccl.
16.16.
The Fire of the Divine Choler, says the Wiseman, will be enkindled against the
Assembly of the Impious, and against the Rebellious, who refuse to obey the
Commandments. If you be found amongst them, you will be involved in their Ruin.
Via peccantium complanata lapidibus, and in fine illorum inseri and tenebrae
and poenae. Eccl. 21.10.
The way of Sinners seems sweet and agreeable, but in the end they will find
Death, Darkness, and Damnation. For this reason I say to you with the Prophet,
Recedite a tabernaculis hominum impiorum, ne involvamini in peccatis eorum,
Number. 16.26.
Withdraw your self from them, lest you be involved in their Sins and Ruin. Woe
be to him, who being forewarned, avoids not this Precipice and eternal
Misfortune.

See a little below, Chap. 8. Art. 3. the History of a young Man, who being
perverted by wicked Company, died in Despair, crying out, Woe be to him who has
seduced me.

There remain's here to speak of the Conversation with the Good; but we have
placed that before amongst the Means to acquire Virtue, Part. 2. Chap. 18.

CHAP. VII.
The Seventh Obstacle of the Salvation of Youth, Idleness.
THIS, Theotime, is one of the greatest Obstacles of your Salvation, and that
which produces, or nourishes all the precedent and many others. Idleness
brings Ignorance and want of Instruction, which cannot be gotten without Labor.
It is that which breeds Untractableness; for a slothful Mind will learn
nothing: The apprehension it has of taking pains, makes it esteem it self
sufficiently Knowing, and refuse to receive the Instruction and Counsel of
others. Sapientior sibi piger videtur septem viris loquentibus sententias.
Prove. 26.16.
The slothful, says the Scripture, accounts himself wiser than many, who
Instruct others with their Documents. Idleness is the cause of Inconstancy;
Piger vult and non vult. Prove. 13.4.
The slothful will, and will not: To day he desires one thing, to morrow
another; To day he will be Good, to morrow he changes his Resolution. Idleness
causes a Shame to do well, and takes away the Courage he ought to have in the
pursuit of Virtue. Pigrum dejicit timor. Prove. 18.9.
Fear makes the slothful lose courage. Idleness makes him seek, and find wicked
Company, and dangerous Recreations. Idleness ordinarily is the Mother of that
misfortunate Sin, which so deplorably destroys a great part of Youth, the Sin
of Impurity, of which we shall speak in the following Chapter.

In a word, There are no Sins, no Disorders, no Occasions of Destruction,
whereof Idleness is not the cause, and brings with it. This is the reason which
made S. Bernard justly call it, Omnium cogitationum malarum, and tentationum,
and inutilium sentina, matter nugarum, noverca virtutum, mors animae, vivi
hominis sepultura, sentina omnium malorum.
The Sink of all Temptations, and wicked Thoughts, the Mother of Follies, and
Stepmother of Virtues, the Death of the Soul, the Sepulcher of a living Man,
the Receptacle of all Evil: And the Holy Ghost himself names it, The Mistress
which teaches many Sins; Multam malitiam docuit otiositas.

Alas, Theotime, is it not a very deplorable thing, How common amongst young
Persons.
to see the Sin which is the Fountain of so many Evils, to be so common amongst
Youth, that it seems to become natural to them! You see the greatest part live
after an idle and negligent manner, flying from Labor like Death it self, not
applying themselves to any constant Exercise; or if they undertake any, they
presently abandon it, or at best acquit themselves very ill of it. They have no
affection nor thought but for Pleasures and Divertisements. Playing, Walking,
Good-chear, Sleeping, are the most considerable Employments of their Life, and
the most serious Occupations of their Minds.

And from thence spring all the Disorders into which we daily see them fall,
How pernicious.
the unbridled Affection to the Pleasures of this Life, the Disrelishing of
Virtue, the Ignorance of the most necessary things, the Forgetfulness of God
and Eternal Salvation. From thence wicked Companions, and the Occasions of
Debauches; From thence all Vices and all bad Inclinations, which increase in
their Souls more abundantly than ill Weeds in a fertile Earth, which the
Gardners Hand neglects to cultivate; And from thence, in fine, it arises, that
they become unuseful for any Good, which by their Labor they might have made
themselves capable of, and that the Vices contracted by the Idleness of their
Youth, renders them wicked and unprofitable all the remainder of their Life.

I would to God it were as easy to root out Vice from the Souls of young
People, as it is facil to make appear the deplorable Effects and vicious
Consequences of it. But this Evil has in such a manner taken possession of
their Hearts, that they will not so much as know it, or knowing will not cure
it. Usque quo piger dormies, quando consurges a somno tuo? paululum dormitabis,
paululum conseres manus ut dormias, and veniet tibi quasi viator egestas, and
pauperies sicut vir armatus. Prove. 6.
O slothful, says the Wiseman, how long will you sleep? when will you awake
from that profound Sleep of Idleness, which has made you so drowsy? and which
will bring you to a poverty of all good, which will surprise you suddenly, and
seize upon you like an armed man. Open your Heart, dear Theotime, to the Voice
of this Divine Spirit, to banish Idleness from thence, or hinder it from ever
coming there. For this end fortify your Mind against this Vice by the
following Reflections, The Remedy.
which I beseech you to read often and attentively.

1. All Men are obliged to Labor. In sudore vultus tui vesceris panem. Genesis 5.
Homo ad laborem natus, si laborem resugit, non sacit id ad quod natus est, quid
respondebit ei qui mittit illum, qui instituit ut laboret? S. Bern. in Declam.
Consider that all Men are born for Labor, God has obliged them thereto by a
solemn Sentence which he pronounced at the beginning of the World. If then you
would be exempt, leading an Idle Life, you resist the Will of God, and break
the Order he has so solemnly Established.

2. If Men be obliged to Labor all their Lifetime, they have yet a stricter
Obligation to it during their Youth; because if that Age be not Exercised in
virtuous Undertakings, it heaps up many Vices and wicked Habits, which continue
all the rest of their Life.

3. Chiefly young Men.
Because Youth is the proper time to cultivate the Mind, and form it for Good,
and wherein only they may make themselves capable of an Employment where they
may busy all the succeeding time of their Life. If this Time be once lost, it
can never be repaired. Time lost in any Age, never returns; but there is this
difference, that Time lost in other Ages may sometimes be recovered, but Time
lost in Youth is irreparable.

4. The Sorrow for loss of Time in Youth.
Consider attentively the Grief you will one day have for losing the Time of
your Youth, when you shall find your self unfit for pious Employments, and
incapable of any Good, as it happens to many: You believe it not at present,
but one day you will be sensible of it, when it is too late.

5. The Account that must be given.
If this Grief at present move you not, the exact Account you shall give to God
of the ill-spent Time of your Youth, will at his Judgment make you tremble. In
that dreadful Judgment all your Life shall be set before your Eyes in order,
one Part after another; and the first Article of the Account which shall be
Examined, will be that of the Employment you have followed in your Youth: What
will you answer to this Demand? There you will distinctly discover all the
Disorders which have sprung from that first Fault; the Ignorances it has
caused in you, the Sins it has made you commit, the Vices wherein you have
been involved, all the Goods you have been rendered incapable of: What have you
to answer to all these things?

6. Many damned for the ill spending of their Touth.
How many others are there now in Hell, who acknowledge the origin of their
Damnation to arise from the ill spending the Time of their Youth? If they could
but hope for one sole Moment of Time, which you have now in your power, O God,
what would they not do to obtain it; and bestow it profitably? Is it possible
that their Misery does not move you, and that you will not grow wise at other
Men's Expense, learning by their Example, to avoid that irreparable Misfortune
into which they are fallen by their Idleness?

O dear Child, for the love you ought to have for your Salvation, fly
absolutely this Vice, I beseech you, which is one of the greatest Impediments
you could put; And that you may remember to avoid it, remember to perform two
things. The First is, Two Practices against Idleness.
To apply your self to some modest Exercise, which may keep you busi'd for the
Time of your Youth; and that you may perform it as you ought, see what we have
spoken of it above in Part 2. Chap. 12. The Second is, That you take care as
much as you can, never to be Idle any more, without doing something; use
constantly some Action, whether of Labor wherein you are engaged, or Reading,
or Divertisement. Let your Recreations be accompanied with Actions either of
Body or Mind. The Devil seeks no better opportunity than to find you Idle, that
he may tempt and suprise you. For this reason practice diligently that
excellent Precept of S. Jerome, Facito aliquid operis ut te semper diabolus
inveniat occupatum, Hieron. Epist. ad Rust.
Be doing always something, that the Devil may always find you employed.

CHAP. VIII.
The Eighth Obstacle, Impurity.
WE are now come to the greatest, most powerful, and most universal of all the
Obstacles of the Salvation of Youth, viz. the Sin of Impurity. At the Entrance
whereof I cannot refrain from uttering that Expression of the Prophet Jeremy,
Quis dabit capiti meo aquam, and oculis meis fontem lachrymarum? and plorabo
die and nocte interfectos filiae populi mei. Jerem. 5.
O that my Head were full of Water, and my Eyes had a Fountain of Tears, that I
might weep Day and Night for the Desolation of my People. For who can
attentively consider the infinite number of young People which this Sin keeps
miserably enslaved, the havoc it makes of their Souls, the innumerable
Offenses it causes them to commit, the Disorders it brings to them, the
Misfortunes into which it daily precipitates them, and chiefly the height of
Misery, viz. the ruin of their Soul, and Eternal Damnation: Who can consider
these things, I say, without having his Heart pierced with Sorrow, and without
being moved with Compassion, to advertise them of the Danger, and afford them
Assistance to withdraw them from the Misfortune into which they blindly run.
For this reason, Theotime, I beseech you six here your Thoughts, and read
attentively some Points of which I am to Discourse with you concerning this
Sin, that I may raise in your Mind the horror and apprehension you ought to
have of it, as of the greatest Enemy of your Salvation, and of the certain
cause of your Destruction.

ARTICLE I.
That the Sin of Impurity is the greatest Enemy of Youth, and Damns more than
all other Vices together.
I would to God this Proposition were rather, a Dream than a Truth, and that
there were as much reason to question the certainty, as to hold it for
infallible: But it is made too clear and visible by daily Experience, which
evidently discovers two things. 1. That a great part of Youth is addicted to
this miserable Sin. 2. That amongst those who are inclined to it, there are
many who are no less subject to other Sins than that.

First, Youth much given to the Sins of Impurity.
Is it not a most deplorable thing, to see the innocentest Age of Life so
corrupted by that infamous Sin, and the most flourishing Portion of Gods Church
dishonored in such a manner by that detestable Vice? They are no sooner capable
of Reason, but this Vice attacks and gains upon them; it creeps into their
Mind, it possesses their Desires, it seises on their Thoughts, it inflames
their Hearts with a love of dishonest Pleasures, which daily increasing with
Age, becomes so strong, that it is almost impossible to extinguish it.

This arises partly from the Corruption of Nature, Three Causes of Impurity.
Sensus and cogitatio humani cordis in malum prona sunt ab adolescentia sua.
Genesis 8.3.
which as the Sacred Scripture takes notice, is inclined to Evil from its
Youth; partly from the Temper and Constitution of that Age, which the
tenderness of the Body, and heat of Blood, makes more susceptible of the
Impression of Sensual Pleasures; and partly also from the malice of the Devil,
which assaults Man in his Youth on the weakest side, making use of the frailty
of the Flesh, to take possession of the Spirit; and, as Adversum juvenes and
puellas aetates ardore hostis noster ahutitur, and in flammat rotam nativitatis
nostrae. Haec sunt ignita diaboli jacula, quae simul and vulnerant, and
inflammant, and a Rege Babilonio tribus pueris praeparantur. S. Hieron. Epist.
ad Demetriad.
S. Jerome judiciously observes, takes advantage of the Heat of Youth, by which
he raises in their Heart the Fire of unchaste Love, enkindling in them a more
burning and cruel Furnace than that which the King of Babylon caused to be
prepared for the three innocent Children of Israel, because that could but
consume their Bodies, but this scorches their Souls, and prepares them by that
impure Flame for another Fire which shall never be consumed.

O Theotime, they who attentively consider the Corruption of Manners which is
found in Youth, can never be sufficiently sorry for them. But that which
deserves most to be lamented, is, that it frequently falls out, that there is
nothing but this Sin which is the cause of it, it being certain that there are
many who are not subject to any other considerable Vices; or if they be, they
are the Effects of this; and if they were freed from this, they would lead a
perfectly pure and innocent Life: Whereas on the contrary, Haec adversus
adolescentiam prima sunt arma daemonum; non sic avaritia quatit, inflat
superbia, delectat ambitio. S. Jer. Epist. ad Eustechium.
permitting themselves to be overcome by this unclean Passion, they live a Life
full of Iniquities, and heaping up daily new Sins, and perverse Habits, cast
themselves into so deplorable a State, that they are often out of hopes of
Amendment and Salvation. O misfortunate Sin, must thou thus destroy Men when
they begin to work for their Salvation? must thou forcibly take away from God
so many beauteous Souls, which without thee would live in innocence, to
sacrifice them to Pleasures, and by Pleasures to the Devil and everlasting
Flames? Cursed Incontinence! who is there that can hate thee as thou deservest?
To apprehend it more clearly, Theotime, read attentively that which follows,
and judge of the Cause by its Effects.

ARTICLE II.
Of the sad Effects of the Sin of Impurity
The Author of the Book De bono pudicitiae, attributed to St. Cyprian,
describes briefly a great number of the misfortunate Effects of this Sin: For
he says, that Impudicitia semper est detestanda, obscoenum ludibrium reddens
ministris suis, nec corporibus parcens, nec animis debellatis propriis moribus,
totum hominem suum sub triumphum libidinis mittit, blanda prius ut plus noceat,
dum placet. Ea hauriens rem cum pudore, cupiditatum infesta tabies, incendium
conscientiae bonae, matter impoenitentiae, ruina melioris aetatis. Auth. de bon.
Pud.
Immodesty is a detestable Passion, which spares neither Souls nor Bodies,
which renders Men absolutely Slaves of dishonest Love, flattering them at the
beginning, that it might more effectually destroy them. When it has gotten
possession of their Hearts, it drains their Goods together with their
Shamefacedness; It excites Passions even to excess, it destroys a good
Conscience, it is the Mother of Impenitence, the loss and ruin of the best part
of Age, that is, of Youth.

Omitting the Damage that Sin causes to the Body, Honor and Possessions, I
shall insist only upon the dreadful Effects it produces in the Soul, which I
reduce to Five or Six.

The First is, First Effect, the destruction of the Fear of God.
the destruction of the Fear of God, which it works in the Soul, and the ruin
of all good Inclinations. Experience shows this Effect so common, that we need
not seek any other Proof; we see many young People well Educated, who have very
good Inclinations in their Youth, an aversion from Evil, a great affection to
Piety, the Fear of God strongly imprinted in their Souls: Now all these good
Qualities remain, if the Sin of Impurity does not take possession of their
Heart; but when that has once entered into their Mind, it entirely subverts
them. It creeps in first by immodest Thoughts, the Thoughts produce the desire
of wanton Pleasures, the Desire moves to unchaste Actions, these Sins repeated
and multiplied, ruin all the good Inclinations; things now appear far otherwise
than before, the Sin now seems no more so great, it becomes more familiar to
them; and such an one who before had a great apprehension of one sole mortal
Sin, when he is once overcome by this brutish Passion, is not dismayed to
commit them by hundreds and thousands. O God, what a Change, what a subversion
is this of a Conscience!

The Second Effect of this Sin, Second Effect. A Disrelish of Virtue.
is a Disrelishing, and even an Aversion to Virtue, and to all pious and
wholesome Things. It is not to be conceived how those who are infected with this
Vice, have an aversion to Divine Things and Salvation. Prayer is tedious to
them, and Sacraments contemptible, the Word of God moves them not, reading of
pious Books is insupportable. This is too manifest by Experience, and no
wonder, Theotime, he who is Distempered with a Fever, takes no delight in the
most delicious Meats; on the contrary, they seem to him bitter, because his
Taste is depraved with some bitter Quality. Thus he who is once seized by this
burning Fever of Impurity, finds a wonderful loathing and dislike of all the
most pious and wholesome Things, by reason he has his Heart infected with
carnal and impure Affections; which permit him not to relish the sweetness of
holy Things. Animalis homo non percipit ea quae Dei sunt.
The natural man, says S. Paul, that is, who follows the Motions of the Animal
or Sensible part, tastes not the things which are of God. And Qui secundum
carnem sunt quae carnis sunt sapiunt. Romans 5.
those who live according to flesh, relish only the things of the flesh.

The Third Effect is a Blindness of Mind which this Sin produces in the Soul,
Third Effect, Blindness of Mind.
which hinders her from discerning Good from Bad, and judging of things as she
ought. It is impossible that a Mind once possessed by that Passion, should not
have its Judgment perverted, and should not determine of things of Salvation
quite contrary to Truth: The Tie and Inclination it has to that Sin, makes it
not account it so great an Evil (for we ordinarily judge according to our
Inclinations) and that it can withdraw it self when it pleases; it hinders it
from seeing the wicked Consequences and Misfortunes this Vice brings after it.
It takes away the remembrance of the Divine Judgments, and frequently
endeadeavors to take God himself out of their Minds, that they may Sin more
freely, as it is observed of those infamous old Men, who attempted to corrupt
the Chastity of modest Susanna. Exarserunt concupiscentiam ejus and everterunt
sensum suum, and declinaverunt oculos suos ut non viderent coelum neque
recordarentur judiciorum justorum. Dan. 3.
They being inflamed with Concupiscence, says the Sacred Scripture, lost their
Sense and Judgment, and cast down their Eyes, that they might not look toward
Heaven, and remember the just Judgments of God. This is the proper and peculiar
Effect of Immodesty; it blinds the Mind, and makes it hoodwink it self,
flifling in it self all good Thoughts, that it might sin with a greater
liberty, and with less remorse of Conscience.

See the Account St. Augustine gives of himself concerning this Subject, in his
Second Book of Confessions, Chap. 2. which I have cited Part 1. Chap. 13.
Artic. 2.

From this Blindness of Mind springs Pride, Fourth Effect, Pride.
the Fourth Effect of this Sin of Impurity, which hindering the Mind from
knowing its own Good, makes it despise all Admonitions, resist all Documents,
and scoff at the most wholesome Counsels. Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus
asper.
So that as this Sin renders young Spirits soft and pliable to Vice, it makes
them inflexible, and obdurate to the Advertisements of their Salvation. The
Wiseman teaches you this Truth, which Experience also makes sufficiently
appear. Verbum sapiens quodcunque audierit scius laudabit, and ad se adjiciet,
audivit luxuriosus and dispiciet illi and projiciet illud post dorsum suum.
Eocl. 2.18.
A wise Man, says he, when he hears wise Sayings and Instructions, receives
them with esteem, and advantages himself by them; the lascivious has no sooner
heard them, but he is disgusted and rejects them with contempt. We need no
other Example of this Truth, than that of S. Augustine in the Second Book of his
Confessions, Chap. 3. where he deplores the insupportable Pride with which he
contemned the discreet Admonitions of his pious Mother, to whom next to God he
was obliged for the Favor of his Salvation.

The Fifth Effect is an Obdurateness of the Will in Wickedness. Fifth Effect,
Obdurateness in Evil.
According to the measure that Sin multiplies, the Soul habituates her self,
and becomes obdurate, so that nothing is able to soften her. It would be an
incredible thing, if we did not daily see it most apparently, how those who are
possessed with this Sin, become stupid and obdurate. They are found insensible
of all good Motions, deaf to all Inspirations of Grace; the Menaces of Divine
Justice and Chastisements seem to them but Dreams; witness the two Sons-in-law
of Lot, Surgite, egrediamini de loco isto, quia delebit Dominus civitatem hanc,
and visus est eis quasi ludens loqui. Genesis 19.
who looked upon that Admonition he gave them to depart from the City of Sodom,
as a Fiction, which the Night following should be destroyed, as in effect it
was, and they together with it. The Examples of those whom God has so
rigorously punished for this Sin, touch them not at all; the Misfortunes which
they see with their own Eyes to befall others like themselves, make no
Impressions upon their Minds; nothing is capable to move them, as soon as this
brutish Passion most dreadfully takes possession. Obsurduerant stridore catenae
mortalitatis meae poena superbiae animae meae. Lib. 2. Conf. cap. 2.
Alas (says St. Augustine,) the Chain of violent Passions wherewith this mortal
Flesh kept me captive, made such a noise about me, that I was deaf to all that
might advertise me for my good. And this Deafness was a Punishment of the Pride
of my Heart, contracted by the Disorders of my Life. O what a deplorable State
is that to which a Soul is reduced by Impurity.

After all these dreadful Effects of the Sin of Immodesty, there remains one,
Sixth Effect, Final Impenitency.
which is the accomplishment of all the former, and the Mark at which they all
aim, viz. Final Impenitency, or Death in mortal Sin; which is the greatest and
utmost of all Misfortunes. It is, O Theotime, a most common, and most ordinary
Effect of this detestable Sin, which incessantly fills Hell with a vast number
of wretched Souls, which by untimely Deaths it casts into that endless Pit:
Some dying surprised with Sickness, which deprives them of the Time or Means to
do Penance; Others seized by some frightful Accident; Others departing in
Obdurateness, abandoned by God in punishment of their Sins. Give ear to what
the Scripture speaks of those, and in the Name of God imprint deeply in your
Heart those astonishing Words of St. Peter, 5. Pet. 2.
Novit Deus pios de tentatione eripere; iniquos vero igni reservare cruciandos.
God, says that great Apostle, knows how to deliver the Good from temptation,
and reserve the Wicked for the torments of Fire, which his Justice has
prepared for them. Hearken to what follows, Mugis autem eos qui post carnem in
concupiscentia immunditiae ambulant. Now for whom amongst the Wicked does he
principally reserve these Chastisements? For those chiefly who walk after the
Flesh in the Concupiscence of immodest Pleasures. But what will befall them?
Hearken, Theotime; Hi velut irationabilia pecora in corruptione sua peribunt,
percipientes mercedem injustitiae. They shall die like brute Beasts in their
Corruption, and perish in their Impurity, receiving thus the Recompense they
have deserved for their Sins. O dear Theotime, is it possible that this Oracle
pronounced by the Holy Ghost himself against Immodesty, causes not an horror of
that detestable Sin? Read it attentively, and preserve it in your Memory; and
that it may be more strongly settled in your Mind, add to it the following
Examples.

ARTICLE III.
Examples of the miserable Death of those who were addicted to the Sin of
Impurity.
The Sacred Scripture can furnish us with a great number of them; we have
already mentioned some in Part 1. Chap. 6. See what we have there recounted of
the two Sons of the Patriarch Juda, Her and Onan.
who were punished by God with sudden Death for the Sins they committed by
detestable Actions of Impurity.

The unfortunate Death of the two Sons of the High Priest Heli, Ophni and Phi.
naees.
and all the other Misfortunes which God sent to that Family, were not only
Punishments of the Irreverences and Injustices they had committed in the
Temple, but also of their Immodesty, as it is observed in the First Book of
Kings, Chap. 2. Verse. 22.

Amnon the Son of David, Amnon.
found the Chastisement of his unchaste Pleasures, in the dreadful Death he
received from the treacherous Hands of his own Brother Absolon.

The Rebellion of Absolon against his Father, Absolon.
was not the sole cause which made God lay his revenging Hand upon him; the
Uncleanness he had committed, whereof it is spoken in the Second Book of
Kings, Chap. 16. with all his other Crimes, did contribute thereunto.

What shall we say of Solomon, Solomon.
Theotime, who being the wisest of all Men, singularly beloved of God, and
favored by him with all desirable Graces, permitting himself to be
misfortunately carried away with unchaste Love, fell from that Sin to the basest
of all Crimes, that is, Idolatry; wherein he continued such a long time, that
it is not known whether he was ever raised from it, and has left all the World
in doubt of his Salvation? O dreadful Example! O frightful Effect of the Sin of
Uncleanness!

If this Sin were so frightful in Particulars, Omnis caro corruperit viam suam.
Genesis 6.
it has no less spared Multitudes, nor even the whole World.

That dreadful Deluge which drowned the whole Earth two thousand Years after
its Creation, was the first Effect of Impurity, which had caused so prodigious
a Corruption in all Human Nature, that it provoked the Divine Choler, Tactus
dolor cordis intrinsecus, delebo inquit, hominem, quem creavi, a facie terrae.
even to destroy by an universal Flood, that same Nature, the most excellent
Workmanship of his Hands; to extinguish in those Waters, the Flames of that
unchaste Love, which had caused such an universal Conslagration.

The Waters of the Deluge were scarce dried up, Clamor Sodomaeorum and
Gomorraeorum multiplicatus est and peccatum eorum aggravatum est nimis. Genesis
19. Igitur pluit Dominus super Sodomam and Gomorram sulphur and ignem, a Domino
de coelo, sed and subvertit civitates has, and omnem circa regionem universos
habitatores urbium, and cuncta terrae viventia. Genesis 19. Quibus in testimonium
nequitiae samigabunda constat deserta terra. Sap. 19.
when this detestable Sin beginning again to enkindle its first Flames, obliged
the Divine Justice to send another frightful Punishment upon those infamous
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah; whose Impudence being arrived at the greatest
height, and crying to Heaven for Vengeance, God showers down Fire and Brimstone
visibly from Heaven, which reduced into Ashes, not only the Men and Cities, but
also all the neighboring Land, which is yet to this day an infectious unwholsom
Marsh, to which Man dares not approach, that it might serve as an Example to
Posterity, and teach the Immodest, that the dishonest Fire with which they
permit themselves to be inflamed, shall be punished with another Fire, which
shall burn always and never be consumed.

To these Examples, which are taken out of the Sacred Scripture, and by
consequence most certain, I might add many others with which Histories
abundantly furnish us. I shall content my self with two, which I have chosen
out amongst others.

The First is recounted by St. Gregory in his Dialogues. He says, S. Greg.
lib. 4. Dial. cap. 35.
there was one in his time, named Chrysorius, a Man of Quality, and very rich;
but as much abounding with Vices as he was wealthy in Riches; but above all
extremely addicted to immodest Pleasures: God resolving to put a period to
those Sins he daily heaped up one after another, sends him a severe Sickness,
of which he died, but with a Death very extraordinary. Approaching to the
greatest extremity of his Distemper, he suddenly perceived a multitude of
malignant Spirits, who presented themselves unto him in hideous Forms, and made
a show as if they would immediately carry him into Hell. He began to tremble,
look aghast, and lamentably cry out for succor; he turns himself on every side
to avoid the sight of those horrid Shapes, but which way soever he moved, they
were continually before his Eyes. After many struglings, feeling himself
pressed, and violent hands laid on him by those wicked Spirits, he began
horribly to cry out, Truce till Morning, Truce till Morning; and shrieking
thus, his Soul was torn from his Body, and he miserably departed without
obtaining the Truce he required. O Incontinence, the Mother of Impenitence!

If this Example be terrible, that which follows is yet more frightful, and
ought to move you more powerfully. It is related by John Gerson Chancellor of
Paris, who took it out of Thomas Cantipratensis Suffragan Bishop of Cambray,
who says he was an Eyewitness of it.

He says, That being a young Scholar, he had a Companion of his Studies, with
whom he had contracted a very strict Friendship, a Person of Quality, and
endowed with all the Virtues one could wish in a young Man. Happy if he had
conserved that Treasure of Innocence! But it chanced by a Misfortune, too
frequent to young Persons, that he fell into wicked Company, which kindled in
his Heart the Fire of unchaste Love: This in a short time consumed all his good
Inclinations, and cast him into the incredible Disorder of a Life full of Sins
and Corruptions. His Irregularities were visible to all the World, and
continues in this depraved Custom, notwithstanding the Admonitions of his
Friends: And this Author says, that he himself frequently exhorted him to
return to the Way from which he had departed. As he contemned all
Advertisements, God was resolved in his Person to show an Example to young
People, who permit themselves to be blindly carried to this miserable Sin, by a
dreadful Accident which I shall recount to you. Being once asleep at Midnight,
he was seized with a terrible Fright; wherein being awaked, he began to cry out
with a dreadful clamor: All the House rises, and every one comes to his
assistance. They ask him where his Sickness held him, but could get no other
Answer from him than hideous Outcries. They cause the Priest to be sent for,
who exhorted him to think upon God, and beg pardon of him for his Sins, but in
vain. The Priest continuing to exhort him with many moving Expressions and
Tears, he turns toward him, and looking upon him with ghastly Eyes, spoke thus
to him in a lamentable Voice; Woe be to him that seduced me, Woe be to him that
seduced me. It is in vain to invoke the Grace of God, I see Hell open ready to
receive me.

After these Words, which redoubled the Lamentations of all those who were
present, every one entreating him to recommend himself to God, he turns to the
other side, and continuing his Clamors, miserably and in Despair he died.

Ought not this Example, Theotime, to make all those tremble, who are addicted
to the Sin of Incontinency, and principally young Persons, to whom it does
particularly appertain? to teach them how they ought to fly this abominable
Sin, and with what care they ought to preserve themselves from the Company of
those misfortunate Spirits, who corrupt the Virtue of others.

ARTICLE IV.
Remedies against Impurity; And first, that this Sin must be resisted at the
beginning.
After I have discovered the Malice of this Sin, I must show the Remedies, and
afford you Means by which you may preserve your self from the Enemy of your
Salvation.

The First which I shall prescribe, First Remedy.
is to resist it betimes, and in its first assaults, before it has gotten
possession, and rendered it self Master of your Heart.

This, The necessity of this Remedy.
Theotime, is the great Remedy against this Sin, and principally in Youth,
wherein it is so necessary, that for want of practicing it, the greatest part
of young Men are misfortunately engaged in this Vice, and oftentimes so deeply,
that they are never able to free themselve, or with very great trouble. It is
the chief Maxim for all Distempers, whether of Body or Soul, to apply their
Remedies in the beginning.

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
The Motions unto Ill at first withstand,
The Cure's too late, when Vice has got Command.
Now if the practice of this Maxim be necessary in all, both Corporal and
Spiritual Distempers, it is particularly in this Sin of Impurity, which is
easily increased, and makes a wonderful progress in a small time.

For this reason the Fathers have recommended it with much care; hearken,
Theotime, to what they shall deliver to you.

St. Cyprian says, Diaboli primis titillationibus obviandum; nec foveri debet
coluber donec in draconem formetur. Cypr. de jejunio. Diabolus Serpens est
lubricus, cujus capiti, hoc est, primae suggestioni, si non resistitur, totus
in interna cordis, dum non sentitur, illabitur. S. Hier. in c. 9. Eccles. Quid
est libido, nisi ignis? Quid virtutes, nisi flores? Quid item turpes
cogitationes, nisi paleae? Quis autem nesciat, si in paleis ignis negligenter
extinguitur, ex parva scintilla omnes paleae accenduntur? Qui ergo virtutum
flores in mente non vult exurere; ita debet libidinis ignem extinguere, ut per
tenuem scintillam nunquam possit ardere. S. Greg. in c. 25. 1 Reg. l. 6.
That we must resist the first Temptations of the Devil; and to do otherwise is
to cherish an Adder, which will grow up into a Serpent, able to devour him who
harbored it.

S. Jerome says, That the Devil is a creeping Serpent; and as to keep a Serpent
from entering into a Hole, we hinder it from putting in its Head, which being
once entered, it cannot be stopped from introducing its whole Body. So to hinder
the Devil from having admittance into our Soul by Sin, we must resist the first
Temptations; which if not withstood, he insensibly creeps into the Heart, and
makes himself Master of it.

St. Gregory says, That Impurity is enkindled in the Soul, like Fire in Straw;
and as if one does not quickly and entirely extinguish the Fire, it burns all
that it encounters; so if the Flame of Incontinence be not carefully put out,
it causes a Fire in the Soul, which is often without remedy.

But give ear, In initio cogitationis iniquae. repelle, and fugiet a te;
cogitatio prava delectationem parit, delectatio consensum, consensus actionem,
actio consuetudinem, consuetudo necessitatem, necessitas mortem. Sicut vipera a
filiis suis in utero positis lacerata perimitur, ita nos cogitationes nostrae
intra nos nutritrae occidunt. S. Bern. lib. de interi. Dom. cap. 39.
Theotime, to the excellent Counsel of St. Bernard, with the reason he there
adds. Reject evil Thoughts at the beginning, and they will fly from you.
Lascivious Thoughts which are not resisted, cause Delight, Delight draws on
Consent, Consent produces the Action, from the Action springs a Habit, from a
Habit Necessity, and from Necessity Death. And as the Viper is killed by the
little ones she carries in her Womb; so we receive Death by our vicious
Thoughts, when we nourish them in our Hearts.

The Reason of this Maxim, so much recommended by the Saints, is, that it is
easiest to resist the Sin of Impurity at the beginning, and very hard to
surmount it when it is become inveterate and strengthened by a long Habit.

To comprehend better the greatness of this Difficulty, see what we have said
in the First Part, of the trouble one is to undergo for his Salvation, when he
has lived ill in his Youth; for all that we have said above, and the Examples
we have brought, are particularly to be understood of the Sin of Incontinence.

ARTICLE V.
That we must avoid the Causes of Impurity.
The Second Means against the Sin of Immodesty is to avoid carefully the Causes
and Occasions of it. Second Remedy.
A Means absolutely necessary, it being certain, that to hinder the Effect we
must take away the Cause; and he who puts himself in the Occasion of Evil,
cannot avoid falling into it; because, according to the Maxim, Qui amat
periculum peribat in illo.
He who loves Danger, shall perish therein.

The first Cause we must fly is Idleness, First Cause to be avoided, Idleness.
which is the Mother of all Vices, as we have said, but principally of this. It
is that which opens the door to evil Thoughts, Omnium cogitationum malarum and
tentationum sentina.
and immodest Desires, which increase extremely in an idle Mind, and make it
commit a vast number of Sins. It is the Sink and Receptacle of impure
Temptations, according to St. Bernard. Impurity, says he, Luxuria cito deripit
homines otio deditos, gravius urit quem otiosum invenit. S. Bern. Sermon. ad
Frat. de Mon. Dei.
has never a greater advantage to surprise Men than in Idleness; it burns more
violently those it finds lulled asleep in Vice. This Verity is so common, that
the Pagans themselves have taught it us.

Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaeque jacent, and sine luce faces.
Quaeritur Aegyptus quare sit factus adulter?
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
If Sloth be banished, Cupid's Bow's unbent,
His Torch extinct, and all his Arrows spent.
Why did the Egyptian Adultery commit?
The Reason's clear, he first did Sloth admit.
Have a care then, Theotime, to fly as much as you can, this great Cause of
Impurity, never remaining Idle, but especially when you are all alone. See what
we have said of Idleness in the former Chapter, and of employment of Time in
Part 2. Chap. 14.

The Second Cause of Impurity is Intemperance in Eating and Drinking, Second
Cause.
with which it is impossible to conserve Chastity in whatsoever Age it be,
principally in Youth. The Heat of Blood which boils in that Age, excites them
very much to Sensual Pleasures; but when it is assisted by exterior Causes, as
Wine and good Cheer, it produces an incredible disturbance. Hearken to what S.
Jerome says, who speaks of it by his own Experience. In his Epistle to Furia he
says, Non Aetnaei ignes, non Vulcania tellus, non Vesuvius aut Olympus, tantis
ardoribus aestuant, ut juveniles medullae vino and dapibus inflammatae. S. Jer.
de Virg. Serve.
That Mount Aetna, Mount Vesuvius, and Mount Olympus, which continually exhale
Fire and Flames, did not burn with greater Heat, than the Marrow of young
People, when they are inflamed with Wine and delicious Meats. And in his
Epistle to Eustochium; Si quid in me potest esse consilii, si experto creditur,
hoc primum moneo, hoc obtestor, ut Sponsa Christi vinum fugiat pro veneno, haec
adversus adolescentiam prima sunt arma daemonum vinum and adolescentia duplex
incendium voluptatis, quid oleum flammae adjicimus? quid ardenti corpusculo
somenta ignium ministramus? S. Jer. Epist. ad Eustoch.
If I be capable, says he, to give any Counsel, if you will give credit to one
that is experienced, I chiefly admonish and beseech that Soul, which desires to
be the Spouse of Jesus Christ by conserving her Purity, to fly from Wine as a
mortal Poison. These are the first Arms the Devil makes use of against Youth.
Wine and Youth are a double inflammation to Pleasure, Why do we cast Oil upon
the Fire? Why do we add more Fuel to a Body that is on Fire? Behold, Theotime,
the Advice of this great Saint, so experienced in the Conduct of Souls, and
chiefly of Youth. Apply all your Endeavors to practice it exactly, if you will
conserve your Chastity; And to exercise it well, see in Part 4. Chap. 23. of
Sobriety.

The Third Cause you ought carefully to avoid, is wicked Company, Third Cause.
and all sort of dissolute Discourses, or any ways tending to Immodesty. It is
not to be imagined how those things corrupt and destroy Chastity in young
People; for how many are there who never fell into this misfortunate Sin, till
they had learned it, either by Conversation with dissolute Persons, or by the
occasion of immodest Discourses, which falling upon young Minds, as a Spark
amongst Straw, frequently inflames them with the Fire of unchaste Love. This
Cause is so ordinary, and so pernicious to young People, that it cannot be
sufficiently repeated, nor ever enough decry'd. Fly wicked Company, have a care
of immodest Discourses, or to say with the Apostle, permit not your self to be
deceived therewith; for Wicked Discourses corrupt good Manners. We have spoken
of this Cause before in Chap. 6. See what is said there, and chiefly the
Example I brought above in Art. 3. of that young Man, who permitting himself to
be depraved with wicked Company, died in Despair.

The Fourth Cause is familiar Conversation with Women, Fourth Cause,
which is also extremely dangerous. It is there, Theotime, where the Chastity
of young Persons is utterly ruined and destroyed; and frequently after it had
been preserved from other Dangers, it there chances to be deplorably
Shipwreckt. Impure Love enters but too easily into young Minds; but when it is
assisted by the presence of the Object, it is inslam'd beyond all imagination.
For this reason the Wiseman gives us that important Admonition, In medio
mulierum noli commorari, de vestimentis enim procedit tinea, and a muliere
iniquitas viri. Eccl. 42.
Continue not amongst Women, because from their Conversation springs the loss
and destruction of Men, as Moths which eat Clothes are bred in the Garments.

Now if the Company of Women be very prejudicial to young People, it becomes
pernicious to them, and absolutely mortal, when it passes to a Familiarity, to
a Desire to please, and be beloved, to overmuch Freedom, to Caresses and
Demonstrations of Friendship, and such like Privacies, too common amongst young
Persons, which S. Jerome calls very well, Principia moriturae virginitatis; The
beginning of the approaching ruin of Chastity.

We must add to this Cause, either immodest or too curious Looks, which may be
performed either in, or out of Conversation. Love enters by the Eyes; and
sometimes a Look, without any wicked Design, draws after it a vast train of
Sins. Give ear to what the Holy Ghost teaches you by the Mouth of the Wiseman,
Virginem ne aspicias, ne forte scandalizer is in decora illius. Averte faciem
tuam a muliere compta, and ne circumspicias speciem alienam. Propter speciem
mulieris multi perierunt, and ex hoc concupiscentia quasi ignis inardescit.
Eccl. 9.
Look not on a Virgin, lest you be scandalized at her Beauty. Divert your Eyes
from a Woman comelily Adorned, and regard not curiously her graceful Behavior.
Remember that Women's Beauty has been fatal to many, and has enkindled unchaste
Flames in their Hearts. What an excellent Advertisement is this, Theotime! yet
as much unknown, as it is important.

Engrave this deeply in your Memory, and have a care to govern well your Sight,
so that it be not too dissolute for all manner of Looks; and if it happen to
glance upon dangerous Objects, at least fix it not there, but withdraw it
immediately. Observe the same Rule in respect of all Pictures, or immodest
Figures, which are so many Rocks for Chastity to split on, and wherewith the
World is misfortunately replenished.

Adjoyn also to the former Causes, Kisses, which amongst young Persons proceed
often from Sensuality and immodest Affection, although it be sometimes concealed;
or at least they excite it, and give a beginning to many Sins and
Uncleanness. For this reason a good Author calls them very properly, Impudici
tactus osculi quid aliud est quam morsus diaboli and arrha peccati? Eusebius.
Emiss. Hom. de Quadr.
The Bitings of the Devil, and an Earnest of Sin.

In fine, add also to these Causes, unchaste Books, which you ought to fly as
the Plague of the Soul, and the certain corruption of Chastity. See what we
have said, Part 2. Chap. 17.

These are the most ordinary Causes of Immodesty, which you ought carefully to
avoid, if you desire to be freed from their pernicious Effect. To fly them
usefully, and as you ought, Theotime, take notice of those you have, and
principally bear dominion in you; and having observed them, avoid them the most
you can. For Example, If it be Idleness, apply all your Care to overcome that
by Labor. If it be Intemperance, be sober in your Diet, and perform some
Abstinence by the Advice of your Ghostly Father.

ARTICLE VI.
Other particular Remedies against Impurity.
In flying the Causes of Impurity, you must apply the Remedies proper to cure,
and entirely repel it. Amongst others I shall give you these Four, which are
jointly most necessary against this Sin, and very efficacious to preserve you
from it.

The First is Prayer. First Remedy.
God is the Author of Purity, we must demand it of him, and the Grace to resist
the Motions of that misfortunate Concupiscence, which causes continual
Rebellions against the Spirit. Demand it daily, Theotime, but not as At ego
adolescens miser valde, miser in exordio adolescentiae etiam petieram a te
castitatem, and dixeram, da mihi castitatem and continentiam, sed noli modo.
Timebam enim ne me cito exaudires; and cito sanarer a morbo concupiscentiae,
quam malebam expleri quam extingui. S. Aug. lib. 28. Confess. 7.
St. Augustine begged it in his Youth, desiring Chastity, yet was afraid to
obtain it; but beg it ardently, and with an earnest longing to acquire it from
God. Cor mundum crea in me, Deus; O God, give me a clean Heart, and renew in my
Bowels an upright Spirit. If you demand it, you will obtain it, and remember to
recommend your self to the Blessed Virgin, as we have said above.

The Second Remedy is frequent Confession to a discreet Ghostly Father. Second
Remedy.
This Remedy is so necessary, that without it it is morally impossible to be
cured of this Sin; and it is so efficacious, that with it we may easily
overcome that Vice. We have spoken sufficiently above of it in Part 2. Chap. 5,
and 7. To show the necessity of the Conduct of a wise Man against this Sin,
Excesserunt caput meum vepres libidinum, and nulla erat eradicans manus. Aug.
l. 2, Conf. c. 3.
I only add, that St. Austin deploring the Disorders of his Youth, was extreme
sorry that he had not then met with a discreet Hand, which might root out his
lascivious Passions, which increased in his Soul without number or measure.
Your Confessor, Theotime, will do you this good Office. Hic si solus fuisset
quo adjutore superasset? Hieron. Epist. ad Eustocb.
And S. Jerome, after he had recounted the Directions with which a Superior of a
Monastery had delivered a young Man from violent Temptations with which he was
troubled, makes this Reflection; If this young Man had been alone, how could he
have ever conquered these Assaults? You see by this, Theotime, how much the
Assistance of a discreet Person is necessary to overcome the Sin of Impurity.

The Third Remedy is Reading and Meditating on pious things, Third Remedy.
which fill the Mind with good Thoughts, banish wicked ones, and fortify it in
time of Temptations. Such are principally the Thoughts of the grievousness of
Sin, of the Justice of God, of his Greatness, of his Goodness, and other
things, which you will see in the following Chapter, Art. 3. the remembrance of
Death, of Judgment, and of Eternal Punishment. Endeavor to fortify your Mind
with these Reflections, by often reading these things seriously and attentively
in some Book which treats of them.

The Fourth is Labor. Fourth Remedy.
This serves to divert the mind from wicked thoughts, Nunquam vacat lascivire
districtis. Seneca Ep. 56.
and to take away from the Flesh the opportunity of rebelling against Reason.
You will find by Experience, that this is an excellent Remedy, if you carefully
apply your self to it. S. Jerome recounts a very notable Example of himself,
which you may may make use of very well. He says, Dum essem juvenis and
solitudinis me deserta vallarent, incentiva vitiorum ardoremque naturae far
non poteram. Quem cum crebris jejuniis frangerem, men's tamen cogitationibus
aestuabat. Ad quam edomandam cuidam fratri qui ex Haebreis crediderat me in
disciplinam dedi; ut post Quintiliani acumina, Ciceronis fluvios, gravitatem
Frontonis, and lenitatem Plinii, alphabetum discerem, and stridentia,
anhelantiaque verba meditarer. Quid ibi laboris insumpserim, quid sustinuerim
difficultatis, quoties desperaverim, quotiesque cessaverim, and contentione
discendi rursus inceperim, testis est conscientia, tam mea qui passus sum, quam
eorum qui mecum vitam duxerunt, and gratias ago Domino quod de amaro semine
literarum dulces fructus capiam. S. Hieron. Epist. ad Rusticum.
that being a young Man, shut up in the solitude of the Wilderness, whither he
was retired for the practice of Virtue, he could not support the Heats of his
Youth, which caused continual and violent Temptations; and tho he repressed
them with frequent Fastings, his Mind was still molested with impure thoughts:
For the conquering of which he was advised of a most efficacious Means. He
submits himself to the Conduct of an Hebrew Master to learn the Hebrew
Language, adding this painful Labor to that which he now exercised in the Study
of Latin Authors, desiring to perfect himself exactly in the Sharpness of
Quintilian, in the Eloquence of Cicero, in the grave Style of Fronton, and in
the Sweetness of Pliny. This Labor caused so great Troubles and Difficulties,
that he frequently left off, despairing to be ever able to attain to his
Desire; yet afterward he renewed his Pains, out of the great longing he had to
learn. But the Vexation of this Trouble was recompensed with the Fruit he
received from thence: For he obtained by this means what he sought for by it,
the deliverance from his vehement Temptations, from which he found himself
free, enjoying afterward a sweet tranquillity. And, I give God thanks, says
he, that from this bitter Seed of Study I now gather most pleasing Fruits.
Behold, Theotime, what an effectual Remedy Labor is against the Vice of
Impurity.

CHAP. IX.
Of Temptations.
I Treat here of Temptations, because although one may be tempted with all sorts
of Sins, yet the Temptations of the Sin of Impurity are more ordinary and
principally to young Persons, and more difficult to encounter with, and cause a
great obstacle to their Salvation. For this reason it is most important, that
they should be well Instructed to resist and overcome them.

ARTICLE. I.
What Temptation is, and of the Means to know whether one has sinned in a
Temptation.
We call Temptation a Proposal of Sin made to the Soul, What Temptation is.
to induce her to commit it, or rather a Thought alluring to Sin.

Now the Soul may consent unto Sin Three manner of ways. 1. Sin may be
consented to three ways.
By actually and voluntarily doing it. 2. In not performing, but desiring to
perform it. 3. Neither performing nor desiring, but taking pleasure or delight
in the Sin. Or to say otherwise, the Will may consent unto Sin by the Action,
by the Desire, and by Complacence or wilful Delectation. From hence arise two
things which ought to be well taken notice of.

1. That there is nothing but Consent which causes the Sin, and by consequence
the Thought alone of a Sin, is not a Sin, as long as the Will does not consent
in one of those three manners; and although the Thought should continue a long
time, it is not a Sin without Consent; but on the contrary, it is meritorious
to reject it.

2. To know whether one has sinned mortally in a Temptation, An imporiant
Remarks
it is not sufficient to consider, whether one has done a wicked Action, or
desired it; but one must take notice whether he has wilfully taken pleasure in
thinking on it: For the voluntary Delectation of a mortal Sin, is a mortal Sin.
This must be well observed, because there are many who deceive themselves
therein, and believe they have not consented to a Temptation, but when they had
either done or desired the Evil to which they were tempted.

Nevertheless, one necessary thing is here to be observed, viz. That there are
two sorts of Delight in Temptation; the one which precedes the Consent, which
is that one feels in the beginning of the Temptation, and which draws the Will
to Consent. The other which follows the Consent, and it is that which the Will
takes in the thing proposed. This Second Delight is a Sin, but not the First.

Wherefore, to see whether you have sinned by the Delectation of an evil
Thought, you must know whether that Delight were voluntary, that is, whether
you gave your Consent. And because an Action cannot be voluntary, except
knowledge went before, to judge whether you consented to that Delectation, you
must take notice whether you perceived it, and how you behaved your self after
you reflected on it, viz. whether you continued to entertain your self
therewith or no; for if you have continued, it is voluntary, and so you have
sinned. And this Sin was either Mortal or Venial; Mortal, if you continued with
a deliberate Will, or by a voluntary and affected Negligence. Venial, if that
Continuation was through Inadvertence, and without an entire Consent, not
desiring really to please your self therein, and yet also not using necessary
Endeavors to reject it.

ARTICLE II.
That one cannot avoid being tempted, and that we must be provided betimes to
resist Temptations.
Son, when you begin to apply your self to the Service of God, Fili, accedens
ad servitutem Dei, sta in justitia, and in timore, and praepara animam tuam ad
tentationem. Eccl. 2.
be firm in Justice and in the Fear of God, and prepare your Soul for
Temptation. It is the chief Advertisement which the Wiseman gives, and which
you ought often to have before your Eyes. It is a certain Maxim, That we cannot
live here without Temptations. This Life is a perpetual Combat, according to
that Saying of the Scripture, which affirms, that Man's Life is a Warfare upon
Earth. Militia est vita hominis super terram. Job.
We have Enemies which assault us on every side, within and without, visible
and invisible. The World and exterior things furnish us with continual occasion
of Sin. Pervigil ille tentator eos acrioribus pulsat insidiis, quos maxim
videt abstinere a peccatis. S. Leo.
The disorder of Concupiscence perpetually moves us that way, by the Rebellions
it raises against the Spirit. The Devil, who watches Night and Day for our
Destruction, employs all his Forces to make us fall into it.

Now if this common Enemy conspires generally to the Ruin of all Men, it is
certain he applies most vigorously the violence of his Temptations against
those who withdraw themselves from him, Diabolus quanto magis nos sibi
rebellare conspicit, magis expugnare contendit; eos enim negligit pulsare, quos
quieto jure possidet. S. Greg. l. 4. Mor. c. 12.
to serve their Creator, according to the Observation of the Fathers. And
amongst those he attacks most strongly young People, whom he endeavors with all
his force to divert from the Service of God, that he might secure himself
betimes of their Ruin, as we have shown, Part 1. Chap. 14.

This being so, dear Theotime, you must not wonder when you feel frequent
Temptations, nor also be out of patience to suffer them; We must not be
impatient in Temptations.
it is a thing you cannot avoid. Temptations are often the Effects of vicious
Habits contracted by former Sins; sometimes they spring from the Occasions into
which you voluntarily by your own fault cast your self. And in these two Cases
you have no reason to complain but of your self. Without these two Causes, your
Age will also furnish you with sufficient: The Enemy will not let you rest, or
if he do, it is to surprise you more easily. You must therefore dispose your
self courageously for the Combat, and prepare the necessary Arms to defend your
self in that War. Have a good courage then, dear Child, you will not be alone
in this Combat; God will be there with you, to assist you to gain the Victory,
and with the Victory, great Advantages for your Salvation.

For these Temptations serve, Three great Benefits from Temptations.
1. To keep you in Humility, and in the fear of falling into Sin, and always to
make you stand upon your Guard by Prayer, and other necessary Means. 2. To
confirm you more and more in Virtue, and daily to increase therein: For every
Resistance you make to Temptation, is a renewing and confirmation of the firm
Resolution you have made, not to offend God any more upon any account
whatsoever; and it merits new Grace from God to resist Temptations for the
future. 3. These Temptations serve to secure your Salvation, and increase your
Glory in Heaven.

ARTICLE. III.
Considerations to fortify the Mind in Temptations.
Temptation being a Thought alluring unto Sin, it is certain the first Remedy
which must be applied, is to furnish the Mind with contrary Thoughts, which may
divert it from the Sin to which it is solicited. See here some of the most
powerful, which will be be able to raise a horror of Sin in you, if you
consider them attentively. Wherefore when you shall be tempted, and principally
if the Temptation be strong and obstinate, make one or more of these
Reflections.

1. What are you going to do? Obstupescite coeli super hoc, and portae eus
desolamini vehementer; duo enim mala fecit populus meus, me dereliquerunt
fontem aquae vivae, and foderunt sibi cisternas, cisternas dissipatas quae
continere non valent aquas. Jer. 2.
You are going by one sole Action, and in a Moment, to lose the Grace of God,
to make your self his Enemy, unworthy of all his Favors, the Object of his
Hatred and Indignation: You are going to renounce Heaven, to lose all the Good
you have ever done, to render your self a Slave of the Devil, and subject to
Eternal Damnation. O God! what a Loss is this! Weigh well all these things one
after another.

2. But for what reason are you about to incur all this Damage? for the
miserable Pleasure of a wicked Thought, of an unchaste Desire, of an Action
Dishonest, brutish and unworthy of Man: Quid tibi vis in via Aegypti ut bibas
aquam turbidam? Ibid.
A Pleasure which will last but a Moment, and being past, leaves nothing behind
it but Sorrow, Vexation, and Remorse of Conscience, which will always persecute
you. Do you act like a Man when you make such a Choice?

3. The Greatness of him offended.
Consider the Quality of him you are about to offend: You go to offend God
infinite in Power, in Greatness, in Majesty, in Holiness. Non est similis tui
Domine! magnus es tu and magnum nomen tuum in fortitudine. Quis non timebit te,
o rex Gentium? Jer. 10. Sapiens cord est and fortis robore; Quis restitit ei
and pacem habuit? Deus cujus irae nemo resistere potest, and sub quo curvantur
qui portant orbem. Job 9. Columnae coeli contremiscunt, and pavent ad nutum
ejus. Job 26. A saeculo confregisti jugum meum, repulisti vincula mea, and
dixisti non serviam. Jer. 2. Peccatum est exhonorare Deum, quod non debet
facere homo, etiamsi necesse erat perire. S. Aug.
A God whom all Creatures adore, in whose Presence the Angels tremble: You are
going to revolt from him, to cast off the Yoke of his Obedience, and say, Non
serviam, I will not Serve. You wretched Man, pitiful Creature! you go to resist
your Creator in his Face. O God, what an Indignity is this! Do you understand,
Theotime, that the Injury Sin does to God is so great, that it were better the
whole World were subverted, than one sole Sin committed?

4. If you could conceal your Sin from God, and not offend him in his Presence,
Quem times major est omnibus: ipse timendus est in publico, ipse in secreto.
Procedis, videris, intras, videris, sucerna ardet, videt te, lucerna extincta
est, videt te, in cubili intras, videt te, in cord versaris, videt te. ipsum
time, cui cura est ut te videat, and vel timendo castus esto, aut si peccare
vis, quaere ubi non te videat, and fac quod vis. S. Aug. Ser. 46. de Verbis
Dom. Quo ibo a spiritu tuo, and quo a facie tua fugiam? Psalm. 138. Ego sum
judex and testis, dicit Dominus. Jer. 29.23. Videt te angelus malus, videt te
angelus bonus, videt bonis and malis major angelis Deus, etc. sub cujus oculis
velle delinquere tam insanum est, quam horrendum incidere in manus Dei
viventis. S. Bern. de Conversione ad Clericos. cap. 16.
you were less culpable; but you go to offend him before his Face, knowing well
that he sees you, considers you, and regards with horror the Sin you are about
to commit. What greater Affront can you offer him than this? You would blush
for shame, if you should think to be seen by a Man in this Action, and have you
no confusion to be seen by God himself? and to do that in his adorable
Presence, which you would be ashamed to do in the presence of the most
miserable of all Men? Can you show a greater Contempt of God than this? O how
blind are you! If you will offend God, seek at least a Place where he is not;
and if you cannot find it, be ashamed to let that holy and adorable Eye see you
in your Sin: And be afraid to commit a Crime before the Face of him who is at
the same time both Witness and Judge, and who could strike you dead in the
moment you have accomplished it.

Cast your Eyes upon the Goodness of him you are going to offend; Haeccine
reddis Domino popule stulte and insipiens? nunquid non ipse est Pater tuus qui
possidet te, and fecit and creavit te? incrassatus est dilectus, and
recalcitravit, dereliquit Deum fautorem suum, and recessit a Deo salutari suo.
Deum qui te genuit dereliquisti, oblitus es Domini creatoris tui; vidit Dominus
and ad iracundiam concitatus est. Deuteronomy. 32. Quid est quod dilectus meus in domo
mea fecit scelera multa? Jer. 11. Popule mi, quid feci tibi, aut quid molestus
fui tibi? responde mihi. Mich. 6.
Who is it that you assault? Nothing less than your Celestial Father, who has
made you what you are, who has given you all that you possess, who conserves
you incessantly, and without whose assistance you could not move a Hand. You
breathe only by the Air he gives you; and if he should abandon you but one
moment, you would fall presently into nothing. Look upon your self from Head to
Toe, and you will find nothing but what comes from God: Yet you in the midst of
all these Favors and all these Benefits, go about criminally to offend him,
despising the Goodness of so liberal a God, the Love of so kind a Father,
making use of his own Blessings against him, and to offer an Injury to him. Go
you ungrateful and degenetate Child, more cruel than Beasts! Tigers have a love
for him that feeds them, and you care not to offend the Author of all the Good
you have.

Come now to that incomprehensible Abyss of the Divine Bounty, to the
Masterpiece of his Love, the Passion of his Son Jesus Christ. It is here,
Theotime, it is here where you will find wherewith entirely to break the
greatest Attempts of the most violent Temptations, more than any where else.
Cast your Eyes upon your Savior nailed upon the Cross, Cum me pull. sat aliqua
turpis cogitatio, recurro ad vulnera Christi; cum me premit caro mea,
recordatione vulnerum Domini me resurgo; in omnibus adversitatibus non inveni
tam efficax remedium, quam vulnera Christi. S. Aug. Manual. c. 22. Nullum tam
potens est and tam efficax contra ardorem libidinis medicamentum, quam mors
Redemptoris mei. Ibid. cap. 23. Rursum crucifigentes sibimet ipsis filium Dei,
and ostentui habentes. Hebr. 6.
all covered with Wounds, overwhelmed with Grief, dying for your Salvation. Fix
there your Sight and Thoughts, consider, meditate attentively all that he
Suffered; Remember that it was for you, and for the Sins you have committed,
that he Suffered in such a manner, and see whether you have a Heart hard and
cruel enough to resolve to offend again a God dying for your Salvation, and
crucify him anew by mortal Sin. Although, dear Child, the view of a God
Crucified for your Sins, shall not be capable to hinder you from offending him,
will not the Blood he shed for your Salvation, soften your Heart? Will not all
the Griefs he endured for you, have force to make you love him? All the Wounds
he received are so many Mouths and Voices, which declare to you a horror for
Sin, and a love for Jesus; and can you behold them without either having a
horror for Sin, which Crucified Christ Jesus, or a love for Jesus Christ
Crucified for your Sins? O Jesus, permit it not, but cause by thy Goodness,
that the sole thought of thy Death so touch our Hearts in Temptations, that it
raise in us a horror of Sin, and make us resolve to choose rather to die than
offend him again, who has suffered Death for our Love.

ARTICLE IV.
How we must behave our selves in Temptations.
From the moment that you perceive your self to be assaulted with a Temptation
which offers to enter into your Mind, Nolo sinas cogitationem crescere, nihil
in te Babylonium. nihil confusionis adolescat. Dum parvus est hostis,
interfice. Ne nequitia, ne zizania crescant, elidatur in semine. Audi
Psalmistam dicentem, Filia Babylonis misera, beatus qui non tenebit, and
allidet parvulos tuos ad Petram, etc. Petra autem erat Christus. S. Hieron.
Epist. ad Eustoch. 22.
be careful readily to reject it without staying therein never so little; It is
the chief Remedy given by the holy Fathers, and particularly by St. Jerome,
writing to the devout Lady Eustochium.

Now that you may thus stifle Temptations in their birth, remember to perform
two things. Statim ut libido titillaverit sensum, aut blandum voluptatis
incendium dulci nos calore perfuderit, erumpamus in hanc vocem: Dominus
auxiliator meus, non timebo quid faciat mihi caro. Ibid.
1. Raise your Mind to God, and protest unto him, that you renounce the
Temptation with all your Heart, and will not consent unto it: Beg of him the
assistance of his Grace to resist it, and acknowledge humbly that you can do
nothing without him. It is incredible, Theotime, how powerful Prayer is in the
moment of Temptation. 2. After that elevation of your Mind, divert your self by
applying your Thought to perform something, as to Labor, to Read, to Speak with
some one, to take some Recreation, or other like thing, which may keep your
Mind employed, and you will find by Experience, that the Temptation oftentimes
without trouble will pass away, and vanish.

If it continue and be obstinate to return, persevere in employing these two
Means; Pray with more fervor, protest that you will not consent, proceed in
entertaining your Mind with something else. If you be all alone, it will be
good to stir up your self by some exterior Action of Devotion, as to raise your
Eyes or Hands to Heaven, knock your Breast, cast your self on your Knees to
demand of God Grace to resist. See the Example of S. Jerome, Art. 8. It would
also do very well to frighten your self with the remembrance of Death, with the
thoughts of Gods Judgments and of Eternal Damnation, according to that great
Advertisement of the Wiseman, In omnibus operibus tuis memorare novissima, and
in aeternum non peccabis. Eccl. 7.40.
Remember the last things, and you shall never sin.

Have a care not to stop your Thoughts to look upon the Temptation it self, An
important Advice.
but apply your Mind to think upon the Motives which may divert you. And for
this effect, principally when the Temptation continues a long time, endeavor to
make reflection upon one or more of the former Considerations, and after you
have weighed them well, make a sinal Resolution never to consent thereunto,
although it should return a thousand times.

Not to content your self to reject a Temptation, Another Advice to make use of
the Temptation, as a Motive to some virtuous Action.
but to take an occasion from thence to perform some Action of Piety, is a most
effectual Remedy against it. For Example, on the Day you have been tempted,
apply your self more to Prayer than ordinarily, read some pious Book, do some
Mortification, give some Alms to the Poor; and above all, in the time of
Temptation exercise some Act of Virtue, as detesting of Sin, loving of God with
all your Heart, protesting you will offend him no more. By this means you will
defeat your Enemy with his own Arms; and he seeing that, instead of moving you
to Sins by his Temptations, he gives you occasion to practice Virtue, will
desist from tempting you, fearing to advance your Salvation by the same Means
he employed to destroy you.

But above all, Third Advice, to distrust ones own Forces.
Theotime, be careful when you resist a Temptation, not to confide in your own
Forces, but to expect all from the sole Grace of God. This is a chief Means to
overcome Temptations, humbly acknowledging that you can do nothing of your
self, and that without the succor of Divine Grace you cannot conquer them. By
how much more you disconfide in your own strength, putting your confidence only
in God, by so much more easily will you surmount them. Noli de viribus tuis
prae sumere. Vide parvum contra Goliam, vide parvum contra ingentem, sed in
nomine Domini praesumentem. Tu venis ad me cum clipeo and lancea, ego in nomine
Domini omnipotentis. Sic aliter non omnino, aliter non prosternitur inimicus.
Qui praesumit de viribus suis antequam pugnet, ipse prosternitur. S. Aug. Sermon.
4. de verb. Apost.
See (says S. Augustine) little David combating Goliath. He was a Child without
Force, without Arms, who encountered a Giant Armed Cap-a-pe from Head to Foot;
but because he put all his confidence in God, he gained the Victory. Thou
come to me (said David to Goliath) with Buckler and Lance, and I come to thee
in the Name of the all-powerful God; And with that confidence he overthrew him
at the first Stroke. Thus must you encounter with the Enemy of your Salvation.
He (says St. Augustine) who trusts in his own Forces, is overcome before he
Fights.

Now the principal Means to obtain many Favors of God in Temptations, is
Prayer, and the frequentation of the Sacraments, and chiefly Confession, which
has a wonderful force against Temptations, and without it it is morally
impossible to resist them any long time. See all we have said in Part 2. Chap.
5. and 7.

ARTICLE V.
Of some Artifices by which the Devil deceives Men in Temptations, and
principally young Men.
All the force of the Devil in Temptations, consists only in Craft and Deceit;
wherefore the best Means to resist him, is to know the Tricks he ordinarily
makes use of. There are many, but I shall only take notice of Three amongst the
rest, by which he maliciously abuses Men, and principally young Men.

The First is that by which he hinders them from regarding or knowing the Evil
which is in the Sin they are going to commit; First Artifice.
and on the contrary, he represents to their Imagination very livelily, on one
side the sweetness of the Delight of Sin, which he always makes them think far
greater than it is, and on the other side the trouble and difficulty to resist
it, and abstain from it, which makes them conceive it insupportable.

Who does not see, The Falsity of this Artifice.
that all these Delusions are great in all these three things? For the Evil
which is in Sin is the chiefest of all Evils imaginable, as we have said above,
Art. 3. The Delight of Sin is but for a moment, and it is followed by Vexation,
Sadness, and Despair. The trouble of resistance continues not long, and a sweet
and pleasing Consolation follows it; it merits Heaven, and frequently the
deliverance from many other Temptations.

O dear Theotime, The Remedy.
permit not your self to be abused in this manner by the Enemy of your
Salvation: When he shall propose a Temptation to you, cast an Eye upon the Evil
you are going to do, which is a mortal Sin, the greatest of all Evils. Think
not on the Pleasure that is offered, which will pass like a Shadow, but upon
the Sorrow and Displeasure it brings after it. Regard not the Pain and
Difficulty of resistance, but the Joy, Consolation, and Benefit you will
receive from thence. If you act thus, you will find that the Temptation will in
a small time vanish.

The Second Deceit by which the Devil seduces young People, Second Artifice.
is to propose unto them in the Temptation, the easiness of getting Pardon, and
persuade them that they will do Penance, and Confess themselves of it. Alas,
Theotime, how frequently does it fall out, and too often, that in the Combat of
Temptation, the Conscience resisting on her side by the good Motions God gives
her, this misfortunate Thought comes into the Mind, I will Confess my self of
it, I will do Penance for it: And with this Thought one miserably resolves to
commit this Sin. What then? If you imagined that God presently after the Sin
would cast you into the Pit of Hell, you would not attempt to offend him; And
because you hope he will pardon you, do not you scruple to displease him? O
what Impiety is this! O Wickedness! Will you be Impious because God is Good? Do
you offend him because he will pardon you? What greater Affront can be offered
to God? O Theotime, if ever this Thought come into your Mind, reject it as a
Blasphemy, and as a Wile of the Devil, by which he would cast you into the
abyss of Sin.

The Third Deceit of the Devil toward young Persons is, Third Artifice.
that after he has made them sometimes yield to his Temptations by the former
Artifices, he puts into their Mind this false and wicked Opinion, That it is
impossible to resist Temptations, and to abstain from Sin; to the end that
being possessed with this Persuasion, they may make no Endeavors to resist
them, and give themselves over to Evil without any restraint. The falseness of
this Persuasion.


A detestable Persuasion! a diabolical Invention! which is so much more
deplorable, as being most false and pernicious, it is nevertheless most common
amongst young People. O insensati Galatae! Quis vos fascinavit non obedire
veritati? persuasio haec non est ex eo qui vocat vos. Gal. 3.
Poor insensible Creatures! what is it that dazles you thus, so that you cannot
see the Truth more clear than day? Do you not see how this Thought is injurious
to the Mercy of your Savior, who has shed his Blood to merit for you, Grace
to resist in these Occasions, and who stretches out his Arms to succor you?
This Persuasion comes not from him who calls you to him to save you, but from
the Devil who seeks to destroy you without recovery.

O dear Child, The Remedies.
permit not your self ever to be seduced by this execrable Thought, but in the
midst of the most violent Temptations call to mind the Mercy of your Savior,
who never abandons those who hope in him. Circumdederunt me undique and non
erat qui adjuvaret, memoratus sum misericordiae tuae, Domine, and cooperationis
tuae quae a sa culo sunt, quoniam eruis sustinentes te, Domine, and liberasti
me de perditione. Eccl. 5.
Tribulations, says the Wiseman, have environed me on every side, and there was
no one that would assist me. I called to mind thy Mercy, O God, knowing that
thou succorest those who trust in thee, and thou have delivered me from my
destruction.

These are the three most ordinary Artifices the Devil makes use of against
young Persons in their Temptations, and all three are pursued in order. For
first, he hides from them the Evil, and makes them believe it is not so great
as in reality it is. Next he persuades them, that they may easily discharge
themselve of it. And in fine, when he has them deeply engaged, he makes the
Difficulty to abstain vast and prodigious in appearance, that they may not
attempt to acquit themselves of it. Reflect well upon these three Artifices,
and have a care not to be deluded by them.

ARTICLE VI.
Of two considerable Faults which ordinarily happen to young Persons in
Temptations.
Besides the Fault they commit, who permit themselves to be deceived by the
three former Artifices, they fall into two others, which cause great
Difficulties in them, and which you must observe, that you may carefully avoid
them.

The First is, that when they see themselves attacked by frequent Temptations,
First Fault.
they presently become impatient, and after having resisted for a while, lose
courage, and yield to the Enemy, believing that they cannot resist him. This
Error is very ordinary amongst young People, and it gives a great advantage to
the Enemy of their Salvation over them.

Heretofore the City of Bethulia in Juda being Besieged by Holofernes, the
principal People of the Town, with all the Commonalty, betook themselves to
their Prayers, to obtain of God their Deliverance: And seeing God did not hear
them so soon as they expected, they resolved to deliver themselves, if Succor
did not come in Five Days. The courageous Judith being advertised of this
Resolution, disapproved it much, and highly reprehended them, saying, Qui estis
vos qui tentatis Dominum? non est iste sermo qui misericordiam provocat, sed
potius qui iram excitet and surorem accendat. Posuistis vos tempus miserationi
Domini, and in arbitrium vestrum constituistis ei. Sed quia patiens est Dominus
in hoc ipso poeniteamus, and indulgentiam ejus fusis lacrymis postulemus.
Expectemus humiles consolationem ejus. Judith 8.
Who are you that thus tempt our Lord? This Design is not to attract the Divine
Bounty to you, but to provoke his Fury and Revenge. What, have you limited a
Time for the Mercy of God, and appointed a Day to succor you? We must not
proceed in this manner. Let us do Penance, let us demand Pardon with many
Tears, and with all humility expect his Comfort.

I say the same to you, dear Theotime, when you vex your self in Temptations,
and despairing to be able to resist them, you take a Resolution at length to
deliver your self over to your Enemy, you offer a great Injury to God; for this
is to distrust his Grace, and dispose of it as you please: This is not the
Means to obtain it, but on the contrary, to make you fall more dangerously into
the Temptations and Sin. No, no, we must not act thus, we must have patience in
Temptations, and humbly expect the Divine Grace, Deus enim (nisi ipsi illius
gratiae defuerint) sicutopus bonum coepit ita perficiet, operans velle and
perficere. Con. Tr. Ses. 6. cap. 13.
which will never fail you, except you be wanting to it first. If you persevere
courageously to resist, he will either deliver you from the Temptations, or
give you Grace to overcome them. Remember, that the greatest Saints have been
tempted like you, and much more: Call to mind the Apostle S. Paul, who having
demanded of God to be delivered from great Temptations, Ne magnitudo
revelationum extollat me, datus est mihi stimulus carnis meae, Angelus Sathanae
qui me colaphizet, propter quod ter Dominum rogavi ut discederet a me, and
dixit mihi, Sufficit tibi gratia mea, nam virtus in infirmitate perficitur. 2
Cor. 21.
received this Answer from him, My Grace is sufficient for thee, for virtue is
perfected in weakness.

The Second Fault young Persons commit in Temptations, is, Second Fault.
that when they once chance to yield unto the Enemy, they lose Courage, cast
away their Arms, and permit themselves to be overcome by all other Temptations,
without any resistance. O God! what a strange Blindness is this! for being once
conquered, to submit entirely to the Enemy; After having received some Wounds,
to be content to receive many more; After having lost the Grace of God, to
continue to provoke more and more his Fury, instead of readily appeasing it by
Penance.

The Israelites being assembled to Fight against the Tribe of Benjamin, to
revenge a most enormous Crime committed by some of that Tribe, although they were
far stronger in the number of Men, they were defeated in the first and second
Battle. Quamobrem omnes filii Israel venerunt in domum Dei, and sedentes
flebant coram Domino, jejunaruntque die illo usque ad vesperam and obtulerunt
ei holocausta, atque pacificas victimas, and super statu suo interrogaverunt.
Judic. 20.
These two Overthrows highly astonished them, yet nevertheless they lost not
Courage; they came before the Tabernacle of God, and there they set themselves
to Weep, to Fast, to make their Supplications, and offer Sacrifices to appease
the Divine Anger. This being done, they took their Arms again, and went
courageously to the Combat, where they gained the Victory, and entirely
defeated their Enemies.

This, Theotime, is exactly the Example of what you must do in the Combat of
Temptations; you must not be discouraged for being once conquered, but
cheerfully Encounter again: You must have recourse to God, lament your Misery,
beg Pardon of him, pacify his Fury, implore the assistance of his Grace, and
after having done Penance for your Sins, reassume your Arms in the Name of God,
and give Battle more courageously than before. The Sorrow for being vanquished
must excite you to resist your Enemy more resolutely, and your Lapse make you
stand better upon your Guard for the future.

ARTICLE VII.
What is to be done after the Temptation is conquered.
We ordinarily commit two Faults after we are delivered from a Temptation. Two
Faults after the Temptation is overcome.
The First is, We give not Thanks to God for the Victory we have gained by the
assistance of his Grace. The Second, We make no preparation to resist the
following Temptations. These two Defects are the cause why we easily relapse
into other Temptations, and are at length overcome by them. The First, because
God would have us acknowledge his Favors, and particularly great ones, such as
is that of a Victory over a Temptation. The Second, because he who does not
stand upon his Guard, is soon surprised by his Enemy.

1. It is therefore most important, First Remedy.
Theotime, when you have surmounted a Temptation, that you have a care to give
God Thanks for it, either sometime after the Temptation, or at least at the end
of the Day in your Evening Prayers. Render him Thanks with all your Heart for
this Victory, acknowledge that it comes from him alone, and not from you, and
that without him you had a thousand times been vanquished.

2. Second Remedy.
Prepare your self to resist Temptations for the future. 1. Making a firm
Protestation to God, to resist them with all your power. 2. Humbly demanding
the continuation of his assistance. 3. Resolving to make use of such and such
Means which you know will happily succeed.

If it chance that you remain some time without any Temptation, confide not too
much in this Peace and Tranquillity: Saepe antiquas hostis, postquam menti
nostrae tentationis certamen inflixerit, ab ipso suo certamine ad rempus
recedit, non ut illatae malitiae finem praebeat, sed ut in corda quae per
quierem secura reddiderit, repent rediens facilius inopinatus erumpat. S.
Greg. 3. Moral. 16.
For it frequently happens, as S. Gregory observes, that the Enemy permits
those whom he has much tempted, to continue some time in quiet, that not
having a care, he may soon after surprise them more easily, when they think
least of him, and that he may make them fall into Sin by a sudden and violent
Temptation. For this reason stand always upon your Guard, demanding daily of
God Grace to resist the Assaults of Temptations. Be careful to divert quickly
from your Mind, all the first Thoughts that may move you to Sin.

ARTICLE VIII.
Considerable Examples to teach us how we must Encounter with Temptations.
An ancient Author says very well, That the way to learn by Precept is very
long, Longum iter per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla. Seneca Epill. 6.
hut that by Example is shorter and most efficacious. Wherefore it will be much
to the purpose, to set here before your Eyes some of those who have
courageously combated against Temptations, that their Example may stir up your
Courage, and teach you how to manage the Arms with which they have very
fortunately overcome.

Amongst many others I might bring, I have chosen out the great S. Jerome, whom
I would propose to you for a Model and Example. He was young as you are, at the
time of these Temptations; he was more tempted than ever you will be, and
perhaps amongst all the Servants of God, his Youth was most tried by
Temptations, and encountered them with an admirable Perseverance. I shall give
you a Relation of what he himself recounts, read it attentively, and mark well
all the Circumstances.

This Saint being yet young, after he had spent some time in a worldly Life,
was moved with a Desire to serve God, and labor to effect his Salvation by a
true Conversion. He takes a Resolution to leave the World, and to retire into
some Wilderness to do Penance, and apply himself entirely to Virtue. He went
first to Jerusalem, to visit the Holy Places, and from thence he retired into
the Desert.

He continued in that Place four whole Years, during which time,
notwithstanding the incredible Austerities he underwent, he was tossed with
continual Temptations, and so great, that they move Compassion in those who
read them. Behold what he says, writing to his devout Eustochium.

O how often in this vast Solitude, Quoties in eremo constitutus in illa vasta
solitudine quae exusta solis ardoribus, horridum monachis praebebat
habitaculum, putavi me Romany interesse deliciis; sedebam solus, quia
amaritudine repletus eram, horrebant sacco membra deformia, quotidie lacrymae
quotidie gemitus, and si quando repugnantem somnus imminens oppressisset, nuda
humo vix ossa haerentia collidebam: de cibis vero and potu taceo, cum etiam
languentes Monachi frigida aqua utantur and coctum aliquid accepisse luxuria
sit; ille igitur ego qui ob metum Gehennae tali me carcere damnaveram, Scor
pionum tantum socius and ferarum, saepe choris intereram puellarum; Pallebant
ora jejuniis, and men's desideriis aestaabat. In frigido corpore, and ante
hominem suum carne praemortua sola libidinum incendia bulliebant. S. Jerome.
Epist. 22. ad Eustoch.
where the continual scorching Heat of the Sun makes the Habitation horrible
and insupportable did the Delights of the City of Rome come to seek me, and
present themselves to my Imagination! The Sorrow and Bitterness with which my
Soul was filled, made me seek the most retired Places to lament for my Sins. My
Body now all hideous, was covered with a Hair Shirt; I ceased not to weep, and
daily sigh; I had no other Bed than the Ground, nor other Nourishment than that
of the Monks of the Desert, who drank nothing but Water, nor eat any thing but
raw Herbs, even in their Distempers. In this State, and in this Prison, to
which I had condemned my self to avoid that of Hell, although I had no other
Company but that of Scorpions and savage Beasts; I found my self often in
Imagination with the Roman Dames. Fasting bad made my Visage pale and
disfigured, yet my' Mind did not cease to be inflamed with unchaste Desires. In
a languishing Body, and a Flesh mortified, so that it seemed almost dead before
me, I burnt with the Flames of immodest Pleasures.

See the Temptations which this Saint endured, and the rude Assaults he has
sustained; but consider how this generous Champion behaved himself.

In this deplorable State, Itaque omni auxilio destitutus, ad Jesu jacebam
pedes, rigabam lacrymis, crino tergebam, and repugnantem carnem hebdomadarum
inedia subjugabam. Memini me clamantem diem crebro junxisse cum nocte, nec
prius a pectoris cessasse verberibus quam rediret Domino imperante
tranquillitas. S. Hieron. ibid.
deprived of all human Succor, I cast my self at the Feet of Jesus Christ; I
watered them with my Tears as the Magdalen, I tamed the Rebellions of my Flesh
with whole Weeks of Abstinence: And amongst other things I remember, that
sometimes I passed whole Nights and Days, crying out for Succor, and imploring
the Assistance of God in these Combats, and desisted not from Praying and
knocking my Breast, till the Tempest was past, and God by his Grace had brought
Repose and Tranquillity.

What an Example, Theotime, is this, to teach you how to encounter with
Temptations! But hearken yet to what follows.

And as God himself is my Witness (goes on the Saint) after many Tears, Et ut
ipse mihi testis est Dominus, post multas lacrymas, post coelo inhaerentes
oculos, nonnunquam videbar mihi agminibus interesse Angelorum, and laetus
gaudensque cantabam, post te in odorem unguentorum tuorum curremus. Ibid.
after having Prayed a long time with Eyes raised to Heaven, I felt so great a
Consolation, that sometimes I seemed to be placed amongst the Quires of Angels,
and Sing with incredible Joy those excellent Words of the Spouse in the
Canticles, I will run, O God, I will run now after thee in the odor of thy
Perfumes, and in the sweetness of thy Consolations.

O what an Example, Theotime, is this, to animate you to combat the Temptations
of youth! O how admirable and instructive is this for you, and all those of
your Age! For amongst others, it teaches you Three things of great importance.
Three things to be learnt from S. Jerome.
1. That you ought not to be astonished to see your self tempted, since this
holy Saint in his Youth, notwithstanding all his Mortifications, and removed
from all Occasions of Sin, suffered so great Temptations. 2. It will teach you
how to encounter with Temptations, viz. by Mortifications, and above all, by
humble, fervent, and persevering Prayer. And in the 3d place, you there learn
the greatness of the Joy God gives to those who have resisted Temptations with
much courage and perseverance.

O my dear Child! Practice.
set this excellent Example often before your Eyes. When you shall be tempted,
represent unto your self S. Jerome in the Desert, combating his Temptations with
Tears, with Prayers, with Mortification, casting himself at the Feet of Jesus
Christ, and imploring his Assistance. Imitate him, let your Chamber serve you
as a Solitude, to find there the Divine Succor against Temptations; and be
assured, that after your Prayer God will send you Tranquillity, and make you
feel an incredible Joy and Consolation, which will animate you anew to resist
Temptations, and serve your Savior more faithfully than ever.

CHAP. X.
Particular Obstacles to rich young Persons.
THE Obstacles we have spoken of hitherto, are common to all young People, of
whatsoever Quality or Condition. But because amongst the Conditions there are
some which bring with them particular Impediments, it is proper to treat
briefly of them. These Conditions are chiefly Riches, Nobility, and Benefices.

As for Riches, there is no question but they cause a particular Obstacle to
Salvation, since the Son of God himself assures us as much, Quod autem in
spinas cecidit, hi sunt qui audierunt, and a sollicitudinibus and divitiis, and
voluptatibus vitae euntes suffocantur and non reserunt fructum. Iuc. 8.
saying they choke the Seed of the Word of God in Souls, and hinder it from
taking root, and bringing forth Fruit; which is true, not only in Men already
advanced in Age, in whom Covetousness, and the love of Riches, often bears
Dominion, but also in young Men, to whom the possession of Riches is frequently
a Hindrance of Salvation.

This is known sufficiently by Experience, which manifests, that rich young
People are ordinarily more vicious than others. We see them addicted to their
Pleasures, slothful, and Enemies to Labor, their Minds always taken up with
Vanity, aspiring after Greatness, Fortune, and the Riches of the World, Proud,
Presumptuous, despising all the World, Untractable, and resisting the most
wholesome Instruction and Advices, subject to a vast number of Sins, oftentimes
malicious and ingenious to effect it. Melior est pauper ambulans in
simplicitate sua, quam dives in pravis itineribus. Prove. 28. Deus superbis
resistit, humilibus autem dat gratiam. Jac. 4. Qui confidunt in virtute sua,
and in multitudine divitiarum suarum gloriantur. Psalm. 48.
And on the contrary, we see young Persons of a mean Condition or small
Fortune, live in the Fear of God, and in Virtue, desirous to procure their
Salvation, addicted to Labor, seeking good Instructions, and receiving them
with Joy and much Fruit, departing as far as they can from Sin; or if they
chance to fall into it, they continue not, but withdraw themselves immediately:
And by this means they heap the Blessings of God upon themselves; for God is
pleased to favor the Humble, and those who fear him, as on the contrary he
rejects the Proud, and those who trust in their own Power, and glory in the
multitude of their Riches.

I say this, Theotime, to the end I may admonish you, that if God has ordered
you to be born in a good and rich Condion, you take a care that your Riches
serve not for your Damnation, as they do daily to many like you; Quam difficice
qui pecunias habent in regnum Dei intrabunt? Lucae 18.
the multitude whereof makes but too evident that Truth delivered by the Mouth
of Jesus Christ, who says, How difficult is it for the Rich to be saved?
Wherefore you have need to perform Three things.

1. Three Remedies.
Be fully persuaded, as it is most certain, that your Riches may much prejudice
your Salvation, if you have not a great care to preserve your self from the
Impediments they cause, and employ them usefully.

2. Understand what these Obstacles are, that you may diligently avoid them.
There are many in them, but those which are most particular are these, viz.
Pride, Untractableness, Idleness, Love of Pleasures, Vicious Company, and
Flatteries of Men; Have a care of all these things.

Be Humble in your Riches, Nihilest quod sic generent divitiae quomodo
superbiam, omne pomum omne lignum habet vermem suum, vermis divitiarum superbia
est. Aug. Ser. 5. de ver. Domini. Quid prodest stulto habere divitias cum
sapientiam emere non possit? Pro. 17.
considering on one side, the danger they daily put you in of offending God,
and ruining your self; and on the other side, the exact Account you must render
to God of the good use you have made of them. Wherefore do you glory in the
Riches you possess, which God can take away in a moment? and with which, as the
Wise man says, you know not how to obtain the true Riches of the Mind, that is,
Wisdom and Virtue. Riches, which if you possess them not, you, with all your
Goods, are but like a Horse richly Trapped, which with all his Ornaments is but
a Beast without Reason.

Render your self easy to be taught, and Tractable; be ready to learn, and
willing to be reprehended; and be persuaded, that by how much you are Nobler
and Richer, by so much ought you to be better instructed, because you have so
much more occasion of failing, and your Faults are of greater consequence than
others.

Fly Idleness, so natural to the Rich. In labor hominum non sunt and cum
hominibus non flagellabuntur. Ps. 72. Peccare volunt sed non flagellari cum
hominibus, unde timendum est ne flagellentur cum daemonibus. S. Bern. Sermon. ad
Pastores.
Remember that the Rich, as the Scripture says, are not in trouble as other
Men, and not subject to the Afflictions of others. But S. Bernard adds, That
there is great reason to fear, lest they should be afflicted with the Devils.

Preserve your self carefully from Dainties, which are the Baits of Pleasures.
Remember that Chastity is in the midst of Dangers and Precipices, when
surrounded with Riches, where daintiness of Nourishment, of Garments, of Lying,
and a thousand other Occasions, expose it to a continual hazard of Ruin, if not
resisted with incredible Diligence. Vae qui opulenti estis in Sion, etc. qui
dormitis in lectis eburneis, and lascivitis in stratis vestris, qui comeditis
agnum de grege, etc. bibentes vinum in phialis, etc. Amos 6. Vae vobis
divitibus! quia habetis consolationem vestram. Lue. 6.
Woe be to the Rich, (says the Prophet) who sleep in curious Beds, who seek
Pleasure in their delicious Couches, who Feast, taking all Delight, whilst the
Poor is in Misery, without showing any Compassion toward him. And the Son of
God, says, Woe be to the Rich, because they have their Consolation in this World.

Withdraw your self from wicked Company, which your Riches will easily attract,
as a Prey invites Birds. See what we have said above, Chap. 6.

Permit not your self to be surprised by Flattery, Adulatorum quoque
assentationes and noxia blandimenta fallaciae velut quasdam pestes animae fuge,
nihil est quod tam facile corrumpat mentes hominum. S. Hier. Epist. ad Celan.
which always accompanies the Rich, and which ordinarily perverts their Mind,
and principally young Persons. Give not credit to any thing they shall say in
your Commendation; for either they commend you for Things that deserve not
Praise, as your Condition, your Wealth, your good Behavior, or other like
things; or for things you have not, as Science, Wisdom, Virtue; or if you have
them, they come not from you.

There remains the Third thing you are to perform, that is, to make good use of
your Riches. I shall appoint you no other than that which S. Paul ordered
Timothy to prescribe to the Rich; consider what he says, and comprehend it
well. Divitibus hujus saeculi praecipe, non sublime sapere, neque sperare in
incerto divitiarum, sed in Deo vivo, qui praestat nobis omnia ad sruendum; been
agere, divites fieri in bonis operibus, facile tribuere, communicare,
Thesaurare sibi fundamentum bonum in futurum, ut apprehendant veram vitam. Tim.
6.
Command the Rich of the World, that they be not highminded, that they put not
their confidence in the uncertainty of Riches, but in the living God, who
gives us abundantly all things to enjoy; that they apply themselves to Virtue,
and be rich in good Works; that they give Alms freely, and communicate their
Goods to those that want; that they lay up store for the time to come, and to
obtain Eternal Life. This, Theotime, is the use of Riches, which the Holy Ghost
prescribes to the Wealthy, and which you ought exactly to practice, if you will
take care that you be not destroyed by your Possessions. After all this, keep
in your Mind that great Truth S. Cyprian teaches you, which is, Tentatio est
Patrimonium grande, nisi ad usus bonos census operetur, ut Patrimonio suo
unusquisque locupletior, magis redimere debeat quam augere delicta. S. Cypr.
lib. de Habit. Virgi.
That a great Patrimony is a Temptation, if the Revenue one possesses be not
employed in pious Uses; and by how much any one abounds in Wealth, by so much
more ought he to make use of it to redeem his Sins, and not to multiply them.

CHAP. XI.
Particular Obstacles to Noble Persons.
TO put Nobility amongst the Obstacles of Virtue, were to offer an Injury to
it; but we shall do no wrong to Truth, if we say that the ill use which Persons
in Dignity make of it, is a great Impediment to their Salvation, and frequently
the cause of their Ruin and Damnation.

To see this Truth, and clearly understand, that there is no State ordinarily
more corrupt, nor filled with Vice, than that of the Nobility, we need only
make a little Reflection upon the Life of Great Men.

We see a prodigious Pride reign in them, which makes them contemn all the
World, and esteem all others infinitely below them. Ambition, and a desire of
growing Great, perpetually possesses them. They are extravagantly addicted to
all their Pleasures, Lovers of Delights, Bold and Shameless to publish their
Sins, and glory in them, Envious in the highest degree, Tied to their Interest,
Affecting none but themselves, Unjust, Violent, Harsh, and often Cruel toward
others, especially their Inferiors, Impatient and Choleric, Given to Swearing
and Blasphemies, Revengeful even to excess, not being able to suffer or
dissemble the least Injury, which frequently is grounded only in their
Imagination, and even make open profession never to endure or dissemble any. O
God! what a Life is this for Men who make profession of Christian Religion!

And that which accomplishes the Misfortune of this Condition is, The
detestable Passion for Duels.
that detestable Passion for Duels, with which they are so continually possessed,
that there is scarce a moment in their Life, wherein they have not a Resolution
to expose themselves to Fight upon the first Injury, or at least at the first
Challenge; A Resolution which keeps them in a continual mortal Sin, and hinders
them from ever being in the Grace of God. Not to mention the Contempt of
Religion, Sensuality and Impiety, which usually reign in that State, and
especially now adays, where there are found so many who say unto God, Qui
dixerunt Deo recede a nobis, scientam viarum tuarum nolumus. Quis est
omnipotens ut serviamus ei? Et quid nobis prodest si oraverimus illum? Job 21.
as the Impious said in the Scripture, Depart from us, we will not have the
knowledge of thy ways. Who is the all-powerful, who says that we must serve
him? What does it profit us to Pray unto him?

Is not this a thing much to be deplored, to see in the midst of Christianity,
the fairest part of Christian States to be most corrupted? And that Nobility
which is given as a Recompense of Virtue, and to excite others thereto, should
become the Source of Vice, and the Fountain of the Corruption of Noble Persons:
So that it is a Mark of Reprobation to many; and it were more desirable for the
greatest part of Noblemen that they had never been born. For what advantage is
it to be Great before Men, and to be wretched and contemptible in the sight of
God? Quid prodest quod liber est in natura, qui servus est in conscientia?
Eusebius. Emiss. Hom. 3. de Pascate.
To be honored by Men, and hated by God? To Command others, and to be a Slave
to Vice, and his own Passions? And in a word, To be happy in this World, and
damned for ever, being of the number of those who eternally cry out, Quid nobis
profuit superbia, aut divitiarum jactantia? quid contulit nobis? Tansierunt
ista omnia tanquam umbra. Ergo erravimus a via veritatis. Sap. 5.
What did our Pride profit us? What advantage has the pomp of Riches brought
to us? All those things are passed away like a Shadow. Wherefore we have erred
from the Way of Truth.

O my dear Theotime, if you be Noble, I beseech you to make here a serious
Reflection upon your self, and upon the Danger your Nobility exposes your
Salvation to. Distrust your State, and be afraid lest it should ruin you. By
how much more you are raised in Condition, by so much more have you an
Obligation to Virtue, and are in greater hazard of Destruction. Remedies
against the Obstacle of Nobility.
Labor earnestly for your Salvation, and use all possible diligence that your
Nobility be not a cause of you Damnation, as it is to many. For this Effect,
practice the following Advices.

1. First Advice.
Understand perfectly what true Nobility is. Nobility is inseparable from
Virtue, it takes its origin from thence, and is only conserved by it. It has
been bestowed upon your Ancestors, in recompense of their worthy Actions; if
you imitate them in their Virtue, you will merit the Title of Noble; if you
imitate them not, you have but a false and imaginary Nobility.

2. Know, Second Advice.
that besides this Nobility Instituted by Men, there is a Divine Nobility
infinitely raised above this, which is that which is acquired by Grace. Videte
qualem charitatem dedit nobis Pater ut filii Dei nominemur and simus. 1 John 3.
Intellige tibi esse genus de coelo. and age vivendo: sancto respondeas patri;
Dei silium ut se probat, qui vitiis non obscuratur humanis, qui divinis
virtutibus elucescit. Chrysolog. Sermon. 6, 7.
For if Nobility consists in being born of Illustrious Parents, and of those
that are considerable in the World, what Nobility will it be to be made the
Child of God, Coheir of Jesus Christ, predestined to possess the the Kingdom
of Heaven? This, Theotime, is the great, the prime and the true Nobility; if
you possess this, you are really Noble; and if you have it not, how Noble
soever you may be before Men, you are most Infamous and Abominable in the sight
of God.

3. This being so, Third Advice.
permit not your self to be puffed up with Pride and Arrogance for your Nobility.
Mala nobilitas quae se per superbiam apud Deum reddit ignobilem. Aug. Sermon. 27.
That is a wicked Nobility (says St. Augustine) which makes you contemptible in
the sight of God by its Pride. On the contrary, by so much more Humble, as you
are more Noble, according to the Precept of the Wiseman; Quanto magnus es
humilia te in omnibus, and apud Deum invenies gratiam. Eccl. 3.
By how much greater you are, says he, by so much humble your self more in all
things; and by this means you will render your self agreeable to God. It is an
excellent Advice, like that which S. Jerome gives to Noblemen; Nulli te unquam
de generis nobilitate praeponas, nec inseriores quasque aut humili loco natas
te inferiores putes. Nescit religio nostra personas accipere, nec conditiones
hominum, sed animos inspicit singulorum, servum and nobilem de moribus
pronunciat, etc. S. Jerome. Epist. ad Celant.
Prefer not your self before others by reason of your Nobility, and contemn not
those who are not Noble. Our Religion has no respect to Persons, it regards
not the Condition of Men, but their Minds; it judges of Nobility by their
Manners. There is no Nobility in the sight of God, but not to serve Sin. The
height of Nobility is to be Illustrious in Virtues. O what an excellent and
necessary Advice is this for Noblemen!

4. Fourth Advice.
Endeavor to observe well the ordinary Vices of the Nobility, that you may
carefully avoid them; we have hinted at some of them, you will here also find
others; have a care to encounter them in good time, that you may shun them, and
clear your self from them, demanding daily of God for this effect the
assistance of his Grace. Exiguo enim conceditur misericordia, potentes autem
potenter tormenta patientur. Sap. 6.
Remember that the Justice of God will be severe toward the Great and Noble,
and their Sins will be punished more rigorously than those of others, as it is
said in the Book of Wisdom.

5. Fifth Advice.
Make your Nobility advance Virtue. You will say, How can this be? See how. If
being Noble you be Virtuous, Minime quidem Deus est acceptor personarum, nescio
tamen quo pacto virtus in nobili plus placet. S. Bern. Epist. ad Sophi.
first your Virtue will be in some manner more agreeable to God, according to
the Judgment of St. Bernard. Besides, your Example will move others to Virtue,
your Discourse will have more authority to persuade them to Good; They will
give credit to you, when you mildly reprehend their Faults. You will have Means
to comfort the Afflicted, Credit to relieve the Oppressed; You may often take
up Quarrels, and reconcile Enemies. Practice your self in all these things, and
God will give a Blessing to your Nobility, and you will be Noble both before
God and Men.

See yet many things which concern Nobility in Part 5. Chap. 11. Article 1.3.
and 4.

CHAP. XII.
Particular Obstacles of young Incumbents, or such as have Benefices without
Cure.
I Shall not Discourse to you here of all the Obstacles which Benefices may
bring to the Salvation of Incumbents, but only of those you may meet with
during your Youth, reserving to speak of the others at the End of this Work.
Here I shall only take notice of Four amongst others.

The First consists in this, First Obstacle.
That being an Incumbent from your Youth, the Benefice designs you to an
Ecclesiastical State, before you be capable to make choice of it, and perhaps
you are not fit for it, nor called by God; and perhaps, as it often happens,
you have an aversion and repugnance to it. This Obstacle is of great
Consequence, and deserves to be well considered; For those who enter thus into
an Ecclesiastical State, put themselves in danger of committing great Faults
therein, and of never obtaining their Salvation; because that State bringing
with it vast Obligations, and requiring a greater Stock of Virtues and
Perfections than others, requires a more advised Deliberation, and chiefly a
Vocation from God. I shall appoint a Remedy for this Obstacle hereafter.

The Second Obstacle springs from the more particular Obligation which the
Benefice brings of living holily. Second Obstacle.
All Christians are obliged to Virtue, but the Clergy and Incumbents by reason
of the Sanctity of their State, have a stricter Obligation to it. This
Obligation renders their Sins more heinous, and them more criminal in the sight
of God, and is the cause that, when they are vicious, they draw upon their
Heads the Divine Anger, and his forsaking them: From whence it happens, that
they become more wicked than others, more obstinate in Vice, and more incapable
of Correction and Amendment. Third Obstacle.


The Third Obstacle comes from the Obligation they have to recite the Divine
Office, of which young Incumbents discharge themselves very badly, although they
be obliged to it under mortal Sin, and omitting to say it, are obliged to the
restitution of the Fruits of their Benefice, according to the number of the
Days they have omitted it. This Impediment of the Salvation of Incumbents is
very great: For the contempt of their Duty, and these mortal Sins thus
neglected and repeated, rendering them more unworthy of the Grace of God, are
the Causes why they fall into many other Sins, and into extreme Disorders, as
we daily see.

The Fourth Obstacle arises from the Obligation they have of exterior Modesty,
Fourth Obstacle.
and an Ecclesiastical Habit; because, as the Council of Trent says admirably
well, Etsi habitus non faciat Monachum, oportet tamen Clericos vestes proprio
congruentes ordini semper defer; Ut per decentiam habitus extrinseci morum
honestatem intrinsecam ostendant. Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 5.
Although the Habit makes not a Monk, yet nevertheless the Clergy ought always to
wear a Habit conformable to their State, that by the modesty of their exterior
Habit, they may discover the interior Goodness of their Manners.

But now adays Incumbents, and particularly young ones, know nothing of this
Obligation: For we see them Clothed like others, Abuses of this Obligation.
always in short Garments, sometimes in undecent Colors, covered with Laces
and other worldly Ornaments, like Laymen; in long Hair, and often Curled and
Powdered, like Courtiers. This is an intolerable Abuse, which causes many
Disorders amongst Incumbents, who not being distinguished from the Laity in
their Habit, do not believe their Duty to consist in their Life and Manners. It
is a Disobedience to the Church, which in all her Councils complains of this
Disorder, and commands Incumbents to wear an Ecclesiastical Habit. It is a
Contempt of Religion, and of the Ecclesiastical State, as the Council of Trent
calls it. It is a considerable Injustice; for is it not an unjust Action, to
desire to live on the Patrimony of the Church, and not be content to bear her
Mark?

Let every one take care of this that will, but Incumbents who live thus, and
will not change, are not in the State of Grace, neither can they receive
Absolution, if they have not a full purpose to wear an Ecclesiastical Habit.
Now, if not they but their Parents enjoy it, as it often happens, they are
obliged to admonish them; and the Parents are not in a good State of
Conscience, but sin grievously, if they hinder them from wearing a Habit
agreeable to their State.

For the remedy of these Obstacles, see what you are to do.

As for the First, First Remedy.
consider whether you have a repugnance to an Ecclesiastical Life, and whether
you be not determined to undertake that State; for in that case you cannot with
a safe Conscience keep your Benefice, you are obliged to quit it, and advertise
your Parents, or those on whom you depend, that you have no intention of being
an Ecclesiastic. If you be only unresolved, not having as yet an absolute Will
to be or not to be of that Condition, you should endeavor to resolve the
soonest you can.

Now if you have no repugnance, but rather an Inclination to an Ecclesiastical
Life, think not that your Benefice ought to be a sufficient Mark of your
Vocation; for perhaps you are not fit for it. Wherefore never desist from
begging daily of God, to know the State which is most proper for his Service,
and your own Salvation; and performing all that, you ought to make a good
Choice of your Condition, as we shall show you hereafter.

For a remedy of the three other Obstacles, Remedy for the three other
Obstacles.
labor to acquit your self of three Obligations of your Benefice which I even
now hinted to you: Live Virtuously, endeavoring to render your Youth pleasing
to God; Recite your Office exactly, and devoutly; Be Clothed like an Incumbent,
that is, not being in Holy Orders, in a black Habit, without Ornaments; your
Hair very modest, wear a long Garment as much as you can upon Sundays and
Feasts, and always when you partake of the Sacraments of Confession and
Communion.

If you do thus, Theotime, it will befall you as it did the Prophet Samuel, who
was Dedicated by his Parents in his Childhood to Serve in the Tabernacle of God
This young Child behaved himself so faithfully in that Place, Puer autem Samuel
proficiebat at que crescebat, and placebat tam Deo quam hominibus. Crevit autem
Samuel and erat Dominus cum eo. Et cognovit universus Israel quod fidelis
Samuel Propheta esset Domini. 1 Reg. 2.
that he became agreeable to God, according to the proportion he increased in
Age; and, as the Scripture says, God was with him, and the Services he did in
the Tabernacle during his Youth were so pleasing to him, that he chose him for
his Prophet, and manifested to all his People the choice he had made. Thus,
Theotime, if you serve God faithfully in an Ecclesiastical State, to which by
your Benefice you are Dedicated in your Youth, God will give a Blessing to the
Entrance you have made, and will do you the Favor one day, to employ you to
serve him in that holy State, and procure thereby your own Glory, and the
Salvation of Souls.

CHAP. XIII.
Advice to Parents upon the same Subject.
AS the Parents are the first Causes of all the Obstacles which Benefices bring
to the Salvation of their Children, it is necessary to give them here a very
important Advice, that they may afford a convenient Remedy.

They are the Persons who with an insatiable Greediness seek Benefices for
their Children: They make them take the (...) ^^^^cal State, before they know
what it is; They inconsiderately charge them with Benefices, who Present
themselves without being concerned to know whether they be fit or Called by
God, or whether they will discharge the great Obligations of that Calling. All
their Care aims at finding Benefices, and sometimes by ill and dangerous Ways,
at advancing the Revenue, receiving and disposing of it as they please, against
the Intention of the Founders, and of the Church her self; making their
Children learn a little Latin, neglecting in the mean time all the rest which
is most necessary, viz. the Care of making their Children acquit themselves of
the Obligations of their State, say their Office, wear an Ecclesiastical Habit,
live conformable to their Profession, and of causing them to be bred up in an
Ecclesiastical Spirit, and instructed in the knowledge of their Duty. O wicked
Parents! who for a little Temporal Wealth, charge themselves with all the Sins
of their Children, and with their Children engage themselves in an inevitable
Damnation. And yet more misfortunate the Uncles and other Relations of
Incumbents, who have no less disordinate Affection for their Nephews and
Cousins, whom they blindly charge with Benefices, and themselves with all the
Ill they cause in the Church, as we daily see. Huic parvulo and forsitan nondum
nato, Ecclesiastica jam Beneficia provida parentum solicitudo parabat. Illum
Praepositus aut Decanus ut sibi succederet plusquam Materno educabit affectu in
deliciis enutriens and delictis. Ille dignus Archidiaconatu quia filius
principis, magis autem si sit Episcopi consobrinus in quo nimirum tota videtur
Episcopatus progenies. S. Bern. in Declamationibus.
This was a Disorder which St. Bernard deplored in his Time, whose Words I
shall put in the Margin.

The Remedy of this Evil is in the Hands of the Parents themselves; it belongs
to them to moderate that great Greediness they have for Benefices, to make more
account of the Salvation of their Children, than of their Temporal Possessions,
and prefer the Quiet of their Conscience before the Advancement of their
Families, which Benefices instead of raising, as they think, frequently ruin.

For this effect they ought to have a care, not to bestow Benefices upon their
Children, without having seriously considered their Spirit, their Inclinations,
and the Dispositions they have to an Ecclesiastical Calling; And that they may
perform it with more certainty, they should not be Judges thereof themselves,
but make the Inclinations of their Children be Examined by able Persons, to
whom the Children may freely declare their repugnance, if they have any, to
that Dignity, as it frequently happens, who might judge religiously of their
Dispositions for the same State, without Interest, without Complacence, and
declare sincerely to the Fathers the Judgment they make of them, whether they
think the Children fit for an Ecclesiastical Calling, as much as they may guess
in that Age. The Fathers may follow their Judgment with the ensuing
Precautions, viz. To take a great care of the Education of the Children they
design for the Church; Make them be brought up in the Fear of God, in an
Ecclesiastical Spirit, in the Knowledge of their State and its Obligations, and
not in the Vanity and Spirit of the World, as they often do. For this end
commit them to Persons of Piety, of Prudence, of Learning, who have the Zeal of
an Ecclesiastical Spirit. Have a care that they acquit themselves of the
Obligation of their Office; That they wear the Habit of Clergymen, at least as
we have said in the precedent Chapter; That they live holily, as Children
destined to the Church; Dispose well of the Revenues of the Benefices,
employing it to discharge their Duty in an honest and moderate Maintenance of
an Incumbent, and the rest in pious Works. And in fine, they ought to observe
the Manners and Inclinations of their Children, informing themselves by their
Masters to whom they are committed, and whether they know they be inclined to
an Ecclesiastical State, or have not convenient Dispositions for it; for then
they are obliged to dispose of their Children in some other Employ.

If they do otherwise than what we have said, they render themselves culpable
of a vast number of Sins which their Children commit in an Ecclesiastical
Calling, which is a horrible thing to reflect on; and for the Temporal Goods
they have too much affected, they will incur their Eternal Damnation, and that
of their Children. Now to the end they may be more convinced of their
Obligation concerning this Subject, let them take the pains to read the former
Chapter, and also Chap. 9. of Part 5.

The End of the Third Part.
THE INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH IN Christian Piety. PART IV.
Of the Virtues necessary for young Persons.
THIS, Theotime, is the chiefest part of your Instruction, to which the three
former relate as the Means to their End; for after the Proposal of the Motives
to incline you to Virtue, the necessary Means to acquire it, the Obstacles
which might divert you, and ought to be avoided during your Youth; there now
remains to give you the Practice of Virtue, and show the particular Virtues to
which you ought to apply your Studies more carefully in your Youth, to render
your self truly Virtuous, and which ought to serve as a Groundwork to others,
which will be necessary for you in the Course of your Life.

CHAP. I.
That young People ought to propose to themselves the Imitation of our Lord
Jesus in his Youth.
BEing that all Christian Piety, both in Great and Small, consists in imitating
our Lord Jesus Christ, I would first of all propose here that Divine Pattern,
to give you a perfect Model of the Virtues you ought to acquire, and by which
you ought to form your Youth.

It was for this Reason, according to the Observation of one of the Fathers of
the Church, why this Divine Master being come to Teach and Save all Men, was
pleased to pass through all the Ages of Man, even to a perfect Age, to sanctify
them all, and by making himself like unto them, more easily invite to his
Imitation.

Ideo in omnem venit aetatem, and infantibus infans factus, sanctificans
infantes, in parvulis parvulus, sanctificans hanc ipsam habentes aetatem; simul
and exemplum illis pietatis effectus justitiae and subjectionis. In juvenibus
juvenis exemplum juvenibus sactus, and sanctificans Domino. S. Irenaeus l. 2.
adversus hereses. c. 39.
For this Reason, says he, he made himself a Child to Children, that he might
sanctify them. He made himself a Little-one to Litle-ones, giving Holiness to
those of that Age, to the end he might afford them in his Person an Example of
Piety and Sanctity, and Subjection. He made himself a young Man to young Men,
giving them a Pattern, and sanctifying them for the Service of our Lord.

It is by this Divine Pattern of Youth, dear Theotime, that you must form
yours, and regulate your Actions. It is from him that you must learn the
Virtues you ought to practice in that Age, Inspice and fac secundum exemplar
quod tibi in monte monstratum est. Exodus 25.
Look, and do according to the Example which is showed you.

Now we find Four things in the Gospel which the Son of God did during the
Youth of his mortal Life.

The First is his hidden Life which he was pleased to lead all that time, not
manifesting himself to Men, but only to his most blessed Mother and S. Joseph;
to teach young People to fly Vanity, so natural to their Age, and also hurtful,
and not to seek after the Esteem of the World by a vain ostentation of their
Parts or Virtues; but only to please God, and content their Parents and
Masters, by a solid Progress in Virtue and Wisdom.

The Second is the Example of Piety and Religion he was pleased to give, by
going to the Temple at solemn Feasts, according to the Command of the Law,
although he was not obliged to it; being there, he hearkened to the Doctors, and
asked them Questions, as if he would learn of them, he who was Master of the
Doctors and of the Law it self. An admirable Example, by which he would show to
young People the Affection they ought to have for Piety, and that their first
Care must be to serve God and labor for their Salvation, addicting themselves
to Acts of Religion, to Prayer, to assist at the Divine Sacrifice, to the
Sacraments, to the Word of God, and to seek Instruction from the Mouth of the
Wise, and from those whom God has given them for their Conduct.

The Third thing is that so admirable Obedience he showed to his Parents, which
the Gospel declares in these Terms; Et descendit cum eis and venit Nazareth and
erat subditus illis. Luc. 2.42.
He returned with them unto Nazareth, and was subject to them. An Example which
ought to confound all young People, who have ordinarily so great a repugnance
to Submission. What a shame is this for you, Theotime, when you are wanting to
the great Respect you owe to them from whom you receive your Life and
Instruction, having before your Eyes the Example of God, Deus erat sub ^itus,
quis, quibus? hominibus Disce, terra subdit, disce pulvis obtemperare, erubesce
superbe cinis, Deus se humiliat, and tu te exaltas? S. Bern. Hom. 1. Super
missas.
who obeys his Creatures? And what Reply will you give to the Son of God
concerning your Disobedience, when he shall reproach you, that he was pleased
to be subject and obedient for your Example?

The Fourth thing that the Gospel teaches us of the Youth of our Lord is, Jesus
proficiebat sapientia and aetate and gratia apud Deum and homines. Ibid.
That according to the measure he advanced in Age, he visibly increased in
Wisdom and Grace before God and Men; which is not to be understood of an
interior increase of these two Perfections in the Soul of the Son of God;
because from the moment of his Conception he was accomplished with them in a
perfect fullness. But this is to be understood as to the Effects he made appear
in his Divine Actions from Day to Day. As the Sun, which although he be as much
adorned with Light at his Rising as at Midday, is said to become more light
according to the degrees he rises, because his Light appears with more
brightness to our Eyes. But the Gospel has made this Observation, to give to
Christian young Persons the most important Advertisement of the great care they
ought to have to employ their Years to increase in Wisdom and Virtue, and to
avoid that so universal a Fault of the greatest part, who seem to advance in
Age to no other end than to diminish in Innocence. It is a Misfortune
infinitely to be deplored, to see that Children should be corrupted according
to the measure that they grow in bigness, and that their Age should serve them
for nothing else but to learn Vice, Lying, Impurity, Pride, Disobedience,
Dissoluteness, as St. Augustine takes notice of himself. Jam mortua erat
adolescentia mea mala and nefanda, and ibam in juventutem quanto aetate major,
tanto vanitate turpior. S. Aug. lib. 7. Conf. cap. 1.
Children of Jesus Christ! is it thus that you imitate your Master? He made
himself a Child like you, to invite you more sweetly to his Imitation, and to
teach you to employ your first Years in the increase of Virtue, and you
miserably lose them in learning Vice. Cast your Eyes upon this Divine Pattern,
to reform by it the Abuses of your Youth which you have committed, and learn to
increase in all Christian Virtues, which is, to be the Disciple and Child of
Jesus Christ. Now that you may perfectly understand them, I shall here
represent them to you one after another.

CHAP. II.
Of the Fear of God.
THE First Virtue that is necessary for you, is the Fear of God; it is that
which next to Faith is the Basis and Groundwork of all others. The Scripture
calls it The beginning of Wisdom; and it teaches us, that it is the first
thing which ought to be inspired into young Souls. For this reason Solomon
Instructing Youth in his Proverbs, begins his Instruction with this excellent
Precept, so often repeated in Scripture, Initium sapientiae timor Domini. Prove.
5.
The Fear of God is the beginning of Wisdom. And the same Scripture, in the
History of holy Tobias, observes expressly, that being a Child, Genuit ex ea
filium quem ab infantia timere Deum docuit, and abstinere ab omni peccato. Tob.
1.
He instructed him from his Infancy to fear God, and to abstain from all Sins.

Now by this Fear we must not understand a gross and servil Fear, that regards
nothing but the Punishment and Chastisement, which it apprehends more than the
Offense; What this Fear is.
but a respectful Fear, by which considering the Greatness, and Majesty of God,
his Sanctity, his Power, his Justice, we conceive a profound Respect, and
apprehend above all things to fall by mortal Sin into the Displeasure of a God
so Great, so Holy, so Powerful, so Just. We have already spoken of it above in
Part 2. Chap. 1.

That, Theotime, is the Fear of God which is the beginning of Wisdom, and the
foundation of true Piety. Practice of the Fear of God.
It is that to which I exhort you here, for which you should chiefly and above
all things labor. As to the obtaining it, see what you are to do.

First, Demand it daily of God, 1. Demand it.
for he is the Author of it: Say to him frequently from the bottom of your
Heart, Confige timore carnes meas, a judiciis enim tuis tremui, Psalm. 118.
O God, engrave thy Fear deeply in my Soul, that it may restrain me from ever
offending thee.

Secondly, 2. Have a great Sense of the Greatness of God.
Conceive a great Apprehension of the Greatness of God. He is the Sovereign
Lord of all things, infinite in all his Perfections, in Majesty, in Wisdom, in
Goodness, in Power, in Justice. All Creatures adore him, the Angels themselves
tremble at the sight of his Grandeur. All that is Great in the World is but an
Atom before him; and as he has created all things by one sole Word, he could
destroy them all in one only Moment. Non est similis tui Domine, magnus es tu,
and magnum nomen tuum in sortitudine; quis non timebit te o Rex gentium? Jer.
10.
O Immense God, there is none like unto thee, said a Prophet, thou art Great,
and thy Name is Great, O King of Nations, who will not fear thee?

Thirdly, 3. Fear to displease God by sin.
Fear above all things to displease God, Timor Domini expellit peccatum. Eccl.
5.
and let that be the first and principal thing you regard in all your Actions,
whether God be not therein offended.

4. 4. Speak of God with Respect.
When you speak of God, never speak of him but with a profound Respect; and
endeavor to cause by your Example, that he never be spoken of otherwise in your
Presence.

CHAP. III.
Of the Love of God.
IF the Greatness of God oblige us to fear and honor him with a profound
Respect, The Love of God ought to be joined with Fear.
his Goodness engages us as much to love him. We must fear God by reason of his
Greatness, which renders him infinitely Adorable; and we must love him because
of his Goodness, which makes him infinitely Amiable; we must not separate these
two things, Fear and Love. Timor Domini initium dilectionis.
The Fear of God is the beginning of Love, as the Holy Scripture says, and Love
is the perfection of Fear. Qui sine timore est non poterit juscificari. Eccl.
25. Qui non diligit manet in morte. 1 John 3.
He who is without Fear cannot be justified, and he who Loves not, remains in
Death.

We must then love God, dear Thotime; for how can it be that we should not love
Goodness it self, and him who has loved you first? We must begin betimes to
love God.
But you must love him betimes, and from your tender Years; you must begin that
quickly which you must do all your Life, and during all Eternity. The Love of
God is our Sovereign Happiness and last End. We are created for that End;
God has placed you in this World on no other Design than to love him, and
that coming to know him for your Creator, you should render that which a Work
ows to its Workman, a Creature to its Creator, a Child to his Father, that is,
Love. And obliged thereto.
And to oblige you the better thereunto, he has added all imaginable Favors,
having designed you for the Enjoyment of his Kingdom in Heaven, Redeemed you
when you were lost, and Redeemed you by the Death of his only Son, Called you
to the Grace of Christianity, Illuminated you with the Light of Faith,
Sanctified you by his Grace, Received you often into his Mercy after you had
grievously offended him, and a thousand other Blessings has be bestowed upon
you. O Theotime, how is it possible not to love a God who has loved you so
much!

Now there are two things in God for which he ought to be beloved. Two Motives
of the Love of God.
The one is his Goodness, which he manifests unto us by all the Favors and
Blessings he bestows upon us. The other is the Goodness he possesses in
himself, which makes him Sovereignly Amiable. For, if we might suppose a thing
impossible, viz. That God had never showed us any Favor, yet he deserved to be
infinitely beloved, by reason of the Sovereign Goodness, and infinite
Perfections he enjoys in himself, which render him infinitely Amiable. Now when
I say we must love God, I speak of both these two Loves, and I mean, that we
must love him for the Benefits he has bestowed upon us, and not only for them,
but also in consideration of his infinite Goodness, which renders him so
lovely, that in the love of his Goodness consists the Eternal Happiness of both
Men and Angels.

But take notice, The essential Condition of the Love of God.
Theotime, that the Love of God to be real, ought to have one very particular
Condition, which occurs not in any other Love: For it does not suffice to love
God as we love Creatures, but we must love him above all things, that is, more
than all Creatures. Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, ex tota anima
tua, ex omnibus viribus tuis and ex omni mente tua. Luc. 20.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, that is, more than all
other things; so that you love nothing above him, as there is nothing greater
or more amiable than he; nor nothing equal to him, as there is nothing which
can match him.

And to speak briefly, the Love of God consists in preferring God before all
things; Wherein the Love of God consists.
before the Goods of the World, Pleasures, Honor, Friends, and Life it self; so
that you must be prepared never to love these things to the prejudice of the
Love you owe to God; and be resolved rather to lose them a thousand times, than
to be wanting to the Obedience you are obliged to render unto him. It is in
this preference of God before all things, wherein the essential Point of the
Love of God consists; a Preference without which it is impossible to love God,
nor by consequence, to be in the State of Salvation.

O dear Theotime, you must then labor to acquire this so amiable a Love, and
this so necessary a Preference, to engrave it deeply in your Heart: And to the
end you be not deceived therein, by taking, as very many do, apparent Love for
the real. The Practice of the love of God.
See the principal Acts you must practice therein, by which you may know
whether you love God truly, or no.

First, 1. Have a horror for Sin.
Above all things fear and have a horror of Sin, because it is displeasing to
God, and infinitely opposite to his Goodness, and be resolved never to commit a
Sin upon any account whatsoever.

Secondly, 2. Avoid venial Sins.
Fly venial Sins the most you can, because they displease God; and although they
destroy not Love, yet they diminish and weaken it, and dispose you to fall into
mortal Sin.

Thirdly, 3. Labor to get Virtue.
Labor to acquire the Virtues so necessary for you, and which he exacts from
you. It is the property of Love, to desire to please him whom one loves.

Fourthly, 4. Advance the Service of God.
Wish often that God should be served and loved as he deserves. Be troubled
when you see him offended, hinder as much as you can that he may not be
displeased, and endeavor by your Words and Example to move others to love him.

But chiefly, Theotime, 5. Begin betimes to love God.
practice these things in good time, and begin from your Youth to love him whom
you must never cease to love. At whatsoever time you begin to love him, it will
be always too late, and you will always have reason to express that Grief which
S. Augustine did; Sero te amavi o pulchritudo tam antiqua and tam nova, sero te
amavi. S. Aug. Conf. lib. 10. cap. 27.
I have loved thee too late, O ancient Beauty, I have loved thee too late, O
Eternal Goodness. Demand of him frequently the Grace to love him as you ought,
and daily say to him from your Heart those excellent Words of David, Quid enim
mihi est in coelo and a te quid volui super terram Deus cordis mei and pars
mea, Deus in aeternum. Psalm. 72.
O God, whether it be in Heaven or Hell, I love nothing but thee; thou art the
God of my Heart, and the Part which I eternally pretend to.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Love of Parents.
HE who fears God, Qui timet Deum honorat Parents, and quasi Dominis serviet
his qui se genuerunt. Eccl. 3.
says the Wiseman, honors his Parents, and will serve as his Masters those who
gave him Birth. Yes, Theotime, if you have the Fear of God in your Heart, you
will honor your Parents, and all those to whom he has given Authority over
you, because he desires it and commands it; The Fear of God makes us honor our
Parents.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. And if you honor them not, you have neither
the Fear nor Love of God.

For to contemn a thing so holy, which Nature her self inspires you with, and
which God has so strictly commanded you, is not to have the Fear of God. There
is no Menace with which he has not threatened those Children who are wanting to
their Duty. Qui affligit Patrem and sugit Matrem ignominiosus erit and
infoelix. Prove. 19.
He says, that He who afflicts his Father, and flies from the discreet
Admonitions of his Mother, will become infamous and miserable. Qui maledicit
patri and matri extinguetur lucerna ejus in mediis tenebris. Prove. 20.
He who curses his Father or Mother shall perish, his Light, that is, his Life,
shall be extinct in Darkness, that is, Death. Oculum qui subsannat patrem and
qui despicit partum matris suae, suffodiunt eum corvi de torrentibus and
commedant eum filii aquilae. Prove. 36.
The Eye which mocks his Father, and which despises the Mother who brought him
forth, deserves to be pulled out by the Crows, and eaten by young Eagles. Quam
malae est famae qui derelinquit patrem, and est maledictus a Deo qui exasperat
matrem. Eccl. 3.
He who abandons his Father, has lost his Honor before Men; and he who vexes
his Mother, is cursed by God. I wish these Menaces were deeply engraven in the
Minds of all Children, who forget never so little their Duty toward their
Parents.

Add to these Threats the rigorous Law God had established in the old Testament
against wicked Children. The Severity of the Old Testament.
I shall cite it all entire, that you may read it attentively.

If it happen, says the Law, that a Father has a rebellious and disobedient
Child, who will not submit himself to the Commands of his Father and Mother,
and they have chastis'd him, and he would not obey, then shall his Father and
his Mother take him, and bring him where they keep Judgment, and there they
shall make their Complaints in this manner: This our Son is stubborn and
disobedient, and will not obey our Admonition, and seeks nothing but Debauches
Lapidibus obruet eum omnis populus civitatis and morietur, ut auferatis maium
de medio vestri, universus Israel audiens pertimescat. Deuteronomy. 21.
Then, adds the Law, he shall be stoned of the People of the City to Death; so
you shall take away the Evil from you, that all may hear it, and fear.

This is the severe Law God had Established against rebellious Children. And
although it was not made in the Evangelical Law, yet they ought no less to fear
his Choler and Vengeance, whereof but too many Effects daily appear, by the
visible Punishment he sends sooner or later to Children who fail in so holy and
inviolable a Duty. This Sin is one of those which God ordinarily punishes in
this Life; and there are scarce any wicked Children to whom some Punishment of
God does not befall in this Life, which is often the beginning of an Eternal
Chastisement.

But let us leave these Motives of terror and fear, to stubborn and obstinate
Spirits, who are not moved to their Duty by Reason and Love; as for you,
Theotime, who have a Design to serve God with all your Heart, these Menaces are
not necessary; and to persuade you to render to your Parents all the Respect
you owe them, it suffices to tell you, that that is reasonable which God
desires. These are the two Motives by which the Apostle S. Paul convinced
Children of this great Obligation. Filii, obedite parentibus vestris in Domino,
hoc enim justum est. Ephesians. 3.
Children, said he, obey your Parents, because it is just; Filii, obedite
parentibus, per omnia, hoc enim placitum est Domino. Coloss. 3.
Children, obey your Parents in all things, because it pleases God. Render
then to your Parents, Theotime, the Honor you owe them, considering 1. That it
is just and reasonable; 2. That God will have it so: God, I say, whose Will
ought to be the Rule of our Actions, and whose good Pleasure is the most
powerful Motive to a generous Soul.

Now the Honor you ought to give to your Parents comprehends Four principal
things, which you owe them, viz. Children owe Four things to their Parents.
Respect, Love, Obedience, and Assistance.

First, Bear them a great Respect, 1. Respect.
considering them as those from whom next to God, you have received your Being.
Have a great care of ever despising them for any Reason whatsoever, neither
interiorly, by any thought of Contempt, nor exteriorly, by any Words or
disesteeming Actions. Receive with respect their Instructions, Admonitions, and
Reprehensions. Audi, fili, disciplinam patris tui, and ne dimittas legem matris
tuae. Prove. 1. Stultus irridet disciplinam patris sui, qui autem custodit
increpationes, astutior fiet. Prove. 15.
Hearken, my Son, says the Wiseman, to the Instructions of your Father, and
depart not from the Law of your Mother: For, as he says afterward, it is the
part of a Fool to mock at the Correction of his Father; he who makes his
advantage of it will become more wise.

Secondly, 2. Love.
You ought to love them with a singular Love. Honora patrem tuum and gemitus
matris tuae ne obliviscaris: memento quoniam nisi per illos natus non fuisses,
and retribue illis quomodo and illi tibi. Eccl. 7.
Remember, says the Wiseman, that you received from them your Birth, and render
your Thanks for it. Now you cannot perform this any other way, but by loving
them. Yet take notice, that this Love must not only be a natural and sensible
Love; it must also be a rational Love, and according to God. To love them
according to God, you must love them because God commands it, and as he
commands it, that is, in such a manner that you love principally their
Spiritual Good and Salvation, and endeavor to procure it by your Prayers, and
all other Means which lies in your power.

Thirdly, 3. Obedience.
Obey their Commands, and be ready to perform their Will; but obey as S. Paul
prescribes, In Domino, In God, that is, because God will have it, casting your
Eye chiefly upon God, who commands you by them; for it is God who commands you
to obey them, and when you obey them, you obey God; as on the contrary, not
o-obeying them, you disobey God, except they command you something against the
Honor of God or your Good; for in these two Cases you owe them not your
Obedience. Nevertheless, you must be very discreet in this Occasion, and take
Advice of able Persons, that you may not be deceived.

Fourthly, Fili suscipe senectam patris tui, and non contristes eum in vita
illius: etsi defecerit sensus, veniam da and ne spernas eum in virtute tua.
Eccl. 3.
You must assist them in their Necessities, as in their Distempers, in their
Poverty, in their old Age, and generally in all their Temporal and Spiritual
Necessities. To leave them in these Occasions, is a very great Crime, which
cries to God for Vengeance.

I fine, Theotime, to keep you laways within the Bounds of your Duty toward
your Parents, set often before your Eyes, two very contrary Examples. Two
contrary Examples.
Look upon the misfortunate Absolon, who having violated in all manner of ways
the Duty of a Child toward his Father, found at the End the just Chastisement
of his Crime, in the dreadful and miserable Death which we have recounted
above. Part 1. Chapter 6.
And on the other side, consider often the admirable Example not of a Man, but
of the Son of God himself, who being Incarnate, and made Man for our Salvation,
would be subject and obedient to his most holy Mother and St. Joseph, Erat
subditus illis. Luc. 2.
until the Age of Thirty Years. He who was the Sovereign Master of all things,
would be subject, to teach by his Example all Children the Honor they ought to
render to their Parents.

CHAP. V.
Of other Persons whom young Men ought to honor.
NExt to your Parents there are other Persons you ought particularly to honor.

1. You must honor those who represent them, as Tutors, and those who have a
Charge of your Person.

2. Your Masters, whether Particular or Public, from whom you receive
Instruction for Virtue and Learning. You ought to honor them by so much more,
as they represent and supply the Place of Fathers; and that the Goods you
receive from them, which are the Goods of the Mind, that is Virtue and Science,
surpass all worldly Riches. And as you ow to your Parents Respect, Love,
Obedience, and Assistance; you ow also to your Masters Respect, Love,
Obedience, and Acknowledgment.

3. Obedite Praepositis vestris, and subjacete eis. Ipsi enim pervigilant quasi
rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri. Heb. 13.
You ought to honor very particularly your Spiritual Fathers, as your Pastors,
and all those who Instruct you in the Way of Salvation, and chiefly your
Ghostly Father; you ought to respect him much, regarding him as an Officer of
God, love him as the Minister of your Salvation, obey him and follow his
Councils, in which young People are very much defective.

4. Honora Deum ex tota anima tua and honorifica sacerdotes. Eccl. 7. Coram
cano capite assurge, and honora personam senis. Lev. 19. Adolescentes subditi
estote senioribus. 1 Pet. 3. Time Dominum, fili mi, and Regem. Prove. 24. Deum
timete, Regem honorificate. 1 Pet. 2. Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus
subdita sit, non est enim potestas nisi a Deo. Romans 13.
Honor all the Persons that are Venerable, either for Dignity, as Priests, whom
the Scripture commands you to honor; Or for their Age, as old Men, to whom
young People should show much Respect; Or for their Virtue: for if you honor
God, you will also honor them who serve him: And finally, Men Constituted in
Public Authority, as the King, and Magistrates, whom God commands you to
honor, as representing his Place, and whom he has Established for his
Ministers in the Temporal Government of Men, and to whom every one ows Respect,
Love, Obedience, and Fidelity.

CHAP. VI.
Of Tractableness.
THIS is one of the first, Tractableness necessary.
and chiefest Virtue of Youth, which being blind, subject to many Faults, and
not able to conduct it self, has an absolute necessity of being guided by
others more knowing, and submitting it self to their Conduct; and this
Submission is called Tractableness.

It is a Virtue which makes us love, What it is.
willingly receive, search after, and put in practice the Instructions,
Counsels, Reprehensions, and Exhortations to Good. O what an excellent Virtue,
Theotime, Its Commendations.
is this, which we may call the Ornament of Youth, the Instrument of good
Education, the Mother of all Virtues in young Persons, the Source of all Good,
the Cause of their Salvation. A tractable Mind is capable of all Good, as an
untractable Mind is subject to all Wickedness. We have spoken sufficiently of
this Virtue, and the opposite Vice, in Part 1. Chap. 3. Read attentively and
often what we have said, and labor to obtain this Virtue, as that on which your
Happiness depends.

CHAP. VII.
Of Obedience.
OBedience is the Daughter of Tractableness: Obedience necessary.
A tractable Mind renders it self obedient to the Will of others, who have any
Authority over it. It is a Virtue necessary for Youth, a Fundamental Virtue,
and without which one can never arrive at any solid Piety, which made the
Wiseman say, Men's justi meditabitur obedientiam. Prove. 15.28.
that The Mind of the Just will meditate Obedience, because it is a most
necessary and effectual Means to acquire Virtue, to which it aspires.

It is not only necessary for Youth, but also so convenient for that Age, that
it is always proper, and as it were natural. A disobedient Child is a Species
of a Monster: And an ancient Author numbering up the Disorders which are found
in the World, St. Cyprian.
puts in the third rank, a disobedient Child, which he says is a Disorder which
brings many others after it.

Love then, Practice.
Theotime, this Virtue, so agreeable to your Age, and besides so necessary and
so powerful to make you really virtuous all the rest your Life. Obey humbly and
willingly your Parents, your Masters, and all those who have Authority over you.

I say, obey humbly and willingly, because it is not enough to obey, but you
must obey well: A constrained Obedience, yielded unwillingly by fear or force,
is a slavish Obedience, which has no Merit, nor any shadow of Virtue.

True Obedience proceeds from the acknowledgment of ones Duty, and a desire to
please God in performing it well. The First makes it humble, the Second makes
it voluntary, prompt, and facil.

You must obey thus, if you desire your Obedience should be virtuous and
agreeable to God. And by obeying thus, you learn in good time not to do your
own proper Will, but that of others. Proper Will, which is ordinarily the cause
of the Destruction of Men, and chiefly of young Persons, is an ill Guide, which
leads them into Precipices, and makes them fall into many Misfortunes. O
Theotime, the Wiseman says, Vir obediens loquetur victorias. Prove. 21.28.
that The obedient Man will recount his Victories. If you obey well in your
tender Age, you will recount one day the Victories you have gained over your
most dangerous Enemy, with your own proper Will; you will know how much this
Virtue was useful, and praise God for it all your Life.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Chastity.
TRactableness and Obedience hinder the Disorders of the Mind, and Chastity
those of the Body.

It is a Virtue which entirely flies the Pleasures of the Flesh, What Chastity
is.
and studies to stifle the Thoughts, Desires, and Feelings of unclean Delight,
because they displease God.

It is necessary for all Men, How necessary.
but particularly for young Persons, who being more susceptible of immodest
Pleasures, have a most particular need of this Virtue, as we have shown in Part
3.

But as there is no Age for which it is more necessary than for Youth, How
convenient.
so there is none to which it is more convenient and advantageous. I would to
God, Theotime, you, and all those of your Age, could comprehend the Beauty of
this Virtue, with the Ornament and Profit it brings you.

If Chastity renders Men like Angels, It makes them like Angels.
according to the Judgment of the holy Fathers cited above in Part 2. because
it makes them imitate the Purity of the Angels in a frail Body: It is chiefly
in young Persons where this Effect is found true, because their Age being less
corrupted by Sin, their Chastity approaches nearer to the Purity of those
celestial Spirits.

If Chastity does partake something of the Glory of Martyrdom, And Martyrs.
according to the Sense of S. Jerome, Habet and pudicitia servata Martyrium
saum. S. Hier. Epist. ad Dem^^r.
by reason of the rude Combats it sustains, which sometimes are no less than
those of Torments. It is chiefly to the Chastity of young Persons to whom that
Glory does appertain, Quem tormenta non vicerant volaptas superabat. Idem in
vita B. Hilarion. Adolescentia multa corporis bella sustinet. Idem. Acrior
pugna juvenum. S. Aug. Ser. 23. de verbis Domini. Martyrium sine sanguine
triplex est. Parcitas in ubertate quam habuit David and Job. Largitas in
paupertate, quam exercuit Tobias and vidua. Castitas in juventute, qua usus est
Joseph in Aegypto. S. Bern. in Sententiis.
because the Combats they suffer are ordinarily more violent and more frequent
than those of others, which made S. Bernard say, that besides the Martyrdom
which is undergone by the Effusion of Blood, there are yet Three others, that
is, Frugality practiced in Plenty, whereof David and Job showed a Pattern.
Liberality in Poverty exercised by Tobias, and the Widow in the Gospel, and
Chastity in Youth preserved by Joseph in Egypt.

Lastly, Theotime, those excellent Commendations, Pudicitia flos morum, honor
corporum, decor sexuum, fundamentum sanctitatis, praesagium omnis bonae mentis.
S. Cyp. de bono pudicitiae. In malevolam animam non introibit sapientia, nec
habitabit in corpore subdito peccatis. Sap. 1.
which the Fathers give to Chastity, which they call the Flower and Ornament of
Manners, The Honor of the Body, The Groundwork of Sanctity, The Presage of all
sort of Virtues, chiefly belong to young Men: For it is true, that Chastity in
young Persons, is a great Foundation for Virtue, and all manner of Good may be
expected from a chaste Youth: Because, as the Spirit of God cannot dwell in
impure Hearts; so it takes delight to inhabit in chaste Souls, and to heap upon
them all sorts of Favors.

Ruffin recounts to this purpose, that St. Gregory of Nazianzen being yet
young, had a Vision of two Ladies, who appeared to him endowed with excellent
Beauties; and as the chaste young Man had a trouble to behold them, they said to
him, Young Man, let not our Presence afflict you, we are two Sisters well known
to you, the one of us is called Wisdom, the other Chastity; we are come to
visit you, because you have prepared an agreeable Habitation for us in your
Soul.

Thus, Theotime, Chastity is inseparable from Wisdom, and it attracts the
Divine Grace and Benediction upon young Souls that addict themselves to it.

Labor then, Practice.
Theotime, to obtain this Virtue, which you ought to esteem the Ornament and
Happiness of your Youth, you will find the Means to acquire it, and conserve
it, in Part 3. Now as to the Practice of this Virtue, remember that it may be
violated many ways, by Thoughts, by Words, by Desires, and by dishonest
Actions; And to be Chaste, you must be so not only in Actions, but in Thoughts,
Desires, and Words, and in all that may never so little wound Purity.

CHAP. IX.
Of Shamefacedness.
AS Trees in producing their Fruits, produce at the same time Leaves to
preserve them against the Injuries of the Air; So Charity placing Chastity in a
Soul, brings forth also Shamefacedness there, to preserve it from any thing
that may hurt it. It is impossible to have Chastity without Shamefacedness, and
Shamefacedness serves very much, and is most necessary for the conservation of
Chastity.

Chastity abhors the Thoughts, Desires, Wherein it consists. Est verecundia
pudicitiae comes, cujus societate castitas ipsa tutior est, bonus enim regendae
castitatis pudor est comes; qui si se protendat ad ea quae prima pericula sunt,
pudicitiam temerari non sinit. S. Amb. 1. Offic. 18.
and Feelings of unclean Pleasures, as we have said: And Shamefacedness removes
all those exterior things which may be either the Causes or Effects of these
Thoughts, Desires, or Feelings, as immodest Words, unchaste Looks, lascivious
Gestures, Kisses, and all other things which may either near or afar off wound
Chastity. Shamefacedness then is a Virtue which sets all these things at a
distance from it, and which cannot permit them neither in it self nor others,
without blushing at them. Now this Virtue agrees particularly with Youth.

For as St. Bernard observes very well, although we ought to labor in every Age
for this Virtue, which is the Ornament of all Ages, yet it appears with much
more splendour in Youth. Quid amabilius verecundo adolescente? quam pulchra
haec, and quam splendida gemma morum in vita and vultu adolescentis? Quam vera
and minime dubia bonae nuntia spei, bonae indolis index? nullum aeque
manifestum indicium columbinae simplicitatis, and ideo etiam testis
innocentiae. Lampas est pudicae mentis jugiter lucens, ut nihil in ea turpe vel
indecorum residere attentet, quod illis non illico prodat. Ita expunctrix
malorum and propugnatrix puritatis intactae, specialis gloria conscientiae, and
famae custos, vitae Deus, virtutis Seeds, virtutum primitiae, naturae laus, and
insigne totius honesti. S. Bern. Sermon. ult. in Can.
What is there more amiable, says he, than a modest young Man? How beautiful
and rich an Ornament is Shamefacedness in the Life and Visage of a young Man?
What a certain Presage of a religious Hope is it in a Child, and an assured
Sign of a Mind born for some great Good? There is no more apparent Mark of a
Dovelike Simplicity, nor a more evident Testimony of a pure Innocence. It is
the Lamp of a chaste Soul, which shines continually to hinder that nothing foul
or indecent enter into the Mind, which it does not immediately discover. And
thus it banishes Sin from the Soul, and conserves Purity. It is the Glory of
the Conscience, the Guardian of Honor, the Ornament of Life, the Seat of Wisdom
and Piety, the First Fruits of Virtue, the Honor of Nature, and the Mark of all
Purity. Weigh well all these Commendations one after another, and judge of the
Account you ought to make of this excellent Virtue.

The Vice opposite to this Virtue is Impudence and Shamelessness, which blushes
at nothing. It is a Vice as much odious in young Men, as Shamefacedness is
amiable. It is the Sign and Effect of an ungracious Nature, and it is no less
the Origin of many Sins, than Shamefacedness is the Mother of Many Virtues.

Endeavor to acquire this excellent Virtue, Practice.
Theotime, and content not your self to fly from the Sins of Impurity, but fly
also all things that may approach it, and may in the least wound Chastity, as
all truly chaste Souls do. It is reported of S. Bernard, that he had so great a
Shamefacedness in his younger Years, Example.
that when any one chanced to speak an unseemly Word in his Presence, he
blushed as if one had given him a Box on the Ear: You will find the Practice of
this Virtue before in Part 3.

CHAP. X.
Of Modesty.
NEXT to Shamefacedness, Modesty is also absolutely necessary for young People.
Wherein it consists.
Shamefacedness has for its Object the removing all exterior things contrary
to Chastity, which it does not permit either in it self or others. And Modesty
regulates and directs all things that may be disordered or indecent in the
Exterior of the Person, as in the Sight, in the Walk, in the Actions, in the
Habits, in the Words, and in all those things whose Irregularity is a Sign and
an Effect of an unchaste Mind.

This Virtue is singularly desirable in a young Man, The Mark of a wise and
virtuous Mind.
because it is a certain Mark of an interior Virtue, and of a wise Mind, and
proper for Piety. The Mind is known by its Actions, and the Wisdom of a Man by
his Exterior. Sapientia hominis lucet in vultu ejus. Eccl. 18. Ex usu
cognoscitur vir, and ab occursu faciei cognoscitur sensatus, amictus corporis,
and risus dentium, and ingressus hominis enuntiant de illo. Eccl. 19. Habitus
mentis in corporis statu cernitur, vox quaedam est animi corporis motus. S.
Ambr. lib. 1. Offic. 18.
Wisdom, says the Sacred Scripture, shines in the Countenance of the Wise. Man
is known by the Eyes, and a well regulated Mind by its Visage. The Habit of the
Body, Laughter, and Walking, discover what a Man is within. Which made S.
Ambrose say, That the Disposition of the Mind is known by the Posture of the
Body, and that the exterior Motion is a Species of Voice by which the Mind
discovers it self.

So that, Theotime, if you have a wise and well regulated Mind, it may appear
by the Modesty of your exterior Behavior; but if you be Immodest and Disordered
without, it is a certain Sign that you have a light, ill governed, humorous and
indiscreet Mind, which is not susceptible of any serious Thought, and which
permits it self to be carried away with vain and impertinent Imaginations. And
this Disorder in the Exterior, will be a very ill Sign for the present, and a
bad Presage of what will one day follow.

St. Gregory of Nazianzen, A remarkable Example.
in his first Oration against Julian the Apostat, recounts, that having Studied
with him in his Youth, he had from that time judged of him, that he would be
very wicked, seeing his Immodesty, and the Disorder of his Actions. One might
see, says he, in him many things which promised nothing of good, a Head always
moving, a wandering and furious Eye, his Feet never standing still, a
contemptible Visage, an insolent Laughter, a stammering Speech; you might hear
him making impertinent Demands, and more foolish Answers: In fine, he says, I
judged from that time what he would be afterward. And after I had attentively
considered him, O quale malum Romana terra nutrit.
I said to many of my Friends, O what a Monster does Rome breed up in this Man.

To practice well this Virtue, Practice.
so necessary for your Age, see what you must do.

1. Modesty in exterior Actions.
Endeavor as much as you can, that nothing of Immodesty appear in your Looks,
your Walk, your Gesture, have a serious, sweet, and affable Countenance, a
reserved Sight, a modest Behavior, which may relish of a wise and well-bred
Mind. Study to be such in the Company of whatsoever Persons you be; with
Superiors, by reason of the Respect you ow them; with your Equals, or
Inferiors, because you must give them Edification and good Example; even when
you are alone, since you are always in the Presence of God. A wise and well
regulated Mind is always modest wheresoever it is; because it is not modest to
please Men, which would be a pure Vanity, but to please God who sees it.
Modestia vestra nota sit omnibus hominibus. Dominibus. Dominus enim prope est.
Phil. 4.
Let your Modesty be known to all Men, says the Apostle, being God is near.

2. Modesty in the Church.
You ought chiefly to show a particular Modesty in the Church. It is the House
of God, and a Place appointed for Prayer, and to adore him: You must enter
there with a great Respect. Custodi pedem tuum ingrediens domum Dei. Eccl. 4.
Domum tuam decet sanctitudo. Psalm. 91. Visitabo omnem qui arroganter ingreditur
super limen, qui complet domum Domini iniquitate. Sophon. 1.
Have a care of your self, says the Wiseman, when you enter into the House of
God. You must remain there with a great Modesty, and in an humble and devout
Posture, agreeable to the Sanctity of the Place. To enter there as into a
profane House, without Respect or Restraint, to continue there without Modesty,
Gazing about, Speaking without necessity, Laughing with others; to be there in
an undecent Posture, Leaning unhandsomly upon the Seats, Kneeling upon one
Knee, and other like Irreverences, are Sins which offend God more than the
generality of People imagine. Judge by this, Theotime, what we must say of those
who commit Insolences, entertain immodest Thoughts, and use unchaste Looks in
the Church, not being ashamed to carry their Crimes into the midst of the
Sanctuary, and offend God in the Place Consecrated to his Adoration. It is a
Crime which God detests much by the Mouth of his Prophets. And Ausus sum etiam
in celebritate solemnitatum tuarum, inter parietes Ecclesiae tuae concupiscere,
and agere negotium procurandi fructus mortis, unde me verberasti gravibus
poenis, sed nihil ad culpam meam. Aug. 3. Confess.
S. Augustine in his Confessions, amongst the Sins of his Life, expresses a
Sorrow for this as for one of his greatest, for which he declares he was
punished by God, though not according to his merit.

3. Modesty in Habit.
Modesty consists also in the Garments, wherein you must avoid two things;
Superfluous Ornaments, which discover a vain and light Mind; but much more
undecent Clothes, and such as serve to attract Impurity. Be Clothed then
modestly, according to your Condition, without seeking other Ornaments than
such as Seemliness permits. In vestitu ne glorieris unquam, quoniam mirabilia
opera altissimi solius. Eccl. 11.
Glory not in your Habit, says the Wiseman, it is a vain and impertinent Glory.
Nec affectatae sordes nec exquisitae munditiae Christiano convenient. S. Hier.
Epist. ad Eustoch.
S. Jerome says excellently well, That a Christian ought not to seek to be
affectedly, or too curiously Clothed. But above all, avoid the Ornaments which
may prejudice Shamefacedness, whether in you, or in those who see you. The same
S. Jerome calls young People, who Curl and Trick up themselves wantonly, Venena
pudicitiae, The Poison of Modesty. O, Theotime, if you have a truly chaste
Heart, you will fly all these Ornaments which can serve you to no good End, and
which may much prejudice either you, or those who see you. Pudicitia semper
ornatur solo pudore, been sibi conscia de pulchritudine, si improbis displicet.
Nihil ornamenti quaerit: Decus suum ipsa est. S. Cypr. lib. 1. de bono
pudicitiae.
Chastity (says St. Cyprian) has no other Ornaments than Shamefacedness; and
she accounts her self to be sufficiently beautiful, when she displeases the
Wicked; she seeks not to be Adorned, being her own Ornament her self.

To acquire this Virtue of Modesty, be careful to practice these Means. 1.
Means to acquire Modesty.
Demand it often of God. 2. Be willing to be Admonished when you do any Action
which is not very modest, and procure a Friend who may advertise you of it. 3.
When you hear others Immodesty blamed, take notice of it to have a care of your
self. 4. Converse often with wise and modest Persons, observe their Modesty to
imitate it. 5. Fly the Company of light Minds, and of such as are irregular in
their outward Behavior.

CHAP. XI.
Of Modesty in Words.
MOdesty consists also in Words. It is a great Virtue, and principally in young
Men, to know how to speak discreetly; for, Ante sermonem ne lauds virum haec
est enim tentatio hominis. Eccl. 27. In lingua Sapientia dignoscitur. Eccl. 4.
as the Wiseman says, The Wisdom of a Man is known by his Speech. Now to speak
wisely Two things are required. 1. To speak nothing ill or impertinent. 2. To
speak good things at a fit time, that is, when and how one ought.

1. Never utter a wanton or indecent Word. Fornicatio and omnis immunditia, nec
nominetur in vobis, sicut decet sanctos. Ephesians. 5. Qui loquitur iniqua non
poterit latere, nec praeteriet illum corripiens judicium. Sap. 1.
The Apostle S. Paul forbids Christians so much as to name impure things, how
much more to speak of them with Pleasure, or Danger of our Neighbor. He who
speaks wicked things, says the Wiseman, cannot conceal himself, neither shall
the Judgment of Reproach let him escape. Fly as the Plague, all Coversation of
dishonest things, which are really the plague and corruption of good Mannners,
and which cause a vast number of Sins in those who discourse of them, and in
those who hearken to them. Fly also all dubious Expressions, or such as incline
to a double Sense, which may give others occasion of impure Thoughts. And
lastly, Avoid all Speeches or immodest Injuries, which Men have so frequently
in their Mouths, and are not sufferable amongst the Debauched, much less in you.

2. In good or indifferent Discourses be not too ready or light in speaking,
but hearken before you speak. There are some Humors which are always the first
in Talking, and the last in holding their Tongues; who meddle with every thing,
interrupt others, and speak of things they understand not. It is the Sign of an
illbred, light, indiscreet, and sometimes of a proud Mind. The Wiseman says
excellently well, Vidisti hominem velocem ad loquendum, stultitia magis
sperandum est quam illius correctio. Prove. 20.
When you see a Man free in Talking; you must expect from him more folly than
Wisdom.

To regulate well your Speech, see the Maxims you must observe.

1. Speak little, and hear much. Rules for Speaking.
It is the chief Mark of a wise Mind, to hearken to others, and speak little.
The Scripture says, that Qui moderatur sermones suos doctus est and prudens.
Stultus quoque si tacuerit, sapiens reputabitur, and si compresserit labia sua,
intelligens. Prove. 17. Utinam taceretis ut putaremini sapientes. Job 1.13. Sit
autem omnis homo velox ad audiendum, tardus vero ad loquendum. Jac. 1.
He who governs well his Speech, is wise, and advised; And that Silence is so
great a Sign of Wisdom, that When it is found in a Man of small Understanding,
it makes him esteemed Discreet. I speak not of a dull and melancholy Silence,
which springs from Stupidity and Heaviness; but of a wise Silence, which is
observed by Modesty, that it may give ear to others, and speak in a proper time.

In Conversation, when another speaks, How we must behave our selves in
Conversation.
have a care of Three things. 1. Not to speak before you have heard what he
says. 2. Not to interrupt him who speaks. 3. Not to be too hasty to Talk, when
something you understand not is well spoken of.

There are three Precepts of the Wiseman. Priusquam inaudias, ne respondeas
verbum; and in medio sermonum ne adjicias loqui. Eccl. 11.
Before you have heard, answer nothing. Speak not in the midst of a Discourse.
Learn before you speak. For, as it is said in the Proverbs, Antequam loquaris,
disce. Eccles. 18. Qui prius respondeat quam audiat, stultum se esse demonstrat
and confusione dignum. Prove. 18.24.
He who speaks before he understands, shows that he is unwise, and worthy of
Confusion.

When you shall be in some Honorable Company, observe what the Wiseman appoints
you to do; Adolescens, loquere in tua causa vix cum necesse fuerit. Si bis
interrogatus fueris habeat caput responsum tuum. In multis esto quasi inscius,
audire tacens simul and quaerens. Eccl. 12.
Speak little, and only when you are asked, and let your Answer be short. Seem
not to be too knowing, but in the most part of Conversations comport your self
as if you understood nothing of the thing which is treated. And this not by
Dissimulation but by Modesty; hearken to others being silent, and ask to learn
of them.

CHAP. XII.
Of other Vices of the Tongue, and particularly of Swearing.
BEsides wicked and impertinent Discourses, and a Vanity in Talking, there are
also many other Vices of the Tongue, which Christian Modesty ought carefully to
retrench; the first whereof is Swearing.

To be addicted to Swearing is a very vicious Quality, especially in young
People. I speak not of Oaths made by Religion, to assure a Truth when
sufficient Necessity requires, a Necessity which seldom happens to young
Persons; but of those Oaths so common amongst Christians, where the adorable
Name of God is employed and taken in vain, in the least Anger, or first
Impatience, and sometimes by a settled Judgment from a detestable Custom of
Swearing by the Name of God in all manner of Occasions.

This Sin is one of the wickedest Habits a Man can contract; For,

1. It is a Contempt of God, Sanctum and terribile nomen ejus. Psalm. 110. Non
assumes nomen Domini Dei tui in vanum. Exodus 20,
to bear so little Respect for his holy Name, which all Creatures adore, and
whose Sanctity makes all the Angels to tremble; and this notwithstanding the
express Prohibition God has made of it, Thou shall not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in vain.

2. It is a notable Outrage offered to his Son Jesus Christ, to treat with so
much Irreverence the precious Death he suffered for our Redemption, and the
adorable Blood he shed for our Salvation. An Outrage which is no less than that
he received by the Cruelty of his Executioners. He was Scourged (says St.
Augustine) with the Rods of the Jews, and he is now Whipped by the blasphemous
Tongues of wicked Christians. And they sin no less who blaspheme Jesus Christ
reigning in Heaven, than those who blasphemed him when he walked upon Earth.

3. The Cause of many Sins.
This Vice causes many other Sins to be committed: For besides that there is no
Sin multiplied like Swearing, it draws the Curse of God upon those who are
accustomed to it, by which they are abandoned to their Passions, Vir multum
jurans replebitur iniquitate. Eccl. 25.
and to the Occasions of Sin; For this reason the Wiseman said, that He who
Swear often, shall be filled with Iniquity.

4. It is hard to be corrected.
This Vice is very hard to be corrected, though never so little rooted; it
increases still with Age, and becomes at length incapable of remedy, as those
who are subject to it do daily misfortunately experience.

Lastly, The Sin of the Devil.
It suffices to say, that this Sin is the Sin of the Devils, who are pleased in
nothing but in abusing the holy Name of God: And it is a horrible thing, that
Christians, who ought to Praise God upon Earth as the Angels Praise him in
Heaven, should offer him here the same Injuries as the Devils vomit out against
him in Hell.

O Theotime, Blasphemers Punishment. Qui blasphemaverit nomen Domini morte
moriatur. Lev. 24.
Fly this detestable Sin, abominable before God and Men, odious in all manner
of Persons, but principally in young People. Remember that the ancient Law
condemned Blasphemers to Death, and St. Paul delivered over to the Devils two
Christians culpable of this Crime. Ut discant nou blasphemare 1 Timothy ^. S.
Greg. ^^e. 4. Di^l. cap. 18.
To teach them, says he, not to blaspheme. And St. Gregory relates, how a Child
accustomed to Swear in his Impatiences by the Name of God, was seized by a
mortal Distemper, and assaulted by malignant Spirits, which caused him to
depart this Life in his Fathers Arms, who being too indulgent in Correcting
him, had bred up in this Child a great Sinner for Hell, as the same Saint
observes.

The Remedy of this Sin, Remedy.
when one has never so little a Habit or Inclination to it, is to fly the
Causes, as Anger, Plays of Hazard, wicked Company, and all other things, which
every one knows to be to them an occasion of Swearing. But above all, it is a
powerful, and even necessary Remedy, to impose upon ones self some rigorous
Punishment for every time he shall fall into this Sin, as some Alms, some
Prayers to be performed the same Day, some Fasting to be observed soon after,
or some other painful Action.

Fly also all sorts of Oaths or Imprecations, and certain Fashions of Speaking,
which not being Oaths, are Dispositions to Swear upon Occasions. Christian
Modesty requires, that we should not Swear at all, according to that holy
Precept of our Savior; Ego autem dico vobis non jurare omnino; sit autem sermo
vester, est, est, non, non; Quod autem his abundantius est, a malo est. Mat. 5.
I say, Swear not at all, and let your Words be yea and nay, what is said
besides this, comes from the Devil.

Of Detraction.
Detraction is another Sin of the Tongue which you ought not only to avoid, but
abhor.

To Detract, What Detraction is.
is to report of another a Sin able to defame him, which he has not committed,
or else a Sin which he has committed, but is not known or public; for as long
as the Sin of our Neighbor is secret, to reveal it to them who knew it not, is
to do him an Injury.

Detraction is sometimes committed out of Malice, It is done two ways.
as by Hatred, Revenge, Envy, or Design to hurt our Neighbor. Sometimes by
Indiscretion and Lightness of Mind, and by an Inclination one has to speak of
the Evil he has heard, or knows of another, which is too common amongst young
People.

Although the first manner of Detraction be most criminal, the second
nevertheless is not without Sin; for it always takes away the Reputation of our
Neighbor, it obliges to repair the Honor he was deprived of. And this
promptness to talk of others Defects, is the result of a Mind defective in
Charity or Prudence, and often in both: For Charity makes us conceal the Faults
of others, as we would have our own kept private, and Prudence hinders us from
speaking ill of another on purpose, or without necessity.

Avoid this Sin, Theotime, as a vile thing, It is odious to God and Man.
Abominatio hominum detractor. Prove. 24.
unworthy of a generous or truly Christian Soul, and as an odious Vice before
both God and Men. A Detractor, says the Wiseman, is the the abomination of Men.

Be not therefore light in speaking of others Defects, Practice.
but keep them secret when you know them. The Wiseman says excellently well,
Audisti verbum adversus proximum tuum? commoriatu rin te. Eccl. 19.
When you have heard any Speech against your Neighbor, let it die within you,
that is, let it go no farther. In fine, conserve the Honor of another, as you
know it is dear to him, and as you would desire he should conserve yours.

Yet it is to be observed, An important Remark.
that it is not Detraction to speak of another Sin, when it is for his Good,
or to hinder that it do not prejudice others, when one tells it to a discreet
Person, who can or ought to apply a Remedy to it. On the contrary, it is always
Charity to do so, and there is frequently an Obligation of Conscience, and a
very strict Obligation, in which one is sometimes defective, out of
Fearfulness, or some vain Pretense he frames to himself, which springs only
from the want of Charity, and affection to the Salvation of our Neighbor, and
which are the Causes that one is made culpable in the sight of God of the Sins
of others. See more of this Subject in Chap. 18. of this Part.

Of Injuries and Reproaches.
Fly also Quarrels. which are the Causes of many Evils, as we shall show
hereafter; And in Debates which arise, avoid to speak injurious Words, utter
not Reproaches or Threats, these are vile things, and unworthy of a virtuous
Soul. Homo assuetus verbis improperit in omnibus diebus non erudietur. Eccl. 23.
Call to mind, that to return Injury for Injury, Reproach for Reproach, is to
wash a Spot with Ink, and make it yet more black; for it is to blot out an
Injury one has done you, which is often only in the Imagination, with a Sin
which is frequently mortal. It is to defend your Honor to the prejudice of your
Salvation; if that can be accounted to defend your Honor, which defends it by
the ruin of another Credit. The Spirit of Christianity is not only ignorant of
offering an Injury, but also of returning to those who first offer it you,
according to those excellent Maxims of S. Paul, Benedicite persequentibus vos,
benedicite and nolite maledicere, nulli malum pro malo reddentes, non
vosmetipsos defendentes, fed date locum irae. Noli vinci a malo, sed vince in
bono malum. Romans 12.
Bless those who persecute you, bless them and curse them not. Render not Ill
for Ill, nor revenge your self, nor give way to your Anger. Permit not your
self to be overcome by Ill, but overcome Ill by Good; that is, the Ill which
another does you, by the Good you render him.

This you will say is very hard. It Is true, Theotime, therefore you must learn to
practice it betimes. These Maxims are difficult to those who are not Instructed
in their Youth, and have not learned to live but according to the Inclinations
of Nature, yet they are facil to those who apply themselves in good time to do
the Will of God, and live according to the Spirit of his Son Jesus Christ, by
imitating his Example, and practicing his Maxims as a Christian ought to do,
otherwise he is a Christian in name, and not in reality.

Of Sowers of Discord.
Have a care also of another Sin of the Tongue, Non appelleris susurro, etc.
Susurratori odium and inimicitia. and contumelia. Eccl. 5.
which is but too common amongst young Persons, yet very prejudicial: It is to
be the Author of Discords, by Reports which are often made by Indiscretion, not
regarding the Evil which may from thence arise, and sometimes out of a bad
Design, to stir up Divisions and Discords.

This Sin is great, and more heinous than is imagined; for it is the cause of
many other Sins, and of all the Ills which accompany Quarrels. The Wiseman
says, that God detests it: Sex sunt quae odit Dominus and septimum detestatur
anima ejus. Oculos sublimes, etc. Et eum qui seminat inter fratres discordias.
Prove. 6.
There are six things, says he, which God hates, and there is a seventh which
he detests; that is, he who sows Discords amongst his Brethren.

And Ecclesiasticus says, Susurro and bilinguis maledictus, multos enim
turbavit pacem habentes. Eccl. 28. v. 13.

Vir peccator turbavit amicos, and in medio pacem habentium immittet
inimicitiam. Ibid. v. 9.


that The Sower of Discord is cursed, because he troubles those who are in
Peace; and it is only the part of a wicked Man to disturb his Friends, and
raise Division in Minds that are well united in Friendship. Yes, Theotime, for
as Peace and Union proceeds from God, Discords and Dissentions spring from the
Devil. Audiant jurgiorum seminatores quod scriptum est. Beati pacifici quia
filii Dei vocabuntur. Si filii Dei qui pacem faciunt, proculdubio filii Satanae
qui confundunt. S. Greg. 3. part. Pastor.
For this reason the Son of God in the Gospel says, That Peacemakers, that is,
those who apply themselve to procure or preserve Peace amongst Men, are the
Children of God. But if those who cause Peace are the Children of God, Then,
adds S. Gregory excellently well, those who disturb it are the Children of
Satan.

Fly this Sin, Theotime, because it is most heinous and criminal, detested both
by God and Men. Keep a guard upon your Words, to the end you may never say any
thing which may cause any Discord amongst others; but chiefly, be not the
Author of it by Malice, or deliberate Purpose. Conceive a horror against this
Vice, which can bring you nothing but inevitable Misfortune.

Of Lying.
There remains Lying, which is none of the meanest amongst the Sins of the
Tongue; and it is by so much more important that you should be solidly
Instructed therein, as it is most ordinary amongst young Persons, and the
Custom of this Sin infinitely pernicious.

A Ly is always a Sin, The Habit of Lying.
because it is always against Truth; And although it be not a mortal Sin, when it
is not in a Business of Consequence, nevertheless the Habit of Lying, although
lightly, is not a light thing, nor of small importance.

A Habit or Custom of Lying opens a Gate to an infinite number of other Vices.
The Vices it produces.
A Lying Spirit will become a Cheat and Deceiver in his Management, Double in
his Words, Unfaithful in his Promises, a Hypocrit in his Manners, a Dissembler
in his Actions, a Flatterer, and Faint-hearted when he should speak Truth, Bold
and Shameless to affirm Lies, Impudent to maintain them as certain Truths, a
Swearer, Detractor, Mistrustful in respect of every one; for as he is
accustomed to Ly, he believes that others always speak false. A Mind addicted
to Lying, will more easily tell them in great things, and be involved in
heinous Sins.

So that, Theotime, Very prejudicial to young People. Noli velle mentiri omne
mendacium, assiduitas enim illius non est bona. Eccl. 7.
there are few Vices more pernicious, and principally to Youth, than this
liberty of Lying. For this reason the Wiseman advertises you, Not to take
Pleasure in any manner of Untruth; for a Custom or Habit of Lying is not good;
that is, according to the Expression of the Scripture, it is very bad.

In a word, it is so wicked a Quality of the Mind to be a Liar, that the
Scripture speaks strange things of it. Abominatio est domino labia mendacia.
It says that God has a horror for it; That Lying Lips are an abomination to
him; as on the contrary, those who love Sincerity in their Words gain his
Friendship. Perdes omnes qui loquuntur mendacium. Psalm. 6.
He will destroy all those who are addicted to Lying. It says, Opprobrium
nequam in homine mendacium. Potior fur quam assiduitas viri mendacis. Eccl. 20.
That amongst Men a Ly is an Infamy, it will always be found in disorderly and
ill-instructed Minds. A Thief is more execusable than a Liar, and both of them
will inherit Perdition.

Lastly, It makes men like Devils.
This Vice makes one like the Devil, who is pleased in nothing more than Lies.
Vos ex patre diabolo essis, etc. Joh. 8.
It was he who first invented it, and who is the Father thereof, as the Son of
God has named him with his own Mouth.

And S. Augustine after him says, Quomodo Deus pater genuit filium veritatem,
sic diabolus lapsus genuit quasi filium mendacium. S. Aug. Tract. 42. in Joh.
Cavete fratres mendacium, quia omnes qui amant mendacium filii sunt, diaboli
qui non solum mendax est sed etiam pater and inventor ipsius mendacii. S. Ambr.
in Sermon. de Dominica Passione.
That as Truth comes from God, Lying takes its origin from the Devil. And S.
Ambrose adds, That those who love Lying are the Children of that detestable
Fiend, for the Children of God love Truth.

Fly entirely, Theotime, this pernicious Vice in all Occurrences, but chiefly
in two.

First, When you speak of a thing of Importance, that is, when it prejudices
your Neighbor in his Goods, Honor, or Health, wherein you must have a great
care, and yet more if it be in your self.

Secondly, When you speak to a Person who has Authority over you; for then a
Ly is a very culpable Imposture, as well by reason of the Respect you violate,
as because it frequently happens, that those Falsehoods notably prejudice your
proper Good, or that of your Neighbor.

In fine, in whatsoever matter it be, and to whatsoever Person you speak,
accustom your self never to tell a Lie on deliberate Purpose, or with
Reflection. Love Truth and Sincerity in all your Words. O what an excellent
Quality is it in a young Man, when he cannot tell an Untruth without Blushing.
The Just, says the Wiseman, Verbum mendax justus detestabitur. Prove. 13.
will detest a Lie. Demand of God that he give you a hatred of this Sin, and
frequently offer to him that Prayer of Solomon, Vanitatem, Verse. 50.
and verba mendacia long fac a me; Remove from my Mind Vanity and lying Words.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Sobriety.
EXhort young Men to be Sober, Juvenes hortare ut Sobrii sint. Tit. 2.
says the Apostle S. Paul to Titus his Disciple. Sobriety, Theotime, in the
Judgment of this great Apostle, is necessary for Youth: And although by this Name
of Sobriety he comprehends generally the moderation of the Heat and Impetuosity
of that Age, which is naturally carried to an Excess in all things;
nevertheless he intends also particularly the moderation of the Excess in
Eating and Drinking, which are very ordinary in Youth, and extreme prejudicial
to them.

As Sobriety consists in the moderation of Eating and Drinking, Sobriety
combats two Vices.
it has two Vices to combat with, Drunkenness and Gluttony, both highly
prejudicial to Youth: For these two Vices fight against four things at the fame
time, These two Vices are contrary to four things.
Civility, Health, Vigor of Mind, and Salvation.

There is nothing so unseemly in young Men, 1. To Civility.
as to be subject to Wine or Gluttony. Discreet Persons have an aversion for
this Vice; and there is none but conceives a bad Judgment of a young Man
addicted to the immoderate Pleasures of Eating and Drinking.

We see by Experience, 2. To Health.
how Wine and delicious Meats hurt the Health principally of young People; In
multis escis erit infirmitas, and aviditas appropinquabit usque ad choleram:
propter crapulam multi obierunt, qui autem abstinens est adjiciet vitam. Eccl.
27.
how the Excess of the one and the other causes Distempers and Infirmities,
which often remain with them all their Life, and how they bring them to their
Grave before their time; whereas on the contrary, Sobriety conserves Health and
Life, as it is observed in many places of Sacred Scripture.

As for the Mind, 3. To the Mind.
who is there that does not know how these two Vices are contrary to it? We
daily see, that Minds addicted to Gluttony become stupid, gross, and carnal,
Venture pinguis non gignit meatem tenuem. Hier. Ep. ad Nepot.
according to the Proverb cited by S. Jerome, A fat Belly never produces a witty
Mind; and those who love Wine become dull, brutish, and incapable of any Good.

But as for thy Salvation, Theotime, 4. To Salvation. It produces many Sins.
it is incredible how these two Vices are hurtful: For besides the Sins of
Intemperance which are committed in the Excess of Eating and Drinking, Vinum
multum potatu, irritationem and iram and ruinas multas facit. Eccl. 31.
which are in great number, and frequently very enormous, these two Vices cause
a vast multitude of others, as Anger, Quarrels, Swearing, Blasphemies, immodest
Discourses; and amongst others, the Sins of Impurity, which Intemperance
enkindles in the Heart, and particularly of young Men, furnishing continually
new Fuel to that Fire of Immodesty, Difficile inter epulas servatur pudicitia,
vinum and adolescentia duplex incendium voluptatis. S. Hier. l. 2. Ep. 6. idem
ad Eustoch.
which Concupiscence and the Heat of that Age incessantly enflames. It is very
difficult (says S. Jerome) to conserve Chastity in the midst of Banquets, and
Wine joined with Youth, makes a double enflaming of Pleasure. See the rest
which we have cited above out of this Father in Part 3. Chap. 8. Artic. 5.

To fly entirely these two Vices, Practice.
and to acquire and preserve Sobriety, you are to observe three things in
Eating and Drinking, The Quantity, the Quality, and Modesty.

As for the Quantity, Quantity.
have a care never to commit any Excess either in the one or the other, keeping
your self always as much as you can within the Bounds of Sufficiency and
Decency. It is the property of carnal Minds, and Ill-instructed, to eat without
Measure and Rule, and to fill themselves with Meat without any Restraint.

In the Quality there are three things to be avoided, Quality.
to seek after delicate Meats, and such as provoke Impurity, as all hot Meats
and Wine, Quicquid facit seminarium voluptatum venenum puta. S. Hier. Ep. ad
Furian. Nolite inebriari vino in quo est luxuria. Ephesians. 5.
which St. Jerome says is a Poison for Youth, and the first Means the Devil
makes use of to move them to Uncleanness.

As for Modesty in Meals, Modesty.
to eat with greediness, to devour all the Table with ones Eyes, to seek to
please ones Palate, to speak of nothing but sweet Bits, to be the first in
Eating, and the last in Leaving-off, are things absolutely opposite to Decency
and Temperance: The Wiseman gives you Precepts quite contrary.

When you are set down at a Table, Super Mensam magnam sedisti, non aperias
super illam faucem tuam prior. Ne dicas ss multa sunt quae super illam sunt,
etc. Ne extendas manum tuam prior, and invidia contaminatus erubescas. Utere
quasi homo frugi his quae tibi apponuntur. Ut non cum manducas multum odio
habearis. Cessa prior causa disciplinae, and noli nimius esse, ne offendas.
Eccl. 51.
says he, behave not your self greedily, as if you would devour all. Ask not if
there be much. Begin not first to eat. Inconvenience not others by Eating. Make
use of the things that are brought up, rationally, and like a sober Man. Make
an end first out of Modesty, and commit no Excess, lest you displease those
with whom you are. You must make great account of these Precepts of Temperance,
since they come from the Holy Ghost himself.

In fine, Noli esse in conviviis peccatorum nec in comessationibus eorum qui
carnes conferunt ad vescendum. Quia vacantes potibus and dantes symbola
consumentur. Prove. 23. Qui diligit epulas in egestate erit, qui amat vinum and
pinguia non ditabitur. Prove. 21.17.
Theotime, be careful not to frequent the Company of those who are addicted to
Wine and Gluttony, according to the Counsel of the same Wiseman. Fly the Places
designed for that use, as Taverns: And chiefly, if you know you have an
Inclination to the immoderate Pleasures of Eating and Drinking, use all your
Endeavors to withdraw your self and amend, calling to mind that excellent
Saying of the Wiseman, He who is addicted to curious Meats, will become poor;
and he who loves Wine and good Cheer, shall never grow rich. He means
principally the Riches of the Mind, which are Wisdom and Virtue.

Demand of God, Aufer a me ventris concupiscentias. Eccl. 23. Esca ventri and
venture escis; Deus autem hanc and has destruet. 1 Cor. 6. Animalis homo non
percipit ea quae; Dei sunt. 1 Cor. 2. Attendite vobis ne graventur corda
vestr^a crapula and ebrietate. Luc. 11.
that he take away from you all affection to these sensual and carnal things,
which never satisfy, and serve for nothing but to fatten that Body, which God
will one day destroy, and will become Worms-meat, which will make the Mind
brutish, and render it incapable of tasting Divine things, and of conceiving a
serious thought of their Salvation.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Meekness and Anger.
AS young Men are extremely addicted to Pleasure, Two Vices that hear sway in
young Persons.
so they are excessively impatient in suffering things which displease them.
These are the two Lording Passions which reign in Youth, and which precipitate
them into all the Disorders we see. Look upon all the Vices and Extravagances
of Youth, consider all the Misfortunes that befall them, and you will find they
spring from one of these two Fountains, either from the Love of Pleasures, or
from Anger, and often from both together. These are the two Means the Devil
employs to destroy young Men, being well assured, that if one succeeded not,
the other would never fail. And it is frequently seen, that he ruins by Anger
those he cannot gain by Pleasures, hurrying them by that impetuous Passion to
most deplorable Misfortunes.

Wherefore, Theotime, as it is most important for you to moderate this Love of
Pleasures, so natural to your Age, of which we have hitherto spoken; so it is a
necessary Entertainment for you, to labor to repress those Motions of Choler,
according to that excellent Precept the Wiseman gives you; Aufer iram a cord
tuo, and amove malitiam a carne tua. Eccl. 11.10.
Take away Anger from your Heart, and remove Malice from your Flesh, that is to
say, Pleasure.

There are so many Reasons to fly Anger, Powerful Reasons to fly Anger.
that it is a thing worthy of Astonishment, to see it should be so common
amongst Men. I beseech you, Theotime, weigh attentively these which follow.

1. Anger is a brutish Passion, which renders Men like Beasts: For what is
there liker an Animal, than a Man who cannot suffer the least thing? Beasts
provoke themselves against every thing that hurts them, because they have no
Reason; and if you stir up your self against every thing which displeases you,
in what are you different from a Beast? And what does your Reason serve for?

2. Anger proceeds ordinarily from a want of Wisdom, or from the weakness of
the Mind, which can suffer or dissemble nothing, and discerns not the things
which deserve Anger, from those which do not. If then you be inclined to Anger,
you show you have a weak Mind, and more filled with Folly than Wisdom. This is
the Judgment of the Wiseman, who says, That Fatuus statim indicat iram. Prove.
12. Ne sis velox ad irascendum, quia ira in sinu stulti requiescit. Eccl. 7.
it belongs to Fools to fall presently into Anger: He therefore gives you this
excellent Admonition, Be not subject to fall into Choler, for Anger rests in
the bosom of the unwise; that is, Anger is proper and natural to ill-bred Minds.

3. Anger disturbs the Judgment and Reason, and renders a Man incapable of
discerning Good from Bad, True from False, Useful from Unprofitable. It makes
one frequently take the one for the other, so that a Man in Anger has nothing
but the exterior Shape and Figure of a Man.

4. The Exterior it self is in such a manner changed, that it makes a Man
contemptible, his Eyes sparkling, his Countenance pale, his Speech interrupted,
his Body trembling, his Clamors, and other like Alterations, are the Effects of
Anger, which make a Man as it were outrageous.

5. Spiritum ad irascendum facilem quis poterit sustinere? Prove 28. Grave est
sax um and onerosa arena, sed ira stulti utroque gravior. Prove. 27.
From thence it comes, that a Man in Anger is insupportable to all the World,
every one stands in fear, and abandons him, even his Friends fly from him. Who
can endure a Mind subject to Choler? says the Wiseman; Stones and Sand are not
so burthensom as a disorderly Mind.

6. How many wicked Effects are there of Anger? The had Effects of Anger.
From thence Quarrels, Injuries, Detractions, Enmities, Desires of Revenge,
Oaths, Blasphemies, and a thousand other Sins which it causes to be committed.
This made the Wiseman say, That he who is subject unto Anger, Qui est ad
indignandum facilis, erit ad peccata velocior. Prove. 28.
will be apt to fall into many Sins. From thence the ruin of Friendship amongst
Friends, inward Grudges, irreconcilable Discords; From thence many
Misfortunes, Revenges, Beatings, Duels, dreadful and miserable Deaths.

Lastly, Anger is absolutely contrary to the Spirit of Christianity. Qui
irascitur fratri suo reus erit judicii. Mat. 5. Discite a me quia mitis sum and
humilis cord. Mat. 11. Charitas patiens est, non irritatur. 1 Cor. 3. Omnis
amaritudo, and ira, and in lignatio, and clamor, and blasphemia, tollatur a
vobis. Ephesians. 4.
He who it angry at his Brother, is worthy of Judgment. Says the Son of God,
Learn from me who am meek, and humble of Heart. Charity (says S. Paul) is
patient and benign, is not provoked. Let all bitterness, choler, indignation,
clamor, blasphemy, be banished from amongst you.

Remedies against Anger.
If you be possessed by this Passion, Theotime, use all your Endeavors to
moderate it: And for this intent read attentively the following Maxims, and
attempt to practice them.

1. Never be provoked to Anger upon small Occasions: For Example, if one says
some light Words to you, does something that displeases you; if a Servant be
wanting to wait on you punctually; to be moved to Choler for these things is an
Indiscretion, and the Effect of an irregular Mind.

2. If the Ill one has done you be great, before you be troubled for it, see
whether your Anger will serve to remedy it, and you will find most commonly,
that it will be absolutely unuseful for that purpose; and if it be
improfitable, it is a folly to vex your self. For Example, One has given you
injurious Words, or spoken ill of you, when you fall into Passion, you will not
repair the Injury nor the Detraction; you must then seek some other Means,
amongst which Contempt is the best.

3. Suppose it be fitting sometimes to manifest some Discontent for the Evil
another has done you, to hinder him from doing the same again, because,
according to the Wiseman, Per triftitiam vultus corrrigitur animus
delinquentis. Eccl. 7.
By the sadness of the Countenance the Mind of him who has failed, is
corrected; yet nevertheless it can never be profitable, either to conceive
Anger in ones Heart, or to brawl, storm, affront, or offer Reproaches. On the
contrary, it prejudices your good Repute, if you have any; and it is against
Virtue, because in all this you offend God.

4. Be then always upon your guard to prevent Anger when you see it coming. Now
if it sometimes prevent you, before you have been able to divert it, endeavor
to return quickly to your self, and to be easily appeased. Well-bred Spirits
are soon pacified, according to the Judgment of the Poet; Quo quisque est
major, magis est placabilis ira,
Et faciles motus men's generosa capit.
And as S. Augustine says excellently well, Irasci hominis est, finem imponere
iracundiae, Christiani. S. Hier. Epist. ad Them.
It is natural to a Man to be angry, but it is the property of a Christian to
keep it within bounds. Beneficium se putabat accepisse augustae memoriae
Theodosius, cum rogaretur ignoscere, and tunc propior erat veniae, cum suisset
commotio major iracundiae. Praerogativa ignoscendi erat indignatum suisse, and
petebatur in eo, quod in aliis timebatur, ut irasceretur. Ambr. de ob. Theod.
St. Ambrose recounts of the Emperor Theodosius the Great, That he was so much
in inclined to Meekness, that he esteemed himself obliged very much, when one
asked him Pardon, and when he was most angry, he pardoned easiest; so that one
desired in him, what was feared in others, viz. that he should be in Choler. O
what an excellent Example is this, and which deserves to be well considered!

5. When you shall be put into Passion, impose some Punishment upon your self,
as some Prayers, Alms, or other things; express a trouble for it to those who
see you.

6. There is scarce any Person but says or does something in his Anger, of
which he repents himself after. When therefore you shall be in Choler, restrain
your self as much as you can from saying or doing any thing which Passion
suggests. Never believe your self when you are in Passion; expect till it be
past, to judge whether a thing be ill spoken or done, and you will often find
that it was not.

7. Entertain not your Thoughts with the Subject of your Displeasure, to
persuade your self that you have just cause to be angry; this is but to cherish
your Passion: there is none but thinks he has a great deal of Reason when he is
in Choler. On the contrary, convince your self that you may be deceived, and
divert your Mind to another thing.

8. If you desire to have an aversion for Anger, consider another attentively
when he is in Passion; you will see nothing in him and his Actions, but what
will displease you. The same happens to you in respect of others, when you are
angry: And if you should see your self in a Looking-glass, you would be vexed
at your self, and would not endure your self in that Condition.

9. Fly the Conversation of impatient and choleric Men, Noli esse amicus
homini iracundo ne forte discas semitas ejus. Prove. 29.
according to that rare Precept of the Wiseman, Contract not Friendship with a
choleric Man, lest you learn his Humor.

In sine, accustom your self to be affable and benign toward others, to excuse
their Faults, to forget Injuries, to pardon easily, not to be so delicate and
sensible in the things which concern you, to speak mildly to all. And learn in
good time, Theotime, the practice of that adorable Sentence of Jesus Christ,
Discite a me quia mitis sum and humilis cord. Mat. 11.
Learn of me, for I am meek and humble of heart.

CHAP. XV.
Of Peace with our Neighbor, against Quarrels and Enmities.
ANger produces Quarrels, Young People are much subject to Quarrels.
Enmities, and other bad Effects which we have spoken of. Now it is important
that you should he well Instructed concerning these had Effects of this wicked
Cause, being that young Men are much subject to these Disorders. The Heat of
their Age makes them impatient to suffer the least Injuries, indiscreet and
inconsiderate to be able to repress them any other ways than by those of
Passion, which carries them to Dissentions, Enmities, and Revenge. From hence
arise a vast number of Mischiefs, and amongst other, the ruin of Virtue in
these young Souls; for where there is no Peace, there can be no Charity, nor
consequently Virtue. And as the Apostle St. James says, Ubi zelus and
contentio, ibi inconstantia and omne opus pravum. Jac. 3.
Where there are Emulation, and Contention, Inconstancy and all sort of wicked
Actions are there also.

It is a Rock which with all possible care you must seek to avoid, learning in
good time to hate Quarrels and Enmities, Pacem habete and Deus pacis and
dilectionis erit vobiscum. 2 Cor. 11.
and to love Peace and Concord: For if you have not a peaceable Spirit, the God
of Peace will not be with you.

To acquire and preserve this peaceable Spirit, Means to acquire a peaceable
Mind.
you must have a care of Three things. 1. Not to quarrel with any Person. 2.
Not to give occasion to others to offer any to you. 3. To behave your self
discreetly when any one has a Difference with you.

1. Raise no Quarrels.
Raise not therefore any Quarrels with others, upon whatsoever occasion. There
are some Spirits naturally quarrelsom, who are always at Debate with others:
Impatient Spirits, which can suffer nothing; rash and inconsiderate, always
guided by a fantastical Humor, and not by Reason. It is a wicked and pernicious
Quality, which is the Mark of a sottish and impertinent Spirit: For, as the
Wiseman says, Labia stulti miscent se rixis and os ejus jurgia provocat. Prove.
18.
The Unwise thrusts himself into Quarrels, and his Mouth provokes Dissentions.
Be not you such an one, Theotime. Honor est homini qui separat se a
contentionibus, omnes autem miscentur contumeliis. Prove. 20.
It is an Honor, says the Wiseman, to be separated from Debates, they are only
ill-bred Spirits who engage themselves therein. Where I speak not of another
sort of quarrelsom Spirits, who through Malice and a very wicked Inclination
seek Quarrels, and take a pleasure in raising them, and making themselves
Enemies: These are ungracious Spirits, who seek their own Misfortune, and find
it at length, according to that Verity of the Scripture, Semper jurgia quaerit
malus, angelus autem crudelis mittetur contra eum. Prove. 13.
The Wicked seeks always Quarrels, but a cruel Angel shall be sent out against
them; that is, the Devil will bring him some Disaster which will destroy him.

2. It is not sufficient to abstain from stirring up a Debate with any one, you
must have a care not to give occasion to others to cause a Difference with you.
Give no occasion of Quarrels.
Sometimes occasion is given upon Design, and deliberate Purpose, which is
proper to turbulent malicious Spirits, Lovers of Disturbance, and Enemies of
peace. Sometimes, and most frequently, Offense is given by Imprudence, for want
of taking care of the things which might provoke our Neighbor. This is what you
must be solicitous to avoid. Ejice derisorem, and exibit cum eo jurgium. Prove.
22.
Endeavor therefore to abstain from every thing that may disgust your Neighbor,
as too great Contradictions, Detractions, indiscreet Reports, Contempts,
S^offs, Injuries, and a thousand other like things.

3. Carry your self Wisely, if you be quarreled with.
Now if it chance that any one quarwith you, even when you gave no occasion on
your part, endeavor to comport your self discreetly, not permitting your self
to be carried away with the Passion of Anger, or at least returning presently
to your self. Above all, suffer not your self to go so far as to offer an
Injury or Reproach, as we have already said; strive to appease your Neighbor
with sweet Words, showing modestly that you have done him no wrong, Responsio
mollis frangit iram. sermo durus suscit furorem. Prove. 19.
or excuse your self mildly if you have offered him any; If he be not pacified
for that, withdraw your self from his Company, to let his Choler pass.

But you will say, They Will contemn me, and account me a Coward. I answer, Answer
to a common Objection.
That none but impertinent Persons will do so, and all discreet Men will praise
you for your Moderation, and esteem you much more. If Courage consisted in
Quarrelling, and giving Injury for Injury, litigious Persons, and all base
Souls, would be more courageous than you. Courage consists in despising
Injuries, dissembling them by Modesty, excusing them easily, diverting them
discreetly when we can, and when we cannot, in supporting them with Christian
Patience, after the Example, and for the Love of our Savior, Who when he was
reviled, Qui cum ma lediceretur non maledicebat, cum pa teretur non
comminabatur. 1 Pet. 2.
reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not. This, Theotime, is the
Courage of a well-bred Mind, the Generosity of a true Christian, and of a
faithful Servant of God.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Pardon of Injuries against Revenge.
THere is yet a necessary thing conserve Peace and Meekness toward our
Neighbor, which is the Pardon of Injuries. It is a Virtue which must be learned
betimes, by so much sooner as it is more difficult, very rare amongst
Christians, and yet absolutely necessary for Salvation.

You must learn, We must learn from our Youth to pardon Injuries.
dear Theotime, to pardon the Injuries which are offered you; that is, never to
harbor in your Mind any hatred against your Neighbor, for whatsoever
Displeasure you have received from him, not to have any desire of Revenge, nor
wish him any Ill; but on the contrary, desire him Good, and show him Kindness,
when his Necessity, or other Edification require it.

You Will say that this is difficult. It Is true, but it is only hard to those who
have never considered the Reasons which oblige them to it; Strong Reasons to
persuade to the pardon of Injuries.
which are so strong and powerful, that they who, after they have made never so
little reflection on them, are not convinced, must needs have lost all their
Sense and Judgment.

1. God will have it, and absolutely, without any Exception commands it you. He
has said in the Old Testament, Non quaeres ultionem nec memoreris injuriae
civium tuorum. Lev. 19.
Seek not Revenge, remember not the Injury of your Fellow-Citizens. And in the
Now, his Son Christ Jesus has solemnly renewed the Prohibition. Diligite
inimicos vestros. Mat. 5.
I say unto you, Love your Enemies, do well to those who hate you. Nulli malum
pro malo reddentes. Romans 12.
Render not ill for ill, says St. Paul. Qui odit fratrem suum homicida est. 1 John 2.
And he who hates his Brother, says St. John, is a Murderer.

2. He will have it on such a Condition, that he will not pardon your Sins,
except you from your Heart pardon all those who have offended you. Dimittite
and dimittemini, eadem quippe mensura qua mensi fueritis remetietur vobis. Luc.
6.
Pardon, and you shall be pardoned, says the Son of God; In the same Measure
you have measured to others, it shall be measured unto you. Si non dimiseritis
hominibus, nec pater vester dimittet vobis. Mat. 6.
If you forgive not Men, your celestial Father will not forgive you. Judicium
sine misericordia, ei qui non secerit misericordiam. Jac. 2.
Judgment shall be given without Mercy, says the Apostle S. James, to him who
has not showed Mercy. Consider this well, and see whether you would not have
God pardon you.

3. This Will of God depends upon so manifest a Point of Equity, that even the
most Obstinate cannot contradict it. Is there any thing more Just, than that
God should treat you as you treat others, That he should pardon you as you
pardon others, That he should revenge himself of you, if you will be revenged
of those who have offended you? Is not this Just? Weigh well, Theotime, what I
am going to say, A Discourse to be well considered.
You would have God infinite in Majesty and Power, offended, by whom? By his
own Creature, after he had bestowed upon it all imaginable Favors, and offended
most grievously, and with an infinite Offense, for which neither you nor all
Creatures together, although you should join your Lamentations with them for all
Eternity, could know how to make him worthy Satisfaction; injured, in fine, by
an Offense which deserves an Eternal Damnation, which cannot be avoided but by
his pure Mercy, which he is not obliged to show you. Would you, I say, desire
that a God so Great, offended by you so grievously, should pardon you such an
Offense, and remit you such a Punishment, and will not you pardon your Brother,
one like to you, for a small Offense? You who are a Sinner as he is, and who
have need of Pardon as well as he; You who perhaps have wronged him first, or
at least have showed him to Kindness, or if you have, it is not comparable to
that God has shown you; nay, moreover, that Favor you have done him, came not
from you, but from God; Will you, I say, amongst all these Considerations seek
Revenge and Satisfaction for your Offense, Qui vindicari vult a Domino inveniet
vindictam. Homo homini reservat iram and a Deo quaerit medelam, in hominem
similem sibi non habet misericordiam, and de peccatis suis deprecatur: ipse cum
caro sit, reservat iram, and propitiationem petit a Deo. Quis exorabit pro
peccatis illius? Eccl. 28.
and will not have God revenge himself of you? Are not you Unjust, yea, even
Ridiculous? Man reserves Anger for Man, and begs Mercy of God. He has no
Compassion of one like himself, and he would have God take pity upon him. He,
miserable and wretched Creature as he is, would revenge himself, and beseeches
God that he would not revenge himself of him. Who is there, says the Wiseman,
will offer Prayers for his Sins?

After this, Theotime, what have you to answer? Will you say that it is hard to
pardon? Say also, A convincing Answer to common Objections on this Subject.
that it is hard that you should obtain pardon of your Sins from God. But you
will say, I would freely pardon him, and not revenge my self; but to love and
wish him well who has offended me, and would do me a Mischief, this is that
wherein I cannot overcome my self. If it be so, grant then that you would not
have God love you, nor bestow upon you any Blessing; for he will treat you as
you treat your Neighbor. Say that you will not love another like your self, for
the love of Jesus Christ, who has loved you so as to Die for your Salvation;
and that God having loved you when you were unworthy, you will not love your
Brother, except he be worthy of your Love. Say that you will not love your
Neighbor for the love of God, but for the love of your self only. And although
God command you to love him who has offended you, exhorts you to it, and
accounts the Love you render to one like you, as done to his own Person; yet
all this is not capable to make you quit the Resentment and hatred you bear in
your Heart. Say, in fine, that you pretend nothing to the Grace of God, and
Eternal Life, being the Scripture teaches us, That Nos scimus quoniam translati
sumus de morte ad vitam quoniam diligimus fratres. Qui non diligit manet in
morte. 1 John 3.
we are transported from Death to Life, by the Love we show to our Brethren;
And that he who loves not, remains in Death.

Let us conclude, Theotime, that either we must renounce Christianity, the Love
of God, and Eternal Salvation, or we must necessarily pardon Injuries, love our
Enemies, and render Good for Evil. But as this Virtue is difficult in the
Corruption of Nature, and the Depravation of the World, which cannot relish it,
you must learn it in good time, Agnoscit se esse hominem, qui novit ignoscere,
and vias Christi sequitur qui carne suscepta maluit in hunc modum redemptor
venire, quam judex. S. Amb. Orat. de obit. Theod.
and demand it frequently of God. Beg of him, that he would give you a meek and
peaceable Heart, and which loves to render Good for Evil. Accustom your self
from your Youth to pardon small Injuries, not to render Ill for Ill, that you
may learn to pardon great ones upon occasion, for the Love of him who has
saved you, when he might most justly have destroyed you for all Eternity.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Love of our Neighbor.
THIS Virtue is the Mother of the three former, and its Defects cause all the
Disorders we have spoken of in the three last Chapters: For Anger, Dissentions,
Animosities, Revenges, spring only from the want of Charity, and because we
love not our Neighbor Christianly, and as God commands us to love him.

It is a thing of most Importance, that you be instructed in this Virtue,
because it is a Fundamental Virtue of Christianity, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum
ex toto cord, and proximum sicut te ipsum.
which is Established upon these two Laws, Love God above all things, and your
Neighbor as your self; and yet very rare, and badly practiced amongst
Christians.

The generality of Christians believe, That to love their Parents, their
Friends, A common Error concerning the Love of our Neighbor.
and those from whom they expect any Favor, is sufficient, and accounts the
Affection to all other Men as indifferent. This is not to love our Neighbor,
but our Selves. Children from their Youth are bred up in this Opinion, they are
taught only to love those who do them good, and hate those who do them hurt.
From hence arise all the Discords which disfigure the the Face of Christianity,
the Harshness with which Men treat one another, the little Support they
mutually give, the small Assistance they afford them in their Necessities. From
thence the Propensity to Quarrels, Injuries, ill Treatments, Hatred, and
Revenge.

It is very important to disabuse young Persons of this common Error, and to
instruct them in this Virtue so necessary for Salvation.

This Error proceeds from three things which ought to be known in this Virtue;
that is, Three things to be known in the Love of our Neighbor.
Who are our Neighbors which must be loved, The Motive for which they must be
loved, And in what this Love consists.

1. 1. Who he is.
Our Neighbors which must be loved, are all Men, even the most unknown, Great
and Mean, Poor and Rich, Good and Bad, Friend and Foe.

2. 2. The Motive to love him.
The Motive for which they must be loved, is because they are all the Children
of God, Created to his Image, Redeemed by the Blood of his Son Jesus Christ;
because God, who is our common Father, will have us love them as our Brethren,
and because Jesus Christ, who is our common Savior has commanded us to love
them.

3. 3. In what it consists.
This Love consists in three things, In desiring Good to all; In doing it when
we can, principally in their Temporal and Spiritual Good; And in supporting
their Defects, and excusing their Faults.

This is, Theotime, true Charity, which is one of the Foundations of Virtue,
the Mark of a Christian Spirit, without which we cannot please God, nor have
any real Virtue, and wherein it is necessary you be exercised in good time to
acquire it.

1. Practice.
1. To desire Good to all.
Accustom your self to consider all Men as your Brethren, and in this Quality
to desire Good to all of them. Be meek and amiable to all, Have compassion on
the Poor and Afflicted, Be not envious at the Rich, and all those in
Prosperity: Love the Good by reason of their Virtue, the Wicked that they may
become Good; desiring the Perseverance of the former, and the Conversion of the
latter. We must hate Sin, which is the Work of Man, but love Man, who is the
Work of God.

2. 2. To procure it when we can.
Being it is nothing to wish one Good, except we do it when we can. Use your
self to be prompt and inclined to do Good to your Neighbor when you can. Three
sorts of Goods.
Now there are three sorts of Goods which we may procure to our Neighbor, in
his Body, in his Honor, and in his Soul.

As for the First, Assist others in their Necessities, according to the Power
and Occasions you have: 1. Corporal.
Give Alms freely to the Poor. O what an excellent Virtue in a young Man is
Mercy and Compassion for the Poor! Happy those who can say with Job, Ab
infantia crevit mecum miseratio. Job 21. Eleemosyna ab omni peccato and morte
liberat and non patietur animam ire ad tenebras. Tob. 4.
Compassion has increased with me from my Infancy. Because it will attract a
great abundance of Divine Blessings upon them during all their Life, and at the
Hour of our Death, as it is said in the Scripture.

As for their Honor, 2. Moral.
you ought to conserve it in your Neighbor as much as possible. Hinder
Calumnies and Detractions. If one be accused of a Wickeness which he has not
done, defend him, and say that it is not so. If one discover the Ill he has
done, endeavor to excuse him, and hinder that it be not spoken of any more:
Speak of some other Good he has done, or some good Quality he is endowed with:
Show that Detraction displeases you, and exhort him who utters it, to spare the
Reputation of his Neighbor.

As for the Good of the Soul, 3. Spiritual.
which consists in Virtue and Salvation, since it is the greatest of all Goods,
you must use all possible Means to procure it for your Neighbor. You will
perform this by Praying for him, by endeavoring to withdraw him from Vice, and
from ill Occasions, when there are any, either by your self, or by others who
can prevail with him; by Advertising him mildly of his Duty, or causing him to
be Admonished; by giving him good Counsel and good Example, and by other Means
which Charity will suggest to you. Accustom your self to do all these things to
them you have most occasion of, as to your Friends, your Companions, your
Domestics, your Servants, and to those with whom you converse. This is the
true Love of our Neighbor, to love him for his Salvation, and Eternity.

There remains a Third thing necessary for the Love of our Neighbor, To support
his Defects.
which is charitably to support his Defects, and excuse his Faults, as much as
Prudence will permit: Priusquam interroges, ne vituperes quemquam: and cum
interrogaveris corripe just. Eccl. 11.
Not to be inclined to blame and reprehend, either without Knowledge, or with
Bitterness, or without any Necessity or Profit. Now there is no Necessity or
Profit, when the Reprehension does not avail for the Amendment of him who is
Faulty, nor for the Edification of others.

In fine, Theotime, the great Rule of the Love of our Neighbor, consists in
judging our Neighbor by our selves, according to the Maxim of the Wiseman,
Intellige quae proximi sunt ex teipso. Eccl. 31.
Judge of that which concerns your Neighbor by your self; and in practicing
that great Maxim of the Scripture, and which Nature her self teaches us, Quod
ab alio oderis tibi fieri, vide ne tu aliquando alteri facias. Tob. 4. Omnia
quaecunque vultis ut faciant vobis homines and vos facite illis. Mat. 7.
Do nothing to another, which you would not have done to your self. And also do
to others the Good which rationally, and according to God, you would have done
to you in the like Occasion.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Fraternal Correction, or of the Obligation of hindering the Ill of another,
when one can.
THAT which we have said of the Obligation, Charity imposes upon Christians, of
procuring the Salvation of our Neighbor when we can, deserves a more particular
Reflection, it being a thing of high Importance, and nevertheless infinitely
neglected, and for the most part absolutely unknown. This Obligation is not
understood what it is; it is taken for a new Language, and for a thing almost
incredible.

Yet there is nothing more common in the Sacred Scripture, which teaches us,
That Mandavit unicuiq^e de proximo suo. Eccl. 17.
God has given the Charge of his Neighbor to every one; That Aedificate
alterutrum sicut and sacitis. 1 Thessal. 5. Pleni estis dilectione, ita ut
possitis alterutrum monere. Romans 15. Nolite communicare operibus infructuosis
tenebrarum; magis autem redarguite. Ephesians. 5.
we should Edify one another, mutually Admonish one another. Not to be
partakers of the Works of Darkness, that is, of the Sins of another, but
reprehend him freely.

In fine, to love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves. For how
do we love our Neighbor as our selves, if these greatest Necessities, which are
those of his Salvation, move us so little, that we abandon them for our least
Interests, which are frequently only in the Imagination, and Fopperies? And how
do we love God above all things, if we neglect to hinder him from being
offended, when some means is offered to effect it.

This Obligation is so great, that it has made St. John Chrisostom deliver an
astonishing Expression, S. Jo Chrisost. adversus vituper. vitae Monast. lib. 5.
viz. That God will require no less Account of us, of the Salvation of our
Neighbor than of our own; And that when we shall have lived all our Life very
piously, if we have neglected the Salvation of others upon occasions, the
Sanctity of our Life shall be unprofitable, it being certain, that that
Negligence is so criminal, that it alone may be the cause of our Damnation. He
gives the Reason, Because he who is wanting to assist his Neighbor in his
corporal Necessities, is rejected by God at the Day of Judgment,
notwithstanding the Good he has otherwise performed: Much more he who neglects
to succor his Brother in a thing of far greater Consequence, as is the
Salvation of his Soul, will deserve all manner of Punishments.

The Discharge of this great Obligation depends upon the practice of the
Commandment of Fraternal Correction which our Lord has given us, and whereof
he has prescribed the Order in Chap. 18. of S. Matthew, in these Words, Si
peccaverit in te frater tuus, vade and corripe eum inter te and ipsum solum. Si
te audierit, lucratus es fratrem tuum, si autem te non audierit, adhibe tecum
unum vel duos, quod si non audierit eos, dic Ecclesiae. Mat. 18.
If your Brother sin against you, go and reprehend him secretly; if he hear
you, you have gained him; if he hear you not, take one or two others with you,
if he will not hear them, tell the Church.

That you may understand this Commandment, Five things of Consequence to be
observed in this Command.
so much unknown, and so ill practiced, I shall observe here four or five
things, which will facilitate the Understanding and Practice of it.

The First is the End of this Commandment, Its End.
which is to remedy the Misfortune of our Neighbor, that is, to hinder that our
Neighbor who has sinned, may not relapse into his Fault, or that others do not
offend by his Example or Inducement.

The Second is, The Persons it obliges.
That this Commandment obliges not only Superiors, but all sorts of Persons, it
being a Command of Charity, which, as S. Thomas says, every one is obliged to
have.

The Third is, The Circumstances wherein it obliges.
That this Obligation is understood only when these two Circumstances occur. 1.
When we know the Ill committed, and the apparent danger that our Neighbor will
relapse into it, or cause others to fall therein. 2. When we may hinder the
Evil of another, and bring some Remedy for it.

The Fourth is, That this Power of stopping the Mischief, is not only
understood of what we our selves may do, but also of what we may effect by
another means. This is what our Lord made evidently appear, in saying, If he
hear not you, take some other Person with you; and if he still continue to
persist, tell the Church.

The Fifth Remark is, That what he says of telling the Church, that is, the
Superiors, may be performed either privately or publicly; and that when the
First Way, that is, the secret, suffices to hinder the Misfortune, as
ordinarily it does, we are not obliged to the Second.

Thus to collect all these Observations, and join them together; The
Commandment of Fraternal Correction obliges every one to hinder the Evil or Sin
of another, when he knows it, and can remedy it, by himself or by other
Persons, which may be employed for that effect. From whence it follows, That to
discharge ones self of the Obligation of this Commandment, one is obliged to
divert the Mischief by another, when one cannot by himself.

We have already manifested the greatness of this Obligation, in which one
cannot fail without a heinous Sin, and the neglect of it will be found most
reprehensible at the Divine Judgment. In effect, Theotime, is it not a highly
criminal thing before God, to see or know any one in the danger of his Soul,
and contemn the Assistance he might afford him in that State? And to be
concerned no more to hinder his Neighbor from mortally offending God when he
can, than to divert him from drinking a Glass of Water? Qui habuerit
substantiam hujus mundi and viderit fratrem suum necessitatem habere, and
clauserit viscera sua ab eo, quomodo charitas Dei manet in eo? 1 John 4.
If any one (says S. John) sees his brother in necessity, and shuts up his
Compassion from him, when he has wherewithal to assist him, how dwells the
love of God in him? If this be so in Corporal Necessities, what will it be in
Spiritual? S. Chris. de ferend. reprehensionibus.
S. Chrysostom says it is an extreme Cruelty to neglect thus a Neighbor. And if
it be an unspeakable Harshness not to help to raise a Beast fallen under his
Burden, how can it but be the utmost Cruelty not to do that for the Soul of
his Brother, which Men do for brute Beasts? A Beast fallen (says S. Bernard)
finds those who raise it, Cadit asinus and est qui sublevet, perit anima and
non est qui reputet. S. Bern. Hom. 4.1. ad Cor.
a Soul is destroyed, and no one concerns himself.

If the Old Law (says St. Chrysostom) strictly commanded not to neglect the Ox
of ones Enemy when he is found strayed, but to bring him back to his Master;
what Pardon ought he to expect, who neglects and abandons not a strayed Ox of
his Enemy, but the Soul of his Brother Christian lost in Sin?

If your Brother (says S. Augustine) had a mortal Wound upon his Body, which he
would conceal for fear of Incision, would it not be an Inhumanity in you, to
conspire by your Silence with him in his Design? as on the contrary, you would
show him a great Kindness, to discover his Distemper to a Physician, to apply a
Remedy to it. With how much more reason ought you to do the same thing for the
Wounds of his Soul, since they are far more dangerous to be neglected, and
permitted to putrify in the Heart, lest they cause Death in him, and infect
others with their Stench.

In sine, if you should see the beginning of a Fire, which you might easily put
out either by your self, or at least by advertising others who might do it,
would you not be guilty of all the Burning if you were defective therein? How
many mortal Sins are there committed in consequence of such a like Negligence
as this?

Consider, Theotime, and weigh well all these Reasons. What would you answer to
God in his dreadful Judgment, if through Remissness, or some vain Fear, or some
miserable Complacence, as it frequently happens, you should be so misfortunate
as to fall into that criminal Negligence? What Reason could you allege which
had hindered you? What is the Salvation of a Soul worth, or one mortal Sin
which you might divert? What will you say when you shall be reproached, that
you had more apprehension of displeasing your Neighbor, than of offending God;
and that frequently by Indiscretion, Anger, or Malice, you were not afraid to
divulge the same thing, which you would not discover secretly by Charity? But
what will you answer when it shall be made appear, that you might have often
hindered the Wickedness of another, without any Danger, and that you had only an
imaginary Fear, or rather a great Slackness, or foolish Complacence, which has
hindered you from it? You will then see your self culpable of the Sins of
another, and charged with many Faults which you might have hindered, and which
were caused by your Silence: God will exact an Account of you for them.

You must avoid this Misfortune, Theotime; and to perform it, practice what the
Son of God has prescribed us. When you see any one offend God mortally, as by
Swearing, Talking uncivilly, Soliciting you to Wickedness, or know of any
notable Disorder, endeavor to divert him from it, if you can, by your mild and
charitable Admonitions. If you cannot, as not having sufficient Boldness to do
it, or sufficient Authority to hinder it, do what our Lord appoints you, employ
discreetly other Persons therein, which you know can perform it better than
you, and particularly those who have the Conduct of him, whom you know to have
gone astray.

This is the Rule which S. Augustine, after our Lord, gives on this Occasion, in
his 109. Epistle, where he adds these excellent Words, which are inserted in
the Canon Law; Non vos judicetis esse malevolos, quando crimen alterius
judicatis: magis quippe innocents non estis, si fratres vestros quos judicando
corrigere potestis, tacendo perire permittitis. S. Aug. 5. Quest. c. 1.
Believe not, says he, that it is to do hurt to your Neighbor, to discover thus
his Wickedness to cure it: On the contrary, you are guilty of his Ruin, if when
you might heal his Evil by declaring it to the Physician, you permit him to
perish by your Silence. Afterward he adds a Comparison cited above.

Now if we must act thus even when the Neighbor's Sin hurts but him alone,
Quaedam sunt peccata occulta quae sunt in nocumento proximorum vel corporale
vel spirituale, and quia ille qui sic occulte peccat, non solum in te peccat,
sed etiam in alios, oporter statim procedere ad denunciationem ut hujusmodi
nocumentum impediatur. S. Thom. 2.2. q. 23. a. 7.
we are much more obliged when it prejudices others, whether by ill Example, if
his Sin be known to any, or because he induces others to Sin; for then he must
desist from his particular Admonition, which can avail nothing, and go directly
to them who can, and ought to watch for the Good and Salvation of others, that
he may prevent by them the Mischief, and hinder the Ruin of another, or of
many, following that Rule of S. Thomas and other Divines.

For Conclusion, Theotime, I shall give you that excellent Saying of S. James
the Apostle to meditate on. Fratres mei, si quis ex vobis erraverit a veritate,
and converti fecerit quis eum, scire debet quoniam qui converti fecerit
peccatorem ab errore viae suae, salvabit animam ejus a morte and operiet
multitudinem peccatorum. Jacob. 5.
Brethren, says he, if any of you goes astray out of the way of Salvation, and
any one shall contribute to his Conversion, he ought to know that he shall save
the Soul of his Brother, and that his Sins shall be forgiven him.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Friendships.
I Speak here of Friendships, because they conduce much to bring Youth to Good
or Evil, according as they are good or bad; and since young People are much
inclined to Love, and besides, not having sufficient Light to discern good
Friendship from hurtful, it often falls out that they contract very bad
Friendships, which prejudice them very much, and are most commonly the cause of
their Destruction.

There is a difference between the Love of our Neighbor and Friendship. We must
love all Men in the manner we have said, but we cannot have Friendship with all
Men, because Friendship is a mutual and particular Love.

It is a reciprocal Communication of Affections, What Friendship is.
by which two Persons particularly love one another, and mutually procure Good
to one another.

Friendship is such as is the Subject on which it is founded; if we love in a
Friend a wicked thing, the Friendship is bad and vicious. If we love a vain and
frivolous thing, as Beauty, good Behavior, the Friendship is frivolous and
impertinent. If we love a good thing, the Friendship is good and laudable. Now
this good thing must be a real Virtue, or a Perfection which may advance
Virtue, as Science, a good Nature, or the like.

Friendship to be good and real, Three Conditions of Friendship to be good.
ought to have three Conditions, which you must observe well. It must be
founded upon Virtue, Tending to Virtue, and Conducted by Virtue.

1. It must be built upon Virtue, that is, we must love a Friend by reason of
some good and laudable Quality, which we know in him.

2. Tending to Virtue, because Friendship ought to desire and procure the Good
of a Friend. Now Virtue is the greatest and most necessary of all Goods: And
the Friendship by which Friends procure Favors to one another, if it neglect
mutually to advance Virtue according to its power, is not a Friendship, but a
manifest Deceit.

3. It ought to be directed by Virtue, that is, Virtue ought to be the Rule of
it, Amicus usque ad aras.
and a Friend should do nothing to a Friend which may be contrary to Virtue.
Friendship which causes God to be offended by a Friend, is a detestable and
cursed Friendship, because it makes one love Man more than God.

By these three Conditions, Theotime, you will easily discern good Friendship
from evil, and those you ought to fly, from those you ought to seek.

You ought to fly the Friendship of those in whom you find no Virtue, nor any
Perfection which you may love, as also the Friendship of those you know to be
subject to any Vice, as to Impurity, Drunkenness, Swearing, whose Friendship
will make you learn their wicked Quallties; because, as the Wiseman says,
Amicus stultorum similis efficietur. Prove. 13.
A Friend of Fools, that is, of vicious People, will become like them.

Fly all Friendship which does not tend to make you better. Such is the
Friendship of those who search after nothing in your Love but their own Profit,
or some vain Complacence they take in loving you, or being beloved by you; of
those, who when they can, do not advertise you of your Good and Salvation. But
above all, abhor the Friendship of those who solicit you to Sin, Vir iniquus
lactat a micum suum and ducit eum per viam non bonam. Prove. 16.
or flatter and cherish you in the Vices you have. You ought to avoid these
Friends, as your greatest and most mortal Enemies.

Avoid the Company of all those who scruple not to offend God for your sake,
and to please you; for Example, to Rob, to Cheat, to Quarrel, to Swear, to
Detract, to treat ill their Neighbor, to Challenge in a Duel, and other such
like things. Have a horror for these Friendships, and account that Maxim for
certain, Non potest homini esse amicus qui Deo fuerit infidus. S. Amb. 3.
Offic. cap. 19.
That he who is unfaithful to God, cannot be a Friend to a Man; And although he
might, yet you cannot adhere to that Friendship, without making your self an
Enemy to God.

On the contrary, seek after the Friendship of those who you know carry
themselves well, and are endowed with some good Qualities, Melior est manisesta
correptio, quam amor absconditus. Meliora sunt vulnera diligentis quam
fraudulenta oscula odio habentis. Prove. 29.
by which you may profit, who will move you to Virtue by their Example and good
Discourses, who will assist you therein by their Counsels, not flatter you in
your Vices, but freely and charitably admonish you; And in fine, those who in
their Friendship have the Fear of God for their Rule, and your greatest and
most desirable Good, which is your Amendment and Salvation for their principal
End. These, Theotime, are the good and real Friendships you must by so much
more seek after, as they are most rare, and carefully entertain when you have
found them. These are the Friendships whereof the Wiseman speaks, when he says,
that Amicus fidelis protectio fortis, qui invenit illum invenit thesaurum;
amico fideli nulla est comparatio, amicus fidelis medicamentum vitae and
immortalitatis. Eccl. 6.
A faithful Friend is a strong Protection, and he who has found him has found
a Treasure; he is more worth than all Gold and Silver, he is a Medicine for
Life and Immortality. Ne derelinquas amicum antiquum, novus enim non erit
similis. Eccl. 6.
Love and seek after these Friendships, apply your self to find them, and when
you have met with one, conserve him carefully, and abandon him not for a light
changeable Mind, as young People ordinarily do.

To find this Friendship, remember First to demand it often of God, for he is
the Author of it, and He who fears him, Qui timet Dominum aeque habebit
amicitiam bonam. Eccl. 6.
says the Wiseman, will find it. In the Second place, be careful to love first,
for you must love to be beloved: But this Love must be such an one as we have
said, built upon Virtue, tending to Virtue, and directed by Virtue.

CHAP. XX.
Of Sports and Recreations.
REcreation is necessary to relax the Spirits, and particularly of young
People; and that which is taken in Sports is most proper for them, it being
more proportioned to their Nature, and the Capacity of their Mind.

Pastime then and Recreation is not contrary to Virtue, but rather commanded,
and it is an Action of Virtue when it is done as it ought.

To be such, The Motive of Sport.
it is necessary before all things that the Motive of it be good; that is, that
it be taken to recreate the Mind, and to make it more capable of Labor, which
it could not be able to undergo, if it were always employed. So that Labor is
the End and Motive of Sport and Recreation.

From thence three Conditions follow, Three Conditions to be observed.
which must be observed in Play, that it may be good and virtuous.

The First, Moderation.
To keep therein a civil Moderation; for if it be taken in excess, it is no
more a Recreation, but rather an Employment; it is not to Play to be made more
fit for Labor, which is the sole End Pastime ought to have, but only for
Pleasure, which is a vicious End; yea, it is to make one unsit for Labor,
because excess of Play dissipates the Spirits, enfeebles the Forces of the
Body, and oftentimes considerably prejudices the Health by the Distempers it
causes.

The Second Condition is, An orderly Affection.
Not to have a disorderly Affection to Play, as it happens frequently to young
Persons. This Affection makes them fall into the Excess we spoke of, lose much
Time, think continually of the Means to divert themselves. It is the cause that
they almost never apply themselves seriously to Labor, and when their Body is
at Study, their Mind is at their Sport and Divertisement.

The Third Condition is, Avoiding the Cames of Hazard.
To fly as much as possible the Plays of Hazard; such Plays keep the Mind too
much tied to them, principally young Peoples: They serve not to recreate the
Spirits, but to give them more disturbance; It is hard to observe therein a
Moderation, one is so engaged either by Loss or Gain. They Play there only out
of Covetousness, The bad Effects of Play.
and to gain, which is a wicked End; Add the ordinary Losses one suffers, which
leave after them Displeasure, Vexation, and Despair: Join to these the Cheats,
unjust Gains, Choler, Swearing, Quarrels, of which these sorts of Plays are
ordinarily full; The excessive loss of Time, the dissipation of Mind and Goods,
the wicked Habits of Anger, of Impatience, of Swearing, of Lying, of
Covetousness, and many others, which Play produces; The disorderly Inclination
to Play which continues all their Life, and frequently ruins their Possessions
and Honor, and reduces them to extreme Miseries, as we daily see but by too
many Examples, and in fine, makes a Man incapable of any Good.

Avoid these Sports, Theotime, Practice.
as absolutely contrary to your Salvation and Happiness, and addict not your
self but to honest Pastimes, which serve for the Divertisement of the Mind, or
Exercise of the Body, observing therein the Conditions we have spoken of, and
chiefly keeping your self from Excesses, which Relaxabantur etiam mihi ad
ludendum habenae ultra temperamentum severitatis in dissolutionem affectionum
variarum. S. Aug. lib. 2. Confess.
S. Augustine in his Confessions acknowledged to be one of the Causes of the
depravation of his Youth. Now this Excess is understood not only of the Time
employed therein, which ought to be well regulated, but also of the Money you
Play, which ought always to be very little; otherwise you will Play for Gain,
and not for Recreation, and the Sport will be a Hell and Disquiet, rather than
a Divertisement. Besides, the Money you lose at Play, would be better employed
amongst the Poor, whose Necessities will cry one day to God for your Excesses,
and against those of all Gamesters.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Liberality against Covetousness.
Although it may seem that Covetousness is not an ordinary Vice amongst young
Persons, Youth must be armed against Covetousness.
yet it is very necessary to arm them against this Passion, which easily taking
root in young Souls, is insensibly augmented, and causes vast Disorders in
their Life.

There are two sorts of Covetousness; Two sorts of Covetousness.
The one, which makes us love Money, to heap it up, to get Treasures and
Purchases; The other, which makes us affect it, to dispose and employ it for
our proper Pleasures. The First is very rare amongst young People, but the
Second is very ordinary with them, and highly prejudicial.

Experience makes appear that it is ordinary with them; How ordinary among
young Persons.
for as they earnestly love their Pleasures, they seek after all Means to
satisfy them, which cannot be effected without Money: From hence it comes that
they apply all their Endeavors to get it; From hence the Cheats and Tricks they
make use of toward their Parents, to get it from them; From hence their
Cozening in Play, their Hard-heartedness to the Poor, and sometimes Robberies
and unjust Ways to procure it; From hence the love of Riches, which we see in
young Spirits, the desires of great Fortunes, the imaginary Designs they lay to
purchase them.

This Passion having thus taken its beginning in Youth, easily increases, How
prejudicial.
and strengthening it self by Age becomes so strangely rooted, that it can
never be pulled up all the remainder of their Life. And it causes that so
general a Disorder which is found amongst Christians, and which the Prophet
deplores when he says, that A minore usque ad majorem omnes avaritiae student.
Jer. 16.13.
From the least to the greatest, all are given to Covetousness; that is, to the
irregular love of the things of the World, which Radix omnium malorum est
cupiditas. 1 Timothy 6.
S. Paul says is The root of all Evils.

This Vice takes its origin from three Causes in Youth. The First is, Three
Causes of Avarice in young Men.
what we have now spoken of. The Second is, the common Example of the World,
which they see loves and esteems Money above all things, and runs after it with
insatiable greediness. The Third is the Fault of Parents, who inspire this Love
into their Children from their tender Years, Discoursing of nothing but the
Care to get their Livelihood, if they be Mean or Poor, or of advancing and
aspiring to a higher Fortune, if they be Rich; teaching thus their Children
that which S. Cyprian reproaches them for, that is, Filios tuos doces
patrimonium magis amare quam Christum. S. Cypr. lib. de oper. Eleem.
To love more their Riches than Jesus Christ; and to labor in such a manner for
the Goods of this mortal Life, that they think little or nothing on the Eternal.

This Evil, dear Theotime, must be prevented in good time, It must be prevented
betimes.
and hindered from taking possession of your Heart, it being certain, that there
is no Vice which increases more with Age than this, and which becomes more
incapable of remedy. For this Effect take notice of what I counsel you.

1. First Means.
Being, as we have said, that the greatest Cause of this Covetousness in young
People, springs from the love of Pleasures, use all your Endeavors to moderate
that Passion, which may be said to be one of the greatest Mischiefs of Youth,
the Cause of all the Misfortunes it commits, and the chiefest Obstacle of all
the Good it can do. In the Name of God pass not from this Place without making
Reflections upon it.

2. Second Means.
That the love of Money may not take possession of your Soul, think often of
that great Maxim of St. Paul, that Covetousness is the root of all Evil. These
Evils are the Sins of the World, and the Misfortunes with which it is
replenished, whereof the greatest part springs from this wicked Cause, as it
would be easy to make it appear.

3. Third Means.
Be persuaded, that Riches damn many of the World, be they Rich or Poor; the
Rich by the ill Use, the Poor by Covetousness. Know, says the same Apostle, Hoc
scitote, intelligentes quod omnis fornicator, aut immundus, aut avarus, quod
est idolorum servitus, non habet haereditatem in regno Christi and Dei. Ephesians.
5.
that the Covetous has no part in the Kingdom of God.

4. Fourth Means.
Accustom your self not to desire Money but for your Necessity, and for your
civil and modest Recreations; and when you lack it, bear that Want with
Patience, considering how many Poor there are who have not Necessaries, and
that you are no better than they. Above all, never make use of Deceits,
Surprises, nor any other unlawful way of getting it.

5. Fifth Means.
Avoid certain Actions which are the Marks or Effects of Avarice in young
People, and which excite it much, as to Play for Gain, to be too fearful of
losing at Play, to Dispute for a small thing, to keep any thing from another,
and much more never to take any thing, be it what it will, which is, besides
the Sin committed, a damnable Custom, and of very dangerous Consequence.

6. Love the Poor, give Alms freely, Sixth Means.
abridge some part of the Money you have for your Recreations, to supply their
Necessities. Is it not a shame in you to be prodigal in your Pleasures, in your
Clothes, in your Superfluities, and to be so Covetous, so hard for the
Necessities of the Poor, who are Men like you, Christians like you, and
sometimes better than you in the sight of God? My Child, said the good old Toby
to his Son, Ex substantia tua fac eleemosynam, and noli avertere faciem tuam ab
ullo paupere, ita enim fiet, ut nec a te a vertatur facies Domini. Quomodo
potueris, ita esto misericors: si multum tibi fuerit, abundanter tribue: si
exiguum tibi fuerit etiam exiguum libenter impertiri stude. Praemium enim bonum
tibi thesaurizas in die necessitatis. Quoniam eleemosyna ab omni peccato and a
morte liberat, and non patietur animam ire in tenebras. Fiducia magna erit
coram summo Deo eleemosyna omnibus facientibus eam. Tob. 4.
give Alms of thy Substance, and turn not thy Face from any Poor, lest God turn
his Face from thee. Give Alms according to thy ability; if thou have but
little, be not afraid to give a little; for thou layest up a good Store for thy
self against the day of necessity: Because Alms delivers from Death, and
suffers not the Soul to come into Darkness; for Alms is a good Gift before
the most High to all them who use it. Consider well these Words, Theotime, and
engrave them deeply in your Mind.

In fine, you are either Poor, or of a mean Fortune, or Rich.

If you be Poor, beg of God the Grace to take your Poverty with Patience for
Penance, and for his Love. Confide in his Providence, which will never be
wanting to his Servants. Si soenum agri sic vestit Deus. quanto magis vos
modicae fidei? Quaerite ergo primum regnum Dei and justitiam ejus and haec
omnia adjicientur vobis. Mat. 6.
If God has care of the least Creatures, according to the Saying of our Lord,
how much more will he have of you? Seek then, says he, first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and all things necessary shall be given you. Read the Sixth Chapter of
S. Matthew. from Verse 24.

If you be of a mean Fortune, have a care to be content, and not to disquiet
your self by the desire of a greater. Call to mind what S. Paul says, Qui
volunt divites fieri, incidunt in tentationem and in laqueos Diaboli, and in
desideria multa inutilia and nociva quae mergunt homines in interitum; radix
enim omnium malorum est cupiditas. 1 Timothy 6.
that Those who desire to be Rich, fall into temptation, and snares of the
Devil, and into many wicked Desires which plunge them in perdition, because
Covetousness is the root of all Evil.

Wherefore practice the best you can that great Maxim which the same Apostle
gives to Christians, Sint mores sine avaritia contenti praesentibus, ipse enim
dixit non te deseram. Heb. 6.
Let there be no Covetousness in your Manners, being contented with the Goods
you possess, being God has said, I will not forsake you.

If you be Rich, stand in great fear of your Riches for your Salvation. Vae
vobis divitibus, quia habetis consolationem vestram. Luc. 6.
Woe be to the Rich, says the Son of God, because they have here their
Consolation. Upon the ocasion of a rich young Man he said, that it is very
difficult for the Rich to be Saved. To avoid the Dangers thereof, read and
practice what we have said in the Chapter of the Obstacles of rich young
Persons, in Part 3. Chap. 10.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Humility.
I Have reserved this Virtue for the last, as that which gives Perfection to
all others, and which is necessary to conserve them, and make them increase in
young Souls.

Pride is an inordinate Esteem of ones self, Pride creeps easily into young
Minds.
is most pernicious to all Men, but particularly to young Persons; It naturally
creeps into their Mind, according to the measure that they advance in Age, in
Virtue, in Science, or such other Perfections which they have, or think they
have; It makes them incapable of all good Impressions, and opens them the way
to all sorts of Vices.

My Child, Superbiam nunquam in tuo sensu, aut tuo verbo dominari permittas; in
ipsa enim initium sumpsit omnis perditio. Tob. 4. Initium omnis peccati est
superbia. Eccl. 10.
have a care that Pride never bear dominion in your Thoughts or Words, because
from it all the Misfortunes of the World arise, said the holy Man Toby to his
Son.

I say unto you also, Pride must be repressed by Humility.
Theotime, preserve your self from Pride, permit it not to take possession of
your Mind, banish it far from you, Humility is necessary for you. Not a
Humility of Behavior or Words, but a true, solid, interior Humility; an
Humility which renders you humble in these three manners, Three sorts of
Humility.
in your self, toward God, and toward Men.

1. 1. In ones self.
Be humble in your self, that is, in your own proper Esteem; Value not your
self for any thing whatsoever, neither for your Riches, nor for your Quality,
nor Beauty or good Behavior; for the Glory one takes in these things is base
and impertinent, and belongs only to vain Spirits; Nor for your Wit or Science,
for these are the Gifts of God, and you offer him an Injury when you raise your
self Esteem from thence; Nor much less for Virtue, for it springs far less from
you, and he who glories therein, puts himself in danger of absolutely losing
it. Besides, we often imagine we have Perfections which we have not; and when we
find in our selves any Advantage, we ought to give the Glory to God, who is the
Author of it, and not to our selves, who have received it, and say from our
Heart, Non nobis, Domine, Psalm. 113.
non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam.

It is an excellent Maxim of S. Bernard, Gloriam meam alteri non dabo, quid
ergo dabis Domine? Quid dabis nobis? Pacem, inquit, do vobis, pacem relinquo
vobis. Sufficit mihi, gratanter accipio quod relinquis, and relinquo quod
retines, sic placet, sic mea interesse non dubito. Abjuro gloriam prorsus, ne
forte si usurpavero non concessam, perdam merito and oblatam. Pacem volo, pacem
desidero, and nihil amplius. Cui non sufficit pax, non sufficis tu; tu es enim
pax nostra, qui secisti utraque unum. Et infra. Gloria in Excelsis Deo, in
terra Pax hominibus bonae voluntatis. At vero non bonae sed planae iniquae
voluntatis est, qui nequaquam pace contentus, superbo oculo and insatiabili
cord inquietus anhelat ad gloriam Dei, nec pacem proinde retinens nec gloriam
apprehendens. S. Bern. Sermon. 13. in Cant.
which ought to be deeply engraven in your Mind, That amongst all the Favors
God has bestowed upon us, he has reserved nothing to himself but the Glory of
being the Author of them; and having committed to us the whole Fruit of them,
it is a very unjust and criminal thing, that we should take to our selves the
Profit and also the Glory of them, retaining our Part, and usurping that which
belongs to God, after he has declared that he would give it to no one; I will
not give, says he, my Glory to another. Weigh well this Reflection, Theotime.

2. 2. Toward God.
Be humble toward God in consideration of his incomprehensible Greatness,
before which you are nothing in contemplation of that Power, Substantia mea
tanquam nihilum ante te. Psalm. 38.
of that Sovereign Majesty, which makes the Angels themselves to tremble.
Acknowledge the Offenses you have committed against this infinite Greatness,
the Favors which without number you have received from his Bounty, the Abuses
you have offered it, the Account you must give in his Judgment, the Necessity
you have of his Graces for your Salvation, with a thousand like things, and you
will find reason enough to humble your self, or rather annihilate your self
before God.

3. 3. Toward Men.
Be humble toward Men. There are those who are humble toward God, (for how
should not a wretched Creature abase it self before its Creator, its Lord and
its Judge?) but they are proud in respect of Men, and so have not true Humility.
To practice this Humility, be careful never to despise any Person, and be ready
to honor every one amongst Men: Some are above you, others equal to you, others
Inferiors.

As to the First, Respect toward Superiors.
be Respectful, Tractable, and Obedient to all those who have any Authority
over you. Suffer humbly to be reprehended, if you do otherwise, you are proud.
Honor also all those who surpass you in any thing, in Age, in Science, in
Quality.

As for your Equals, Toward Equals.
endeavor to treat them always with Esteem, with Honor, with Deference, without
being well-conceited of your self, without being offended at his Rank of Honor,
nor desiring to precede; you must leave these Vanities to those who affect them.

As for your Inferiors, Toward Inferiors.
be mild and benign to all those who Serve you, considering them as your
Brethren. Et vos, domini eadem facite illis, remittentes minas, scientes quia
illorum and vester Dominus est in coelis, and personarum acceptio non est a pud
eum. Ephesians. 6.9.
And you, Masters, (says the Apostle S. Paul) treat sweetly your Servants,
refraining from Threats, remembering that you have a common Master with them in
Heaven, who has no respect of Persons. Show your self humble and affable to
all others that are of a meaner Condition than you, according to that excellent
Precept of the Wiseman, Congregationi pauperum affabilem te facito.
Be affable to the company of the Poor; be ready to serve and assist them in
their Necessities.

In fine, A great Means to repress Pride, is to consider what Man is, his
Baseness, his Miseries, the shortness of Life, and what follows after Death.
Quid superbis terra and cinis? omnis Potentatus vita brevis; Rex hodie est and
cras morietur, cum morietur homo haereditabit serpents, bestias and vermes.
Eccl. 10.
Dust and Ashes, what do thou glory in? says the Wiseman. All Authority is
but of a short continuance. To day a King, to morrow nothing; and when Man
shall be dead, he will inherit Beasts, Serpents, and Worms. O God what a Motive
is this of Pride!

Respect not, Theotime, many exterior things, which environ you, and raise in
you Pride and Vanity, but consider what you are in your self, and you will find
reason enough to be humble; It is the Advice S. Bernard gives you in those
excellent Verses which I shall present to you, to meditate attentively on.

Forma favor populi, S. Bern. Medit. cap. 3.
fervor juvenilis, opesque
Subripuere tibi, noscere quid sit homo.
Vnde superbit homo? Cujus conceptio culpa,
Nasci paena, labor vita, necesse Mori.
Post hominem vermis; post vermem faetor and horror:
Sic in non hominem vertitur omnis homo.
Youth and Beauty, Wealth, and the Worlds Applause,
Make Man forget his Nature, and her Laws.
His Life's a Toil, Conception Sin, a Pain
His Birth, and needs must die. Why then so vain?
His Crops will Worms possess; and Stench and Dread
Will Worms succeed. See then what is Man when dead!
The Meaning is, That if Man will consider himself attentively, he will find
reason enough to repress his Pride; he will find that his Conception casts him
into Sin, his Birth into Misery, that his Life is a continued Chain of Labors,
that Death is an unavoidable Necessity, and that after Death he shall possess
nothing but Stench, Corruption and Horror, as to his Body. But as for his Soul,
she is to be presented before the Judgment of God, to receive there the Decree
of her Eternal Happiness or Misery; and this Judgment shall be terrible to the
greatest Saints.

THE INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH IN Christian Piety. PART V.
Of the Choice of a State of Life.
THIS Instruction would be imperfect, and destitute of one of the best and most
necessary Parts, if after having showed how we must live during Youth, it
should not direct how to make a good Choice of the Condition or State wherein
one ought to pass the remainder of his Life. This Choice is a Subject, whose
Knowledge is by so much more necessary to young Persons, as its Importance is
unknown to the greatest part of Men, and the Faults that are there committed
are most commonly irreparable; or if sometimes they be repaired, it is with
very great pains and difficulty. Besides, they are not light or of small
consequence, because the issues of them are extended to all the Life of a Man,
and pass even to his Eternal Salvation, of which they often draw the ruin after
them. For this reason, Theotime, I beseech you read attentively this last Part,
whether before you enter upon this Deliberation, or when you shall be at the
Point of making your Choice, and also after you have made it; for you will find
therein whereby to profit at each of those Times.

CHAP. I.
How important it is to make a good Choice of a State of Life.
THIS Importance is built upon two Truths, Two Fundamental Truths in this
matter.
which are to be supposed here as Fundamental in this matter.

The First is, That although all States may be good, yet all States are not good
for every one; and that such a State is profitable for one Man which will be
hurtful for another, all not having the same Inclinations, nor the same
Capacities, nor the same Favors of God.

The Second is, That God who has Established by his Providence the diversity
of States and Employments of the Life of Man, distributes them differently by
his Wisdom, designing some for one Employment, others for another: As a Father
of a Family divides amongst his Domestics the Offices of his House, according
as he finds them fit. For this reason he gives to Men different Inclinations,
diverse natural Abilities, as well Corporal as Spiritual; and also distributes
amongst them his Favors diversely, according to the several Necessities of
different States, to which he calls them.

These two Truths thus presupposed, evidently manifest how important it is to
choose well ones State and Condition: For if all States are not good for all,
it is then most important to choose advisedly, that we may not fall into a
State which may be contrary to us. And if God call each Man to one State more
particularly than another, it follows that we must proceed therein with a great
Circumspection, to choose what is most conformable to his Will, and for which
he has given us most Capacity, and prepared most Favors.

This choice is of such consequence, How important the Choice of a State is.
that on it depends all the Good of a Man, both for this Life, and for Eternal
Salvation. Be attentive, Theotime, to comprehend the Mischiefs into which all
ill Choice of a Condition casts Men, and into which it will cast you, if you be
defective therein.

First, 1. For the present Life.
for the present Life, What Good, what Contentment can he have, who is entered
into a State which he has ill chosen, and for which he is not proper? There is
no Condition more miserable. The Displeasure of seeing himself engaged against
his Inclination, joined with the Difficulties he undergoes to acquit himself of
his Duty, casts him into a Disquiet and Melancholy, which incessantly gnaws
him, makes him insupportable to others, and himself, and find in his Condition
a more horrid Prison than that of Criminals, and Chains more unmerciful than
those of Gally-slaves.

As for Salvation, 2. For Salvation.
what can a Man do in that State? For besides that Melancholy casts him into a
continual Idleness, and that Idleness into Vice and Perdition; With what
trouble must he effect his Salvation in a State wherein he has neither
Ability, nor Vocation from God? The want of these two things are the Causes why
he will commit an infinite number of sins, which he would not have done in
another State. The defect of Capacity makes him find continual Difficulties in
satisfying his Duty, and the particular Obligation of his State. The defect of
Vocation is the Cause why he wants many Favors he should have received in
another Calling, and of which he is made unworthy, being entered rashly into
this Condition, without consulting God, without demanding of him his Will. And
certainly, if we search into the Cause of the Disorders we see in each State,
Ecclesiastical, Religious, and Secular, wherein many discharge themselves of
their Duty very badly, we shall find the greatest part of the Mischiefs spring
from this Source, that is, from an ill Entrance into a State of Life; and that
the greatest part enter upon slight Grounds, without Examining whether they are
proper for it, and called by God.

For a Conclusion of this Importance, A profitable Advice.
I exhort all those who deliberate about the Choice of their State, attentively
to reflect upon these three things.

1. Upon the Displeasure and Sadness they will feel all their Life, for having
made an ill Choice of their Calling. 2. The great number of Sins they will
commit in a State they had lightly chosen, and which they would not have
committed in another Condition. 3. The Danger to which they expose their
Salvation, in choosing after this manner.
They who will attentively consider these three things, will take care not to
be defective in an Affair of this Importance.

CHAP. II.
Of the Faults that are ordinarily committed in this Choice.
I Find four sorts of Faults which young Men are accustomed to fall into, Four
ordinary Faults in this Choice.
in this so important a Choice, which are the Causes why they succeed therein
so very badly.

First, 1. They deliberate not.
They deliberate not at all upon this Choice, and instead of choosing a State
according to the Rules of Reason, and after a long and serious Deliberation,
they engage themselves in a Calling sometimes by a sudden Passion and Fancy,
sometimes by Occasion, and frequently by the sole Inclination they feel to one
Condition rather than another, without Examining whether they are proper for
it, whether it be for their Good, and whether they shall effect therein their
Salvation.

Secondly, When they deliberate, 2. They deliberate ill.
they propose things naughtily, that is, upon ill Grounds, and regard other
Ends than such as they ought to have before their Eyes in this Deliberation.
Some look upon the Sweetness of Life in the State they would embrace; Others
upon Riches and Preferment; Others upon Honor and Reputation; And in a word,
all regard Temporal Goods, and the present Life; but few propose Virtue and
Eternal Salvation, which chiefly, and before all things ought to be considered.
One says, This is proper to promote me in the World, and advance my Fortune;
but he does not say it is fit to promote me in Virtue, and effect my Salvation;
or else it is not suitable to me, because I foresee I shall offend God in many
Occurrences; I see therein Obligations I cannot satisfy, many Occasions and
Dangers of ruining me.

This Fault is great, and against all Reason; for, to deliberate wisely of the
State wherein we must spend our Life, we must cast our Eye upon the End for
which our Life is given us: This End is the Service of God, and the Salvation
of our Souls. We must then refer the Calling we choose to that; to do otherwise
is to stray out of the Way at the beginning, and suffer Shipwreck in the Port.

The Third Fault is, 3. Without Counsel.
That in deliberating on the Condition they ought to embrace, they only consult
with themselves, without communicating, or asking Counsel of any one. This
Fault is very common amongst young People, and besides, one of the greatest
they can commit in this Choice: For what appearance is there of deliberating
well of the most important Affair of our Life, in an Age wherein we have as yet
neither Judgment nor Experience of any thing, without taking Counsel of wise
and discreet Persons? This cannot but be the effect of an insupportable
Rashness, or certainly of a great Ignorance, which deserves so much more
compassion, as it is the cause of many Mischiefs. If the Wiseman recommend so
much to young People, Ne innitaris prudentiae tuae. Prove. 3. Fili, sine
consilio nihil facias, and post factum non poenitebit. Eccl. 32.
Not to trust to their own Judgment, to do nothing without Counsel, is it not
in this so important Affair, more than in any other, where they ought to follow
the Advice of the Holy Ghost himself? Observe well this Fault, for the Devil
often makes use of it to deceive young Persons in the Choice of their Calling. We
shall tell you hereafter with what kind of Persons you should consult in this
Concern.

There is a Fourth Fault yet more dangerous, 4. They consult not God.
which is, That in this Deliberation they consult not him who ought to be
consulted with above all others, viz. God himself: They have no recourse to him
by Prayer, humbly to demand of him his holy Inspirations, and Grace to know his
Will, although it be by him alone that we can succeed well in this Choice. He is
the Father of Lights, he is the Author of good Counsels. Besides, it belongs to
him to give us our Calling, and the Employment wherein he would have us serve
him in this Life, we must receive it from his Hands. He has a mind that we
should have recourse to him, and to advise with him in important Affairs; he
accounts himself offended when we are defective therein, and frequently he
gives us not his Blessing. See a convincing Example.

The Israelites, desirous to sly the Persecution of their Enemies, took a
Resolution to return into Egypt, out of their own Heads, without consulting God
to know what they should do. He reproached them exceedingly by his Prophet, and
threatened them that their Design should not succeed, but have a dreadful issue,
as in effect it had. Vae filii deserteres, ut faceretis confilium, and non ex
me ordiremini telam, and non per spiritum meum, ut adderetis peccatum super
peccatum, qui ambulatis ut descendatis in Aegyptum, and os meum non
interrogastis, erit vobis fortitudo Pharaonis in confusionem, and fiducia
umbrae Aegyptiae in ignominiam. Isai. 30.
Woe, says he, be to you fugitive Children, who abandon me to enter upon a
Design without consulting me, and to begin an Enterprise without expecting my
Will; adding to your former Sins a new one, of taking your Resolution without
my Counsel. Your Design shall turn to your Misfortune and Confusion. I would to
God all those who deliberate of the Choice of their State, had frequently these
Words in their Memory.

CHAP. III.
Of the Means to choose well a State of Life. And First, That a good Life
during Youth, is a Means highly necessary to succeed in this Choice.
AFter having showed you the Faults which are accustomed to be committed in the
Choice of a Condition, I come to the Means you must employ to succeed therein.

The First I assign you, is a Means on which few Persons reflect, although it be
most important in this Affair, viz. A good Life during the time of Youth.

I promote this Means, The Sins of Youth the cause of an ill Choice.
Theotime, to teach you betimes a Truth which the greatest part of Men are
ignorant of, or learn it too late, which is, That there is no greater Obstacle
to the Choice of a happy Calling, than the Sins of Youth; and that the most
ordinary Cause of the bad Election many make of their Condition, is a
disordered Life, and full of Sins, which they lead whilst they are young.

It is not hard to manifest this Truth, The Proof.
which many experience daily too much, God, in punishment of their Sins, not
affording them the Favor to know the Calling proper for them, abandons them in
this Choice of so great Importance, as they have deserted his Service: He
denies them high Light, as they have refused him their Obedience and Love. They
have given their first Years to the Devil, and God permits also that the Devil
should deceive them in this Election, making them undertake a State contrary to
their Good. And as they would not hearken to the Voice of his Commandments, and
holy Inspirations, he also gives not ear unto them when they have need of his
Assistance. In vocabunt me and non exaudiam, mane consurgent and non invenient
me eo quod exosam habuerint disciplinam, and timorem Domini non susceperint.
Prove. 3.
They shall call upon me, says he, and I will not hear them, they shall seek
after me, and shall not find me; because they have hated Instruction, and have
not received the Fear of God.

The Scripture is also full of the like Menaces, by which God assures us he
will deny his Light to those who have made themselves unworthy by their Sins.
Those Threats which were uttered by the Mouth of the Prophet Ezechiel are
astonishing. Many Persons of Quality being come to this Prophet, to consult God
by his Mediation, God speaks to the Prophet and tells him, Fili hominis, viri
isti posuerunt immunditias suas in cordibus suis, nunquid interrogatus
respondebo eis? Homo, homo de domo Israel, qui posuerit immunditias suas in
cord suo. Et venerit ad Prophetam interrogans per eum, me. Ego Dominus
respondebo ei, in multitudine immunditiarum suarum. Ezech. 14.
That he would not answer them, that is, he would not let them know his Will,
because they were wicked, and still kept their Wickedness in their Hearts. He
adds, That whosoever should come to his Prophet, to know by him his Will,
bearing also his Sins in his Heart, without having entirely parted with them,
he would answer him according to the multitude of his Iniquities; that is, he
would not answer him at all, but would permit that he should be deceived in his
Resolution, and that the Event should be misfortunate, as his Sins deserved.

The History of Kings furnishes us with a terrible Example of this Verity in
the Person of Saul first King of Israel. A notable Example, 1 Reg. 28.
This Prince had excited the Choler of God against him, by his Disobediences
and Ingratitudes. One day he found himself reduced to a great Extremity,
environed by his Enemies with this Army, and in the necessity of either
engaging in a Fight, or infallibly perishing. Not knowing what to resolve on,
he sends to the Priests and Prophets to consult God, and know what he must do
in this so pressing an Occasion. But God, who was displeased at him, answered
nothing, nor made his Will known to Priest or Prophet. Consuluit Dominum, and
non respondit ei neque per Somnia, neque per Sacerdotes, neque per Prophetas.
He consults God, says the Scripture, who answered nothing, neither by Dreams,
nor Priests, nor Prophets. This misfortunate Prince seeing himself thus
abandoned by God, is wholly bent on a Resolution Despair prompted. He goes
himself to consult a Witch, and asks of her that she would bring him to the
sight of the Ghost of Samuel, who was dead a little before, and had been a
Father and Director to him. Happy had he been, if he had always followed the
Counsel of that Man of God. God permits that this wicked Means should succeed,
and the Ghost of Samuel appeared to him, but it was only that he might learn
from him his Misfortune. Quid me interrogas cum Dominus recesserit a te? faciet
enim tibi Dominus sicut locutus est in manu mea. Quia non obedisti voci Domini
idcirco quod pateris fecit tibi Dominus hodie. Et dabit Dominus etiam Israel in
manu Philistim, cras autem tu and filii tui mecum eritis.
Why do thou ask me, said Samuel to him, since God has forsaken thee? Know,
that God will accomplish in thee all that he has foretold by my Mouth, because
thou have not obeyed his Voice; and it is in punishment of that Disobedience
that he has abandoned thee in this Necessity, and not answered thee to Day;
and besides, before to Morrow pass, thou shall be conquered by thy Enemies, and
shall die together with thy Children. All which punctually fell out.

O what a frightful Example is this! to manifest the Truth we here established,
of the Rejection of God in the most urgent Necessities, in punishment of former
Sins. And I would to God it were as rare as it is terrible, and that it were
not daily renewed in so many young Persons, whom God abandons in this so
important an Affair, of the Choice of their Calling, by reason of the Sins of
their Youth; for what else is it which we see in many? Some choose a State
quite contrary to their Good and Salvation, and which is often the cause of
either their Temporal or Eternal Ruin. Others continue in a long and perpetual
Irresolution, which hinders them from resolving upon any State or Condition,
and makes them lose the best part of their Life, which they spend thus in
Idleness, and frequently in Vice. Others tossed with a perpetual Inconstancy,
are displeased in all sorts of Callings; have scarce made choice of one, but
seek after and desire another, which hinders them from ever succeeding in any.
Are not all these things, I say, visible and manifest Effects of the Punishment
of God for the Sins committed in Youth? And we may say with truth to every one
of them, as Samuel to Saul, Quia non credidisti voci Domini, idcirco quod
pateris, fecit tibi Dominus hodie; That which thou suffer at present, is in
punishment of the Disobediences thou have committed against God.

For Conclusion, Theotime, I give you this Advertisement, which you can never
relfect on too much. If you be not already at the Time and Age of choosing your
State, have a care to live so in the Fear of God, and in the Flight of Sin,
that you deserve not to be abandoned of his Assistance, when you shall be at
the time of making this so important a Choice, but draw upon you, by your good
Life, his Blessing to succeed happily therein.

Now if you be at the Time of making this Choice, take notice how you have
lived hitherto, before you deliberate concerning it: And if your Life has been
sinful, have a care of choosing yet, but first take time to amend your Life, to
do Penance, and to be entirely converted to God, to the end your sins may not
be the Cause why God deserts you in this Choice. I tell you, Theotime, if you
make your Election in that State, you expose your self to evident danger of
deceiving your self, and succeeding misfortunately in the Choice you shall make.

CHAP. IV.
That to succeed well in the Choice of a State of Life, it is most important to
think of it before one be in the Time of Choosing.
AS the Choice of a Condition concerns the whole Life, it must not be done in a
Day, or a short time, nor without having thought on it a long time before. We
must dispose our selves a great while for an Affair of such consequence, that
we may judge of it more seriously when we shall be at the point of
Deliberating, and find less Difficulties, and also more Assistance from God in
this so important a Deliberation

For this effect you have three things to do, Three things to be done.
except you be at the Time of deliberating upon this Choice.

The First is to live Virtuously, 1. To Live well.
that you may not render your self unworthy of the Divine Favors for that Time,
as we have said.

The Second is, 2. To pray for that end.
to offer your Prayers frequently to God for that end; to demand often, that he
would do you the Kindness to make you know the Condition wherein he would have
you serve him. Notum fac mihi viam in qua ambulem, quia ad te levavi animam
meam, doce me facere voluntatem tuam. Psalm. 142.
Make me, O God, know the Way wherein I ought to walk, teach me to perform thy
Will.

The Third thing you have to do at that Time, 3. To think sometimes of this
Choice.
is to think sometimes upon the Choice of a Calling you are one day to make,
not to deliberate on it, but to find out to what you have an Inclination, what
Thoughts or Motions God gives you in that Time. The observation of these things
will serve much when you shall deliberate on a Choice: And it happens very
often, that by the Inclinations of Youth, God points us out the Condition to
which he calls us.

CHAP. V.
Of the Means which must be employed, when one deliberates on the Choice of a
State of Life.
HItherto we have spoken of the Means which must be practiced a long time
before we deliberate on the Choice of our Calling; now I come to those we must
employ when we are at the point of making that Election.

The Wiseman in Chap. 37. Three things to be done when we deliberate.
of Ecclesiasticus, teaching how we must comport our selves when we deliberate
on an Affair of consequence, appoints three things to be done, that we may
succeed happily.

1. He says, That we must take Counsel, not of all sorts of Men, but of some
wise and virtuous Person; for after he had numbered up many, who are not fit for
Counsel, he adds, Non attendas his in omni consilio sed cum viro sancto
assiduus esto. Quemcunque cognoveris observantem timorem Domini. Eccl. 37.
Take not Counsel of all those, but advise with a pious Man, and whom you know
to have the Fear of God; which I have already cited above, Part 2. Chap. 6.

2. He says, That we must consult our selves; Take Counsel of your own Heart,
Et cor boni consilii statue tecum. Non est enim aliud pluris illo. Ibid. v. 8.
says he, or as the Greek has it, Establish a Council in your Heart; That is,
you must deliberate within your self, examining seriously the thing you consult
of, its Circumstances, its Consequences, observing the Inclinations or
Repugnances you feel in your self, what you can, and what you cannot, and other
like things which must be considered in this Affair, following that excellent
Advice of St. Ambrose, Unusquisque suum ingenium noverit and ad id se applicet
quod sibi aptum delegerit. Ita quid sequatur prius consideret non solum noverit
bona sua; sed etiam vitia cognoscat: aequalemque sui se judicem praebeat, ut
bonis intendat, vitia declinet. S. Ambr. lib. 1. Offic. cap. 44.
Let every one, says he, know his own Disposition, and let him apply himself to
that he shall choose, as the most convenient for him: Let him consider first
what he will follow, let him not only know his good Qualities, but also his
bad, and let him judge of himself with equity.

The Pagans themselves were not ignorant of this so necessary a Counsel, which
one of their Poets has expressed in these Verses.

E coelo descendit (...)
Fingendum, Juvenal. Satyr 11.
and memori tractandum pectore sive
Conjugium quaeras, vel sacri in part Senatus
Esse velis, seu tu magno discrimine causam
Protegere affectes: Te consule, dic tibi quis sis.
From Heaven came down (...)
Consult your Mind if Marriage you desire,
Or to share in the sacred Senate you aspire,
Or Causes right in Courts of Justice Plead,
Resolve your self, and your own Orders read.
The Wiseman adds to these two Means a third, without which the other two are
unprofitable; that is, to consult God by Prayer, and humbly demand of him, that
he will conduct us in our Deliberation, and in the Resolution we shall take; Et
in his omnibus deprecare altissimum; ut dirigat in veritate viam tuam.
And in all these things beseech God to direct your ways in truth; that is,
that he would guide you so that you should not be deceived in your Choice: Men
may fail in their Counsels, you may be deceived in Deliberating, if they and
you be not conduct by God who is the Author of good Counsels, and can bring
them to a happy issue.

These, Theotime, are the three Means you ought to employ for the choice of
your Calling, and when you ought to embrace with so much more Respect, as it is
the Holy Ghost who prescribes them to you. Now to the end you may profitably
make use of them, I shall tell you in order what you must do when you shall be
upon the point of Employing them.

CHAP. VI.
What is to be done when one is upon the point of choosing his State.
WHEN you shall be upon the point of choosing a State of Life, which you ought
not to do, if possible, sooner than between Eighteen and Twenty Years of Age,
see what you shall practice.

First, What is to be done.
Being resolved with the Counsel of some discreet Person, to deliberate of the
Choice of your State, Take time to deliberate.
propose to your self a sufficient Time to apply your self entirely to this
important Deliberation: For Example, a Time of five or six Months, or more,
according to the Difficulty you shall find to resolve upon a Calling. Having
settled this Time, you shall perform what follows.

In the beginning of this Deliberation, Direct your Intention.
make your Intention to choose a State wherein you may serve God well, and
secure your Salvation in the practice of Virtue, and of a truly Christian Life:
Let that be your principal End, and your chiefest Motive, and let not temporal
Inducements enter into this Deliberation, but after this first and principal
Design.

Persuade your self, Account this Affair of greatest consequence.
as it is most certain, that this here is the most important Affair which can
ever befall you in your whole Life.

Begin by a good, Begin by a general Confession.
and if possible, by a general Confession: It will help, 1. To make you know
whether you be in a State to deliberate on this Choice, and whether your Sins
hinder you not, as we have said. 2. To make you more pleasing to God, and more
worthy of his Assistance and Light. 3. To discover unto you your Inclination.
4. To inform your Ghostly Father the better to counsel and direct you in this
Deliberation.

After Confession Communicate, and beg of God in your Communion, that he would
be pleased to assist you in this Deliberation you begin, and humbly offer your
Prayers to him for this Effect: This is the beginning. During the time of your
Deliberation, observe what you must do. 1. Have a great care to live in Virtue,
and in a great distance from Sin, Da mihi se dium tuarum assistricem
sapientiam. Mitte illam de coelis sanctis tuis and a sede magnitudinis tuae, ut
mecum sit and mecum laboret, ut sciam quid acceptum sit apud te. Sap. 9.
to make you worthy of Divine Favors. 2. Offer particular Prayers daily to God,
Vias tuas Domine demonstra mihi and semitas tuas edoce me: dirige me in
veritate tua delicta juventutis meae, and ignorantias meas ne memineris. Psalm.
24.
humbly to beg of him the Grace to know the State to which he calls you; Notam
fac mihi viam in qua ambulem. Invoke also daily the B. Virgin to obtain this
Grace of God, demand the assistance of your good Angel. 3. Confess your self
often during this time, that is, every Fortnight, and Communicate also at the
same time, according to the Advice of your Confessor. Be present at the Holy
Sacrifice of the Altar as often as you can, to demand of God therein his
Assistance. Give Alms according to your power, and also perform some Fasts for
this Intention. Recommend this Affair to the Prayers of your Friends. Let all
the Good you do be referred to that End, that is, to obtain of God the Grace to
choose well your Calling. 4. Apply some Hour of the Day to think seriously on
the State you must choose, and to deliberate of it within your self.

The first thing to be Examined in this Deliberation, Three things to be done
in this Deliberation.
is the choice of two general States, under which all others are comprehended;
that is, the State of Continence, and that of Marriage. The State of Continence
comprises principally the Ecclesiastical and Religious State, the State of
Marriage comprehends the different Callings of the World.

Examine first these two general States, and observe whether you be indifferent,
or have an Inclination to one of them.

If you be indifferent, take time to Examine seriously both of them in the sight
of God, and with a Design to choose that of the two which you shall find, after
a serious Deliberation and with good Counsel, to be the better, and most proper
for you.

If you be inclined, and carried to one of these two States, have a care not to
follow presently your Inclination, but Examine it diligently, and a long time.

And first, if it be to a Lay State, consider whether you have had this
Inclination a long time; Whether it be a good Motive that carries you to that
State; Whether it be not a greediness after Riches, a love of Pleasure or
Ambition, as it often happens. Call to mind the Difficulties, and Obligations
of that State; and to know them more easily, descend to the particular Callings
of the World, which you may most likely embrace. For this effect read what
shall be said thereof hereafter in Chap. 11. and 12. Beseech God that he would
make you know his Will, and not permit you to embrace that State, unless it be
to serve him. Protest to him, that this is your Design, and that
notwithstanding any Inclination you have for that Condition, you will quit your
self of it, if he shall make it known to you that it is not his Will. Banish
from your Mind all bad Motives of Pleasure, Covetousness, Ambition, and Vanity;
and propose no other than that of serving God, and doing his Will. When you
have proposed all these things during a good space of time, if this Inclination
continue with you, you may in the Name of God embrace that State, proposing
chiefly to your self, to comport your self therein as a virtuous Man, to avoid
the Dangers of it, to discharge your Obligations, and always to have the Fear
of God for the Rule of your Actions, and of all your whole Life. But in
choosing amongst the Callings of the World, have a care not to take those
wherein you see many Dangers of offending God, and ruining your self.

Now if you perceive your self to be moved to the State of Continence, whether
Ecclesiastical or Religious, as you must have a very particular Vocation to
these two States, so you must seriously examine it, and resolve nothing therein,
till after you have demanded a long time of God the Grace to know it, after you
have considered a good while the Difficulties and Advantages of the State you
would choose; and when you have taken good Counsel in it, we shall tell you
hereafter what you must do in the choice of these two Callings.

In fine, Theotime, during all the time of your Deliberation, Confer often with
your Ghostly Father, declare to him all that you observe in your self, the
Inclinations and Repugnances you find to diverse Conditions, the Difficulties
you apprehend therein, the Motives that incline you rather to one State than
another: Add thereunto also the Counsel of some other Persons, supposing they
have the Qualities we are about to speak of.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Qualities those ought to have of whom Counsel is to be taken for the
Choice of a State of Life.
THERE is no Question but you must principally consult in this Choice, him who
has knowledge of your Conscience, there being none who can see more clearly in
this Affair than he, since it is often an obscure, doubtful, and difficult
Business to resolve on, even with that Knowledge. But he must be a select Man,
endowed with much Virtue, with a most singular Prudence, and one who observes
exactly the following Rules.

1. Let him not undertake to conduct another in this Choice, until he has
offered his Prayers to God for that effect, and know whether he will make use
of him in this Occasion.

2. Let him in this Direction regard nothing but God, and the Salvation of him
whom he Conducts, and let him have no other Design but to seek the Will of God.

3. Let him strip himself of all Inclination he may have to move to one State
rather than another. For Example, an Ecclesiastic must lay aside the
Inclination to move to an Ecclesiastical Life; A Religious, that of persuading
to a Religious State. He must be absolutely disengaged in this Conduct, that he
may not take his own Inclination for the Will of God, much less must he have
any Interest, which is a Crime in this Concern.

4. Let him proceed seriously in this Direction, not giving Counsel in have,
and in a short time, but taking leisure to think on it, to Examine all the
Reasons, and all the necessary Circumstances, to ask Counsel of others if it be
convenient, without naming the Person concerning whom he Consults; and above
all, to Pray much.

5. Let him have recourse to God, to know what he must counsel him according to
his holy Will, and for the Good and Salvation of him whom he Advises; and let
him put more trust in his Prayers than his own Judgment, expecting to know
nothing by himself, but by the sole Grace of God: For, as the Wiseman says,
Quis enim hominum scire potest consilium Dei, aut quis poterit cogitare quid
velit Deus? sensum autem tuum quis sciet, nisi tu dederis sapientiam, Spiritum
sanctum tuum de altissimis? Sap. 9.
Who can know the Design of God? or who can know his Will? And who can know his
own Thought, except God himself give him the knowledge of it?

There happen sometimes so great Difficulties in this Choice, that he who gives
Counsel, knows not on what to resolve. Vast Obstacles offer themselves in the
Execution of some Design, and a Man cannot tell whether they be Temptations of
the Devil, which endeavor to divert from it, or Impediments which God sends, to
show that he only desires the Good Will, and not the Execution of that Design;
and then there is no other Means to be taken but Time and Prayer.

To the Counsel of the Confessor may be added that of some other Persons, on
Condition they have these three Qualities, Cum fatuis consilium ne habeas, non
enim potuerunt diligere, nisi quae eis placent. Eccl. 8. Cum sapientibus and
prudentibus tracta. Eccl. 9.
Virtue, Wisdom, and Disinteressedness; That is, That they regard principally
the Salvation of him whom they Counsel; That they consider seriously all
things; And that they have no Interest to see him of one Calling rather than
another.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether Parents are to be hearkened to in this Choice.
I Treat this Question here, because it frequently falls out, that the Choice
of a State of Life is hindered or disturbed by Parents, who give not to their
Children the liberty of choosing, but determine them themselves according to
their Inclination or Interest; in which Point they sin most grievously, and
render themselves culpable in the sight of God, An Advertisement for Paerents.
of all the Disorders or Misfortunes which often happen, or may happen from
their unjust Proceeding.

First then, Theotime, if your Parents leave you at liberty to choose your
Calling, you must account your self happy, and give God many Thanks for it. Now
if they permit not you to have the liberty of choosing, this is what you must
do.

1. In respect of an Ecclesiastical, or Religious State. 2. In respect of a Lay
State.

As for the Ecclesiastical or Religious State, neither their Counsel nor their
Will ought to be a sufficient Reason to choose, or leave one of these Callings;
but you must consider whether you be called thereto by God. These two States
being more perfect, and having greater Obligations than others, require a
particular Vocation from God; which ought to be followed when it is known, and
when it is not, you must not engage your self therein. For this Reason, if your
Parents desire that you be an Ecclesiastic, or Religious, First Examine, and
that a long time, whether God has called you to one of these States; and if
after you have consulted a good while, you find no Vocation to either, be
careful not to enter upon either, notwithstanding any Persuasions they may use,
or Commands they may lay upon you, even when they employ Constraint and
Violence: Yet remember to make this Resistance with all the Respect you ow
them, showing them modestly that you cannot comply with their Desires, and the
Reasons you have for it. Cause these Declarations to be made to them by Persons
who have power over their Minds. Beseech God that he will make them change
their Minds, or let you know whether you must follow it. If on the contrary,
they divert you from an Ecclesiastical, or Religious State, and you perceive
your self strongly moved thereto, you must Examine your Inclination, to know
whether it come from God; for if God call you, you must obey Him, and not Men.
You will know whether it come from God, by doing that which we shall appoint
you hereafter concerning the Choice of these two Callings. Chiefly, if your
Inclination has no other Motive than to serve God, Marks of a Vocation from
God.
and procure your Salvation; if it be urgent, long, and persevering; if it
still continue with you amidst the Obstacles and Resistances which are offered,
notwithstanding all the Persuasions may be used to the contrary; it is a great
sign that it comes from God: Nevertheless, act nothing therein without taking
Advice from wise Persons, who may counsel you what you have to do; to follow at
the same time the Inspiration of God, and not offer an Injury to the Respect
you ow to your Parents.

As to the choice of different Conditions in the World, supposing you are
determined to a Lay State, you must conform your self to the Will of your
Parents, and yield much to their Inclination and Judgment, except the Condition
to which they design you, expose you to evident Occasions of offending God, or
be notably prejudicial to your Good, or else that you have such a repugnance to
it, that you cannot conquer it, or a manifest unfitness, or other great
Reasons; of which yet you alone must not judge, but by the Counsel of wise and
virtuous Persons.

CHAP. IX.
Of the different States of Life, and first of the Ecclesiastical State.
THAT you may better deliberate on the Calling you ought to choose, it is
seasonable that I should speak of the principal States, and propose the most
important things you must consider in each of them.

I begin with the Ecclesiastical State, concerning which, if you deliberate,
you ought to reflect attentively upon three things.

1. What it is, that is, how great, and what its Obligations and Dangers are.
2. The Vocation you must have to it. 3. The preparation you must bring with
you.
ARTICLE. I.
Of the greatness of the Obligations and Dangers of an Ecclesiastical State.
FIRST then, you must consider that you deliberate on a State which is the
highest, and most elevated of all the States in the World. It is the Calling
which approaches nearest to God, and which God has Established to be Mediator
betwixt him and Men, and by the Mediation whereof he communicates himself to
them. He has committed to its Trust all that is most perfect and dear to him;
The Ministry of his Word, the Dispensation of his Divine Mysteries, the
Administration of his Sacraments, the Government of the Church, and in fine,
the Salvation of Souls which he has Redem'd by the Price of his Blood; A State
whose Functions surpass all those of Angels, who look upon them with a profound
Respect, esteeming them infinitely above their Power, and the Dignity of their
Celestial Nature. O God, Theotime, what a Grandeur and Dignity is this!

This so exalted a State ought not to swell Ecclesiastics with Glory, The
Obligations of an Ecclesiastical State.
but fill them with much Fear and Trembling; for as it is high, it brings with
it vast Obligations.

1. It obliges them to a great Sanctity; because they approach to God in their
Ministry, they are obliged to be Holy. Sanctificabor in eis qui appropinquant
ad me. Lev. 10. Sancti estote quia ego sanctus sum. Levit. 1.
I will be sanctified, says he, in those who approach to me. Be holy, because I
am holy. For this Reason Per sacrum ordinem deputatur aliquis ad dignissima
ministeria quibus ipsi Christo servitur in ministerio altaris ad quod
requiritur major sanctitas interior, quam requirat etiam religionis status. S.
Thom. 2a 2 ae Quaest. 138. Art. 8.
S. Thomas says that the Sanctity required for this State, ought to be greater
than that of a Religious State.

And they are not only obliged to a particular and hidden Sanctity, such as
that of other Christians, but to an exemplar Sanctity, which serves as a Light
to others. They are designed for that End, the Son of God said particularly to
them, Vos estis lux mundi, sic luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, ut videant
opera vestra bona and glorificent patrem vestrum qui in coelis est. Mat. 5.
You are the Light of the World, let your Light shine so amongst Men, that they
may see your good Works, and glorify your Celestial Father. And the Council of
Trent says Divinely, Nihil est quod alios magis ad pietatem and Dei cultum
assidue instruat, quam eorum vita and exemplum qui se divino ministerio
dedicarunt. Quapropter sic decet omnino Clericos in sortem Domini vocatos,
vitam moresque suos omnes componere; ut habitu, gestu, incessu, sermon,
aliisque omnibus, nihil nisi grave, moderatum, and religionis plenum prae se
ferant; levia etiam delicta, quae in ipsis maxima essent, effugiant; ut eorum
actiones cunctis afferant venerationem. Conc. T^id. Sess. 21. c. 1.
That there is nothing more instructs others in Piety, and the Service of God,
than the Life and Example of those who are Consecrated to the Divine Ministry.
And for this reason it behooves the Clergy, who are called to the Lot of our
Lord, so to regulate their Life and Manners, that in their Habit, Gesture,
Walking, Discourses, and other things, there appear nothing but what may relish
of Gravity, Modesty, and Religion; And avoid light Faults, which would be
heinous in their Persons, that their Actions may cause Veneration in all Men.

The other Obligation of Ecclesiastics, is to cooperate to the Salvation of
Souls; they are Established for that End, and without a Crime they cannot
dispense with it; It is an Abuse to believe, that only Curats are charged with
that Obligation. All Incumbents, and all Ecclesiastics, are obliged to this
Labor. St. Paul says, That Nos autem servos vestros per Jesum. 2 Cor. 4.
they are Servants of the Faithful. The Oblations are given to them by the
Faithful for that intent. And St. Gregory says, Pensemus cujus damnationis sit
^ine labor hic recipere mercedem laboris. Ecce ex obla tione fidelium vivimus,
sed nunquid pro animabus fidelium laboramus. S. Greg. Hom. 1. in Evangel. Cant.
Laetemur ad ascensum, sed timeamus ad lapsum, etc. Neque enim solum pro nostris
delictis reddemus rationem, sed pro omnium quorum abutimur bonis, and nequaquam
sumus de eorum salute solliciti. S. Hieron. in cap. 44. Ezech.
they ought to consider how criminal and punishable a thing it is, to receive
the Fruit of Labor without Labor. S. Jerome says, That Priests shall not only
render an Account of their own Sins, but of the Sins of all those whose Goods
they abuse, living on their Goods, and not taking aeny care of their Salvation.

S. Bernard adds a dreadful thing, Venient, venient ante tribunal Christi,
audietur populorum querela gravis, accusatio dura quorum vixere stipendiis, nec
diluere peccata, quibus facti sunt duces caeci, fraudulenti mediatores. S. Ber.
in Decl.
That at the Universal Judgment we shall hear the Complaints and Lamentations
of People, who shall rigorously accuse the Ecclesiastics before the Tribunal of
God, as Deceivers, for having lived on their Goods, without applying themselves
to the Expiation of their Sins; for having been blind Guides, and unfaithful
Mediators of their Salvation; for having cast them into a Precipice, instead of
conducting them to Eternal Life.

O Theotime, read attentively, and weigh well the Sentiments of these great
Saints, touching this Obligation of Ecclesiastics, to engrave them deeply in
your Heart, and advantage your self by them, when you shall be entered into an
Ecclesiastical State.

From these two so strict obligations spring two extreme Dangers of this State.
The Dangers of an Ecclesiastical State.
The one is, of not being endowed with the Sanctity it requires, but corrupted
by the Spirit and Maxims of the World, and much more by the Contagion of
Ecclesiastics, the greatest part whereof lead a Life far removed from the
Perfection of their State. The other Danger is, Multam malitiam docuit
otiositas.
of falling into that Idleness common to Ecclesiastics; which making them
neglect the Labor to which their Calling obliges them, renders them most
culpable in the sight of God, and moreover casts them into many Disorders and
Vices, whereof it is ordinarily the Mother.

To these two Dangers must be added two others, which arise from Benefices. Two
other Dangers, Plurality of Benefices, and bad use of Ecclesiastical Goods.
The First is, to possess many Benefices, when one is sufficient for an honest
and moderate Maintenance; for that is against the Law of God, and of his
Church, and against all Reason. It is the constant Opinion of Divines, That
that cannot be done without a mortal Sin, except it be by a particular
Dispensation, built upon good and real Causes, which ought to spring from the
Necessity of the Church, or from her greater Advantage. I know very well, that
the Covetousness of Incumbents finds sufficient Means to Disguise themselves on
this Occasion, under the Pretenses of Necessity, Congruity, and even of Piety;
but when these Pretenses shall be Examined at the Divine Judgment, they will
appear what they are, that is, a pure disguising of real Avarice, which will be
found most criminal in the sight of God, and cause the Damnation of many, who
will be sorry too late for having followed the disorderly Motions of their
insatiable Covetousness.

The other Danger consists in the Management of their Revenues, which cannot
without a mortal Sin be employed in wicked, or even in superfluous Expenses, as
in Delicacies, in good Cheer, in Vanities, in Excesses of Feasts, of Garments,
of Movables, and other like things; Not to enrich their Relations, or heap up
Treasures, which often draw the visible Curse of God upon those who hoard them
up. Incumbents are forbidden all these things. And it is an absolutely certain
Truth, that they cannot receive from their Benefices more than their sufficient
and modest Maintenance, and the rest ought to be employed in Alms and pious
Works. Many Divines hold they are bound to Restitution, when they dispose of it
otherwise; and the generality condemns them at least of a mortal Sin.

ARTICLE II.
Of the Vocation to an Ecclesiastical State.
The Ecclesiastical State being so high and elevated, There must be a Vocation
to an Ecclesiastical State.
must certainly require a Vocation from God. This is the great Maxim of the
Apostle, Nec quisquam sumat sibi honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo tanquam Aaron.
Heb. 5.
Let no Man take this Honor to himself, but he who is called by God as Aaron. A
Maxim which he confirms by the adorable Example of Jesus Christ, who being by
himself, and by his Dignity of the Son of God, a Priest, would not take upon
him the Quality of Sovereign High Priest, but received it from Him, who from
all Eternity said to him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee; and in
the Moment of his Incarnation said to him, Thou art a Priest for ever according
to the Order of Melchisedec.

There must then be a Vocation to an Ecclesiastical State, and this sole
Example of Jesus Christ ought to confound all those who have the boldness to
intrude themselves by their own Motion, without a Divine Call, drawing upon
themselves by this Impudence, the Wrath of Almighty God, the refusal of his
Favors, and the certain loss of their Eternal Salvation.

This being so, Theotime, you may very well judge with what care you ought to
Examine your Vocation, if you deliberate about the Choice of an Ecclesiastical
State. To succeed happily therein, see what you are to do: You must know
whether the Motion and Inclination you feel to an Ecclesiastical State, come
from God; for if it come from him, it is a Vocation, but if it come not from
him, it is an Illusion and Deceit of the Devil, who moves you to an
Eccclesiastical State to ruin you therein.

To know whether this Motion come from God, you must Examine two things. 1. What
Intention inclines you to this State. 2. Whether you have the requisite
Dispositions.

As to the Intention, if it be bad, it is certain your Motion comes not from
God; for he cannot be the Author of any Ill. Now it is bad, if you have for the
Mark at which you aim, any of these Ends; that is, To live more at your Ease in
an Ecclesiastical State; To find therein Repose, Idleness, or Delights; To heap
up Riches; To be honored and esteemed by Men, and other like things: All these
Motives are bad, and if you have any such, your Vocation is not from God, but
rather from the Devil. This Truth is learned from S. Bernard; Universos in
ordinibus Ecclesiasticis, honorem quaerentes proprium aut divitias, aut saeculi
voluptates, postremo quae sua sunt, non quae Jesu Christi, maniseste prorsus
and indubitanter non ea quae ex Deo est charitas, sed aliena a Deo, and omnium
radix malorum cupiditas introducit. S. Bern. in Declamat.
All those, says he, who in Ecclesiastical Orders seek either Honor or Riches,
or the Pleasures of this Life; and in a word, who seek their Interest, and not
that of Jesus Christ, without doubt are not moved to this State by Charity,
which is from God, but by Covetousness, which is the Enemy of God, and the
Fountain of all Mischiefs.

Your Intention then must be good, Two Ends which make an Ecclesiastical State
good.
and to be so, it must have for its End these two things, The Sanctification of
your own Soul, and the Salvation of your Neighbors, which are the two general
Obligations of that Calling, as it has been said. That is, you should propose
to your self to live in that State a holy and exemplar Life, and contribute to
the Salvation of Souls by your Prayers, Labor, and all possible Means,
according to the same S. Bernard, who says, That he who would enter into the
Orders of the Church, and be received into the Ministry of the Sanctuary, ought
to have this Quis ea intention gradus Ecclesiasticos and ministerium
sanctuarii quaerit ut sine curis saeculi, in sanctimonia cordis and corporis
illuminandus accedat ad Dominum and suam pariter and proximorum salutem
operetur orationis studio deditus, and verbo praedicationis? Idem ibid.
Intention, To approach to God with an absolute Disengagement from the things
of this World, in a perfect Purity of Mind and Body, to be illuminated by him,
and procure therein his own Salvation, and that of his Neighbor, by applying
himself to Prayer, and to the Dispensation of the Word of God.

It is not sufficient for the Ecclesiastical State, to have a good Intention,
you must besides be fit for it. There are two sorts of Defects which make a Man
improper for that Calling, the Defects of the Mind, and the Corruption of Life
and Manners. We shall not speak of those of the Body, whereof some render a Man
Irregular, that is, incapable, according to the Canons of the Church, of being
admitted to Orders. The Defects of the Mind are Dullness or Stupidity,
Rudeness, Lightness of Mind, Ignorance, and other like, which visibly render a
Man incapable of discharging Ecclesiastical Duties. Such Defects, when they
cannot be concealed by Age, and Labor, are contrary to an Ecclesiastical
Calling, and apparently discover that a Man is not called to it.

The same is to be said of the Corruption of Manners. Every one who has lived
in Sin, or is still subject to any considerable Vice, as Impurity, Drunkenness,
Swearing, Revenge, Covetousness, Ambition, and other like Faults, ought not to
believe himself fit, or called by God to an Ecclesiastical Life, except he has
corrected his former Manners by a long Penance, and has entirely mortified his
Passions, and conquered his bad Inclinations by contrary Virtues. This Verity
belongs to the Preparation of which we are going to speak.

ARTICLE. III.
Of the Preparation necessary for an Ecclesiastical State.
Preparation is the third thing you have to Examine in deliberating on an
Ecclesiastical State, There must be a Preparation to an Ecclesiastical State,
by a virtuous and holy Life.
and so much more necessarily, as it frequently happens, that they who aspire
to this State, account not themselves obliged to be prepared for it a long time
before by a virtuous and holy Life. This is an Error so much the more to be
deplored, as it is most common, and the reason why Ecclesiastics dishonor their
State by their Life, because engaging themselves therein without this
Preparation, it is no wonder, if they lead as they did before, a Secular, and
oftentimes a most Vicious Life.

To disabuse you, Theotime, of this Error, Proofs of this Truth.
it is sufficient to represent unto you the Sanctity of that State: For if it
be so holy and elevated, it is an infallible Consequence, 1. By the Sanctity of
the State.
that you must prepare your self for it by a holy Life; and to desire to enter
into Orders with a Soul still subject unto Sin, and full of Vicious Habits, is
to contemn it, and to offer a most heinous Injury to it: It is to put your self
in a most evident danger of dishonoring it by a Life unworthy of it, and
contrary to the Sanctity it requires, and to find therein a certain Damnation.

But to convince you absolutely of the Necessity of this Preparation, 2. By
convincing Authorities.
I shall give you here the Sentiment of the Saints, and of the Church her self,
upon this Subject.

S. Gregory the Great says, Ordinate ad ordines ascendendum est, nam casum
appetit qui ad summa loci fastigia, postpositis gradibus per abrupta quaerit
ascensum. Apta namque aedificationibus e sylvis ligna succiduntur nec tamen
adhuc viridibus aedificii pondus imponitur, nisi eorum viriditatem multorum
dierum mora siccaverit, and apta ad necessarium usum effecerit; Quae
observantia si forte negligatur, citius superposita mole franguntur, and gignit
ruinam ad auxilium res provisa. S. Greg. l. 7. Epist. 112.
That we must ascend unto Orders by Order; for he seeks a Ruin and Precipice,
who desiring to mount up to a high Place, leaves the ordinary Degrees to ascend
by rough and craggy Ways. And he adds an excellent Comparison: For as Timber is
not proper to be employed in Building when it is yet green, and newly come out
of the Forest, except it be dried and seasoned a long time; otherwise it rather
serves to ruin the Building than support it. Thus they ought not to be advanced
to Sacred Orders, who have lately been engaged in Sin, except all their wicked
Habits have been corrected by a long and serious Penance.

St. Jerome speaking of an Ecclesiastical State, Vae homini illi qui non habens
vestem nuptialem ingreditur ad coenam, nil superest nisi ut audiat. Amice
quomodo huc intrasti, etc. Probet se unusquisque and sic accedat. Non facit,
Ecclesiastica dignitas Christianum. S. Hier. Epist. 1.
says, Woe be to him who enters therein without the Nuptial Robe of Sanctity. He
further adds, Let every one Examine and Prove himself, and not approach before
that Trial. Ecclesiastical Dignity does not make a Christian nor a virtuous
Man, such an one as an Ecclesiastic ought to be.

S. Bernard in many places of his Works, Vae filiis irae qui nec dum
reconciliati reconciliationis alienae negotia, quasi homines qui justitiam
fecerint, apprehendunt. S. Bern. de Conversi ad Clericos cap. 10.
does nothing but make Complaints and Invectives against those who enter thus
into Orders, without bringing with them the Preparation of a holy Life
experienced in Virtue. He says it is an insupportable Affront of those who do
it, and that it is the Source of all the Disorders of Ecclesiastics.

St. Thomas establishes this Difference between Sacred Orders and a Religious
State, Religionem ingredi non solum expedit his qui sunt exercitati in
praeceptis, ut ad majorem perfectionem perveniant, sed etiam his qui non sunt
exercitati, ut facilius peccata vitent, and perfectionem assequantur. Ad
dicendum quod ordines sacri praeexigunt sanctitatem, sed Status Religionis est
exercitium quoddam ad sanctitatem assequendam. Unde pondus ordinum imponendum
est parietibus jam per sanctitatem desiccatis, sed pondus religionis desiccat
parietes. id est, homines ab humore vitiorum, S. Thom. 2.2. Quaest. 180. Art.
1. Vtrum qui non sunt exercitati in praeceptis debeant ingredi religionem.
That to enter into Religion it is not necessary to be Exercised beforehand in
Virtue; but to enter into Orders it is required: And he brings this Reason,
Because, says he, Sacred Orders require a precedent Sanctity, which the State
of Religion does not, which is an Exercise instituted to attain unto Sanctity.

All these Authorities are clear, and admit of no Reply. Give ear to that of
the whole Church speaking in the Council of Trent.

The Sacred Council, after it had determined the Age wherein one might receive
Holy Orders, adds, That Sciant tamen Epifcopi non singulos in ea aetate
constitutos debere ad hos ordines assumi, sed dignos duntaxat and quorum
probata vita senectus sit. Council. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 12.
all those are not capable of Orders who have attained to that Age, but only
those who are worthy of it, and whose experienced Life is a certain old Age;
That is, they should recompense their Age by the Wisdom of their Life, and
Sanctity of their Manners, according to that Maxim of the Wiseman, which says,
That Cani sunt sensus hominum and aetas senectutis vita immaculata. Sap. 4.
the gray Hairs of a Man consists in Wisdom, and in a holy and immaculate Life.

After all these Authorities there is no reason to doubt of the necessity of
this Preparation to an Ecclesiastical State, but rather to be both astonished
and sorry to see it so ill observed.

ARTICLE IV.
The Conclusion of the Precedent Chapter.
These are the principal things which he, who aspires to an Ecclesiastical
State, ought attentively to consider.

If then you deliberate of this Calling, What is to be done about deliberating
on an Ecclesiastical Life.
see what you have to do. Practice all that we have said in the Sixth Chapter,
take a reasonable time to perform this Deliberation, and during that time, 1.
Pray much, Confess, and Communicate often. 2. Read, and Meditate attentively
what we have said concerning the Ecclesiastical State: Weigh well the Greatness
and Holiness of that Calling, to conceive a high Esteem of it; its Obligations,
to see whether you can acquit your self of them; and its Dangers, to avoid
them: Examine diligently, and without flattering your self, what Motive you
bring to this State, what Fitness you have for it, and whether you have nothing
in you which may be contrary to it. 3. Confer often with some wise and virtuous
Ecclesiastic, who shall perfectly know how to inform you of all you ought to
consider in that Calling, and discover to you whether you have requisite
Dispositions for it.

If after a long Deliberation you believe you ought to embrace that State, What
is to be done after the Resolution.
resolve to dispose your self for it as you ought, that is, by a holy and
virtuous Life, and by a serious Study of the Knowledge of those things which
shall be necessary for you. And as soon as you are fixed upon your Resolution,
apply your self seriously to these two things.

First, 1. He must prepare himself by a holy Life.
Addict your self entirely to Piety, fly Sin, labor to mortify your Passions,
to correct your irregular Inclinations, to attain to Christian Virtues,
Chastity, Humility, Modesty, Simplicity, and the Contempt of the World: Fly the
Spirit of the World and worldly Conversation, frequent the Sacraments, read
pious Books, and above all the New Testament, and Books which treat of the
Obligations of an Ecclesiastical State, which the holy Fathers have left us, as
the Offices of S. Ambrose, the Epistle of S. Jerome to Nepotian of the Life of
Clergymen, the Pastoral of S. Gregory, the Declamations of S. Bernard, alias De
contemptu mundi ad Clericos, his Books De Conversione ad Clericos, his Books De
Consideratione, and other Works of this Subject, as well ancient as modern
Authors. A remarkable Advice.
Have frequently before your Eyes that remarkable Advice which S. Jerome gave to
Rusticus a Monk, who aspired to an Ecclesiastical State; Ita age and vive in
Monasterio ut Clericus esse merearis, ut adolescentiam tuam nulla sorde
commacules, ut ad altar Christi quasi de thalamo virgo procedas. S. Hier. Ep.
ad Rustic.
Live so holily in your Monastery, says he to him, that you may deserve to be
of the Clergy, and not defiling your Youth by Sin, you may approach to the
Altar of Jesus Christ in a perfect Purity. Meditate well upon this Advice,
Theotime, consider it often, and conceive it spoken to your self, and certainly
with much more Reason; for, if a young Religious, living in the observance of a
Monastical Rule, must have a care of himself, to make himself worthy of an
Ecclesiastical State by a holy Life, how much more care and pains ought you to
take, who live in the World, where you have not the Advantages of a Regular
Life?

Secondly, 2. By the Study of Sciences necessary for an Ecclesiastic.
When you prepare your self for an Ecclesiastical State by a virtuous Life,
remember to join with the Exercises of Piety, diligent Labor, and continual
Study, to make your self capable to serve God in that Calling. This Labor is no
less necessary for an Ecclesiastical State than that of Sanctity. You are
obliged to it in Conscience, and if you apply not your self carefully to it,
you render your self unworthy of that Calling: Quia tu repulisti scientiam,
repellam te ne sacerdotio fungaris mihi. Oseae. 4.
For God will reject from his Priesthood, him who has rejected Science. And
moreover, you make your self guilty in the sight of God, of all the Mischiefs
which happen through your Ignorance.

The Ignorance of Priests is the greatest Evil that can be found in the Church,
The great Evils which spring from the Ignorance of Priests.
it being the chiefest Cause of the Corruption of the People, and Loss of
Souls. It is impossible but that an ignorant Ecclesiastic should be Slothful
and Idle, not being able to apply himself to his Studies, and that Idleness
should cast him into Vice, as we daily see. Now although he should not be
vicious, Idleness alone is criminal in a Priest. Add the Mischiefs which the
Ignorance of Ecclesiastics causes in respect of the People: For it either
hinders them from laboring for the Salvation of Souls (from whence the People
suffer much, losing the Assistance they ought to receive from them for their
Eternal Salvation,) or else renders them incapable of sufficiently acquitting
themselves of that labor, and is the Cause that many Souls are Damned by their
Incapacity, which bars them from Instructing them in those things they ought to
know; and in a word, from directing them in the Way of Salvation, which the
greatest part know not. It is not to be conceived how many Souls are lost by
the Ignorance of Priests. Quid enim periculi sit ubi non invenit Pastor pascua,
dux ignorant itineris viam, servus nescit Domini voluntatem, Ecclesia quotidie
multipliciter and miserabiliter experitur. S. Bern. in Declamat.
The Church (says St. Bernard) has daily a great and lamentable Experience of
the Danger Souls are exposed unto, when the Pastor wants wherewith to feed his
Sheep, when the Guide knows not the Way by which he should conduct them to
Salvation, nor the Servant the Will of his Master, which he ought to declare to
others.

O my dear Theotime, reflect well upon these things, and be afraid, lest by
your Ignorance you make your self the Cause of the ruin of Souls redeemed by
the Blood of Jesus Christ. Addict your self seriously to the Study necessary
for an Ecclesiastic, and assign for the Mark at which you aim, the making your
self the most capable you can of serving God in the State to which he has
called you.

In fine, An important Advice.
Whether in Deliberating on this Condition, or Preparing your self for it, set
frequently before your Eyes those excellent Words of S. Augustine, writing to a
Friend of his, who demanded of him Counsel concerning an Ecclesiastical State.
Ante omnia peto ut cogitet religiosa prudentia tua nihil esse in hac vita and
maxim hoc tempore, facilius and levius and hominibus acceptabilius Episcopi,
Presbyteri, and Diaconi Officio, si persunctorie and adulatorie res agatur, sed
nihil apud Deum miserabilius and tristius, and damnabilius. Item nihil esse in
hac vita and maxim hoc tempore difficilius, laboriosius and periculosius
Episcopi, Presbyteri, aut Diaconi Officio, sed apud Deum nihil beatius, si eo
modo militetur quo noster Imperator jubet. S. Aug. Epist. 184.
I entreat you, says he, before all things, that by your Virtuous Wisdom you
will consider well that there is nothing in this Life, and principally at this
Time, more easy, more light, and more acceptable to Men, than the Charge of a
Bishop, of a Priest, or of a Deacon, if negligently or flatteringly it be
discharged; yet there is nothing more miserable, more dreadful, and more
damnable in the sight of God. Besides, there is nothing in this Life, and at
this Time, more difficult, more painful, and more dangerous, than the Office of
a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, if they acquit themselves of it as they ought, and
according to the Will of our Master; as also there is nothing more happy in the
sight of God.

CHAP. X.
Of a Religious State.
AFTER the Ecclesiastical State I come to the Religious, the Choice whereof is
of no less Consequence than that of the former, nor subject to less Faults.

It is an excellent thing that a Religious, who having once forsaken all
things, should have no other care than to please God by the practice of Penance
and Humility, living in the exact observance of his Rule, and keeping himself
retired from the Commerce of the World, that he may addict himself entirely to
the Study of real and solid Perfection.

But on the contrary, it is a sad and deplorable thing, that a Religious, who
is only religious in Habit, and making a particular Profession of Perfection,
is farther from it than the most imperfect Layman; loving the World, and
worldly things, subject even to the most gross Vices; or having overcome
corporal Vices, as Impurity, Gluttony, and the like, permits himself to be
carried away by spiritual Sins, as Anger, Ambition, Envy, Discord, Enmity, and
other like, which are by so much more dangerous, as they are less sensible. I
omit to speak of those, who being entered too easily into Religion, and without
a Vocation from God, repent themselves afterward, for being too lightly
engaged in a Business of such Imtance. A Repentance which frequently casts them
into great Disorders, and sometimes carries them even to Apostasy.

To make a good Choice of this State, Two things to be considered in a
Religious Life.
two things are necessary, 1. To know it well; that is to say, to understand
what it is, its Obligations, its Advantages, and its Dangers. 2. To be
Instructed well in in the Means he must make use of to deliberate on it, and to
know whether he be called to it. This is what we shall Treat of in the three
following Articles.

ARTICLE I.
What a Religious State is; What its Obligations, its Advantages, and Dangers
are.
A Religious Life (according to S. Thomas) is a Means instituted to acquire
Sanctity. Status religionis est exercitium quoddam ad sanctitatem assequendam.
S. Thom. 2.2. Quaest. 189. Art. 1.
Not an exterior Sanctity, which appears in the Habit, and exterior Actions of
Piety, but in an interior Holiness, which consists in the Sanctification of the
Soul; which is effected by the mortification of the Passions, by the abridgment
of disorderly Passions, by the stripping her self from all Inclination to
Creatures and Self-love, by a strict Union with God through Charity. For this End
do they leave the World, that with less hindrance, and more freedom they may
apply themselves to these Exercises. For this do they renounce all worldly
Goods and Contentments, not only in Affection, as all Christians are obliged to
renounce them; but also in Effect, that they may more freely and perfectly give
themselves to God. And Lastly, To acquire this interior Sanctity, they practice
Austerities, Obediences, and all the Rules of Religion, which are made only for
that End.

The Obligations of this kind of Life are great; Its Obligations.
for it obliges to observe an exact Chastity, a perfect Poverty, removed not
only from the Possession of any Goods, but from all Affection to earthly
things, with an entire renunciation of their proper Will to follow that of
their Superiors, and to sanctify themselves interiorly by the practice of
Christian Virtues, of which we have already spoken.

As the Obligations of this State are strict, there are also singular
Advantages, Its Advantages.
which Quae est ista tam preciosa margarita, nonne haec Religio sancta, pura
and immaculata, in qua homo vivit purius, cadit rarius, surgit velocius,
incedit cautius, irroratur frequentius, quiescit securius, moritur fiducius,
purgatur citius, praemiatur copiosius? S. Bern. Hom. de verbis Domini, simile
est regnum coelorum homini negotiatori.
S. Bernard handles in one of his Sermons, where he says, That in Religion a
Man lives more purely, is raised more readily, walks more cautiously, is more
frequently bedewed with Divine Grace, reposes with more security, dies with
less fear, is sooner purged in the other Life, and more abundantly recompensed
in Heaven. But this is to be understood, as he himself says, of a holy, pure,
and immaculate Religion, that is, a Religion observed holily, wherein they
labor solidly for interior Sanctity, as has been said.

This State has no small Dangers as well as great Advantages; Its Dangers.
the same Recta quidem semita vestra and securior conjugatorum vita, non tamen
omnino secura. Timendum enim periculum triplex, id est, ne forte aequare se
alteri, aut respicere retro, aut certe in medio ponte stare, seu residere quis
velit. S. Bern. de tribus ordinibus.
S. Bernard reduces them to three.

The First Danger is of falling into Pride, and a good Opinion of ones self,
which creeps so easily and insensibly into pious Actions, whose merit it
greatly diminishes, and many times absolutely ruins.

The Second is the Danger of looking back to return unto the World, either in
Effect, or by Affection and Desire.

The Third is of growing loose in the Exercise of a Religious life. It is a
Way, as the same Saint says, wherein one must necessarily either advance, or
retire; and if a Man grows slack, he falls into Disorder, which makes him in
the Habit of Religion and Piety lead a most secular Life, and full of Vices,
and which is by so much more dangerous, as being really wicked, it bears the
appearance of Virtue.

The first of these Dangers ordinarily springs from this, that Men judge of
Sanctity by the Exterior, and one esteems himself such as he seems in
appearance, not regarding that Sanctity consists in the Virtues of the Soul,
and chiefly in the practice of a solid, and perfect Humility. The Second and
Third arise most frequently from conversing with the World, which is infinitely
dangerous for Religious Persons, as Necesse est ut quisque religiosus si
falvari desiderat, saeculum contemnat, and sese intra monasterii claustra
concludat. S. Bern. lib. debene vivend. Sermon. 66.
S. Bernard says, and all three together proceed from the want of a true
Vocation to Religion.

These, Theotime, are the principal things you ought to consider, if you
deliberate on a Religious Calling: Now to the end you may proceed with more
assurance in this Deliberation, I shall tell you the Order, you must observe
therein, and what you must do to know whether you be called to it.

ARTICLE II.
What is to be done to know whether one be called to Religion.
First, If you perceive in your self a strong Motion to that State, have a care
not to reject it, because perhaps it is a Vocation from God; nor also to
embrace it suddenly, being it may be only a human Motion. You must examine
whether it be God who speaks interiorly to you; for if it be, you must hear and
follow him whither he calls you; if it be not, you must remain as you are.

But how should I know that? you will say: See the Means. Take a good space of
time to apply your self to this important Affair, and during that time practice
exactly four things.

1. Refrain from any Conversation with those who would move or excite you to be
Religious. The Reason is very manifest; for as soon as you shall be solicited
to it, you will not know how to discern whether the Inclination you have to it
comes from the Inspiration of God, or the Persuasion of Men.

2. Beg daily of God with great earnestness, that he would be pleased to make
his Will known to you, and confirm you in this Motion if it come from him, or
take it away if it come not from him. Say to him as S. Peter did, Domine, si tu
es, jube me venire ad te. Mat. 14.
Lord, if it be thou who speak, command me to come to thee. Declare that you
are ready to hearken to him as young Samuel, Loquere Domine, quia audit servus
tuus. 1 Reg. 3.
Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears thee; and say with S. Paul, Domine, quid me
vis facere? Act 9.
Lord, what will thou have me do?

3. Examine diligently, 1. The Obligations, Advantages, and Dangers of a
Religious Life, of which we have spoken above. 2. The Intention you bring to
this State. The Intention that must be had to enter into Religion.
The Intention which must be had in this Design, is to withdraw your self from
the World to do Penance, and to be sanctified interiorly by the practice of
Christian Virtues. See whether this be your Motive; think often on it seriously
without flattering your self; for if another Motive incline you to that
Calling, your Design is not from God. Examine also whether you be fit for it,
and whether you have nothing that is incompatible with that Condition, be it in
Body or Mind. Corporal Infirmities, and bad Qualities of the Mind; but chiefly
all Lightness and Inconstancy render a Man unapt for that Calling.

4. Above all things resolve not on your own Head, and without taking good
Counsel. It is a very common Fault amongst young People, many whereof put
themselves into Religion without any other Counsel than that of their own Mind,
which frequently they admit there too easily: From whence it often falls out,
that they are obliged to go out, or having a shame to change, they badly, and
without Vocation engage themselves therein. Act not so, Theotime, but declare
your Design to some prudent Person, and particularly to your Ghostly Father;
and if you have not an ordinary one, choose avertuous, discreet, and
understanding one; discover all your interior Thoughts to him, and hearken
humbly to his Advice.

When you have done thus for a good space of time, that is, at least for six
Months, or a Year; If the Intention you have to be Religious, continue still,
and your Intention also be such as it ought to be, that is, pure and holy, and
that you have convenient Dispositions of Mind and Body for that State, you have
reason to believe that your Inspiration comes from God, and that he calls you
to Religion; But if this Inclination continues not, it is a sign that it was
only a human Motion.

Some may say that you ought readily to put in Execution the Inspirations from
God, and that to delay the Performance a long time, is to put ones self in
danger of losing them, according to that Maxim of St. Ambrose, Nescit tarda
molimina Spiritus sancti gratia.
which says, That the Grace of the Holy Ghost approves not of slow Endeavors.

I answer, That it is true when you sufficiently know that the Inspiration
comes from God; but before you can have that knowledge, you not only do well to
defer it, but you ought to delay, principally in Affairs of consequence. Now to
come to this knowledge you must have time: And in a word, to do what we have
said, is not to be wanting to our Fidelity, and Trust in the Grace of God, but
to practice faithfully the Maxim of the Holy Ghost himself, who commands us Not
to believe every Spirit, but to try whether they come from God. This is not to
put ones self in danger of losing ones Vocation, but to comply with ones Duty,
to know the truth of it by sufficient Marks, the best whereof is, Perseverance
to embrace it more zealously, and to execute it with more fidelity. In fine,
that you may be more convinced of this Maxim against the Oppositions you may
find therein, I shall add to it another particular Article.

ARTICLE III.
That a Man must take time to know whether he be called to Religion.
If God gave us always certain and undoubted Marks of his Inspiration for great
Enterprises, questionless we should not take time to deliberate on them, nor to
put them in Execution; but because he is not pleased ordinarily to deal with us
in this manner, and admonishes us by the Apostle, Nolite omni Spiritui
credere; sed probate Spiritus si ex Deo sint. 1 Jo. 4.
Not to give credit to every Spirit, but to try whether they come from him,
adding in another place, That Ipse Satanas transfigurat se in Angelum lucis. 2
Cor. 11.
the Spirit of Darkness frequently transforms himself into an Angel of Light:
There is no question but that it is so far from being a bad Action to defer in
this Occasion, that it is a thing absolutely necessary and conformable to the
Order established by God, who would have us make use of Means proper to know
his Will, and of the Signs he has given us, to discern the Inspirations which
come from his Grace, from those which come not.

These Means are the three we have already given you above, a good Life,
Prayer, and Counsel. A good Life takes away the greatest Obstacle to the Grace
of God, which is Sin, and makes us most worthy of his Lights. Prayer, when it
is humble, fervent, and perseverant, makes us obtain them. And good Counsel
serves to direct us to know the Will of God, and not take our own Inclination
for a Divine Inspiration.

When our Lord had touched Paul, and brought him to demand what he would have
him do, he sends him to Ananias to learn his Will from him. This holy Man
inspired by God, comes to seek this new Convert, who was at Prayer, and
declared to him on the part of God what he would have him do. This is a Model
of what you ought to do in this so important an Occasion.

Permit yourself to be moved by God for your Conversion, and look upon it as
your principal End; Beg of him to know what his Will is, that you should
perform, to do Penance: Pray incessantly for this intent, and go to take
Counsel, to learn there what you must do.

As for the Marks of a Vocation, there are also three, which are, Humility,
Quiet of Mind, and Perseverance. By Humility, I understand that Virtue which
makes us wholly distrust our own Judgment in an Affair of such importance, to
follow that of the more wise. By Quiet of Mind, I mean a Disposition to follow
the Will of God, on whatsoever side it may incline, when we shall sufficiently
know it. By Perseverance, I understand the long continuance of an Inspiration,
amidst the Obstacles and Difficulties which occur.

These are the three most ordinary Marks by which the Spirit of God makes
himself known to us; and if any of those be wanting, you have reason to doubt
of your Vocation; as on the contrary, if you have them all together, you have
good cause to believe that God calls you. If some say to you, that there is no
need of Deliberating so exactly about entering into Religion, because there is a
Year of Noviceship, to try their Vocation by the Marks and Practices we have
spoken of. I answer, That this would be true, if it were as easy to go out of
Religion, as to enter into it; and if this going out did not draw after it so
many bad Consequences as ordinarily it does. But because it frequently happens,
that those who are entered into Religion, are kept there by the fear of being
accounted Inconstant, or for some other human Consideration, which makes them
engage themselves in that State badly, and without a Vocation; or chancing to
depart from Religion, are looked upon by the World as Inconstant, contemned as
People fit for nothing; and what is yet worse, it happens, often, that leaving
the Religious Habit, they also forsake Virtue, and lead a Life very different
from what they had begun in Religion. For all these Reasons I continue to say,
that a Man must Examine the Vocation before he enters into Religion; and for
this intent take all the time that shall be necessary to be morally assured of
it.

Act so then, Theotime, if you perceive your self moved to Religion, and be not
afraid of losing your Vocation, if you put it not suddenly in Execution; for if
you practice faithfully what we have said, with a sincere Intention to know the
Will of God, you will not fail in the Resolution you shall take; God will
conduct you in that Deliberation to the State he has prepared for you; and if
he call you to Religion, he will confirm you in that Desire by the Perseverance
he will give you, and perfect in you the good Work he shall have begun,
according to that Expression of S. Paul, Qui caepit in vos opus bonum,
perficiet, confirmabit, solidabitque.

After all, when you resolve to embrace a Religious Life, remember to prefer
amongst the Religious, those where a Regular Life is most exactly observed, and
where they solidly labor to gain Piety, and as much as you can, where there is
least Communication with the World.

CHAP. XI.
Of the diverse States of a Secular Life.
AS the Life of Ecclesiastics and Religigious has its Dangers, the Secular Life
has also its Perils, which are not small; he who deliberates on it, ought
necessarily to foresee them: And these Dangers are different, according to the
diverse States of that Life. Wherefore I Treat here of the principal Callings of
a Secular Life, to the end every one may Examine that which he will embrace, and
may know well its Obligations.

ARTICLE. I.
Of the Condition of the Great, and of those who Govern others.
If there be a difficult and dangerous Condition in the World, Maxims to be
observed by those who Govern others.
it is the Office of those who are called to Govern others; as Kings and
Princes, who have Sovereign Authority; Lords of particular Places, who have an
inferior Authority; Magistrates and Public Officers, who have an assigned
Authority committed to them by the Prince. If then by your Condition, or for
any other Cause, you see your self designed for a State of Government, you
ought to arm your self against the great Difficulties, and innumerable Dangers
of that State, with wholesome Christian Maxims, whereof these are the principal,
which I beseech you read attentively.

1. Have a care of giving access to the thoughts of Pride or Presumption, for
seeing your self raised above others: Remember that by how much higher you are
raised, by so much more have you reason to fear, according to that Maxim of the
Scripture, Quanto major es, humilia te in omnibus. Eccl. 3.
By how much you are greater, humble your self in all things. Rectorem
posuerunt te, noli extolli. Eccl. 30.
Is Authority conferred upon you? be not puffed up.

2. Consider not your State as a Happiness, but as a weighty Charge; nor as a
thing given you for your good, but for the benefit of others. Know, that those
whom you Command, are not made for you, but you for them: They ow Respect and
Obedience to you, and you ow to them things that are far more difficult, that
is, Care, Assistance, Conservation, and Justice.

3. Believe firmly, that how great Power soever you have, you hold it from God,
and that you are his Minister and his Servant for the Government of Men, and by
consequence, that you ought to Govern according to his Will, and shall give him
an exact Account of your Conduct.

4. Place frequently before your Eyes that dreadful Truth of the Sacred
Scripture, Judicium durissimum his qui praesunt, fiet. Potentes potenter
tormenta patientur. Sap. 6.6, and 7.
A rigorous Judgment shall they have who Rule. The Powerful shall be powerfully
tormented.

Now there are two things you ought to have a care of in your Condition;
Governors ought to have a care of two things.
the First, to Live well; the Second, to Govern well.

As for the First, 1. To Live well.
you must live like a virtuous Man, governing your Passions, having the Law of
God for the Rule of your Actions, considering that it is a shameful thing to
Govern others, and to be ignorant of governing ones self; to Command Men, and
to be a Servant and Slave to his own Passions and the Devil.

You are obliged to it by the Rank you bear, for you hold the place of God; you
ought to imitate his Sanctity, as you represent his Person in Power and
Authority.

You are also obliged to it for the benefit of your Inferiors, who cannot but
be miserable when they are Governed by a wicked Man. In multiplicatione
justorum laetabitur vulgus; cum impii sumpserint principatum gemet populus.
Prove. 29.
The People shall rejoice, says the Wiseman, in the multiplication of the Just,
but will lament when the Wicked hold the Government.

For this reason in the ancient Law, God had commanded that the King, and it
ought to be understood of all those who Command, should always have with him
the Book of the Law, and should read it daily, Ut discat timere Dominum Deum
suum, and custodire verba and ceremonias ejus quae in lege praecepta sunt.
Deuteronomy. 17.
To the end, says he, he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and observe his
Words, and the Ceremonies which are there commanded.

Moreover, your Example will much influence your Superiors; if you be good,
they will imitate your Virtue; if you be vicious, they will take all liberty to
be wicked, according to the Maxim of the Wiseman, Secundum judicem populi sic
and ministri ejus. Qualis rector est civitatis sic and habitantes in ea. Eccl.
10.
As the Judge of the People is himself, so are his Officers. The Inhabitants of
a City conform themselves to him who Governs them. By your Example you will
cause many Blessings, or much Mischief, and you will be guilty in the sight of
God of all the Sins others shall commit by your Imitation.

Call to mind the History of Jeroboam King of Israel: A remarkable Example.
This Man being raised to the Government of the Ten Tribes of Israel, had no
sooner the Authority in his Hand, but he misfortunately abused it, abandoning
the Service of the true God to adore Idols. His Example had so great a force,
that he not only drew to his Imitation all that great People he Commanded, who
became Idolaters like him, but also made that Sin of Idolatry hold on its
Course in all his Successors during the space of Two hundred Years and more;
and the Sacred Scripture had such a horror for the Mischief this misfortunate
Prince caused by his Example, that almost every time it speaks of him, it says,
Tradet Dominus Israel propter peccata Jeroboam qui peccavit, and fecit Israel
peccare. 3 Reg. 14.
He who sinned, and made Israel to sin: And speaking of each of his Successors,
it says, Fecit malum coram Domino ambulans in via Jeroboam and in peccato ejus,
qui peccare fecit Israel. Cap. 16.19.
They followed the ways of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin; reproaching and
showing a perpetual detestation of the Sin of that wicked Prince, by reason of
the dreadful Consequence of his ill Example.

As to the Second Care you ought to have, 2. To Govern well.
which is to Govern well, remember, that those who Govern bear the Image of
God, Governing visibly Inferiors by their Conduct, as he Governs invisibly all
things by his Providence. If you be his Image, you ought to endeavor to
resemble him: And as he Governs not only by exercising his Power, but also his
Wisdom, his Goodness, and his Justice, you must also exercise your Authority
with these Qualities, performing nothing but with much Wisdom, treating your
Inferiors with a Fatherly Goodness, and giving Justice to every one. Leo
rapiens, and Ursus esuriens, Princeps impius super populum suum. Prove. 28.
Authority exercised without Wisdom is a Brutishness, without Goodness is a
Tyranny, and without Justice is a Robbing.

You must employ your Authority and Power chiefly to conserve Religion, What he
must do to Govern well.
to advance the Honor of God, destroy Vice, exterminate the Wicked, and to
maintain and augment Piety amongst those who are subject to you; that is the
principal End for which all Temporal Power is Established by God: And if you be
defective in that, he in his Judgment will exact a a most strict Account for
it. Faelices eos dicimus si just imperant, si suam potestatem ad Dei cultum
maxim dilatandum majestati ejus famulam faciunt. S. Aug. lib. 5. de Civit. Dei
cap. 14.
S. Augustine says, That the Great ones ought to make their Authority
subservient to God, to extend much, and increase his Honor and Religion.

Next to Religion and Piety, you must have a care of the Temporal good of your
Inferiors, that is, of their Quiet and Security, and Protection against the
Wicked. This is the Second End for which God has Establiish'd you: For this
reason give ear willingly to the Complaints of the Oppressed, and easy Access
to every one. It is a grievous Evil amongst the Great ones, that Little ones
cannot approach to them, to have recourse to their Justice, as the Scripture it
self complains, Pupillo non judicant, and causa viduae non ingreditur ad illos.
Isai. 1.
They do not Justice to Orphans, and the Cause of the Widow enters not unto
them. Expect not that one should complain; but inform your self carefully of
the Disorders which reign amongst your Inferiors, to the end you may aply a
necessary Remedy.

Permit not your self to be surprised by Flatteries, Governors ought to avoid,
1. Flatterers.
which pervert the Mind of Great ones, whose Condition is most misfortunate in
this Point; for they are scarce ever told the truth in the things they are
obliged to know. Banish Flatterers far from you, and esteem them as your
greatest Enemies, as in reality they are. Place frequently hefore your Eyes
that deplorable Example of Joas Postquam autem obilt Josada, ingressi sunt
Principes Juda and adora verunt Regem, qui delinitus obsequiis eorum, acquievit
eis, and dereliquerunt templum Domini Dei patrum suorum, servieruntque lucis
and sculptilibus. 2 Par. 24.
King of Juda, who after he had spent many Years in a holy Life, was
misfortunately perverted by the Flattery of his Courtiers, even to entirely
desert, by their Persuasion, the Service of God, and fall into Idolatry, which
is the most heinous of all Crimes. Conceive a horror for those Persons. On the
contrary, love those who tell you the truth, manifest an Affection for those
who admonish you, give them the liberty to do so. Make choice of one, or many
Persons for your confident Friends, to whom give express Charge to advertise
you of things wherein you are defective, and of all they shall judge fitting;
it is a thing which is wanting to all Great ones, and to all those who are in
Office.

Have a care of Covetousness, and of that insatiable Desire of Money, which is
the Plague of Great ones, Quare atteritis populum meum and facies eorum
commolitis. Isai. 3. Principes ejus in medio illius quasi lupi rapientes.
Ezech. 32.
and of those who Govern, and which makes them commit a vast number of Crimes:
For from thence arise unjust Actions, Violences, Oppressions of the Innocent,
unreasonable Exactions, and a thousand other Disorders, which make the People
groan under the Injustice and Tyranny of Great ones, which God by his Prophets
so much detests.

Revenge is also an Evil you ought very much to avoid: 3. Revenge.
Great ones permit themselves many times to be carried away with it, by so much
more easily as they have Power in their Hands, and frequently execute it under
the pretense of Justice, when it proceeds only from a pure Passion, in which
they grossly deceive themselves; for Justice only regards the Public good, or
the Amendment of him whom it punishes; but Revenge seeks its own proper
Satisfaction.

Yet in flying Revenge and Passion, 4. Negligence in punishing Criminals.
be careful of falling into another Extreme, which is too much Mildness, and
Remissness in punishing Crimes. You are obliged to be exact in that,
principally when they are against the Public good, and yet more when they
injure Religion; you must answer it before God if you be wanting therein. A
remarkable Example.
Achab King of Israel having pardoned the Life of a wicked Man, God sends a
Prophet to him to tell him, that he should answer Soul for Soul for it; Quia
dimisisti virum dignum morte, erit anima tua pro anima ejus. 3 Reg. 29.
Because thou have dismissed a Man worthy of Death, thy Life shall be put for
his; which Menace punctually fell out: for after three years he was defeated in
a Battle, and killed by that very Man whose Life he had pardoned.

In fine, that you may know what it is to Govern, I shall cite you here two
very authentic Pieces for the Instruction of Great ones, which I exhort you to
consider attentively.

The First is out of the Sacred Scripture, A considerable Advertisement.
in the Sixth Chapter of Wisdom, wherein is contained this terrible Admonition,
which the Holy Ghost gives to Great ones, Audite ergo Reges and intelligite,
discite judices finium terrae. Praebete aures vos qui continetis multitudines,
and placetis vobis in turbis nationum, quoniam data est a Domino potestas
vobis, and virtus ab Altissimo, qui interrogabit opera vestra, and cogitationes
scrutabitur, quoniam cum essetis ministri regni illius, non recte judicastis,
nec custodistis legem justitiae, nec secundum voluntatem Dei ambulastis.
Horrende and cito apparebit vobis quoniam judicium durissimum, his qui
praesunt, fiet: Exiguo enim conceditur misericordia, potentes autem potenter
tormenta patientur. Non enim subtrabet personam cujusquam Deus, nec verebitur
magnitudinem cujusquam: quoniam pusillum and magnum ipse fecit, and aequaliter
cura est illi de omnibus; fortioribus autem fortior instat cruciatio. Sap. 6.
verse. 2.
Hear, o you Kings, and understand, o you Judges of the Earth; be attentive,
you who Govern the People, and take pleasure in Commanding. Authority is given
you from God, and Power from the most High, who will try your Works, and search
out your Imaginations. Because being Officers of his Kingdom, you have not
judged aright, nor observed the Law, nor walked after the Will of God, horribly
and suddenly will he appear unto you; for a hard Judgment shall they have who
bear Rule. For he who is most low is worthy of Mercy, but the Mighty shall be
mightily tormented. For God who commands all things, shall spare no Person,
neither shall he fear any Greatness, for he has made the Small and the Great,
and has an equal care of all. But for the Mighty he has reserved a sorer
Trial. I would to God all those who have any Authority in the World, would read
often this Admonition.

The other authentic Piece which I propose unto you, is in Book 5. Chap. 14.
of the City of God, written by S. Augustine, where he describes in this manner
the Obligations of the Great ones.

We esteem not Christian Emperors happy, Neque enim nos Christianos quosdam
Imperatores ideo foelices dicimus, quia vel diutius imperant, vel imperantes
filios morte placida reliquerunt, vel hosts reipublicae domuerunt, vel
inimicos cives adversus se insurgentes, and cavere and opprimere potuerunt.
Haec enim and alia vitae hujus aerumnosae vel munera vel solatia, quidam etiam
cultores Daemonum accipere meruerunt, qui non pertinent ad regnum Dei, quo
pertinent isti. Et hoc ipsius misericordia factum est, ne ab illo ista qui in
eum crederent velut summa bona desiderarent. Sed eos soelices dicimus, qui
just imperant, si inter linguas sublimiter honorantium, and obsequia nimis
humiliter salutantium non se extollant, sed se homines esse meminerunt. Si suam
potestatem ad Dei cultum maxim dilatandam, majestati ejus famulam saciunt. Si
Deum timent, diligunt, colunt. Si plus amant illud regnum ubi non timent habere
consortes, si tardius vindicant, facile ignoscunt, si eandem vindictam pro
utilitate regendae tuendaeque reipublicae, non pro saturandis inimicitiarum
odiis exercent. Si eandem veniam non ad impunitatem iniquitatis, sed ad spem
correctionis indulgent. Si quod aspere cogantur plerumque discernere
misericordiae lenitate, and beneficiorum largitate compensant. Si luxuria tanto
eis est castigatio, quanto possit esse liberior. Si malunt cupiditatibus
pravis, quam quibuslibet imperare, and si haec omnia faciunt non propter
ardorem gloriae inanis, sed propter charitatem foelicitatis aeternae. Si pro
suis peccatis humilitatis, miserationis, and orationis sacrificium Deo suo vero
immolare non negligunt. Tales Christianos Imperatores dicimus esse foelices
interim spe, postea relpsa futuros, cum id quod expectamus advenerit.
and the same in proportion is to be said of all Great ones, because they
Command a long time; nor because being dead in peace, they have left after them
Children Inheritors of their Fortune; or because they have conquered their
Enemies, Strangers, or Domestics; for all these things, which appertain only
to the Favors and Consolations of this miserable Life, have been granted to
Pagans, who have no part of the Kingdom of God; and God acts thus by an Effect
of his Mercy, that Christians may not desire of him these Goods as their
Sovereign Happiness: But we account them happy if they Govern justly; If they
be not pussed up with Pride and Presumption in the midst of the high Praises
which are given them, and too low Respect which is shown them, but remember
that they are mortal Men; If they make their Authority subservient to the
Majesty of God, to extend as much as they can his Service and Religion; If they
fear, love, and honor God; If they affect more the Eternal Kingdom, where they
shall not fear to have Companions, than their mortal and perishable Kingdom; If
they proceed maturely to the punishment of Crimes; If they pardon easily; If
they inflict Chastisement for the good Government and Conservation of the
Public, and not to satisfy their particular Hatred or Revenge; and if they
consent to pardon upon the prospect of the amendment of the Guilty, when there
is hopes of it, and not through a neglect of punishing Crimes; If they sweeten by
Benefits and Mercy the Sharpness they are obliged to observe in many
Occurrences; If they by so much more abstain from Pleasure and unlawful
Delights, as they have Power and Liberty to enjoy them; If they make more
account of governing their Passions, than having Command over all the Nations
of the World; If they perform all these things, not for the desire of earthly
Glory, but for the love of Life everlasting; If they humble themselves before
God, and if they have a care of offering him a Sacrifice of Prayer to obtain
Pardon for their Sins: We say, that Great ones, who live in this manner, are
happy in this Life by Hope, as they shall be hereafter in Effect.

ARTICLE II.
Of the Offices of Justice, and Magistracy.
All that we have said belongs also to Judges and Magistrates; but there are
yet other Obligations particular unto them, for which those who look upon
themselves as designed for those Charges ought carefully to be prepared.

If you be of that number, An important Advice.
besides the former Advices, which you ought attentively to read, to put them
in practice, because they concern you, you shall carefully observe those which
follow.

1. Place chiefly before your Eyes that considerable Advertisement which holy
King Josaphat, King of Juda, gave to his Judges. Praecipiens Judicibus, videte,
ait, quid faciatis, non enim hominis exercetis judicium, sed Domini, and
quodcunque judicaveritis in vos redundabit. Sit timor Domini ^obiscum, and cum
diligentia cuncta facite. 2 Par. 1.
Have a care, said he to them, what you do; for it is not the Judgment of Man
which you Exercise, but of God: And what you shall judge shall fall upon you.
Let the Fear of God be with you, and perform all things with care and diligence.

2. That you may practice these Advertisements, have a care to study and
understand your Profession, and make your self capable to perform well your
Office, without committing any Faults therein. Remember that the Possession,
Honor, and frequently the Lives of Men, depend upon your Mouth: If by your
Incapacity you commit any Faults in Judging these things, you are responsible
for all the Wrong your Neighbor shall suffer by it.

3. Being capable of your Charge, trust not so much to your Ability, as ever to
do any thing hastily, and without having well Examined the Cause you Judge.
Causam quam nesciebam diligentissime in vestigabam.
I diligently Examined (says the holy Man Job) a Cause which I was ignorant of.
Rely not also on the Judgment of your Companions, nor much less on those who
Labor under you. Know, that if you Judge ill, either by Ignorance, or Rashness,
or by Determinating upon the Judgment of another, you are obliged to
Restitution of all the Wrong you have caused by your Decree. Observe this well,
for there are few Judges who reflect upon this Truth.

4. Never permit your self to be corrupted, either by Presents, which a Judge
ought to fly as from the Plague. Non accipies personam nec munera, quia munera
excaecant oculos sapientum, and mutant verba justorum. Deuteronomy 26. Vae vobis qui
justicatis impium pro muneribus, and justitiam justi aufertis ab eo. Isai. 5.
You shall not receive Gifts, says the Scripture, speaking to Judges, because
they blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert the Words of the Just. Woe be to
you who justify the Wicked by your Presents, and deprive the Just of their
Right. Nor also by Threats, nor Promises, nor Flatteries of Men, nor by any
Persuasion. A Judge ought to be above all these things, and have an immovable
Resolution never to commit any Injustice upon what account soever, according to
that excellent Precept of the Wiseman, Pro justitia agonizare quasi pro anima
tua, and usque ad mortem certa pro justitia. Eccl. 4.
Engage for Justice as much as for your Life, and defend it even until Death.

5. Have a care of being an accepter of Persons; it is an Evil which easily
creeps into the Minds of Judges and Magistrates, and causes them to commit many
Injustices. They give free liberty to the Rich, they hearken favorably to
them, dispatch their Affairs, and favor them in all things: Causam viduae non
judicaverunt: causam pupilli non direxerunt, and judicium pauperum non
judicaverunt. Jer. 5.
But the Poor and Mean can find no admittance to them; they are repulsed, their
Causes are neglected, and drawn out into extreme Delays, which often ruin them,
or notably incommode them. These are the Injustices which spring from the
acceptance of Persons, and which God strictly prohibits to Judges. Audite
illos, and quod justum est judicate, sive civis ille fuerit sive peregrinus.
Nulla erit distantia personarum: ita parvum audietis ut magnum, nec accipietis
personam cujusquam, quia Dei judicium est, Deuteronomy. 1.
Hearken, says he, to those whom you Judge, and give Sentence justly, whether
he be a Citizen or a Stranger, there shall be no difference of Persons. You
shall hear the Little as well as the Great, and there shall be no acceptance
of the Person of any one, because this is the Judgment of God.

6 Be resolute to resist Evil, to oppose Injustices and Violences, which you
see exercised by the Wicked, and chiefly by Great ones: You are obliged to
employ therein all that you rationally and piously can. Noli quaerere fieri
judex, nisi valeas virtute irrumpere iniquitates, ne forte extimescas faciem
potentis, and ponas scandalum in agilitate tua. Eccl. 7.
Seek not to be Judge, says the Wiseman, if you have not sufficient courage
stoutly to resist Iniquities, lest perhaps fearing the Face of a Great one, you
become wanting to your Duty. God puts this Compliance of Judges with Great
ones, amongst the chiefest Corruptions of the Earth, Princeps postulat and
judex in ^ddendo e^^. Mi^^. 7.
A Prince requires, and the Judge grants what he pleases. Have a care of this
Fault, which makes Judges and Magistrates most culpable in the sight of God;
and hold it for a Maxim, That you should rather lose all your Goods, and Life
it self, than comply with the Wills of Great ones when they are unjust.

Hinder also, as much as you can, all Cozening, Wrangling, Cheating, and
Injustices which are committed in Processes by Advocates, Procurators, and
Officers of Justice.

7. Be just in punishing Crimes, exterminating Malefactors, and all those who
disturb the Public Quiet, and Security of the State, without excepting of
Persons. Call to mind King Achab, of whom we have spoken in the former Title.

8. Be a Protector of the Poor, of Widows and Orphans, and of all those who
suffer Injustices. You are obliged to it by your Charge, and in performing this
you will draw down upon you the Divine Benediction. Learn that excellent
Precept of the Holy Ghost himself, uttered by the Mouth of the Wiseman, Libera
eum qui injuriam patitur de manu superbi, and non acide feras in anima tua; in
judicando esto pupillis misericors ut pater, and pro viro matri illorum and
eris tu velut Altissimi filius obediens, and miserebitur tui magis quam matter.
Eccl. 4.
Deliver from the Hands of the Wicked him who suffers Injustice, and perform it
not with a regret, or as the Greek has it, be not remiss. In Judging be as a
Father to Orphans, and as a Husband to their Mother, taking upon you their
Protection; and in doing thus you shall be the Child of God, executing his
Will, and he will have more than a Motherly Bounty for you. O happy Consolation
for a Judge, when in reality he may say as the holy Man Job, Auris audiens
beatificabat me, and oculus videns testimonium reddebat mihi. Eo quod
liberassem pauperem vociferantem and pupillum cui non esset adjutor. Benedictio
perituri super me veniebat, and cor viduae consolatus sum, pater eram pauperum.
Job. 29.
The public Voice gave testimony that he defended the Poor and Orphan, who
cried to him for succor; when they had no one to help them; he delivered him
who was persecuted, and comforted the Heart of Widows, and was a Father of the
Poor.

9. Be careful not to commit the Crimes you punish. With what Front can you
punish a Crime whereof you are guilty? So many Judgments as you give, so many
times do you pronounce a Sentence against your self, which will serve for your
Condemnation at the Divine Judgment. There you shall be reproached for
punishing Thieves, you your self having stolen the Goods of another, in exacting
what was not your due, in appropriating unjustly to your self the Goods which
were taken by Thieves, which you ought to have restored to the right Owners;
wherein you are more a Robber than the Thieves themselves; because being
constituted to render to every one what belongs to him, you are the first who
have violently taken his Goods.

In fine, Theotime, have a great care of Judging or Governing others, except
you have Four Qualities, Four Qualities required in Judges.
which the Sacred Scripture requires in those who Judge or Govern; which are,
Wisdom, The Fear of God, The Love of Justice, And the Hatred of Covetousness.
These are the Four Conditions which the Scripture points at in the wise Counsel
Jethro gave to Moses, Provide de omni plebe vitos sapientes and timenres Deum,
in quibas in veritas and qui oderint avaritiam, and constitue ex eis tribunos
and centuriones qui judicent populum. Exodus 18.
by which he advised him to choose wise Men, fearing God, loving Truth, that
is, Justice, and Enemies of Avarice, to Govern the People of Israel.

These Four Qualities, with all that we have said of Judges and Magistrates,
must proportionably be understood of Advocates and Solicitors, of whom we shall
speak hereafter, of all Officers, and of all those who have Public Charges.

ARTICLE. III.
Of a Court-Life.
This Life is full of Dangers and Precipices, The Dangers of a Courtiers Life
which are very hardly to be avoided by them who are engaged therein. Common
Virtues are easily there corrupted, the most solid are there shaken, and it is
very difficult not to be destroyed in it. It is a Life wherein Pride, Ambition,
Vanity, Idleness, Excess, Intemperance, a disordinate love of Pleasures, an
insatiable Covetousness of the Goods of the World do apparently reign. If there
be any Religion, it is only in show and hypocrisy; every one makes so much
appear as is necessary to arrive at his End. Solid Virtue is there contemned,
mocked, and many times persecuted. An insatiable desire of growing Great
possesses the Minds of all. Every one thinks of nothing but his Interest and
Fortune. From thence spring the Flattering of Great ones, a loose Complacence
toward all the World, unworthy Submission, false Friendships, Dissimulation,
which shows a pleasing Countenance to those whom they hate in their Heart. From
thence Envies, Cozening, Cheats, malicious Intrigues, unjust Means to supplant
others, and to advance themselves at their Expense. From thence irreconcilable
Enmities, Revenge, and many dreadful Accidents take their rise.

If things be so, how can one be Saved in this Condition, you will say? And what
must they do who see themselves destinated for that State? I answer, that
although Salvation be not absolutely impossible in that Condition, yet it is very
difficult, and those who see themselves like to be engaged therein, ought to
stand in great fear, and arm themselves with great Precautions against the
Dangers of that Life. See here what you must bring with you, if any Necessity,
or Birth, or any Office design you for that State.

The First Precaution is, 1. Precaution.
to bring thither a Mind fully convinced of the Vanity of Earthly things, of
Greatness, of Riches, of Pleasures; all these things pass, and you shall pass
with them, but Eternity shall never pass.

The Second is, 2. Precaution.
to bring with you a Mind limited in the desire of preferring your self, and
advancing your Fortune; confine your self to your Condition, and as for the
rest, make account that the great Fortune you are to raise, is to procure your
Salvation. What does it profit a Man, says the Son of God, to get the whole
World, and lose his own Soul? to be happy for a short time, and miserable for
all Eternity? O what an admirable Fortune is that, Theotime, to gain Heaven.

The Third is, 3. Precaution.
to make a firm Resolution to live like a true Christian, and never to offend
God upon any Account whatsoever. Renew often this Resolution, and demand of God
daily the Grace to observe it faithfully.

The Fourth is, 4. Precaution.
to carry your self wisely in all your Actions, Offend no one, be Circumspect,
Civil, ready to offer your Service, to oblige all that you can, and that not
out of a worldly Compliance, nor Policy, but out of Charity. Dissemble much the
things which shall be said or done to you. Give not credit easily to Reports
which are spread abroad, which ordinarily are false, or upon some ill Design.
Have a care of the Friendship you contract, lest it should be with a Person
whose Example or Conversation might change your Mind, and withdraw you from the
Path of Virtue, which is much to be feared in a Life at Court.

In fine, as this State is full of Dangers, you have need of arming your self
strongly by frequent and daily Prayers, by frequenting the Sacraments, by the
Counsel of a wise Person, by the Reading of pious Books, and by the Example of
those who lived holily in the Court of Princes, or those who yet lead there
their Life in great Virtue.

ARTICLE IV.
Of the Profession of Arms.
This Condition is no less dangerous than the former, and abounding with as
many Obstacles of Salvation. It is good in it self, it being necessary for the
Conservation of the Realm against the Violences of Strangers, and for the
Defense of Religion against her Enemies; but it is become so corrupted, that it
is almost impossible to be Saved therein.

Amongst the Vices which reign in this Profession, there are Five very common,
and most enormous ones. The First is a great Irreligion, which makes them
contemn the Service of God and their own Salvation. And this Irreligion
frequently extends it self to Impiety and Atheism. The Second, an execrable
Custom of Swearing and Blaspheming. The Third, an unbridled Impurity, which
reigns in that Calling in an incredible manner. The Fourth, a madness of
Duelling, which miserably sacrifices to the Devil, and Eternal Flames, a vast
number of that Profession. The Fifth consists in Rapines, unjust Exactions,
Violences, and ill Treating those who cannot resist.

It is a most difficult thing to be of that Profession, and not to fall into
these Vices: The wisest and most virtuous learn them sooner or later, and are
depraved at the end by the Example or Persuasion of others.

O Theotime, if any inevitable Necessity destinate you for that State, know,
that you cannot sufficiently apprehend your Danger; and if you will avoid your
Eternal Ruin, you have need of arming your self powerfully against these
Enemies and Dangers which environ you.

1. Embrace not that Calling but with Reason, and for a good Cause; as, because
your Birth obliges you thereto, Non enim militare delictum est, sed propter
praedam militare peccatum est. S. Aug. Sermon. 19. de Verb. Domini.
or for Public Necessity, or other good Reason, and not for a Capricho and
Licenciousness, for Idleness and Sloth, for a desire of raising your Fortune,
nor much less to enrich your self by Spoils, Robberies, and Extortions. These
are the most ordinary Motives of those who cast themselves into that Condition,
Apud omnem Christianum prima honestatis debet esse militia. Idem ibid.
and the first Fountain of the Misfortunes we see therein.

2. Hoc primum cogita quando armaris ad pugnam, quia virtus tua etiam ipsa
corporalis, donum Dei est; sic enim cogitabis de dono Dei non facere contra
Deum. S. Aug. Epist. 205. ad Bonifac.
Make a Resolution to live like a virtuous Man, fearing God, flying the
particular Vices of that Profession, not concerning your self for what others
shall say of you; they will cause you some trouble in the beginning, but at the
end you will get above them.

3. Place not your Generosity and Courage in appearing Valiant, in suffering
nothing from any Person, in Fighting upon all Occasions, but in Serving
faithfully and courageously your Prince and Country in all Occurrences.

4. Arm your self against the tyranny of Duels, by a firm Resolution never to
Fight a Duel; a Resolution, without which you can never be in the State of
Grace, but in a perpetual State of mortal Sin and Damnation. Ought not this
sole Thought to raise in you a horror for Duels? Although you perform all the
Good imaginable, although you lead a Life as holy as the greatest Saints, except
you have this Resolution of not Fighting a Duel, you are not in the State of
Salvation: All your Confessions are Sacrileges and Abominations in the sight of
God, because you still continue in a Will to offend him mortally: Even that
which you shall make at the hour of Death, if you have time to make it, will
avail you nothing; for never having had this Resolution during your whole Life,
it is almost impossible you should have a true and sincere one at the hour of
your Death.

I could bring you here many powerful Reasons against this madness of Duels.
Diverse Reasons against Duels.
A Duel is not an Action of Courage; Courage consists in exposing ones Life for
the Public Good, in defending ones self when he is assaulted: Now in a Duel
you expose your Life without necessity, for a Displeasure, for a Revenge, which
is permitted to no Man; oftentimes for pure Folly and Childishness, sometimes
to please another, who requests that Service of you, that is, to sacrifice your
Life, and damn your Soul for his Quarrel. Now you expose therein your Life,
which is not yours, but belongs to God, and the Public. The Honor which is
pretended to be forfeited by avoiding or refusing a Duel, is an imaginary
Honor, there being none but worldly and wicked Persons who condemn this
Refusal, which is praised and approved by wise and good People. All discreet
Men detest Duels, and none but the wicked approve them. The Law punishes them
as Enemies of the Public Good. Your Prince, to whom you ow Obedience, forbids
them. The Church detests and condemns them; She Excommunicates all those who
Fight Duels, or contribute any thing to them; She deprives of Ecclesiastical
Burying, all those who die in that Combat.

Without stopping to Treat at large these most powerful Reasons, I shall
content my self to make you consider two things. 1. Two strong Reasons against
Duels.
That a Duel is a Crime in the sight of God. 2. That it is incompatible with
your Salvation.

It is a Crime as great, as Homicide or Murder is great and enormous. Remember
how Homicide or Murder is detested by God: It is a Crime which destroys the
Image of God, and the Workmanship of his Hands; God has such a horror for it,
that he would not have him pardoned who is guilty of it. Quicunque effuderit
humanum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius, ad imaginem quippe Dei factus est
homo. Genesis 9.
Whosoever, says he, sheds human Blood, his Blood shall be shed, being Man is
made to the Image of God. He threatens to extend his Revenge thereof even to
Sanguinem animarum vestrarum requiram de manu cunctarum bestiarum. Ibid.
Beasts, which had taken away Man's Life, to manifest what a horror he had for
Murder. By this, judge of the quality of a Duel, by which you go to spill the
Blood of your Brother, destroy the Image of God, and what is yet more horrible,
to ruin for ever the Soul of your Adversary, or your own, for each of which
Jesus Christ has died: Or if you arrive not at these Misfortunes, you expose
your self to evident danger of falling into them, and so you are as criminal in
the sight of God as if the Effect succeeded. Consider that this Blood which you
shall have shed, Vox sanguinis fratris tui clamat ad me de terra. Genesis 14.
will cry to God for Vengeance against you, as that of Abel against Cain; Anima
vulneratorum clamavit, and Deus inultam abire non patitur. Job. 24.
that the Soul which you have destroyed will curse you eternally; that your
Conscience will continually reproach you for your Crime, and will cause
particular Disturbances, Terrors, and Apprehensions of the Divine Judgment and
Vegeance, which you shall never escape either in this World, or in the next.

From hence follows the Second Truth which I have proposed to you, viz. That a
Duel is incompatible with Salvation. Where by a Duel I understand not the
actual Fighting, but the Will of Duelling; because the Will to commit a Crime,
is directly opposite to Salvation. You must then either renounce Duels, or your
Salvation; Consider which you will renounce. This is very difficult, you will
say: It Is true, but it is necessary. It is difficult principally in the
Corruption of the Times; but your Salvation is concerned. It is hard in the
beginning, but in time, and by the Grace of God, it becomes easy. In a word,
Theotime, you will conquer the Difficulties, if you will apply your self
seriously to it, and make use of the following Means.

1. Demand of God the Grace to renounce from your Heart that tyranny, and never
to yield to it.

2. Be convinced of the nature of a Duel, that a Duel is a wicked Action, base
and impertinent, forbidden by God, Detestabilis duellorum usus, fabricante
diabolo, introductus; ut cruenta corporum morte animarum etiam perniciem
lucretur, ex orb penitus exterminetur. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. cap. 19.
detested by the Church, contrary to the Public Good, an Enemy of our
Salvation, a Madness; the tyranny of a detestable Custom, and Invention of the
Devil, to destroy Souls by the bloody Death of the Body, as the Council of
Trent speaks.

3. Call to mind those of your Acquaintance who are dead in Duels, and lost for
ever: Judge what Apprehensions they have now of Duels, and what Renunciations
they would make of them, if they could return into the World; but there is no
more time for them.

4. When any one shall Challenge you, answer him aloud, That you will not
Fight, a Duel being forbidden both by Divine and Human Laws. If any one accuse
you of Cowardice, tell him, That you know well how to show your Courage in good
Occasions, for the Service of your Prince and Country. If he threaten to
assault you wheresoever he shall find you, answer, That you will defend your
self, but make no Appointment either directly or indirectly, saying, I pass by
such a Place, or the like. If after this he attack you, defend your self.

5. Avoid the Causes of Duels, as Quarrels and Enmities. Offend no Person; or
if by Imprudence, or otherwise, you wrong any one, give him Satisfaction, and
declare you had no intention to offend him. This is what concerns Duels.

As for what remains toward the regulating your Life, be no Swearer, and
Blasphemer as others. See what we have said of Oaths, Ornet mores tuos
pudicitia conjugalis, ornet sobrietas and frugalitas. Valde enim turpe est, ut
quem non vincit homo, vincat libido, and obruatur vino qui non vincitur ferro.
S. Aug. Epist. 205. ad Bonifac.
Part 4. Chap. 12. Fly Impurity like Death, there is nothing more unworthy of a
generous Soul; and besides, it is the Source of all the Misfortunes which
befall those of your Profession. See what has been said of this Vice, Part 3.
Chap. 8.

Hinder Disorders, as Duels, Blasphemies, Injustices, Robberies, Vexations,
Violences, Sacrileges, and all other Mischiefs which Soldiers may commit: You
are obliged to it when you can, and chiefly if you have Command. You shall
answer to God for all the Disorders which shall be acted under you, if you have
not used all your Endeavors to stop them. And you are obliged to make
Restitution for all the Damage which is done to others by your Fault. Have a
care of ever commanding to do an Injustice, or even to put in Execution the
Commands of others which you clearly see to be unjust.

Be assisting to the Afflicted, Erue eos qui ducuntur ad mortem, and qui
trahuntur ad interitum, liberare necesses. Prove. 24.
protect the Poor, and all those who suffer Violence or Injustice.

Be not insolent in Victory, nor cruel toward the Conquered, but mild and
favorable as much as Prudence will permit, following that Maxim of S. Augustine,
Hostem pugnantem necessitas perimat, non voluntas. Sicut enim rebellanti and
resistenti violentia redditur, ita victo vel capto misericordia jam debetur,
maxim in quo pacis perturbatio non timetur. S. Aug. supra.
who says, That as Force is used toward the Enemy who resists, so Mercy ought
to be shown to him who is overcome, when he is no more in a Condition to hurt.

Examine often your Conscience, to keep your self still in a good State; Confess
frequently, beg of God daily that he would give you Grace to avoid the Dangers
of your State and Condition.

ARTICLE V.
Of other Conditions of a Secular Life.
The Four Conditions whereof we have spoken, are the most difficult and
dangerous of a Secular Life; for this reason we were obliged to handle them
more at large. Others also have their Difficulties and Dangers, which are
necessary to be foreseen when one deliberates on them, to be armed in respect
of them, and prepared to surmount them; I shall here only run over the most
considerable.

Counselors and Solicitors are to avoid Ignorance in their Profession,
Rashness in Affairs, undertaking the Defense of bad Causes, that are either
unjust or ill grounded, counselling a Process in most doubtful Affairs,
answering according to the Affection of the Parties, rendering all Businesses
probable, Hi sunt qui docuerunt linguas suas loqui mendacium, diserti adversus
justitiam, eruditi pro falsitate, sapientes ut faciant malum, eloquentes ut
impugnent verum. S. Bern. lib. 1. de Consid. cap. 10.
making use of Cheats, Surprises, Cozening, Falsity, Injustices, Detraction of
the Neighbor in defending themselves, speaking of the Ill he has not done,
revealing what is secret when it does not appertain to the Cause, making
Invectives, offering all sorts of Injuries, wherein they give themselves an
incredible License, as if it were permitted to violate Charity to conserve ones
Right; making their Clients suffer by Delays and Negligences, prolonging
unjustly the Suits to render the Opponents Poor, and put them into an
Incapacity of pursuing their just Right, pronouncing unjust Judgments, exacting
more than they ought for their Wages, and particularly of poor and mean People;
following poor Men's Businesses negligently, continuing the Suits which might
easily be ended, animating Parties one against another, fomenting Divisions and
Enmities, and having with these Businesses their Minds so much employed, that
they almost never, or very rarely think of God or their Salvation, which is too
ordinary amongst those of their Profession, who often revolve in their thoughts
every thing except themselves, and who following the Temporal Affairs of their
Neighbor, neglect the most important Affair of their own Salvation.

Physicians, who are of a necessary Profession for the Life and Conversation of
Men, must avoid being ignorant in their Science, rash in their Advice,
negligent in knowing exactly the Distempers they meddle with, and studying for
the Remedies; too confident in their own Sufficiency, little careful of the
Salvation of their Patients, not admonishing them in good time to set in order
their Conscience, which is the cause why many die in a bad State through the
Physicians Fault; too complacent in giving Judgment, and putting them to
Charges without sufficient necessity, too free in attributing much to Nature
and little to God, who is the Author of Nature, and other like things. I add
the Dangers of Chastity, to which they are often exposed, by reason of the
necessity they have of treating with Objects which may excite Impurity, which
is a Reason why they should have a great Precaution against this Vice.

Merchants ought to avoid Covetousness, or the excessive desire of Gain or
Riches, which totally possesses their Mind, Deceits, disguising or falsifying
Merchandises, breaking their Word, unjust and excessive Gain, Usury and other
Disorders. The same in proportion is to be said of Artificers and other
Professions, which have relation or combination with the former.

Thus in every Profession there are Vices and Dangers, which must be known
before one enters into them, that they may have a care of them, because without
this Precaution they follow the great Road of others, are engaged in the Abuses
of their Profession, and by these Abuses in the ruin of their Salvation.

CHAP. XII.
Of the State of Marriage.
WHEN you shall be entered in to one of the former Employments of a Civil Life,
you must come ere long to settle in the World, which ordinarily is performed by
Marriage, and sometimes, though more rarely, by an unmarry'd Life. I spoke
nothing of these States in the first Impressions of this Book, but after I made
reffection of it, when I reviewed it for this Edition, I conceived it very
proper to speak to you of them, and give you some necessary Advices, to make
you avoid a great number of most important Faults which Men are accustomed to
fall into, in the choice of these two States, which draw after them an infinite
number of Miseries, and frequently Eternal Damnation. To perform this
profitably I shall follow the Method I have already observed for the
Ecclesiastical and Religious State. I shall Treat of two things concerning
these two States. 1. What we must consider to know them well. 2. The
Dispositions we must bring to enter well into that State, and acquit our Selves
worthily in it.

ARTICLE. I.
What we must know of a Married Life.
There are four things to be known of this State, its Holiness, its
Obligations, its Advantages, and its Dangers.

I say First, that this State is Holy, it having been Instituted and Sanctified
by God himself from the beginning of the World, and since raised to the Dignity
of a Sacrament by his Son Jesus Christ, to sanctify the Persons that would
enter into it, and to confer on them Graces necessary to acquit themselves
worthily of it. Thus this State is Holy every way, by its Author who is God, by
the Dignity of the Sacrament which is annexed to it, by the sanctifying Grace
which it augments in those who duly receive it, by the Favors and Assistances
it affords them in their Necessities; and in fine, by the excellent
Signification of the Union of Jesus Christ with the Church his Spouse, which
made S. Paul give it the Name of a Sacramentum hoc magnum est, ego autem dico
in Christo and in Ecclesia. Ephesians. 5.
great Sacrament.

Secondly, The Holiness of this State brings with it great Obligations, whereof
the First is, to enter into it Holily, that is, with the requisite
Dispositions, which we shall speak of hereafter. The Second is, to lead to holy
and truly Christian Life, in the Fear of God, and in the Observation of his
Commandments, as it is said of the Erant autem justi ambo ante Deum incedentes
in omnibus mandatis, and justificationibus Domini sine querela. Luc. 1.
Father and Mother of S. John; to observe an inviolable Fidelity to his
Consort, to use moderately lawful Pleasures, and to refrain from those that are
forbidden, to Educate their Children in the Fear of God, provide for their
Necessities, to have a care of their Temporal Settlement, and much more of
their Eternal Salvation.

Thirdly, The Advantages of this State for Salvation are not so great as those
of the Ecclesiastical or Religious Life; It is also true, that it requires not
so high a Perfection: And if there be any Advantage above those two States, it
is, that not obliging to such strict things, it leaves a greater facility for
Salvation, when there occur not other Obstacles besides. As for the Temporal
Advantages, I place them not here to be considered, because we look upon this
State here only in reference to Salvation. Moreover, the Pleasures and
Contentments that are found therein, are not comparable to the Troubles and
Adversities with which it is replenished, according to that Expression of S.
Paul, who says, that Afflictions are inevitable to Married Persons,
Tribulationes carnis habebunt hujusmodi.

Fourthly, The Dangers of this State are great in number, and they are by so
much greater, as they are not discovered, nor often perceived by those who are
environed with them.

The First springs from the excessive and unreasonable Love that is frequently
found between Married Persons, which is the cause of a vast number of Sins they
commit by a criminal Complacence, which makes them fear more to displease their
Consort than offend God, and draw upon them his Displeasure and Indignation.

The Second Danger arises from a Cause quite contrary to the former, which is
an Aversion they sometimes have for one another, proceeding from the
contrariety of Humors, Jealousies, or other like Causes. An Aversion which
draws after it a continual train of Sins, and an abyss of Miseries.

The Third Danger comes from the irregular Love they have for their Children,
which is also an unexhaustible Source of Sins to Parents, when through that
foolish Love they apply all their Care for the Temporal Advantages of their
Children, as Health, Beauty, good Behavior, to promote them in the World, to
heap up Riches for them, which will only serve to destroy them, to procure
great Employments for them, and in the mean time neglect their Education, their
Correction, their Amendment, their good Life, and their Eternal Salvation.

The Fourth Danger is that of Loving the World too much, and engaging
themselves too deeply in the Affection of the Goods and Pleasures of this Life:
An Affection which makes them lose the taste and sense of real Goods, which are
those of Grace and Eternal Salvation. This made S. Paul say, Qui cum uxore est,
solicitus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat uxori, and divisus est. 1 Cor. 7.
That he who is Married is perplexed with the Affairs of the World, and his
Spirit is divided between God and the World. All these Dangers are greater than
can be expressed, and Married Persons have need of much Grace to avoid them.

ARTICLE II.
The necessary Dispositions for a Married State.
We may say with truth, that the greatest part of the Miseries which happen in
a Married Life, springs from the bad Dispositions they bring with them, and
particularly the following.

The First is, the bad Life of young People in their Youth, and chiefly after
they have finished their Studies, until the time of their Marriage: For if, as
the Wiseman says, God will give a happy Marriage to those who have lived
piously during their Youth, it follows manifestly, that he frequently punishes
the Sins of Youth by an unfortunate Marriage, as we daily see.

The Second Fault is, the bad Intention of those who enter into the State of
Marriage; who propose to themselves no other End in that State than Pleasure,
and the Contents they expect to find therein, and which they conceive to be
quite different from what in effect they are.

The Third is that which is committed in the choice of the Person they have a
mind to Espouse: A Choice which is ordinarily made without consulting God,
without any knowledge of the Disposition, Manners, or Humor of the Person with
whom they are to be Engaged for their whole Life, and without any other
Consideration than that of Interest, or frequently by an indiscreet and
ill-grounded Love. This is the Complaint of S. Jerome, who says it often
happens, that there is no Plerisque nulla est uxoris electio, sed qualis
obvenerit habenda, si fatua, si ambitiosa, quodcunque vitii est, post nu-ptias
discimus.
Choice made in Marriages, and that the Faults of the Women are not known till
after they are Espoused.

The Fourth Cause springs from the bad Disposition they bring to the Sacrament
of Matrimony, Filii sanctorum sumus, and non postumus ita conjungi sicut Gentes
quae ignorant Deum. Tob. 8.
which they often receive in a wicked State; and from all the Disorders that
are committed in the Celebration of the Nuptials, as well by the Married as by
those who are invited: For, how can God give his Benediction to a Marriage
wherein the Parties bring a Heart full of lewd Thoughts, and unchaste Desires;
where they make Expenses of Garments and Feasts, which offend Christian
Modesty, and frequently exceed their State and Ability, and where all things
pass in a licencious freedom of saying and doing any thing? So that these
Nuptials are rather the Triumph of impure Love, and a Feast of the Devil, than
a Marriage of Christians, which ought to be consecrated to Modesty, and
sanctified by the Presence of Jesus Christ.

These are the the most ordinary Causes of bad Marriages, and of all the
Miseries and Misfortunes which arise from thence. From whence it follows, that
the first Means to succeed well in so great and important an Enterprise, is
carefully to avoid all these so dreadful Causes.

To perform this with success, this is what you shall do. You must be convinced
of three Truths, which are certain and undoubted Maxims in this matter.

The First is, That the greatest Happiness that can befall him who embraces a
Married Life, is to succeed well in the choice of the Person he would Espouse;
as on the contrary, there is no greater Misfortune than to prosper ill in this
Occasion. The Second is, That this good success can only come from God. And the
Third, That God does not ordinarily show this Favor but to those who have lived
well, or have done Penance, and have not fallen into the Faults we have pointed
at.

These three Truths are expressed by the Holy Ghost himself; he teaches the
First, when he says by the Mouth of the Wiseman, Qui invenit mulierem bonam,
invenit bonum, and hauriet salutem a domino. Prove. 18. Mulieris bonae beatus
vir. Eccl. 26.
That he who has found a good Wife, has found a great Blessing; for a good
Wife makes her Husband happy; That it is a Blessing which surpasses all
Blessings; That there is nothing which can be compared to a virtuous Wife. And
on the contrary he says, That Qui tenet mulierem nequam quasi qui apprehendit
scorpionem.
he who has met with a wicked Wife, is like him who has taken up a Scorpion
in his Hand; And that Commorari leoni and draconi placebit quam habitare cum
muliere nequam. Eccl. 25.
the Company of a Lion or Serpent is more supportable than that of a bad Wife.
The Second Truth is expressed by these excellent Words, That Datum Dei est
mulier sensata and tacita, non est immutatio eruditae animae. Eccl. 26.
a prudent and discreet Wife is the Gift of God, to which there is nothing
comparable. And in the Proverbs, That Domus and divitiae dantur a parentibus, a
Domino autem proprie uxor prudens. Prove. 19.
Parents may well give a House and Riches to their Children, but it appertains
only to God to give a discreet Wife. The Third Truth is a consequence of the
Second; for if God gives this great Blessing, it follows also, that a Man must
merit it from him, as he himself has declared by the same Wiseman, who says,
Pars bona mulier bona, in part timentium Deum dabitur viro pro factio bonis.
Eccl. 26.
A Man is happy when he finds a good Wife, and that it is the Portion of those
who fear God; and that God gives it to Man in recompense of his good Actions.

And the Angel Raphael says to the Father of young Sara, that his Daughter was
reserved for young Toby, because he feared God, and that the others had been
unworthy of her by reason of their Sins. Huic timenti Deum debetur conjux filia
tua, propterea alius non potuit habere eam.

The Second thing you shall have to do when you shall be fully convinced of
these Truths, is to concern your self to avoid the four Faults we mentioned,
which are the most ordinary Causes of bad Marriages, and by avoiding them to
practice the contrary Actions, which are the necessary Dispositions for
Marriage.

First then, Live well during your Youth. Be Chaste, and let not the love of
Pleasures take possession of your Heart. Follow not the Torrent of the bad
Example of those of your Age, who gape after nothing but Pleasures. Be afraid,
lest God punish you by the same way by which you shall have sinned, and that
for the Pleasures you shall have taken during your Youth, which are soon past,
he send you the anguish and trouble of a misfortunate Marriage, which will
continue all your Life.

Secondly, When you shall be at the time of thinking of Marriage, be careful to
look upon it with a chaste and pure Eye, and have nothing but a holy Intention,
which seeks not Pleasure and Delight in so pious a thing, but the virtuous End
which a Christian ought to propose to himself. The Angel Raphael has declared
it in a word to young Toby; Accipies virginem cum timore Domini, amore filiorum
magis quam libidine ductus. Tob. 6.
You shall Marry in the Fear of God, with an intention of having Children, and
not through a love of Pleasures. Call to mind the terrible Example of the seven
Husbands of young Sara, who were all stifled by the Devil on the Day of their
Nuptials, and learn from thence the Cause which the same Angel told to Toby;
Audi me and ostendam tibi qui sunt quibus praevalere potest daemonium. Hi
namque qui conjugium ita suscipiunt, ut Deum a se and a sua mente excludant,
and suae libidini ita vacent sicut equus and mulus quibus non est intellectus,
habet potestatem Daemonium super eos. Ibid.
Give ear to me, says he to him, and I shall tell you who those are, over whom
the Devil has power: For those who enter into Marriage, not having God with
them, or thinking on him, and who only seek wanton Pleasures as Beasts which
have no Reason, are they over whom the Devil has power.

Imprint these words deeply in your Mind, and know, that if the Devil only
killed those immediately who abused the Sanctity of Marriage, he wants not
other Means to exercise over them the power God has given him, whereof he
discovers but too many Effects by all the Miseries with which he infests
Marriage. They who would not fall into them, ought to avoid the Cause, and have
nothing but a chaste Love in their Heart, so that they may truly say to God
those excellent words of young Toby, Et nunc, Domine, tu scis quia non luxuriae
causa accipio sororem meam conjugem, sed sola posteritatis dilectione, in qua
benedicatur nomen tuum in saecula saeculorum. Tob. 8.
Lord, thou know that it is not the love of Pleasures which makes me take
this Wife, but the desire of a holy Posterity, which may bless thy Name for
ever.

Thirdly, When you shall have a good Intention, employ the convenient Means to
deliberate well on so important an Affair. The First, and most necessary, is to
consult God by Prayer, since a good Marriage is the Gift of God, and one of his
greatest Favors for those who embrace that State, as we have shown you.
Moreover, there being nothing more difficult than to know well the Disposition
and Humor of the Person, the Divine Assistance is most particularly necessary,
that you may not be deceived therein, and this Assistance ought to be demanded;
to Prayer must be added all human and virtuous Means to understand well the
Disposition of the Person, that you may not be engaged in a bad Subject; and
know before you Love.

Fourthly, When you shall be at the point of seeing the accomplishment of this
great Affair, remember to avoid the considerable Faults which we have pointed
at above, and are usually committed at the Celebration of Marriage. And First,
because it is a Sacrament, which ought to be received in the State of Grace,
you must dispose your self for it by Confession and Communion. It Is true, it is
ordinarily done, but it is also true, that it is frequently performed so badly,
that there is no Confession in ones whole Life that is worse made; for it is
often without Preparation, and with a Mind full of Distractions, which thinks
of nothing less than of God, and the Affairs of Salvation, but is intent upon
the Excess, Vanity, and Pomps of the World: Not to speak of those who Confess
in haste, without Examen, without Contrition, without having thought of the
amendment of their Life, which makes them, commit one Sacrilege in Confession,
and another in receiving the Sacrament of Matrimony. Not to speak also of
those, who having Confessed themselves well, relapse into Sin before Matrimony,
by Desires or immodest Actions. There is no need to tell you much these
Confessions may draw Misfortunes upon Marriages: For besides that it makes them
lose all the Graces which the Sacrament confers on Married Persons, to acquit
themselves of the Obligations of their State, and that for want of these Graces
they fall into a vast number of Sins, they draw upon them also the Malediction
of God, who sees himself offended by a Sacrilege at the time when they have
most need of his Grace. Avoid this so important and dreadful a Fault, when that
time is come. Content not your self with an ordinary Confession. Take time to
think seriously of your Salvation, by retiring privately for some Days, or for
some Hours in many Days; and in that Retirement Pray to God, demand his Grace,
implore his Mercy, examine well your Conscience to Confess all your Sins,
propose to your self to live piously for the future, and to acquit your self of
all the Obligations of your Marriage; and to perform the better all these
things, make choice of a discreet Confessor, of whom you may receive all the
Advices necessary for you. Read some Books which may instruct you in the
Holiness of Matrimony, and in its Obligations. I advise you to read the History
of Toby in the Sacred Scripture, you will there find Rules, and the Model of a
truly holy Marriage, with the Blessings which crowned it.

In fine, In the Celebration of the Nuptials be mindful to avoid the Excess in
Clothes and Feasts, and all Expenses which shall be only for Vanity, and
instead of those Expenses, which are only done to please Men, give some
considerable Alms to the Poor, which will attract the Divine Benediction upon
you, as it is said to Toby, Cumque dixissent amen, accesserunt ad convivium:
sed and cum timore Domini nuptiarum convivium exercebant. Tob. 9.
That after the Nuptial Benediction they made the Wedding Feast, but in the
sight and fear of God.

Be careful that all things be managed with Virtue and Modesty, so that God be
no wise offended. When you Invite your Relations and Friends, remember to
Invite Jesus Christ thither; that is, beseech him that he will be present by
his Grace, and give his Blessing to it, as he did to the Wedding of Cana.
Forget not also to Invite thither his holy Mother: It was she who had a care to
supply what was wanting in those Nuptials, and who beseech'd her Son to have
compassion on them, and by that Prayer obtained that great Miracle of the
change of Water into Wine: She will perform the same in respect of you, if you
Pray to her as you ought. For, as Ipsa, dico vobis, si pie a vobis pulsata
suerit, non deerit necessitati nostrae quoniam misericors est and matter
misericordiae, nam si compassa est verecundiae illorum a quibus suerit
invitata, multo magis compatietur nobis si pie fuerit invocata. S. Bern. de
Nuptiis.
S. Bernard says, if she has had compassion on the Temporal Necessities of
those who had Invited her, there is no doubt but she will be the same to you
for your Spiritual Necessities: She will obtain by her Intercession what is
ordinarily wanting in Nuptials; not a Material Wine, but the Spiritual Wine of
the Love of God, of a good Intention, of a Conjugal Chastity, of a solid and
persevering Virtue, and all the necessary Favors to acquit your self of the
Obligation of your State.

ARTICLE III.
The Conclusion of the foregoing Chapter.
In fine, dear Theotime, when you shall be once engaged in a worldly Life, and
in the State of Matrimony, propose to your self to live therein in such a
manner, that your State be not a cause of your Damnation, but a certain Means
of your Salvation. It was on this Consideration that you made choice of it, and
God has given it you only for this End. Labor therefore to follow the
Intention of God, and to put in Execution that which you your self have
undertaken. For this reason I have above pointed at the Obligations of your
State, and the Dangers with which it abounds, that you may avoid these, and
have a care to discharge your self of the other.

These Obligations may be reduced to four Things, which Married People ow to
four Persons, to God, their Consort, their Children, and themselves. They ow to
God a holy Life, and well regulated in the Path of his Commandments; To their
Wife, an inviolable Fidelity; To their Children, the care of Educating them in
the Fear of God; And to themselves, the care of their Salvation, by preferring
it before all Temporal Blessings. Propose to your self these four Obligations,
as the indispensible Rules which you ought always to have before your Eyes, to
acquit your self faithfully of them.

As for the Dangers, use all your Endeavors absolutely to avoid them: We have
above reduced them to four, which are the most ordinary Sources of all, both
Temporal and Spiritual Miseries, which happen to Married Persons.

You will prevent the First and Third, by placing frequently before your Eyes
that Expression of Jesus Christ, Qui amat patrem aut matrem plus quam me, non
est me dignus. Mat. 10.
He who loves his Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me. If you
love God as you ought, you will love him above all things, that is, more than
any thing that is most dear to you in the World. He who loves him not in this
manner, shall never be worthy to possess him in his Eternal Happiness. The Wise
and Children must be loved next to God, according to God, and for God.

The Second Danger which springs from the Aversion which sometimes arises
between Married Persons, is a Mischief which is easilier prevented than cured.
To perform both the one and the other, there is no better Means than frequently
to represent unto your self that excellent Admonition S. Paul gives to Men,
Viri diligite uxores vestras sicur and Christus dilexit Ecclesiam, and seipsum
tradidit pro ea ut sanctuicaret eam. Ephesians. 5.
To love their Wives as Jesus Christ loved the Church his Spouse, for whom he
gave himself, that he might sanctify her. If you will consider well this
Example, you will find therein a perfect Model of the true Love Married Persons
ought to bear to their Wives, which ought to be a generous Love, which raises
them above their Imperfections, to support them with Patience, and to cure them
by the convenient Means which Prudence and Charity shall suggest to them, if
they have a real desire to save themselves with them.

And in fine, You shall avoid the Fourth Danger, which comes from the Love of
the World, by this great Advertisement which the same Apostle gives to Married
Persons, which they ought always to revolve in their Mind. Hoc itaque dico
fratres, tempus breve est, reliqumn est ut and qui habent uxores tanquam non
habentes sint, and qui flent tanquam non flentes, and qui gaudent tanquam non
gaudentes and qui emunt tanquam non possidentes, and qui utuntur, hoc mundo
tanquam non utantur, Praeterit enim figura hujus mundi. 1 Cor. 7.29.
This therefore I say, Brethren, the time is short, it remains, that they also
who have Wives be as though they had not, and they that weep as though they wept
not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though
they possessed not, and they that use the World as though they used it not; for
the sigure of this World passes away. The meaning is, That this Life being
short, we must make use of these Goods with much moderation, and as by the by,
not fixing our Affection upon them; And that the Goods of this Life having more
of appearance than solidity, it is a great folly to love them to the prejudice
of those of the other Life, which are real Goods; and for these imaginary and
perishable Riches, to put ones self in danger of losing Eternal Blessings which
shall never end, and by losing them, draw upon ones self an Eternity of
Miseries.

CHAP. XIII.
Of a Single Life.
I Speak not here of the Single Life of Priests and Religious, but of the State
of Continence, which Persons of both Sexes sometimes observe in the World;
which may happen two ways, by Necessity or by Election. By Necessity, when for
some Cause which depends not on us, as Poverty, Infirmity, or some other
invincible Impediment, a Man cannot attain to a good Marriage. By Election,
when by deliberate Purpose one renounces the State of Matrimony, to live in a
perpetual Continence.

They who chance to be obliged to Continence by the former Way, have need of
much Virtue, to save themselves in a State wherein they remain against their
Will.

1. The first thing to be done, is strongly to resist the Vexation their
Condition obliges them to. They ought to consider, that it is God who by his
Will has placed them in that State; that he has done it for good Reasons, and
chiefly for their Salvation: From whence it follows, that he will not fail to
bestow on them, all the Graces necessary to observe Continence, and live holily
in their Condition. Now after all, they have this Advantage, which is found in
none of the other States, to be fully assured that their Vocation comes from
God, and by consequence nothing will be wanting on his part, to effect their
Salvation in the State wherein God has placed them.

2. Being convinced of these Truths, they must perform a Second thing, which
is, as it is ordinarily said, make a Virtue of Necessity, by doing through a
voluntary acceptance of their State, what they would have done by choosing it
freely, if they had had their Wish; That is to say, they must embrace their
Condition as coming from the Hand of God, and consecrate to him their Chastity,
as a Present he requires of them, which may be as pleasing to him as if they
had offered it by their express and proper Motion.

3. After they have thus voluntarily accepted the Condition God has placed
them in, they must propose to live holily therein, and use the necessary Means
for that End, which are the same we are about to give to them who make choice
of it by their own proper Will.

I come now to those who voluntarily prefer the State of Continence before that
of Marriage, and I say they have need of many Advertisements, which I beseech
you, Theotime, to weigh well if you be of that number.

The First is, to Examine well the Motive which induces you to embrace this
Choice, and the Life you would lead in that Condition: For, if you only make
choice of the State of Continence to avoid the Troubles and Perplexity of
Marriage, and if you would live in that Condition with all the liberty a Man
gives himself in Marriage, to take therein all your Pleasures, to converse with
Women, and be as much in Divertisements and worldly Company as if you were
Married, it is certain your Choice is worth nothing; it is a Snare the Devil
lays for you, to make you fall into an infinite number of Sins against
Chastity, from which it is impossible to preserve your self amidst Pleasures,
and so many Dangers and Occasions. If you will choose well the State of
Continence, and according to God, you must embrace it by a Motive of Piety,
that is, to please God more in that State, and to effect your Salvation better.
This is the sole and only Intention you ought to have in choosing so perfect a
State as that, and they who have it not cannot, but have embraced it on an ill
Account, and with danger of concluding miserably therein. Wherefore, Theotime,
Examine seriously that which you have, be careful of being deceived in it; be
solicitous to confer with some wise and pious Person about it.

Secondly, When you shall be assured of your Intention, you must come to the
Means to acquit your self well of that State, whereof the first is to know
perfectly the Greatness of it, the Advantages, and the Dangers.

As for the Greatness, I shall not insist here to Discourse of what the Fathers
have said of the State of Continence, because that would be endless; it
suffices to say, that this State surpasses much that of Marriage; And although
that be good and holy, as well by its Institution, which comes from God, as for
other Reasons we have spoken of above, the State of Continence is yet better,
and much more holy.

It surpasses that of Marriage, as a Father of the Church says, Utriusque rei
congrua discretione momenta pensantes tantum dicimus a sanctis nuptiis sanctam
virginitatem merito potiore distare, quantum distant a bonis meliora, ab
humilibus celsa, a terrenis coelestia, a beatis beatiora a sanctis sanctiora.
S. Fulg. lib. de Virgin.
as much as better things surpass less good; as things above, those which are
below, as much as Celestial surpass Terrestrial, the more happy and holy those
which have less Sanctity and Holiness.

The Advantages of this State are great, Qui fine uxore est solicitus est quae
Domini sunt, quomodo placeat Deo, and mulier innupta and virgo cogitat quae
Domini sunt, ut sit sancta corpore and spiritu. 1 Cor. 7.
St. Paul has comprised them in few words, when he said, That they who were
unmarry'd had their Minds more free and disengaged from worldly Affairs, have
better Means to think upon God, to please him, and to sanctific themselves both
in Body and Mind.

The Obligations of the same State are no less than its Advantages. It obliges
to two great Virtues, the practice of which are very difficult, Chastity and
Humility. Chastity does not only oblige to abstain from the Pleasures which
Matrimony may render lawful, but also to preserve an absolute, entire, and
perfect Purity of Mind and Body, and to fly afar off from whatsoever may in the
least wound Modesty in Thought, Word, or Deed. And Humility obliges them to
preserve themselves carefully from falling into Vanity, or having any good
Opinion or Presumption of themselves for the illustrious Virtue of Virginal
Chastity. These two Virtues ought to be inseparable, and they have so great a
connection one with another, that S. Fulgentius calls them by the same Name,
Propter quod non est Christi virginibus negligentius intuendum, quantum cordis
virginitas carnis virginitati praeponderet: haec enim si a fidelibus conjugatis
ac viduis in fide per dilectionem operatur, etiam sine virginitate corporea, in
hac vita fuerit custodita in futuro, nec carnis virginitate privabitur, and
regni coelestis beatitudine perfruetur. Corporalis vero virginitas, etiam Deo
dicata, si virginitatem non servaverit cordis, nihil proderit in corpore
custodita, si spiritalis castitas fuerit in mente corrupta. S. Fulgen. de
Virginitate.
saying, That Humility is the Virginity of the Mind; and that it is so
necessary for that of the Body, that Corporal Chastity advantages nothing
without that of the Mind, it being certain, that Married Persons shall be Saved
without observing Corporal Virginity, and that Virgins shall not without the
Spiritual, which is Humility.

From these two great Obligations it is easy to judge of the Dangers of that
State; they are as great as these two Virtues are difficult to practice, and to
join together; and the Enemy of our Salvation employs all his Endeavors against
Virgins, to make them lose both the one and the other. This is also the
Judgment of that great Saint, who says, Utramque Diabolus persequitur, utramque
callidis consiliis insectatur, sed virginitatem carnis per hominem nititur
praeripere, cordis virginitatem per seipsum conatur auferre: nam plerumque ad
hoc carnis virginitatem quae exterior est, non impugnat ut illius quae potior
est fundamenta suffodiat, etc. Et cum certamini manifesto cedit, ad hoc se
victum demonstrat, ut vincat, etc. Evidentibus quippe vitiis provocat dum
virginitatem carnis im pugnat: in quibus si palam superetur, illico superbiam
perniciosissime jaculatur, and vitiorum author in eo quod vincere non potest
vitiis suis, vincit virtutibus alienis. S. Fulgent. ibid.
That the Devil assaults strongly these two Virtues in Virgins of both Sexes,
and when he cannot carry away the first by Temptations, he endeavors to ravish
the second by Illusions. He also adds, That sometimes he attacks not so
strongly the Chastity of the Body, that he may more easily prevail over that of
the Mind, which is more considerable; That he lets himself be overcome in the
Temptations of the Flesh, that by this Victory he may instill Pride into the
Mind of him who has overcome, and that not being able to conquer Virgins by
open-fac'd Vice, which he inspires into them, he gains them by sins which he
draws from their own Virtue.

It behooves you therefore, Theotime, to be admonished of these Dangers, that
they may not divert you from embracing the State of Continence, if you be
inclined thereunto by a good Motive, such as we have spoken of; for if it be
true, that the Persecution against Virgins is great, it is yet more true, that
the Grace of God is stronger to defend and preserve them; and that God by his
Goodness fails not to assist with his powerful Favors, those who embrace so
difficult a State, to Serve him more perfectly, and who seek all the necessary
Means to discharge themselves well, whereof the first is that which we have
spoken of, that is, to know well the Greatness, the Obligations and the Dangers
of that State.

The other Means which he must practice after this, are Prayer, and Meditation
upon holy things, Labor, and all those others we have shown above in Part 3.
Chap. 8. to conserve Chastity; and also those we have given to conserve
Humility, in Part 4. Chap. 22.

CHAP. XIV.
Most important Advices for young Persons, who begin to enter into the World.
THE Sacred Scripture in the Second Book of Machabees, Read these Advices
attentively.
Chap. 2. recounts, that after the taking of the City of Jerusalem by
Nabuchadonosor, when the Jews were upon the point of being sent to Babylon, the
Prophet Jeremy took a care to furnish them with a great number of good
Admonitions against the Occasions they should be exposed unto, of departing
from God, and being utterly destroyed in that Pagan Country. Et dedit illis
legem ne obliviscerentur praecepta Domini, and ut non exerrarent mentibus
videntes simulacra argentea and aurea and ornamenta eorum, and alia hujusmodi,
dicens, hortabatur ne legem amoverent a cord suo. 2 Machab. 2.
He gave them the Law, that is, the Scripture, that they might not forget the
Commandments of God, nor fall into Error, seeing the Idols of Gold and Silver,
with all their Ornaments. And in telling them many such like things, he
exhorted them that they should never let the Law of God be removed from their
Hearts.

What that holy Prophet did in that Occasion concerning the Jews, I ought to
perform here is respect of you, dear Theotime, and with as much necessity.
Having conducted you even to the end of Youth, which ordinarily is spent in
Studies, or other Employments convenient for that Age; and considering you in
this time about to enter into some State of Life, I am obliged to admonish you
of many things at that Entrance, and to arm you with good Advertisements
against the Dangers you will find in the World, where you will meet with no
less Hazards than the Jews did in the Captivity of Babylon: It is a Place where
you will have many Occasions of forgetting God, and of running your self. For
this reason I exhort you with the Prophet to have a care of your self, that the
Law of God may never be taken out of your Heart. For this end I have prepared
for you the following Advices which I beseech you to read with much attention,
as most important for your Salvation.

ADVICE I.
That the time of issuing out of Youth, and entering into the World, is the most
dangerous of all the Life, and many are shipwreckt therein.
This is the first Advertisement I give you, and which I wish may be deeply
engraven in the Minds of all young People, to make them very much stand in fear
of so slippery a Step, and so dangerous a Place for their Age, where many run
misfortunately into Ruin.

It is there where the Devil waits for them, and where he hopes his Attempts
will not be vain and unprofitable: He finds then all the possible Advantages to
withdraw them from Virtue, if before they have been bred up therein, or engage
them more deeply in Vice; The Liberty they begin to enjoy, the Idleness
whereinto they easily fall at that time, the greater Occasions they have of
committing III, the easier Means they have to give themselves to Merriment and
take their Pleasures, the new Companies which they frequent, where they soon
learn the Spirit of the World, Vanity, Pride, love of Pleasures, the Maxims of
the World, the Imitation of the Wicked, and the entire corruption of Manners;
the Sentiments of Virtue which they had learnt in their Youth, are easily
dislipated; those seem now fit only for Children, they think they must have a
more refined and elevated Spirit, they contemn what they esteemed before, the
most pious Resolutions appear to them the Effects of Simplicity; and from
thence springs the ruin of Virtue, and the entire corruption of their Manners,
which follows that of the Mind.

This Truth is very manifest, Experience makes it daily appear, to the great
regret of those whom the Salvation of Youth moves never so little.

S. Augustine had made trial of this to his great Damage, as he himself deplores
it in his Confessions, where he says, That Domestic Affairs, having made him
leave off his Studies Sed ubi sexto illo decimo anno interposito otio, ex
necessitate domestica feriatus ab omni schola, cum parentibus esse coepi,
excesserunt caput meum vepres libidinum, and nulla erat eradicans manus. S.
Aug. lib. 2. Confess. cap. 3.
at the Age of Sixteen, and return to his Fathers House, Vices and wanton
Pleasures began, as he himself says, to grow above his Head, as Briers in a
neglected Ground, and to be multiplied so much more as there was no discreet
Hand to weed them out.

And I would to God he had not had so many Companions in his Misfortune, but
the multitude of them is innumerable, particularly amongst young People, who
have any Advantage above others in their Condition or Fortune.

There are few found who imitate the holy Man Toby, whom all young Persons
ought to take for their Example and Model in that time; concerning whom the
Scripture observes so expressly, and on purpose, Cumque esset junior omnibus in
tribu Nephthali, nihil tamen puerile gessit in opere. Denique cum irent omnes
ad vitulos aureos quos Jeroboam fecerat, hic solus fugiebat consortia omnium
and pergebat in Jerusalem ad Templum Domini, and ibi adorabat Dominum Deum
Israel. Tob. 1.
That in his Youth he acted nothing Childish; and that all his Fellow-Citizens
going to adore the Idols, he withdrew himself from their Company, and went
alone to Jerusalem to adore the true God, not permitting himself to be
corrupted by the Example of others. O what an excellent Pattern is this for
young People, who enter into the World, and which they ought frequently to
place before their Eyes, as being proposed by the Holy Ghost for that intent.

Although there are few who imitate this Example, yet there are some; God has
always his Servants, he reserves some for himself, who bend not their Knees
before Baal, who permit not themselves to be corrupted by the Contagion of the
World. To the end, Theotime, you may be of that number, do I give you this so
necessary, and little known Admonition, and continue the following Advices.

ADVICE II.
That the chief care of young Men, who enter into the World, ought to be to
conserve the Sentiments and Practices of Piety which they have observed in
their Youth.
The reason of this Advice is, because the first source of the Disorder of
young Persons in that time, spring from the change of the Sentiments they have
concerning Piety, as we have said, and abandoning the Practices they observed
before, as ordinary Prayer, reading pious Books, frequenting the Sacraments,
Conversation with virtuous Persons, and chiefly Conference with a discreet
Confessor. Wherefore I tell you, Theotime, that the prime care you ought to
have at that time, is to conserve the Sentiments of Virtue which you have
received, and the practice of those you have been instructed in.

As for the Sentiments, know that Virtue is always one and the same, and in
whatsoever Age or Occasion you be in, you are still obliged to consecrate your
self to God, to obey and serve him faithfully.

As for the Practices remember, that if you be obliged to Virtue, you are also
obliged in like manner to all the necessary Means to acquire and conserve it;
such are the Practices we have spoken of above. Wherefore I advise you, as a
thing most important for your Salvation, not to desist from them; if you leave
them off, you ruin your self in Vice. Be diligent in Praying, in Reading good
Books, in frequenting the Sacraments, in Conversing with virtuous Persons, and
chiefly in discovering your Conscience to a discreet Ghostly Father, whether to
him who directed you before, if you can have him, for that is always best, or
to another. It is in this that all young People are defective at that time.
From the time they begin to know themselves, they will not discover themselves
to any Person; they fly from those who may keep them in the good Path, or set
them right when they are gone astray, which is the cause why they remove
themselves so so far from them, and often never, or too late return to them.

Act not in this manner, Theotime, call to mind that St. Augustine attributes to
this Cause the Disorder he fell into at the end of his Studies, because he had
no one to take care to root out the Vices which then grew in his Soul. Forget
not also what the Scripture recounts of King Joas, That he was virtuous as long
as he was instructed by the High Priest Joiada, Fecit Joas rectum coram Domino
cunctis diebus quibus docuit cum Joiada sacerdos. 4 Reg. 3.
he had no sooner lost the Conduct of that holy Man, but he became wicked and
was misfortunately ruined.

ADVICE. III.
That young Men must fly carefully wicked Company, and particularly that of
young vicious Persons of their Profession.
The first Snare the Devil sets at that time for the Salvation of young People,
See Part 3. Chap. 9.
is the meeting with wicked Company: We have spoken above how hurtful it is,
principally at that time, where it is dangerous beyond imagination. The reason
is, because the World is full of them, and it is impossible but that they
should fall amongst them. Besides, they have not as yet sufficient Judgment to
discern them, nor sufficient Conduct to avoid them, nor force of Mind to resist
them. The Wicked besiege them continually, to draw them to their Disorders, as
it is said in the Proverbs. Fili mi, si te lactaverint peccatores, ne
acquiescas eis. Si dixerint veni nobiscum, etc. ne ambules cum eis. Prove. 1.
They tell them they must do as others do; Complacence moves them, and Shame
hinders them from contradicting: Thus they find themselves overcome and
perverted in a small time. O God, Theotime, who will deliver you from this so
great and so present a Danger!

Stand mightily in fear of this Precipice, if you desire your Salvation; you
can never sufficiently apprehend the Danger. Beseech God daily that he would
deliver you; Stand upon your guard to avoid them, or retire from them when you
shall fall amongst them.

Amongst wicked Company have a care chiefly of those of your own Profession;
you will meet with them more frequently, you will have more trouble to resist
them; we easilier permit our selves to be won by those that are like us.
Postquam autem obiit Joiada, ingressi sunt principes Juda, and adoraverunt
Regem. Qui delinitus obsequiis eorum acquievit eis. Et dereliquerunt templum
domini Dei patrum suorum. Paral. 24.
King Joas, who had lived so holily during his Youth, under the Conduct of the
High Priest Joiada, was preverted by his Courtiers, so as by their solicitation
to fall into Idolatry. Stand upon your guard, I say, that at least you may not
be corrupted by them, although you cannot absolutely avoid the meeting with such
Company: For this reason fly their Conversation as much as you can; when you
cannot avoid them, stay not long with them, find some Means to break off fairly
from them. O Theotime, how happy would you be, if after this so dangerous a
time of Youth, you might truly say as King David, Funes peccatorum circumplexi
sunt me, and legem tuam non sum oblitus. Psalm. 117. Protexisti me a conventu
malignantium, a multitudine operantium iniquitatem. Psalm. 65.
The Snares of Sinners have environed me, thou have preserved me, O God, from
the Assembly of the Wicked, and from the multitude of those who work Iniquity.

ADVICE IV.
That they must apply themselves quickly to some Labor, which may employ their
Time, and make them avoid Idleness, which is then most dangerous, and more than
at any other time.
Idleness is the greatest cause of the Dissoluteness of young Men when they
have finished their Studies. It is the Mother of Vices, and very hard to be
avoided at that time. Nature of her self is inclined to it, and most of all in
Youth, after Labor, and a Labor performed with some Restraint, such as is that
of Study, or other Employments of young Men. For this reason when they begin to
enjoy Liberty, and to be Masters of themselves, they give reins to Idleness
with so much less Restraint as they have a long time sighed after it, and know
not the necessity of Labor at that time, nor the great Damages Idleness will
bring to them. In this slothfulness Vice and ill Habits grow up in a short
time, as it happened to S. Augustine. They think of nothing but Play and
Pastimes, following all their Pleasures, seeking after Companions, and all the
Occasions of destroying themselves.

To avoid this Disorder, Theotime, I advise you to have a great care to fly at
that time this so pernicious an Idleness. Apply your self betimes to a regular
Labor, and chiefly to that which is necessary for you, to make you capable and
expert in the Profession you embrace; you are obliged to it in Conscience and
in the sight of God. Add thereto the Studies proper to improve your Mind, as
that of History, as well Sacred as Profane, Chronology, Geography, proper
Language, good Authors, and other like Studies, which are both honest,
profitable, and pleasing. If you will take pains, you will find Means enough to
employ your time well; and besides the Profit of your Labor, you will find
therein most perfect Pleasures and Satisfaction of Mind, Read Part 3. Chap. 7.
to which all the Contentments of the World are not comparable.

ADVICE V.
That young People ought to have a care of avoiding three ordinary Causes of
their Ruin at that time, Play, Wine, and Impurity.
These are the three great Rocks on which at this time young People split, and
to which Idleness and Company bring them, and cause their Shipwreck. Some are
lost by the irregular love of Gaming, which occasions an excessive loss of
Time, prodigality of their Means, Vexation and Despair, and casts them
frequently into Extremities. Others by the excess of Wine and good Cheer, which
they seek then as their chiefest Happiness, and which besides the ruin of their
Health and Fortunes, is frequently the cause of sad Mischiefs. Others, and the
greatest part, by the detestable Sin of Impurity, which so universally
possesses young People, and principally at that time, and often by all these
together.

I beseech you, dear Theotime, in the Name of God, to observe attentively these
three Evils, as the three Precipices you are to avoid at that time. See what we
have said above of each of these in Part 3. Chap. 8. and in Part 4. Chap. 20.
Use all possible Endeavors to fly them, and be confident, that upon this Flight
depends all your Good and Salvation.

ADVICE VI.
That they must avoid at that time Irresolution concerning the State they ought
to choose, and after the Choice, not easily, nor without great reason, change.
This is also an Advice of much importance for young Persons, when they are at
the time of choosing a Condition of Life, not to be too long unresolved. The
reason is, that this Irresolution hinders them from applying themselves to any
settled Labor; it makes them lose much time, which might be usefully employed;
it exposes them to many Temptations, oftentimes to Sadness and Discontent; and
when it continues long, it renders them unfit for any thing that is good all the
rest of their Life, as we daily see.

He must then Resolve in good time on the State he will embrace, observing
nevertheless in this Resolution the Conditions we have spoken of above.

But after the Resolution seriously taken, he ought to avoid Inconstancy and
Change, which is yet a greater Mischief than the first Irresolution.

The Evils which this Inconstancy causes in a young Man, cannot be sufficiently
expressed: The Devil makes use of it to cast him into Melancholy, Vexation, and
Disquiet; from thence into a long Idleness, to make him lose unprofitably the
best part of his Life, and hinder him from making himself capable of any good
Employment. He there takes occasion of moving him to Impatience, to a Distaste
of Virtue, to a Looseness in the Exercise of Piety, and of casting him into
great Temptations, and often deeply into Vice.

This made the Wiseman say, Sicut avis transmigrans de nido suo, sic vir qui
derelinquit locum suum. Prove. 27.
That he who changes his Resolution, is like a Bird which leaves her Nest: For
as that Bird finds neither Repose nor Security, flying up and down without
meeting with any Resting Place, exposing her Life to many Dangers; so an
unconstant Man finds no Quiet, but exposes his Soul to many Hazards.

Avoid then, Theotime, this inconstancy of Resolution; and if you be disturbed
with it, be assured that you undergo a very dangerous Evil, and a great
Temptation. This Mischief is frequently the Punishment of the Sins of Youth;
wherefore humble your self before God, and beg of him that he would deliver you
by his Grace, and bestow on you a Constancy of Mind to continue in his Will.

Make a good Resolution in the manner we have said, maturely, and with advised
Counsel; and when that comes into your Mind, if there happen any great Reason
for changing your Resolution, trust not to your own Judgment, but to that of
discreet Persons; and in expecting their Counsel remain still in your former
Resolution, and continue the Exercises you performed to prepare your self for
it, until by discreet Counsel you find an absolute Reason to change.

ADVICE VII.
That young Men ought to foresee the Dangers and Obligations of their
Profession, and firmly purpose to avoid those Dangers, and acquit themselves of
their Obligations, and live in their Profession like virtuous Men, and
according to God.
I have spoken above of the Dangers and Obligations of diverse States, that I
might give you this Precaution, and make you take this Resolution.

Now I speak not of a slight Foreseeing, nor of a short Resolution, but of a
serious and well meditated Foresight, and of a long and often repeated
Resolution.

But to render it effcacious, forget not to join to it Prayer, and to beseech
God frequently, that he would assist you with his holy Grace, to avoid the
Dangers you meet with in the World, and discharge your self of the Duty of a
true Christian in your Profession, and also of the particular Obligations it
imposes on you.

ADVICE VIII.
That they must accustom themselves betimes not to be ashamed of Virtue, nor of
performing the Actions thereof.
When you shall be armed and fortified against all the former Obstacles, there
will remain yet one for you to encounter with, which is that misfortunate Shame
one frequently has for Virtue: The World is so corrupted, that Virtue is become
the Object of Shame and Confusion, particularly amongst young Persons. For this
reason I advertise you to accustom your self betimes to surmount that foolish
Shame. It is most criminal in the sight of God, to blush at his Service; and he
will not acknowledge those for his Servants, who have blushed to perform his
Commandments.

You must resist this Shame, Theotime, with all your power, there is only a
little trouble in the beginning; you must declare you self quickly, praising
Good, and blaming Evil, and perform freely the Actions of a virtuous Man,
without ostentation, not concerning your self at what the World may say or
think of it, but only regarding God and the Duty of a Christian. See what we
have said of this Subject in Part 3. Chap. 5.

ADVICE IX.
That they must have a care to embrace a solid and real Virtue, and not an
apparent and deceitful Piety.
This also, Theotime, is an eminent Danger which you will find in the World,
wherein being resolved to live virtuously, you may be deceived in the choice of
Piety, leaving solid and real Virtue, to embrace a false and imaginary
Devotion, which oftentimes is more dangerous than barefaced Vice, yet
nevertheless very common amongst Men of all States, even amongst Ecclesiastics
and Regulars. Four sorts of false Piety.
Now there are many sorts of this false Piety, amongst which these Four are the
most ordinary.

The First is of those who addict themselves only to the exterior Show of
Piety, First.
performing carefully certain outward Actions of Devotion, as some usual Course
of Prayer, certain Abstinences and Fasts not commanded, or other exterior
Mortification, some Practices of the Confraternities, and other like Devotions,
and in the mean time neglect interior and solid Virtue, that is, the Flight of
Sin, the Correction of their Vices, Mortification of their Passions, continuing
always in the same Vices, Proud, Choleric, not being able to suffer any thing,
Revengeful, extraordinarily addicted to earthly Goods, to the Pleasures of this
Life, to Excess, to Vanity, and often to unchaste Delights, and to many other
Vices.

The Second is of those who give themselves to the Works of Counsel, Second.
and leave those of Command and Obligation. Such is the Piety of the Master of
a Family, who applies himself to frequent the Sacraments, to be diligent at
Church, to visit Hospitals, and in the mean time neglects the care he ought to
have of his Family, to Instruct his Children, to withdraw them from Vice when
they are engaged therein, to be solicitous for the Salvation of his Domestics,
to watch over their Actions, to avoid the Disorders of his House, to pay his
Debts, to restore ill-gotten Goods.

The Third is of those, Third.
who amongst the things commanded observe some and leave others, practice those
which they find to be most facil, or conformable to their Inclination, and omit
those which seem to them more difficult. For Example, there are who would do no
wrong to their Neighbor in his Goods, and yet make no scruple of taking away
their Honor by Detraction. Others have an aversion for Drunkenness, but not for
Impurity. Others hate lewd Actions, but not unchaste Desires and Discourses.
Others love to do well to their Neighbor, but never will be brought to pardon
an Offense. Now all these Pieties are false, because he who is defective in one
sole Commandment has no Charity.

The Fourth is of those who observe the things of Obligation which are common
to all Christians, Fourth.
and perform not those which belong to the particular Duty of their State. Thus
for a Superior, a Pastor, a Magistrate, to live like an honest Man, and in the
mean time to neglect the care of his Charge, and the particular Obligations of
his Calling, is not a true, but false Virtue. The Virtues of a private Man are
different from those of a public Person, and in each Condition there are
particular Obligations, wherein one cannot fail without being wanting to
Virtue, and entirely destroying it.

I should be too long if I should handle all sorts of false Piety; That you may
comprehend them briefly, Theotime, I shall advise you not to embrace a proud
and arrogant Virtue, which despises others, which can suffer nothing, which
takes notice of the Faults of others, but acknowledges not its own.

Nor a sad and melancholy Virtue, which makes it self troublesome and difficult
to all, severe to others, mild to it self; ready to blame, but never to excuse,
even when there is great reason.

Nor a singular Virtue, which sequesters it self from the Ways of others, to
follow extraordinary Practices, new Devotions, affected Singularities, which
are often the Effects of a secret and great Presumption.

Nor a mean, silly, and childish Virtue, which trembles where it ought not to
fear, stands in dread where it ought not to doubt, which makes a scruple of
things which are not Sins, and no difficulty of those which are.

Nor on the contrary, a rash, and too bold a Virtue, which under pretext of not
committing great Crimes, gives it self liberty for all other Sins, which is a
great Error, because he who contemns little Faults, shall fall into great ones.

Nor an imprudent and indiscreet Virtue, which takes no care of many Fults
which offend their Neighbor, and which destroys more by its ill Conduct, than
it edifies by the Good it does.

Nor a human and politic Virtue, which acts Good for worldly Considerations,
to please some one, to be esteemed, to obtain some Design; briefly, which
regards its self in all things it performs.

Nor an interessed Virtue, which addicts it self to Good by reason of the
Benefit it receives from it, and its Temporal Advancement.

Nor a remiss Virtue or of short continuance, which is dejected by the least
Obstacle, which desists from doing well, and returns back because of the
Difficulties it encounters therein.

Be cautious to avoid all these sorts of Virtues, Theotime, or rather all the
Faults which destroy Virtue; labor to shun them, and acquire the contrary
Qualities. Let your Virtue be humble in it self, sweet and charitable toward
others, no-wise singular; which loves the Order of the Church, and Conduct of
its Pastors; rational, that is, neither too fearful nor too bold; discreet in
its Actios, disinteressed in its Pretensions, which seeks only to please God,
and to perform Good only for his sake; generous in the midst of Impediments,
and persevering when surrounded with Difficulties.

ADVICE X.
That young Persons ought to fix themselves more and more in the solid
Sentiments of Faith and Religion.
This is also a very necessary Admonition, because Faith is the solid
Groundwork of Piety, and without her Sine fide impossible est placere Deo.
Heb. 12. Domus Dei credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur.
S. Aug. Ser. 20. de verb. Dom.
there is is no Salvation. Now you will find in the World many Machins levelled
against this Fundamental Rock, from which you must guard your self; and for
this end it is good you should be advertised of them. These Machins are
Impiety, Heresy, and Licenciousness. Impiety of the Wicked, Heresy of
Reformers in Matters of Religion, and the Licenciousness of some wicked
Catholics.

Impiety is a Monster which attacks God himself, which lifts up its Head
against Heaven, Tetendit adversus Deum manum suam, and contra omnipotentem
roboratus est. Cucurrit adversus eum erecto collo. Job 15. Servi erunt
creaturae potius quam cretori. Romans 1.
and its Hand against the Omnipotent, and which revolts against its Creator, to
serve unworthily the Creature, endeavoring to deface in its Heart the most holy
and inviolable Sentiments which Faith, Reason, and Nature her self, had
imprinted there, to give it self over to its Passions with more liberty, and
less remorse of Conscience.

Heresy, to follow its own proper Judgment in Matters of Faith, shakes off the
Yoke of the Catholic Church, which is the Columna and firmamentum veritatis.
Pillar and Rock of Truth, Super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and
portae inferi non praevalebunt adversum eam. Mat. 16.
against which the Gates of Hell shall never prevail, according to the Promise
of the Son of God, who commands us to hearken to her, except we will be
accounted Heathens; Qui Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi Ethnicus and
Publicanus. Mat. 18.
so that he who does not acknowledge this holy Mother, shall not have God for
his Father, Habere non potest Deum Patrem qui Ecclesiam non habuerit Matrem. S.
Cypr. lib. de unitat. Eccl.
as St. Cyprian and S. Augustine, and others speak.

The Licenciousness of wicked Catholics making them seek Means to cherish and
flatter themselves in their Vices, emboldens them to take the Liberty to Examine
Divine Truths, and Judge of them by human Reasoning; and by this Liberty makes
them fall into doubt, and from doubt into impious Opinions, secret and hidden
Errors, which lead them to Perdition.

These are the three Monsters, Theotime, whose Encounter in the World you ought
to stand in dread of: Fly them, and have a horror and abomination for them, as
the Offspring of Hell, and the Plague of Human Kind: Avoid all those in whom
you shall find them. Erunt homines seipsos amantes, cupidi elati, superbi,
blasphemi, scelesti, voluptatum amatores magis quam Dei, and hos devita. 2 Timothy
3.
There will be Men, says the great Apostle, lovers of themselves, covetous,
proud, blasphemers, wicked, who love pleasures more than God; avoid them.

Account it for an infallible Maxim, Hoc factum est divina providentia, per
Prophetarum oracula, per humanitatem doctrinamque Christi, per Apostolorum
itinera, per Martyrum contumelias, cruces, sanguinem, mortes, per sanctorum
praedicabilem vitam, atque in his universis digna rebus tantis atque virtutibus
pro temporum opportunitate miracula. S. Aug. de utilitat. credend.
That there is nothing more certain and immovable than the Christian Catholic
Faith. This Faith so sublime in her Mysteries, so pure and holy in her Maxims,
supported by so great Authorities, foretold by the Prophets, confirmed by so
many Miracles, cemented by the Blood of Martyrs, defended by so many Learned
and Saintly Persons, embraced by such a multitude of People, continued during
so many Ages, which has never been shaken either by the Persecution of Pagans,
or by the false Doctrine of Heretics, or by the wicked Lives of Catholics.

After all these things (says St. Augustine) shall we doubt to enclose our
selves in the Bosom of this holy Church, Cum igitur tantum auxilium Dei tantum
profectum videamus, dubitabimus nos ejus Ecclesiae condere gremio, quae usque
ad confessionem generis humani ab Apostolica Sede per successiones Episcoporum,
frustra haereticis circumlatrantibus and partim plebis ipsius judicio, partim
conciliorum gravitate, partim etiam miraculorum majestate damnatis, culmen
authoritatis obtinuit? Cui nolle primas dare vel summae profecto impietatis
est, vel praecipitis arrogantiae. S. Aug. ib. circa finem.
which according to the Confession of the whole World, since the Apostles to
this present Time, by a perpetual Succession of Bishops and Pastors, has
always stood on foot, in the midst of a vast number of Heretics, who have in
vain assaulted her, and who have always been condemned, either by the Judgment
of the People themselves, or by the Authority of Councils, or by the Force of
Miracles? Not to acknowledge the Primacy of this Church, is an Effect of the
highest Impiety, or of an unbridled Arrogance.

Meditate well on these Considerations which are powerful enough to subdue the
most rebellious Spirits. Give thanks to God, that he has placed you in the Lap
of this Holy Church, continue firm and constant therein, adhere always to the
pious Doctrine of this infallible Guide, be subject to her Pastors, and to her
visible Head the supreme Bishop. This is the Body of the Tree, from which we
must never be separated, to stick to the Boughs. But to conserve your Faith,
remember to lead a good Life; because the Corruption of Faith is an Effect of
Sin. Hoc praeceptum commendo tibi Timothee, ut milites militiam bonam, habens
fidem and bonam conscientiam, quam quidam repellentes circa fidem
naufragaverunt. 1 Timothy 2.
I recommend unto you chiesly (says S. Paul to Timothy) that you fight stoutly,
conserving Faith and a good Conscience, which some having rejected, have made
Shipwreck of their Faith.

ADVICE XI.
That they must be strongly settled in the Christian Maxims, opposite to those
of the World.
It is not sufficient to be established in the solid Sentiments of Faith, you
must also be settled in the Maxims of Manners, and of a Christian Life. The
greatest Danger you will find in the World, is that of corrupting your Mind by
the false Maxims of the World, quite contrary to those of Salvation, by which
the Judgment being corrupted, it is impossible that the Life and Actions should
not be absolutely depraved. Vi lebitis in Babylonio Deos au^eos and argenteos
and ligneos in humeris portari, ostentantibus metum gentibus, videte ergo ne
and vos similes efficiamini factis alienis, and metuatis and metus vos capiat
in ipsis; visa itaqe turba de retro and ab ante adorantis dicite in cordibus
vestris, Te oportet adorari, Domine. Bar. 6.
You will see in Babylon, said the Prophet Jeremy, writing to the Jews in
Captivity, the Idols of Gold and Silver, which are carried upon their Backs, to
cause a terror and respect in Men; Have a care you adore them not with others.
When therefore you shall see the World which adores them, in great troops from
all Parts, say in your Heart, O Lord, thou alone art he who ought to be adored.
I say the same unto you, Theotime, you will see Men in the World adoring Idols,
that is, Pleasures, Vanities, Riches, the Flesh, and their Passions; you will
there see Vice honored, Virtue contemned; you will there hear Maxims according
to that Corruption which the Devil has introduced. Be careful that you permit
not your self to be depraved by the Example of the Multitude. For this Effect
place frequently before your Eyes the true Maxims of Christianity, those
Eternal Verities which the World will not know, and which will never alter or
change. Imprint them deeply in your Mind, to have recourse to them there,
against the Example and false Maxims of the World: And to the end they may serve
you as certain Rules for the Conduct of your Life, I shall give you here the
most important, which I beseech you to read often.

CHAP. XV.
Christian Maxims.
MAXIM I.
That we are not created for this present Life, but for Heaven.
THIS is the Fundamental Truth of Christianity, Credere enim oportet accedentem
ad Deum quia est, and inquirentibus se remuneratus sit. Heb. 11. Non habemus
hic manentem civitatem, sed futuram inquirimus.
That there is a God, and that he has prepared an Eternal Reward for them who
serve him; That this Life is but a Passage and Way by which we must walk
toward Life everlasting. We have not here a permanent City, says the Apostle,
but seek for one hereafter.

MAXIM II.
That the most important Affair which we have in this Life, is our Salvation.
There is one thing necessary, Unum est necessarium. Luc. 10. Quid prodest
hemini si universum mundum lucretur, animae vero suae detrimentum patiatur?
Mat. 16.
says Truth it self. What does it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul?

MAXIM. III.
That Salvation is not obtained without Pains and Labor.
This is what Men cannot be convinced of, and yet it is most certain. The Son
of God cries out aloud to all Christians, Regnum coelorum vim patitur, and
violenti rapiunt illud. Mat 11. Si quis vult venire post me, abneget semetipsum
and tollat crucem suam and sequatur me. Mat. 16.
The Kingdom of God suffers Violence. If any one will follow me, he must
renounce himself, and carry his Cross. Quam angusta porta and arcta via est
quae ducit ad vitam and pauci sunt qui inveniunt eam. Mat. 7.
The Gate is narrow, and the Way strait which leads to Salvation, and there are
few who find it. Observe these words. In another place he says, Contendite
intrare per angustam portam; multi, dico vobis, quaerent intrare, and non
poterunt. Luc. 13.
Strive to enter by the narrow Gate; many, I tell you, will seek to enter
therein, but cannot.

MAXIM IV.
That our chiefest care in this Life must be to please God, and live in his
Grace.
To please God his Creator, his Lord, and his Sovereign Good, is the sole and
real Happiness of Man in this Life: A Happiness, without which all the greatst
Blessings are extreme Miseries, and which the great Apostle wishes particularly
to his dear Disciples, and to all Christians Non cessamus pro vobis orantes and
postulantes, ut impleamini agnitione voluntatis ejus, and in omni sapientia and
intellectu spirituali, ut ambuletis digne Deo, per omnia placentes in omnibus,
in opere bono fructificantes, and crescentes in scientia Dei. Colos. 2.
I cease not, says he, to pray for you, and to beseech God that you may be
filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and understanding, and
that you may walk worthily, pleasing God in all things, fructifying in all
sorts of good works, increasing in the knowledge of God.

MAXIM V.
That we cannot be in the Grace of God without having a constant Resolution
never to offend him upon any score.
In this Resolution consists the Practice of the great Commandment of loving
God above all things, without which it is impossible to please him, and be in
his Grace; for he who loves him not, remains in death. Now we cannot love God
without this Resolution of never offending him. Si quis diligit me, sermones
meos servabit. Qui non diligit me, sermones meos non servat. Joh. 14.
If any one loves me, says the Son of God, he keeps my Commandments. He who
loves me not, observes not my words.

MAXIM VI.
That Sin is the greatest Evil which can befall a Man.
Sin offers an infinite Injury to God, which all Men and Angels know not how to
repair: It deprives Man of the Grace of God, and makes him incur his Hatred and
Indignation: It causes him to lose Heaven for ever, and puts him in the State
of Eternal Damnation: It renders him unworthy of all the Graces necessary to
raise him from that deplorable Condition, wherein God may justly leave him as
he does many. O God, is there any Mischief in the World to be compared to this!

MAXIM VII.
That the worst of all Misfortunes, is to die in Mortal Sin.
It is the Misery of Miseries, because it is the beginning of Eternal
Calamities, the loss of all Happiness, the Source of all Evils, and that
without remedy, without recovery, and without any hope; in a word, it is
Eternal Damnation. To comprehend this Misfortune, consider if you can, what it
is to lose God, and that for ever; to be banished from Heaven, and that for
ever; to be condemned to the Flames of Hell, with the Devils, and that for
ever, without end, without cessation, without comfort, without hope, always in
Rage, always in Despair, for being fallen into this dreadful Calamity, having
been able to avoid it, having despised God's Grace, having lost such Means of
Salvation. O Theotime, is it possible to think on this Misfortune, and not
stand in dread of it?

MAXIM VIII.
That this Misfortune happens to many, and to those who think not of it.
It happens to all those who have not time to do Penance before their Death, or
having time, were not Penitent at all, or as they ought, dying without the
Dispositions necessary for Salvation. For this reason the Son of God has so
often advertised us to Vigilate, orate, nescitis enim quando tempus sit. Mat.
13.
Watch, to be upon our guard; We know not when the time will come; We know
neither the day nor the hour; To be always prepared, because he will come at
the hour we think not on; Vigilate quia nescitis diem neque horam. Mat. 25. Et
vos estote parati, quia qua hora non putatis filius hominis veniet. Mat. 24.
Luc. 12. Quod autem dico vobis, omnibus dico, vigilate. Marc. 13.
What I say to you, I say to all, watch.

MAXIM IX.
That we must think frequently on Death, Judgment, and Eternity.
This is the chief Means to avoid that so common a Misfortune. He who shall
reflect well on the Judgment of God, will be afraid to fall into Sin, or to
continue in it never so little. This is the great Advertisement of the Wiseman,
which all Men ought to have continually in their memory, In omnibus operibus
tuis memorare novissima tua, and in aeternum non peccabis. Eccl. 7.
In all your Actions remember your last things, and you shall never sin.

MAXIM X.
That we must serve God for himself, and by Love.
Although the Considerations of Death, Judgment, and Eternity, be effectual and
necessary to move us to Virtue, nevertheless we must not stop there; Read Part
4. Chap. 2. and 3. and the Instruction about Communion, Part 2. Chapter 3. Art. 4.
it appertains only to servil Souls to be conducted by Fear alone, generous
Souls serve for Love, and because he deserves to be beloved, honored, and
served. Fear is good, but it must not be alone, Love must perfect what Fear
has begun. O, Theotime, how is it possible for a Soul to serve a God so
amiable in himself, and from whom she has received all she possesses,
otherwise than by Love?

MAXIM XI.
That we must have a Rule of our Actions, and that this Rule ought to be the
Law of God, the Example and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and not the World, nor the
Example of others, nor Custom.
It is a common Maxim amongst Men, To do as others do; and to bring for a
Reason of their Actions, That the World does so; That it is the Custom; That
such and such act so. This is a wicked, false, and pernicious Maxim: Men are
not our Rule, but God. The World is all full of Error: Men, whatsoever they be,
are subject to Failings. God is Truth himself, he has given us his Law to
conduct us, he has sent his Son Jesus Christ to teach us, Hic est filius meus
dilectus in quo mihi been complacui, ipsum audite. Mat. 17.
he has commanded us to hearken to him, ipsum audite, that is the Rule we
ought to follow. Let not those (says S. Jerome) who make profession to be the
Disciples of Truth, Nec turbam sequantur errantem qui se veritatis discipulos
confitentur. Hunc certe imitari tutissimum est, atque ejus vestigia sequi, qui
dixit, ego sum via, veritas, and vita: nunquam errat qui sequitur veritatem. S.
Hieron. Epist. ad Celant. Magister vester unus est Christus. Mat. 18. Qui
Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus. Mat. 18. Qui
vos audit me audit, qui vos spernit me spernit. Luc. 10.
follow the erring Multitude: It is most safe to follow him who says, He is
the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Never govern your self by the World, by
Custom, or by Example of others: And in all your Actions look not upon the
Practice nor Judgment of Men, but upon the Law of God, and the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ and his Church, which he has commanded us to hear and follow, and act
nothing but what shall be conformable to that infallible Rule.

MAXIM XII.
That the World is deceived in all its Judgments and Maxims.
It is easy to manifest this Maxim by Induction. The World places its
Sovereign Happiness in Riches, it desires them with earnestness, and seeks
after them before all things. And the truth is, that Riches makes not a Man
happy, they are frequently great Impediments to Salvation; Beatum dixerunt
populum cui haec sunt. Beatus populus cujus Dominus Deus ejus. Psalm. 143.
for to possess God is real Riches.

The World makes account, that there is no Contentment but that which is found
in the satisfaction of the Senses, and in the Pleasures of this Life. And the
truth is, that there is no solid Pleasure but in Virtue.

The World places Honor in many things which are not Honorable, as in Esteem,
Reputation, Dignities, Places of Honor, Respect of Men. And the truth is, that
real Honor consists in Virtue, and is inseparable from it.

The World places Courage and Generosity in taking Revenge, and in not
pardoning an Injury. And the truth is, Courage consists in Pardoning, or else
the Son of God had no Courage, when he Prayed on the Cross for his Persecutors,
and was deceived when he commanded us to love our Enemies. Aut ille fallitur,
aut mundus errat. S. Ber. Ser. 3. de Nativitat.
Either the Son of God (says St. Bernard) is deceived, or else the world errs.
The same may be said of other Maxims of the World, which are absolutely
contrary to those of Jesus Christ.

MAXIM XIII.
That to be united only to God, we must contemn Earthly things.
Yes, Theotime, for all that is in the World is Vanity; there is nothing solid
but God, and in God. Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas. Eccl. 1.
Vanity of vanities, says the Wiseman, and all things are vanity. All that is
here is nothing, all passes like a Shadow and Smoke. Propter quem omnia
detrimentum feci, and arbitror ut stercora ut Christum lucrifaciam. Phil. 3.
For this reason the Divine Apostle said he contemned all things, and esteemed
them as dung, that he might purchase Jesus Christ. And the welbeloved Disciple
cries out to all the Faithful, Nolite diligere mundum, neque ea quae in mundo
sunt, si quis diligit mundum non est charitas patris in eo. Quoniam omne quod
est in mundo concupiscentia carnis est, and concupiscentia oculorum, and
superbia vitae. 1 John 2.
Love not the World, nor the things that are in the World; if any one loves the
World, he loves not God, because all that is in the World is Concupiscence of
the Flesh, Concupiscence of the Eyes, and Pride of Life. Mundus transit and
concupiscentia ejus. Quid vis? utrum amare temporalia and transire cum tempore,
aut mundum non amare, and cum Deo in Aeternum vivere? S. Aug. Tract. 2. in
Epist. 1. S. Joh.
The World passes and its Concupiscence. Make choice (adds S. Augustine) either
to set your affection on temporal things, and pass with time; or to love
everlasting things, and live eternally with God.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Perseverance.
THIS, dear Theotime, is the last Advertisement I have to give you, for your
perfect Instruction, yet it is the greatest and most necessary of all. It is to
no purpose to have begun in Virtue, nor to have made some progress therein,
except we persevere to the end: It is Perseverance which gives the Reward and
Recompense, and on it Salvation and Eternity do entirely depend.

It is a great Happiness to have been faithful to the Divine Favors in Youth,
and also to have conserved Virtue at our entering into a State of Life; but it
is a horrible Misfortune, when forgetting the great Obligations we have to
serve God, and abusing the Favors we have received by his Mercy, we
misfortunately abandon it to follow Sin. O Theotime, comprehend well this
Misery. Vae his qui perdiderunt sustinentiam, and dereliquerunt vias rectas and
diverterunt in vias pravas! and quid facient cum inspicere caeperit Dominus?
Eccl. 2.
Woe be to them, says the Wiseman, who have lost Perseverance, and have departed
from the Way of Virtue, to wander in the high Road of Vice. What will they do
when God shall examine their Life? Yes, Theotime, what will they answer at that
dreadful Day of the Divine Judgment, when God shall make them see the greatness
and multitude of his Favors, and shall reproach their wicked Ingratitude, their
Infidelity, their Inconstancy in his Service, the Blindness with which they
abandoned him, who is the Fountain of all Blessings, and the sole Author of
Salvation. Melius erat eis non cognoscere viam justitiae, quam post agnitionem
retrorsum converti ab eo, quod illis traditum est, sancto mandato. 2 Pet. 2.
Had it not been better for them (says the Apostle St. Peter) that they had
never known the Path of Virtue, than after having known it, to retreat, and
turn their backs to the holy Law which had been given them?

There is no question but a good beginning in Youth, is highly necessary for a
happy end, there is no doubt but it avails much; but it is also most certain,
that it is not always pursued, and that it happens too often to Men as to
Trees, which bear fair Blossoms in the Spring, and no Fruit in Autumn. The
Sacred Scripture furnishes us with many Examples of those who have finished
their Life in Virtue, having embraced it in their Youth; but it also produces
some who have not persever'd, to teach Men the great care they ought to have to
continue constant in the Way of Justice.

We have a convincing proof of this Verity in the Example I have often cited,
of King Joas, who having lived in Virtue from his tender Youth till the Age of
Forty Years and more, fell most deplorably into Vice and Idolatry.

But that of Solomon was dreadful in this matter. That Prince had been favored
in his Youth with extraordinary Blessings. Vocavit nomen ejus amabilis Domino,
eo quod diligeret enm Dominus. 2 Reg. 12. Apparuit Dominus Salomoni per somnium
nocte dicens, postula a me quod vis ut them tibi. Sap. 7. 3 ^eg. 3. Domine Deus
tu regnare fecisti servum tuum pro David patre meo. Ego autem, sum puer
parvulus, ignorans egressum and introitum meum, etc. Dabis servo tuo cor
^ocile, ut populum tuum judicare possit and discernere inter bonum and malum.
He had been bred up in Virtue by the incredible care of his Parents, as he
himself testifies. He was in his Youth the most pure, most holy, and the most
accomplished of any that ever lived. God himself had done him the honor to
speak to him, and to give him permission to demand of him whatsoever he
pleased. In this liberty of Wishing granted him, he was so wise and virtuous,
that be demanded neither Riches, nor Pleasures, nor Glory, nor any of the
things which young People are accustomed so greedily to seek after, but only
Virtue and Wisdom.

This Choice was so pleasing to God, Pl^^uit sermo co^a^ Domino ^^o^ S^lo^^on
po^^^lasset hujusmodi rem. Et ait Dominus Salomoni, quia postulasti verbum hoc,
etc. 3. Reg. 4. Et veniebant de cunctis populis ad audiendam sapientiam
Salomonis, and ab universis regibus terrae qui audiebant sapientiam ejus.
Cumque esset sapientissimus Ecclesiastes docuit populum, and enarravit quae
fecerat and investigans composuit parabolas multas, quaesivit verba utilia, and
conscripsit sermones rectissimos, ac veritate plenos. Eccl. 1, 2. Rex autem
Solomon adamavit mulieres alienigenas multas, etc. His copulatus est
ardentissimo amore, and averterunt mulieres cor ejus. Cumque jam esset senex,
depravatum est cor ejus per mulieres ut sequeretur Deos alienos. 3 Reg. 11.
that he granted him a Wisdom by which he surpassed all Men that ever had been,
or should be after him. With this great Wisdom he spends the better part of his
Life in an eminent Virtue, acceptable to God, honored, and almost adored by
Men, who came from all Parts of the World to hear his Wisdom; Governing his
People with an admirable Conduct, instructing them in the Service of God by his
wise Discourses, and by the Sacred Books he had composed, full of Divine
Wisdom, dictated by the Holy Ghost himself. Now after all this, O Theotime, who
could believe it, if the Scripture had not said it, after all these Favors, and
all these Wonders, this incomparable Man fell so misfortunately, that he cast
himself into a dreadful Precipice. This great Light was ecclipsed, this so
admirable Wisdom permitted it self to be surprised, and this great Wit, who had
been the wisest of Mortals, letting his Heart be conquered by the Love of
Women, lost in a short time all his Wisdom, and became infatuated even to such
a degree, as to commit Idolatry with his Idolatrous Women, and to adore as many
Idols as he had Women of different Religions.

O human Misery, how great art thou! O the Weakness and Inconstancy of Man! Who
is there that ought not to tremble after this terrible Example? If the highest
Virtues fall so miserably, what ought not common and mean Virtues to fear? Woe,
and woe again to those who have lost Perseverance, and who have departed from
the Path of Virtue, to go astray in the great Road of Vice.

O my dear Theotime, let us learn by this Example to Cum metu and tremore
salutem vestram operamini. Phil. 2.
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; not to trust to our own past
Merits, but to be always upon our guard. Qui stat, videat ne cadat. 1 Cor. 10.
He who thinks he stands, let him have a care of falling. He did not say, He
who shall have begun, but, Qui perseveraverit usque in finem hic salvus erit.
Mat. 24.
He who shall have persever'd until the end, shall be saved.

To avoid this Misfortune, see here the Means you must practice.

1. Be faithful to the Divine Favors; for as the holy Council of Trent says
admirably, Deus enim nisi illius gratiae defuerimus, sicut caepit opus bonum
ita perficiet, operans velle and perficere. Conc. Trid. Sess 6. c. 13.
Except we be wanting to the Grace of God, he will perfect in us the Happiness
he has begun, working in us the will and accomplishment.

2. Live always in Humility, in Fear, in a Distrust of your self, in the
Exercise of good Works: for according to the Doctrine of the same Council, In
Dei auxilio sirmissimam spem collocare and reponere omnes debent, etc.
Veruntamen qui se existimant stare, videant ne cadant, and cum timore and
tremore salutem suam operentur, in laboribus, in vigiliis, in eleemosynis, in
orationibus, and oblationibus, and jejuniis, and castitate. Formidare enim
debent, scientes quod in spem gloriae, at nondum in gloriam renati sunt, de
pugna quae superest cum carne, cum mundo, cum diabolo, in qua victores esse non
possunt, nisi cum gratia Dei Apostolo obtemperent dicenti, debitores sumus non
carni, ut secundum carnem vivamus, si autem Spiritu facta carnis
mortificaveritis, vivetes. Sup.
Although every one should firmly trust to the Divine Assistance, yet
nevertheless those who think they stand, ought to have a care they fall not,
and work their Salvation with fear and trembling, by Labor, by Watching, by
Alms, by Prayers, by Offerings, by Fasts, by Charity. Because not being as yet
regenerated to Glory, but only to the Hopes of enjoying it, they ought to stand
in fear of the Battle with the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, in which they
must yet engage, and in which they cannot conquer, unless by the Grace of God
they obey the Apostle, who admonishes us not to live according to the Flesh;
for if we live according to it, we shall die, but if by the Spirit we shall
mortify in us the works of the Flesh, we shall live.

3. The Third Means is diligently to have a care of Five things. 1. To fly the
dangerous Occasions of offending God; for he who preserves not himself from
Danger, shall fall therein. 2. Not to lapse into a Remissness, but to rise as
soon as we are fallen, because that easily leads to Sin. 3. To avoid the Sins
of Omission, and amongst others, those which are against the Obligations of
ones State; pious Persons often trip grossly in this Point. 4. To preserve your
self from a secret Presumption, which insensibly mingling it self with Virtue,
is a great Disposition to a Fall and Precipice. 5. To avoid a multitude of
Venial sins, which being neglected lead to Mortal. Qui spernit modica paulatim
decidet. Eccl. 19.
He who despises small Faults, says the Wiseman, will fall by little and little.

4. The Fourth Means is, to Examine often the Condition of your Soul, her
Habits, her Inclinations, her Affections; to know those which are ill, and
correct them. For this reason you must frequently reflect upon your self, and
from time to time, or at least once a Year, review and renew your interior
State, that you may get fresh Forces in the Service of God. To read often the
Advices given above in Chapter 14. and Christian Maxims in Chapter 15. will also help
very much.

And in fine, the great, necessary, and most effectual Means, is to Pray much,
and beg of God frequently this holy Perseverance. Hence it is that the Son of
God says, that Vigilate and orate. Marc. 13. Oportet semper orare, and non
deficere. Luc. 13.
we must Watch and Pray, that we must Pray always without intermission. S.
Augustine says, that it is only granted to those that Pray for it. And the
Second Council of Orange teaches us, that even Adjutorium Dei etiam renatis and
sanctis semper est implorandum, ut ad finem bonum pervenire, vel in bono
possint opere perd rare. Council. Arausic. c. 10.
the Faithful and Saints ought always to implore the Divine Assistance, that
they may arrive at a good End, or persevere in good Works.

O Theotime, how happy would you be, if having begun to serve God in your
tender Years, you have a care to say with David all your Life, O God, Deus
docuisti me a juventute mea and usque nunc pronuntiabo mirabilia tua. Et usque
in senectam and senium, ne derelinquas me. Psalm. 70.
thou have taught me from my Youth; and even until now will I declare thy
Wonders, and until my old and decrepid Age, O God, depart not from me.

After all this, my dear Reader, remember, that Life passes, Death advances,
Eternity approaches, Life is but a Moment, and on this Moment depends Eternity.
O Moment! O Eternity! Let us at least employ this Moment to serve our Creator,
who deserves an Eternity of Service. Let us Consecrate our selves during this
mortal Life, to that adorable Goodness, who gives himself fully to us for all
Eternity. Let nothing be able to sep^rate us from his Service. Quis nos
separabit a charitate Christi^ Romans 8.
Who shall sepa^ate us from the Charity of Jesus Christ? says the Divine
Apostle. O God, permit it not, but cause by thy Divine Bounty, that our Hearts
be inseparably united unto thee; and that performing thy Will in all things, we
may love thee perseveringly in this Life, to love, adore, and bless thee for
ever in Heaven, where thou live and reignest world without end. Amen.

A TREATISE OF MEDITATION OR MENTAL PRAYER, To be added to the Book of the
Instruction of Youth.
I Present you here, dear Theotime, with this small Instruction, as an
important Piece, which I thought was wanting in that I gave you before. I
conceived that this Subject ought to have been Treated there, even from the
time I composed that Book; but the fear I had that it would not be well
received, made me then be silent, supposing perhaps that you, as many others,
might be prevented with this false Persuasion, That Meditation is not the
Exercise of young People; that it ought to be of those already arrived at a
perfect Age, and also of a high Spirit; and that it is only good for Religious
Persons, or for those of great Devotion in the World.

Upon this Thought I conceived it fitting to defer it, and in the mean time
observe what use you made of the Book, and what Blessing God would be pleased
to lay upon it. Seeing then the Success which by the Divine Goodness it has
had, and that its apparent Benefit obliged me to repeat the Edition, I could
stay no longer from presenting you with a Practice of such importance, without
which not only all this Book, but also all the Instructions you shall receive
in your whole Life, may become unprofitable.

Entertain then this Doctrine with Love; and although it be placed at the end of
the Book, yet for that reason read it not last, because it may help you to reap
a Profit by reading all that is taught in this Book.

ARTICLE I.
What is it to Meditate?
It is not that which the generality of Men imagine, who conceive that
Meditation is a high Speculation of sublime things, that has no other end than
to acquire elevated Thoughts and Knowledges which others have not, wherein they
are notably deceived.

Meditation does not consist in high Thoughts, but in those which are good and
wholesome; nor only in pious Thoughts, but in holy Affections which spring from
thence; as to hate Sin, to love God, to fear his Judgments, and in the
Resolutions which are made in consequence of these Thoughts and Affections.

So that to Meditate, is to apply ones Mind attentively to consider the Truths
of Salvation, to stir up ones self to love them, and resolve to practice them.

Now that you may have a just Idea of Meditation, it may be defined in these
Terms. Meditation is a serious and frequent Reflection, which is made in the
Presence of God, and by the assistance of his Grace, upon the Truths of
Salvation, to know them perfectly, to love them, and to put them in practice.

Observe well this Definition, and consider each Word, because there is not one
which has not its Sense and Signification, which you will yet understand
better by the following Articles, and particularly by the Ninth.

ARTICLE II.
That without Meditating it is hard to effect our Salvation.
This Truth follows from the former Definition. For if Meditation be nothing
else but a frequent and serious Reflection upon the Truths of Salvation, to
know them, to love them, and to practice them, it is certain that it is a thing
also difficult to effect ones Salvation without Meditating, as it is hard to
practice the Truths of the same Salvation without loving them, and to love them
without knowing them, and to know them without thinking seriously and
frequently on them, which is that which we call Meditating, and without often
demanding of God the Grace to know them, to love them, and to practice them,
which is obtained principally by Prayer. The Scripture for this reason
attributes the frequent loss of the Salvation of Men, and corruption of
Manners, to the want of Reflection. Desolatione desolata est terra quia non est
qui recogitet cord; The Earth is all replenished with Desolation, because
there is no Person who revolves in his Heart the Truths of Salvation. Weigh
well this Verity, which is most certain, and which will be yet more settled in
you by what follows.

ARTICLE III.
That Meditation is not an Invention of Man, but of God.
They who fly Meditation, imagine that it is a small Practice of Devotion, only
invented by Men; but they are grossly deceived, it being a certain thing, that
God is the first and principal Author of it.

As soon as he had given the Law to his People, he caused the continual
Meditating on it to be chiefly recommended to them. Eruntque verba haec quae
praecipio tibi hodie in cord tuo, and narrabis filiis tuis, and meditaberis
sedens in domo tua and ambulans in itinere, dormiens and consurgens, and
ligabis ea quasi signum in manu tua, eruntque and movebuntur inter oculos tuos,
scribesque ea limine and ostiis domus tuae. Deuteronomy. 6.
The things which I have ordered to day, shall continue in your Heart; you
shall teach them to your Children, and you shall meditate on them, whether
sitting in your House, or walking on the Way, lying down, or rising up, you
shall have them always in your Hands, and before your Eyes. And a little after,
Poni te haec verba in cordibus and animis vestris, and suspendite ea pro signo
in manibus, and inter oculos vestros collocate, docete filios vestros ut illa
meditentur. Cap. 9.
Fix, says he, my words in your Heart, and in your Mind; have them in your
Hands, and before your Eyes; teach them to your Children, that they may
meditate on them.

To represent this Truth yet better, he at the same time ordains, That Omne
animal quod non ruminat immundum erit. Levit. 11.
all living Creatures which ruminate not, that is, which chew not the Cud,
should be reputed unclean, and not be offered to him in Sacrifice.

For this reason also David begins his Psalms with the praise of Meditation
saying, In lege Domini voluntas ejus, and in lege ejus meditabitur die ac
nocte. Et erit tanquam lignum quod plantatum est secus decursus aquarum, quod
fructum suum dabit in tempore suo. Psalm. 1.
The Just shall always have his affection in the Law of God, and meditate on it
Night and Day. He adds, that this Meditation will make the Just resemble a fair
Tree planted by the Waterside, which will bear Fruit in its time, because as
the Water moistning the Root of the Tree, makes it fertile and abounding in
Fruit; so Meditation upon holy things, filling the Heart with good Thoughts and
pious Affections, renders it rich in Virtue and good Works.

ARTICLE IV.
That Meditation is not so difficult as many conceive it.
This is a Truth which is easy to be made appear. Is it not a strange thing,
that Men should account that hard, yea even impossible, which is performed
daily in all manner of Subjects, except that of Salvation? What Merchant is
there who does not often, and seriously think on the Affairs of his Traffic?
He who has a Process or Suit at Law, does he not daily cast in his Mind the
Means to gain it? and that not lightly, and hastily, but seriously, with
attention, with Affection, and putting in Execution all the Means he finds. To
act in this manner, is that which we understand by Meditating.

Do not you your self, Theotime, who are as yet perhaps in your Studies,
meditate when you are at your Book, composing any thing, or learning a Question
in Philosophy, or any other Science? You apply your Mind to comprehend it, to
remember, and reap profit from what you learn: All this is nothing else but
Meditating. Why then cannot you do that for your Eternal Salvation, which you
perform for a Temporal Science?

I say more, Why can you not perform that for your Salvation, which you do for
your Divertisement, on which you think so often, with so much application and
pleasure, that frequently you have no other Thoughts but those, and they
totally take up your Mind? Why do you meditate so easily upon your Pleasures,
and cannot meditate on your Salvation? Why in fine, can you do less for Virtue,
than the Impious for Vice and Wickedness? When they have an ill Design to put
in Execution, they perpetually think on it, they take no greater Pleasure, than
in seeking and finding the Means to effect it.

This is what the Scripture calls, Iniquitatem me^^tatus est in cubili suo.
Psalm. 35.
To meditate Iniquity. Why cannot you meditate upon Virtue, and perform that
for it, which others do for Vice, and which you your self perhaps have done?
Say not then any more, that Meditation is too hard.

ARTICLE V.
That Meditation may be rendered facil.
Notwithstanding the Difficulties which may be apprehended in this Action,
there are many Means to make it easy.

The first, and most efficacious Means is a good Desire and Affection for
Salvation. He who loves his Salvation, will think freely and often on it, will
seek with much care the Means to obtain it, and make them easy and familiar:
Nothing is difficult to him who loves. Amongst these Means, Meditation and
Prayer keep the first Rank.

Next to them there are three others, which will make this Action facil,
Method, Exercise, and the Assistance of Divine Grace.

You must first learn a short Method, which gives entrance to an Exercise you
know not, and which teaches how you should behave your self therein: We shall
assign one hereafter.

Secondly, You must make use of it, there being nothing which more facilitates
an Action than the frequent Exercise thereof, Exercise making you overcome in
all things the greatest Difficulties, and rendering facil that which before
appeared impossible.

Lastly, and above all, You must be assisted therein by the Grace of God, who
is the Father of Lights, and Author of all pious Affections. Upon this you must
rely in this Exercise more than upon all human Industry; and for this effect
you must in your Meditation beg it earnestly of Almighty God, as we shall tell
you presently.

ARTICLE VI.
That young Persons may Meditate, and that they have need of it.
I say first, that they may, because there is nothing impossible to the Grace
of God, who can do all things; and God who is pleased with young Souls, is
never wanting to communicate himself to them, when they seek him in sincerity
of Heart.

Besides, young Minds not being as yet encumbred with the care of worldly
Affairs, nor prevented by violent Passions, nor engaged in so many Vices as
they are in a more advanced Age, are capable of applying themselves to the
thoughts of pious things, and more apt to receive the Light God communicates in
this holy Exercise, and good Motions which his Grace inspires therein.

I have said moreover that young People have need of Meditating for this
reason, which seems to me convincing; Because the Lightness of Mind natural to
their Age, hinders them ordinarily from applying themselves so much as they
ought to the thoughts of their Salvation: They easily receive Knowledges, but
they are as soon blotted out of their Mind, because they make not Reflections
on them. This is what hinders them from profiting in Virtue; they have
therefore great need of some Means which may keep their Mind attentive, and
accustom them to weigh things with Reflection: Now a little Exercise in
Meditation serves marvellously for this.

The same Lightness of Mind puts an Impediment to their advancing in the most
necessary Means of their Salvation, and particularly in three, that is, in
Prayer, in the Word of God, and in reading pious Books.

They Pray without Attention and Affection; They recite their Prayers without
thinking on what they say; They speak to God with their Lips, but not with
their Heart; Their Tongue talks, but their Heart is silent, and yet it is the
Heart alone which Prays and obtains; it is that alone to whose Voice and
Language Almighty God gives ear. Now this Prayer of the Heart is learnt in the
Exercise of Meditation.

The same is to be said of the Word of God, they often hearken to it with a
most wandering and distracted Mind; where, if they give any Attention to it,
they make no Reflection on the Verities they have learnt, which is the cause
why they so soon slip out of their Memory, and they lose all the Fruit of them.

The like befalls them in reading of pious Books, to which they apply not
themselves but with trouble, and get no profit by them. This springs from their
Lightness of Mind, which cannot apply it self to serious and profitable
Thoughts, unless it be in good time accustomed and framed to it. Now this is
performed by the Exercise of Meditation, which accustoms them to raise their
Mind to God, to fix their Thoughts upon an Object of Piety, to form holy
Affections therein, and take convenient Resolutions.

ARTICLE. VII.
A Confirmation of the two former Truths out of the Sacred Scripture.
To convince you yet more of these two Verities, I shall bring the Sentiment of
the Sacred Scripture, that is, of God himself.

If young Persons were not capable of Meditating, and if they had not need of
it, would the Scripture exhort them so frequently as it does, in the Book of
Proverbs and elsewhere, to so holy an Exercise?

My Child, Fili, si susceperis sermones meos, and mandata mea absconderes penes
te, ut audiat sapientiam auris tua, inclina cor tuum ad cognoscendam
prudentiam, si enim sapientiam invocaveris, and inclinaveris cor tuum
prudentiae, si quaesieris quasi pecuniam, and sicut thesauros effoderis illam,
tunc intelliges timorem Domini, and scientiam Dei invenies. Prove. 2.
says the Wiseman in Cha. 2. of that Book, if you shall receive my words, and
engrave them in your Mind to become wise, remember to apply your self with all
your Heart to know Prudence. If you demand Wisdom, if you bear an inclination
or affection to the search of it; if you seek it as Men seek Money and
Treasures, that is, employing the same Diligence, and as much Affection, you
will become wise in the Fear of God, and you will learn to know it.

Observe, Theotime, that Comparison of the Care young People ought to bring to
the search of Wisdom, with that which is employed in seeking Money, and
discovering a hidden. Treasure; and remember the Earnestness with which you
sometimes searched after the Means to get it; how often have you meditated upon
it, and frequently without effect? Why will you do less for your Eternal
Salvation, on which you shall never think without Fruit and Advantage?

In Chap. 3. he exhorts young Persons to think often on the Means of their
Salvation, which he comprehends under the Names of Misericordia and Veritas non
te deserant; circunda eos gutturi tuo, and describe in tabulis cordis tui.
Prove. 3.
Mercy and Truth: He desires that they should always have them before their
Eyes, and write them in their Heart. What is this but to Meditate? In Chap. 4.
Fili mi, ausculta sermones meos, and ad eloquia mea inclina aurem tuam. Ne
recedant ab oculis tuis, custodi ea in medio cordis tui, vita enim sunt
invenientibus ea. Prove. 4.
Son, hearken to my Words, and be attentive to my Counsels, have them often
before your Eyes, and conserve them in the middle of your Heart: for they will
give Life to those who find them.

In Chap. 6. Conserva, fili, praecepta patris tui, and ne dimittas legem matris
tuae; liga ea in cord tuo jugiter, and circunda gutturi tuo, cum ambulaveris
gradiantur tecum; cum dormieris custodiant te. Prove. 6.
Son, conserve the Precepts of your Father, and neglect not the Admonitions of
your Mother; keep them carefully as if tied in your Heart and about your Neck;
let them be always with you, that they may guard you when you sleep, and
awaking you may entertain your self with them.

In Chap. 6. of Ecclesiasticus the same Counsel is also reiterated. Cogitatum
tuum habe in praeceptis Dei, and in madatis illius maxim assiduus esto, and
ipse dabit tibi cor, and concupiscentia sapientiae dabitur tibi, Eccl. 6.
Fix your thoughts upon the Commandments of God, and be very solicitous to
meditate upon them, and he will give you a perfect Heart, and a love of true
Wisdom.

In fine, The Practice of the Church in receiving young People to the
Profession of a Religious Life at the Age of Sixteen complete, shows
sufficiently that they are capable of Meditating, since they are then capable
of Engaging themselves for their whole Life, which ought not to be done without
considering of it a long time, and seriously. Now for this we have need of
Meditation and Prayer.

ARTICLE. VIII.
Of the great Benefit of Meditation.
The great and general Benefit we gather from this holy Exercise is, That we
learn there to know solidly the Truths of Salvation, to love them, and put them
in practice. These are the three Effects of Meditation, which cannot be
sufficiently esteemed, because they comprehend all that is necessary for
Salvation.

Besides those, there are two others, which deserve a particular Consideration,
because they are the Fountain of the rest, viz. Meditation teaches us to speak
to God, and to hear God when he does us the Favor to speak to us. Christum
alloquimur cum oramus, Christum audimus cum divina legimus oracula. S. Ambr. 1.
Offic. 20.
We speak to God when we Pray, and when we beg of him those things we stand in
need of; God speaks to us when he interiorly inspires us, illuminating our
Understandings by good Thoughts, exciting our Will by good Motions which he
gives it, and animating us to put them in Execution.

Upon these two Actions, Speaking to God with our Heart, and Harkening to him
when he speaks to our Heart, depends absolutely our Salvation, that is, the
beginning, progress, and perfecting of our Sanctification. It is for this
reason that the Fathers have recommended them to us with so much care. One
while speak to God, Nunc cum Deo loquere, nunc Deus tecum.
(says S. Jerome) another while give ear to what God speaks to you. In speaking
to God, we beseech him that he will come to us by his Grace; In harkening unto
him, we open our Heart for him to enter there. In speaking to him, we demand of
him his Lights and Favors; In harkening to him, we receive them, and enclose
them in our Heart to conserve and practice them.

What Honor, Theotime, and Happiness is this, to be able to speak to God
freely and familiarly, and that he should vouchsafe to speak to us, and inspire
us with his holy Will! A Happiness which Men know so little how to value, that
the greatest part are even ignorant of the use, although on it their Eternal
Salvation depends. God is always ready to hearken to us, and we speak not to
him: He speaks to us, and we know not what it is to hearken to him. What
Blindess is greater than this, to neglect thus, so honorable, so advantageous,
and so necessary a Favor! If Kings of the Earth should give so free an Access
to their Persons, and to their familiar Entertainment, they would be
overwhelmed with the multitude of those who approach unto them. God
communicates himself with such an incredible Bounty, and he is left all alone,
there are few found who will advantage themselves by it.

They are chiefly young Persons who profit the least by these Celestial Favors;
They understand not what it is either to speak to God from the bottom of their
Heart, or to hearken when he speaks interiorly to them, as he frequently does
by his holy Inspirations; which is the cause why they neglect them, and lose
the Fruit of them.

Young Samuel being asleep, heard a Voice which called him; he believed it was
that of his good Master the High Priest Hely: He presently rises and goes to
him, asking him what his Pleasure was. The good Man sends him back, saying that
he had not called him. The young Man having gone three times in this manner, the
same Voice still awaking him, the good old Man Hely said to him, Son, I have
not called you, but without doubt it is God who speaks to you; wherefore return
to your Chamber, and if you hear the same Voice again, answer presently in this
manner, Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears thee. Samuel returns, and the same
Voice having awaked him again, he answered as he was appointed, Speak, Lord,
for thy Servant hears thee, and God gave him to understand all that he had to
speak to him.

Do you see, Theotime, that God speaks to this young Man, but he hears not,
because, as the Scripture takes notice, he was not then accustomed to that
Language; Porro Samuel nondum sciebat Dominum. But when he had been well
Instructed, he knew the Voice of God, and he learnt to hearken to it, and to
advantage himself infinitely in that Divine School.

Thus it frequently happens to you, that God speaks to you interiorly by so
many good Motions which he inspires you with, and you let them slip, because
you conceived not that they came from God, and that it was he that spoke to
you; this is the reason why you lose so many of them, and advantage not your
self by them, because as yet you have not learnt to hearken to the Voice of
God, and answer seasonably to him. Now it is this which we learn by the use of
Prayer and Meditation.

ARTICLE IX.
The Method of Meditation.
All that we have said hitherto, serves only to convince you of the Use of
Meditation; it is now time to show you the Practice, and discover to you how
you must perform this holy Exercise. It is necessary therefore to speak to you
first of the Method to be observed therein.

To make you more easily comprehend this Method, I shall take notice here of
some important Truths on which it depends, and which it is necessary you should
comprehend well.

The First regards the End of Meditation. Now to Meditate usefully, you must in
the first place know the End for which you ought to Meditate, and that this End
is nothing else but the Sanctification and Salvation of your Soul by the flight
of Vice, and the practice of real Virtue. This is that which makes the
difference between Meditation and Study of holy things; for we Study to become
Knowing, and we Meditate to make our selves Good and Virtuous.

The Second Verity is, That to effect our Salvation, and acquire Virtue, three
things are necessary, To Know it, to Love, and to Practice it.

The sole Knowledge does not suffice, except we be inclined with an Affection
to the Good we know; and the Love of the Good serves for nothing, unless we
proceed to the Execution. And this also is a difference between Meditation and
Study; for Study contents it self with the Knowledge of holy things, but
Meditation proceeds to the Love and Practice of Virtue, as its principal End.

The Third Verity is, That we cannot of our selves have any of these three
things we have spoken of, that is, neither good Thoughts for Salvation, nor
pious Affections, nor any good Resolutions, except we be inspired with the
Grace of God. It is a Truth which our Lord has taught us, when he said Sine me
nihil potestis sacere. Jo. 15.
we could do nothing without him; and his Apostle after him, when he affirmed,
Non quod sufficientes simus cogitare aliquid bonum a nobis quasi ex nobis, sed
sufficientia nostra ex Deo est. 2 Cor. 3.
That we are not able of our selves to have any good Thought, but all we do
comes from God. And in another place, Deus est qui operatur in nobis and velle
and perficere pro bona voluntate. Phil. 2.
It is God who gives the Grace and Will to do good.

The Fourth is, That although we cannot of our selves produce any good Affection
or Resolution for Salvation without the Grace of God, yet God requires, and
will have our Cooperation, to give us them, to augment them, to fortify them,
and to make us put them in Execution. For this reason he admonishes us Petite
and dabitur vobis, quaerite and invenietis, pulsate and aperietur vobis. Mat. 7.
to ask, to seek, to knock at the door.

This Cooperation on our part consists in two Actions. 1. In demanding of God
humbly, and with perseverance, the Favor of good Thoughts, pious Affections,
and holy Resolutions for our Salvation. 2. To apply our Minds to consider
attentively the Truths of Salvation, to draw from thence by the Grace of God,
convenient Thoughts, Affections, and Resolutions. This is what God would
signify unto us, when he admonished us to ask, to meditate, to conserve in our
Heart the Truths of Salvation.

These four Maxims being thus settled, it is easy to make you understand the
Method of Meditation, the knowledge whereof depends upon the understanding of
three things. 1. To know well the End for which we must Meditate. 2. To
comprehend the Acts which must be practiced for that End. 3. The Means which
ought to be employed to perform well, and profitably these Actions.

The End of Meditation is the Salvation, or Sanctification of our Soul, by the
avoiding Sin, by advancing in the Love of God, and by the practice of Christian
Virtues. This is the sole thing which ought to be proposed and sought for in
this holy Exercise.

The Acts to arrive at this End are three, which we have spoken of, good
Thoughts, pious Affections for Good, and firm and solid Resolutions to practice
it.

The Means to perform well these Acts, are Prayer, to demand them of God, and
the Application of Mind, to consider the Verities which may move us to the Love
of God, and to the Practice of Virtue.

From the knowledge of these three things you may easily gather the Order and
Method which is to be observed in Meditation, which comprehends three Parts.

The First serves for Preparation, and consists, 1. In representing to you the
End for which you will Meditate, which is to advance you in Virtue. 2. In
placing your self in the Presence of God, and begging of him the Favor, to draw
from the Subject you are going to Meditate on, some pious Thoughts, Affections,
and Resolutions for Salvation. But this Prayer must be made from the bottom of
your Heart, desiring ardently to obtain that which you demand.

The Second is Meditation it self, which consists in three Acts, of which we
have frequently spoken; To raise good Thoughts, Affections, and Resolutions,
from the Subject on which you Meditate. The Subject therefore to be Meditated
on, must be read, and looked over beforehand; and after having made your Prayer
to God, the Mind must be applied to consider attentively the Thoughts you shall
have had, and the Motives you shall have read upon the matter, or others with
which God shall inspire you, to draw from thence convenient Affections, and
Resolutions to practice them. You must perform these three Acts in the Presence
of God; consider, that from him all good Thoughts come, demand them therefore
of him very often, and beseech him to speak to your Heart. Loquere, Domine,
quia audit servus tuus. 2 Reg. 3.
Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears thee. Audiam quid loquatur in me Dominus.
Psalm. 84.
I will hearken to what our Lord shall speak within me.

In this Exercise is practiced that holy Commerce of which we spoke above, of
speaking to God, and hearing God when he speaks to us. We speak to him in
Praying to him, and Ruminating in his Presence on the Subject on which we
Meditate. We hearken to him by expecting, and receiving his holy Inspirations,
and entertaining them in our Heart, and conserving them to put them in
Practice. But this Conference of speaking to God, and harkening to God in our
Heart, must be performed in Repose and Silence, as the Prophet says, that is,
with a quiet and attentive Mind, and desirous to profit in Virtue.

The Third Part is the Conclusion, which is effected only by Prayer, wherein
acknowledging two things in the sight of God, viz. That all good Thoughts come
from him, and that we know not how to put them in practice but by his Grace; we
give him most humble thanks for those he has bestowed upon us, and beseech him
that he will give us the Grace to put them in practice.

Thus, Theotime, if you consider well the Economy or Disposition of
Meditation, you will find that it is totally referred to two things, to Pray
and to Meditate; this is all which is performed in that holy Exercise; It is
therefore sometimes called Meditation, sometimes Mental Prayer. And it is upon
these two Actions that our Salvation and Sanctification depend; We must
Meditate to fill our Mind with the Knowledge of pious things, but we must Pray
to be illuminated by God in this Knowledge, and that the Light we receive
therein, may inflame us with the Love of God. We ought therefore to say often
with good King Ezechias, Sicut pullus hirundinis clamabo, meditabor ut columba.
Isai. 38.
I will cry out like a young Swallow, and will meditate like a Dove.

In fine, Theotime, we interiorly perform in this Exercise, the same which the
Prophet Elias did in a visible Sacrifice which he would offer to God; He
prepared the Victim, and Wood to burn it, and afterward he set himself to
Prayer, to demand of God, that he would be pleased to send him Fire from
Heaven, to burn that Holocaust; Fire in reality descended, and consumed all the
Sacrifice. Thus in this holy Exercise of Prayer we prepare our Heart to
sacrifice it to God, we fill it with the Knowledge of pious things, which are
apt to inflame it with the Love of God; but the Celestial Fire must descend
upon it; that is, God must inflame it with his Grace, and enkindle in it the
Fire of his Love, that same Fire which he himself came to bring into the World,
and which he earnestly desires should inflame all our Hearts.

ARTICLE X.
The Subject on which we must Meditate.
After we have spoken of the Method of Meditation, we must now speak of the
Subject, or Matter on which you may Meditate. These Subjects are generally all
the Truths of Salvation, which God has revealed and manifested to Men, the
knowledge whereof serves to excite us to the Love of God; such are these which
follow.

1. The Greatness and Perfections of God, as his Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
Justice, Immensity, and Eternity. 2. The Favors of God toward Men, as
Creation, Conservation, Redemption, Vocation to Christianity, the Grace of
Justification, the particular Benefits we find we have received from him. 3.
The Nativity, the Life, the Actions, the Miracles, the Passion, the Death, the
Resurrection, the Ascension of our Savior Jesus Christ, with all his Divine
Words, are excellent and plentiful Subjects of Meditation. 4 The four last
things of Man, that is, his Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell. 5. Sin in general.
6. The Sins or Vices in particular, as Pride, Impurity, Intemperance, Anger,
Covetousness, Envy, and all others. 7. The Christian Virtues opposite to these
Vices, the Love of God, the Love of our Neighbor, Humility, Chastity, Meekness
of Heart, and others.
In fine, We may Meditate upon Faith, and by consequence upon the Articles of
the Creed, upon Hope, and upon every Petition of the Pater Noster or Lord's
Prayer, upon Charity, and at the same time upon the Commandments of God, all
which have relation to Charity.

Upon the first Subjects, which are the Perfections of God, we Meditate upon
their greatness, which may be learnt by Books which treat of them; and we draw
from thence convenient Affections, as Admiration, Respect, Submission, Fear,
Hope, Love.

Upon the Benefits of God, we consider their greatness by the excellence of the
thing which is given, by the Greatness of him who gives them, and who bestows
Favors on us out of his pure Goodness, without having any need of us, by the
meanness of him who receives the Benefits, that is, of our selves; from thence
we examine the good or ill Use we have made of them, the ingratitude with which
we have received them, the good Use we are bound to make of them for the future.

Upon the Life and Actions of our Lord, we consider the Circumstances which
render them admirable, the Virtues he made appear therein; from thence we draw
powerful Motives of Love, of Acknowledgment, and of Imitation.

Upon the four last things, by looking on them attentively and as at hand, we
learn to know them, to fear them, and to prepare our selves for them in good
time by a holy Life. This is a very profitable and efficacious Meditation, when
it is often performed, and with necessary application. Memorare novissima tua
and in aeternum non peccabis. Eccl, 7.
Remember, says the Wiseman, the last things, and you shall never sin.

Upon Sin in general, there are two great Considerations, which comprehend all
others, to be reflected on. The First is the Injury Sin offers to God; The
Second is the Prejudice and Damage it brings to the Soul of him who commits it.

The greatness and enormity of the Injury Sin offers to God, may be gathered
from the infinite Majesty of him who is offended, and the baseness and
unworthiness of him who offends, who is a wretched Creature, which revolts
against his Creator, by an enormous Ingratitude which he commits against his
Benefactor; from the Hatred God bears to Sin, by the horrible Punishments he
lays upon it, in Heaven upon the Angels, in Earth upon Men, and by what he
heaps upon the Damned in Hell, which he will cause to continue for all
Eternity; And in fine, from the Justice and Satisfaction he exacted from his
own Son, who alone was able to satisfy the Divine Justice for the infinite
Injury Sin had done to God.

The Damage Sin brings to the Soul consists in this, that it miserably robs her
of the Grace of God, it deprives her of the Right she had to Paradise; it makes
her a Slave of the Devil, and subject to Eternal Damnation.

All these things seriously considered, excite in the Soul a Hatred and
Detestation of Sin, a Sorrow and Regret for having committed it, an ardent Will
to do Penance for it, and a constant Resolution for the future to fly from that
Monster, and by serving God faithfully, to avoid the Misery of Miseries.

As to Vices in particular, we ponder the Reasons and Motives which oblige to
eschew them, which are many and most effectual, we endeavor to convince the
Mind to fly from them entirely, and to confirm our selves in the Resolution of
shunning them; from thence we Meditate on the Means to put them in practice.

The same is to be used in respect of Virtue, we examine the Motives which
render them amiable, we stir up our selves to love and embrace them, we seek
the Means to acquire them, foresee the Obstacles which may be found therein to
avoid them, the Occasions we shall have to practice them, and other like things.

ARTICLE XI.
Another easy and profitable Subject of Meditation.
You will find all the former Subjects in diverse Books of Meditation, which are
made expressly for that intent; but to sacilitate yet more the Use of this holy
Exercise, there is a Way which seems to me more commodious, and which may be
very beneficial to you.

It is to take a Book of Devotion, and to make use of each Chapter for the
Matter of one or more Meditations. You may profitably employ in this Business,
the Book of the Imitation of Christ, the great Guide and Memorial of Granado,
the Introduction to a Devout Life, and many other good Books.

But not to send you farther, you may easily advantage your self by this Book
of the Instruction of Youth, and gather from thence much profit. There is
scarce any Chapter which contains not the three Acts of Meditation, that is,
Considerations upon the Subject, and afterward Affections and Resolutions
raised from thence, or at least it is easy to draw them from the
Considerations which are there treated.

So that taking a Chapter to Meditate on, you may first make choice of the
principal Considerations you will Meditate on, and afterward having placed
your self in the Presence of God, and begged of him the Light of his Grace,
revolve in your Mind these Considerations, read them, and weigh them
attentively; then draw from thence Affections agreeable to the Matter, and form
necessary Resolutions; and in fine, after you have well digested them in your
Mind, and are sufficiently confirmed in them, demand of God the Grace to retain
and practice them. This is a manner of Meditation which seems to me facil, and
which may be very profitable.

To facilitate this yet more, I will set you down here some Examples.

If you shall desire to Meditate on the first Chapter of the Book, which is of
the End for which Man is created, read attentively the whole Chapter, you will
find in it three Reflections upon Man, or upon your self, What you are, Who
made you what you are, And for what End he has made you. You will see there,
that this End is nothing less than God himself, who would give himself to you
to possess him perfectly; and this not for a short time, but for all Eternity.
You will see there how great this End is, how amiable, and how ardently you
ought to desire it. These Considerations will stir you up to acknowledge on one
side, the immense Goodness of God toward you; and on the other side, the
horrible Blindness of Men, and your own also, who think so little on so noble
and blessed an End, and put your self often in danger of losing it without
recovery. You will afterward find Reflections to make upon your self, as well
for what is past as for the future, and the Resolutions you ought to make upon
so important a Subject.

In the Second Chapter, which treats of the Vocation to Christianity, you will
find how much this vast Benefit of God obliges you to serve him. 1. By the
greatness of this Grace, upon which you will observe three Reflections, which
will furnish you to make one, or many very profitable Meditations. 2. By the
great Obligation of Christianity, which being well considered, will effectually
excite you to acquit your self of it as you ought.

Continuing thus through every Chapter of the First Part, you will find in them
wherewith to entertain your Mind profitably before God, and wherewith to stir
your self up, and resolve to serve him faithfully.

In the Second Part you will take notice of the Means which are necessary for
you to attain to Virtue. There is no Chapter which will not furnish you with
Matter whereon to Meditate, and which will not raise in you powerful
Considerations to persuade you to love them, and put them in practice. Meditate
on them in this Spirit, that is, in the Design to convince your self of the
practice of the Means, and continue on this Subject until such time as you find
in your self the Effect of this Persuasion.

The Third Part speaks to you of the Obstacles of Salvation, that is, of Vices,
which you ought to avoid. Upon every Vice you will find first the Motives which
oblige you to fly from them, and consequently the Means you must use for that
End. Read both of them attentively upon each Obstacle, the First to instruct
you, and convince your Mind, the Second to put them in practice. Meditate on
them in the Presence of God, with design to advantage your self by them.
Observe therein the Order we have given, and you will find that it will not be
performed without profit.

You will find the same in the Fourth Part, which treats of Virtues necessary
for young People. The Motives are still there mentioned, and afterward the
Means to acquire them. If you read them with never so little attention, you
will find that there is no Subject or Matter of Meditation more easy, as it is
one of the most useful and necessary.

The Last Part of the Book, which treats of the Choice of a State of Life, will
furnish you whereon to Meditate, when you shall be upon the point of that
Deliberation. You will there find the importance of the Choice, the Faults you
must avoid therein, the Means you must employ in it, diverse Considerations upon
each State, and other things of consequence. All this will afford you both
profitable and necessary Matter of Meditation.

ARTICLE XII.
The Practice of Meditation.
To reduce into Practice all that we have said of Meditation, see here what you
shall do. First, As the Morning is the most commodious time for the Exercises
of the Mind, take that to make your Meditation in, following the Advice of the
Wiseman, who says, Cor suum tradet ad vigilandum diluculo ad Dominum qui fecit
illum, and in conspectu altissimi deprecabitur. Eccl. 39.
The Just will apply his Heart in the Morning to think upon God his Creator,
and to Pray in the Presence of the most High; and many other Passages of
Scripture which recommend In matutinis meditabor in te. Psalm. 62. Praevenerunt
oculi mei ad te diluculo, ut meditarer eloquia tua. Psalm. 118.
Morning Prayer.

From this very Day read the Subject you will Meditate on. In the next Morning,
after you have adored Almighty God, and offered to him your Ordinary Prayers,
read again the same Matter. Afterward casting your self upon your Knees in the
Presence of God, beg of him the Grace to perform well this Meditation, and to
learn therein, and keep in mind some important Truths for your Salvation.

Present your self to him as a blind Man, who desires to have his Sight
restored. Luc. 18.
Domine, ut videam; Grant, O Lord, that I may see thy holy Verities. Deus meus,
illumina tenebras meas; Clear, O God, the darkness of my Soul. Revela oculos
meos, and considerabo mirabilia tua; Open my interior Eyes, that I may
attentively consider the Wonders that are included in thy holy Law. Or as a
poor Omnes enim quando oramus mendici Dei sumus, ante januam magni
patrisfamilias stamus, imo etiam prosternimur, supplices ingemiscimus, volentes
aliquid accipere, and ipsum aliquid ipse Deus est. S. Aug. Ser. 15. de verbis
Domini.
Man, who demands of God a Morsel of Bread for the nourishment of his Soul.
Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie; Give me, O God, by thy Grace, a
little of that Celestial Bread which thou distributest to thy Children; Respice
in me, and miserere mei, quia unicus, and pauper sum ego; Cast thy Eyes upon
me, and have mercy on my Misery, because I am a poor forsaken Man, incapable of
having by my self any good Thought, except it come from thy Grace. Or as an
infirm Man, who seeks the Remedies of his Soul. Miserere mei, Domine, anima mea
male a Daemonio vexatur; Have pity, O God, on my Soul, which is persecuted by
the Enemies of her Salvation. You shall make use of some of these, or such like
Prayers.

Afterward apply your Mind to consider the Subject you are to Meditate on;
choose two or three of those Considerations which you shall find in your Book,
fix your Thought upon each, one after another, to weigh them, to convince your
self of them, and to keep them in your Mind.

But settle most of all your Heart and Affection thereon, to stir up your self
to love, to embrace, and to practice the Truths you Meditate on; for this is
the Fruit and End of Meditation. We Meditate not to understand the good, but to
love it, and put it in Execution; We seek not after Science but Virtue.

For this reason you must pause longer upon the Affections and Resolutions,
than upon the Considerations; you must enlarge them, entertain them, and relish
them at leisure. For Example, it does not suffice to consider in Meditation how
amiable God is, to represent the Reasons of it, as his Goodness, his
Perfections, his Favors; but after having made these Considerations, you must
descend to the Affections thereof, to love him actually, and say from your
Heart, It is true, O God, that thou art infinitely amiable, and that there are
infinite Reasons to love thee, why should I not then perform it? Why shall I be
so obdurate, so ungrateful, such an Enemy to my self, as not to have a Love for
thee? O God, how misfortunate is he who loves thee not! and how miserable was I
when I loved thee not! and instead of bearing thee a Kindness, was wedded to my
Passions and Pleasures! I have loved thee too late, O infinite Goodness! I have
loved thee too late! but now I will love thee most perfectly; nothing shall
separate me from thy Love, from thy Service, from thy Obedience.

It is chiefly in this place of Affections, where God speaks to the Heart by
good Motions, which he bestows upon it: It is there, where finding the Soul in
a holy Solitude, and thinking on nothing but him, he is pleased to speak to her
interiorly, and replenish her with his Love. Ducam eam in solitudinem and
loquar ad cor ejus. Oseae. 2.
I will lead her, says he, into the Solitude, and speak unto her Heart. It is
there where Bonum est P^aestolari cum silentio salutare Dei. Thren. 3.
it is good, as the Prophet says, to expect with silence the wholesome Grace of
God; and to say to him with young Samuel, Loquere, Domine, quia audit servus
tuus. 1 Reg. 3. Loquere, Domine, quia audit servus tuus: non loquatur mihi
Moses, aut unus ex Prophetis, sed tu potius loquere, Domine, inspirator and
illuminator omnium Prophetarum, quia tu solus sine eis potes me perfect
imbuere; illi autem sine te nihil proficient. Possunt quidem illi verba sonare
sed spiritum non conferunt. Pulchriter dicunt, sed tu sensus aperis. Mysteria
proferunt, sed tu reseras intellectum signorum. Mandata edicunt, sed tu juvas
ad perficiendum. Viam ostendunt, sed tu confortas ad ambulandum. Lib. 3. de
Imitat. Christ. cap. 3.
Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears thee. Let not Men now talk to me, let not
Books instruct me at this time; but thou, O Lord, do me the Favor to speak
interiorly to me, and touch my Heart, and fill it with thy Love.

Continue a while in this State, and in these pious Affections which God shall
bestow upon you, stirring them up, and entertaining them the best you can;
applying them one while to the Hatred of Sin, to the Fear of God and his
Judgments; another while to a desire to serve God, to become Virtuous, to fly
the Occasions of Sin, and strongly resist Temptations; but most frequently to
the Love of God, to an Affection for Christian Virtues, Humility, Chastity,
Temperance, and other pious and wholesome Affections, as the Matter of your
Meditation shall direct.

But chiefly, forget not to come to good Resolutions; for it would be to offer
a great Injury to God, to have received from him good Motions, and not to put
them in Execution. Wherefore you must always conclude your Meditation with firm
Resolutions, to practice the Good with which God has inspired you in Prayer.
But this Resolution must be strong and efficacious, let it therefore be
followed by its Effect; and that it may be such, read and practice the Third
and Fourth Advice which you will find in the following Article.

Finish your Prayer by giving Thanks to God for the good Thoughts and Motions
he has bestowed upon you, and in humbly begging of him the Grace to put them
in practice; foresee the occasion you may have to practice them, that you may
be mindful of them.

You may perform this Exercise in a large quarter of an hour; that time is not
too long for an Action of such importance, where you treat with God concerning
your Salvation, and wherein God does you the Honor to hearken to you, and
communicate himself to you with so much Bounty.

As for the Days of Meditation, it would be a great Blessing for you, if you
could perform it every Day: In expecting that Blessing, endeavor to perform it
at least every Sunday and Feast, on the Days of Confession and Communion, and
also on some Days before to prepare your self for it, and some Days after to
conserve the Fruit of it; I add also the Days wherein you shall find your self
moved with Temptations, that in this Exercise you may find Arms to defend your
self, according to that remarkable Advertisement of our Lord, Vigilate and
orate, ut non intretis in tentationem. Mat. 26.
Watch and Pray, that you enter not into Temptation.

Make choice also of a commodious Place removed from Noise, and wherein you may
be all alone as much as you can, that you may have less occasion of
Distractions, and more liberty to apply your self to God.

ARTICLE XIII.
Some Advices concerning Meditation.
Before the finishing of this Treatise, there remain some Advices to be given
you, to prevent the Difficulties which will occur in this holy Exercise, and to
make it solidly profitable to you.

ADVICE I.
The First is, That you diligently take care, not to permit your Mind to be
prepossessed with any false Opinion against Meditation, as to conceive that you
are not capable of Meditating, or that it is too much trouble, or not
necessary, or the like.

This is the first Obstacle the Devil will put in your way, to divert you
entirely from this Exercise; but we have already before taken notice of this
Impediment, and discovered the vanity of that Illusion, in the Eight First
Articles, wherefore read them attentively.

And chiefly concerning the Capacity, remember, that it is not your great Wit,
nor your high Studies, which make you capable of Meditating, but Humility, and
the knowledge of your own Disability to think or do any good Actions, and the
great Desire to profit in Virtue. These are the Dispositions which render you
capable of Meditating, or rather of receiving the Lights and Motions of Divine
Grace, which are the things we seek in Meditation, and not our proper
Imaginations.

ADVICE II.
The Second Advice is, Not to be dismayed with the Difficulties you may find in
this Exercise, as the trouble to apply your Mind, Distractions, Distasts, and
the like.

1. Represent to your self, that good things are not acquired without pains.
How much is there in Studies, and other Exercises of Human Life, from which yet
we desist not by reason of that Difficulty?

2. Consider, that all Beginnings are difficult, and that by Exercise they are
overcome, and chiefly by the Grace of God, which is the first Mover to all good
things, but particularly in this Action, where it is the prime and principal
support.

3. Make these Distractions serve for your Meditation, and proceed in this
manner. Humble your self in the sight of God, because you cannot keep your Mind
attentive: Acknowledge that it is through your Fault, That your Sins are the
cause, That this springs from your Lightness, and from the too much inclination
you have to the Vanities and Pleasures of the World. Take from thence occasion
to lament your Sins, to demand pardon of God for them, to purpose to fly from
them for the future, to correct the Levity of your Mind, and to redress your
disorderly Affections.

4. Amongst all these Distractions, account your self as a Beggar at the Gate
of God, from whom you beg an Alms. Does a Beggar esteem himself repulsed,
because he is not hearkened to at his first Request? He continues soliciting, he
expects, he comes again. Act you in that manner, persevere, humbly Si vis
habere justitiam Dei, esto mendicus Dei, qui te monuit ut peteres. S. Aug. Ser.
5. de verb. Dom.
begging of God a good Thought for your Salvation. Although you should spend all
the time of your Meditation in this Demand, you would not have performed much.
Call to mind that excellent Sentence of St. Augustine, who says, That Cum
aliquando tardius dat Deus, commendat dona non negat; diu desiderata dulcius
obtinentur; citius data vilescunt. Ibid.
when God does not presently grant the Petition we desire, it is not because he
refuses us, but because he would have us set such a value on his Favors as they
deserve; It being certain that we more esteem the things we obtain with much
trouble, and make less account of those we acquire without pains. For this
reason he adds, Pete, quaere, insta, servat cibi Deus quod non vult cito dare,
ut discas magna magne desiderare. Ibid.
Ask, seek, urge; God reserves the Favor to grant it at the end, although he
would not consent to it at the first, that you might learn to solicit for great
things with an ardent desire.

5. In these Occasions behave your self like the poor Cananean, who gained by
her admirable Patience, the Favor which the Son of God had refused her. This
Woman being afflicted, came, and cast her self at the Feet of our Lord, to
obtain the cure of her Daughter tormented with a malignant Spirit. He passes on
his Way without answering her one word. She addresses her self to the Apostles,
who intercede for her, but to no purpose. Seeing her self thus rejected, she
puts her self forward, and presents her self to him again with more instance
than before, O Lord, assist me! He answers roughly, That it is not reasonable
to take the Bread of the Children to cast it to the Dogs; An Answer sufficient
to repulse a most approved Patience. She instead of being dejected by it, takes
advantage from his Words, and makes use of them to obtain the Effect of her
Prayer; Ah Lord! pardon me if I tell you, that sometimes Bread is given to the
Dogs, for at least they are permitted to eat the Crumbs which fall from their
Master's Table: I also demand nothing more than the remainder of the Favors you
show to your Children. Our Lord took so much content in seeing the Faith,
Humility, and Patience of this afflicted Person, that praising her highly, he
said to her, O Woman, great is thy Faith, be it to thee as thou desire.

Imitate in your Prayer this admirable Example, and still when you beg of God
any Grace for your Salvation, although God answer you not by some good Thoughts,
continue entreating, Domine, adjuva me, Lord, assist me. Have recourse to the
Intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and of the Saints, as the Cananean to
that of the Apostles. If these Coldnesses chancing to continue, your Conscience
tell you, that they are your Sins which are the cause, and that they render you
unworthy of the Favors you request; Acknowledge humbly the truth, and declaring
that it is so, say from your Heart as the Cananean, It is true, O God, it is
not reasonable that thou should give the Bread of thy Children to Dogs, that
is, to Sinners, such as I am; but at least, as the Crumbs of Bread which fall
from the Table are allowed to the Dogs, deny me not those which fall from
thine; grant me some small remainder of those abundant Graces which thou
pourest upon those who faithfully serve thee. If you persevere thus, God will
grant your Petition, and recompense your Faith, your Humility, and your
Patience. And although he should give you no good Thoughts at all upon the
Subject you would Meditate, that Patience, that Humility, that steadfast Faith
which you exercise, will be more pleasing to him than any thing else, and more
profitable to you, and this will be the best Fruit of your Prayer. Thus,
Theotime, you shall lose nothing; for in seeking God on one side, you will find
him on the other; and you will experience the truth of that excellent
Observation made by the great St. Bernard, Dico tibi solus est Deus qui frustra
nunquam quaeri potest, nec etiam cum inveniri non potest. S. Bern. l. 5. de
Consider. c. 11.
That amongst all the things we seek for, only God is never sought for in vain,
even when we imagine we cannot find him.

ADVICE. III.
The Third Advice is, That in every Meditation you still be mindful of the End
for which you Meditate, which is the Sanctification of your Soul, and to make
you really virtuous in the sight of God; so that the Meditation which does not
improve you, is not a Meditation nor Prayer, but a Speculative Study, which is
sometimes more prejudicial than profitable.

The Meditation which is performed without a prospect of this End, is full of
an infinite number of most dangerous Defects. It makes us stop at the Thoughts,
and not at the Affections; at the subtle Imaginations, and not at the solid; at
those which delight the Mind, and not at those which move the Heart. If we pass
to Affections, it is to those which are found most agreeable, and not to those
which are most necessary, such as the hatred of Sin, the desire of mortifying
our Passions, and correcting our Vices. We content our selves with the
Affection, and omit the Resolutions; and if we proceed to Resolutions, we
content our selves with general ones, without descending to Particulars. For
Example, we say, I would be Humble, Chaste, Temperate; but we do not say, I will
be Humble in that Occasion, I will Obey when I shall be Commanded, I will
acknowledge my Fault when I shall be Reprehended, and other like; I will be
Chaste by resisting Temptations, through such and such Means; I will avoid such
Occasions, which are dangerous for me; I will shun Idleness, etc. And in fine,
if we come to some particular Resolutions, we make them but weakly, and not
with force and vigor; from whence it comes to pass that we accomplish them not,
and so they are as unprofitable as if they were not made at all.

All these Faults in Meditation spring from the first, that we propose not
effectually in Meditating the Sanctification of our Soul, by the solid Practice
of Virtue.

From hence it comes, that this manner of Meditation prejudices more than it
profits, because it is apt to give to those who act thus, a very good Opinion
of themselves, a Contempt of others, and a Confidence in their Merits: It makes
them much addicted to their own Judgment and Will, and believe they are Saints
by Meditating on holy things, although they practice them not, which is a very
great Mischief, not only to them, but to others, who take from thence an
occasion to blame Meditation and Devotion, whereas they are not the cause of
these Disorders, but the ill use these Persons make of them.

For this reason, Theotime, when you apply your self to this holy Exercise,
propose to your self strongly that End, to make your self Virtuous, and believe
that that Meditation is unprofitable, from which you depart without a
particular Resolution of correcting your self, and of loving God, more than you
have done as yet.

ADVICE IV.
But it is not sufficient to refer Meditation to the practice of Virtue, we
must also be careful to relate it to the practice of the most solid Virtues, as
Faith, Humility, the Love of God and our Neighbor, Chastity, Temperance, and
others; and chiefly those we have most need of in the present State wherein we
find our selves, and whose Occasions occur most frequently.

This Advice is one of the most important which can be given in this Matter;
for to what purpose is it to propose to our selves in Meditating, fair and
apparent Virtues, and in the mean time omit the more solid, which are the
Groundwork and Foundation of all others, and which making less show, are
notwithstanding more necessary? To what end, for Example, do we propose to our
selves to be very liberal to the Poor, if we had Means, to suffer great
Persecutions for Gods sake, if they should befall us, with other like things,
and neglect the Virtues we stand in present want of, as Chastity, Humility,
Meekness toward our Neighbor; or those which we have every Day occasion to
practice, as the mortifying our Passions, refraining our Anger, suffering our
Neighbor, obeying our Superiors?

In a word, Meditation is a Means to sanctify our Souls. This Sanctification
consists in moderating our Passions, correcting our Vices, and by consequence,
in acquiring the contrary Virtues: It ought therefore to be necessarily
referred to that End, and to produce that Effect; otherwise it is not a
Meditation, but a pure Illusion: And those who make use of it so, abuse the
most holy and wholesome thing, which they render unprofitable to themselves, and
contemptible to others.

Act not in this manner, Theotime, Meditate really to sanctify your Soul, to
mortify your Passions, to correct the Vices which bear dominion in you, to
practice true and solid Virtues, and those you stand in most need of in your
present State.

CONCLUSION.
This is what I had to propose to you upon this Subject of Meditation. To
conclude, I have but two Words to say to you, Read, and Practice. Read, to
instruct your self in a thing which as yet you know not, to convince your self
that Meditation is not so difficult as you might conceive it, but that you may
practice it, and that it may be very beneficial to you. Read, to learn the
Method of it, and practice the same. But content not your self with the
Reading, proceed to the Practice and Exercise of so pious a thing. Try what you
can do therein, or rather what God will give you the Grace to perform: Be
assured he will give you much, if you approach to it with a sincere Intention
to please him, and to learn in that Divine School the Truths of your Salvation,
and to practice them faithfully. Be not dismayed for the Difficulties, be
faithful and perseverant, and God will bestow upon you the Means to surmount
them. Call to mind that Sentence of the Prophet, That Bonus est Dominus
sperantibus in se animae quaerenti illum. Thren. 3.
God is good to those who hope in him, and to Souls which in reality search
after him. Seek after him in your Prayers and Meditations, and you will find
him, if you search faithfully. Petite and accipietis, quaerite, etc.
Ask, and it shall be granted to you; seek, and you shall find; knock at the
Door, and it shall be opened to you. Gustate and videte quam suavis est
Dominus. Psa. 51.
Taste, Theotime, and experience, how sweet and pleasant God is, in this pious
Exercise, and you will find by experience, and in effect, the truth of that
Sentence of the Divine Wisdom, Beatus homo qui audit me, qui vigilat ad fores
meas quotidie, and observat ad posts ostii mei. Qui me invenerit inveniet
vitam, and hauriet salutem a Domino. Prove. 8.
Blessed is he who hears me, and who watches often at my Door, and waits at my
Gates. He who shall find me shall find Life, and receive Salvation from the
Hand of our Lord.

FINIS.

