A JUST DISCHARGE TO DR. STILLINGFLEET'S VNJVST CHARGE OF IDOLATRY AGAINST THE
CHURCH OF ROME. WITH A Discovery of the Vanity of his late Defense, In his
Pretended Answer to a Book Entitled CATHOLICS NO IDOLATERS By way of Dialogue
Between. EVNOMIVS, a Conformist and CATHARINVS, a Nonconformist.

THE FIRST PART.

Concerning the Charge of Idolatry, etc.

Facile est cuiquam videri respondisse, si tacere noluerit.

S. Aug. PARIS, Printed for RENE' GUIGNARD, at the sign of S. Basil, in S.
Jacques Street

M.DC.LXXVII.

Avec Privilege du Roy.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER
THe Design of these Dialogues discovering it self in the Title Page, and the
Particular Subjects they treat of being set down in the Summary annexed, and
the Table at the End, supersede the troubling the Reader with any long Preface.
I shall therefore only touch briefly upon some few things, which I conceive his
Curiosity would lead him to demand, if he knew of whom.

The First is concerning the Author, who he is, and it is his desire that his
name should be concealed, not to put the Dr. into the Temptation of giving him
a like occasion of complaint, as he had done formerly to T G when having gotten
the knowledge of his being the Author of a certain private Cath. u^ Idol.
Preface.
Paper in answer to some Objections made by him, he published the said Paper in
Print with such Characteristical notes of the Author, as might easily discover
who he was, and in terms so invidious, as were apt to create the greatest
Prejudice against him.

The Second is, what determined the Author to make choice of this way of
Dialogue between a Conformist and a Nonconformist, and I have heard him say,
it was Dr St's constant acting of both parts in his Writings without any manner
of Retractation; and no Method seemed more apt to make the Reader sensible of
this Artifice, than to distribute the Parts to the Proper Persons, and make
each rehearse for himself.

The Third is the Style, in which if the Dr chance to meet with some of those
which he calls hard words, and which he says he is so used to, that he Def. p.
4.
can easily pass them over, yet in case this good Resolution should fail him,
he can have no just reason to complain, they being either All or the greatest
part of them as appears by the Citations in the Margent, transcribed from his
own Original, and but the Echos of his own Reproaches. And I doubt not, but the
Reader after he has considered all things, will find them to be much beneath
the merits of his Intolerable Vapouring without cause, and the bitter Sarcasms,
with which he treats T. G. who for the moderation used by him in his Reply had
gained the repute of a Civil and modest Adversary in the judgment of many
Learned men of the Church of England.

The Fourth is, why some Passages are more largely insisted on in this
Treatise, which the Reader perhaps will think did not deserve the Pains that is
bestowed on them, and particularly that Religious Question concerning the
Heathen's Jupiter, whether according to the Fathers he were the true God or a
Devil? But the great advantage the Dr thinks it to be to his Cause, to maintain
him to be the true God, and the discussing this Point Def. p. 24
to be so very material toward the true Understanding the nature of Idolatry,
as to deem it worth the while to spend a hundred and twelve Pages in giving a
full account of the Sense of the Fathers concerning it, is to be considered, as
also his unreasonable triumphing over his Adversary for having asserted Jupiter
according to the Fathers to be a devil, and the Impression all this must make
upon an unwary Reader, together with the great abuse he puts upon the Fathers
by mis-representing their Sense, and corrupting their words* as is shown in the
Third Part of this Treatise Dial. 3.

The last is, how it can be expected, that a little Anonymous Book in 12o of 500
Pages should ever pass in the world for a Just Answer to a Volume of Dr
Stillingfleet's in large 8vo consisting of near 900. in which the Citations too
are without number, the Arguments without measure, and the Discourses o^ rather
Excursions without end. But for that I must referr the Reader to the Treatise
it se^f, in which he will sind all the material difficulties of the Dr's
D^fence relating to the Charge of Idolatry, proposed in his own words with
their due Strength and light (and often times with advantage) by Catharinus,
and ful^y refuted by Eunomius. It Is not Noise and Bulk which make an Answer,
but Truth and Reason. For as S. Augustine says Quid est loquacius vanitate?
Quae non ideo potest quod Veritas, quia li. 5. de Civ. Dei ^. ult.
si voluerit, etiam plus potest clamar^ quam Veritas. There is nothing so full
of words as Vanity: Yet we are not therefore to think, that Vanity can do what
Truth does, because if it be resolved not to hold it is peace, it can make a
greater Noise, than Truth it self.

A SUMMARY OF The Chief matters contained in these Dialogues.
In the First Part.
THe Charge of Idolatry shown Vnmaintainable by Dr Stillingfleet.

1. Without dissenting from the Sense of Dial. 1.
the True and Genuin Sons of the Church of England.

2. Without imposing upon the 22th of the 39. Articles, a Sense never intended
Dial. 2.
by the Compilers of them.

3. Without denying or Assigning a distinct Church in all Ages preserved from
Dial. 3.
Heresy and Idolatry, with which all Christians were bound to join in Communion.

4. Without granting the Church of Ibid. p. 91. etc*
Rome to err against a Fundamental Point of Faith.

5. Without bringing the Guilt and Mischi^f of the Schism upon the maintainers
Dial. 4.
of the Charge.

6. Without subverting all Lawful Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church Dial.
5.
of England.

In the Second Part.
1. What Dr St has done in his late Defense, Dial. 1.
shown to have been un-necessary, as to the greater part of it, in Relation to
T. G.

2. What it was he ought to have done to Dial. 2.
maintain his Charge of Idolatry. viz

1st To have laid down the true Notion of Idolatry in the nature of the thing,
which he has not done,

And then 2ly to have shown how it Dial. 3.
agreed to the doctrine of the Church of Rome in her Councils, viz

1 The Second Nicene.

2ly And that of Trent. In both which he Dial. 4.
is shown to have failed; as also in the Parallel he draws from the Practice of
Ibid. p 247.
the Arians.

Some Instances of his unfaithful reporting Dial. 3. p. 220*
the words and sense of Authors cited by him, tendered to Consideration. Dial.
4. p. 234. 252.


In the Third Part.
1. The Question is stated concerning the Dial. 1.
Heathen's Jupiter, whether according to the Fathers, he were the true God ora
Devil? The latter proved by more than a whole Jury of them.

2. The greatest part of the Testimonies produced by Dr St shown to be
Impertinent, Dial. 2.
(together with a short yet clear Account of the Heathens Theology out of the
Fathers) and Ib. p. 330


3. Those Testimo^ies which seem most Dial. 3.
Express to be misrepresented or corrupted by him.

4. The Parallel he draws from the Practice of the Vulgar Heathens shown Dial.
4.
to be Unjust, with another Instance of his unfaithful reporting of a Passage
of Ib. p. 3^9
Thomas Aquinas.

5. As also his other Parallel from the Practice of the Wiser Heathens. Dial. 5.


6. The Argument from God's Appropriation of certain External Acts to his Ib.
p. 447. etc
worship, shown to conclude nothing against the Church of Rome, And

7. No succor to be had to his Cause from the determination of Circumstances
Dial. 6.
as assigned by him.

8. A Just discharge to his Unjust Charge of Idolatry from the doctrine of Ib.
p. 488.
Mr Daille concerning the Use of Signs Instituted by men.

Lastly his denying Christ himself to be offered as a Sacrifice upon the Altar,
Ib. p. 512
shown to be repugnant to the Sense of the true and Genuin Sons of the Church
of England.

ERRATA.
THe English Press being watched of late, as the Orchard of the Hesperides was
of old, and a necessity arising from thence of making use of a Paris Printer,
who understands not a word of English, the Reader will have no cause to wonder,
if he sometimes meet with ant for and, bu for but, te for the, is for it, tit
for it is, wish for with, etc. and oftentimes with false Pointings, words unduly
joined, and syllables un-artificially divided at the end of lines, as Ro-me,
appropria-t^, and the like. I can assure him, the Correction of the Press cost
little less pains, than the writing of the Treatise. Yet was it not possible to
avoid all Errors. The most material are here noted, and I desire the Reader's
Candor in the Amendment of them.

In the First Part.
P. 33. in the Marg. for 244. read 124. P. 40. l. 10. f. nay r. may. P. 54. l.
4. f. sigh. r. sight P. 68. l. 4. f. et r. it.

P. 71. l 15, f. Hall r. Hell. P. 92. l. 13. f. his r. to his. P. 101. l. 28.
f. thati r. that it. P. 115. l. 7. f. Prophani r. Profane. P. 123. l. 2. f. Wit
r. wits. P. 124. l. 6. f. else r. tells. Ibid. l. 7. f. if r. of.

P. 137. l. 3. f. f r. if. P. 139. l. 6. f. who r. whom. P. 150. l. 25. f.
^spiter r. Jupiter*

In the Second Part.
P. 170. l. 27. f. Papisti r. Papists.

P. 186. l. 23. f. upon r. upon P. 188. l. 20. f. the r. they. Ibid. l. 26. f.
13.tly r 13th.

P. 189. l. 20. f. to r. as. Ibid. l. 21. f. forbidden r. forbidden as. P. 190.
l. 9. f. Postulat's r. Postulata's. P. 219. l. 19. f. every r to every.

P. 232. l. 14. f. These r. There.

P. 240. l. 15. f. Auditros r. Auditors.

Ibid. l. 25. f Receptable r. Receptacle.

P. 281. l. 28. f. when r. whom.

In the Third Part.
P. 291. l. 8. f. being r. they are.

P. 292. l 22. f. have r. have not.

P. 299. l. 3. f. spirits r. spirit.

P. 320. l. 17. f. Po^tical r. Poetical.

P. 330. l. 26. f. whom r. (whom. Ibid. l. 27. f. heaven r. heaven)

P. 242. l. ult. f. to r. to be.

P. 346. l. 14. f. to weak r. so weak.

Ibid. l, 22. f. exatted r. exacted.

P. 455. l. 21. f. such r. such as.

P. 497. l. 9. f. it In like r. In like.

P. 502. l. 20. f. carnetly r. earnestly.

P. 525. l. 24. f. that r. than.

P. 526. l. 20. f. the. Wise r. the Wise,

THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
EVnomins declares his dis-satisfaction witb the Charge of Idolatry, and Dr
Stillingfleet's pretending it to be the Sense of the Church of England. The
Dr's Endeavors in that part shown to be Insufficient, particularly as to the
Book of Homilies, and the Rubric for kneeling at Communion. The sad account of
History we are like to have from him when he denies Robere Abbot Bishop of
Salisbury to have been ever till now suspected for a Puritan. His charge of
Idolatry different from that of the true and Genuin Sons of the Church of
England; diverse of whom vindicate the Doctrine of the Second Council of Nice
concerning the worship of Images, from the note of Idolatry. The true State of
the Controversy concerning that Point.

EVNOMIVS. CATHARINVS. EVnomius: How does my good friend Catharinus? What, ever
more poring upon Books? Me thinks, you should sometimes give your self leave to
divert a little. Neque semper arcum. --


Cathar; Truly I think it much better to spend my time in reading Sermons and
good Books of Controversy, than as Profane men do now adays in Playhouses and
Taverns.


Eunom: These I confess are but the too frequent Employments, rather than
Recreations of the time. But do you never spend an hour in reading a Play or a
Romance?


Cathar: It is not needful. I have Dr Stillingfleet's Books of Controversy,
which exceed them all not only in Profit but Delight: for he is the man in my
mind, who Omne tulit punctum, dum miscuit utile dulci.


Eunom. But is there not something of picquant, as well as dulce in his
writings, which perhaps makes them relish the better with you? What you have
before you, seems to me, by the bulk and fashion of the Book, to be his DEFENSE
of his Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome, in answer to T. Gs Book
entitled, Catholics no Idolaters.


Cathar. It is the very same: and I have read it over once with a great deal of
pleasure and satisfaction, to see the Heathens could not be justly charged with
Idolatry, bu the Papists must be so too: And am now tasting it over again, the
second time.


Eun. Every one, as Aristotle says, judges (as well as tastes) according as
he is affected. I have met with some who have been delighted with it too, at
the first reading, but as we use to be with the strange Adventures and Passages
in Cassandra or the Grand Cyrus; in which Fiction and Truth are so artificially
interwouen, that men easily suffer themselves to be Surpised, and then please
themselves with the surprise. But Others there are, who look upon it, as an
Apology rather for the Heathens, than a Conviction of the Romanists. And Others
again, considering the veneration given to Holy Things and Places in the Church
of England, and particularly to the Altar by Dr St. himself, are of opinion,
that if the Church of Rome be guilty of Idolatry, for giving an Honourary
Respect to the Images of Christ and his Saints, both himself and the Church of
England must be in the same condemnation.


Cathar. By this I see, that for a man to write any thing in this age,
especialy Controversy, is but to ly down and hold his hand for Every one to
Strike. And to say the truth, his Adversaries have not been sparing to take
their turns, and lay on as hard as they could. But notwithstanding all their
Rage and malice, he sits down, he says, with that Ep, Dedic.
contentment, that He has defended a Righteous cause, and, with an honest mind.
And therefore I hope you make a more favorable Judgment of his Performance.


Eun: To deal plainly wirh you, Catharinus, I was never satisfied with the
Charge it self of Idolatry, against the Church of Rome, and much less with Dr
St's endeavoring to fasten it upon the Church of England as her Sense; and till
I be satisfied of these things, I must beg your pardon, if my Judgment be not
the same with yours.


Cathar. I can not but wonder to hear this come from you, especially for what
concerns the latter part of it, if you have seriously considered the
irrefragable Evidences, which Dr. St. produces, first in the Preface to his
Roman Idolatry, and afterward in his General Preface, (where he brings in the
Knight himself encountering the Dragon) to prove it to be the sense of the
Church of England. For although the Knight show himself not inexpert in the Art
of Chivalry, by the buckling on his Armor; mounting his Steed, and according
to all ancient and Modern pictures of the Combat, directing his lance into the
very mouth of the dragon, as Dr St: pleasantly describes him; yet the Weapon
entered no further then the Teeth, and was there Shivered in a thousand pieces.
And for his charging Dr St. with dissenting from the doctrine of the Church of
England in accusing the Church of Rome of Idolatry, it is so notorious a piece
of disingenuous dealing in him, that the Dr desires the Reader by this one
Instance to judge, what Candor Gen: Preface.
and sincerity he is to expect in his Book.


Eun: I have considered the Pieces you mention over and over, and before I give
you my thoughts of them, I must desire you, to consider me, as a Person
perfectly of Mr Thorndike's Judgment in this matter, and so to look upon the
Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome not only as groundless and
Dangerous in it self, but Injurious to the Church of England; and,
consequently, what I shall say upon this subject, shall either be from the said
Mr Thorndike's own words, or what I conceive himself must and would have said
in conformity to his Principles. This premised, I must desire you to reflect,
how Dr St: in the Preface to his Roman Idolatry, fearing the Censure of diverse
learned men of the Church of England, for charging so horrid a crime upon the
Mother Church of the English nation, judged it stood him upon to order the
matter so, that he might not be thought in so severe acensure, as that of
Idolatry, to contradict the sense of the Church of England; (which he says he
has so great aregard to.) And the way he takes to do it is to show that this
charge of Idolatry has been managed against the Church of Rome, by the
greatest and most learned defenders of it, ever since the Reformation, deeming
those who excuse her from it, persons of more charity than Judgment in so
doing, and accordingly alleges in his behalf the Book of Homilies and the
Testimonies of seventeen several Authors.

His Adversary T. G to show the Dr had not proceeded regularly in the proof of
what he undertook, first demands, if he have such a regard, as he says, for
the Church of England, why he did not appeal to her 39 Articles? For, as Dr St.
himself says of the Sense of the Church of Rome that we are to appeal for it,
not to the Testimonies of Particular Rom Idol: p. 209.
Persons in that Church, but to the decrees of the Council of Trent. So in like
manner, for the Sense of the Church of England (the same case, as himself
says, holding for Titius that does for Sempronius) He ought to have appealed
to the publicly authorized Articles of that Church. But in them the Church of
England declares no such thing as shall be showed hereafter.

2. As for the Book of Homilies, T. G. cited diverse Eminent Divines of the
Church of England as Bp Montague, Dr Heylin* and Mr Thorndike who do not allow
that Book to contain in every part of it the public dogmaticall doctrine of
that Church; and the last of them Mr Thorndike instances particularly in the
very Homily against Peril of Idolatry; of which he says, that in this
particular he must have leave to think it fails, as it evidently does in others.

3. He excepted against little less than two parts of three, of the seventeen
Authors produced by Dr. St, as incompetent Witnesses in the case, upon the
account of being either Puritans, or Puritanically inclined; And although Dr
St. call this a frivolous exception, Yet to do T. G. Justice, and free him
from envy in this particular, He took this measure from Dr. St. himself, who to
make the Testimony of Ar. Bp Whitgift valid in his own cause, gives this for
the Reason, because none could be less suspected to be Puritanically inclined
than He; which was to insinuate that even suspicion of Puritanism was a
sufficient exception in this case. And therefore in pursuance of this, T. G.
showed from the Testimonies not of Roman, but of Protestant Authors, that Eleven
of the Seventeen were accounted Puritans, or Puritanically inclined.


Cathar: I took Good notice of that Reason of Dr. St. in his first Preface, and
how tenderly in his General Preface he handled that Point, as willing rather
to wave the exception by pretty facetious artifices of wit, then repel it from
the Generality of those Eminent Persons by a Downright denial, out of the
affection I hope he bears still to the Cause which had been honored by such
learned and Godly Bps as Jewel, Downham, Usher, the two Abbots, Robert, and
George, and Davenant: all which I find recorded among many others by my good
frind the Patron Bonae sidei in the Catalogue he gives of Prelates in the Sp^c.
p. 49.
Church of England, who have been Puritans, or Puritanically inclined. Dr. St.
says indeed of Robert Abbot, that he was never till now suspected for a
Puritan: but I understand him to speak with relation to his Adversary who had
mistaken the one Brother for the Other, and so endeavored to cast upon him the
Suspicion of Puritanism. But the Dr. has brought such a new recruit of
Testimonies, to maintain his charge. --


Eunom: Hold there my good Friend; I pray content your self a while with this
sweet Bit, and have a little patience while I go on.

4. For the other six remaining Authors, cited by Dr. St. viz* D^. Jackson, Dr.
Field. Arch Bp Lau^* etc. T. G. evidenced from their very words alleged, that
they did not charge the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in the Council of Trent,
or the practice, as conformable to that Doctrine to be Idolatry; but such
things as they conceived to be great abuses in the practice of it; and
consequently Preface to Romans Idol.
that they differed only as more and less in the same kind, from th^se other
Learned Protestants, of whom the Dr. Himself confesses, that they excuse^h
Church of Rome from Idolatry although not all who live in the Communion of it.

By all which it appears to me, that T. G. did not dispute exprofesso, whether
it were the sense of the Church of England, that the Church of Rome is guilty
of Idolatry, or no? Nor whether Dr. St. dissented from the sense of his Church?
(as he calls it) but what he undertook to show was no more than that two parts
of the' Authors there cited by the Dr. were Puritans or Puritanically inclined,
by the Confession of other Divines of the Church of England: and that therefore
according to Dr. Sts. own measures (if they were good) their testimonies were
to be looked on as incompetent to prove what he asserted; And for the other
six; that what they charged with Idolatry, was not the doctrine of the Church
of Rome, but some things which they conceived to be great abuses in the
practice of it.

This being the true state of that Controversy between him and his Adversary in
that place, what Ingenuity was it in the Dr. to tell his Reader in his General
Preface (as you said even now,) that T. G. charged him with absolute Dissenting
from the doctrine of the Church of England in accusing the Church of Rome of
Idolatry; and then desiring his Reader by this one Instance, to judge what
Candor and sincerity he is to expect from T. G. in his Book; where as what T.
G. charged him with was only, that He had not proved in the very way himself
made choice of (as the best to do it) his charge of Idolatry to be the received
doctrine of the Church of England, if that were not to be taken (as the Dr.
himself insinuated) from such as were known Puritans or to be Puritanically
inclined; and his charge of Idolatry were not the same with that of the
aforesaid six Authors in the places alleged by him; much less if it were to be
taken from the sentiments of those who are esteemed her true and Genuin sons;
who excuse the Church of Rome from Idolatry, although not all who live in the
communion of it. And upon this account me thinks with all due respect to Dr.
St. T. G. might much better desire his Reader by this one Instance to judge
what Candor and Sincerity he is to expect from him in his defense. For to me
it seems not the Same, to tell a Person, who brings witnesses to attest his
Innocence, that his Witnesses are exceptionable, upon the account of Friendship
or Relation, etc. or that they speak not home to his purpose; And to charge him
as Guilty. But by the way, I must tell you, I never thought it the greatest
Sign of Innocence, for a Person to be over solicitous to prove himself not
guilty.


Cathar: I see very well, that what T. G. aimed at, was to show the way the Dr.
took to prove his charge of Idolatry to be the Sense of the Church of England,
not to be Regular, because not from the publikly authorized Articles of that
Church; and his Witnesses many of them to be incompetent by the Test the Dr
Himself had given for the Trial of them, as being Puritans or Puritanically
inclined; and although I am satisfied my self that they were so, at least the
most Eminent of them, yet I do not see, but as to any thing returned by T. G.
Dr. St. has sufficiently removed that exception from them in his General
Preface: and has brought such Authentic Testimonies from other public Acts
and Records as evidently prove it to be the Sense of the Church of England.


Eunom: Nor can I see what necessity there is that T. G. should Engage himself
farther in this argument, his intention being only (as I said) to show, that
Dr. St. had not sufficiently proved it to be the Sense of the Church of
England, from the Testimonies he then produced, whateuer he might or could do
from other Acts or Authors of that Church, and so might leave it to be disputed
between him and his Church (if it be His) and having given that only as a
P^^ludium of the close arguing of his Adversary, betake himself to his defense
against the Charge of Idolatry, whether it were the sense of the Church of
England or no. But because I see you think, the Dr. has sufficiently acquitted
himself, as to T. G. pray let me hear some of the Principal passages, in which
you think he has done it; and I shall heartily give you my sense of them, for
hitherto, I confess I am not convinced that it is the Sense of the Church of
England, nor can I wish it may be proved so, the Accusation is so foul, so
extravagant, and, as yet it appears to me, so unjust


Cathar: First then, what can you say to the Book of Homilies? The greatest
Exception T. G. made, was why Dr. St. did not appeal for the Sense of the
Church of England to her 39. Articles: And to this Dr. St. tells him, that the
Approbation of that Book was one of them. Viz the 35. and that they were
subscribed by the Bishops and whole convocation. A D. 1571. which they could
never do, he says, with a good Conscience, if they believed any great and
considerable part of the doctrine therein contained, to be falls and dangerous.


Eun: To the first part of this Viz; the Approba^ion of that Book T. G. in his
Preface answered, that it does not euince that Every particular doctrine
contained in that Book is a Godly and wholesome doctrine, citing for it the
Authorityes of Bp. Montagu, and Dr. Heylin; and what comes yet more close, Mr.
Thorndike confessing of that very Homily against peril of Idolatry, that he
must have leave to think it fails in this particular, as he says it evidently
does in others. And what gives great force to this Answer (though not taken
notice of by Dr. St.) is what T. G. had said a little before, that had the
Church of England authorized the particular doctrine of that Homily, as her
dogmaticall doctrine, these Persons by asserting and maintaining the contrary
as Erroneous, had incurred Excommunication ipso facto (as appears by the Canons
printed before the 39. Articles, set forth by Mr. Rogers) which I never heard
they were charged with.

As for the other Point of appealing to men's thoughts and Consciences in a
matter of subscription, as he does, when he says he hopes, it does not evince
that the subscribers did not think the main doctrine of any one Homily to be
falls, it is a very hopeful Topic, if we consider what has been done and
undone in that Kind in the Reigns of Kg Henry 8. K. Edw. 6. Q. Mary and Q.
Elizabeth, not to speak of later times. If this be all he has to say for the
Book of Homilies, Mr. Thorndike, whom himself confesses to have been a Man of
Excellent Learning and great Piety must in all likelihood have subscribed the
39. Articles against his conscience, (which I shall never be brought to
believe) when nevertheless he declared his Judgment to be, that the Homily
against Peril of Idolatry failed in this particular. And till I hear him and
his Fellows condemned for what they assert, I must have leave to think, that
the bare alleging the Fact of Subscription to the 35. Article among the rest,
is not sufficient proof, that the contrary to what they judged is the
dogmaticall Sense of the Church of England, especially when speaking expressly
in the 22. Article of the Romish doctrine concerning Worshipping and Adoraetion
of Images, She gives it only the name of a vain thing and a fond Invention.


Cathar. But Dr. St. goes on; and shows the current doctrine of the Church ever
since the Reformation to have been agreeable to this Homily of the Peril of
Idolatry. from the Injunctions of K. Edw. 6. and Q. Elizabeth.


Eun: This he saw very well might be looked upon, as an Effect of Heat at the
first reformation, and whereas he will not have us think it was only a sudden
Heat. I shall give you an account of the progress of it out of Dr. Heylin.
There was a time, says he, when Q. Elizabeth beheld Cyprian Angl. page 342 2.
Edit.
the Pope as her greatest Enemy, in reference to her Mothers Marriage, her own
Birth and consequently her Title to the Crown of England: and many of the Books
which were printed in and about that time, were full of bitterness and
revilings against the Church of Rome it self, and all the divine Offices,
ceremonies and Performances of it. But after the C^own was settled upon K.
James, whose Title was unquestionable both at Rome and abroad; the dangerous
consequences of the charge of Idolatry upon the Church of Rome began to be more
calmely and maturely considered; and were so thoroughly weighed in the time of
K. Charles I. that as the same Heylin says Arch. B. Laud with equal diligence
endeavored by his decree, to hinder the reprinting of the said Books, as also
of others containing Calvinian doctrines, that so the Church might rest in
quiet, without any trouble or molestation in her self or giving offense to any
other. Which evidently shows, that that Party never looked upon the Expressions
of Idolatry contained in those Injunctions, as the Dogmaticall Sense of the
Church of England.


Cathar: I know the Heat of this charge began to grow cool in process of time,
and together with it the fervor of the Reformation. But what can be said to
the Rubric in the 2d. Liturgy by Edw. 6. readmitted of late into the the Book
of Communion: in which the Adoration of the Host is expressly called Idolatry?
That very Rubric of which T. G. (says Dr. St.) according to his excellent
Skill in the Offices of our Church, says, it is not yet more than a dozen years
since it was inserted into the Communion Book; which he might baue found above
a 100. years before in the Book of E^w. 6. The words are these, that by
kneeling at Communion no Adoration is intended or ought to be done either unto
the Sacrament all Bread and wine, there bodily received; or any Corporal
Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood: For the Sacramental Bread and
wine remain still in their very natural substances, and therefore may not be
ador^d. For that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all Faithful Christians. And
now what can be more plain, then that the Adoration of the Host is here
expressly condemned as Idolatry?


Eun: To this I answer that the various Fate of this Rubric, first in not
being annexed to the Communion Book till the 2d. Liturgy in the 5. of Edw. 6.
and being cast out again in the year 1562. under Q. Elizabeth, and so remaining
for almost a 100. years, and then readmitted again, is no Eviction to me,
that Dr. St's. charge of Idolatry is the dogmaticall doctrine of the Church of
England; which although she affirm (Art. 28.) that Transsubstantiation has
given occasion to many Superstitions, yet does she not charge it with Idolatry.
And what co^firms me more in this Judgment is that we know that Dr. Tailor and
Mr. Thorndike both maintain, that although they suppose those of the church of
Rome to be mistaken in their belief of the Elements being changed into the Body
and Blood of Christ; yet they deny it follows from thence, that they are
Idolaters, because the Object of their Adoration is Christ the only true and
Eternal God. And I never heard they were looked upon as Excommunicated Persons
for it, though they both lived a considerable time after this Rubric was
annexed, Dr Tailor being advanced to a Bishopric and Mr. Thorndike publishing
his Just Weights and Measures in the year 1662. that is, two years after the
said Rubric was inserted; in which Book he expressly maintains that the
worship of the Host in the chap. 19
Papacy is not Idolatry. and gives this reason for it, because they that
worship the Host do not believe that the Elements remain; but believe our Lord
Christ, the only true God hypostatically united to our flesh and Blood to be
there present in an especial manner. And your friend the Patron Bonae Fidei
declares his Judgment also to be, that it is not so Prodr. p. 77.
much madness in the Romanists to adore the Lord JESUS under the species of
Bread and wine, as it is a gross Error in them to believe that the Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ. But then again, to tell you my own thoughts
concerning the Sense of this Rubric, as it now stands, I take the meaning of
it not to be, the denying Adoration to be due in regard of Christ's Body being
present Spiritually but truly in the Sacrament, (for this is asserted by Bp
Andrews, Praesentiam credimus non minus quam vos veram, Mr. Thorndike, and
Andr. Resp. ad Apol. Bellar.
other learned men of the Church of England) but only that no adoration ought
to be done to any Corporal Presence of c. 1. Thornd Epil. p. 350.
Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood, as the word Corporal is taken by Dr Tailor
in his Treatise of the Real Presence, and by other Protestant Divines, to
signify the Natural. (or as Dr. Cosins calls it, Carnal) manner of a Body's
being present. And my Reasons are. First because the words in the 2d, Liturgy
of Edw. 6. (inserted by some of Calvin's disciples then prevailing) No adoration
ought to be done to any Real or Essential Being of Christ's natural Flesh and
Blood, are now changed in the present Communion-Book, into any corporal
Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood. For either the Corporal Presence
is here distinguished by them from the Real and Essential, or not. If not, why
were the words changed? If it be, it is manifest that this last Edition of the
Rubric deter mins nothing expressly of the Real and Essential Being of
Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood, nor of the Adoration due to it, but rather
intimates that Such a presence may be the Ground of Adoration: the word
Corporal supposing only for the natural Presence after a gross and Carnal
manner, as has been said. And that the denying the Ceremony of kneeling at the
participation of the Sacrament, to be done in regard of a^y Real and Essential
Being of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood, being found in that Rubric was one
of the reasons, why the whole Rubric was expunged by the Revisors of the
Liturgy in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth is expressly affirmed by Dr H^ylin in
his Ecclesia R^formata, Q. Eliz page III. and that for this very reason, not to
give scandal or Off^nce to the Popish Party, who though they maintain the Body
of Christ to be t^uly, realy and substantially present in the Eucharist, yet
they deny it to be there Corporaliter, Corporally, as the word is understood to
imply the Natural manner of a Body's Existence. 2ly. Because Dr. Tailor in his
Real Bellarm de Euch. li. 1. c. 2.
Presence p. 12. says that when the word Real Presence is denied by some
Protestants, it is taken for natural Presence, and not for Presence in rei
veritate, which is at large declared by Bp. Cosins chapter 2. of his History of
Transubstantiation (which at the Entreaty of Friends he permitted to be printed
a little before his death) to be the unanimous Belief of all Protestants. Lastly
had T. G. said it was not more then a Dozen years since this Rubric was framed
and devised, Dr. St. had had some reason to tax his want of skill in the
Offices of the Church of England, but saying only as he did that it was not
more than a dozen years since it was inserted, I do not conceive it to be so
improper a speech as to deserve the Ferula, being spoken of a thing, which had
been cast out by public Authority at the reviewing and correcting the Liturgy
in the year 1562. and had remaind so, for well near a 100. years, and then put
in.

If the Explication I have given of it is meaning be not agreeable to Dr. Sts
sense, he may if he please, impugn. it; but it will import him, as I suppose,
to do it so, as not to undermine the Constant doctrine of the Church of England
concerning the Real Presence, and leave us nothing but pure Zuinglianism in
place of it.


Cathar. I shall leave that to the Dr. to make what he will or can of it; And
proceed to a Passage, in which you neither will nor can deny, but that T. G.
was grossly out indeed; viz, when he mistook George Abbot Arch Bp of
Canterbury, for Robert Abbot Bishop of Salisbury, the former being never
mentioned by Dr. St. and the latter, as he says, never till now suspected for
a Puritan. But they of the Church of Rome as the Dr. observes upon this
pass^ge, have a faculty of doing greater wonders, with five words, than
changing a Bishop into an Arch Bp. And he hopes T. G. understands the Church he
is of, better than that he lif^, or else we are like to have a sad account of
History from him.


Eun: This was a terrible mistake indeed of one Bishop for another, both
Brothers and living at the Same time, as these Abbots were, and doubtless
deserves such a Magisteriall Animadversion aas the Dr. has given upon it, as
tending to the confusion of all History; especially if He of Salisbury cited by
Dr. St. were not also Puritanically inclined.


Cathar: Dr. Still. expressly affirms it, that he was never till now suspected
for a Puritan. And I have that esteem for his Skill in History, that I believe
you will not euince the contrary.


Eun. And yet you cannot but know, that your friend the Patron bonae Fidei
alleged even now by your self recites the two Abbots, Robert and George, among
those of the Hierarchy, whose names are in your Diptyeks; and his Book was
published a year before Dr. St. printed his General Preface. But to pass this
by: Let us hear the account Dr. H^ylin gives of Dr Robert Abbot in his
Cyprianus Anglious, when by the power and P. 61.
favor of his Brother, then Bishop of London, he was preferred to the Place of
his Maties Professor for Divinity; He was, says he, a man of Eminent Learning,
and a more moderate Calvinian than either of his Predecessors in the matter of
Predestination, but altogether depending on the will of his Brother, whom the
Dr. cannot deny to have been Deep died in the Doctrine of Geneua. The same Dr
Heylin tells us also a passage or two which sufficiently show the temper of
this Dr. Abbot. For upon occasion of Dr. Laud's touching in his Sermon upon the
Presbyterians and their proceedings, and using some words to this effect, viz,
that the Presbyterians were as bad as the Papists; this being so directly
contrary, says Heylin to the Judgment and opinion of this Dr. Abbot who was
then Vice Chancellor, Laud was exposed by him (on the next occasion) to public
shame and Censure: as Howson and Corbet both of Christ's P, 62.
Church had been before by the same Dr. Abbot in the like case; the first
having been suspended propter conciones minus Orthodoxas, for accusing the
Geneua notes on the Bible of mis-interpretation concerning Christ's Divinity
and Messiah-ship. The Other soundly ratled by the Repetitioner, for grating
upon Calvin's manifest perverting the sense and meaning of the Article of
Christ's descending into Hell. These are Historical Passages, which discover
this Dr. Abbot not only to have acted in favor of Geneua, out of compliance
with his Brother, but out of Opinion and Judgment. So do the Praises he gives
Mr. Perkins as a man well deserving for his great trauail and pains for the
furtherance of true Religion, and edifying of the Church; as his Adversary Dr.
Bishop cites the words in his Reproof page 48. and the same is confirmed by his
last Swan-like song, as the English-Dutch-British Author of Herwologia Anglica
calls it Cygnea cantio de gratia and perseverantia Sanctorum, of the Grace and
Perseverance of the Saints. And Dr. St. knows who they be, that hold no falling
from Grace. By all which it appears, that Dr. St. himself was grossly mistaken
in point of History, when he affirmed of Robert Abbot Bp. of Salisbury that he
was never till now suspected for a Puritan, he being Brother to Arch Bp Abbot
as well in Judgment as Nature, with that difference only which the Poet observes
to be usually found in the faces of such near Relations, Facies non vna duobus
nec diversa tamen. And I think T. G. may with more reason return Dr. St's
words upon him, that he has a faculty of doing greater wonders with seven or
eight words viz (Robert Abbot was never till now suspected for a Puritan) than
changing a Bishop into an Arch Bp And that he may hope too, the Dr understands
the Church he opposes, better than that he undertakes to defend, otherwise we
are like to have a sad account of history from him: for to me it seems a
greater wonder to change a Prelatik into a Puritan than a Bishop, into an Arch
Bp. And likely to bring greater confusion into History, to err in the Quality
of the Person, than to mistake him for his Brother they being as Like as Twins
to each other. Had I any power with Dr. St. I would advise him not to be so
Tragical upon such slight occasions, The Reader may think either that some
secret Splinters of the Lance stick in the Dragons Jaws, which he cannot free
himself from; or that he could find nothing of moment in his Adversary to
exercise his Talent upon; when he sees him fling and lay about him so
unreasonably for a thing of nothing, and in which his own mistake was far the
greater, the quality or Judgment of the Person being more to the purpose than
his Individuality.


Cathar: Every one you know has his several Gift, and will exercise it as he
sees best for his cause. I shall trouble you but with one Instance more upon
this subject at present, and that is the Answer which T. G. gives to the other
six Autho^s, whom he reckons of the same kind, with those of whom, Dr. St.
says, for mere shame he will not say they were Puritans, or Puritanical^y
inclined, Viz, that they c^arged the Papists with what they thought they did,
but the Papists deny they do any such thing A Pretty Answer truly, and which
seems to me to be the Same, as Dr. St. well observes, as to say They charge
them with Idolatry, but the Papists deny they commit it. And so says he they
do when I charge them with it: So that T. G. by the very same reason might
have acquitted me from charging them with it, and have spared his Book.


Eun: What needed the words for mere shame, when T. G. did not charge the
aforesaid six Authors of being Puritans or Puritanically inclined? But the Gift
must be kept in ure for fear of growing restiff. What T. G. answers (howeuer
Dr. St. moulds it after his own fashion to make it appear ridiculous) is this,
that whoeuer attentively considers but the very places cited by Dr. St. out of
those Authors, shall find that they do not impugn the doctrine it self of the
Church of Rome, or the practice conformable to that doctrine; but such things
as they conceived to be great Abuses in the practice of it, which by the way is
all can be made out of the Drs new Testimony of Arch Bp. Bancroft when he
charges the Papists, with I kn^w not what (they are his own words) intolerable
superstition and Idolatry, And in this T. G. says, these Authors differ only
as more or less in the same kind, from what Mr Thorndike, and other learned
Protestants pretend, when they reprove some practices, as Idolatrous, or at
least in danger to be such, when nevertheless as Dr. St. Himself acknowledges
in his first Preface, they excuse the Church of Rome from Idolatry, although
not all who live in Communion of it. Now to me, I confess it seems not to be
the same, to accuse the Doctrine of a Church and the Practice conf^rmable to
that doctrine, which is what Dr. St. does in charging the Church of Rome as
guil^y of Idolatry; and to reprove some abuses conceived to be committed in the
practice of it, which is what the aforesaid Authors do. Again, it seems not to
me to be the same, not to excuse all the persons who live in the Communion of a
Church from the guilt of Idolatry, which is what Mr. Thorndike, and those other
Learned Pr^testants do; and to accuse the Church of Rome, f^r requiring by the
terms of Communion with her, the committing Idolatry, parallel to that of the
Heathens, as Dr. St. does. These I take to be very different charges, and so
did Dr. St. understand them, when he said, that upon the whole matter T. G.
cannot produce any one Person of our Church that has clearly and wholly (mark
that) acquitted the Church of Rome from the charge of Idolatry. It was not then
T. G's. denying (as Dr. St. represents it) that those of the Church of Rome de
commit Idolatry in the practices those Authors reprove, that acquits them,
(though not in the whole, yet in part) of the charge of Idolatry, as it is
advanced by Dr. St. but their own excusing, (as himself confesses) the Church
of Rome from Idolatry, though not all who live in the Communion of it. From
whence it follows that the case is not the same between them and Dr. St. who
asserts, that all the Members of that Church inust by the terms of Communion
with her be guilty of damnable hypocrisy or Idolatry. 1. c. if their practice
be conformable to her doctrine, since the terms of Communion can oblige them
to no more And now if thus be what he means by the Sense of the Church of
England when he would not be thought to contradict it, I think he will never
be able to make out that it is so; when that Church proposes no such thing in
her Articles, and such Eminent Divines of her Communion, as are farthest from
the suspicion of Puritanism affirm the contrary. For what the Church of Rome
requires of those of her Communion in the Point of Images (the grand contest at
present between Dr. St. and his Adversary) as it is declared in the 2d. Council
of Nice (to which the Council of Trent refers, and to which, according to the
Drs. own Rule we are to appeal for the Sense of that Church and not to the
testimonies of particular persons) what I say the Church of Rome requires there
of those of her Communion, is to salute and give an honorary adoration (or
respect as the term Adoration is there declared to mean) to the Images of
Christ and his Saints, like as is given to the Figure of the Holy Cross, to
Chalices, to the Books of the Holy Gospels, and sucb like sacred vtensils: but
not Latria which (as true Faith teaches) is due only to God. And in this, as
T. G. showed (and it ought to be repeated because Dr. St. takes no notice of it
in his Defense) the Council is vindicated from Cath. no Idol. p. 144. Epil. 3.
P. p. 363.
Idolatry by Eminent divines, as I said, of the Church of England, as Mr.
Thorndike, who freely confesses, that he must maintain as unquestionable, Of
the Church li. 3. c. 36.
that the Council of Nice enioyns no Idolatry, and Dr. Field, who affirms that
the Nicen Fathers mean nothing else ^y adorati^n ^f Images, but embracing,
kissing and rever^ntly using of them, like to the Honor, we (says he) do the
Books of ^oly Scripture: and Bp. Montague having laid down the doctrine of the
Church of Rome in these terms, you say the Pictures of Christ, the Bd. Virgin
and Saints must not have Latria; so We. You give them Dulia: I quarrel not the
term, says he, Gagg. p. ^18.
though I could. There is a respect due unto, and honor given relatiuely to
them. If this you call Dulia, we give it too. Let practice and Doctrine go
together, we agree. So that it is not the doctrine of the Church of Rome (if
truly stated out of the Decrees of her Councils) or practice agreeable to that
doctrine, which these Divines impeach as Idolatrous; but the Opinions of some
School Divines, or Abuses they conceived to be committed in the practice of it.
And I think T. G. has still good reason to desire the Reader to judge, whether
Dr. St. being (as he says) by command publickely engaged in the defense of so
Excellent a cause, as that of the Church of England against the Church of Rome,
have not betrayed his Trust, and his Church too (if it be his) by advancing such
a Medium to justify her separation, as contradicts the sense of that Church, if
it be to be taken form the Sentiments of those who are esteemed her true and
Genuine sons: that is (as Dr. St. paraphrases) the most remote from all
suspicion of disaffection to her, or Inclination to Puritanism (as these were)
and in the Judgment of Mr. Thorndike, makes her in plain terms to be
Schismatic. This T. G. Says, will appear yet more clearly, if we consider
how this charge of Idolatry, as maintained by Dr. St. subuerts the very
foundation of Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England, of which I
may have occasion to speak hereafter.

What I observe at present is, that how courageously soever He charges the
Church of Rome with Idolatry, yet he Seldom or but Obiter only speaks of the
Images of Christ and his Saints, which are the only subject of the Decree of
the Council of Trent, and consequently ought to be the chief if not only
argument of his Book; but the main of his discourse is of the Image of God,
which Bellarmin tells us belongs not to Faith, but stands under Opinion: To. ^.
li. 2. c. 8.
and thereupon taxes Calvin of extraordinary fraud and craft, who after he had
proved, that Images of God are not to be made, as being incongruous to the
divine nature, runs out into Amplifications (in which he is followed and at
last outrun by Dr. St.) and sings Io triumph in so merry a t^ne, as if he had
proved it vnlan f^ll to m^k^ or worship any Image at all. And upon this acount,
I confess I think T. G. might have spared his Book, till the Dr. had thought
fit to speak to this Essential Question, Whether it be Idolatry for a
Christian to give, not Latria, which is due only to God, but a honourary
respect and Veneration, to the Images of Christ and his Saints; such as is
given to the Books of the Holy Gospells, to the Sacraments, and such like
sacred Things? This being as much as the Church of Rome requires by the terms
of Communion with her. If Dr. St. can prove this to be Idolatry, the Knight
must unbuckle his Armor, descend from his steed, and yield up his Lance. But
if Declining this, he will set himself to combat the Opinions of school men
concerning the nature of the worship, some of them contending that the worship,
due to Holy Image^ in general is Religious, and to that of Christ Latria, etc.
Howeuer it may serve him to his purpose (which himself knows best what it is,
and others are not w^olly ignorant of,) it will be nothing to the Question;
since none of those expressions are found in their Pr^f^ssion of Faith, or the
Decree^ of their Councils, from whence we are to take the terms of Communion
with that Church. And as Mr. Thorndike well observes. (Just weights. chapter 1.)
we are not to forsake it for the actions of particular persons contrary to that
which they publicly prof^ss. For my part as I told you I am of the same Mr.
Thorndik'es mind, when he says, that f^r any to change the Pope to be
Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters, is to lead the P^ple by the Nose, to
believe that they can prove their Supposition, when they cannot; but much more
as it is managed by Dr. Sr. for which I shall give you my reasons to morrow, if
you can be at leisure.


Cathar. I shall prefer no business to this, and therefore pray fail not to be
as good as your word.


Eun. Til then Farewell.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Farther Declaration of the Sense of the Church of England concerning the
Charge of Idolatry, in answer to what Dr. St. urges from the Testimony of Arch
Bishop Whitgift, and the 39. Articles. The Lambeth Articles suppressed by Q.
Eliz. And rejected by K. James: The Dr. desired to reconcile the doctrine of
his Irenicum, viz, that nothing is lawful in the worship of Godbut what he
has expressly commanded; with that in his Answer to N. O. that All things are
lawful which are not forbidd^n. The true meaning of the 22th. Article
concerning the worshipping and Adoration of Images asserted.

CATHARINVS EVNOMIVS. Cathar. What you discoursed yesterday concerning the
sense of the Church of England, has I confess confirmed me something more in
the Judgment, our Par^^ has always made of that Church, that it is but too
much inclind to Rome. And if ever they lay aside the Disputes about the Nature
of the Worship which you look upon as Impertinent, and come up closely to
debate what you call the Essential Question, Whether a Chistian nay not give a
honourary respect and Veneration to the Images of Christ and his Saints? I
think they will quickly come to an agreement, and so farewell the Reformation:
and much more if the Charge it self of Idolatry, which you will have to be
heartily and thoroughly advanced by none but the Puritan Party may not be made
use of to Justi^y the separation. I am very desirous to hear what you can say
upon this Subject; but ^wo things have occurred to me since yesterday, upon a
Review I made of Dr. St's. General Preface about the former contention between
him and T. G. concerning the Sense of the Church of England: and I should be
glad, you would first speak to them.


Eun. I cannot easily believe, that any thing Material in that matter has
escaped your diligence. But if you think them so, I pray propose them.


Cathar. The first, being about a particular Author Arch Bp. Whitgift, Is not
So Material, as the Second, which I take to be an Evident Demonstration from
the publicly authorized Articles of the Church of England, that the Charge of
Idolatry, as advanced by Dr. St. against the Church of Rome, is the Dogmaticall
Sense of that Church.


Eun. I wonder so important a passage should have been forgotten, and which
alone would have done the work. But first, what of Arch Bp. Whitgift?


Cathar. Why must He, Says Dr. St. be thrown away to the Puritans? (I could
quarrel the expression, but that I suppose him to speak his Adversary's mind,
not his own) why must He be thrown away (says he) to the Puritans, when all
the world knows he was a great Adversary to T. C. on the very account of the
Puritan cause? But he is known also, says T. G. to have consented to the
framing of the Lambeth Articles, and sending them to the Divines of Cambridge.
And what then? Are the Dominicans Puritans, and no Papists? If the Church of
Rome may have liberty not to determine those nice Points, why may not the Church
of England? And so both parties remain of it, as long as they contradict no
received Artticles among us? But then again the Lambeth Articles were never
intended for any more, then as Responsa Prudentum to silence disputes in the
University. And I believe none of the Puritan Party after that took Arch Bp.
Whitgift to be a Patron of the Cause.


Eun. Admitting all this to be as you say, yet I see not but Arch Bp Whitgift
by this f^ct of his, brought himself at least under the Suspicion of being
Puritanically inclined, which was all that T. G. aimed at to show, in
opposition to what Dr. St. himself had asserted, that of all persons of that
Age none could be less suspected to be Puritanically inclined than Arch Bp.
Whitgift. Now that there was ground at least of Suspicion of it in this fact,
(howeuer he defended the Cburch of England against T. C.) appears first because
Whitaker and Perk^ns, both Caluinists, says Dr. Cyprian. Angl. page 193.
Heylin and both of them Supralapsarians, were the chief Promoters and
sollicitors for the making those Articles, among which the 5th carries that
very stamp upon it which Dr. St. gives for a mark of Puritanism, that there is
no falling from Grace. 2dly because the Arch Bp. himself consented to the
framing of those Articles, and proposed them to the Divines of Cambridge for
regulating disputations in those Points of Controversy. And though they were
not intended as Articles determined by the Church but as Responsa Prudentum
(not so much to silence, as to regulate disputes) yet the Arch Bp. it seems
thought it prudent by this proceeding to countenance the maintaining of them.
3dly because the news of these proceedings being brought to the Queen, she was
so offended, that onee she was at a point to have them all endited of a
Praemunire, had not the high esteem she had for Whitgift, whom she commonly
called her Black Husband, reprieued all the rest from the danger of it. And her
Offense proceeded not only from their intrenchment upon her Prerogative in
making such a declaration without her Authority; but ftom the Information she
had how little those Articles agreed Ibid. p. 132.
with the Practice of Piety and Obedience to all Government: whereupon such a
strict course was taken for the suppressing of them, that a Copy of them was not
to be found in Cambridge for a long time after, though after the Queen's death
they began to peep abroad again.

4thly Because K. James was no better conceited of them, than Q. Elizabeth was;
for when it was moved by Dr. Reynolds, at Hamptoncourt that the nine
Orthodoxall Assertions (as He pleased to call them) which were concluded on at
Lambeth, might be admitted into the Confession of the Church of England, the
King so much disliked the motion, that it was presently rejected without more
ado. This is the account which Dr. Heylin gives of this matter in his
Cyprianus Angl. p. 193. 194. And I desire any indifferent Person to consider
whether the Arch Bp's consenting to the framing these Articles, and sending
them to Cambridge, and thereby countenancing the maintaining of them, were not
sufficient to bring him at least under the Suspicion of being Puritanically
inclined, and consequently ground enough for T. G. to lay this Exception
against him. What esteem the Puritan Party had for him after it I know not. If
they did not look upon him as a Patron, they had reason I am sure to think him
a Favourer. Fot my part I should not stick to hold that Dominican to be no true
Papist, but a Patron of the cause. who should do but the half of what Arch Bp.
Whitgift did.


Cathar: This Peter Heylin's Book I see, serves you for a store house to
furnish you with Historical passages, as Dr St. says, that Bellarmin and
Coccius do T. G, sor Testimonies of the Fathers. But he is known to be a great
Enemy to the Puritan Party.


Eun. And that makes it the more unlikely, that he would, though not throw away
so eminent a Man to the Puritans, yet bring him at leust by such a relation
under the Suspicion of being a Favorer of them. But what is it after all, that
Arch Bp. Whitgift says?


Cathar. Marry, that there are three kinds of Idolatry The one is, when the
true God is worshipped by other means and ways, than he has prescribed, or
would be worshipped. The other is when the true God is worshipped with f^ls
Gods: the third is when we worship falls Gods, and altogesher forget the worship
of the true God. And although, he says he cannot see or learn, that the
Papists are in this third kind of Idolatry yet he condemns them as guilty of
the two former: which is enough and too much for any Christians.


Euno. I have not Arch Bp. Whitgift's Book by me to see on what occasion he
said this, nor what connection these words have to the Antecedent and consequent
discourse, but as they stand, they seem to me but to involue him deeper in the
suspicion of Puritanism. But first I pray tell me, what you understand by his
first kind of Idolatry: when (as he says) the true God is worshipped by other
means and ways, than he has prescribed or would be worshipped.


Cathar. I know Dr. St. says his meaning is, when God is worshipped against
his express Command: but the words to me seem not so much to condemn of
Idolatry the giving that worship to God, which he has expressly forbidden; as
the giving him any worship, which he has not expres^ly commanded. And this
appears evident to me from the Application the Arch Bp. makes, of what he had
said, to the Papists, viz, that they worhip God other wise than his will is,
and otherwise than he has prescribed i. e. by means and ways, which he has
not commanded; and then, that they also give to the creature that which is due
to the Creator, and sin against the first Table. i. e. against his express
Prohibition in the 2d Commandment.


Eun. This I should also take with Dr. St's. leave to be the meaning of his
words. And now I beseech you to consider if this do not involue him more deeply
yet in the suspicion of Puritanism. For although I do not make the charging the
Papists to be Idolaters to be a distinctive sign of Puritanism, yet Dr. St.
himself in his answer to N. O. p. 181. does; when he says that those who
separate from the Church of England make this their Fundamental Principle as
to worship, (wherein the difference lies) that nothing is lawful in the
worship of God, but what he has expressly commanded: We say all things are
lawful which are not forbidden: and upon this single Point says he the whole
Controversy of separation stands as to the Constitution of our Church. Now if
this single Point be, as Dr. St. says, the Criterium between a Protestant and
a Puritan, that the former says all things are lawf^ll in the worship of God
which are not forbidden; and the latter, that nothing is lawful but what he
has expressly commanded; And Arch Bp. Whitgif^ have carried his charge so
far, as to make it Idolatry, not only to worship God against his express
command but by other means and ways than he has commanded, it is plain that
according to Dr. St. himself, he takes part with the Puritans in that very
Point, upon which the whole Controversy of the Separation stands as to them.


Cathar. This is one of those which they call Argumenta ad hominem. And I
cannot but wonder Dr. St. would lay himself open to it by varying so much from
his Old Principles so firmly settled by him in his Irenicum, where page 6. he
teaches, that in those things which are therefore only Good because commanded,
a command is necessary to make them lawful, as in immediate positive Asts of
worship toward God; in which nothing is lawful any further, than it is
founded upon a Divine Command. I Speak not, says he, of Circumstances
belonging to the acts of Worship, but whateuer is looked upon, as a part of
Divine Worship, if it be not commanded by God himself, it is no ways acceptable
to him, and theref^re not lawful. And then a little after. Although even here
we may say too, that it is not merely the want of a Divine Precept, which makes
any part of Divine Worship uncommanded by God unlawful, but the General
Prohibition, that nothing should be done in the immediate Worship of God, but
what we have a Divine Command for,


Eun. This is a Wonder indeed; and must be attributed to those men, who as Dr.
St. says, have a facul^y of doing greater wonders which five words, than
changing a Bishop into an Arch. Bishop: for if they are not the cause, they
have been at least the occation of this great change in him, viz that whereas
before he asserted with those of your Party, that nothing is lawful in the
immediate worship of God, but what is commanded: he affirms now with the Church
of England, that all things are lawful which are not forbidden; unless we may
impute it to a greater light of the Spirit, which I am sure you will not. For
other considerations which your friend Patronus Prodr. p* 76.
bonae fidei would have thought to be the Motives of this Change, I shall not
concern my self with them.


Cathar. Whateuer wrought the wonder in Dr. St. or howeuer Archbishop Whitgift
fell upon this Principle, that to worship the true God by other means and ways,
than He had prescribed, is Idolatry; his name is not found that I know of,
among our Worthies; and you cannot deny, but that he charges the Papists with
this kind of Idolatry, and that other too of giving to the Creature that which
is due to the Creator.


Eun. Whether it were heat of disputation, or con^escendence to free himself
from a troublesome Adversary, who had taxed him for having spok^ something in
b^half of the Papists (of which (...). to (...). Idol^^.
there is some appearance in his words cited by the Dr) yet his charge as you
see, so far forth as it makes the giving to God any worship which he has not
commanded, to be Idolatry, is grounded upon the very Fundamental Principle,
which according to Dr. St. distinguishes the Puritan Party, from those of the
Church of England; and so can be no Proof that it is the Sense of that Church.
And for the 2d part of it, viz that the Papists give to the Creature that which
is due to the Creator, we may consider the time when he lived, in the beginning
of Q. Elizabeth, of which you have heard what Dr. Heylin says. How ever,
methinks Dr. St. ought not to assert this Charge of Idolatry to be the Sense of
the Church of England, but might have been content to have it pass for one of
those nice Points, of which, himself says, that the Church may have liberty
not to determine, when the Church herself (as I said before) in her 39. Articles
reiects the Romish doctrine concerning worshipping and Adoration of Images, not
as Idolatry, but as a fond thing vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty
of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. And therefore that he
exceeded the bounds, which he ought to have observed as the Champion of the
Church of England, in making it to be her Sense to charge that with Idolatry,
which the Compilers of the Articles call only a fond thing vainly invented; and
in positively defining that to be expressly prohibited in the 2d Commandment,
which they, after their best inquiry, pronounce Problematically only as rather
repugnant to the word of God, than agreeable to it.


Cathar. This is the very place, which Dr. St. has pitched upon to prove his
charge of Idolatry to be the Sense of the Church of England. And he has done
it so home, that I think there is no avoiding it. And that you may better see
the force of his Arguments, I shall put them in form. And First he argues also
ad hominem against T. G. in this manner.

If T. G. and all others of their Divines yield that adoration of Images which
the Church of England charges them with, to be Idolatry, then they must needs
grant it to be her sense to charge them with Idolatry.

But T. G. and all others of their Divines, yield that Adoration of Images,
which our Church charge them with Art. 22. (viz, not barely worshipping, but
Adoration of Images) to be Idolatry. Therefore they must grant it to be her
sense to charge them with Idolatry.

And that it is not merely the Practice used in the Church of Rome but their
very doctrine, which the Church of England charge with Idolatry heproues no
less strongly by this 2d Argument.

The Romish doctrine (mark that) concerning the worshipping and Adoration Art.
22.
of Images etc. is a f^nd thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty
of scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.

Therefore it is not merely the Practice used in the Church of Rome but their
very doctrine concerning Ad^ration of Images, which is here charged. But a
Church cannot teach Adoration of Images but she must be guilty of Idolatry;

Ergo the Sense of the Article is to charge with Idolatry the very doctrine of
the Church of Rome concerning the Adoration of Images. What do you think of
this my Friend?


Eun. I Will be sworn, I think Dr. St. is much obliged to you for reducing his
Arguments into form: for as you have done it, they appear at first sight
Formidable indeed, like an upper and lower Range of Teeth with their Majors,
Minors, Subsumptions, and Conclusions, threatening the very last extremity of
danger to the Knight, if he dare evermore direct his lance into the Dragon's
mouth. But then upon second considerations, I think he may venture to draw
near, for (if I mistake not) these arguments, like the Young men, who arose to
play before Abner and Ioab, catch each other by the head, and thrust their
swords into their fellows side; and both fall down together. And I doubt not to
make you see it as clearly, as two and three make five, if we can but agree
what is meant by those words of the Article viz The Romish Doctrine concerning
Adoration of Images: For the term Romish Doctrine is not clear, and as Mr.
Thorndike has observed, the word Adoration is and may be in despite of our
hearts Equivocal, i. e. sometimes signify one kind of honor, and sometimes
another.


Cathar. But I have a way to avoid all that in the present case, by telling
you, that, the Romish doctrine concerning Adoration of Images, is as if one
should say, the Adoration of Images taught in the Church of Rome.


Eun. Very Identically answered I can assure you; and as much as is needful.
Let us then apply it to our present purpose, and reduce both arguments into
one, since the First is but a consequence of the Second.

It is not merely the Practice used in the Church of Rome, but their very
doctrine concerning Adoration of Images, i. e. the Adoration of Images taught
in that Church, which is Charged by the Church of England.

But T. G. and all others of their Divines yield that Adoration of Images which
our Church charge them with, i. e. which is taught in the Church of Rome, to
be Idolatry. Ergo.

Do you not see how if the First Proposition be true, the second is false? For
who ever heard that T. G. or any other of the Divines of the Church of Rome,
held the doctrine taught in that Church, concerning the Adoration of Images to
be Idolatry? And consequently to use a simile suitable to the Dr's Genius, the
Teeth of this dragon like those* of that other sown by Cadmus, come up like
armed Soldiers, but fight and Destroy each other. For if T. G. and all others
of their Divines do not yield the Adoration of Images taught in the Church of
Rome to be Idolatry (as certainly they do not) it is manifest that they do not
yield that Adoration of Images to be Idolatry, which the Church of England
charge them with; if she charge the very doctrine of that Church.


Cathar. I did not think such use could be made of Identicall Propositions, as
you have made of them. But what do you say to each argument a part.


Eun. I say that by the words, Romish doctrine concerning Adoration of Images,
may be understood, either the doctrine taught in her Schools, which being but
the Opinions of Particular Persons, no man is bound to follow: or the Doctrine
taught in her Councils, to which all those of her Communion are bound to submit
by the terms of Communion with her. And if the Doctrine which the Church of
England here charge, be that which is taught in the Church of Rome by some of
her School-Diuines (which I take indeed to be her true meaning) this also is
denied (at least by those very Divines who teach it,) to be Idolatry: and comes
not home to the charge advanced by Dr. St. viz that what she requires by the
terms of her Communion is Idolatry. And so the first argument falls to the
ground. But if you will have the Church of England to lay her charge against
the Doctrine of the Church of Rom in her Councils concerning worshipping and
Adoration of Images; herein She is vindicated from the note of Idolatry by
Eminent Divines, and such as have always been esteemed the true and Genuine
Sons of the Church of England, as you heard before. And so the second goes
after the first. For were this her Sense, those Divines had not escaped without
some note, if not incurred the censure of excommunication for maintaining the
contrary. In a word, which way soever you understand the words, Romish Doctrine
concerning Adoration of Images, all that the Church of England charge it
with, is that it is a fond thing, vainly invented and rather rep^gnant to the
word of God, but not that is Idolatry.


Cathar. But as Dr. St. well observes, It is not barely worshipping, but
Adoration of Images which is here charged: And can any Church teach Adoration
of Images, and not be guilty of Idolatry? Or were the Compilers of the Articles
so Senseless, as not to think Idolatry repugnant to Scripture?


Eun, I hope I may suppose the Church of England, to be as little in love with
wrangling about words, as Dr. St. professes himself to be* You have heard Mr.
Thorndike and others affirm, that the word Adoration is or may be in despite of
our hearts Equivocal, that is sometimes signify one kind of honor, sometimes
another, And if it be taken, not for Latria, which is due to God, but to
signify an Honoura^y ^espect and Venera^ion (as they confess it is used in the
2d Council of Nice) they maintain it is not Idolatry: which they could not have
done without a Reproof were it the Sense of the Church of England, that it is
Idolatry. As for the Compilers of the Articles, I do not take them to be so
Senseless, as not to think Idolatry repugnant to Scripture, but had they
thought it to be Idolatry, they had been Senseless indeed to reject it only as
being rather repugnant to the word of God.


Cathar. An ingenious Criticism indeed! as Dr. St. calls it: but such an one as
had been utterly lost, if T. G. had looked into the Latin Articles, where the
words are, Immo verbo Dei contradicit, whereby it appears, that [rather] is not
used as a term of diminution, but of a more vehement affirmation.


Eun. And what of this for the love of Grammar? Would the Dr. have the word
rather to be of so vehement an affirmation* as to aff^ct the words that follow,
and affirm it to be absolutely repugnant ^o the word of God? This were to make
the Compilers no wiser Grammarians, than He would have them thought to be
Divines, and to send the Church of England to School to learn her Accidence. Or
would he have it only to be a more vehement Affirmation of what went before,
that is, that they looked upon the worshipping of Images, not only as grounded
upon no warranty of scripture, but of the two to be rather repugnant, than
agreeable to the word of God? This is what was urgedby T. G. against him to show
his Confidence in peremptorily fixing upon the Church of England a sense which
she durst not own. Have but a little patience and I shall give you the very
words of T. G. which had the Dr. set down, this notable Criticism of his had
been utterly lost.

As for any Command, says he, of God forbiding to honor the Images Cath. no
Idol p: 197.
of Christ and his Saints, besides that I have shown that Assertion to be in
every respect groundless, yet for the satisfaction of the true Protestant
Reader I shall add one Observation more upon that subject. And it is this,
that the Compilers of the 39. Articles (in Which is contained the doctrine of
the Church of England) sufficiently insinuate they could sind no such command,
when they rejected the Adoration of Images, not as Idolatry (as the Dr. does)
but only as a Fond thing, vainly invented; nor as repugnant to the plain words
of Scripture (as they profess very roundly Artic. 28. though without ground,
when they speak of Transubstantiation) but as being rather repugnant to the
word of God: Which Qualification of theirs plainly gives us to understand. That
they had done their endeavors to find a Command, but could meet with none; For
had they made any such discovery either in the Second Commandment, or else where
in the Word of God, they would not haues pared to tell us of it, and have cried
it down for flat Idolatry, as the Dr. does. In the mean time, says he, it is
pleasant (I should have said Sad) to see what Veneration this Champion of the
Church of England, has either for the compilers of those Articles, or for the
Articles themselves, when what they call only a Fond thing, a vain Invention;
he condemns as Idolatry, most damnable Idolatry; and Magisterially declares it
to be expressly prohibited in the second Commandment, when they after the best
Inquiry they could make, pronounce only Problematically, that in their
Judgment, they thought it to be rather repugnant, than conformable to the word
of God. Thus clearly has T. G. evinced the sense of the Church of England in
this matter. And although he had not only that regard to her as to repel the
odious charge of Idolatry (which Dr. St. would have fixed upon her) by showing
he had not proved what he undertook; but that Civility also for the Dr.
himself, as not to charge him with downright contradicting the sense of that
Church which he was engaged to defend, I think it my part to speak my mind more
freely, and affirm as I may do from what I have here alleged, that it is plain
he dissents from the sense of the Church of England: while he endeauours to
make that worsh^pping and Adoration of Images which the Church of Rome teaches
in her Councils, and requires submission to by the terms of Communion with her,
to be I^olatry. I shall proceed, if you give leave, in our next Conference to
lay down the dangerous and detestable consequences, urged by T. G. as
following from the charge of Idolatry and particularly that of the Subversion
of all Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England; to all which Dr. St.
has either returned nothing at all, or such an answer as is worth just nothing.


Cathar. This with your leave, is I hope, more than you can make good: and
therefore I pray think well on^t against the next time we meet.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
Several important Consequences, urged by T. G. as following from the charge
of Idolatry, which the Dr. passes by in silence. His obligation either to deny,
or assign a distinct Church in all Ages, preserved from Heresy and Idolatry,
with which Christians were bound to ioyn in Communion. T. G's Arguments to show
the Roman Church to be that Church, not answered by the Dr. nor the Question
proposed by T. G. concerning the necessily of ioining with the Church of
England. His Irenicall Doctrine; Of the lawfulness of Non-Communion with any
Church, that imposes doubtful or suspected Practices. The charge of Idolatry
not maintainable upon the Dr's Principles without gross self-contradiction.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. CAthar. You promised at our last parting to let me see I
know not what dangerous and detestable consequences, which T. G. urged as
following from the charge of Idolatry, and to which you say Dr. St. has either
returned nothing at all in answer, or such an answer as is worth just nothing.
And I cannot but wonder they should be of any importance, when Dr. St. at the
end of his defense says, he has gone through all the material points in T. Gs
p. 877.
Book, which relate to the General nature of Idolatry; and diligently weighed
and considered every thing that lookod like a difficulty in the Controversy
about the worship of Images.


Eun. How Dr. St. has performed this, his Readers will judge. But there are
other material Difficulties relating to the Charge of Idolatry (be it is nature
what it will, of which we may speak here aster) which he has either not
weighed or considered at all, or not in their Just weights and measures. For as
Just weights chap. 1.
Mr. Thorndike well observes; To charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry, it is
Necessary to provide that we contradict not our selves. It is necessary also to
consider the importance and consequence of it; Whether tbe reason of the
distance amount to so heavy a charge or not. It is necessary that we understand
our selves, whether we admit the consequence of our own Supposition or not. And
to let you see that Dr. St. has not considered nor provided for these things,
and consequently failed in his Defense, I shall desire you to consider in the
first place that whoeuer will undertake to maintain this charge, must at the
same time profess, that Christ, who commanded us under pain of damnation to
hear his Church, has permitted Her to require and enioyn her Children for many
hundreds of years together, to commit Idolatry parallel (as Dr. St contends) to
that of the Heathens.

2dly. That Mahomet (that Grand Impostor) whose Followers have been preserved
by the grounds he laid, for above a thousand years from falling into Idolatry,
had more wisdom and Power to contriue and carry on his design, than the Son of
God. And 3dly. that our Forefathers in this Land, had better haut been
converted to Judaism or Turcism, than to Christianity as they were. These are
things which must needs strike horror into the Soul of any Christian as often
as he repeats those words of his Creed, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, if
he consider what he says; and firmly believes that Christ himself has
promised to be with his disciples always even to the end of the world: and
send the Holy Ghost, to guide them into all truth, and that the Gates of Hell
shall never preuail against his Church; and being laid down by T. G in his
Epistle Dedicatory as following from the cbarge of Idolatry, ought not Dr. St.
when he undertakes to maintain it, to have removed them in the first place, and
not passed them over in silence? What can such a Silence argue, but that he
declined them as too true to be refuted? And now please your self if you can in
the charge of Idolat^y.


Cathar. Perhaps these things appear not such horrible Bugbears to all, as you
would make them. We know that excellent Servant of God Calvin (as the Dr.
represents him in his Irenicum) maintains in the Preface to his Institutions,
that Iren. p. 405.
God had suffered men for their unthankfulness to be dro^^ned in deep darkness,
so that there was no Face of the true Church to be seer. And et is no new thing
to find Cypr. Ang^. P. 391.
among us Godly Persons who (as your Peter H^ylin observes) look upon the
R^lig^on of Rome, as worse than that of the Turk^ and Moors, and hold
conformity to them in Rites and Ceremonies (...) tolerable than to those of
Rome. But how fart this Silence of Dr. Sts. argues his consent to these Points,
I cannot determine. I wonder he should neither grant nor deny them, yet now I
think on it, I remember that in his Defense he does deny it follows from the
charge of P. 141.
I^olatry, that the Gates of Hell have preuaild against the Church, when he
asks T. G. upon his obiecting it to him, Against what Church? the whole
Christian Church? Whoeuer said they could, o^ low does that follow? which I
take to be the same as to deny it does or can follow.


Eun. And so do I too. But then, if it be as you say, that Dr. St. denies it to
follow from the charge of Idolatry that the Gates of Hell have prevailed
against the whole Christian Church, ought he not to have assigned us some
Church, distinct in all Ages from all Heretical and Idolatrous Congregations,
which Christ has preserved allwaies from heresy and Idolatry?


Cathar. Not at all, if he be of Mr. Calvin's mind (that Excellent Servant of
God) that there was a time when the Face of the true Church was not to be seen.


Eun. But what if Dr. St. assert (as he does in his Roman Idolatry) that a
Christian by virtue of his being so, is page 8.
bound to ioyn insome Church or Congregation of Christians, does it not follow,
that the^e must be such a Church at all times to join with? And that those who
in any time did not ioyn with it, acted against their very Christianity, by
virtue of which they were bound to do it? Let him then assign us such a Church
in the world before Luther, to which all Christians by virtue of their being
so, were bound to ioyn in Communion; or else he must grant that the Gates of
Hell had then prevailed against the whole Christian Church.


Cathar. This Principle of the Drs. viz that a Christian by virtue of his being
so, is bound to ioyn in some Church or Congregation of Christians, I confess,
has always seemed odd to me. But I am very well assured, he will not assign
the Roman to be that Church, because in that very place he expressly affirms,
that the Gates of Hell do certainly Defense. P. 141.
preuail against the Church of Rome, if it does vn-church all other Christians
that are not of it is Communion: as certainly it does.


Eun. But if the Dr. some Ieaucs before, viz, page 785. allow the Church of
Rome to be a true Church, as holding all the Essential Points of Faith, what
does he mean now by telling us that the Gates of Hell have prevailed against
it? Do you not see into what turnings and windings they are driven, who will
take upon them to maintain this Charge of Idolatry? Such frequent dizziness
gives cause to suspect, that the Point of the Lance has passed beyond tbe
Teeth of the Dragon.


Cathar. No such matter. For a Church may hold all the Essential Points of
Faith, and yet the Gat^s of Hell prevail against it for it is Tyranny in
un-churching all other Christians, who are not of its Communion.


Eun. It is not then the mere holding and teaching Idolatry inconsistent (as
the Dr. says) with salvation, for which the Gates of Hell have prevailed
against the Church of Rome, but her Severity in removing those from her
Communion, who will not conform to her doctrine. But what ever the cause be, if
the Gates of Hell have prevailed against it, the Dr. is obliged by his
Principles to assign some other Church, which Christians by virtue of their
being so are bound to ioyn in Communion with; and if he can assign none such,
he must grant that the Gates of Hall have prevailed against the wh^le Christian
Church.


Cathar. Whateuer he can or may do in this matter, (and I see by his Principles
he is bound to do it) I am very much pleased with a Qu^stion, which I remember
he often requested, and insisted upon so earnestly as to conjure the Lady whose
satisfaction he end eavoured, to intercede if not for her own sake, yet for
his, to procure of T. G. that he might k^ow one reason at least, why the
Believing all the Ancient C^eeds, and leading a Good life, may not be
sufficient to salvation, unless one be of the Communion of the Church of Rome?


Eun. I believe I ghess the reason why you are so pleased with this Question:
as supposing there lies at the bottom of it, that the Believing the Ancient
Creeds, and Leading a Good life, may be sufficient to salvation without
communicating with any Church at all. But I know not whether you will be as
much pleased with the Answer. For whereas Dr. St. had reproached T. G. Cath. no
I^ol. p. 5.
that he had often requested an answer to this Question, but could not procure
it T. G. tells him, that had he pleased to have taken notice of it, he had done
it in his first paper, as far as was pertinent to the present purpose (that is
in handling the 2d Question, where it came in order) where Dr. St. grants, that
a Christian by virtue of his being so, is bound to ioyn in some Church and to
choose the Communion of the Purest. Where upon says T. G. I subioyned, that
that Church was to be judged the purest, which had the strongest Motives for
it, and then laid down a Catalogue of such weighty motives for the Roman.
Catholic, allowed by Dr. Tailor (lib. of Proph. Sect. 20). that neither Dr.
St. in his Defense, nor Dr. Tailor himself when he had a mind to invalidate
them, produced any thing to weigh against them, but a few Tinsel-words, and one
Scripture-Testimony, interpreted by and according to their own fancy. But then
again, because Dr. St. passed this Answer by, as not worth his taking notice
of, T. G. not to be wanting to so earnest a Request, proceeded to add three
reasons more to the former to prove the Roman Church to be that, with which all
are bound by virtue of their Christianity to ioyn in communion: And I shall
give you them in order as they lie.

1. There was in the world before Luther a distinct Church, whose Communion was
necessary to Salvation; but this was not the Protestant; Therefore it was the
Roman. The Mayor, says he, is evident from Dr. St's. own Conf^ssion, that a
Christian by virtue of his being so, is bound to ioyn in some Church; which is
not possible, if there be not such a Church to ioyn with. The Minor also, that
this was not the Protestant, is manifest, because before Luther there was no
such Church in the world distinct from the Roman. It follows therefore, says
he (the Q^estion between Dr. St. and him, being supposed to be of the necessity
of Communion either with the Roman, or wih the Protestant) that of the two the
Roman Church was, and still is (as remaining still the same) that Church, whose
Communion is necessary to salvation.

2. Again, says he; taking the term Roman-Church, not only for the Particular
Diocese of Rome, but for the Churches also in Communion with it, as the Head,
(as it is generally taken in this Controversy) nothing can render her Communion
not necessary to salvation, but either Heresy, that is, an adhesion to some
private or singular Opinion or Error in Faith; Or Schism, that is separation
from former Ecclesiastical unity. For the first, he says, that Dr. St.
himself (Rat. Aecount, p. 54) acknowledges the Church of Rome to believe all
the same Articles of Faith with the Protestant; and that the Points in which
the Protestant differs from the Roman, are not Articles of Faith. Consequently
the Opposite Tenets to them can be no Errors in Faith with him. And for the
second, if he will make the Cburch of Rome guilty of Schism, he must assign
some other distinct Church, (then at least in being) from whose unity She
departed: which T. G. thinks he says, was never pretended, and mak^s himself
sure can never be performed.


Cathar: T. G. is no good Undertaker for what his Adversary can or cannot
perform in this point. But it is evident the Church of Rome has given just
cause for other Churches to withdraw themselves from her Communion, by imposing
new Articles of Faith, and some of them Idolatrous. And this makes the crime of
the Schism to lie at her door.


Eun. This Objection T. G. foresaw, and three things he says to it. 1. that
this is the Common Plea of all Separatists, viz to charge those from whom they
separated with bringing in new doctrines. 2. that it implies an acknowledgment
of the Fact of Schism, that is, of breaking Church-Vnity to be on the
Protestants side. 3. that this being so, the Protestants stand arraigned of the
crime of Schism also, for breaking Communion with the Church of Rome, until
the Accusation be made good, and judged to be so, by some other more competent
Judge than themselves in their own cause.

3. The third and last argument pressed p. 9.
by T. G. why the beleiuing all the Ancient creeds, and leading a good life,
may not be sufficient to saluat on, unless one be of the Communion of the
Church of Rome is this A Christian by virtue of his being so, is bound to be of
the Communion of that Church, which evidently was the true one, and the purest;
until it be as evidently at least (if not more evidently) proved not to be so;
for otherwise he wrongs both his Reason and conscience, if he leave a greater
evidence and adhere to a lesser. But the Roman Church, as comprehending all
those in Communion with her by the Testimony not only of S. Paul (Romans C. 1.
and c. 16) but of the whole Christian world of all Ages, was evidently once the
only true Church of Christ, and consequently, the Purest; and neither has it,
nor can it be as evidently, (much less more evidently) proved not to be so
still; since the Testimony of those who do or will deny it, is incomparably
Short of the former. Therefore says T. G. a Christian by virtue of his being
so is bound to be of the Communion of the Roman Church.

These are the reasons which T. G. gave to Dr. St's demand, and says, he
hea^tily prays they may do him good, because he requested so earnestly to know
them for his own sake; and I cannot but wonder that* the Dr. having so
earnestly requested them, and so feelingly complained that he could not procure
them, now that they are given, should pass them also by in Silence and take no
notice of them.


Cathar. I fear you think these arguments conclude, that Communion with the
Church of Rome is necessary to salvation, and I should be loath to hear so
convincing an argument of your Inclination to Popery.


Eun. You do not hear me say so; and yet I cannot but look upon them, as coming
so home to the Point, that unless answered, they carry all before them and
quite ruin the Cause of the Reformation. And although perhaps you will not
confess so much, yet I perceive by your discourse, you are not so well pleased
either with the Argument^ of T. G. or Dr. St's silence, as you were with the
Question. However there is one thing added by T. G. which I think you will not
be displeased with: and that is a Reflection he makes, that wbereas it has been
hitherto speciously pretended against the Church of Rome, ^. 9. 10.
that the believing all the Ancient Creeds, and leading a good life, is all
that is necessary to salvation, yet now there is more required by Dr. St. Viz,
to ioyn in some Church or Congregation of Christ^a^^, by virtue of a man's
being a Christian; and that he is bound to choose the Communion of the Purest:
by which T. G. says, he will suppose he means at present the Church of
England: and thereupon hopes he may without Offense tak^ the same liberty with
Dr. St. which Dr St. had done with him, and desire if not for his own sake, yet
for the sake of the Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and other separated
Congregations, to know one reason from him, why the believing all the Ancient
Creeds, and leading a good life may not be sufficient to salvation unless one
be of the Communion of the Church of England? This you see how it was press't
by T. G. after he had given his reasons to Dr. St's demand; but the Dr. has not
been so mutually kind as to defer^ to so earnest a request in his Defense.


Cathar. Perhaps he looked upon it as an impertinent Digression.


Eun. So himself also feared he should be thought to digress when he proposed
the Romans Idol. p. 50.
Question to T. G. and yet could never be at rest till he had procured an
answer from him. Why then ought he not to have done the same, when if there
were any digression, himself was the Author of it


Cathar. Perhaps it suited not with his Circumstances, yet I could wish he had
done it, because then I suppose we should have seen with how much greater
Justice the Church of England exacts Communion with her from other Churches,
than the Church of Rome. Which hitherto I confess I have not been able to
discern, and that for a reason offered formerly to Consideration by Dr. St.
himself in his Irenicum page 117. where having laid down this Proposition viz.
[where any Church retaining purity of Doctrine does require the owning of and
conforming to any unlawful or suspected practice, Men may lawf^lly deny
conformity to, and Communion with that Church in such things, without the guilt
of Schism] he endeavors to justify it from the lawfulness of separation from
the Church of Rome, in this manner. If our separation from the Church of Rome
was therefore lawful, because she required unlawful things as conditions of her
Communion; then whereuer such things are required by any Church (as we say they
are by the Church of England) non-Communion with that Church in those things
will be lawful too, and where non-communion is lawful, there can be no Schism
in it. If it be said here (he means, I suppose, by the Prelates of Iren. p. 118.
the Church of England) that the Pope's Power was an usurpation, which is not
in lawful Governors of Churches; it is some replied says he, that the Pope's
usurpation mainly lies in imposing things upon men's Consciences, as necessary,
which are doubtful or unlawful. And whereuer the same thing is done, there is
an usurpation of the same nature, though not in so high a degree: and it may be
as lawful to withdraw Communion from one, as well as the othre.


Eun: But may it not be said, that Men are bound to be ruled by their
Governors, in determining what things are lawful and what not?


Cathar. To this it is answered by Dr. St. first that no true Protestant can
swear blind Obedience to Church Governors in all things. That every one has a
Judicium priuatae discretionis, which is the Rule of practice as to himself:
and though we freely allow a Ministerial Power under Christ in the Governors
of the Church, yet that extends not to an obligation upon men to go against the
dictates of their own reason and conscience. Their power is only directive, and
declaratiue, and in matters of duty can bind no more than reason and evidence
brought from Scripture by them does. Again if the Governors must be Judges,
what things are lawful what not, their power will be absolute; for to be sure
what ever they command, they will say is lawful either in it is self, or as they
command it: If every private person must judge what is lawful, what not, which
is commanded; (as when all is said, every man will be his own Judge in this
case, in things concerning his own welfare) then he is no further bound to
obey, than he judges the thing to be lawful which is commanded. And for the
plea of an erroneous conscience, that takes not off the obligation to follow
the dictates of it: for as he is bound to lay it down, supposing it erroneous;
so he is bound not to go against it while it is not laid down. But then again
-- Did not the Pope plead to be a lawful Governor? And if men are bound to
submit to the determination of Church Governors, as to the lawfulness of
things, they were bound to believe him in that as well as other things, and so
separation from that Church (that is, the Church of Rome) was unlawful then.
Where upon he concludes, that let men turn and wind themselves, which way they
will, by the very same Arguments, that any will prove Separation from the
Church of Rome lawful, because she required unlawful things, as conditions of
her Communion, it will be proved lawful, not to conform to any suspected or
unlawful practice, required by any Church Governors, upon the same terms? if
the thing so required, be after serious and sober inquiry, judged unwarrantable
by a Man's own Conscience. Lastly, he adds, that withal, it would be further
considered, whether when our best Writers against the Papists do lay the
imputation of Schism, not on those who withdraw Communion, but on them for
requiring such conditions of Communion (whereby they did rather eiect men out
of their Communion, than the others separate from them) they do not by the same
argument, lay the Imputation of Schism on all, who require such conditions of
Communion, and take it wholly off from those, who refuse to conform for
Conscience sake: And much more to the same purpose, which for breuities sake I
omit to repeat.


Eun. Now I perceive what it is you would be at; you would have had Dr. St.
answer his own argument. A very ungrateful employement I can assure you; for
either he cannot absolve you from the crime of Schism, or he must deny (which I
am sure you will not) that the Church of England imposes any doubtful and
suspected practices, as conditions of Communion with her, ye^ if I mistake not,
he has offered something to this purpose in his Rational Account page 54.
where he lays down the State of the difference between the Church of Rome and
the Church of England in these words. The Church of Rome, says he, imposes
new Articles of Faith to be believed as necessary to salvation. But the Church
of England mak^s no Articles of Faith, but such as have the Testimony and
Approbation of the whole Christian world of all ages, and are acknowledged to
be such by Rome it self; and in other things she requires subscription to them,
not as Articles of Faith, but as Inferior Truths, or as Dr. Br^^hall calls
them pio^^ Opinions fitted for the Preservation of Unity, not, says he, that
we oblige any man to believe them, but only not to oppose or contradict them.
How far this Answer may relish with you, Catharinus, as implying the Guilt of
Schism to be on your side for denying Conformity to so moderate a condition, as
non-contradicting only is, I leave to your consideration. But the use that T.
G. makes of it, is to show that Dr. St. was not well advised upon these
Principles, to undertake the charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome. In
order to which he first lays down the Sense of what the Dr. affirms in these
words. This says he according to Dr. St. is the Basis and Foundation of the
Pr^t^stant Religion, that no doctrine of the Protestant Religion, as it differs
from that of the Roman, is an Article of Faith; that is, that no Protestant
belieues; or if he do, he ougbt not to believe, as a matter of Faith, viz, that
the Images of Christ and his Saints, are not to be honored; that the Substance
of the Bread is not changed in to the Body of Christ; that the Saints in heaven
are not to be invoked to pray for us. But all that he is obliged to by the
Church of England, is not to oppose or contradict them. And then inferrs these
Consequences from the Dr's Assertion.

1. That the Church of Rome according Cath. no Idol. p. 14.
to him, does not err against any Article of Faith, because the Church of
England, as he says, makes no Articles of Faith, but such as are acknowledged
to be such by Rome it self.

2. That himself does not believe any of the af^resaid Points as they are
determined by the Church of England, to be Articles of Faith: because to be
Articles of Faith with him they must have the Testimony and Approbation of the
whole Christian world of all Ages, and be acknowledged to be such by Rome it
self; which certainly the English Articles concerning the worshipping of
Images, the Adoration of the Host, and the Invocation of Saints, are not,

3. That after all this bustle to make the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry in
these very Points, for ought any man knows, himself gives no Interior Assent
to any of the forementioned Tenets (as determined by the Church of England)
not even as to Inferior Truths, or Pious Opinions, because the Church of
England does not oblige any man to believe them as such, but only not to oppose
or contradict them: and it is not likely, says T. G. he defers more to the
Church of England, than She obliges him to (or than he conceiues She obliges
him to.)

4. And lastly, that this Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome is vain
and groundless; because Idolatry being an Error against the most Fundamental
Point of Faith, and the Church of Rome according to him, not erring against any
Article of Faith, it is evident, says T. G. that to charge the Church of Rome
with Idolatry must according to his own Principles be the most groundless,
unreasonable, and contradictory proceeding in the world.

This done he desires every indifferent Reader to reflect and judge whether Dr.
St. to render the doctrine of the 39 Articles digestible (as he phrases it) to
the most squeamish stomach of the Nicest Nonconformist, have not done a
notable piece of Service to the Church of England in degrading so many of them,
as are not ackno^ledged by the Church of Rome (although they be esteemed the
distinctiue badge of the Purity of the Church of England) from the dignity of
being Articles of Faith, into a lower Class of Inf^riour Truths (as he calls
them) such as neither himself, nor any body else knows, whether they have a
grain of truth in them, or no; and consequently are not bound to believe them?
Nay, says he, Does he not undermine the Church of England, both in her
doctrine and Government? In her doctrine, by freeing her subjects from any
obligation of interior believing her Articles, so far forth as they differ
from thos^ of the Church of Rome to be so much as inferior Truth? In her
Government, by exposing her Ordination, (or Publik Ministry) to be invaded
without scruple, by such as in their hearts judge it Antichristian, when he
tells them, her Sense is to oblige them no fa^ther, than not to oppose or
contradict it? In which by the way I think he dissents as much from the Sense
of the Church of England, if that be to be taken from the public Acts of her
Convocat^ons, as in his charge of Idolatry. But to proceed with T. G. Was it
not worth the while, says he, to rend asunder the peace of Christendom for a
Company of Opinions, which (though Dr. Bramhal call them Pious, yet (the
greater part of Christians, both in the East and West for many Ages have, and
do condemn for Impious and Blasphemous? Is not this, says he, a very Rational,
or rather (as Mr. I. S. expounds the word) a very Reasonable Account of the
grounds of the Protestant Religion, and a rare way of Justifying her from the
guilt of Schism? Surely he never thought of charging the Church of Rome with
Idolatry, when he laid such sandy Principles of so brittle a Temper, that it
was not possible they should bear so great a charge, without breaking and
discharging upon himself.

This and much more to the same purpose (which I may have occasion to mind you
of hereafter, is urged by T. G. and I could wish Dr. St. would have d^gr^ssed
so far, as to show the consistency of his Charge of Idolat^y with these
Principles; though he had spared the giving us a digression of near two hundred
Pages together in the first chapter of his defense about the worship both of
the Ancient and Modern Hea^hens; which when all is done signifies just nothing
to the making of a Parallel with that of the Church of Rome, as will be very
easily made appear.


Cathar. As for the digression (as you call it) it is not our concern at
present to engage in it. It lies at his Adversaries door; and so does the
Imputation of Schism at the Church of Englands, on the same account, as on the
Church of Rome's, while she imposes doubtful and Suspected Practices as
condi^^ons of her Communion. But for the consequences T. G. inferrs from the
difference laid down by Dr. St. between the Church of England and that of Rome
he has sufficiently shown the vanity of one of them. viz. the 4th in the last
Chapter of his Defense, where 1st he says that to affirm that the Church of
Rome does not err in any Fundamental Point of the Chrictian Faith, and yet may
be guilty of Idolatry, has no contradiction in it; f^r the notion of Idolatry,
as applied to the Church of Rome, is consistent which it is owning the General
Principles of Faith, as to the true God and Jesus Christ, and giving Souereign
Worship to them. 2. Whereas T. G. says, that Idolatry is an Error against the
most Fundamental Point of Faith, Dr. St. replies that T. G. himself confesses
the true Notion of Idolatry to be, the giving the worship due to God to a
Creature: And so, if Dr. St. have proved that the worship of Images in the
Roman Church be the giving the worship due only to God to a Creature, then
although the Church of Rome may hold all the Essentials of Faith and be a true
Church, yet may it be guilty of Idolatry without contradiction.


Eun. I was very well aware of this, but did not believe your self would take
it for an answer, especially seeing he says nothing at all to the Three first,
which plainly euince he cannot maintain his charge of Idolatry without
contradicting himself. And if this you allege be all he has to say to the 4th
I think he has but spun a webb to entangle himself the more. For his
Adversaries will soon reply, that in proving the Church of Rome to be guil^y of
Idolatry he proves her at the same time to err against a Fundamental Article
of Faith: unless he will deny, (which I am sure you will not) the doctrine of
the 2d Commandment to be a Fundame^tal A^ticle, or that to teach the opposite
to it, is not to err against it.


Cathar. But Dr. St. being, as he p. 7^9.
says, afraid to be snap'd by such cunning S^phisters, has therefore
distinguished in time, viz. that to affirm a Church to hold any Idolatry
lawful, which it judges to be Idolatry and not err against a Fundamental
Point, would be a contradiction. But to say, that it may entertain a false
notion of Idolatry, or of that worship which is due only to God, and not err
against any Fundamental, is none: for this false notion being received, men may
really give the worship that belongs only to God to his creatures. And this
says he, is the v^most error necessa^y in this case.


Eun. This I take to be the utmost, which Dr St. can say in this case: And when
I consider the distinction he gives, methinkes I am more clearly conuinc'd of
the truth of that Sage saying of his (though ill applied his Adversary I. W.
for his distinction of expressly or impl^citely,) viz that Mother-wit is much
better than Scholastic Fooling. For if p. 791.
my Mo^her-wit fail me not; to err, in the strictest way of speaking, (though
it be used also to signify any Opposition to Truth) is not so properly to
oppos^ the Truth, knowing it to be the Truth, as to teach that which is
opposite to truth in reality, the Teacher not knowing it to be so. And if the
Church of Rome err in telling men, that the Honor She gives to the Images of
Christ and his Saints is not a part of the Honor due to God, if in reality it
be a part of his Honor, it is Evident She erres against the 2d Commandment,
though she judges she does not. So that which way soever the Dr. turns himself,
he cannot maintain the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry without erring
against a Fundamental Po^^t. And that this Error is damnable, is avowed by
himself in his very change, when he asserteth* that those who Communicate with
the Church of Rome, must by the terms of Communion with her be guilty either of
Hypocrisy or Idolatry, either of which, says he, are sins inconsistent with
salvation.


Cathar. But still methinks you come not home to the Point. For what the Dr.
fixes himself upon p. 787. is that the Notion of Idolatry as applied to the
Church of Rome (mark that) is consistent with its owning the General Principles
of Faith, as to the true God and Jesus Christ, and giving Soueraign worship to
them, that is, if I understand him aright, that the Church of Rome may teach in
the General that Soueraign worship is due only to the true God and Jesus
Christ, and yet give the real parts of worship due only to God to a mere
creature, in worshipping him by an Image, (which is the notion of Idolatry he
applies to that Church) and yet again at the same time tell men, it is not a
part of the Honor which is due to God, as not judging it to be such.


Eun. Well, if this be the Point, I think I have spoken sufficiently to it
already. But to make it yet plainer, I must desire you to reflect, that the
Controversy here is not only upon a General Thesis whether some Idolatrous
Practice may not consist with owning the General Principles of Faith as to the
true God and Jesus Christ, and giving. Soueraign worship to them (which yet I
know not, how himself can maintain against I W's distinction of expressly or
implicitly, when he supposes the Church of Rome to debauch the very p. 788.
essential Principles of Faith by damnable errors, and to corrupt the worship
of God by virtue of them) but upon a particular Hypothesis, viz, whether the
notion of Idolatry, as applied to the Church of Rome.) 1. e. the worshipping of
God by an Image) be consistent with, that is, be not an error against the
doctrine of the 2d Commandment, if that be, to forbid men to worship him by an
Image? The Affirmative of this I think is too manifest to be denied by any man
that has not lost his Mother-Wit. And therefore if it be a Fundamental Point
to believe that to be Idolatry, which God himself has expressly f^rbidden in
the law under the notion of Idolat^y and that be, the worshipping of him by an
Image (as Dr. St. asserts) it is clear that the Church of Rome in telling men it
is no^ Idolatry (as not knowing it to be such) erres against a Fundamental
Point; and he cannot according to his Principles maintain his charge of
I^olatry without a Contradiction. For if it be expressly revealed in H.
Scripture, that to worship God by an Image is Idolatry, it is an Article of
Paith, and a Fundamental One too, and the Church of Rome in teaching men to do
so, erres against it. And if Dr. St. with the Church of England make no
Articles of Faith, but such as are aknowledged to be such by Rome it self (as
this is not) according to him it is no Article of Faith at all, that God i^ not
to be w^r^hipped by an Image. This I take to be Contradiction enough, and the
Dr. must clear himself from it as he can.


Cathar. This is what a man gets by dropping, (as Dr. St. says upon this p.
785.
occasion) some kind words toward them who whil be sure to make all possible
advantages from them, to overthrow the force of whateuer can be said afterward
against them. Had he not been so kind hearted as to allow the Church of Rome to
be a true Church, and hold all the Essential Points of Christian Faith, but had
stood firm to the Principles of our Party, who look upon that Church, not as a
true Church, but as the Synagogue of Antichrist, he had done the work
thoroughly, and freed himself from the intangling Sophisms of these Scholastic
Foolers.


Eun. I think you have little reason to esteem T. G. for one of them who make
all possible advantages from the Dr's kind words to overthrow the force of
whateuer might or was, said afterward against him, if you consider how exact
he was afterward in replying to all his arguments, whereas the Dr. in his
Defense has passed over many important things objected by T. G. (as you have
heard) without taking notice at all of them. But in the main, I see by what you
say, you agree so far with me, that Dr. St. was not well-aduised to charge the
Church of Rome with Idolatry upon his Principles. Nor am I less dissatisfied
with his managing it, upon some other Accounts, which I shall acquaint you with
at our next meeting.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
MR. Thorndike's Judgment of the Charge of Idolatry, with Dr. St's. Honorable
Encomium of him. Instead of justifying the Separation, he brings the Guilt of
the Schism upon himself and the Church of England. A farther display of his
Omissions and Contradictions. His Parallel between the worship of the Heathens,
and that of the Church of Rome shown to be Impertinent, and the Worship of God
by an Image not to be expressly prohibited in the 2d Commandment.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS CAthar. I remember at the beginning of our discourse, you
desired me to consider you under the quality of a Person perfectly of Mr.
Thorndik's Judgment, as to the Charge of Idolatry upon the Church of Rome: and
that what you should produce upon that account, should be either from his own
words, or what you conceived himself must and would have said in conformity to
his Principles, And I was willing to entertain this conceit of you; but cannot
persuade my self, that so learned and Judicious a Man, as Mr. Thorndike is
esteemed, would have allowed so much partiality, as you have shown in this
cause both to T. G. and the Church of Rome.


Eun. This is what I expected all along to hear from you. And though I have not
the other works of that Learned Person by me, yet I may hope to acquit my self
sufficiently of this Imputation with his Just weights and measures.

For first if the Question be of the charge it self of Idolatry, it is manifest
that Mr. Tho^ndike excuses the Doctrine and Pr^fession of the Church of Rome
(from whence we are to take the terms of Communion with it) from Idolatry, in
all the three Points objected by Dr. St. viz, The worshipping of Images, and
the Adoration of the Host in the 19th Chapter; and the Invocation of Saints in
the 16th.

Of the first he says, that to the Images of Saints there can be no Idolatry,
so long as men take them for Saints, that is, Gods creatures; much less to the
Images of our Lord, for it is the honor of our Lord and not of his Image. And
although, says he, the 2d Council of Nice acknowledges that the Image it self
is ho^oured, by the honor given to that which it signifies before the Image,
yet it distinguishes this honor from the honor of our Lord: and therefore
teaches not Idolatry, by teaching to honor Images, though it acknowledge that
the Image it self is honored, when it need not. Of the 2d he affirms that
the worship of the Host in the Papacy is not Idolatry, because those who
worship the Host, do not believe that the Elements remain, but that our Lord
Christ, the only true God is present there in a particular manner. For the 3d;
though he seem more Scrupulous in that than the other two, because the same
things he says, are desired of the Saints, and in the same terms, in which
they are desired of God, even in the Holy Scripture, yet he acknowledges there
is a Profession of that Church extant, which contradicts the proper sense of
such prayers, and forces the Addressers of them, unless they will contradict
themselves, to expound them to signify no more, than obtaining that of God,
which they are desired to grant of themselves. And this he implies to be
sufficient to excuse them from Idolatry, when he says, that were it not so,
they could not be excused from it.

Again, if the Question be concerning the managing the Charge of Idolatry,
supposing or granting the Church of Rome to be a true Church, as Dr. St. does.
Mr. Thorndik^ expressly affirms in his 1. Chapter, that if the Pope be
Antichrist, and the Papists Idol^ters the Church of Rome is no true Church; and
if it be a true Church, that which it professes, is not Idolatry, and
thereupon gives this necessary caution to those who will proceed upon that
supposition, to provide that they contradict not themselves; which in his 2d
Chapter he says they must do, i. e. contradict themselves if they maintain
it. 3dly if the Question be of the Sense of the Church of England, Mr.
Thorndike shows from the very fact of the Refo^mation, that i^ was not the
meaning of those who made the Change, to charge the Church of Rome with
Idolatry, because that were to suppose it not to be a true Church, and the
Church of England not to be the same Church with that which was: whereas the
R^formation was not intended for the making a new Church, which was not before,
but for the restoring a sick Church to its soundness, and a corrupted Church to
it is Purity. Chapt. 1. and 3d

4thly if the Question be, on which side the crime of Schism lies, he affirms
in the same first Chapter, that they that separate from the Church of Rome as
Idolaters, are thereby Schismatics before God; and again, that in plain terms
we make our selves Schismatics, by grounding our Reformation upon this
pretense.

Lastly, he asserteth the Profession of one Visible Church, to oblige all to
stand to those grounds and those terms, upon which it is to be maintained (of
which certainly with him the charge of Idolatry is none) and that he who takes
the Pope for Antichrist, and the Papists for Idolaters, can never weigh by his
own Weights, and mete by his own measures, till he hate Papists worse than I^ws
or Mahumetans; chapter 2. These things being so, I hope you will absolve me from
the Suspicion of having advanced any thing in this matter, but what Mr.
Thorndike himself allows. The Reasons he brings for these Positions you may see
your self at leisure in the Places I have cited.


Cath. You have sufficiently acquitted your self of the conceit I began to have
of you: and Dr. St. seems to have acquitted himself also sufficiently, as to
the respect due to the memory of so learned and Pious a Person (as himself
acknowledges Mr. Thorndike to have been) when he assures T. G. that if he could
have thought, what that Learned Def. p. 783.
Man had said in this matter, to have been agreeable either to Scripture or
Reason, or the sense of the Primitive, or of the present Church of England, it
might have prevented his writing, by changing his Opinion; for he says, he was
no stranger to his writings or his arguments. By which you see, he came to them
with a good will to be informed before he engaged in this cause and would not
have receded from his Opinion, could he have adhered to it without violence to
his Reason.


Eun. This I know is returned by Dr. St. in his late defense. p. 783. in answer
to T. G. who upon occasion of a discourse of Mr. Thorndike's, about the Sense
of the 2d Commandment, diametrically opposite to that which Dr. St. gives, had
said, that he could not but look upon it, as a kind of Prophetical Co^f^tation
in the year 1662. of all which the Dr. had produced in the year Cath. no Idol.
p. 175.
1671. (when his Treatise of Roman Idolatry came forth) for the proof of h^^
charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome in the matter of Images. And how
full of respect the Dr's answer is to the Memory of that excellent Person, your
self will judge, if you consider what an honor it is for Mr. Thorndike, for
the world to hear it proclaimed from the mouth of Dr. St; that what he has
said in this matter is in his Judgment agreeable neither to Scripture, nor
Reason, nor the Sense of the Primitive Church, nor of his own; and this after
he had made himself no Stranger to his writings, or his Arguments. Do you not
think that many will be apt to believe that there must be none of all these in
^h^m, when such a Man as Dr. St. brought both wit and will to discover them,
but could not? But why did he not make it some part of his business to answer
his A^guments, if he found them so void of Sense and Reason, at least those
which T. G. urged against him, and, because the Dr. left them vn-answered, said
he must look upon Mr. Thorndike's Book, as a Confutation of his before it was
written? Does not Mr. Thorndike himself in the 1. Chapter of his Just Weights
and Measures, speaking to those of Dr. St's Judgment, demand, if they can
pretend so much charity to him, as to have attempted the answering of his
Reasons, and the rectifying of his mistakes? Or will they, says he, show me
who has answered them; and so, that they need not be troubled for me? And now,
when Mr. Thorndike himself so charitably, and T. G so justly called upon Dr.
St. to answer his arguments, was it enough for him to pass all this by with a
deaf ear, and having professed himself no stranger to the writings, and
arguments of that great Man, to tell us with an Ipse dixit, that he could find
neither Scripture nor Reason, nor the Sense of the Primitive Church, nor of his
own in what he had said in this mat^er? You may believe as you please, but
those of the Church of England have a d^ffer^nt esteem for him, and for his
writings. What if T. G. should answer Dr. St's defense in the same manner, and
with the same words, would you take it for good payment? For my part I should
be satisfied with neither, nor will your self be, I believe, for what concerns
Mr. Thorndike, when you shall have heard what T. G. alleged out of him, Pref.
^^ Cath. no Idol.
to show the crime of Schism to ly at their doors, who charge the Church of
Rome with Idolatry, and is left untouched by Dr. St. both in his General
Preface, and late Defense. That this was Mr. Thorndike's Judgment as to the
charge of Idolatry in general, is evident from what I have cited above out of
his First chapter; and for the worship of images in particular, in his 19th
Chapter he says, It is manifest that the Church of God is tied no farther than
there can appear danger of Idolatry, which if it be so heightened, beyond
appearance, as to involve the Church in the crime of it (i. e. Idolatry)
charge the schism that may come by that means upon them, that so inhanse it.


Cathar. This is a thing which I have often heard, and always with wonder;
nothing appearing to me so proper to justify the Separation of the Church of
England from that of Rome, as the charging that Church with Idolatry: for (as
Dr. St. himself gives the reason Pref. to Romans Id^l.
in his Preface) whereas other things are subtle and nice, tedious and obscure,
this lies plain to the conscience of every man: If the Church of Rome be guilty
of Idolatry, our Separation can be no Schism, either before God or man, because
our Communion would be a Sin.


Eun. This wonder of yours proceeds from a mistake (as you heard before) that
those who made the change intended a Separation; whereas Reformat^on is indeed,
and allwaies was the thing intended. And for what you allege from Dr. St. M.
Thorndike confesses, this cause (i. e. Idolatry) Just. weight. chapter 1.
would be more then sufficient to justify separation, did it appear to be true:
but then on the other side, says he, it charges the mischiefs of the Schism
upon those that proceed upon it, before it be as evident as the mischief, are,
which they run into upon it. So that, should the Church of England declare that
the Change, which we call Reformation is grounded upon this supposition, I must
then acknowledge says he, that we are Schismatics. For the cause not appearing
to me (as hitherto it has not, and I think will never be made to appear to me)
the Separation, and the Mischiefs of it must be imputed to them that make the
change. And therefore we (of the Church of England) in plain terms make our
selves Schismatics, by grounding our Reformation upon this Pretense. This was
returned by T. G. in his Preface, to Dr St. with this reflection, that this
Judgment of Mr. Thorndike, abetted by diverse of the most learned, and most
Judicious Persons of the Church of England, will stand as a convincing
Prejudice against him, and his charge, till he can make it as evident that the
Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry, as the mischiefs are that have ensued
upon it. And I can imagine no probable reason, why he should not have
endeavored at least, either in his General Preface, or in his Defense, to have
removed this Prejudice, but that he was so far of Mr. Thorndike's mind in the
matter, as to think it a task impossible to be performed. Otherwise surely he
would not have sat down quietly with the Imputation of so horrible a Sin, as
Mr. Thorndike characters that of Schisin to be in the sight of God in his next
Chapter, even greater than that of Heresy Chap. 2.
or Aposta^y. For an Heretic or an Apostate, says he, in the sight of God
destroys only (...) own soul. But he that causes division in the Church,
either peremptorily destroys, or probably hinders the Salvation of all who are
parties to it. So the Authors of Schisin must answer for all the souls that
perish by it. Add to this, the infinite Blood. shed, the barbarous Violences,
the uncharitable sland^rs, the horrid perjuries, the unchristian practices, the
Antichristian doctrines, the hatred of our Fellow christians worse than Jews
and Mahumetans, the reviling the first and greatest of Patriarchs, (at least in
Order and Dignity,) as the Man of sin; and railing at that Church, which the
Dr. himself acknowledges to be a true Church, and to hold all the Essentials of
Faith, as the Mistress of Idolatry, and the Whore of Babylon: besides the other
mischi^f. and Miseries, which this division has brought forth, part of which
says Dr. St. himself, if our experience does not tell us of, yet our
consciences Iren. p. 62.
may. Add I say these things, which lie open to the eyes of men, to the
hainousness of Schism in the sight of God, which, as Dr. Hammond tells us out
of the Fathers, is as great if not greater than Sacriledg, Parricide or
Idolatry, not iustifyable by any pretense Of Schis. chapter 1. Sect. 6. 7. 8.
whatsoever, nor expiable even by Martyrdom it self, and you will see what
reason there was, why Dr. St. should have endeavored at least the answering Mr.
Thorndike's argument, least he might be thought by his silence to stand
convicted of the consequence of it, (that is, the guilt of Schism) in his own
Judgment.


Cathar. These are terrible Bugbears indeed to frighten us from the Charge of
Idolatry. But still our Plea is the same in order to the Church of England,
With that of the Church of England to that of Rome; and whether the charge be
of Idolatry, as we will have it, or only of Abuses and Superstitions as Mr.
Thorndike calls them, the case of both is alike as to the Church of Rome: for
both do grant, that not those who separate, but those who cause the separation
by imposing and requiring things unlawful, as conditions of Communion, are
Schismatics before God; Only this advantage they have, who charge the Church
of Rome with Idolatry, that it lies open to the Conscience of every man, if
that Church be guilty of it, our separation can be no Schism either before God
or man, because our Communion would be a sin, whereas other Pleas are subtle
and Nice, tedious and obscure, as Dr St. says.


Eun. But have you proved the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry, or those
things which the Church of England requires of you to be unlawful, as
evidently, as the Mischiefs are which have Ensued upon the Separation?


Cathar. And have you proved the things which the Church of England requires,
to be lawful; and the Abuses and Superstitions of the Church of Rome as Mr.
Thornd. calls them, to be as evidently such, as the Mischiefs are which have
followed from the imposing of them? The contest at the best stands yet sub
Judice as to both, and for what concerns the Church of Rome, those that Govern
that See (whom Mr. Thorndike esteems the Chapter 2
wisest people upon earth) and all those, whom their wisdom carries along,
deny what they require as terms of Communion with them, to be either abuses or
Superstitions. And so T. G's. Argument, which you mentioned before, if it be
good for any thing will have equal force against the charge of Superstition,
as of Idolatry, viz, that till the Accusation be made Good, and judged so by
some more competent Judge, than your selves, you stand arraigned of the Crime
of Schism also for breaking Communion with the Church of Rome.


Eun. Forthat, we appeal, says Dr. St. to the doctrine and Practice of the
truly Catholic Church, in the matters Ansvv. 10 N. O. ^. 180.
of difference between us and the Church of Rome.


Cathar. Very well: But then, you are bound I hope, as well as Dr. St. either
to acknowledge the Roman to be that Church, and consequently to stand to her
Judgment: or to assign some other Church distinct from the Roman, which Christ
has preserved free from those doctrines and Practices, which you call Abuses
and Superstitions, unless you will be your own Judges. Which way you will take,
I shall leave to your consideration.

But for the Dr. me thinks you needed not to have been so severe upon him, for
not Answering Mr. Thorndike's Arguments; for although he thought it not fitting
to combat him by name, whilst he was defending the cause of the Church of
England, yet he has Sufficiently proved his own Charge, both in his Treatise
of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, and in his late Defense of it against
the Cavils of T. G. first by showing, that the Heathens were not justly charged
with Idolatry, if the Church of Rome be not guilty of it; and 2dly that all
worship of God by an Image is expressly forbidden under the notion of Idolatry
in the 2d Commandment. What need was there then of a particular answer?


Eun. This is a pretty kind of plausible come off, but will not serve the turn,
I know the word [sufficiently] confidently uttered can do wonders. The Oracles
of General Councils are nothing to it, especially if added to a Text of
Scripture though never so much wrested. But I am too well acquainted with it,
to be imposed on by it. Nothing will be sufficient here, but what makes the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, as Evident as the mischiefs are, which have
ensued upon the Separation; and your self I believe will grant the first Proof
from the practice of the Heathens not to be of that nature, when you shall have
considered, how expressly the Scripture taxes the Heathens of Polytheism and
for worshipping their Idols as Gods; and the Obscurity and Contradiction there
is found in the manner of their worship even as it was explicated by the most
learned of their Philosophers. I know very well that Dr St. in his defense
strains all the Nerves of his wit, and the Texts, of many of those Fathers he
cites to prove the Heathens supreme God Jupiter, to be the Supreme Being,
Creator and Governor of the worl^* by that means to dragg the worship of the
Heathens in to a Paral^l with that of the Church of Rome: but I never yet met
with any man that believed it was or is what he would have it to be; and I have
that esteem for the devotion of the Feminine Sex that did they believe it, they
would never be so Prophani, as to give the sacred name of Jupiter to their
Dogs: But however that be (which we may have occasion to Examine hereafter) it is
plain the Argument can signify nothing to the purpose. For if the Heathens gave
not the same worship to their Images and Inferior Deities which the Church of
Rome does to her Images and Saints, the Parallel is lost: And if they gave the
same which the Church of Rome allows, the manner of the Worship which he there
insists upon (howeuer they might be mistaken in the things or Persons) is
excused from Idolatry by many Emin^nt divines of the Church of England, as you
heard before, and will never be proved by Dr. St. to be so. All then that such
an Extrinsic Topic can do, is that it may serve to amuze the Ignorant but can
never Satisfy a Judicious Reader.

As for the 2d that God in the second Commandment has expressly prohibited the
giving any worship to himself by an Image, let us first hear the Exceptions
which T G. lays against it, in p. 33.
the 3d Chapter of his Catholics no Idolaters, of which Dr St. takes not the
least notice neither in his Defense.

What we are to consider in the first Cath. ^o Idol. p. 33.
place here, says T. G. is what it is that Dr. St. will undertake to prove:
and it is this; that God in the 2d Commandment has expressly prohibited the
giving any worship to himself by an Image. This is what upon Second thoughts
(for the term expressly was not in his first Answer) he undertakes to prove:
And I cannot but wonder, says he, to see it drop now from his Pen, who on the
other side asserts Scripture (doubtless Express Scripture) to be his most
certain Rule of Faith, and on the other side denies, (as has been showed
above) any thing to be an Article of Faith which is not acknowledged to be such
by Rome it self. What may the meaning of this be? If it be expressly revealed
in Scripture that God is not to be worshipped by an Image, it is an Article of
Faith, If it be not acknowledged to be such by Rome it self, it is no Article
of Faith but (as he calls it) an Inferior Truth or Pious Opinion, yet such as
neither himself, nor any man else according to his Principles ought to believe
there is a Jot of Truth in it. Here upon he calls upon the Dr. to speak out. Is
it, or is it not an Article of Faith? If it be an Article of Faith, it is false
what he asserts so stiffly in his Rational Account p. 54. that the Church of
England makes no Articles of Faith, but what are acknowledged to be such by
Rome it self. If it be not an Article of Faith, it is false what he affirms so
positiuely here, that God has expressly prohibited it in the 2d Commandment.
And which side soever he takes, it is manifest he contradicts himself. Here was
Provocation enough for Dr. St. to clear himself. But T. G. proceeds.

Perhaps his meaning is, says he, that what at one time is but an Inferior
Truth, must at another time be an Article of Faith, according as it may serve
to the different ends and purposes he has designed to himself. And here, if I
mistake not, says T. G. lies the Knack, or (if you will give it so venerable a
name) the Mystery of the business. When the Hedge of the Church of England
(viz, Suscription to her 39. Articles) must be broken down for the Good
Brethren the Non-Conformists (pray pardon me, if I repeat his words) to enter
in and ravage without scruple her Rights and Revenues, so many of the said
Articles, as are not owned by Rome it self, must pass for a company of
Inferior Truths, or Pious Opinions, not, to be assented to, but not to be
opposed for Unitie's sake. But when the Church of Rome is to be charged with
Idolatry (the Pretense, says Mr. Thorndike, with which Ignorant Preachers
drive their factions) then they are no more Inferior Truths, but Articles of
Faith expressly revealed in Holy Scripture. Now would an Impartial Reader (to
use Dr. Taylor's expression upon another occasion) say upon his Conscience,
that this was not kindly done, to make use of the Authority of the Church of
Rome, to unhallow so many of the 39. Articles, as are not owned by her, and
cast them down into the class of Inferior Truths, to stich up the Rent made by
the Non-Conformists from the Church of England: And then to consecrate them
again so easily by virtue of that one Definitive word [expressly] into divine
Revelations, against the Church of Rome, to make the Breach of the Church of
England from her, yet wider. But what cannot an Irenical compliance with one
Party; and a Polemical Animosity, or (as Mr. Thorndike calls it Faction)
against another do? when the same Proposition, as it respects the former shall
be ranked only amongst Inferior Truths, which none are obliged to assent to;
and as it may serve to oppugn the latter, shall be raised to an Article of
Faith, which all are bound to believe. Here then says he, lies the Mystery,
that the same Proposition, viz that God is not to be worshipped by an Image,
taken Irenically and in its Pacifick temper, is but an Inferior Truth, because
not owned to be an Article of Faith by the Church of Rome: but taken
Polemically, and in its warlike Humor, it must be an Article of Faith, because
expressly (as Dr. St. says) revealed in scripture. Thus T. G.


Ca^har. This is mere Scholastic Fooling indeed, and would you have Dr. St.
trouble himself with such stuff as this? What he would have said, could he have
spoken to it, (for I confess the Point is nice in his circumstances) I shall not
undertake to Divine. It Is wisdom you know to be in vt^umque paratus yet I was
always of Opinion, that if he would have no Articles of Faith, but what are
acknowledged for such by Rome it self; he ought to have excepted tbis at least
of not giving any wor^hip to God himself by an Image, this seeming to me so
plainly and expressly delivered in the 2d Commandment, That if Scripture be the
Rule of our Faith, I see not how any point can be an Article of Faith, if this
be not.


Eun. I see you are no Friend to School-distinctions; (though Dr. St. himself
as you know is sometimes fain to make use of them) and much less to the way of
making men contradict themselves. But then it is necessary, especially for
Controvertists to provide they do not do it. It Is necessary as Mr. Thorndike
says, that they understand themselves, whether they admit the consequence of
their own supposition, or not: which I think Dr. St. did not consider, when he
advanced this Proposition, that God in the 2d Commandment has expressly
prohibited the giving any worship to himself by an Image. For (as T. G.
discourses upon it) It were well he Cath^. no. Idol. p. 36.
would tell us first, what he understands by the term [Expressly.] For if he
call Li de Unit. Eccl. c. 19.
that (for example) an express Text, which of it self is absolutely clear and
manifest, and therefore as St. Austin says, Non eget Interpre^e, needs no
Interpreter, Mr. Thorndike (and those other learned men of the Church of
England who see no better than He) have reason to lament the loss of their
Eyesight. But if he mean no more, but that it is clear and manifest to
himself, they may hope they see as well as their Neighbors, though they see
the quite contrary; unless they will suffer themselves to be wrought upon by
his stout asserting it to be clear and manifest as the Travelers were by
Polus, (in Erasmus his Exorcismus) when pretending that he saw a huge Dragon
with fiery horns in the sky, by auouching it strongly, and pointing expressly
to the Place, he forced them (out of shame not to see so conspicuous a thing)
to confess, that they saw it also. Now that it is not absolutely clear and
manifest of it self, the pains and ways he takes to find it out sufficiently
evince, And whether it be clear and manifest even to himself, we have cause to
doubt; because the Proposition in debate, viz, That God has prohibited the
giving any worship to himself by an Image, not being acknowledged by the Church
of Rome for an Article of Faith, the Church of England, according to himself,
obliges no man to assent to it, but only not to oppose it; and yet on the other
side Every man is bound to assent to that, which he sees to be clear and
manifest. Such frequent self-contradictions, says T. G. are the natural
consequences of a discourse not grounded upon Truth.


Cathar. This is just what Dr. St. says of I. W: that he makes him pile
Contradictions upon Contradictions, as Def. p. 785.
Children do cards one upon another, and then he comes and cunningly steals
away one of the Supporters, and down all the rest fall in great disorder and
confusion.


Eun: This is pleasantly enough said, and may serve to entertain drollish wit,
though I understand not well what he means by his Aduersary's Stealing aw^y one
of the Supporters. If this piling of contradictions be like that of Cards, me
thinks it should be Dr. St's. part to steal away one of the supporters, that
the Falrick may fall to the ground; for whilst both stand the Contradiction
will remain. But this cannot be done without renouncing one of his Principles,
viz, either that he makes no Articles of Faith but what are acknowledged f^r
such by Rome it self, or that it is expressly revealed in Scripture (the Rule
of Faith) that God is not to be worshipped by an Image. Otherwise it is not the
puff of a Jest that will blow down the building. And therefore T. G. adds, that
although the Reader may think, (as I perceive you do) he takes a delight to
discover such frequent Contradictions in his Adversary, yet I can assure him,
says he, t'it a much greater Grief to me, to see so subtle a wit so often
entangled in them. The fault is in the Cause, (I suppose he means the charge of
Idolatry) which cannot be managed without falling into them. But as St Austin
says. Quis coegit eos malam causam habere; Who compelled him and his Partisans
to engage themselves in a bad Cause? Nothing of Faith, if that be true, which
he else us in his Rational Account. Nothing tf Reason, as will be showed in the
examination of his Proofs. Now if after all this, you still persist in the same
mind you were of, that the prohibition of giving any worship to God himself by
an Image, is so clearly and expressly delivered in tho 2d Commandment, that if
Scripture be the Rule of Faith, nothing can be an Rule of Faith, if that be
not; let me desire you to consider farther what T. G. has replied in
particular, to Dr. Sts first way of finding out the Sense of the Law, viz, from
the Terms in which the Law is expressod. Gathar. no Idol. p. 38.
Exodus 20. 4. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of
any thing etc. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. These
are the Terms, in which the Law is expressed according to the Translation used
in the Church of England: and ^here, I pray, says T. G. is it expressed here
that we may not give any worship to God himself by an Image? The first part
touches not the worship of Images, or of God himself by them, but only the
making them, and gives matter to Divines to dispute, whether it be forbidden by
this Commandment to make any Image or any likeness at all; a thing in which
Protestants are concerned, as well as Catholics. The second forbids indeed in
express terms to bow our selves down to the Images themselves (as the Heathens
did) but speaks not one word of the lawfulness or vnlaw^ulness of worshipping
God himself by them. So that if to treat a matter expressly, be not the same in
other words, as not to speak of it at all, it is manifest, that to worship God
himself before or by an Image, is not expressly prohibited by this Commandment
This T. G. desires his Protestant Reader (he should have said Puritan) to
consider well, and not suffer Puritan) to be deluded wish the sound of words.
Is it all, one, says he to bow our selves down to the Images themselves
without any Relation to God, and to worship God himself by bowing before an
Image? The difference is too palpable not to be seen by any one who has not
the natural Conceptions of his mind corrupted by an over eager desire to pursue
at any rate so unjust and uncharitable a charge, as that of Idolatry. The Jews
we know gave worship to God by bowing down before the Ark and the Cherubins,
and yet they did not worship them instead of God: And if Dr. St. will needs
contend, that this was a particular dispensation to the Jews, that they might
lawfully bow down to or before the Ark and Cherubins to give worship to God, he
must acknowledge the Precept (if it were so) as to that part, viz, of not
worshipping God by bowing before an Image, not to have been Natural, for then
God had dispensed with them to commit Real Idolatry; but Ceremonial only, and
so not to oblige Christians, unless he will engage them also in the observance
of all the Ceremonial part of the Law of Moses. Taking then the Terms of the
Law, and that in the most favorable Translation to the Dr's Cause, it is evident
that to worship God himself by an Image is not expressly prohibited in it. And
the Evidence of this is so great, that although Dr. St. in his late D^f^nce
spend above a 100. Pages about the Sense of the Second Commandment, yet he
neither endeavors to remove the Contradictions,, nor answer the Arguments of
T. G. His whole business there is to Criticize upon the Exceptions which T. G.
had made to the several Methods he proposed for the finding out, the Sense of
the Law. A very pleasant diversion if you consider it well. I proposed, P. 720.
says he, several Methods for the finding out the Sense of the Law. The first
whereof was from the General terms in which the Law was Expressed (viz the
terms, Image, and Similitude.) And that we might be sure to take notice of it
he gives us the same Item when he comes to the Second: The second way, says
he, I proposed to find P. 73^.
out the sense of the Commandment was from the Reason of it. And so when he
comes to the Third. The last way, P. 747.
I proposed to find out the sense of the Law, was from the Judgment of the
Lawgiver in the Case of the Golden Calf. And who can choose but wonder to see
so many ways and Methods pursued, so much pains and labor spent (not to say
lost) to seek out what was Express in the Text and plain to be seen without
more ado? What need such beating the Hedges and Bushes to find out the Game, if
it show it self fairly in the Open Field? Hunters sometimes will pass by a Hare
in the Form, and let the ^ounds loose to find her out by the Sent. But these
are such as hunt more for their Pleasure and Exercise, than for the Game.


Cathar. And why may not Dr. St. course it somerimes in like manner in
Controversy. It Is mean and clownish to knock the Point presently on the head,
where as she pursuing new ways and Methods to find it out affords great matter
both of pleasure and Exercise of Wit.


Eunom. But whilst the Dr. hunts thus for his pleasure, may he not be in danger
to lose the Prey?


Cathar. No fear at all of that. The very Charge of Idolatry secures it to him:
For (as my good Friend, Patronus bonae Spec. p. 44.
Fidei observes) The Puritans (who ground themselves upon that charge) do not
so easily become Papists, as those of the Church of England who take other
ways; whose consanguinity (as he calls it) in life and discipline with the
Papists carries them over to them upon the least impulse, as might be insta^^'d
in many, whose names you may find in a little Book called Legenda lignea:
Whereas on the contrary, the l^f^, the doctrine and discipline of the P^ritans,
as approaehing nearer to the Apostolic, make them more averse and (...)
against the Papists, and very hardly or never to pass over to them.


Eun. This is a notable Observation indeed, and perhaps may hold better, for
the ^anaticks or the Turks, than the Puritans. But Mr. Thorndike had a
different esteem of the matter, when weighing in his Ju^t Weight chapter 2. what we
get (...) the Change of Idolatry and Antichrist, he app^als to the Judgment of
men of discretion, Whither This be not the reason of that which wise men have
observed, that the passage from the one Extreme to the other is more easy and
frequent among us, than from the mean to the Extreme. For when a Novice, says
he, grounded upon this Supposition is forced from his Ground upon Remonstrance
of such Reasons (as may be and are produced against it) how ready is He to fall
into the Snare of the Missionaries. And there upon it is, that he advises them
not to lead the People by the Nose; to believe, they can prove their
Supposition, when They cannot; and then expect that it be maintained by Those
that own the Church of Rome for a true Church, and therefore must contradict
themselves, if they maintain it. What Dr. St. should have done was to remove
the Contradictions, objected to him, and answer the Arguments of T. G. and not
go a coursing for his pleasure with new ways and Methods to find out that which
himself affirms to be so clearly Expressed in the Second Commandment, that it
cannot enter into his mind, how God should have forbidden it by more express
and Emphatical words, Romans Idel p. ^8.
than he has done. But of this I may have occasion to speak again here after.
Let us now, if you please, adjourn till another time.


THE FIFTH DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Charge of Idolatry not maintainable without subverting all lawful
Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England. Dr. St's. Doctrine in his
Answer to N. O. concerning the Power and Authority of the Church: He is left at
liberty to choose whether he will have it be a Retractation or Contradiction of
what he asserted in his Irenicum, set down in the 3d Dialogue. His mistake of
the Validity of Ordination for the lawful Authority to Exercise the Power
conferred by it, shown to be Inexcusable. A Recapitulation of what has been
discoursed in this, and the foregoing Dialogues.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS EVn: Hitherto Catharinus I have entertained you with some
remarkable Omissions of Dr. St. to the Exceptions made by T. G. to his Charge
of Idolatry; and although perhaps you will not esteem them so much as Venial
sins, and much less his Silence to be a yiedling of the Caus^; yet some of them
are of that Importanc^ that the whole weight of the matter in debatelies upon
them. As for the faults of Commission, where He thought fit to break Silence,
and speak to his Adversary's Arguments, some of them also may chance to come in
our way before we end: At present I shall only give you one for a Taste, by
which you may judge, not only what Candor, and S^n^^rity, but what skill also
in Church Affairs you are to expect in the rest. It is that of the Subversion
of Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England which T. G. contends to
follow from the Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome.


Cathar. This is what I have long expected, and would gladly see. And surely,
it must be no less, than another Thunder-shower with a terrible crack, it has
made such a rumbling in the air P. 273.
before it breaks.


Eun: Whateuer it be, you shall have it in T. Gs. own words at the end of his
Pr^f^ce to Catholics no Idolaters, where having laid down this for his
Position, that the Charge of Idolatry subverts the very foundation of
Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England, he proves it with this
reason; because it being a received Maxim, and not deniable by any one of
Common Sense, that no man can give to another, that which he has not himself,
it lies open to the Conscience of Every man, that if the Church of Rome be
guilty of Heresy. much more if guilty of Idolat^y, it falls under the Apostle's
Excommunication (Gal 1. 8) and so remains deprived of the lawful Authority to
use and exercise the power of Orders, and consequently the Authority of
Governing, Preaching, and Administering Sacraments, which those of the Church of
England challenge to themselves, as derived from the Church of Rome, can be no
true and lawful Jurifdiction, but usurped and Antichristian. This you see bids
very fair toward the subversion of all lawful Authority in the Church of
England if the Church of Rome were guilty of Idolatry, when the Schism began;
because Excommunicated Persons, such as Idolaters are, being deprived of
lawful Authority themselves, can give none to others; and if those others take
any upon them, it must be usurped and unlawful; no man can give to another what
he has not in himself: and upon this Principle it is, that the Earl of
Clarendon in his late Excellent Survey of Leviathan p. 40. 41. affirms, that
this sole Proposition, that men cannot dispose of their own lives, has been
always held as a manifest and undeniable Argument, that Sovereigns never had,
nor can have their power from the People; because it is without doubt, that no
man is Dominus vitae suae and therefore cannot give that to another, which he
has not in himself* And the Maxim holds no less in Spiritual than in Temporal
Jurisdiction.

But then again, if we consider the time, when Dr. St. advanced this charge of
Idolatry against the Church of Rome, that is, after he had by a new Impression
tendered his Irenicum in the year 1662. to Consideration. Viz, after that
Episcopacy was resetled in the Church of England, we shall find the Argument
press much more home, For, maintaining as he does in that Book, that no
particular Form of Church Government is de Jure Divino but mutable as the
secular Magistrate, with the advice of learned and Experienced Persons, shall
see convenient for State and Church; and particularly that the main ground for
settling Episcopal Government in this Nation, was not any pretense of Divine
Right, but Convenience to the State and Condition of the Church at tbe time of
it is Reformation, citing for it the Testimony of Arch Bp. Cranmer and others;
This says T. G. seems but too apparently to be a clinching of the Nail which
he had driven before to the head. For, if the Form of Church Government be
mutable, as the Secular Power wel-advised shall see Reason, what greater Reason
can there be, says he, for the actual changing of Episcopacy, than the Nullity
of it is Jurisdiction? And therefore wonders, how the Governors of tbe Church
of England could see their Authority so closely attacqued (at least so
manifestly betrayed) by their pretended Champion, and not vindicate themselves
and their Jurisdiction from the foul stain of Antichristian, which necessarily
follows, if the Church of Rome, as he pretends, be guilty of Idolatry, and they
derive together with their Consecration, their Episcopal Jurisdiction from it.


Cathar. This is a terrible Bl^w indeed, as Dr. St. calls it in his General
Preface, and had he not sufficiently warded it off, others perhaps might have
been sollicitous for it. But I still hope with my good Friend Patronus bonae
fidei, that what Defens. verit. p. 1^.
things were formerly said by Dr. St. in a lower fortune and station,
concerning the Irregular and Exorbitant Power of the English Episcopacy (of
which there is no appearance in the Primitive Church) viz that one Pastor
should be over many fixed Congregations of Christians; as also concerning the
discipline of the Presbyterians, more nearly approaching to the Apostolic
Form, than that of the Hierarchicks, and more fitly agreing with the light of
Nature; my hope is, I say, that now he sits high among the Hierarchicks, and is
in the way to rise higher, He will not retract and co^demn his former
Assertions, making his Opinion turn and vere about with the wind of honor.


Eun: I told you before, I shall not concern my self in the M^tives of the
change. They better become (or ^f you will, come better from) your Friend, the
Patron bonae sidei, as you call him. But how far the Dr. St. has proceeded in
changing his Opinions (if they were as you say) your self will judge when you
shall hear what he says in the first Part of his Answer to N. O.

First concerning Episcopacy. We defend, says he, the Government of the p. 181.
Church by Bishops to be the most ancient and Apostolical Government, and that
no Person can have sufficient reason to cast that off, which has been so
universally received in all Ages since the Apostle's times.

2dly Concerning the Authority of making Rules and Canons about matters of
Order and Decency in the Church, I freely grant says he, not only that such p.
26^.
an Authority is in its self reasonable and Just; but that in such matters
requi^ed by a lawful Authority, (such as tha^ of our Church is) there is an
advantage on the side of Authority, against a Scrupulous Conscience, which
ought t^ ouerrule the practice of such who are the members of that Church.

3dly Concerning the Authority of proposing even matters of Faith, and p. 269.
directing men in Religion, which he says, is the proper Authority of
Teachers, and Guides, and Instructers of others, he affirms that those who
are duly appointed for this work, and ordained by those whose Office is to
ordain, viz, the Bishops, have an Authority to declare what the mind and will
of God is, contained in Scripture in order to the Salvation and edification of
the souls of Men.

4thly Concerning Subscription, he acknowledges that the Synod or Convocation
in the present circumstances has the power and Authority within it self to
declare what Errors and Abuses are crept into Religion and Doctrine, Which
they judge fit to reform, and to require a consent to such Propositions as are
agreed upon for that end, of those who are to enjoy the Public Offices of
teaching and instructing others, and not to allow any Persons to preach and
Officiate in the Church, in a way contrary to the design of such a Reformation
Which I take to be the same with what the Author of the Reply to the Naked
Truth, page 6. asserteth, when he says, that the Church is so just to her self
as to exact for the security of her own peace, that all whom she trusts with
teaching others, or whom she recommends to the world with Vniversity-Degrees
shall subscribe to the 39. Articles, as their own Opinions, and what they
believe as convinced in their ^wn Judgments that they are true, what do you
think of this, Catharinus? Is this a Retractation or no?


Cathar. I think there is a great deal of difference between changing Opinion,
and changing the Person. That Dr. St. speaks there in the Person of the Church
of England to stop the mouth of an Importune Adversary (N. O.) who would have
no Authority left in the Guides of the Church, if I^fallible direction were
taken from them; is manifest from the Design of his discourse. But nothing I
suppose of a Retractation, because I never heard he made any
Recantation-Sermon, for what he had written either in his Irenicum, or Rational
Account, or other writings; or any other public Profession of retracting or
condemning his former Opinions. Nay do you not see, how careful he is not to be
thought to retract, when having given Authority to the Synod to require a
consent to the Propositions agreed upon; he presently takes it away again, by
telling us, that Persons may not be allowed to preach and Officiate in the
Church in a way contrary to the design of the Reformation? Which I take to be
the same with his former Assertion, that what is required of them is no more
than not to oppose or contradict them.


Eun: This kind of dealing is I assure you an Argument to me, that the Reasons
for these new Assertions did not appear Satisfactory to him, because I believe
what he protests concerning his charge of Idolatry at the end of his defense p.
877. viz that if the subtilties of T. G. could have satisfied him or any other
Argument he had met with, he would as f^eely have retracted his Charge of
Idolatry, as he ever made it; to be altogether as true here; that is, had he
met with any Arguments which could have satisfied him of the Erroneousness of
his former Opinions, he would as willingly have retracted them as ever he
advanced them. The distinction you make of changing the Person, not the
Opinion, is very subtle: But he has Cunning Sophisters, as you know, to deal
with; and if it pass not for a Retractation, they will be ready to say that he
contradicts himself; and so raise up a new Pile or rather Pyramid of
Contradictions, for him to pluck down.


Cathar. I hate this piling of Contradictions with all my heart. And therefore
pray return to the Terrible Blow.


Eun. I shall. And it is if you remember that if the first Ordainers of the
English Bishops were Idolaters, they were deprived themselves of lawful
Authority to ordain, because they fell under the Apostles Excommunication, and
so could give none to those whom they ordained? What can be said to this?


Cathar: This it is, as Dr. St. Says, to charge home, and so Farewell to the
Church of England, if the Church of Rome were not more kind in this case, than
T. G. is. Hitherto we have seen his Skill in the affairs of our Church, and now
says the Dr. we shall see just as much in the Doctrine of his own. For does
not the Council of Trent make Orders a Sacrament? And one of those which do
imprint an indelible Character? And does not that Council pronounce an Anathema
against those that denied the validity of the Sacrament administered by one in
mortal sin, in case he observes the Essentials of it. How then can T. G. escape
Excommunication from his own Church, who denies the validity of the Sacrament
of Orders, in case of the sin of the Giuers of it? And then after this he
proceeds to prove his Assertion for no less than 16. Pages together, viz. that
a Bishop who is in mortal sin, or an Heretic, may validly ordain a Bishop or a
Priest, with a cloud of Testimonies both out of the Ancient Fathers, and Modern
Doctors of the Church of Rome as Vasquez, Estius, Aquinas, Bonaventure, etc. as
also from the Practice both of the Ancient and Modern Church, in this case. Do
you not think the B^ew sufficiently warded off, and deservedly retorted upon
the head of T. G.


Eun: This indeed may be called an Answer with a Witness. But what if the
Witnesses speak not at all to the case in debate, or if they do, it is for T.
G. Does T. G. any where deny the Validity of the Sacrament of Orders in case
of the Sin of the Giuers of it? Consider the argument again* and you will not
find so much as one word that sounds to that purpose. The Consequence T. G.
draws from Dr. Sts charge of Idolatry, was not to disprove the Validity of the
Ordination of the Protestant Bishops, but the lawfulness of their Authority to
use and exe^cise the power of Orders, which he did by showing, that the
Ordainers having lost the lawful exercise of their Orders by falling into
Idolatry, (though we should suppose the Protestant Bishops, to have been
validly ordained by them,) yet could they not receive any lawful Authority or
Jurisdiction from them; it being an undeniable Maxim, that nothing can give to
another what it has not it self. Now that a Man may truly and validly have
the Order of a Bishop or Priest conferred upon him, and yet not have lawful
Authority to exercise what belongs to that Order, is out of question, from the
acknowledgment and practice both of the Church of Rome and that of England,
which for certain crimes, as Heresy, Murder, Apostasy, and the like, suspend
and Excommunicate the Offenders. And it is agreed on both sides, that Persons
so suspended and Excommunicated cannot lawfully exercise the Functions
belonging to those Orders. Hence it is, that a Minister Silenced and Suspended
by his Bishop, though he retain the character of his Order, that is, remain
still a Minister, yet cannot he lawfully preach or administer the Sacraments.
The same is also of a Bishop, if he be suspended or Excommunicated for heresy
or the like, he cannot lawfully confer Orders, nor give that Jurisdiction to
another, of which he is deprived himself. And in case he should, the Person so
receiving them, would in that case remain suspended as well as the Bishop. This
then is what T. G. insisted upon, that the First Ordainers, who were of the
Roman Communion, having lost by the supposed crime of Idolatry, the lawful
Authority of exercising their Orders, could not communicate* any such Authority
to those whom they Ordained; and consequently there could be no such Authority
in the Pr^testant Bishops, if the Church of Rome, as Dr. St. pretends, were
guilty of Idolatry, and they derive together with their Consecration their
Episcopal Jurisdiction from it.


Cathar. I consess, you have given me a new prospect of T. G's. drift and
meaning in this Argument, which I never discerned till new, nor do I believe
Dr. St. took it so. Otherwise, (I have that esteem for his Sincerity) he would
not hauespent so much pains, and so many Pages to prove what was quite beside
the intent of his Adversary, and never denied by him, viz that the Sacrament of
Orders is validly conferred, though the Person conferring chance to be in
mortal sin, or Excommunicated.


Eun. Be it as you believe; yet Dr. St I think had little reason to charge T. G.
with Ignorance in Church affairs, when himself mistook so grossly in them, as
to understand his Adversary to speak of the Invalidity of Orders in case of the
sin of the Giuers, when his whole discourse tended only to show the want of due
Authority to exercise them, in case the Ordainers had none to give t^em. But I
fear there is but too much reason to believe that Dr St. understood all this
well enough: and my Grounds are these. 1st because there is nothing more
visible (nor more complained of by those of your Party) in the practice of the
Church of England, than the Silencing and suspending factious Prea^hers from
the Office of Preaching: and Dr. St. himself supposes it just and lawful, when
he says as you heard before, that Persons are not to be allowed to preach and
Officiate in the Church, in a way cont^ary to the design of the Reformation.
They must then be Silenced and Suspended from the Exercise of their Function;
but are not thereby deprived of the Order of their Ministry, as might be
instanced in many cases both A^cient and Mo^ern, well known to Dr. St. in which
the Persons were Restored to the exercise of their Order, (whether Episcopal or
Minister^al) not by a new Ordination, but by taking off the Suspension 2dly.
Because himself could not but take no^ice of the Distinction between O^din^tio
and Jurisdictior, laid down by some of the Roman Doctors cited by himself, as
E^tius and Bonaventure. The former of which, says he, affi^meth, that no Crime
or General ^^^face,
Censure how heavy soever, can hinder the validity of Ordination by a Bishop,
although it be of those who are not Subject to his Jurisdiction, in case he
observe the Essentials of the Sacrament; and that we might not doubt but he
took good notice of what he said, he puts in a distinct character, that it was
for this reason. Because Ordination says Estius belongs to the Power of Order,
which being once received can never be lost, but those things which belong ^o
Jurisdiction, as Absolution and Excommunication, have no Effect where that
Jurisdiction is taken away. And the l^t^er viz, B^naventure says, that in the
matter of Ordination, the Power of Orders can ^o more be taken way, than the
Character it self; but whateuer is founded upon Jurisdiction, as the Power of
Excommuni^ation and Ab^olution, may be taken away. Do you st^ll believe, that
Dr St. had not gro^nd enough to make him consider, whether his Adversary spoke
of Ordination or Jurisdictio^? That which follows will put the matter quite out
of doubt; Because 3.dly. T. G. exp^e^sly declares himself all along to speak,
of the lawful Authority to use and exercise the Power of Orders, and in his
last words clearly distinguishes Jurisdiction from Consecration when he says.
If the B^^hops together with their C^ns^cration, derive their Episcopal
Juris^iction from the Church of Rome. By which it is plain to any one of Common
sense, that his Int^ntion in that place, was not to attacque the Consecrat^on
of the Engil^h B^^hops, but rather supposing that in the present case, (as not
to his purpose,) to show from Dr. Sts. charge of Idolatry upon their first
Ordainers, their want of lawf^l Jurisdiction. What then can be said here, but
that Dr. St. could not but (...) the meaning and force of T. Gs. Argument; but
not being able to ward off the blow, resolved to cast a blind before his
Readers eyes, by impugning T. G as if he had denied the validity of Ordination
in case ^f he sin of the Giuers of it, And to make the m^st the darker he heaps
a whole Shower of reproaches upon him, as the veryest Ignoramus, that ever set
pen to paper. Hi^he^to, says he, we have seen his skill in the affairs of our
Church, and now we shall see just as much in the doctrine of his o^n. How can
be escape Excommunication from his own Church, who denies the validity of the
Sacrament of Orders in case of the sin of the Giuers of it? Methinks if he had
f^rgotten the doctrine of the Council of Trent, he might have looked into some
one or other of their own Authors, to have informed himself be^ter of their
doctrine in this matter. By this we may indge of the lear^ing and skill of T.
G. in the doctrine of his own Church. But if he would not look into the
Controuersial writers of their Church, yet if he had b^t ^earched into the
practice of the Church, either in Ancient or Modern times, he would have been
Ashamed to have made use of such an Argument to overthr^w all Ecclesiastical
Authority among us. What do you think of this, Catharinus? do you not believe
the Dr. was put hard to it to keep his Countenance for 16. Pages together; but
that he must laugh at least through his fingers to see what a fourb he had put
upon his Readers. First by imposing falsely upon T. G. that he denied the
validity of Ordination in case of the sin of the Giuers of it, and then
treating him like a Dolt, and most triumphantly telling him, he might have been
Ashamed to make use of such an Argument? Is this it he means, when he so
piously protests, that he loves not to repre^ent others worse than they are? He
may, if he can, Sit down with that contentment which he proposes to himself as
his last resort, that he h^s defended a Righteous Ep. D^dic. to his Defense.
cause, and with an honest mind. But if he can do it upon no better an account,
himself is like to reap but little comfort from it; and the Church of England
will I fear soon have cause enough to be ashamed of such a Champion. For my
part, I shall never judge worse hereafter of any Adversary, for being
reproached by Dr. St. but s^sp^ct his own want of Ingenuity, or of an Answer,
rather than his Adversary's deficiency either in Wit or Learning. And to tell
you my Apprehensions, I begin already to question, whether T. G. ever asserted,
the Heathens to be Idolaters only for giving divine honor to the Devil: and
much less whether the Apostles and Fath^rs ever preached to the world, that the
Heathen's I^piter was the only true G^d. The noble P^neg^rick he makes of that
King of Gods and Men in the first Chapter of his Defense, out of the Poets,
Orators, Philosophers and Fathers, has but little Influence upon me row (though
before it had a great deal) to make me alter my Creed, and say, I believe in
one God Jupiter, the Father Almighty, maker of H^auen and Earth, etc,


Cathar. You are too severe Eunomius, in your censure; for although Dr. St.
could not be ignorant, that a man may have the ^^wer of Orders and yet not have
lawful Authority to use them, yet it being the Common Objection of those of the
Church of R^me, that the Bishops of England never had any valid Ordination, he
might not reflect upon the Nic^ty of the dist^nction, but suppose his Adversary
proceeded in the same strain with his felloows.


Eun: An excellent defense indeed for a writer of Controversy. But what if Dr.
St have been publicly reproved for this mistake, (as you will have it;) as he
is by E. W. (Mr Edward Worstl^y) in his Treatise of the Infallibility of the
Roman Catholic Church, printed at Antwerp 1674. and yet after that, shall take
no not^ce of it, but go on, as he does in his late Defense, to confirm his
former Answer with n^w Proofs and Testimonies, that Bishops ordained by
Idolaters, were esteemed validly ordained; and not speak one word in Answer to
what was objected by T. G. viz that the English Bishps must want lawful
A^thority to exercise the Power of Orders, if their first Ordainers were
Idolaters?


Cathar. To this I know not well what can be replied; unless perhaps it may be
said, that the B^ok you speak of never came to Dr. Stills kn^wledg. You know
how difficult a thing it is to import Books, especially of that nature printed
beyond sea, into England, and how much more Dangerous to disperse them.


Eun. How ever, it cannot be doubted, but one of them came to Dr. St's. hands,
before he published his late defense, for p. 785. he cites the said Treatise,
setting down the very year when it was printed and calls the Author, in his
Encomiastick way of speaking. That mighty man at Ecclesiastical Fencing E. W.


Cathar. I remember now who you mean, The renowned Champion, as the Dr. goes
on, of our Lady of Loreto, and the miraculous Translation of her Chapel; of
whom, he says, he must have little care of himself, if he ever more come near
the Clutches of such a Giant, who seems to write with a Beetle instead of a
Pen; and therefore resolves to let him lie quietly in his shades, and snore on
to doomsday for him, unless he see further reason of disturbing his repose,
than at present he does.


Eun: This is indeed the Character, which Dr. St. is pleased to give of that
Person, whom I have heard much esteemed for his Learning. And although he meant
it for an Irony, yet it expresses well the nature of the Blows, which E. W.
gives; and the Dr's Resolution thereupon, never more to disturb his repose:
there being as little fencing I suppose against a Beetle, as a Flail. And I pray
see how close the Dr. has stuck to this Resolution, in the passage we are now
upon concerning T. G.

I cannot but reflect, says E. W. (p. 87. of the forementioned Treatise) upon
another intolerable mistake of Dr St. that whereas T. G. had said in his
Preface, that, it is a known Maxim, that none can give to another that which he
has not himself; and therefore if the Church of Rome be guilty of Heresy, much
more of Idolatry, it fall^ under the Apostles Excommunication, and so remains
deprived of lawful Authority (mark the words, says he,) to use and exercise
the power of Orders, and consequently the Authority of Governing, preaching,
and administering Sacraments, which those of the Church of England challenge to
themselves, as derived from the Church of Rome, can be no true and lawful
Jurisdiction but usurped and Antichristian. The plain and ob^ions sense of
which words says he, is that He who has no Jurisdiction, but is deprived of
it by the Church's Censures, cannot give it to anot^er. Neither can He that
has no lawful Authority to ordain, lawfully ordain any, or give Authority
lawfully to ordain others. Now comes Dr. St. in his General Preface to ward off
this blow, but never man did it less dexterously, and we must wholly attribute
it to his little Skill in fencing He tells us that the Council of Trent
pronounces Anathema against those that deny the validity (observe here also,
says he the word Validity) of the Sacrament administered by one in mortal sin,
in case he observes the Essentials of it; and in this gross error he runs on
for 9. or 10. Pages, (he might have said almost as many leaves) citing Author
after Author to prove that the Sacrament of Order is validly given by one in
mortal sin or Excommunicated. But what is all this, Says E. W. to T. Gs. most
true Assertion? that none guilty of Idolatry, or Heresy can give Jurisdiction
to any of the Church of England (which they must have from Catholic Bishops,
or wholly want it,) or empower them to ordain others lawfully, when they are
deprived them selves, of all lawful Authority to use or exercise the power of
Orders? Hence you se^, says he, Dr. Sts. blindness, who argues from the
validity of giving Orders, to the lawful giving them, etc. Thus E. W. And such
a public rebuke one would think, had been sufficient to make Dr. St. open his
Eyes, and consider what it was that his Adversary objected; if he intended ever
more to speak to this Argument. But as if he were wholly insensible of the
gross and intolerable error E. W. taxed him with, (whether stunned with the
blow of the Beetle, or not having any thing else to answer, he runs again into
the same shameful mistake, and instead of defending that the first Bishops of
the Church of England received lawful Authority to use and exercise the Power
of O^ders which T. G. denied they could, in case their Ordainers were guilty of
Idolatry, he falls upon him afresh in his late defense, as if he demed the
validity of Orders given by a Bishop in case of Idolatry. And that his Reader
may see, he was resolved notwithstanding the Rebukes of E. W. to go on in the
same track still, he tells him page 795. that having formerly showed, in his
General Preface, that no Act of Ordination is invalid in case of any Heresy or
crime of the Giver, and that the contrary Doctrine is condemned for Heresy by
the Church, he shall now particularly show, that the Power of giving Orders is
not taken away by the guilt of Idolatry; which he there proceeds to prove from
the case of the* Arian Bishops; And if I can make it appear says he, that the
Arian Ordinations were allowed, I shall put this matter beyond dispute, that
the Charge of Idolatry does not null the Ordinations of our Church, as being
derived from those who were guilty of Idolatry. Thus Dr. St. after he had been
publicly told of his mistake. And what is this but to tell us, that howeuer E.
W. and T. G, urge him, the o^e with a Pen, the ^ther with a B^etle to show how
the sirst Protestant Bishops could have any lawf^l Jurisdiction or Authority to
exercise the p^we^ of Orders, in case heir Ordainers were guilty of Idolat^y,
he is resolved neuertheless to take no notice at all of that (which was the
only thing in disput^) but will fight on still courageously against a Shad^w of
his own making, and put it beyond dispute, that the Act it se^f of Ordinat^on
is not inval^d in case of the I^ol^try of (...) G^uers, which was never denied
by his A^ve^sary. What shall I say here? Are the Power of giving Orders, and
lawful Autho^ity to give them, so ^ssentially linked to each other, that they
cannot be separated? May not a Bishop or P^^est remaining so, be deprived of
all lawful Authority to exercise their Functions, for having fallen into Heresy
or Idolatry? And if they have non^ t^emselues, can they give it to others? does
not Estius cited by the Dr, affirm, that no crime or Censure how h^a^y ^o^uer
can hinder the validity of O^dination by a Bishop although it be of those who
are not s^biect to his Jurisdictio^? etc. By which it is manifest the Power of
Ordination may have its effect, where there is no lawf^l Authority to exercise
it? And does not the Church of England suspend her Bishops and Priests in case
of those or the lik^ crimes, and upon their repentance admit them again without
(...)? And if the Protestant Bishops neither have nor could have any lawful
Jurisdiction derived upon them, in case their first O^dainer* were guilty of
Idolatry and so could give none is there not all the reason in the world
according to the Dr's Irenicall Principle of the mutabili^y of
Chu^ch-Gouernment, to take away Episcopacy, and Substiti^te some other in it^s
Place? These are the Points, which Dr. St: should have spoken to, to an^w^^ his
Adversarys argument; but instead of doing that, to mo^k his Reader, and lavish
away time and paper, as he does, to prove the validity of Ordination in case of
the Heresy or Idolat^y of the giver, (a po^nt well known to T. G. before Dr. St
took upon him to teach him) is the greatest sign of Tergiversation, to say no
worse, Jeuer yet met with.


Cathar. Here I confess was ground enough, and Provocation enough for Dr. St to
see what it was his Adversary drove at, and speak to the Point if he had
thought fit. Why he did it not I do not understand, but rather w^nde he should
take such pains to prove that the Power of giving Orders is not taken a^ay by
the guilt of Idolatry. Yet I observe that he does not positively assert th^^ as
his own Opinon, but lays it down rather as the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
to show the little Skill which T. G has in his own Church's affairs: And I
should wonder more, were it otherwise, when Dr. Wille^ contr. 16. qu. 2. de
ord. part 4 (as I find him cited by my Friend Patronus bonae fidei. p. 47)
expressly affirms, that Ministers ordained in the Roman Church, are not true
Presbyters, because the Bishops of that Church are not the Minist^^s of Christ
but of Antichrist.


Eun: This would be to make the force of T. Gs. Argument yet stronger, which it
may be is what you would be at. For if the first Ordainers were no true
Bishops, those whom they ordained could be none, and much less could they
receive la^ful Authority from them to make others. But how wary soever the Dr.
be in expressing his thoughts, yet I do not find, he any were denies the
Bishops of the Church of Rome to be true B^^hops: nor does T. G. concern
himself to disprove the validity of the Ordination of the Bishops of the Church
of E^gland; but only to show it to be a consequence of Dr. St's charge of
Idolatry, that they could have ^o lawful Authority to exercise the power of
Orders, in case their first O^^ainers were Idolaters. And methinks T. G's.
Civility in this Point, in wauing the Q^est on of the validity of their
Ordination (a Topic vehemently insisted on by those of his Party) ought to
have prevailed with Dr. St. to have treated him with more Moderation; and yet
the Impor^ance of the Argument ^aue induced him not to leave it vnspok^n to, in
its full f^rce and utmost consequence; which was no less than the actual ch^nge
of Epis^opal Government in England, according to his Principles. Ordinary
Readers, if Impartial, will be at a loss what to think of this; but those of
better capacity will be apt to suspect, (what it may be you hope) there was
something in the bottom, which made him so careful not to touch this Point;
and so much the more, if they shall but res^ect with themselves, how things
have been managed by him in relation to it from the beginning, as.

1. His publishing of the doctrine of the Mutability of Church Government as
the secular Magistrate shall see reason, laid down by him at large in his
Irenicum.

2. His re-printing that Book after the Bishops were re-established by law, and
humbly tendering it to Consideration.

3. His cajolling the very Bishops themselves in his Preface; with what a rare
example of self-denial, and of the highest Christian Prudence it would be in
them, to reduce the form of Church Government in England to its Primitive state
and Order by retrenching all Exorbitances of Power, (mark that) and restoring
those Presbyteries, which no law has forbidden, but only through disuse have
been laid aside.

4ly when this would not take with them to make them divest themselves of what
they thought to be their Just Power, his putting forth a Treatise to charge the
Church of R^me with Idolatry, when neither of the two Questions proposed to him
and his Adversary required it: and endeavoring to fasten that charge upon the
Church of England as her Sense, and so make her contribute to the subversion of
her own Authority. 5.ly when T G. urged upon him, the want of lawf^l
Jurisdiction as the consequence of this cha^g^, and consequently that in his
Principles there was reason enough for the State to think fit to take away
Episcopa^y; His passing this by, as if he saw it not and trifling with his
Adversary, about the validity of Ordination in case of Heresy. And, lastly,
when (...) put him in mind of his duty, as the Champion of the Church of
England; and in such a manner as would provoke a man of more Phlegm, than Dr.
St shows himself to be; His still letting it alone and running a new descant
upon the old mistake, viz, the validity of Ordination in case of the Idolatry
of the Givers of it: neither retracting his Principles, nor speaking to the
Point, but leaving Episcopacy, as it is established in the Church of England,
under the s^^okes of the B^^tle to shift for it'sself, as it can. And what was
this I pray (if you will not call it attacquing) but to betray at least the
cause of the Church of England as T. G. says, whilst he pretends to d^f^nd it?


Catha^* What my sentiment is in this matter, I need not tell you. But I must
needs tell you, I am ^o at all ^atisfied with the Surmis^ you cast into the
Readers mind of Dr St's ma^aging this change of Idolat^y upon some desi^n
against the Episcopal G^u^rnment established in this land. This is a great
Secre^ indeed, and transcends the power of the Judge of controversies, much
more of any privaete man to dive into it.


E^n: But you have heard I hope of some f^mous P^ophetick pict^r^s pretending
to represent the f^te of England, in which the chief thing observable (in
several of them) is a Mo^e, a creature blind and busy smooth and deceitful,
continually working under ground, but now and th^n to be discerned by the
disturbance it makes in the surface of the Earth.


Cath I remember very well that Dr. St begins his Epistle Dedicatory before his
defense with this passage, as so natural a description of a restless party
among us, that w^ need no Judge of controversies to inter^ret the meaning of
it. But what do you infer from that Prophetic Emblem?


Eun: Nothing, but that we may see by the casting up of the little Hills, which
way the Mole works; and the Church of England may judge, by the Drs. aforesa^d
managing of the charge of Idolatry, to whom the description more naturally
belongs, without either the help of the Judge of controversies, or the light of
the Private spirit.


Cathar. Well then, leaving these things, as T. G. does in his Preface to those
whom they concern; as I have given you hitherto the Satisfaction at least of a
fair hearing, whilst you represented the Motives of your dissatisfaction with
the charge of Idolatry, as managed by Dr. St, so now I expect you will be so kind,
as to give me your Opinion of the Book you found me upon at your first visit,
viz. Dr. St's late Defense of his Roman Idolatry in answer to T. G. For
although you have occasionally touched upon some passages of it in our former
discourses, yet I would willingly hear what you think of the whole.


Eunom. This then (if you will needs have it) shall be the subject of another
Conference. Only I shall leave you a short Memorial to consider on, of the
matters we have hitherto discoursed, and it is this: that Dr. St. (as has been
shown) cannot maintain his charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome. 1.
without dissenting from the Judgment of the true and Genuine sons of Dial. 1.
the Church of England. 2ly not without Dial. 2.
offering violence to the 39. Articles. 3ly not without denying or assigning
Dial. 3.
a Church in all ages distinct from all Conuenticles of Hercticks and
Schismatics, with which Christians were bound to ioyn in Communion. 4ly not
without granting the Church of Rome to err against a Fundamental Point of
Faith. 5ly not without bringing the guilt and Mischeifs of the Schism upon the
Dial. 4.
Maintainer. 6ly not without quitting that grand supporter of the Cause the
words, Expressly prohibited in the second Commandment. 7ly not without frequent
and manifest Self-Contradictions. Dial. 3. 4.
Lastly not without subverting all ^i^al. 5.
lawful Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England.

And if these things cannot be cleared (as hitherto by Dr Sts. behavior it
does not appear to me they ca^) That must stand good which T. G asserts, as the
consequence of them, viz that the Charge of Idolatry (especially as D. St. has
managed it) is the most g^oundless, unreasonable, and cont^adictory proceeding
in the world. And with this I take leave at present.


The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE JUST DISCHARGE TO DR. STILLINGFLEET'S VNJVST CHARGE OF
IDOLATRY, etc. Discovering. The vanity of his late Defense in his pretended
Answer to a Book entitled CATHOLICS NO IDOLATERS By way of Dialogue Between.
EVNOMIVS, a Conformist. and CATHARINVS, a Nonconformist.

PARIS, Printed for RENE' GUIGNARD, at the sign of S. Basil, in S. Jacques
Streer.

M.DC.LXXVII.

Avec Privilege du Roy.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Discovery of the Vanity of Dr. St's Endless discourses in his late Defense,
in relation to T. G. His Excellent Gloss of the Canon of the Church of
England, concerning Bowing to the Altar; which the Author of a late Treatise,
entitled Patronus Bonae Fidei, by Arguments cast in the Dr's own moulds,
contends to be Idolatry, worse than that of the Romanists, or Egyptians.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. CAthar: What Judgment to make of the Memorial you left
me, I cannot easily determine. If the Consequences contained in it be false, (as
I hope they are) I cannot but wonder Dr. St. in his Defense should take so
little notice of them? And if they be true I wonder as much, he should take so
much pains to maintain the Charge; unless it be to keep up the Cry against
Popery, by exposing the Papists, as Idolaters, to the hatred of all Good
Christians. Other Pretenses may fail; but this will be sure to take place, as
they find by the success.


Eunom: The Bulk of a Book too, as you know, may conduce much to make the Cry
the Louder. But were the ^oise a little over, that men could hear one another
speak, I am of Opinion there would not be many found of such awkward
Intellectuals; as to believe it to be Idolatry, to kiss or put off our hats, or
kneel before an Image or Picture of Christ, with Intention by those outward
Acts to show the respect we have for his Person; which is what Dr. St. obliges
himself to maintain when he asserts the making and bowing b^f^re an Romans Idol.
p. 60. 62.
Image with respect to the worship of God to be forbidden under the notion of
I^olatry: But does it in such a manner, that I have heard some Learned men say,
they could look upon his Performance in this Point, no otherwise than as an
Essay of his Wit, like that of Erasmus, when he undertook to write a Book in
Commendatien of Folly; but with this difference, that Erasmus foresaw no harm
like to ensue from his Panegyric to the world; for none wete likely to be more
in love withit for his Praises, nor to suffer more for it, than if he had said
nothing. But Dr St. could not but have a Prospect at least of much. Mischief
likely to f^llow to his Fellow Subjects from his Idle Charge of Idolatry, as
Mr. Thorndike called it a little before his death.


Cathar. How ever others may look upon his Performance, For my parr I think I
have reason to hope (as he does himself) of his D^fence, that it will be a
Prophetical Confutation of all that T. G. will ever be able to say upon this
subject. Although (if it be true what the Dr. saih of him in his Epist.
Dedicat.) H^ has said as much in def^nce of the Romam cause, as wit and
subtilty could invent; But withal he wishes he could speak as freely of his
Fair-dealing and ing^nuity.


Eun. Egr^g^am sane laudem. a very ample Enco^mium no doubt as to the first
part of it, and such a one as adds no small glory to the Dr's Triumph, to drag
such an Adversary after the wheels of his Chariot. But if you take it together
with the 2d part, I. can by no means allow it to be a good definition, as being
such a Collection of Properties, as is found with more advantage in a Subject
much nearer home. Witness the Taste I have given you even now of the Dr's own
^air-dealing and Ingenuity; and of which I may have occasion to give you
farther Instances before we end.


Cathar. These are such Complements as pass between Adversaries when each hopes
and defigns to lay the other in the dust. But to come to the Point we were
entering upon, and which you promised to speak to at our last parting. Have you
not read the Dr's Defense.


Eun. Yes I have, but to deal ingenuously with you, not with that pleasure and
Satisfaction, you expressed, at the beginning of our discourse, to see that the
Heathens could not be justly charged with Idolatry, but the Papists must be so
too. For naturally I love not to see People represented worse than they are;
and though Dr. St. Profess he (...), yet his Readers will iu^g^ as they find
cause Besides, I evermore (...) a great (...) upon one Subject, as supposing
much time must be (...) in reading many t^ings which are crowded in (...) to
the purpose: However like tho^^, w^o put themselu^s (as we say) into the S^ock*
to comply with the (...), I resolved as I saw others do, to (...) upon it; And
to tell you the truth, I had scarcely gotten over half a score Leaves, when I
found my self in the case of the unfortunate Laconian in Boccalini.


Cathar. And what was that I pray?


Eun. Why, this it was. The poor Man for having delivered that in three words,
which might have been said in two, after eight month's imprisonment, was
condemned to read over the War of Pisa written by Guicciardine. So horribly
tedious did that rabble of discourse appear to him, that after he had read over
the first leaf with much agony, he earnestly entreated the Judges to reuerse
the Sentence, and condemn him rather to row in the Galleys all his life. What
other Sentiment could I have of my Condition, than that of this unhappy
Laconian, to see my self condemned, (for what fault of mine I know not) by that
Tyrant custom, to read over Dr. St's endless discourses? First a hundred and
fourscore and three Pages, Of T. G^. notion of Idolatry. Then a hundred and
threescore and four Pages, Of the Nature of divino Worship. Then a hundred and
forty Pages, Of the State of the Controversy about the worship of Images
between Christians and Heathens. After that a hundred and fourscore and odd
Pages, Of the State of the Controversy about Images in the Christian Church.
Then a hundred and thirteen Pages, Of the sense of the second Commandment. And
lastly Fourscore and thirteen Pages more, In answer to the Instances and some
other. Passages of T. G. However, I resolved (as I said) to read them over; but
all the while I was doing it, I could not but think, had the Book been brought
before the Judges of Parnass^s, what punishment they would or could have
inflicted suitable to the delict, viz, for a man of Dr. Sts. parts to spend
near nine hundred Pages (if you take in the Epistle dedicatory and the Preface)
in delivering that, which might have been expressed sufficienthy for what
concerns T. G in nine or ten lines.


Ca^har: You amaze me with this discourse; and I shall look upon it, as no
other than a dream upon Parnass^^, unless you give me good reason for it.


Eun: Content; but then you must have patience, whilst I give you the reason:
and this it is: Had Dr. St. according to the Method used by the Mathematicians,
but laid down these f^w Points as Postulatas, viz. 1. That Idolatry may consist
with the acknowledgment of one Supreme Being, which is the subject of his first
Chapter. 2. That God ought to be worshipped according to his own appointment;
or that those external acts of worship, which God has appropriated to himself,
cannot, while that appropriation remains, be given to another, which is what he
ayms at in his second. 3. That the Wiser Heathens pretended, they did not look
upon their Images as Gods, but as Symbols of that Being to which they gave
divine worship, which is the Scope of his T^ird. And 4. That f^r the four first
Centuries there was little or no use of Imag^s in ^he Temples and Oratories of
Christians; but that the use and Veneration of them came in afterward by
degrees, which is the subi^ct of his Fou^th. Had the Dr. I say laid these
Po^^t^ons (...) P^stulatas, he might (if I understand T. G. aright) have saved
himself the pains of writing, and his Readers the t^o^ble of reading more than
two third Parts of his Book which are spent upon them.

For as for the I That Idolatry may consist with the acknowledgment of one
Supreme Being, at least as Idolatry is taken by Dr. St. for the giving External
Acts of worship due only to God, to a Creature, and Was sussicient as it was
practiced by his Wiser Heathens, for the Fathers to charge them with Idolatry;
it is plainly acknowledged by T. G. Page 23 of his first Paper where speaking
of those, of whom S. Paul says, that though they knew God, they did not
glorify him as God. T. G. says, they changed his glory into an Image made like
to corruptible man, by adoring and offering sacr^fice due to God alone to the
Statues themselves, or the deities they s^pposed to dwell in them: and the same
he repeats again Page 97. and other Places of his Book.

For the 2. That God is to be worshipped with external Acts according to his
own appointment etc. This is no where denied by T. G. but is supposed by him
Page 29. where he says, that if God have forbidden himself to be worshipped
after such a manner, the giving him such worship will be a dishonouring him,
t^ough the Giver intend it never so much for his honor, much more then, the
giving acts of worship appropriated to him to another.

The 3 also concerning the Practice of the Wiser Heathens is admitted by T. G.
for the Dr. to make his best of it, when he says p. 107. 108. that howeuer
they pretended through the Images to worship the true deity, yet they were to
blame in two things. 1. Because the Images being instituted by public
Authority for the worship of false Gods they concurred (as Dr. St. himself
acknowledges) with the vulgar in all the External practices of their Idolatry.
2. Because, though in the schools they denied them to be Gods neuertheless they
gave honor to them so far, as to lead the People into error by their Example.

And for the 4 the l^tle or no use of Images in Churches for the sirst four
hundred years* it was not looked upon by T G. as any Prejudic^ to his cause
although it had been much longer before the use and Venerat^on of them were
brought in, as he sufficiently declares (p. 171.) where he answers in Mr.
Thorndikes words, that for the first h^e^ or four Centuries, ther^ might be
Ieaiousy of Offense in having Images in Churches, before Idolatry was quite
rooted out, of which afterward there might be no appearance. And therefore
they were afterward admitted all over, for it is manif^st, says he the Church
is tied no farther, than there can appear danger of Idolatry. And again, p.
173. What furniture and Ceremonies the Churches of Christians, and the public
worship of God in them may require, now all the world professes Christianity,
this, says he, the Church is at freedom to determine by the word of God
expounded according to the best agreement of Christians. And whilst the Church
is acknowledged to have such a Power in decreeing Rites and Ceremonies (of
which nature the use of Images is) as ought to overrule a scrupulous
Conscience, what the Dr. objects against Mr. Thorndikes reason concerning the
danger of Idolatry in after times, comes not Home to the purpose; Fot it is not
his scrupulous Conscience, but the Church that must be the Judge. What need was
there then to lavish away six hundred and seventy Pages, to prove those things
which were either granted or given as granted by T. G.?

But then again for the 5. Chapter, Of the sense Of the second Commandm^nt, if
God have there expressly prohibit^d ^he giving any wors^ip ^o himself by an
Image, as Dr. St. affirms, there needed no more than to expose the Law, as in a
Table, printed in Legis latiue Gothic (as it is done by him. p. 671.) with the
addition only of a Finger in the Margent to point to the words for every one
that runs to read them: the thing being so plain, that himself confesses, it
cannot enter into his mind, how Roman Idol. p. 59.
God should have forbidden it by more express and Emphatical words than he has
done. If this be so, then certainly it was a needless and strange Extravagance,
to spend a hundred and thirteen Pages to speak that in less Express and
Emphatical terms, (that is to say, more obscurely) what God had already spoken
in a few words more cl^^rly; and in criticizing as he does upon the words,
Idol, Image, Similitude etc. and drawing arguments 1. from the Terms of the
law, 2. from the Reason annexed to it, and 3. from the Judgment of the
Lawgiuer, to find out what himself cannot conceive how God should have
expressed it in clearer terms. For my part, I believe, that God can express
himself much clearer than Man: Catb. no Idol. p. 50.
and yet I must be of T. G's. mind in this case, that had the Law been
delivered in Dr. Sts. own words (Rom: Idol p. 60. viz that any Image or
similitude is forbidden to be made with respect to the worship of God,) they
had been much more express and Emphatical to his purpose, than those in which
God himself did deliver it. For these we see require much criticizing and many
arguments to make the sense be, what Dr. St. would have it; where as those are
so plain, that every one that reads, understands their meaning at the first
sight It was well for T. G. that God himself was pleased to write the
Commandment with his own finger. For had Dr. St been trusted with the penning
of it, he would no doubt, (if it be true what he says) have outdone God
himself, though he had done his best.

As for the last Chapter, where Dr. St. sets himself to show the diff^rence
between the Instances brought by T. G. viz, the Reverence showed to the G^ound
by Moses and Joshua, the bowing at the name of Jesus, and toward the Altar,
used by the Church of England on the one side, and the vespect and Veneration
given to Images by those of the Church of Rome on the other: (the most material
thing in that Chapter) I think there needed no more than to say, as he does in
two lines p 869. that the Church of England does not allow any worship to be
given to the Altar: meaning thereby, as I suppose, that the Church of England
intends not by the ^xternal Act of Bowing to she any Reverence to the Altar.
This you see is a very compendious, and yet clear decifion of the case; and
there needed no more, to defeat the other Instances also brought by T. G. For
if he speak consequently, the same must hold with him for them too. But then on
the other side, you must give me leave to tell you, that I do not see how this
Assertion of Dr. St. agrees either with the sense of the Church of England in
the Canon he appeals to for it* or with what himself affirms but three leaves
before. For the Canon says no more (and I cannot but wonder why he caused it
to be printed in great Characters for the world to take notice of his fair
dealing) than that their Intent on in doing Reverence and Obeisance at the
coming in or going out of the Church or Chancel, is no^ to exhibit any
Religious worship oath Communion Table etc. in which they agree with Aquinas
and other Divines of the Church of Rome; but no where deny they intend not to
give any worship at all to it, as the Dr. glosses it. Nor does it agree with
what himself had affirmed but three leaves before p. 863. that there is a
Reverence left to be showed to Sacred Places, on the account of their
discrimination from other places, and separation for Sacred uses.


Cathar: But the Dr. you know distinguishes between Reverence and Worship; and
it is this latter, which he charges with Idolatry, as it is an Expression of
our submission to a mere inanimate thing.


Eun: But if those of the Church of Rome by the word Worship in the case of
Images declare, they require no more by the terms of Communion wi^h her, but
Reverence, or (as they call it) a honourary respect and V^neration, the Dr.
must either lay down his ^harge of Idolatry against the Church of R^me, or if
he will maintain a Reverence due to sacred Places and things, he must put
himself in, and the Church of England too (if it be her cause) for company.


Cathar. This I confess has stuck long in my thoughs; and to tell you the
truth, (now that you urge it a second time) I was never thoroughly satisfied
either ^ith Dr. Sts. practice or defense in this Point; For though I hope well
still of his Affection to the Cause, yet it cannot be denied, but his bending
compliance in this particular of bowing to the Altar, has given but too much
advantage to his Adversaries, and too much Offense to the Godly: whose sense I
shall give you in the words of my good Friend Patronus bonae Fidei, with
relation to the Dr. The discourse is somewhat of the longest, but I hope you
will have patience to hear it. Thus then He in his Prodromus p 76.

Quicquid Clarissimus Stillingfleet Delinitus and occoecatus etc. Howeuer the
most Renowned Stillingfleet wheadled and blinded with (...)* (I dare say no
more for fear of a Rebuke) endeavor in his most learned and accurate work to
dawb and smo^th over (and that but sleigh^ly neither) this kind of Adoration,
with intention to vindicate it from the crime of Idolatry, lest himself amidst
the crowd of those who bow down before the Altar be deemed guilty of a crime,
which none has thrown with more strength upon the Romanists, than He; yet I
doubt not* says he, to affirm, that this Bowing out vies the Idolatry both of
the Egyptians and Romanists, not only in horrible iniquity and enormitis, but
in madness and folly.

Having laid down this for his Position, he proceeds to prove it in this
manner. And first for the Romanists; It is not says he, so much Madness in
them to adore the Lord Jesus under the species of Bread, as it is a gross
Error in the ground of the thing, viz, their believing the Bread to be in very
deed Transubstantiated, as they call it, into the Body of Christ. But it is no
other than the dotage of Hypochondriacks, and a mere giddy-brain'd stupidity
for men to perform their Adorations toward that place, where Christ is no more
present, than any where else, and where neither the Table nor the Altar, nor
any thing that is set upon the Table (unless perchance a clean Towell, two
Books richly bound, or a pair of Candlesticks with two Candles in them, not to
be lighted, till their minds be quite drunk with Popery) represent either
Christ or his Image; A Fanatical Adoration, as he calls it, without any Object.

2. For the Egyptians; They, says he, pretended some color for their
Idolatry, as that an Ape, a cat, a Wolf a Ball, an Ibis, were things endowed
with that Principle of life, with that air and participation of the divinity,
by which the worsbippers were carried to God, whom alone they made the Object
of their Adoration; denying any thing to be worshipped by them hut with
relation to God, as we learn from Origin against Celsus, and Augustine upon the
96. Psalm. where this latter farther adds, that the Heathens pretended they did
not worship any corporeal Representation (and that it was a meercalumny imputed
to them by the Christians) but the divinity, which was represented and
expressed by such an Effigies. So that now Those who bow down to a logge, a
Stock, and a Trunk, such as is a Wooden Table out of the use for which it is
ordained, are Themselves stocks, and render themselves guilty of a far more
greiuous crime, Jam sure, of a far more giddy-brain'd Madness, than either the
Egyptians or the Romanists. For what Dr. Stillingfleet says, that this
worship is perfo^med only in the coming in, and going out of the Temple, takes
not away the crime of Idolatry, as more or less changes not the kind: Nor does
it agree with Truth etc.

This done and having very fitly applied to them for their frequent and
p^ofound Adorations (so low that they almost knock says he, the pauement with
their Foreheads) those words of Persius.

O curuae in terras Animae, and coelestium inanes!

He goes on saying, that this Fanaticisin is the more gross and blockish, in
that the Altar or Table it self are not so much worshipped, as the Place for
it is rich Furniture in which they are set. For let them be removed but never so
little from the Wall, and placed with out the Rails: Let but the Eucharistical
decking be taken away, and they left naked, and transferred to some other part
of the Temple, no man thinks them worthy of Adoration; no man b^ws down (unless
perchance to the East.) A madness Parallel to that of tbe Romanists, who have a
Reverence and Veneration for their Images, while they are set up in high
Places, and so much the more as they are more richly attired and adorned, but
being taken from thence, or laid upon the ground or broken, no one thinks them
worthy to be looked on.

Nor is this all. He affirms yet farther, that this Bowing to the Altar, does
not only out-vy in its Enormity the Idolatry both of the Egyptians and
Romanists, but, although we had never heard, says he, of their Idolatry; yet
this is such, that it fights against Reason it self, and that Analogy or
Relaton there is between an Altar and it is Correlate, (i. e^. a Sacrifice) for
which reason, the old English Superstition under Popery in the Book of Windsor,
did with much congruity command the Adoration to be performed Deo and Altati,
to God and to the Altar, or Host, in wh^^h the true Body of Christ was believed
to be. But for as much as the Altar we speak of at present, has no such Host
upon it, no, not so much as the Bread; for any one to bow down to it, it can be
judged no other, than Irrational and Absurd, because there is no true Altar
without an Host.

Lastly (not to exercise your patience too too much) he concludes with a
Consideration, which, he says, shows this Rite of bowing to the Altar, to be
the Symptom of a mind perfectly mad, viz, because no Ado^ation was ever made,
nor ought to be made by those who worship God rightly, but with eyes and mind
fixed and intent upon and toward the Propitiatory or Mercy-Seat; which is no
other than Christ reconciling Sinners to God, and He sitting at the right hand
of his Father; not standing in that place, where the Romanists Altar was placed.


Euno^n: This is a discourse which shows the Author to be a Son of Thunder
indeed. May I not know what other name he has?


Cathar: He wanted neither courage nor zeal I can assure you, to have put it to
his Book; and there was much ado to persuade him not to do it. But at length he
suffered himself to be prevailed with, licet aegre, (as he says in his
Admonition to the Reader) by the importunity of a F^iend to leave out his name,
out of a true Christian Charity, as I take it, not to stir up the B^le of the
Hierarchicks too much. Moreover also, not to hazard the losing so worthy a
Member as Dr. Stillingfleet by some free Reflections (as he calls them) upon
his compliance, he was contented, after his Book was finished, in a leaf
printed apart to be inserted toward the latter end of it to set Dr.
Stillingfleet's name in the middle, between G^urnall and Conant, on the one
side, and Meriton and Neston on the other, and so represent them all together,
as Men who upon the change of affairs, had joined themselves to the
Hierarchicks, not out of hope of Lucre or a more plentiful fortune, but out of
the dictamen of Conscience, holding fast, says he, to that Principle, that
separation is not to be made from the Public Ministry, but for very weighty
causes, yet not so, as that the laid aside their former more favorable
Inclinations to the Puritans.


Eun: This by your leave seems to me to be nothing, but plain dawhing with that
untempered Mortar, of which the Prophet Ezechiel speakethin his 13tly Chapter.
For what can be more inconsistent, than to make the public Ministry
Idolatrous, as your Friend does, and then acknowledge, they ioin in it for
Conscience sake? T. G. himself (the man of Intentions) acknowledges that be the
Intention never so good, yet if the Act be forbidden, the doing it will be
unlawful. And which way soever the Dr. turn him, he will find himself, if I be
not deceived in a case of much Perplexity. For if he maintain a Reverence to be
showed to the Altar, he puts himself in for company with the Romanists, and
must either acquit them, or incurr himself the guilt of Idolatry. And if he
deny any to be given, yet he stands condemned of Idolatry, worfe than that of
the Egyptians or Romauists by your Friend the Patron, for performing the
external act of worship toward the Altar; and very agreeably, to I take it, to
his Principles, who asserts the External act to be forbidden, Idolatrous in the
second Commandment, whereas the only external act expressly there forbidden, is
that of B^wing, Thou shall not bow down to them. But these things require a
larger discussion. What I intended at present, was not to engage in a
particular dispute, but to let you see, (as I said at first) that what Dr. St.
has with much labor to himself, and pain to his Readers delivered in nine
hundred Pages might have been done sufficiently (so far forth, as it relates to
the Contest between him and T. G.) in nine or ten lines; For there needed no
more, than to put down in Gothic Character, the Four Postulat's above
mentioned; The words of the Sccond Commandment; and his own Excellent Gloss of
the Canon of the Church of England. For the Postulata's were granted, or given
for granted, before hand, by T. G. The words of the Commandment, are according
to him so Express and Emphatical, that it cannot enter his mind how God should
have made them more, and therefore they needed not the Explication of man. And
lastly his Gloss of the Canon, that it allows no worship to be given to the
Altar, supersedes all trouble of showing any farther difference between the
Ceremony of bowing to the Altar, and the other Instances produced by T. G. on
the one side and to that of Bowing before an Image on the other.


Cathar. By this I see, you think the Dr. might have spared all his long and
elaborate discourses upon these subjects, as unnecessary, and consequently his
whole Book excepting nine or ten lines. This doubtless would have been a great
Contentment to T. G.


Eun: I, and to many others besides him, who would have been glad to have saved
both their money and Time.


Cathar: But what is it then you judge necessary the Dr. should have done?


Eun: That if you please shall be the Subject of our next Conference.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
WHat Dr. St. ought to have done to maintain his Charge. The first thing was to
have laid down the true Notion of Idolatry in the Nature of the thing,
antecedently to any Positive Prohibition. The Notion he gives of it shown to be
insufficient; and the Heathens not justly chargeable with Idolat^y by virtue of
it. The Consequence he urges from the worship of Images to a like worship of
all other Beings declared useless: And a Specimen given of his rare Insight in
Mystical Theology.

CATH ARINVS. EV NOMIVS. CAthar. You promised. Eunomius, to tell me at our next
meeting, what it was the Dr. ought to have done, but has not done to maintain
his charge of Idolatry. And I pray let me know, what it is without suspending
my longing with another Preamble like that of the unfortunate Laconian.


Eun: I shall do my endeavor to comply with your desire both in the one and
the other. Nature and Art, you know, both tell us, that the first thing to be
done in a Dispute (if the discovery of Truth and satisfact on of the Reader be
intended) is to settle the State of the Controversy upon its right Grounds. And
that nothing tends more effectually to the doing of it, than to lay down the
true Notion of the matter in debate; without which though much Wit perhaps may
be shown, and much Reading too, yet All to little purpose. What therefore I
think Dr. St. ought to have done, had his business been to manage his Charge
of Idolatry so as not to amuze, but satisfy his Reader, was in the First place
to have given us the true notion of Idolatry in the nature of the thing; and
then in the second place to have shown that Notion to have agreed to the Honor
and Veneration, which the Church of Rome in her Councils declares may be given
to the Images of Christ and the Saints. This had been to set the matter in it is
true light; But he chose rather to dazzle the eyes of the Reader with the false
lights of mere External Acts, the obscure practice even of the Wiser Heathens,
and the clashing of School-divines.


Cathar: Every one you know, Eunomius, is at liberty, especially the Accuser,
to lay and manage his Charge in the Method and way he deems best for his cause.
And al though Dr. St. have drawn in these Auxiliaries to his Assistance, and
insist very much upon them; yet methinks you are much mistaken when you say he
has omitted those things, which you judge to be the only necessary ones. And
for the first of them I cannot but wonder, how you could forget, that the first
thing he aduances, in the uery first Page of his Defense, to make good his
Charge of Idolatry, is to lay down the right Notion of it. J begin, says he,
with the consideration of the nature of Idolatry, not only because my Adversary
calls me to it in these words, [Here the Axe is laid to the Catho. no Idol. p.
203.
Root, and if ever the Dr. will speak home to the purpose, it must be upon this
Point: He must speak to the Nature of the thing etc.] But because the weight of
the whole matter depends upon it. And then having refuted T. Gs. notion of
Idolatry at large in his first Chapter he lays down the Notion of Divine
worship in the Second. What could have been done more Methodically by the best
School-Divine of them all?


Euno: This was a fair Beginning indeed, had he gone on to pursue it in the
sense it was proposed by his Adversary, but like a Preacher, that has patched
up a Sermon out of his note-Book, he names the Text, and then takes his leave
of it. What his Adversary called him to in that place, was to speak to the
Notion of Idolatry in the Nature of the thing, independently of any Positive
law. For speaking there of the Reverence shown by Moses and Joshua to the
G^ound by putting of their shoes, he says, If it were Idolatry in the nature
of the thing to put off their shoes in Reverence to the Ground, God's command
could not make it to be otherwise, And if it were nor Idolatry in it self to do
it, neither is it to give a like honor to the Image of Christ. From whence it
follows, to the v^ter ruin of all the Dr has argued from his pretended
Prohibition, that as no command of God can make that to be not Idolatry, which
is so in the nature of the thing: so no Prohibition (if there were any) could
make that to be Idolatry, which has not in it the true and Real nature of
Idolatry. This done he tells the Dr. Here it is the Axe is laid to the Ro^t,
and if ever he will speak home to the purpose, it must be upon this Point. He
must speak to the nature of the thing. This is what T. G. called him to: and I
saw very plainly there must be such a thing as. Idolatry independently of any
Positive law of God; and that Dr. St. by the manner of his Procedure was
engaged to speak to it: because otherwise the Heathens (of whom he makes so
much upon all occasions) before that Law was made, and afterward also, if not
promulgated to them* could not have been justly charged with Idolatry. This
therefore I carried along with me in my mind, whilst I read over his
discourses. But after I had tired my self with seeking for it in his first Part
consisting of three hundred and forty seven Pages, in which he pretends to
consider the nature of Idolatry, I found that in the sirst Chapter he imposed a
fallacious Notion of the Heathens Idolatry upon T. G. for himself to triumph in
impugning it, viz that the particular Idolatry of the Heathens consisted in
giving Divine worship to the Devil, as if T. G. had asserted them to be
Idolaters upon no other account: And in the Second he gives no other notion of
it himself, but that of an External Act of worship standing under a supposed
(but not proved) Prohibition. For although he assure T. G. upon his word, p.
269. that he meant very Real Idolatry, yet he immediately adds that it was upon
this Reason, because it belongs (says he) to God to appropriate Acts of
worship to himself, and that having appropriated them, they become only due to
him. And after a long discourse to the same purpose, (though nothing to the
purpose) he tells us over again p 275. for fear we should mistake him, that the
meaning of it all is no more, than to show that Adoration of Images is Idolatry
by virtue of that Commandment. And by the way is in such a chafe with T. G. for
offering to understand some words of his to imply Real Idolatry antecedently to
any Prohibition, that he compares the attempt to a Thunder-Shower full of
sulphur and darkness with a terrible Crack, and looks upon Gunpowder, as a
needless Invention to blow a Man up in comparison of a Train of Consequences
from his own words, let but T. G. have the laying of it. Nothing then can be
more evident, than that the Dr. notwithstanding his fair proposal, meant not to
speak to the nature of Idolatry in it't self, which his Adversary called him
to, and upon which the weight of the whole matter in debate depends;
particularly that which concerns the Heathens, as I said before; and which for
the want of it must needs fall to the ground. For if by very Real Idolatry he
mean no more, than that to give any worship to God by an Image is such only
upon the account of being forbidden by a Positive Law, viz, the 2d Commandment,
all the arguments, he draws from the supposed Practice of the Heathens, as
worshipping the true God by their Images (which make up well near one half of
his Book) are blown up with this rare Invention of his, and made of no use
either to himself or his cause; because the Law not being given or promulgated
to them, they can be no farther concerned in what is forbidden by it, than as
it is evil in its self antecedently to any such Positive Prohibition.


Cathar; But, as Dr. St. says very well, p. 263. What notion of Idolatry could
the Heathens have, bu^ what was the same the Jews had from the Law of Moses?
The notion of Idolatry was a new thing among them, who knew no harm at all in
giving Divine honor to Creatures. From whence should they understand the
sinfulness and the nature of it, if not from some Law of God?


Eun: This was kindly done of the Dr. to make this Apology for the poor
Heathens, who had stood him in so much stead. But had not his kindness made him
forget what S. Paul says Romans 2. that when the Gentiles who have not the Law,
do by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law are a
Law unto themselves, ^ho show the wo^k^ of the Law written in their hearts,
their Conscience bearing witness, and their though^s between themselves
accusing or else excusing one another? And how by virtue of this Law, which was
written in their hearts, and not of the Law of Moses, the same Apostle in the
Precedent Chapter declared them inexcusable for giving divine honor to
Creatures; because that which may be k^own of God, was manifest in them: for
God, says he, manifested it to them, in as much as the Invisible things of
him, even his Eternal Power and divinity are seen from the Creation of the
world, being understood by the things tbat are made. Here you see S. Paul
plainly asserts a Law written in their hearts by which they might and ought to
have understood the nature and sinfullness of Idolatry. And if their hearts
were so blinded with the love of the Creatures, as not to know any harm at all
in giving them divine honor, yet this hinders not but that there was harm in
it, and that it was sinful in its own nature antecedently to the Law, as
Concupiscence was, although the Apostle says he knew it not to be sin, but by
the Law. Here then it was that the Dr. should have laid the Axe to the Root,
and added a 7th Chapter to show wherein the deordination or sinfulness of
Idolatry consists antecedently to any Positive Prohibition; and till this be
done, you must give me leave to say of the other six, what Virgil said of the
walls of Carthage, when left unfinished. Pendent opera interrupta, minaeque.


Mu^orum Ingentes. It Was necessary for him to have settled the notion of Idolatry
in the nature of the thing; and not after a mighty Bravado, as if he meant
nothing less than to do it, to divert and amuze his Reader with a tedious
discourse of External Acts of worship, as standing under a Positive
Prohibition, though to the utter ruin of the aid he proposed to his cause from
the Parallel he draws from the supposed practicae of the Heathens, who were not
under the Law, and therefore if they were Idolaters, it must be upon some other
account abstracting from the Law. But this it is to be a Dragon at Controversy.


Cathar: Yet when all is done, Eunomius, you must give me leave to tell you,
that the securest way to settle the Notion of Idolatry, must be from such a
Prohibition. For, abstracting from that, in comes the distinction of Absolute
and Relative Worship; and I do not see, but by virtue of that, if it be
admitted, Men may worship the sun, the stars, the Earth, or any other
creature, with the same kind of worship that they do an Image, and be no more
guilty of Idolatry in the one than in the other. And in what will this differ
from the practice of the Heathens?


Eun: This is a thing frequently and Roman Idol. p. ^29.
mightily objected by Dr. St. and the Consequence, as the world goes, seems not
much unlike to that of the Improuem^nt^ of the Speaking-Trumpet fancied by a
late Virtuoso, as being made capable to carry the voice, if a league off. then
eight mile about, if eight mile about, then round a whole County: If round a
whole County, then why not from one Nation to another, there being no stop in
Art? And so there will need says he, but one Pa^son to preach to a whole
County, from the most Eminent place in it; and Princes may convers and treat
without the great charge and trouble of Ambassadors.


Cathar: This is a Fancy you have met with in some Idle Poet or other; but
nothing suitable to the present purpose, since Art may stretch Nature too far,
and render it unserviceable to its designs. But the Consequence we speak of is
admitted very seriously by some of the Roman Divines; and Vasques in
particular, a man of a searching wit, not only grants but contends for it in a
set disputation, wherein he proves very well from the Principles of worship
allowed in the Roman Church, that God may be adored in any other Beings,
Rational or Irrational, as well as in an Image; provided the mind do not rest
in the Creature, but be terminated upon God.


Eun: For the Fancy as you call it, it matters not much where I had it: It Is
the Conformity we are to mind between it, and the Extension you urge of the
worship given to an Image, to any other creature. For what ever the consequence
of this latter may be as to Speculation, yet for the Practicablenesse of it, I
think, as matters now stand with mankind after the fall of Adam, it will find
as great a stop in nature, as the Speaking Trumpet; the creatures ever since
Sense prevailed against reason, being become like stumbling blocks to the souls
of men, and a snare to the feet of the unwise, to allure and draw them to the
worship of them. And therefore those very Divines of the Church of Rome, who
admit the Consequence in speculation, and do not condemn the Practice of it in
Philosophical and Contemplative men, who consider the Creatures purely as the
works of God, and as it were behold him present in them; do notwithstanding
utterly condemn the common and promiscuous use of it in the Vulgar, as exposing
them to manifest danger of being seduced by the tempting beauty and astonishing
power of the Creatures to forget the Creator, and worship them. And that this
was the case of the Heathens, at least the Generality of them, is expressly
asserted by Vossius in his first Preface, Where he Voss. d^ Idol. Praef. 1.
says that the Gentiles did not distinguish the Divine Power, which is from
God, from that other which is in God, and therefore from the wonderful things
of nature, concluded nature it self to be God, and the parts of it also to be
deities. And this he affirms to be one of the reasons which moved him to lay
open the admirable virtue and power of the Creatures in a Treatise of Idolatry,
that we may know says he, what compelled the Gentiles to forsake God, and stay
in the worship of Nature. This is the account which Vossius gives of the
prastice of the Heathens (vt relicto Deo in naturae veneratione consisterent)
and it is no other than that which the Scripture and the Fathers give of it, as
I could show at large, if need were. As for the supposed Practice of the Wiser
Heathens, I have shown the Arguments which the Dr. draws from thence to support
his charge, to be insignificant and useless, both in this and the 4th Dialogue.
Part. 1. p 114. 115.



Cathar: This defense of yours, though brought in with a speaking-Trumpet comes
at last I see to be the same in substance with that of T. G. viz, that the
Creatures subsisting in them selves, and Cath. no Idol. p. 93.
being eviden^ly the causes of many great Benesits to mankind, the danger is
greater of terminating worship upon them, than upon an Image, whose formal
Being consisting only in representation connaturally carries our thoughts and
Affections to the Person represented by it: And the danger is so much the
greater, in that the Creatures, he says, represent God rudely, remotely,
darkly, and imperfectly. An excellent Paraphrase no doubt, as Dr. St. observes,
on the words of the Psalmist. The Heavens declare the Glory of Def. p. 805.
God, and the Firmament shows his handy-worke. O how much the skill of a
Painter exceeds the Power of God?


Eun: This was a nicking remark indeed, and not to be omitted. But then you are
to consider that T. G. speaks there of the Creatures comparatively to Images,
viz that though they carry in them the marks and tokens of an Infinite Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness, yet they are not so apparently representative of God, that
upon the sig^t of them, our thoughts are presently and effectually carried to
him, as they are upon the sight of an Image to the Person represented by it,
but that there is need of a great deal of discourse to discover the Analogy
they bear to the Creator, and the dependence they have of him for their very
Being, yet so that from the greatness and beau^y of the Creatures, the Maker of
them may proportionably be seen* And this, I hope, is no incongruous Paraphrase
of the words of the Psalmist, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handiwork. If Dr. St. have the eye of his understanding
so elevated and penetrating, that upon the sight of them, his mind is as
presently and effectually carried to God, as from the sight of an Image to the
Prototype, I believe he is one of the most admirable Persons in the
Meletetiques, (as the same Author calls them) in the whole world.


Cathar, The Meletetiques? What mean you by that? some new Science invented of
late by the Vertuosi?


Eun: I mean the Excellent Art of Reflection and Meditation upon the Creatures:
which as it is used by the Vertuosi for the benefit of Mankind, or their own
Curiosity, may go for a part of natural Philosophy: But applied to devotion, in
the manner it is by Dr. St. I take it to be that part of Mystical Theology,
which so in-essences the soul with God, as to make it see great Evidences of
his Romans Idol. p. 69.
Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness in an Ant or a Fly, which may suggest
venerable Apprehensions of him to the mind; when it can see nothing in any
Artificial Image (though of God Incarnate dying for our sakes upon the Cross)
worthy admiration, but the skill of the Painter or Artificer; nor any thing
that can warm or inflame ones devotion comparably to the Sun. Petrus Viretus
must doubtless have been well advanced in this Science, when, as the Lutherans
report of him he wrote, that Cbrist Crucified was represented b^tter by a Cow
than In Collo. Mompelgart.
by any Image either painted or graven. And Beza yet more, when he professed
that from his heart he detested the Image of Christ crucified: as being an
Image Ibid.
of the Cruelty of the Jews toward him, and therefore could not endure it.
What a p^escinding faculty was this, to see in a C^ucifix the Cruelty of the
Jews to detest it, and not see the love of a dying God to admire it? But every
one has not made so great a progress in this kind of Meletetiques, as these
men, or as the Dr himself has done. And yet I cannot but wonder how He comes to
be so Excellent in it, while he affirms the Creatures can give no greater than
Moral Rat. Acc. p. 178. 286. etc.
certainty of the Being of God himself, which seems to me to be no such great
Incentive to Devotion, if according to him it admit a possibility of being
otherwise.


Cathar: yet I am sure He lays down Romans Idol. p. 560.
this for one of his Principles, that what. ever God reveals to man is
infallibly true, and may be certainly known to be his Will. And again that all
supernatural Revelation must suppose (not only the moral certainty, but) the
Truth of Natural Religion: for unless We be says he, antecedently certain that
there is a God, it is impossible to be certain that God has revealed his Will
to us.


Eun: I know very well the Dr. can say and unsay without retracting with as
much Art and Ease as any man I ever read. But if you ask him, whether the
Creatures afford any such Evidence of the Existence of a deity, as can
inf^llibly convince it to be absolutely true and so impossible to be false! He
will tell you, The nature of the thing will not bear it; and consequently for
any thing He or any one according to him, can certainly know from the
Creatures, possibly there may be no such thing as a God. A much rarer
Paraphrase no doubt than T. Gs. was on the same words of the Psalmist, The
Heavens declare the G^o^y of God, and the Firmament shows hi^ handiwork. And
of those other words also of S. Paul, The Invisible things of God, even his
Eternal Power and Divinity, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made. O how much a resolute persuasion that there is a God,
notwithstanding a known Possibility of Falsehood, exceeds the Certainty of a
Demonstration, to raise and warm one's devot^on toward him! It Was for this I
suppose that Dr. St. represents the Heathens (who neither had nor could have
according to him any Infallible certainty of the Being of God) so piously wary
not to let their worship stay in the Creatures, but to transfort it to God; and
Christians who profess to have such certainty of his Being from the works of
the Creation, so inconsiderately apt to terminate their worship upon an Image.
If this admirable way of inflaming Affections be well improu'd, who knows but
Ignorance at length may come indeed to be the Mother of devotion. But to return
from whence you have made me digress, if I have not forgotten it.


Cathar: I shall give you time to call upon yout me mory till to morrow. For I
must now go to another meeting.


Eun: But I pray do not you in the mean time forget that whilst the Dr. gives
us no other Notion of Idolatry than that of External Acts of worship standing
under a positive Prohibition, he cannot make the Heathens to be Idolaters, at
least before the Law was given; and so ruins the great support of his cause
from their practice. And if (...) were Idolaters without the Law, as S. Paul
says they were, he has failed to give us the true and proper N^tion of
Idolatry; which was the first thing I said was necessary for him to have done.
The second now comes to my mind, but I shall reserve it for to morrow.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Second Thing Dr. S^. oug^t to have done, to maintain his Charge of
Idolatry, in the worship of Images, was to show the doctrine of the Church of
Rome in her Councils to be Idolatrous. The doctrine of the Second Council of
Nice in that Point, as stated by himself, not Idolatrous; and the Practice of
bowing to the Altar, according to his Principles, flat Idol^try. An Instance of
his reporting, faithsully the Atthorities he alleges, laid open in a passage
cited by him out of Cardinal Lugo.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. EVnom. The Second Thing I judged necessary for the Dr.
to have done was after he had settled the true Notion of Idolatry, to show how
it agreed to the doctrine of the Church of Rome in her Councils; since it is
from them we are to take the terms of Communion with her.


Cathar: And I wonder yet more, how you should think him defective in this,
when he has treated so largely of the doctrine both of that Wise Synod of
Nice, and of that wary Council of Trent, as he calls them.


Eun: And what is it He finds in their Decrees that he can fix the notion of
Idolatry upon, without returning it upon himself, and the Church of England?
And first for the Council of Nice. The doctrine of that Council concern^ng the
Images of Christ and the Saints was no more, but that a honourary adoration be
given them, like as is given to the Figure of the Holy Cross, to Chalices, to
the Books of the Gospels and such like sacred Vtensils. This was the doctrine
of the Council of Nice: and how it is freed in this from the note of Idolatry
by Eminent Divines of the Church of England, you have heard before in our first
Conference. What the Dr. himself says of it in his Defense is. 1. that the
Council required true and real worship p. 575.
to be given to Images. 2. that it was an Inferior worship, and not Latria.
And supposing this to be as he would have it, can any thing be clearer, than
that the worship or respect which the Council required to be given to Images,
was not the Worship due to God, and consequently the Church of Rome not
chargeable with Idolatry for any thing contained in that decree.


Cathar: But still the worship, says he, Def. p. 600. 601.
required is higher than mere Reverence, due to Holy places and things; which
is but a different usage and regard from other things; as the Vessels of the
Church, or the Chalices are not to be used for common drinking. And is there no
difference think you between a Religious respect (if I may so call it) ^o
sacred places and things; and all the most solemn Acts of Adoration, which were
ever given to p. 603.
Images by the grossest and most sottish Idolaters; such as kneelings before
them, prostrations, praying with their eyes fixed upon them, as though they
were speaking to them, burning Incense and lights before them?


Eun: If Dr. St. will be so liberal as to give it the title of Religious
respect to Holy Places and Things, it is more than those of the Church of Rome
are bound to do by the terms of Communion with her; for there is no such
Expression in the Decrees of her Councils. But then again, if the degree of
respect or honor to be showed to them, be only a different usage and regard
from other things, as that the Vessels of the Church, or Chalices are not to be
used for common drinking, what means the Church of England by bowing before the
Altar? Is not the Altar sufficiently guarded by being set with in Rails, and
regard sufficiently showed to it by keeping it clean, and decently covered, and
not permitting it to be used for common eating? Why then must the Ministers bow
down before it, as often as they go in and out of the Chancel, which if the
Altar had any sense would think were done to it? as I have for certain been
informed of a Countrey-fellow (something of kin as I suppose to him, who found
out the brave Covie of one Partridge) who being got near the Altar in his
Maties Chapel thought all the Congies had been made to him, and so as in
Courtship bound fell to making of legs after his Fashion to answer the great
Civilities that were done him. On the other side, If the Church of England mean
by this Action to show, what the Dr. says may be called a Religious respect,
to the Altar; on the account of its being Sacred to God, why may not the Church
of Rome do the same to the Images of Christ and the Saints? And if Bowing,
which is an Act appropriated to God (and reckoned as such by Dr. St. himself
together with consecrating, kneeling, etc. p. 861.) may be used for that end,
why not kneeling, or prostration, or fixing of eyes in time of prayer, or
burning Incense, or lights? What makes the discrimination between these Acts,
if they be all appropriated to God? And if there be none made, and any of them
may be used, is not the Church at liberty to determine which or how many of
them she will make use of? However Those of the Church of Rome to purge
themselves from Idolatry in bowing etc. before the Images of Christ and the
Saints may pretend that they intend not to give to them, the honor due to God;
and those of the Church of England, that they intend not to exhibit any
Religious worship to the Communion. Table; yet I see not how Dr. St. can purge
himself or the Church of England (if it be his) from that crime, when he
asserts, that any Image being made so far the Object of Divine worship, that
Men do bow down before it (and I suppose the same holds with him for any other
creature) it does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is forbidden in
the 2d Commandment.


Cathar: But this Act of Bowing is not used in the Church of England, as Dr.
St. Def. p. 86. 863.
says, with any submission of the mind toward the Altar; as it is in the
Church of Rome toward Images; And herein I conceive he makes the main point of
the difference to consist.


Eun: This is to give a new turn to the Business. For by this it should seem,
that it is not now the doing an External act appropriated to God, to the Altar,
or an Image, which makes it Idolatry, but the intention of the mind with which
it is done: And so the Dr. must renounce his old notion of Idolatry, and give
us a new one. But where does he read in the Decree of the Council, that it
requires submission of mind to the Images themselves? What the Council requires
is that the Faithful salute them, and exhibit (honorariam Adorationem) a
certain worship of honor to them; and whether you will call it Salutation or
Adoration, Epiphanius there declares it will be the same thing, so does the
Patriarch Tarasius also (Ep. ad Imperator.) when he says, that the Adoration
here meant is no other than a saluting, or if you had rather call it so,
Embracing of them. And accordingly the Anathema at the end of the Council runs
thus; Si quis non salutaverit, if any one shall not salute in the name of our
Lord and his Saints their sacred Images, etc.


Cathar: Here I confess the Fathers of that Council showed themselves wary as
well as Wise: Notwithanding it is the Def. p. ^9^.
Judgment of many of the most learned and Eminent Divines of the Roman Church,
that by the Decree of the Nicene Council such true and real worship is to be
given to Images, as is terminated upon the Images themselves And amongst the
rest Cardinal Lugo says, that to the worship of Images, it is not only
necessary, that the External Act be performed to the Image, viz of kissing or
bowing etc. but there must be an inward Affection too which implies submission.
For, says he, worship, as all agree, is an Expression of submission to the
thing worshipped. And it would be ridiculous to say that Peter is worshipped by
that token of submission which J show to Paul. Therefore to the worship of the
Image, the outward Act must express the inward submission of the mind to it; or
else we must deny the Common definition of Adoration, and make a new one. And
this he afterward proves to have been the definition of the Second Council of
Nice, who did decree that true and real worship is to be given to Images, as
they are distinct from the Exemplar according every thing that is required to
the nature of worship.


Eun: supposing this to be as Dr. St. represents, it is but the Ratiocination
of a Divine, endeavoring to show his Opinion conformable to the words of the
Council. But what if the Dr. have strained the words and sense of the Cardinal
beyond, and besides, if not against his meaning? T^is none of the ^audable
virtues of a Contrevertist to do so; yet being a thing so frequently in use
among them, I could not having the Book by me, but indulge so far to my
Curiosity, as to look into the place cited by the Dr. viz de mist, I nearn.
disp. 36. sect. 3. n. 37. And first I found a strange want of exactness as to
the words: for what the Cardinal there says is this.

3. Ponendum est, non it a ferri ad imaginem solum actum externum osculi aut
genuflexionis etc. ut non feratur etiam ad illam aliquis affectus internus, qui
etiam potest dici affectus aliquis summissionis. That is, in the third place it
is to be supposed, that the sole external Act of kissing or bowing etc. is not
so carried to the Image, that some inward affection (aliquis internus affectus,
mark that) is not also carried to it, which may be also called (potest dici,
mark that also) some, or a certain kind (affectus aliquis) of submission. Now
comes Dr. St. and tells us very roundly that Cardinal Lugo says, that to the
worship of Images, it is not only necessary, that the External Act be performed
to the Image, of kissing or bowing etc. but there must be an inward affection
which implies submission. Where, (not to quarrel the words necessary and must
put into the Text,) I noted that those qualifying or diminishing expressions of
aliquis and potest dici, were left out by the Dr. and the Sense by so doing
rendered Absolute; This I liked so much the worse, for that he had prepared his
Reader before hand to entertain this conceit of it, by telling him that
Cardinal Lugo says of the Def. p. 186.
word cultus, that in approved Authors he finds it always applied to signify
Reverence toward Superiors; which joined to the otherwords, as translated by
him, must needs breed an Impression in the Reader, that the inward affection
the Cardinal required, was of giving submission to an Image as Superior. This
excited me to look into the two foregoing Positions, laid down by the Cardinal:
where I found the first (which he asserts as most certain) to be, that when we
worship an Image, the inward affection is not carried to the Image, after the
same manner it is to the Prototype. For we worship, says he, the Prototype
absolutely, that is, for it is own proper Excellency; but the Image only with a
Relative worship, cultu solum respectivo, that is for the Excellency, not of
the Image it self, but of the Prototype, which kind of worship (cultus) he
affirms to be far Inferior to that other, which is Absolute. Again we worship
the Prototype, says he, as that to which we owe that worship, and to which we
pay it as a debt, and in order to which it is an act of Justice. But we do not
worship the Image so, but as the term of that worship which we owe to another,
that is, the Prototype.

His 2d Position is, that we have not the same inward submission toward the
Image, which we have toward the Prototype. For we submit ourselves to the
Prototype, acknowledging it to be more excellent than ourselves, and superior
to us; which kind of submission we cannot prudently conceive to belong to an
Image, nor indeed any at all, by which we submit our selves to it, preferring
it before us. For this would be a foolish lie etc. No man therefore can say
that the worship of an Image includes such an Internal submission, nor can
there be in reason any Controversy about it.

Having laid down these two Positions n. 35. 36. so directly contrary to the
Impression which Dr. St. had given his Reader by his dexterity in the Art of
reporting faithfully, (as he promised) the words and sense of the Authors cited
by him, he immediately adds in the 3d place, n. 37. the passage alleged by the
Dr. viz that the sole external act of kissing or bowing, is not so carried to
the Image, but that some inward affection also goes along with it, which he
says may be called also (aliquis affectus) some kind of affection of
submission. Here upon I was drawn yet farther to seek what k^nd of submission
this was, and n. 39. I found him to mean by it an affection of submitting our
selves outwardly to the Image: for as much as the act of the will from which it
proceeds is an affection of perf^rming those acts about their Images, which we
are wont to exercise toward our superiors. And then declares himself farther
in these words. J truly yield, says he, in point of external honor to an
Image, giving it a better and higher place, treating it honorably, and the
like; but this which J do exteriourly, J do not only interiourly will, but
intend also to signify that J have an intention of performing all these things,
for the word Adoro, or J worship, signifies says he, this affection of the
mind toward Holy Images; Therefore J signify some inward purpose of yiedling
and submitting my self as to my outward deportment, to the Image. And this very
purpose or affection is that says he which we call Internal submission. For
we intend neither to say, that we esteem it interiorly to be more perfect than
our selves, or that it is superior to us, nor to have any dominion over us, for
which we ought to serve it. Who can say this? But only that we have interiourly
an intention of performing outwardly toward an Image for the excellency of the
Prototype who is represented by it, those acts of external submission, which we
are wont to perform toward those who are more excellent, and have dominion
over us; because all this honor is due to the Prototype also in his Image,
which in reality, says he, Sect. 4. n. 49. is no other than to say, that the
Prototype in it self deserves to be treated honorably, not only in it self,
but in all things which have connection with it, as its Image or Garment or the
like. This is the Explication the Cardinal himself gives, of what he says may
be called affectus aliquis submissionis, some kind of affection of submission.

And now I pray consider what a different face of things here is, from what
they were represented by Dr. St. and how far the Cardinal is from
acknowledging any submission of mind to an Image, as Superior, which is the
Impression the Dr. gave his Reader by forestalling his Judgment, with those
other words of the Cardinal, viz, that he had found the word worship in
approved Authors to be always applied to signify Reverence toward Superiors,
which may be done, by performing external acts of honor to them either in
themselves, or in such things as have connection with them: and then
endeavoring to fix it deeper by leaving out in the passage translated by him,
the words Aliquis, and potest dici, used on purpose by the Cardinal to qualify
the term submission, as applicable to an Image in the manner you have heard.
Had T. G. whom the Dr. calls a man of Tricks, played such a trick of legerdemain as this, what sad complaints should we have had of his want of Candor
and Sincerity? What hearty wishes of his fair-dealing and Ingenuity? And afte^
all, what a Thundershower full of Sulphur, and Nitre and darkness with a
terrible Crack to his credit never to be repaired? What think you of this
Catharinus?


Cathar: I cannot say, that this was very fairly done, if it be as you say; And
I think if men will cite Authors, they ought to do it in their own words, at
least according to their own meaning: Or else to what purpose is it done?


Eun: To a great deal of purpose I can assure you. For first, it serves to
breed a high conceit of the learning and knowledge of the Alledger, especially
if the Citations be many and long, and out of Authors of all Nations, and all
languages, and all ages, and all Religions. 2dly It serves to captivate the
assent of partial Readers, and to suspend at least the Judgment of such as are
Impartial, till they have examined the Testimonies, which in all likelihood
will be never. 3dly It serves to engage the Respondent (if he have no more wit)
to write a Volume in answer to them as bigg as a Church-Bible, or Foxe's Acts
and Monuments, if any considerable part of them should chance to be like this
out of Cardinal Lugo: and so the Book to be looked upon as not answered, till
that be done.


Cathar. Not so neither, Eunomius, as you put the case. But if four of five of
them be discovered to be faulty, it will serve to crack the credit, as you say,
of all the rest.


Eun: This possibly may come to be the Result after a little time; For I durst
my self undertake to show half a score considerable faults of this nature, in
that first glorious Chapter of the Drs. Defense wherein he cites so many
Authors both ancient and Modern, to prove the Heathens Jupiter to be the one
true Supreme God, and make their worship and that of the Arians parallel to that
of the Church of Rome. And now because the Arians are come in my way, in whose
aid the Dr. places so great confidence, I shall give you another instance of
his sincerity in their very case, both to confirm what I have advanced with a
double witness and to let you see the vanity of the Drs. Argument from the
practice of the Arians.


Cathar. This I should be sorry to hear for the Drs. and the Cause's sake. But
for this of Cardinal Lugo though there be stretching in the case, yet I cannot
believe it was done out of design: And after all, I see very well, that he
requires some inward affection of submission to an Image, which is sufficient
in the present case to make the difference wide enough between him and the Dr.


Eun: The Cardinal says it may be called so, in regard the External Act of
bowing proceeds, as he says, from an Intention to deferr to the Image an
external honor not for it is self, but for the Prototype's sake; but yet in
reality, he says, it amounts to no more, but that the Prototype by reason of
it is Excellency deserves to be treated honorably not only in its self, but in
all things which have connection with it, as an Image or the like. And if this
be the Sense of the Council, as the Cardinal endeauours to prove, however Dr.
St. may quarrel with him about the words, viz, whether it may be called a
certain kind of Affection of submission to the Image, or no? yet I do not see
but he perfectly agrees with him in the thing: when he affirms, that although
Def. p. 600. 601
no irrational or inanimate Being be capable of that real Excellency to deserve
any honor from us for it is own sake (as Aquinas, says he, determines, and he
might have said, Cardinal Lugo too) yet such things says he, may have a
Relation to matters of so high a nature, as to deserve a different usage and
regard from other things: which is I suppose what he afterward means by the
Reverence he says there is left to be showed to p. 862.
sacred Places, and with an (if I may so call it, just like the Cardinal) a
Religious respect to sacred Places and p. 603.
Things. For if these things, upon account of the Relation they have to some
thing of an higher nature, deserve Reverence and Respect from us, there must be
some Intention of the mind to express it toward them, as is granted by the Dr.
himself. p. 862. And if the outward Act to be given, be of Bowing which is a
Token or Expression of submission, there must be a proportionable Affection of
the mind to perform it, for example, toward the Altar. Otherwise the outward
Act will be false and Hypocrytical, and no more honor will be done to the
Altar, than to another Table by kneeling before it. Whether the Dr. will think
fit to call this inward Act of the mind, affectus aliquis submissionis, as the
Cardinal thinks it may be called, (potest dici) I should advise him to dispute
it with him, but that he professes so sincerely, he loves not to wrangle about
words. But whilst he bows toward the Altar with intention to show that
Reverence and Respect, which it deserves for the Relation it has to God, he
does in reality all that to the Altar, which the Cardinal requires to be done
to an Image. So that if the one be Idolatry, the other must be so too; and if
either be more than other, the disadvantage is on the Dr's side, at least as to
the manner of Expression; First, because the Cardinal places the desert for
which this external deference is performed toward an Image, in the Prototype;
This, says he, in reality is no more than to say, that the Prototype deserves
to be treated honorably, not only in it self, but in all things which have
connection with it: But Dr. St. places it in the things themselves, which he
says may deserve to have such Reverence expressed to them for the Relation
they have to God. 2dly Because the Sect. 5. ^. 62.
Cardinal makes the same Reverence in substance, which is terminated on the
Prototype to fall after an Inf^rior manner on the Image for his sake. But Dr.
St. will have the Reverence shown to sacred D^s. p. 861. 862.
Places and things, (for example to the Altar) together with the Intention to
express such outward Reverence to them on the account of their being sacred to
God, to be distinct from the Reverence that is due to God: which is the very
thing, Vasquez charges with Idolatry, if the Reverence shown be a token or
Expression of submission, as B^wing is: so hard a thing is it for him to meddle
with those sharp-edged Tools, called school-distinctions, without hazarding to
cut some thing more than his own fingers with them, I mean the very throac of
his cause.


Cathar: This I suppose was the Reason why my Friend the Patron Bonae Fidei,
said of him, that he had endeavored to da^b and smooth over this kind of
Adoration, but levi brachio, as he expresses it.


Eun: And in that I think he had reason: For he that can see the difference
between bowing toward an Image as maintained by the Cardinal, and bowing
toward the Altar as defended by Dr. St. except in words, must have his sight
sharp enough to discern Invisibles: As he on the other side must have little or
none left him, that cannot see the difference between the practice of the
Arrians, toward Christ, and that of the Church of Rome toward the Saints.


Cathar: This puts me in mind of the other Instance you promised, to confirm
what you had said of the Dr's misrepresenting the Authors he cites. And I pray
what was it?


Eun: These are some months past, since I took notice of it: But I will look it
out against our next meeting. In the mean time you may ruminate upon his kind
usage of the Cardinal.


Cath. It has made too great an Impression upon me to be easily forgotten.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
ANother Instance of Dr. Sts. reporting faithfully, shown in a passage he cites
out of S. Gregory Nyssen in the case of the Arians. The doctrine of the same S.
Gregory concerning an Inferior Respect due to the Saints, and their Relics.
The Argument the Dr. brings from the practice of the Arians, shown to be
Incongruous, and manifestly different from that of Roman Catholics toward
Saints and Images. His Excellent Defense of a Testimony out of Arnobius
formerly misrepresented by him: and Subtle Observations upon the doctrine of
the Council of Trent in the matter of Images. The Remedies devised by him for
avoiding Idolatry in the worship of Images, equally applicable to Bowing to the
Altar, or the Chair of slate.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. CAthar. Well, Eunomius, have you found the other
Instance you promised to give me in the case of the Arians, of the Drs.
mis-representing (as you call it) the Authors he cites?


Eun: I have, and it is this. Among other Testimonies brought by him with a
greal deal of Pomp to show that the Arians were charged with Idolatry for the
wor^h^p they gave to Christ, whom They acknowledged to be a Creature, from
thence to parallel their worship with that of the Church of Rome to the Saints,
he cites the words of S. Greg. Nyssen Def. p 170.
Orat. de laudibus Basilij, viz, that the Denil by the means of Arianism
brought Idolatry again insensibly into the world, persuading men to return to
the worship of the creature by his sophistry, and that Arius, Eunomius,
Eudoxius, and Aerius were his instruments in restoring Idolatry under a
pr^tence of Christianity. This is what he tells us that Father said, and as to
the general truly enough. But was there no more requisite to be done in the
case? Does not S. Greg. tell us in that very place, what kind of worship it
was, which the Arians gave to Christ, and for which he charges them with
Idolatry? yes he does. And his words are these, viz, that the devil under a
pretense of Christianity brought Idolatry again insensibly into the world,
persuading men, says he, not to recede from the Creature, but to adore and
worship it, and think a creature to be God having given it the name of the Son;
and although it were of a different nature from God, not to regard that, but
placing the name of Christ upon a Creature, to worship and seru^ it, and also
to fix hopes of salvation in it, and expect Judgment from it. Thus does S.
Greg. lay forth the nature of the worship which the Arians gave to Christ. And
then come in these other words, uiz, that Arius, Eudoxius and the rest were the
Devil's Instruments in the restoring Idolatry. And now I pray tell me, was it
not neatly done of the Dr. to wrap up all this in those short words. The devil
persuaded men to return to the worship of the Creature? Had he made use of this
kind of Laconism in those frequent Amplifications, where he dilates himself
usque ad nauseam in things Indifferent, and I may say, Impertinent to the
Question, it had been agreat Ease to his Reader, and no Prejudice to his cause.
But here to suppress the nature of the worship given by the Arians to Christ,
from whence the Parallel was to be made with that which the Church of Rome
allows to the Saints was but to cast a mist before his Readers eyes with that
General, (and as Mr. Thorndike calls it) equivocal term of worship to a
Creature. But then again the setting down the words, as they are in S. Greg^ry,
would have been a great prejudice to his Cause indeed, because the world would
have clearly seen, how different the worship, which the Church of Rome gives to
the Saints, is from that which the Arians gave to Christ, acknowledging him to
be a Creature. For those of the Church of Rome publicly profess that they look
not upon the Saints as Gods, but as the Servants of God; nor as Mediators of
Redemption, in whom they put the Trust of their Salvation, and from whom they
expect the final reward of their labors; not worship and serve them with
Latria, a^ the Arians did the Son, though they believed believed him to be a
Creature; but that they humbly beg the prayers of those Just persons, which
they know to be available with God, as a means to obtain these and other
benefits from him (the sole Author of them) by his Son our Lord Jesus Christ,
whom they acknowledge to be their only Redeemer and Savior. What the Dr.
objects concerning the Phrase suppliciter invocare Def. p. 293.
used by the Council of Trent is so frivolous and school-boy-like, (not to say
childish, as he does to T. G.) that a man must have very little to do to set his
wit against it. Every child knows how to beg his Father's prayers in a
suppliant manner without making him a God. And for that farther Objection, p.
294.
which, he says, puts the matter out of dispute with all who do not wilfully
blind themselves, viz, that the Council of Trent commends the making recourse
not only to the Prayers of the Saints, but to their Aid and Assistance, this
precious Objection had been quite lost, had he but set down the end for which
their aid and assistance is there required, viz, ob beneficia impetranda a Deo
per Filium ejus etc. For the obtaining benefits from God, (the word impetrare
signifies to obtain by request) through his Son our Lord Jesus Christ. And if
the Dr. will needs have aid and assistance to be taken as distinct from
prayers; A man does, J suppose answer the signification of that Phrase by
desiring the Saints to employ the Favor they have with God, as Just Persons,
for the obtaining of them from God, without making recourse to them as to the
Authors of those Blessings. He that cannot see the difference of these things
(as the Dr. Def. p. 861.
says else where) has some Cataracts before his eyes, which need couching:
And I know none fitter to make the Operation in the present Circumstance, than
the same S. Gregory in the Oration he made upon the Great and Holy Martyr S.
Theodore, which is not questioned even by Rivetus himself that Caprichious
Fanatic in Criticism, to be the Genuine work of that Father.

In the beginning of that Oration S. Gregory having commended his Auditors for
their devotion to the Martyrs, which he there calls, (...) a pure worship;
and minded them, from the deliverance they had received the year before from
the fury of the Barbarous Scythians by that Glorious soldier of Christ S.
Theo^o^e (ut credimus, as we believe, says he) to consider how great a thing a
Just man is, and how many rewards he is made wo^thy of, even in the things of
this world, and belonging to us; He first describes the Magnificent Structure
of the Temple, with the great concourse of people from other Cities and
Countries to it, the curious pieces of Sculpture that were in it in wood,
stone, and silver: and above all the Picture of the Martyr in the several
Stages of his combat, and that of Christ our Lord assisting him in them drawn
with such exquisite Art, that it caused both delight and Benefit in the
Spectators to behold them. Then descending to the Shrine, where the Body of the
Martyr was kept, he sets forth the great esteem the Faithful made of the very
dust of the Place, and the earnest desire they had to touch the Sacred
Relics, which, he says, was deemed a great Happiness^ for any to be
permitted to do; And in case it were obtained, They embrace, says he, the Body
as if they beheld it yet alive, app^ying it first to their eyes, mouth, ears,
and other Instruments of sense; and then pow^ing forth tears of duty and
Affection upon the Martyr, as if he were whole before them, solicit his
Supplication and Intercession, beseeching him as a Champion of God, and
Invocating him, as one that could obtain Blessings, when he would, for them.
After this, he dilates himself upon the valor and Constancy of the Martyr in
his Confession and sufferings, with his consummation and passage to Heaven by
Fire. Then puts his Auditors again in mind of the great benefits received by
him, in convocating Assemblies, instructing the Church, driving away devils,
bringing back the Angels of Peace, begging of God profitable things for them,
and making the very place where his Body rested, a Storehouse of Remedies for
manifold diseases; a Harbor for those who are tossed with the Tempest of
Afflictions, a Plent^full Treasury for the Poor, a quiet Receptable for
Travelers, and a Glorious Station for such as meet to celebrate his Feast,
whom there he calls the Ministers of his Honor. Having thus erected and
inflamed their minds with hope of Aid and Assistance from the Martyr in their
present necessities, he addresses himself to him at the end of the Oration, in
these words. We stand in need of many benefits, do Thou intercede and deprecate
with our Common King and Lord for thy Country. We live in continual fear of
dangers. The Cruel Scythians are not far off ready to invade us. Do thou as a
soldier fight in our defense, and as a Martyr speak with freedom in b^half of
thy fellow servants. Though Thou have overcome the world, yet thou k^o^est the
Affections and necessities of our humane condition. Beg for Peace that these
public Assemblies be not interrupted by ^he Incursion of the Barbarians. That
we have been preserved hitherto from their Fury; we acknowledge as a benefit
received from thee. We desire also security for the time to come. And in case
there be need of greater Intercession, call an Assembly of thy Brother-Martyrs;
Let the prayers of many Just Persons expiate the sins of Multitudes of
Offenders. Admonish Peter, excite Paul, and John also the Beloved Disciple, to
be solicitous for the Churches they have founded, and for which they have
suffered Imprisonments and death; that Idolatry may not lift up it is head; that
Heresies like Thorns may not over grow the Vineyard, nor Tares choke up the
wheat etc. But by the virtue, ((...) by the power) of thine and thy Fellow's
Intercession, O admirable Man, and Eminent among Martyrs, the Christian Church
may be a plentiful Field of Harvest, yiedling always fruit of Everlasting life
conferred upon us by our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the H.
Ghost be Glory, dominion and Honor now and for evermore.

Had Dr. St. been present at this Oration how may we think, would his zeal have
urged him, to have cried out Idolatry, Flat Idolatry, very real I^olatry, mere
Heathenish Idolatry, and in all likelihood to have returned upon Gregory, what
Gregory had said in the former Testimony of Arius and the rest, that he was the
D^vel's Instrument to bring back Idolatry into the world, persuading men to
return to the worship of the Creature, by making recourse not only to the
Prayers, but to the aid and assistance of the Saints; giving them thanks for
benefits received, and expecting defense and Protection from them for the
future.


Cathar. And truly I think he would have had reason enough to do so; For what
the wary Fathers of the Council of Trent say, looks but like a piece of
Reformation if ^ompared with this.


E^n: And yet this is that very Gregory, who was Brother to the great S. Basil;
a man famous for his learning and Pi^ty, and on that account particularly
Reverenced by S. G^^go^y Nazianzen, and S. Hierom. He lived in that Age of the
church, of which the Dr. himself in the Epistle Dedicato^y to his Defense,
says, that Idolatry was then suppressed by the Imperial Edicts the Churches
settled by Law under the Government of Bishops, Public Liturgies appointed,
Antiquity reverenced, Schi^m discountenanced, Learning encouraged, and some f^w
Ceremonies used, but without any of those corrupt mixtures which afterward
prevailed in the Roman Church. The Bishops of that time were says he men of
that Exemplar P^ety, of those great Abilities, of that excellent conduct and
Magnanimity, as set them above the contempt or reproach of any but Infidels and
Apostates. For then, says he, lived the Gregory's, (of which surely this was
one) the Basils, the Chrysostoms in the Eastern Church; the Ambroses and
Augustins in the Western; and they who can suspect these to have been Enemies
to the Power of Godliness, did never understand what it meant. I leave the
Doctor to apply his own words as he pleases. It is in his choice, whether he
will put himself among the Contemners and Reproachers; or acknowle^ge the
veneration of Relics and Invocation of Saints not to be corruptions. As for
S. Gregory it is manifest he both called upon the Martyrs for their aid and
assistance, and excited the People to do so, not as a new thing, but what they
had been bred to, without fear either of being reproached by those other great
Lights of that Age, who did the same, or of being understood by any (for Dr.
St. was not there, nor Vigilant us neither as I suppose) to make the Saints
themselves the Authors of the Benefits they desired; or to place Hope of
Salvation in them, or expect the reward of Eternal life from them, which is
what he charged the Arians with in the other Testimony, to do toward Christ,
whom they acknowledged to be a Creature. And Dr. St. by suppressing those most
important words, when he cit^d the passage has given us another very ^regnant
example of his reporting faithfully; but so much the more unpardonable, in that
he had been forewarned of it by his Adversary T. G. (cath. no Idol. p, 126.)
where he shows the Fathers of the Synod of Constantinople, who alleged that
very passage of S. Gregory against the worship of Images, to have been charged
by Epiphanius in the Second Council of Nice for adulterating the words and
meaning of it, viz, for putting the name of Christ for that of the S^n; and
whereas S. Gregory's discourse there, was against the Arians, proving them to
be Idolaters, because they acknowledged Christ to be a Creature, and yet
adored, served, and put their Trust in him, they wickedly perverted his words
against the Images of Christ; which although Christians retain in memory, and
reverence out of love to him, who is represented by them, yet they neither call
them Gods, nor serve them as Gods, nor at any time put their hope of Salvation
in them, as the Arians did in the Son, though they believed him to be a
Creature. Thus T. G out of Epiphanius, and then adds, that the Dr. thought it
not to his purpose to take notice of this Iuggle of his Constantinopolitan
Fathers, in putting the name Christ for Son, least it might put his Reader in
mind, of his own dexterous managing the words and sense of Authors cited by
himself; which any one would think might have been a very sufficient caution to
him, either not to have meddled with this passage of S. Gregory at all, or to
have given it in it is fullwords and meaning. By this then, and the for^^^
Instance out of Cardinal Lugo, you may ghess in part (and the world in time may
see more fully) what Candor and Sincerity is to be exp^cted from him in his
Citations, especially at such time as the very point to be proved depends upon
them: as also what a proper Argument that is, which he draws from the practice
of the Arians to conclude those of the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry in the
worship of S^ints; for they do not think them to be Gods, nor worship and serve
them (the word is (...)) with the worship proper to God, nor fix their hopes of
Salvation ^n them, nor expect Judgment from them, as S. G^egory says the
Arians did all these things to Christ, though they believed him to be a
Creatu^e.


Cathar: But Dr. St. as I remember, says that although the Arians did invocate
Christ, and put their Trust in him, yet they still supposed him to be a
Creature, and therefore believed, that all the Power and Authority he had was
given him; So that the worship they give to Christ must be Inferior to that
ho^our they gave to the supreme God, whom they believed to be supreme,
Absolute, and Independent; and in this it is he makes their worship of Christ
parallel to that used by the Church of Rome to the Saints.


Eunomi: This indeed is brought in by the Dr. at the convenient distance of
three hundred and fifty Pages after the Passage we spoke of, and that without
any particular mention of S. Grego^y, or relation to him. A very late Salve for
so old a wound; and a very improper one too when all is done, there being so
many things, which show it not only to be incongruous to make the intended
Parallel, but inconsistent both with the practice of the Arians, and the
doctrine of the Fathers. For

1. The Fathers in general, and particularly S. Grego^y in the Oration now S.
Aug. li. 20. cont Faust. c. 21. S. G^eg. Naz. O^at. de Not. Christi. S Hier. Ep
ad Marcellam.
cited by me, acknowledge aworship due to the Saints (and called by the same S.
Gregory a Pure Worship) Inferior to the worship due to God. And therefore
could not have condemned the Arians of Idolatry for giving only a like worship
to christ, though in a higher degree, without condemning themselves of the like
crime.

2ly However the Dr. now makes this plausible Apolog^ for the Arians, yet I do
not find that the Arians made it for themselves. What he says of it himself
(page 165.) is, that we may suppose this was the Answer of the Arians. And
whereas he adds speaking of S. Athanasius, that he could not but fo^esee it,
and a man of so much understanding, as h^ was, would have prevented this Answer
had he thought it to his purpose. I should rather think, if a man of so much
understanding as he was, thought it not to his purpose then to prevent it, it
were but little to the purpose now for the Dr. to allege it.

3ly Although the Arians believed that all the Power and Authority, which
Christ had, was given him by the Supreme God, whom they believed to be Supreme,
Absolute, and Independent; yet why might not the Generality at least, believe
him to be of a Superior Order, so as to have true divinity in him, as the
Heathens did of their lesser Gods, and that being assumed, as a Consort in the
Empire, Absolute divine honor was due to him? S. Gregory seems to intimate as
much in the words left out by the Doctor, where he says, that the devil under
a pretense of Christianity brought Idolatry again insensibly into the world,
persuading men, not to recede from the Creature, but to adore and worship it,
and think a creature to be God having given it the name of the Son; and
although it were of a different nature from God, not to regard that, but
placing the name of Christ upon a Creature, to worship and serve it with
Latria, to fix their hopes of salvation in it, and expect Judgment from it.
This I hope is far enough from the Dr's Relative or Inferior worship; and
whoever reads the Fa^hers, shall find they evermore charge the Arians for
giving absolute Divine worship to Christ, though they believed him to be of a
different nature from the Supreme God But if nothing will serve the Dr. but
that we must suppose the Arians to have answered, as he would have them, viz,
that the worship they gau^ to Christ, was I^feriour to that honor which they
gave to the Supreme God; I answer,

4thly That the Fathers notwithstanding had all the reason in the world to look
upon this as a mere Sophistical Pretense, and to charge them with Idolatry for
doing what they did, when they saw them avowedly give those acts of worship to
Christ believing him to be a Creature, which by the Common Consent, and public
practice of Christians, from whence Exterior sions in the duties of Reli^ion
receive their determination, were understood to be due only to God I^carnate,
as calling him Go^ when they had given him the name of the Son, putting their
Trust in him as the Mediato of Redemption, and invoking him as the Judge of the
Quick and the Dead etc. Which makes the case of those of the Church of Rome,
even in this Supposition, to be quite different from that of the Arians; the
Acts of worship which they give to Saints and Images, being such as by the
common use and Custom of the Christian world before Luther were determined and
understood, when applied to Saints and Images, to express an Inf^riour degree
of Reverence or worship, than what is due to God himself, as Bowings,
Prostrations, burning of Incense, lighting of Candles, using certain forms of
words and Expressions in prayer etc. in like manner as B^wing (though
particularly expressed in the Commandment as forbidden) to the Alta^ is at
present determined and understood in the Church of England. This the Dr foresaw
very well, but found no way to prevent it but by suppressing the words of S.
Greg. Nyssen, in which he clearly expresses the different worship which the
Arians gave to Christ, from that which is given by those of the Church of Rome
to Saints and Images. And this I said was so much the more foul, for that he
had been so fairly forewarned of it by his Adversary T. G. in the like case of
his Constantinopolitan Fathers. Pray then let me desire you to keep this in
memory together with the former passage out of Cardinal Lugo, till more come.


Cathar: I fancy you have picked out this passage, as one you judge the most
faulty in the whole Book; but both this and the rest, when brought to Trial,
may happily prove like that Heavy charge, as Dr. St. calls it, wherewith T. G.
loads him for cogging (as he ph^aseth Cath. no Idol. p. 101.
it) the word Divinity in the singular number instead of Adorable Deities in
the plural, into a Testimony he cited formerly out of Arnobius in his Roman
Idolatry p. 74. The Dr. to show his Innocence, assures T. G. that the words he
translated were these very words of Arnobius, Def. p. 471.
nihil numinis inesse simulachris, that the Images have no Divinity in them;
and generously referrs himself to him, if he please to take it upon his word,
or if not, to search the place once more.


Eun: This is to bring the business to the Test, and T. G. it seems may do as
he pleases But do you your self believe it to be so?


Cathar. Yes without doubt; for the Dr adds, that if these words be not in
that very place: and but two lines before those quoted by T. G. viz, Erras and
laberis etc. be will venture his credit in citing Authors upon T. G's.
Ingenuity.


Eun: This argues a greater Confidence in T. Gs. Ingenuity, than I could ever
have expected from one who charges him so often with desingenuous dealing. But
it may be the Drs. good wishes have wrought some good effect upon him, However
I should think him in a manner obliged for his kind offer to take it upon his
word.


Cathar: But then again, if these very words be there as Dr. St. says, most
certainly they are, what does such a man deserve for so notorious f^ir dealing?


Eun: Here the Dr. comes briskly up indeed to T. G. if he fail not in the Trial
of the cause, which I think he does. And to make it plain to you, give me leave
to ask you this one Question. When Dr. St. tells us, that the Rom: Idol. p. 74.
Heathens in Arnobius deny they ever thought their Images to be Gods or to have
any D^vinity in them, but what only comes from their Consecration to such an
use, whether did he translate the words of Arnobius to the Hea^hens, or the
words of the Heathens to Arnobius?


Cathar: Doubtless the words of the Hea^hens to Arnobius, for he says, The
Heathens in Arnobius deny etc. And were it otherwise, he must have translated
the words of the Objection, made by Arnobius, for those of the Heathen's
Answer, which had been no fair dealing in case they were opposite.


Eun: And that you may see this to be in very deed the case at present,
(supposing the Drs design was to prove by that Testimony, that the Heathens did
not wors^ip the Images the^s^lues for Gods,) hear the words as they ly in
Arnobius Erubescite ergo vel sero, says he, and doceant vos animantia muta Li.
6. c^nt. Gent.
nihil divinitatis in esse simulachris, in quae obscaena dejicere neque m^tuunt
neque vitant. Sed erras inquitis, and laberis, nam neque nos era, neque auri
argentique mat^rias, neque alias, quibus signa confiunt, ^as esse perse Deos,
and religiosa decernimus numina; sed eos in his colimus, eosque veneramur, quos
dedicatio infert sacra, and fabrilibus efficit inhabitare simulachri. Arnobius
had objected to the Heathens the Indignities done to their Images by Spiders,
Swallows and such other creatures; and bids them at length to be a^hamed, and
learn from them, there was no divini^y in their Images. And what do the
Heathans reply to this? 1. They deny they ever thought the Images themselves to
be Gods, and adorable Deities. 2dly They grant they worshipped the deities
residing in them by the virtue of dedication, and therefore tell him he was
mistaken, when he said there was no divinity in them. This was the substance of
the discourse p 473. And Dr. St. taking part with the Heathens, nothing can be
more evident, than that the words designed to be translated by him, were the
words of the Heathens, in which they deny the Images themselves to be Gods or
A^o^able Deities, (which is the thing he says he produced Def. p. 473.
that Testimony to prove:) and not the words of Arnobius [viz that there was no
divinity in their Images] which the Heathens excepted against, as ^ot denying
but that they worshipped adorable Deities brought into them by Dedication. For
my part I think the Dr. might better have excused himself by imputing it to a
casual vndulation of the Visual Rays, incident at times to the best
Transcribers, especially when the words are but two lines distant, (as he
assures us they were no more in his Copy) and there is an appearance of some
affinity between them; than by professing he intended to translate the words of
Arnobius and not of the Heathens, in a Testimony wherein the Heathens deny the
words of Arnobius to be true. But if, you have yet Faith enough to believe it
upon his word, that the words he translated were these very words of Arnobius,
nihil divinitatis in esse simulachris, that there was no divinity in their
Images (not two but four lines in the Copy I have which is of the largest sort
of Folio's above those words of the Heathens he began to translate) he has
reason so far to acknowledge your kindness: but then you must grant him guilty
of what T. G. lays to his charge, viz, of ^ogging the word Divinity in the
singular number* instead of Adorable Deities in the plural (which was quite
lest out by him) into the Testimony of the Heathens; and that cortrary both to
their meaning, who believed such deities to dwell in them, and to his own
design in producing that Testimony, which he says was to prove, that the
Heathens denied that they worshipped the Images themselves for Gods, and not
that they denied they worshipped the Deities assisting in them. Read over the
words once more, which if you please you may take upon my word, or if not,
search the place in Arnobius, and I believe you will confess, that if the Dr.
makes no better a defense for the Testimonies he cites out of Cardinal Lugo,
and S. Gregory Nyssen, than he has done for this of the Heathens in Arnobius,
we are like to have but a sad account of Citations from him; and Impartial
Readers will hardly be persuaded to take them upon his word, but rather return
his own Question upon him in downright English, What does such a man deserve
for so notorious foul dealing?


Cathar: Before I pass my Judgment I shall with your leave search the place in
Arnobius himself.


Eun: I commend your wariness, and wish the rest of his Readers would do the
like. In the mean time, we will return if you please to what we were upon, and
see what it is he finds fault with in the Council of Trent.


Cathar: And not to deferr it to a longer time, I remember very well; He makes
three Observations upon the doctrine of that Council, The First is::::


Eun: I see you have him at your fingers ends, but let us first if you please
hear the words of the Council as set down by him.


Cathar: You do not intend I hope to except against his Fidelity in the
Relation of them.


Eun: I am not so quarrelsome, Catharinus, as you take me to be, though I think
he has translated them also to his best advantage. But my Intention is other
at present as you will understand, if you please to repeat the words.


Cathar: That wary Council, says the Def. p. 613.
Dr. knowing very well the practice of their Church and the Opinion of Divines,
only determines due honor and Veneration to be given to Images, not for the
sake of any Divinity or power inherent in them, for which they are to be
worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or that Trust is to be
put in the Images, as it was of old by the Heathens, who placed their H^pe in
Idols; but because the honor which is done to them, is referred to the
Prototype, which they represent, so that by the Image which we kiss, and before
which we uncouer our heads, and fall down, we adore Christ and worship the
Saints which they represent. Which has been already decreed by Councils
against Opposers of Images, especially the 2d Nicen Sy^od. These are the words
of the Counc^l related by him.


Eun: And what I pray do you find in them, from which it may be gathered that
the Council intended to require of those of its Communion to give the honor
due to Christ and his Saints, to the Images themselves?


Cathar: The words I confess are very warily couched and so much war^ness makes
us suspect c^aft, as the Dr. has very clearly discovered in the Observations I
began to tell you, he makes upon them. The First whereof is, that all External
Acts of Adoration are allowed to be done to Images.


Eun: To this I have answered alreadly, p. 216.
that the Church is at liberty to determine what external Act, she thinks fit to
make use of toward Images, and those the Church of R^me makes use of (for of
all She does not) are no less (if not more) understood by common consent and
custom as tokens and expressions of a Relative respect to Images, than B^wing
toward the Altar in the Church of England.


Cathar: But as Dr. St. observes in the 2d place, There is not the least
Intimation in the Council against giving the same kind and degree o^ worship to
the Image, which is given to Christ himself.


Eun: But how so Ipray! Does not the Dr. himself acknowledge that the wor^hip
required by the 2d Council of Nice, was lo^er than Latria, which is due to God;
and does not the wa^y Council o^ Tre^t as related by him r^f^rr us especially
to that of Nice in this matter? how then could he say there was not the least
I^timation in the Council against givi^g the same kind or degree of worship to
the Image, which is given to Christ himself? Is it not strange he should fo^get
himself so soon?


Cathar: But the Divines it seems did not understand it so, and therefore as he
observes in the Third Place; After page 614.
the Council of Trent, many ^f the most Eminent among them have asserted the
worship of Latria to be given to Images.


Eun: This is a Field into which Dr. St. makes frequent excursions, and
triumphs exceedingly in his own Conceit. But has not T. G. sufficiently Cah.
no Idol. p. 190.
showed, that even those very Divines who call it Latria* do not mean by the
word that proper divine worship which is due to God and terminated upon him;
but that the Act being in their Opinion One in substance to the Prototype and
the Images, it is terminated absolut^ly upon the Person of Christ for himself,
and falls upon the Image after an Inferior manner, as a thing only relating to
him and purely for his sake; as you heard but even now out of Cardinal


Lugo: For which reason some of them call it Relative Latria. Others,
Secondary; Others, Improper, others, Analogical; others, per accidens: And the
difpute in effect, as T. G. observes, is rather de modo loquendi, than of the
thing it self. For they all agree, that the worship proper to Go^ signified
primarily by the word Latria, is not to be given to Images. But now for the
love of Controversy, what is all this to the doctrine of the Council? Cannot a
man give due honor to the Image of his Princ^, or of Christ, unless subtle
disputants be first agreed by what name it must be called? What Dr. St. should
have done to maintain his charge of I^o^atry, was to prove out of the decrees
of the Council it self, that the due honor and Veneration, it declares lawful
to be given to Images, is the Latria due to God. But this was too hard a task
for him to undertake, and therefore to divert his Reader he entertains him with
a pleasant Counterscuffle among the School-divines, about Def. p. 610.
reconciling their doctrine with the Definition of the Council of Nice, to
which the Council of Trent refers; as if it were a greater wonder that they
cannot ag^ee in this, than in those other Nice points concerning
Predestination, and the like; Or as if the Church may not have liberty not to
determine either the one or the other; and so both parties remain of the Church
(as Dr. St. insinuates Gen: Pref.
of the latter) as long as they contradict no received Articles in it. But
something, or rather a great deal was to be said, though nothing to the
purpose, as I shall let you see. For what he charges the Church of Rome with in
his first Paper, is that all those who are of the Communion of that Church,
must by the terms of Communion with her be guilty either of Idolatry or of
Hypocrisy: But the terms of Communion with that Church are not the Opinions of
her School-divines, but the decrees of her Councils: And therefore for him to
represent them in a pleasant counter-scuffle, may be a pleasant divertisment to
some kind of Readers, but no Satisfaction to the Wis^; since the Divines
themselves are not Roman Catholics for maintaining their Opinions, but for
submit^ing, on all sides, to the Decrees of the Councils.


Cathar: But what Security can be expected from such an Answer? when each side
charging the other with Idolatry, the General Terms of Councils, (as Dr. St.
says very well) serve only Def. ^. 849.
to draw men into the snare, and not to help them out of it.


Eun, Security enough (as T. G. tells Cath: no Idol. p. 188.
us) from honest nature informed with Christian Principles, which will teach us
to honor the Image of Christ for his sake, who is represented by it, with as
little danger of committing Idolatry, notwithstanding the Counter-scufsle
between School-divines about the Act's being the same or distinct; as it does a
Subject to give a proportionable Respect to the Chair of State; or a Wife, to
kiss her Husband's picture, without fear of committing either Treason or
Adultery by so doing. I should be glad, you could help me out here; For for my
life I cannot understand, how agood Wise (to use the Dr's old example) is e're
the more in danger of committing Adultery in kissing her husbands picture,
because, were she asked the Question, she would be mightily puzzled to tell,
whether the kindness she expressed to the Picture were the same with that to
her Husband, or distinct from it. And I am confident, had his Majesty after his
happy Restoration found it necessary to have made an Order, that due honor
and respect should be given to the Chair of State, as formerly had been done
(notwithstanding any dispute, which might have been raised about it is being the
same or distinct from that due to the King; or the Parties growing hot,
accusing one another of Treason if it be the same, or of submission to a mere
Inanimate thing if distinct) you would not say that the General Terms of the
Edict served only to draw men into the snare, and not to help them out of it.


Cathar. For that Dr. St. tells us, that the Rules of the Court are to be
observed, where there is no intrenchment upon Def. p. 852.
Divine Laws.


Eun: And T. G. will tell us, the Rules of the Church are in like manner to be
observed for the other, and the dispute about the Act's being the same or
distinct will equally hinder or not hinder the practice of both.


Cathar: Dr. St. indeed acknowledges P. 853. 854.
the case to be alike in both; and therefore to avoid Idolatry in the worship
of Images, he tells us, men must give none at all; especially when there is no
necessity at all of doing it.


Eun: And will not your Friend, Patronus Bonae Fidei, tell us, that to avoid
Idolatry in bowing to the Altar, men must give no Reverence at all, especially
when there is no necessity at all of doing it? And the like may be said of
uncovering the Head, or doing Obeisance to the Chair of State. But what will
become then of the Rules of the Court, which the Dr. says are to be observed
and the Rules of the Church which now as you have heard, he affirms in like
manner are to be observed, if men may be permitted to break them for such
Capriches as these are? Must love and duty be tied up to n^cessity? Have they
not a larger Sphere to act in? Are not all things lawful in the worship of
God, which are not forbidden? and upon that account, Bowing to the Altar in the
Church of England? Alas poor Dr. St. (would T. G. say, returning his own p. 862.
words upon him) how does he argue like a man spent and quite gone? It Is high
time I see for us to draw to an end.


Cathar: But before we do that, I shall give you a clear and full Solution of
the Case, by which you will see, the Dr. is not so far gone, as you imagine;
Whateuer T. G. thinks, says he, we say, that God by his Law having made some
Acts of worship peculiar to himself p. 849.
by way of acknowledgment of his Sovereignty and Dominion over us, we must not
use those Acts to any Creature. And therefore here, he says, the most Material
Question can be asked is, whether the Acts of worship be the same, which we are
to use to God or no, i e^, whether they are Acts forbidden or lawful?


Eun: This is a most material Question indeed, and how does he resolve it, I
pray?


Cathar: Thus, that if the Acts be the Same, they are forbidden; if not, they
may be lawful.


Eun: This is, as far as I can understand it, as if one should say, that if
the Acts be such as are forbidden, they are forbidden; and if they be such as
are not forbidden, they are not fo^bidden. A very clear decision of the case in
the Identical way. But I pray tell me, Is not Bowing one of the Acts, nay the
only External Act expressly forbidden by the Law to be used to any Creature?
How comes it then, that Bowing to the Altar is not Idolatry; and the same to an
Image, is Idolatry; when according to the Dr. God having by his Law made this
very Act of worship peculiar to himself, we must not use it to any Creature,
whether Image or Altar!


Cathar: To deal plainly with you Eunomius I evermore suspected this Bowing to
the Altar would spoil all. And I am clearly of Opinion, ever since I read what
my Friend, the Patron Bonae Fidei says of it that either Himself or Mr Baxter,
or some such other Inflexible man, had been a fi^ter Champion, to manage the
charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome, than Dr. St.


Eun: However, The Dr. is a man of Tricks, as well as T. G. and may Deff. p.
4^9.
perhaps have some Fetch left behind, which we know not of: You may if you
please co^f^rr with him at leisure, upon this Point, and the Premises. Only I
shall desire two things of you: The one is, to know of him, if he give no other
notion of Idolatry, than that of External Acts standing under a Prohibition,
how he charges all those of the Communion of the Church of Rome, of being
guilty either of Idolatry, or Hypocrisy, either of which he says, are sins
inconsistent with salvation. For if any creature, (whether Image or Altar)
being made so far the Object of Divine worship that Men do bew down before it,
does thereby become an Idol, I see they must be Idolaters who do it. But how
they can be Hypocrites in doing it, and not Idolaters, (if the very doing it in
case it be prohibited, be Idolatry) I do not understand. It Is an Aenigma, that
deserves an Oedipus.

The other is, if you have still courage enough to read over his Defense the
Se^ond time (which I believe you are the only man in the world will do) to
desire you to look now and then upon the ^emorial I gave you at the end of the
Fifth Dialogue, and to reflect upon what I have shown in these last four
Conferences concerning his Pe^formance in it. As 1. how all his long and Dial.
1.
elaborate discourses are but the Clamours of Vanity, and the substance of them
might have been comprised in a Nutshell. 2. How his Notion of Idolatry's Dial.
2.
consisting in External Acts of worship, as standing under a Prohibition of the
Law of Moses, quite ruins the Parallel he strives to draw between the Practice
of the Heathens (who were not under the Law,) and that of the Church of Rome.

3. How the Consequence he urges from the worship of Images, to the worship
Dial. 2.
of all other creatures is in its self useless to his Cause, and not allowed
for common practice by those very divines who admit it in speculation. 4. How
being Dial. 3. 4.
obliged to prove his charge of Idolatry, against the doctrine of the Church of
Rome in her Councils, (as that from whence we are to take the terms of
Communion with that Church) he makes it his business all along to Combat the
Opinions of the School-Divines. 5 How endeavoring to evade the Instance of
Dial. 2. 3. 4.
bowing to the Altar urged by T. G. he must either deny any Reverence at all to
be given to the Altar, or involve himself and the Church of England in the same
condemnation with t^ose of the Dial 4.
Church of Rome. 6. How diff^rent the Wo^ship, which the Arians gave to Christ
believing him to be a Creature, and for which they were charged with Idolatry
by the Fathers, was from that which the Church of Rome requires to be given to
Dial. 3. 4.
Saints and Images. Lastly, how to make a show at least of answering, he is
forced against his promise of reporting faithfully to pervert the words and
meaning of the Authors he cites.

If you carry these Remarks along with you, and join them to his Omissions laid
down in the first five Dialogues of the First Part, I doubt not but you will
find all the Principal Arguments, with which he endeavors to prop up his
tottering Cause in his late defense, defeated, or returned upon himself.


Cath. You have, I confess, spoken to many things, more than I did expect from
you, and perhaps more, though you shroud your self under Mr Thorndike's
Authority, than the Church of England will thank you for. Yet there is one
Point remaining, which you have but slightly only touched in passing, though
Dr. St. make it the main ground, upon which he builds his Confutation of T. G.


Eun: Whilst I have spoken but what Mr Thorndike did, or must have said, in his
Principles, I have little reason to fear any Reproof from the Church of England:
Nor have you much, to expect any thanks for your solicitude in endeavoring to
fix upon her, as her Sense, so foul a Charge as that of Idolatry against the
Church of Rome. But what is this great Point you say has been omitted?


Cath. It is this, that T. G. denies the Heathen's supreme God Jupiter to be
the One supreme Being Maker and Governor of the World, and makes them to be
Idolaters only for worshipping the Devil. This is a Point, which Dr. St. has
proved* so fully against him, that he has reason to be ashamed of imposing
such a Notion of Idolatry upon them.


Eun: I was in good hopes we had been at the End of our Work, and was preparing
for the Country: But since you think this to be so main a Point and the
reason, as I now remember why Dr. St. lays so much stress upon it, is because
he judges it very material toward the true Understanding the Nature Def. p. 24.
of Idolatry. I shall deferr my Journey a week longer, and let you see where
the shame lights. Only I shall beg a day or two's respite to order some
affairs; and review some Notes I cursorily made, when I perused the Drs. Book:
And then, God willing I will see you again.


The End of the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF THE JUST DISCHARGE TO DR. STILLINGFLEET'S VNJVST CHARGE OF
IDOLATRY. Wherein His great Concern to make Jupiter to have been the true God,
And the Sinister ways he takes to maintain it, are laid open. And His Pretended
Parallel from the Practice both of the Vulgar and Wiser Heathens, More fully
refuted. By way of Dialogue Between. EVNOMIVS, a Conformist and CATHARINVS, a
Nonconformist.

PARIS, M.DC.LXXVII.

Avec Privilege du Roy.

THE THIRD PART.
THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Notion of the Heathen's Idolatry imposed on T. G. by Dr. St. refuted from
the Places out of which it was pretended to be gathered. The Grand Question
brought to trial, viz whether the Heathen's Jupiter were according to the
Fathers, the true God, or a Devil? The former asserted by Dr. St. the latter by
T. G. and proved by plain and undeniable Testimonies of more than a whole Jury
of Fathers besides Origin. The Dr's mighty Argument from the Inscription to the
Unknown God, shown to be not only Impertinent, but against himself.

CATHARINVS. EVNOMIVS. CAth. Welcome Eunomius; Having consulted your Note-Book,
and considered the Point a second time, Pray tell me, if you ever met with any
thing more absurd than T. Gs. Notion of the Heathen's Idolatry, as Dr. St. has
exposed it, viz, that Idolatry is the Def. p. 3.
giving the Sovereign Worship of God to a Creature, and among the Heathens, to
the devil, as if the Idolat^y of the Heathens consisted only in their
worshipping of the devil.


Eun: A very absurd Notion indeed, if the Meaning of it be, that the Heathens
had no other Object of their worship, but that Evil Spirit which we call the
devil: And such an one, as evidently concludes T. G. to be no better skilled in
the Church Affairs of the Heath^ns, than the Dr. would make him be in those of
his own Church, or of the Church of England. For S. Augustine, who I am sure
understood very well the divinity of the Heathens, speaking of the many and
false Gods worshipped by them, reduces them to these three Heads. 1. The Images
themselves. 2. Evil Spirits. 3. Or at best some Creatures, Li. 6. de civ. Dei.
c. 1.
not the Creator; All which, says he, they worshipped with that Worship, which
is due only to the One true God. But Pray tell me, do you think it was T. G's.
meaning to make the Heathens to be Idolaters only for worshipping the devil?


Cath. I do not see, what other meaning Dr. Sts. words can have, when having
told us in general what he and T. G. were agreed in, viz, that Idolatry is the
giving the honor due to God to a Creature; he subjoins as the Point in
difference between them, that the Heathen's Idolatry according to T. G.
consisted in worshipping the devil. For this latter Proposition determins the
more General one to that particular Object: Just as when we say, The main Point
of the Reformation consists in giving the Supreme Authority in Church Affairs
not to the Pope, but some other and among those of the Church of England to the
King, we take the meaning to be that they acknowledge the king to be under God
the only supreme Head of the Church.


Eun: The Parallel is Just, and I confess it made the same Impression upon me,
when I read it, and as many others as I have discoursed with about it. But does
the Dr. cite any passages out of T. G's. Book to show that he advances this
absurd Position?


Cath. A great many I can assure you from which he gathers it very plainly.
Def. p. 2. 3.



Eun: Pray do me the kindness to let me hear them.


Cath That you shall, but little to T. Gs. comfort or your own, if you intend to
defend him.

1. Then T. G. says, that the Worship of Images forbidden in the Commandment
Cath. no Idol. p. 36.
is the worshipping Images instead of God: And the reason of this Law was to
keep the People in their duty of giving Sovereign worship to God alone p. 63.
by restraining them from I^olatry.

2ly That this Law was made particularly p. 67.
to forbid Sovereign worship to be given (as T. G. says it was given a^ that
time by the Heathens) to graven Images, i. e. Representations of Imaginary
Beings; or to any similitude i. e. the likeness of any thing, which although it
had a Real Being, yet was not God.

3ly That the Image Worship condemned by S. Paul, was the wor^hipping of p. 99.
Images for Gods, or as the Images of False Gods.

4ly That Evil Spirits or False Gods p. 103.
did reside in their Images by Magical Incartation.

5ly That the Supreme God of the Heathens was not the true God, but a devil. p.
349.
Lo here the Places, from which the Dr. says it is no hard matter to form T.
Gs. notion of Idolatry viz, that it is the giving the Sovereign Worship of God
to a Creature, and among the Heathens to the devil.


Eun: And it is well the Dr. tells us so, For had I been left to my own
motherwit Def. p. 3.
I should have inferred the quite cont^ary from these Assertions, viz, that T.
G. made the Idolatry of the H^a^h^ns to consist in giving the Sovereign worship
of God not only to the devil, but to someting else besides him. For

In the 1. of these Assertions, he evidently supposes the Heathens to have been
Idolaters for worshipping their Images instead of God.

In the 2d the Dr. himself confesses, that T. G. asserts Sovereign worship to
have been given by the Heathens both to the Representations of Imaginary Beings
(of which I suppose he will not make the devils to be) or to the likeness of
any thing, which although it had a Real Being, yet was not God of which kind
the Heathens had good store besides the devil, as the Sun, moon, stars, Sea,
Earth, etc.

In the 3d He makes S. Paul condemn the Heathens for worshipping the Images
themselves for Gods, (which certainly were not devils,) or as the Images of
False Gods.

In the 4th He reckons indeed the devils for one of the kinds of the False
Gods, to whom the Heathens gave Divine worship, but not the Only. And in the
last he affirms the Heathens supreme God Jupiter to be one of those devils. So
that had I been left, as I said, to my own Mother-wit, I should have inferred
from those very Assertions of T. G. that he perfectly agreed with S. Augustine
in making the Heathens to be Idolaters forgiving the worship due to God either
to the Images themselves, or to Evil Spirits, or to some other of the
Creatures, and not to restrain their Idolatry to the worshipping only of the
devil, as Dr. St. by his Logic would make his Reader believe. Here then you
must acknowledge the Dr. to have prevaricated from the Design he tells us he
has, of representing ma^ters in d^ff^rence truly, when he imposes Pref. to
Rom: Idol.
so false a Notion of the Heathen's Idolatry upon his Adversary in the very
Entrance of his defense; and that from passages of T. Gs. Book, which if I
understand any thing, convince it to be false. But he has conversed so much
with the Poets and Painters, who represent Jupiter as the Father of Gods and
Men, that he seems to have learnt from them to faign his Adversary to say, what
he pleases. And it may be it was for this Reason, that although at first he
said, The notion which T. G. lays down may be gathered from these Assertions p.
2.
of his, yet at last he tells us only, that from th^se Assertions it is no hard
p. 3.
matter to form T. Gs. Notion of Idolatry; an expression better suiting with
the Inventive Faculty of a Poet, than the Rational Collection of a Logician.


Cath. Be this as it will, the matter seems not great. I am sure, you cannot
deny but that T. G. affirms the Supreme Cath. no Idol p. 3483. 49.
God Jupiter, when the Heathens called the Father of Gods and Men, not to be
the true God but a Devil. An Assertion so wild, absurd, and foolish, as
evidently betrays the little Skill of the Advancer of it in the Writings of the
Fathers.


Eun: Yet you know he cited Origin for it.


Cath. I know he did and then according to the custom of that Party, tells us
very judiciously, that the Dr's Father of Gods and men was, according to the
Fathers, an Arch-devil, as if p. 350.
Origin, whom his own Church esteems to have been Heretical, were all the
Fathers with him. But the Dr. I hope will teach both him and his Fellows here
after to talk more sparingly of the Fathers. Is it not possible, says he, for
you D. s. p 23. 24.
to entertain wild and absurd Opinions but upon all occasions you must lay them
at the doors of the Fathers. I have heard of a place where the People were hard
put to it to provide Godfathers for their children; At last they resolved to
choose two men that were to stand as Godfathers for all the Children that were
to be born in the Parish: Just such a use you make of the Fathers; They must
Christen all your Brats; And how f^olish soever an Opinion be, if it comes from
you, it must presently pass under the name of the Fathers. But I shall do my
endeavor to break this bad custom of yours; and since T. G. thinks mea
scarce-revolted Presbyterian, I shall make the right Father stand for his own
Children. And because this is very material toward the true Understanding the
nature of Idolatry, I shall give a full account of the Sense of the Fathers in
this Point; and not as T. G. has done from one single passage of a Learned
(but by their own Church thought Heretical) Father, viz, Origin, presently cry
out, The Fathers, The Fathers. which is like a Country-Fellow, that came to a
Gentleman and told him he had found out a brave Covie of Parstridges lying in
such a Field; The Gentleman was very much pleased with the ne^s, and presently
asked him how many there were: what half a score? No. Eight? No: Six? No. Four:
No. But how many then are there? Sir, says the Country-Fellow, It is a Covie
of One. I am afraid T Gs. Covie of Fathers will hardly come to One at last.


Eun: I See now, Catharinus, there are many ways of writing besides with a
Goos-quill. The Dr. himself represents the renowned Champion of our Lady of
Loretto, writing with a Beetle. And who would not think the most renowned
Champion of Jupiter wrote this with a weaker, smarter Instrument? Dionysius now
turned Pedant never ranted more Magisterially with Birchen scepter in his hand;
nor reforming Stepmother ever used more zealous endeavors to break the former
Wife's Children of their bad customs. But what if after all this T. G. and his
Fellows will not stand corrected but rather venture a fleaing, than cease to
cry out upon all occasions, The Fathers. The Fathers? you say the Dr. will give
such a full account of their sense in this Point (the moiety whereof, if we may
believe him, might be sufficient p. 785.
to convince a Modest man) as may serve to break this bad custom of T. G. But
were it not for spoiling the pleasant stories of the Dr's Godfathers and
Partridges, I could tell you of two Testimonies more cited in that very Page by
T. G. in which, had Dr. St. looked Cath. no Idol. p. 349.
into them, he might have found Theophilus Antio^henus and S. Augustine
asserting Theoph. i. 1. ad Antol. S. Aug. in Ps. 96.
the same with Origin. But how should he then have come quit with T. G. for his
story of the Count^y-Fellow that disputed with the Guard about the p. 186.
h^^our due to the Chair of State? No weapon so proper against a Flail, as a
Flail. But since the Dr. thought not fit to take notice of those Testimonies
for fear of losing his Beloved Covie of One, I shall undertake to make it
appear by more than a Covie of half a score, that T. G. had reason to say as he
did, that the Heathen's Jupiter was according to the Fathers not the true God,
but a Devil.


Cath. You may spare your pains, if you please: Eunomius; For I dare venture
half of all I am worth upon the Dr's credit, that you will not find two, that
will stand for the Brat.


E^n. You shall hazard nothing with me but a little Patience


Cath. Of that I will give you, as much as you please.


Eun. First then for Origin, (the only Fa^he^ cited by T. G. as Dr. St would
have it believed) noth^ng can be more express, than what he says in the name
of the Christians of his time. We are Li. 5. cont. less.
ready, says he, to undergo any torments rather than conf^ss Jupiter to be
God. For we do not believe Jupiter and Sabbath to be the same, nor indeed to be
any God at all, but a devil who is delighted with the name of Jupiter, an Enemy
to Men and God. This is so clear a Testimony, that Dr. St. himself is forced to
acknowledge it. I grant, says he, that Origin does say so. page 8.



Cath. But, he presently adds, Suppose S. Paul and Origin contradict one
another, I desire to know whom we are to follow: and withal tells T. G. that
though Origin were a learned Father, yet he is thought by their own Church to
be Heretical.


Eun: For S. Paul I suppose you will give me occasion to speak of him
hereafter: And for Origen's being thought Her^tical, I hope your self will be
satisfied it was not sor his asserting Jupiter to be a devil, if I shall show,
that in this he speaks not his own Sense alone, but the Sense of the Fathers
that went before him. Those whose writings against the Heathens are come to our
hands were chiefly Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Theophilus Antiochenus,
Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Minucius Felix. I shall take them in
order as they lie.

First Justin Martyr gives this account Apol. 2.
of the Heathen's Idolatry, that wicked devils of old appearing in Counterfeit
shapes conversed with women, and wro^ght such strange prodigies in the world,
that men astonished with fear, and not knowing them to be wicked devils, took
them for Gods, and called every one by that name, which each devil had taken to
himself. And a little after he says, The Images of the Heathens, did not carry
the marks and form of God, but of those wicked devils who had appeared. And
then again, that He that was called Jupiter was one of them, he asserts in his
first Apology, where he says, that the Poets and Mythologists, not knowing
that the Angels, and Doemons begotten by them had been the Authors of the
Infamous practices he there speaks of, attributed them to God himself, (by whom
he means him, whom they esteemed their chief God and called him Jupiter, as
appears by what he adds) and to the sons begotten by him, and to those who are
called his Brothers, Neptune and Pluto. For they called every one by that name,
which each of the Ang^ls (i. e. Evil Angels) had imposed on himself and those
begotten by him. From all which it is evident, that whatever Judgment later
writers make of this Opinion of Justin concerning the Angels conversing with
Women, yet it was his Sense, that the Gods of the Heathens were devils, and
among them Jupiter the Supreme.

2. Athenagoras first shows from what the Poets and Historians relate of the
Legate.
Heathen's Gods, that there was nothing pro Christ.
in them that might induce us to believe, Saturn, Jupit^r, Proserpine, and the
rest p. 64.
of them to be Gods: And then from the Interpretations of the Philosophers,
pretending they meant by Jupiter, the Fire; p. 66.
by Juno, the Earth: by Pluto, the Ay^ etc. having convinced them not to be
Gods, neither Jupiter, says he, nor Juno, nor Pluto: He concludes that those
Gods, whom the Vulgar were delighted with (of which Jupiter no doubt was one)
and bare the same names with the S^atues or Images, were Men, as appears out of
their History. But that they were indeed Devils, who assumed to themselves the
names of those men, may be proved, says he, from their Actions.

3. The same is asserted by Theophilus Antiochenus, (cited by T. G. in the Li.
1. ad Au^olic.
same Page with Origin) where he says, that neither She who is called the
Mother of the Gods, nor her Children, are Gods, but Idols, the works of men's
hands, and most impure devils.

4 After him follows Tertullian, and tells us. W^ know the names of dead men ^i.
de Spect. c. 1. and Apol. c. 27.
to be nothing, as well as their Statues. But we are not ignorant that those
who act, and are pleased, and counterfeit a divinity under those names and
consecrat^d Statues, are wicked Spirits that is, devils. Again, We worship,
says he, one God whom ye all know by the light Li. ad Scap. c. 1.
of nature. As for the rest whom yo^ think to be Gods, we know them to be
devils. And that he esteemed Jupiter to be one of them, and not the true God,
is manifest from what he says in his Apol^g^tick, where speaking of the
Supplications Apol. ^. 40.
made by the Heathens to Jupiter in the Capitol, he says, they were in so
doing averse both from God and Heaven. And in the 23. chapter of the same
Apologetick he says. We are esteemed not to be Romans, b^t Injurious to them,
because we do not worship the God of the Romans. T^'s well, says he, He is the
God of All, whether we will or no. But among you, it is lawful to worship any
thing but the true God; as if He were not the Great God of all, whose We are
All. What could be said more express to remove that abominable pretense of the
Drs. that the God of the Romans was the true God.

5. In the fifth place comes Clemens Alexandrinus, and agreably to the rest
^otrept. p. 55. 16. Edit. ^ ^asil.
affirms of all the Gods of the Heathens that they are the Idols of Devils; and
of the most honored among them, that they were great Devils, viz Apollo,
Diana, Latona, Ceres, Proserpina, Pluto, Hercules, and Ipse Jupiter, Jupiter
himself. This he proves from the delight they took, as they professed, in the
steam and Odor of the Sacrifices; and exacting men to be offered in sacrifice,
to them, of which he give for examples, Diana, and Jupiter. So far was He from
thinking Jupiter to be the true God.

6. But none speaks more home to the purpose than Minucius Felix: for, having
Page 87. Edit. Oxon.
described the several Arts and Cheats, by which these impure Spirits lurking
(as he says) in the Consecrated Statues gained to themselves the Authority and
Esteem of a Deity that was there present, He addresses himself to the Heathens
in these words, All these things many of you know that the Devils confess of
themselves, as often as by us Christians P. 89.
being cast out of the bodies they possess, by the tormenting efficacy of our
words and the Fire of our Prayers. Even Saturn himself, and Serapis, Jupiter
(mark that) and whateuer Devils you worship, Theodoret. li. 3. c. 13.
being overcome with the torture, openly declare what they are. Nor is it to be
S. Hieron. c. Vigil. S. Aug. de civ. Dei li. 8, c. 26.
conceived they lie to their own confusion especially some of your selves being
present. Believe their own Testimony then, when they confess the truth of
themselves, that they are Devils. What would Dr. St. have said to this
argument, had he been one of the Standers by, and heard Jupiter and the rest
confess themseves to be devils? It Is hard to imagine. unless he will grant his
true God Jupiter to have belied himself, or deny the matter of fact to be true,
which yet is avowed by Tertullian also in his Apologetick cap. 23. where he
presses the Heathens with the same argument. You who believed them, says he,
when they lied, Believe them when they speak Truth. No one lies to his own
shame, but for his honor. It Is much more reasonable to believe them conf^ssing
against themselves than denying for themselves. These Confessions of your own
Gods have made many Heathens become Christians. And I do not see, what the
maintaining them not to be devils, when they confess it of themselves, can do,
but dispose Christians to become Heathens. What think you of this C^tharinus?
Here you have a Covie of half a dozen Fathers before Origin, who affirm the
same that he does. Had not T. G. reason then to say at he did, that the
Heathen's Supreme God Jupiter was according to the Fathers an Arch-devil?


Cath. But does not Dr. St. from these very Fathers prove that he was the true
God? Do the Fa^hers blow hot and cold, say, and unsay, as they please? You have
learned I hope of T. G. to play tricks* Doubtless there must be One in this.


Eun: Yes And I hope to make you see where it lies before we have done; if you
will but comply with your promise, and have a little more patience, whilst I
give the Sense of the most Eminent Fathers also who lived after Origin. And
first,

Eusebius; who wrote his Books de Praeparatione Evangelica expressly against
Li. 4. c. 8.
the Heathens, and than whom no man understood their Principles better, tells
them to their Faces, that they ley, when convinced by the wicked Practices of
those they worshipped, they deny that they sacrificed to devils. For to them,
says he, they gave wor^hip; to them they Sacrificed men, and committed most
abominable things in honor of them whom they deemed and called, the most Great
Gods, viz, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Dionysius, Juno, Minerva, Venus, and the most
Wise and Beautiful Apollo, to all whom the Heathens gave the Titles of Dij
Optimi Maximi, and Salvatores, of the most Good and most Great Gods, and
Saviors: But Eusebius proves them to be most Pernicious devils, For if they be
such, says he, as take delight in the slaughter of men, (and it is plain they
are delighted with it, when they cannot be satisfied but with human Sacrifices)
they are certainly convinced to be most wick^d Spirits. -- Nay farther, when by
their Oracles and Answers they required Men to be Sacrificed to them, and most
horrible Impieties to be offered in their Temples, it appears invery deed that
they are by nature most pernicious and wicked. Now if you ask who they were
whom he charge with these things, consult, says he, but their own
Historians, and you will find the whole world to have been subject to these
wicked Spirits Greece, Africa, Thrace, Seythia, the most wise people of Athens,
and the Great City it self, for even there also in the Dialia men were offered
in Sacrifice: Moreover Rhodes, Salamina, all the Islands, Chio, Tenedus,
Arcadia, Lacedemonia, Egypt. Phaenicia, Libya, Syria, Arabia, In fine every
where until the coming of our Savior, they appeased the most pernicious
devils with the slaughter both of beasts and Men, and by most detestable
abominations. F^r we have heard their own Historians ackn^wledge that these
abominations were practiced and continued until the time of Adrianus, and that
then all these horrible practices were understood and laid aside; that is, when
the Preaching of the Gospel of Salvation had dispersed its beams through the
world. This was the Judgment of Eusebius concerning the divinity of Jupiter:
but it may be he was an Heretic as well as Origin; And so indeed he is
esteemed by S. A^hanasius, but not for proving Jupiter and the Rest to be most
wicked devils in the manner he does: for S. Athanasius himself makes use of
Orat. contr. Gent. c^n. med.
the same discourse, and for the same End, when speaking of the custom of the
S^ythians in offering part of the Prisoners taken in war to their Gods, he
says this Tragical cruelty was no^ to be imputed only to the natural
Barbarousn^sse of those People; but that it was the Proper Effect of the
wickedness of the Idols and devils; For the Egyptians also says he, were wont
of old to offer such kind of victimes to Juno. The Phaenicians lik^wise and
those of Creet make Saturn propitious by immolating their children; And the
ancient R^mans also wo^^hipped Jupiter Latiarius with sacrificed men. By this
you see in what esteem Jupiter was for a God with S. Ahanasius; and with him
agree the rest of the Fathers.

S. Cyprian in his Book of the Vanity De Idol. van.
of Idols, makes use of the very arguments and words of M^^ucius Felix to prove
them to be wiked Spirits that lurk under the consecrated Statues and De Idol.
van.
Images. S. Chrysostom says that the Idols of the Heathens are Stone, and
Wood, In 1. Cor. 8.
and Devils. St. Hierom that unclean In Abac. 2.
Spirits assist in all their Images. Arnobius Li. 1. adv. Gent.
Senior that Jupiter whom they called Op^. Max. and to whom they dedicated the
Capitol, was not the true Omnipotent God. A^nobius Junior, that all In Ps. 95.
the Gods of he Gentiles, which were placed in the Temples, were inhabited by
Devils. Lactantius, that Incestuous Spirits feigned many C^lestial (Gods) and
Li. 2. c. 16.
one the King of all Jupiter, because there are many Angelical Spirits in
heaven, and one Father and Lord of all, God. But they have taken a way, says
he, the truth from the eyes of men by involving it under counter feit and lying
namer. These, says he c. 14. are the Authors of the Evils which are acted,
whose Prince is the devil; whence Trismegistus calls him (...), the Arch-Devil:
and these they take to be Gods. Lastly, not to keep your patience too long
stretched, for I perceive you are uneasy, S. Augustine In Ps. 16.
in the place cited by T. G. a little after Origin, replying to one of the Dr's
subtiller Heathens, who pretended as He does, that they did not worship the
Image it self, but the Invisible deity which presided over such an Image. Ego
dico, I assert, says he, that in your Temples none but wicked Spirits are
worshipped. And a little below, such, says he, were D^abolus (the Devil himself
or Arch-Devil) and Daemonia ejus, his Angels. He arrogated divine honor to
himself and to all the Devils, and filled the Temples of the Heathens, and
persuaded simulacra Statues to be dedicated, and Sacrifices to be offered to
them. In like manner in his 4th Book of the City of God A way, says he, with
this rabble C. 25.
of Innumerable Devils. He that thinks it enough for him to be Happy, let him
serve the One God, who is the Giver of Happiness. That is, according to Dr. St.
J^piter, but not so according to S. Augustine, for he presently adds, Non est
ipse quemnominant Jovem. It is not He wh^^ they call Jupiter. No; He puts him
in among the rest when he says, that none but wicked Spirits or Devils are
worshipped in their Temples.

Thus for a Covie of one (which the Dr. almost despaired of too (I have
presented you with more than a whole Jury besides Origin, of Eminent Fathers
who all assert with him, that the Heathen's Supreme God Iupite^, that is, (as
himself describes him) He that was Def. p. 41.
worshipped in the Capitol at Rome with the title of Jupiter O. M. was not the
true God but a Devil. And it were easy to add more to them if need were; But
these I hope may serve to break that bad custom in the Dr. of ranting and
vapouring without a cause, and we shall hear no more of his pretty storys of
the two God f^thers, and ridiculous Covie of one. Yet I cannot omit, for the
great ^useb. de Praep. Evang. li. 4. c. 11.
Esteem he has for the Wiser Heathens to add one Testimony more out of
Eusebius, and that is of the great Porphyrius, who confesses it to be the work
of the Devils to draw the multitude by the allurements of Riches, Pleasures,
Power, and Vain glory from the true Opinion concerning the worship of the Gods,
to conferr it upon them; and what is worst of all, to persuade not only the
Vulgar, but many of the Philosophers also (as in effect they did) to believe,
that the Gods themselves, even the Supreme God of the Universe were obnoxious,
to the same Vices: which was, says Eusebius, to persuade them that the first
or chief Spirits among them was the Supreme God. And had not the Fathers then
reason to affirm, as they did, that the Heathens Supreme God was an Arch-Devil,
when so great a Patron of their cause, as Porphyrius, convinced by the Evidence
of truth, was forced to confess it? What had become of half of all you are
worth, Catharinus, had I permitted you to venture it upon the Dr's credit?


Cath. You have taken a great deal of pains, Eunomius to make so many God
fathers stand for this Brat. And I cannot but thank you for your kindness in
not accepting my Offer. But when all is done you have done just nothing, unless
on the other side you can make it appear that the Passages cited by Dr. St. to
prove the Heathen's Jupiter ^o be the true God are impertinently alleged, or
their Sense misrepresented, or their words corrupted by him. Is you can do any
or all of these, I must knock under the Table.


Eun: I readily embrace the Overture. And if I fail in the performance, --


Cath. Hold Eunomius, You shall lay no wagers neither. Nor will it be safe for
you, while the Testimony of Scripture Def. p. 6.
is so plain in this matter to any unbyassed mind, as appears by S. Paul's
saying to the Men of Athens, when he sow the Altar to the Unknown God; Whom you
ignorantly worship, Him I declare to you. Pray hear the Dr's Paraphrase upon
this Text. Did S. Paul mean the Devil by this? Did he in good earnest go abroad
to preach the Devil to p. 7.
the world? Yet he preached him, whom they ignorantly worshipped, i. e. the
Devil, says T, G. although S. Paul immediately says, It was the God that made
the world and all things in it. And asterward quotes one of their Poets for
saying (...). For we are his Offspring, and it is observable that the words
immediately going before in Aratus are (...); And he uses (...) twice more in
the Verses before Ex (...). -- (...), which is the very word that T. G. says
does signify an Arch-Devil, does S. Paul then say, We are all the Devil's
Offspring? and not an Ordinary one neither, but the very Arch-Devil's? Was this
his way of persuading ^he Athenians to leave the worship of Devils, to tell
them, that they were All the Devil's Offspring? No. It was far enough from
him, for he inferrs from that saying of Aratus, that they were the Offspring of
G. d. (...) So that if S. Paul may be credited rather than T. G. their Jupiter
was so far from being the Arch-Devil, that he was the true God, Blessed for
evermore.


Eun: A very Godly Paraphrase no doubt: but such an one as plainly contradicts
the meaning of S. Paul, if that Altar were not dedicated to Jupiter: as it
appears most Evidently it was not, from the very Inscription: which was not
Iovi Opt. Max. whom they all knew very well, and to whom they had Altars
particularly dedicated; but Ignoto D^o to an Unknown God, whom they were
ignorant of. And S. Paul himself gives this for the reason, why he calls the
Athenians (...) more Superstitiously Religious, than others, because not
content with the commonly known Gods, (of whom Jupiter was certainly One,) they
had erected an Altar to One, they knew not who. Could any thing then be more
contrary to the meaning of S. Paul, than to argue from this Inscription, that
S. Paul came to preach their Jupiter to the Athenians, when he expressly tells
them, he came to declare to them a God whom they did not know? This had been a
better Argument for T. G. to prove, that this Unknown God was the only true God
according to S. Paul, and that Jupiter and the rest whom they worshipped, were
False Gods or Devils. But the Dr. has a Faculty of doing greater wonders with
two words (Ignoto Deo) than those of the Church of Rome with Five when he can
thus easily change the Devil himself into God. Lucifer once attempted something
like it, but failed in the design, and can only transform himself into an Angel
of Light.


Cath. I confess the Observation you make from the Inscription (Ignoto Deo) is
so plain and Obvious, that I wonder so acute a man, as Dr. St. could oversee it.


Eun: It Is the Glory of great Wits not to see that, which every one can see:
but to discover that which none can see but themselves.


Cath. But what do you say to that Observation of his, that S. Paul cites the
words of Aratus, We are his offspring, when the Poet had thrice used the word
Jupiter before those cited by the Apostle?


Eun: I say, that for a Heathen Poet to apply the Attributes of the true God to
Jupiter is no great great wonder; And if A^atus knew the true God, he might
think fit to apply the name of Jupiter to him, as being the name of that Deity
which was Supreme among them, as S. Augustine says of Varro; but it does not
Li. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 22.
follow, that S. Paul, because he cited him, thought their Jupiter to be the
true God. This was so far from his thoughts, that he left out the words of
Aratus (though as much for his purpose) in which mention was made of Jupiter;
and made use only of those, in which Jupiter was not named, ((...), For we are
his Offspring) as being applicable in that Abstraction to the true God only,
whom he had taken occasion from the Inscription, To the Unknown God, to declare
unto them. And although the Relative, (...) (His) in Aratus referr to Jupiter,
yet in S. Paul it referrs to him of whom he had spoken before, viz the God who
made Heaven and Earth, in whom we live, and move, and have our Being, as some
of your own Poets says he, have also said. For we are his Offspring. And that
we might not think, as Dr. St. does, that he spoke of Jupiter, he immediately
repeats the words assigning them their true and proper Substantive (...). Being
therefore the Offspring of God, not (...), of Jupiter. What means this changing
of the name, if according to S. Paul, as the Dr. says, their Jup^ter was so
far from being an A^ch-D^v^l, that he was the true God, Blessed for evermore?
you cannot but remember what the same S. Paul says 1. Cor 10. 20. that What
^he Heathens offer in Sacrifice h^y offer to Devils, and not to God. And
however the Dr. will have S. Paul and Origin to cont^adict one another, yet I
suppose he will not say, that S. Paul contradicts himself. Nor can you have
forgot, how when at Lystra, the Priest of Jupiter would have offered Acts 14.
Sacrifice to him as Mercu^y, and to Barnab is as ^oue, in whose shapes they
supposed those Gods to have appeared, he not only forbad them to do it because
they were men of like passions with them; but with all told them, that the end
of their coming was to preach to them, that they might be converted from those
vain things (that is, in the Phrase of H. Scripture from their False Gods) to
the Living God. And now Catharinus (to return the Dr's own Figure of Rhetoric
upon him) pray tell me what you think: Did S. Paul mean Jupiter by this Living
God? Did he in good earnest go abroad to preach Jupiter to the world? yet he
taught them to convert themselves from those vain things (their False Gods) to
the Living God, i. e. to Jupiter says Dr. St. Was this his way to persuade the
men of Lystra to leave the worship of their Gods, to tell them that he came to
teach them to worship Jupiter? No. It was far enough from S. Paul, for by
saying* these vain things he expressly tells them, that Mercury and Jupiter
were two of those vain and f^lse Gods, and that he came to convert them from
the worship of them to the Living God. So that if S. Paul may be credited,
rather than Dr. St. their Jupiter was so far from being the true God Blessed
for evermore, that he was the Arch-Devil, damned for evermore. What think you
of this, Catharinus?


Cath. Marry, I think this Rhet^rick to be a very dangerous thing, when the
same Figure conveniently applied will serve to prove the Heathen's Jupiter to
be the true Supreme God according to Dr. St. and to be an Arch-Devil, according
to T. G.


Eun: The thing is good in it self, but may be abused, as it is here by Dr. St.
to put a Gloss upon the words of S. Paul quite contrary to his meaning, as I
have showed from the very Text it self, and other passages of the Apostle. And
if he durst treat S. Paul himself in this manner to make him stand as
Godfather to this Infamous Brat, what may we not expect he will do with the
Fathers?


Cath. That is what I long to hear: What you can say to that full Account,
which the Dr says he has given of their Sense in this matter.


Eun. Nor shall it be long before I give you satisfaction in that Point.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe greatest part of the Testimonies of the Fathers produced by Dr. St. that
is, All those which import no more, than either that the Heathens had a natural
knowledge of one Supreme God, or that it was their Sense that their Inpiter was
He, shown to be Inpertinent to the Dispute between him and T. G. from the true
State of the Question. His injurious usage of the Fathers, blaming them for
charging the Heathens with more than they were guilty of, or themselves could
prove, (being indeed atacite Conf^ssion that he looked upon them as Opposite to
him) laid open in a clee^ Account of the Heathen's Theology, and the several
ways, the Fathers took to ref^te it, all of them convincing, as is made
manifest both from the arguments themselves being rightly applied to their due
subjects, and the success they had.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. CA^h. It Is now, Eunomius, that I expect the performance
of your p^omise, which was to show, that the Dr's Citations out of the Fathers,
to prove the Heathen's Jupiter to be the true God, are all either impertinently
alleged, or their meaning misrepresented, or both their words and Sense
corrupted by him. If you can do this, the Dr. fot ought I can see must stand
for his own Child.


Eun: This I confess is what I promised; and to perform it, it will be
necessary in the first place to set down the true State of the ^uestion between
the Dr. and T. G. in this Point, which I take to be this, viz, Whether the
H^athen's I^piter were according to the Fathers the true God, that is, whether
it were the Father's own Sense that Jupiter was the true God? That this is the
true State of the Question between them, is evident from the D'rs own words;
For having sufficiently reproached T. G. for affirming the Heathen's Jupiter to
be according to the Fathers, not the true God, but a Devil, what he says he
will undertake to do is to break him and his fellows of he p. 24.
bad custom* they have got of passing their own foolish Opinions under the
name of the Fathers, by giving a full account of the Sense of the Fathers in
this Point, and not as T. G. had done from one single passage of a learned, but
by their own Church thought Heretical Father. Now what he resolved to correct
in T. G. at present was his pretending the Sense of Origin to be the Sense of
the Fathers. And therefore in another place, I commend, says he T. G. f^r his
Modesty, p. 78.
that when he had said this was the Sense of the Fathers he produces no more
but good Father Origin, and with great judgment supposes, that what he said was
the Common Sense of the Fathers. This appears yet farther from that Religious
Assertion p. 7.
of his, that i^ S. Paul may be credited rather than T. G. the Heathen's
Jupiter was so far from being an Arch Devil, that he was the true God, Blessed
for evermore: where you see he makes it to be S. Paul's Sens^, that Jupiter was
the true God, and therefore in the next page, having granted it to be Origen's
Sense, p. ^.
that he was a Devil, he fupposes Origin therein to contradict S. Paul. So that
the Question between them as I said, is whether it were the Sense of the
Fathers, that the Heathen's Jupiter, that Jupiter O. M. for example, to use the
Dr's own words, that was worshipped in the Capitol at Rome, were the true God?
p. 14.



Cathar. This I easily grant to be the true State of the Question. But why are
you so sollicitous about it?


Eun: Because there are many other Questions, which seem to bear some affinity
to this, and yet are very different from it, as 1st. whether the Heathens did
not acknowledge one Supreme God? 2ly. Whether themselves did not pretend that
they understood this Supreme God by Jupiter, and accordingly gave to him the
Titles due to the Supreme Go? 3dly. Whether the Fathers do not acknowledge that
this was pretended by the Heathens? All these Questions I say, how speciously
soever connected they may seem to you, yet in truth they are very different
from the point in debate between the Dr. and T. G. viz, whether it were the
Father's own Sense, that Jupiter was the Supreme God? For 1. Those very Fathers
who assert the knowledge of the true God to be in all men by the light of
nature, condemn the Heathens for worshipping the Creatures instead of the
Creator, and particularly for worshipping Jupiter, whom they affirmed to be a
Devil, as you heard before. 2ly Though the Heathens might pretend, they
understood the Supreme God by Jupiter, yet this was but the Sense of the
Heathens, not of the Fathers. And 3ly though the Fathers acknowledge that this
was pretended by the Heathens, yet they might be far enough in their own
Judgments from thinking Jupiter to be the Supreme God. From whence it follows,
that as many of the Drs. Testimonies as shall be found to carry no farther,
than either to prove, that the Heathens did acknowledge one Supreme God; or
that they themselves owned Jupiter to be the Supreme God; or that the Fathers
related only some sayings of theirs, in which they did so; do evidently fall
sho^t of the Question, which was not whether it were the Sense of the Heathens,
but of the Fathers themselves that Jupiter was the true God? And here lies the
Trick which I promised to let you see.


Cath. It Is a Subtilty I confess which as yet I do not fully comprehend: and
therefore desire you will explicate your self a little more upon each particular.


Eun: First then I say, that all those Testimonies of the Fathers, cited by the
1*
Dr. which serve only to prove that the Heathens had a knowledge of one Supreme
God, are altogether impertinent to prove it to be the Sense of the Fathers,
that Jupiter was the Supreme God; because those very Fathers, who affirm this
of them, deny Jupiter to be the true God, and condemn the Heathens for giving
the honor due to the true God, to him. And that you may fee this to be so I
shall cite you some of their own words. We Li. 1. Adv. Gent. p. 9.
know, says Arnobius that the knowledge of God is in all men by nature, but He
is not Jupiter. Such is the force of the true Divinity, says S Augustine, that
it cannot Tract. 106. in (...).
be altogether hidden to a Rational Creature in possession of the use of
reason: For excepting a f^w in whom nature is too too much depraved, all
mankind conf^sses God to be the Author of the world. But that this was not the
Roman's Jupiter he expressly affirms li. 4. de Civ. Deic. 17. 25. Non est Ipse
qnem Iovem nominant. And in his first Book de cons. Evang, he proves the
Heathens did not worship the true God, c. 2^.
because they did not worship the God of the Jews. That there is one Supreme
Governor of the world, says Minucius Felix, p. 54.
whom we call God, I have the consent of all men: But as for Jupiter, he p. 89.
reckons him as you heard before, among the Devils. When we see, says
Lactantius, the Worshippers of False Gods ^ftentimes Li. 2. c. 1.
confess the One Supreme God. what pardon can they hope for their Impiety, in
not acknowledging the worship of him who cannot possibly be altogether unknown
to Mankind: When they swear, or wish, or give thanks, they do not, says he,
name Jupiter or their many Gods, but God. Thus does Truth by the sorce of
nature break from their relucting hearts. Lastly, not to strain your patience
too much, That God has given such or such a Benefit, says Tertullian, is the
Apol. c. 17.
Voice of all, as also those other Common Expressions, when they appeal to him
as Judge, God sees, and I commend it to God, God will restore. O testimony of
a Soul, says he, naturally Christian. But then remarks, that when they say
these things, they lift not up their Eyes to the Capitol, but to Heaven, which
they k^ow to be the Throne of the Living God. In like manner in his Book de
Anima, Give testimony, says he, O soul, if thou know one only God from whom
all things ^ 5.
are: For we hear thee also saying that God has given etc. By which Expression
thou signifiest there is some such One, and that all power belongs to him; but
at the same time thou deniest the rest to be Gods, whilst thou call them by
their own names, S^turn, Jupiter, Mars etc. For thou confessest him alone to be
God, whom alone thou call God. So that when thou sometimes call those
other Gods thou do but borrow, or rather steal that name from another, whose
properly it is. And again, at the end of the Book, In the very Temples, says
he, thou call upon God as Judge, but do not appeal to any of the present
Gods, that is, who are worshipped in those Temples. O Testimony of Truth which
gives Evidence for Christians in the presence of the Devils themselves! Many
other passages could I cite to the same purpose out of Justin Martyr,
Athenagoras, Clemens Alexandrinus, S. Cyprian, and others, were I minded to
amuze the world with a great Book: but these may suffice to let you see how
Impertinent it was to the point in debate (viz whether it were the Sense of the
Fathers, that Jupiter was the Supreme God?) for Dr. St. to stuff out so many
Pages with Testimonies to prove that the Heathens had the knowledge of one
Supreme God ingrafted in them by nature, when those very Fathers, who affirm it
of them, deny Jupiter to be the Supreme God, and show from the very Expressions
and actions of the Heathens, that they themselves acknowledged another distinct
from Jupiter to be the true God.


Cath. Thus far I think I comprehend your meaning, and must confess that had
the Dr. done no more, he had done but little to the purpose. But there are other
Testimonies produced by him, which evidently prove that the Heathens by Jupiter
understood and worshipped the one Supreme God.


Eun: This is the 2d Question, which 2.
I said might be proposed. And to say the Truth, Dr. St. gives us a pretty full
account of the Fathers in this matter. But what Fathers are they? The first (in
dignity at least) are the two most Reverend Fathers in Jupiter* Father R^mulus,
p. 3^. 34. 39.
and Father Numa, whom he makes little Inferior to Moses and Aaron in their
care to instruct the People in the knowledge and worship of the One Supreme
God. To them he joins Father Livy, Father Varro, Father Ennius, Father P. 35.
36.
Plautus, Father Virgll, Father Ovid, Father Tacitus and Father Pliny, who give
to Jupiter the Titles of Opt. Max. and of Father of Gods and men. But then for
fear these should not be strong enough to do the work he comes in with an
Arrier-ban of other Fathers, who bestow upon him the Titles of Omnipotent, and
Chief of the Gods, viz, P. 44.
Father Balbus, Father Cicero, Fath^^ Seneca, Father Virgil, Father Soranus,
Father Dio Chrysostom, and Father Dionysius Halicarnassaeus. And then to put
the matter out of all dispute, he comes over again with Father Plautus, because
he affords us many Instances of prayers to P. 46. 49.
the Supreme God, as when the Punick Nurse, cried out Proh Supreme I^piter!
Poenul. Act. 5. Sc. 3.
though like a Saucy Miller he ioyn the Title of Versipellis at the same time
to that of Summus Jupiter for the lewd In Amphitr. Prol.
trick he played Alcumena in her Husbands absence, leaving her Vtrinque
gravidam and ex viro and ex S^mmo Jove. Father Virgil also is brought in a
third and a 4th time. (No doubt because he was, as the Dr. tells us
particularly observed by the ancient Critics, to be so Nice p. 46.
and exact in all matters that concerned their Religion, as if he had been
Pontifex Max.) and then adds to them, to complete the number, Father Silius,
Father Persius, Father Horace, Father Valerius Maximus, and lastly the
diminutive Father, Father Paterculus, for p. 54.
concluding his Book with that Religious Invocation, Jupiter Capitoline, Auctor
and Stator Romani Nominis. By this you see what Fathers they are, that Dr. St.
is conversant with. But what is all this (in case the Heathens did give the
Titles of the true God to Jupiter and that in the midst of all his mad pranks,
as Father Plautus does, for which reason I remember I was taught Amphitr. in
Prol. and Act. 5. Sc. 1. Summus Imperator Divum atque hominum Jupiter, Is se
dixit cum Alcume^a clam ^onsuetum cubi^^bus.
at School to look upon them as Prosane Blasphemers,) what is all this I say to
the Question between the Dr and T. G. which was not as I suppose, whether it
were the Sense of the Heathen, but of the Ch^istian Fathers, that their Jupiter
was the Supreme God? All these Testimonies therefore ought to be laid aside
also as Impertinent to the present purpose.

The same I affirm also of those other Testimonies relating to the 3d Question,
3.
in which the Christian Fathers are cited by Dr. St. as acknowledging that the
Heathens pretended they understood by Jupiter the Supreme God: For they might
cite some sayings of the Heathens to that purpose, and yet be of a contra^y
Judgment themselves; as if One should tell you, that Dr. St. says he sits down
with this contentment, that he has defended a righteous cause, and with an
honest mind, He may think otherwise himself for ought you know. Now that the
Fathers were of a contrary Judgment themselves in this Point is manifest,
because (as you heard before) they affirmed Jupiter to be a Devil, and proved
him to be so from his actions; and rejected that pretense of the Heathens as
vain and Impious: and consequently all the Testimonies of this kind also, cited
by the Dr. are altogether as Impertinent as the Former. These things Dr. St.
was not ignorant of, and thinking to mend the matter, has made it worse. For
what do you think he does? Very fairly he takes part with the Heathens against
the Fathers by endeavoring to make them appear either Impertinently obstinat^
in not believing the Heathens; or if they did believe them, so perversely
I^sincere, as to make them Idolaters whither they would or no, for worshipping
Jupiter, and this by such kind of arguments, as according to him gave the
Advantage to the Heathens: And yet this is the man that undertakes to maintain
it to be the Sense of the Fathers themselves, that Jupiter was the true God.


Cath. Here you must give me leave, Eunomius, to tell you, that I think you are
too Severe upon the Dr. for no man of an Ordinary Mother-wit would betray his
cause by such a Tacit Confessio, as this is, that he looked upon the Fa^hers as
Opposite to him.


Eun: yet I shall prove what I have said from his own words. For what else does
he mean, when having varnished over the most Obscene and abominable Ceremonies
used by the Heathens in the worship of their Gods, with the gentle name only of
Indecencies, which the Fathers, says he, charge the Practice of their Religion
with, he adds with a But. p. 40. 41.
that as they were not to be excused in other things, so we ought not to charge
them with more than they were guilty of? And what that was, he tells us in the
next words; I mean, says he, when all the Poetical Fables of Jupiter, are
applied to Jupiter O. M. that was worshipped in the Capitol at Rome. You are
satisfied now, I hope, Catharinus, that the Dr. makes the Fathers charge the
Heathens with more than they were guilty of, which they could not do, but
either they must not believe them, when they pretended Jupiter to be the
Supreme God; or if they believed them, must act against their consciences, and
betray their own cause, by applying the Po^tical Fables of Jupiter to Jupiter
O. M. who was worshipped in the Capitol. Now that this was done by all the
Fathers, Dr. St. very well knows. But mere shame would not permit him to lay so
great a reproach upon them all at once, and therefore he picks out two at first
viz, A^nobius and Lactantius, with whom he thought he might be more bold, and
goes on in this manner. But some Writers, are to be excused, who having been
bred up in the Schools of Rhetoricians, and practicing that Art so long before,
when they came to be Christians, they could not easily f^rbear giving a cast of
their f^rmer employment, As when Arnobius, says he, had been proving the
natural Notion of one Supreme God in the minds of men, he brings in the Romans
answering, that if this were intended against them, it was a mere calumny, for
they believed him, and called him Jupiter O. M. and built a most Magnificent
Temple to him in the Capitol: which he (i. e^. Arnobius) endeavors to
disprove, (mark that) because God is Eternal, and their Jupiter was bo^n, and
had a Father and Mother and Uncles and Aunts, as other M^^tals baue. Which
indeed, says the Dr. was an Infallible Argument, that Jupiter of Cr^te could
not be the Supreme God, but for all that, might not the Romans call the Supreme
God by the name of Jupiter Opt. Max? where he evidently disallows the discourse
of Arnobius, and shows how it was, or might have been avoided by the Heathens,
had he been to answer for them. In the same manner he treats Lactantius, for
ripping up, (as he calls it) all the Extravagancies of the p. 42.
Poets concerning Jupiter, interposing presently in their behalf, as though the
Romans at the same time believed him to have done all those things, and to have
been the Supreme Governor of the world. And when Lactantius to enforce his
argument, and confute this pretense of theirs alleges, that they themselves
confess he same Jupiter to have been bo^n of Saturn and Rhea, the doctor
replies upon him, that he might have done well to have explained himself a
little more. And what is this I pray, but to tell us, that these F^thers changed
the Heathens with more than they were guilty of, and that not being able to
make good what they charged them with, they thought to fob them off with a cast
of their former employment*

Having thus broken the Ice he now dares venture to fix the same reproach,
though more covertly, on Clemens Al^xandrinus p. 74.
also: for having told us, how he understood the Principles of the Heathen
Theology as well as any, and exposed all their P^e^ical Fables, and Greek
mysteries with as much advantage as any Christian Writer, he gives us this very
honorable account of his performance. After he has sufficiently, p. 75.
says he, derided the Poetical Theology and the Vulgar Idolatry, he comes to
the Philosophers, who did he says make an Idol of matter; and after reckoning
up Thales, Anaximenes, Parmenides, and others, he calls them all Atheists,
because with a foolish kind of Wis^o^ they did worship Matter, and scorning to
worship wood and Stones did d^ify the Mother of them: And so runs out, says
he, after his way (which in the Dr's. Rhetoric signifies he run out of the
way) i^to a discourse about the Several Nat^ons, that despised Images, and
worshipped the Several Parts of ^h^ Universe, and the Symbols of them, as the
Scythians, Sarmatians, Persians, and Macedonians. And then reckons up other
Philosophers that wors^ipped the Stars, as animated Beings; Others, the
Planets and the world, and the Stoics who said, God passed through the meanest
parts of Matter. By this account the Dr. gives of Clemens his performance
(however he treat him with more respect than he had done A^nobius and
Lactantius) yet it is evident he looks upon his way of confuting the Heathens,
as inept and frivolous also.

But none is represented by him to have been so much baffled by the Heathens in
the Point of I^piter's divinity as S. Augustine, of whom he says, It is p. 94.
true, that He argu^s against the Heathen's pretense of Jupiter's being the
true Go^ from the Poetical Fables about Saturn and Juno, but conf^sses withal,
that they thought it very unreasonable for their Religion to be charged with
those Fables, which themselves diso^ned. And hitherto S. Augustine goes along
with his Fellows, that is, he argued just as wisely as they had done before
him. But this last acknowledgment of the Heathens Pretense it seems wrought a
different effect in him, from what it had done in them. For whereas they were
so Obstinate as to persist in rejecting and impugning this pretense of the
Heathens as vain and absurd, S. Augustine, according to what the Dr. adds of
him, was so convinced of the evidence of it, that theref^^e at last he could
not deny that they believed themselves, that by the Jove in the Capitol they
understood and worshipped the Spirit that quick^ns and fills the world, of
which Virgil spoke in those words, Iovis omnia plena. And had not one Wise word
to answer for himself, but sit down and wonder, tha^ since they acknowledged
this to be the Supreme, if not the only Deity, the Romans did not rather
content themselves with the worship of him alone, th^n run about and m^ke so
many addresses to the Pe^ty and Inferior Deities. Thus had Dr. St. been
constituted Vmpire, the Victory had been given to the Heathens; and S. A^gustin
(at least whilst he argued against them from the Poetical Fables,) and the rest
of the Fathers had been condemned as Imposto^s, for charging the Heathens with
more than they were guilty of, or themselves could prove. This kind of
procedure would have suited much better with the design of Julian, than of the
Reformation, and it cannot be presumed, but that that Religious Emperor, who
utterly also rejected the Poetical Fables concerning the Gods, would have had
avery high p. 88.
esteem for such a Champ^on.


Cath. These passages I must acknowledge, argue agreat deal of kindness and
tenderness in the Dr. for the poor Heathens, to see them so ill treated by the
Fathers. And it was but Christian Generosity in him to do them right;
especially when the Papists themselves confess they do not take all the
Arguments of the Fathers to be Infallible demonstrations.


Eun: But where was his Christian Generosi^y, when himself charges the poor
Papists with mo^^ than they are guilty of, if their Public Professions are to
be believed; at least with what themselves deny? They must be made to take the
Saints for Gods, and worship the very stock^ and Stones as such, whether they
will or no. Was all his tenderness spent upon the Heathens, and none left for
his Fellow Christians? Not one kind Parenthesis for them, as well as for the
Heathens, (as though there ever had been such F^ols in the world; or p. 541.
p. 706.
if at least any considerable number of them ever did so?) Kissing I see goes
by Favor, and the Heathens are more beholden to him, than those of the Church
of Rome, though he acknowledge it to be a true Church, as holding all the
Essential Points of Faith. As for what you add of them, that they do not take
all the Arguments of the Fathers to be Infallible demonstrations, I think it
very unreasonably applied to the present case. But am very well assured, your
self cannot deny this to be an I^f^llible demonstration, viz, that the Fathers,
while they would not admit the pretense of the Heathens, affirming they
worshipped the true God under the name of Jupiter, but set themselves by such
arguments, as they (poor men) were able, to consute it, did not themselves
believe that Jupiter was the true God, which was what Dr. St. had undertaken to
prove against T. G. Or else that they were not as he describes them, M^n of Ep.
D^dic.
that Exemplary Piet^, great Abilities, and Excellen^ Conduct and Magnanimity,
as s^t ^h^m above the contempt and reproach o^ any but I^fidels and Apostates;
when himself, as you have seen, exposes t^em to the contempt and reproach of
being Unequal Matches to the Heathen Achillesses; or which is worse, down right
Prevaricators. By this you see what a Full account the Dr. gives us of the
Sense of the Fathers in this Point, when the greatest part of the Testimonies
he brings reach no farther, than to prove that the Heathens had a natural
Notion of one Supreme God, or at most that it was the Sense of the Heathens,
that I^piter was He (all which I have (...) to be Impertinent to the Point in
debate) and reproaches the Fathers for endeavoring to disprove them; which is
as much, in plain English, as to tell us, that it was not their Sense, that
Jupiter was the true God.


Cath. You are too rigorous, Eunomius, in tying up an Author always to the
strict Method of close arguing. There is a Libe^ty to be given to Writers to
make use some times of Rhetorical Ornaments and Amplifications. And such I take
these passages cited by the Dr. to be, which though they come not home to the
Question, and therefore are rejected by you as Impertinent; yet they serve to
illustrate those other Testimonies, that do* of which the Dr. has alleged
good store out of the Fathers.


Eun: This is what I deny; and if you think fit to produce them, I do not
doubt, but to make good my promise, that is, to show, that either the meaning
of the Fathers is misrepresented, or both their words and Sense corrupted by
him.


Cathar. But before you proceed to that, which I am well assured you will never
make out, I would gladly receive satisfaction from you in a Point relating to
our former discourse; viz, what Judgment your self make of the Arguments
produced by the Fathers to convince the Heathens of Idolatry, and particularly
of those from the Poetical Fables, which seem to me to be Ironical and Trivial,
rather than Serious and Solid.


Eun: Could I transcribe the Arguments used by the Fathers upon this Occasion,
I durst leave them to speak for themselves at the Bar of your Judgment. But
this would require a Volume, or rather many Volumes to do, they being well nigh
Infinite. I shall therefore at present reduce so many of them as occurr to my
Memory to some certain General Heads, from whence you may take a sufficient
Prospect not only of the Fathers designs, and the force of their Arguments, but
upon what account alfo it was that they charged the Heathens with Idolatry. To
do this with greater clearness, I must desire you to take notice, that as the
Heathens had many kinds of Gods for the worshipping of which they were charged
with Idolatry so the Fathers had not one only sort of Adversaries to deal with,
but many. And

First for the Gods, S. Augustine tells us out of Varro, and Scaevola that the
Li. 6. de civ. Dei c. and li. 4. c. 27. Eusebius. li. 4. de Praep. Evang. in Praef.
Heathen's Theology gave a threefold account of them, the one Fabulous, used by
the Poets; the 2d Natural, used by the Philosophers, and the 3d Civil used by
the Priests and People in their public worship. The first they said was
accomodated to the Theater, the 2d to the Philosophers, the third to the
People. But S. Augustine shows the first and the last viz, the Fabulous and the
Civil, not to be well distinguished, because the same Gods who were exposed to
Derision in the Theaters, were p^oposed as Objects of Ado^ation in the Temples,
and had Sacrifices offered to them. So that in reality they had but two kinds
of Gods, the Fabulous or Civil used by the Priests and People, and the Natural
by the Arnob. li. 1. Tertull. Apol. c. 10. lact. li. 1. c. 8. S. Aug. li. 8. de
civ. Dei. c. ^6. Cic.
Philosophers. The Former of these were Originally Dead men, whom the People
out of flattery or Affection had place^ in heaven, and the Images erected to
their memory; but consequently Evil Spirits, which as it were incorporated li.
2. de not. Deo.
themselves in the Images, and as Minucius Felix says, by exhibiting
themselves present in the Temples, inspiring the Vates, animating the entrails
of beasts, governing the flight o^ birds, directing Lots to fall where they
pleased, and the like Prodigious effects, gained to themselves Vid. S. Aug. de
civ. Dei li. 8. c. 22.
the Authority and Esteem of Gods, assuming with all to themselves, as
Athenagoras says, the same names with the p. 66.
Statues or Images in which they assisted. Hence the Poets took occasion
sometimes to subject them to the Passions of Men, sometimes to give them the
Titles due only to the true divinity; The Priests also, to make a strange
mixture or confusion of Poetical Fables and Religious Ceremonies in their
public worship, at once to delight and S. Aug. li. 4. de civ. Dei. c. 27. 32.
delude the People: And the Philo^ophers, to invent new Interpretations to
avoid the shame of those foul Practices, which not only the Poets, but the
Historians also attributed to them, Lict. li. 1. c. 8. and 11.
as Lactantius shows. And this was the Origin of that sort of Gods which S.
Aug. li. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 23.
they called Fabulous or Civil, first the favor of the People, and (...) the
delusion of wicked Spirits.

The 2d kind, which they called Natural, had for it is Object the parts of the
Universe, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Fire, the Air, the Earth and. And
although it be appropriated to the Def. p. 15.
Philosophers, yet as Dr. St. himself tells us out of Clemens Alexandrinus,
there were Several Nations, that despised Images, and worshipped the Several
parts of the Universe, and the Symb^ls of them, as the Scythians, Sarmatians,
Persians, and Macedonians, (among whom the Egyptians may be reckoned for that
part of their Religion, which concerned the worship of creatures) whom the said
Clemens makes to have been the Phil^sop^er's Masters in the worship of these
Inf^riour Elements, which were made to be Serviceable to men; And then reckons
up other Philosophers, that worshipped the Stars, as animated Beings; Others
the Planets and the World, and the Stoics who said, God passed through the
meanest parts of Matter. If you ask from whence this kind of Idolat^y took it is
rise, Vossius, as you heard before assigns it to the Ignorance and Inadvertency
of men, in De Idol. Praefat. 1.
not distinguishing the Divine Power which is from God, from that other which
is in God, and therefore from the wonderful works which they discovered in
nature, concluded Nature it self to be God, and the parts of it also to be
Deities, (very agreably to what the Author of the Book of Wisdom relates of
this matter in his 13th Chapter) though both the said Vossius and Others add
many other impulsive Causes which concurred to plunge the Heathens in this kind
of Idolatry; among which Lactantius makes the chief to be the Devil, who being
always an Enemy to Truth, takes Li. 2. c. 1.
pleasure in the Errors of men, and makes it his continual and only business
to pour darkness upon their minds, and blind their Understandings, that they
may not look up to Heaven.

These things premised, it follows clearly that as the Theology of the Heathens
(if I may so call it) was manifold, so the ways of defending their worship were
diverse; and consequently the Arguments produced by the Fathers against them
could not be all of one kind, but must needs be different proportionably to the
Subjects they were to treat of. Hence when they were to impugn those who
worshipped the ^mages for Gods, they argued from the vileness and Impotency of
the matter, of which they were made, from the nature of the Artificer that made
them, the Indignities they sustained from the vilest of creatures, as Bats
Flies, Spiders etc. their having eyes, but not seeing, Ears, but not hearing
etc. And these Arguments I hope you will grant did conclude that for which they
were brought, viz, that the Idols or Images of the Heathens were not Gods.


Cathar. You need not doubt of it at all: I readily grant them to be absolutely
conclusive. But with all I must tell you that I think you have brought your
self by your defending the Image Worship of the Church of Rome, into a snare
out of which you will not easily get free: viz, that you will be forced to
grant the aforesaid Arguments to be altogether as conclusive against the Images
of that Church: for the Absurdities objected agree every Jot as well to them,
as to the Images of the Heathens, as the Dr. has very well observed: They also
are made of wood or stone or metal, have eyes and see not, ears and hear not
etc.


Eun. But this with your leave, Catharinus, I shall deny, viz that the
Arguments of the Fathers are equally conclusive against the Images of the
Church of Rome, as against those of the Heathens; and I think it no hard matter
to free my self of this snare. For the Fathers did not found their Arguments
merely upon the matter of the Images, and the Art of the Artificers; but upon
these two conditions conjointly taken, viz, that they were held to be Gods, and
neverthe less took their Being from wood, or stone, or some kind of metal, and
the Art of the Workman, whereas those of the Church of Rome do not believe
their Images to be Gods, not worship them as such, as the Heathens did. And
therefore it was but a Slip-knot which the Dr. tied, when he suppressed the
former of these conditions, viz, that the Heathens held their Images to be
Gods, and applied the reproaches of the Latter to the Images of the Church of
Rome, which, as you your self know very well, declares it belieues no divinity
to be in them, for which they ought to be Council. Trent. Sess. 25.
wo^shipped.


Cathar. This I confess alters the case something, if here ever were such Fools
in the world who worshipped their Images as Gods, or if at least any
considerable Def. p. 541. p. 706.
number of the Heathens ever did so, which I perceive is no Article of Faith
with Dr. St.


Eun: Yet nothing, as you know very well, is more plain and Express in
Scripture, than that they did so. And because the Dr. is ever now and then
casting in Parentheses to insinuate the contrary, it will not be amiss to
repeat a few of the many Texts, that occurr in it: as Levit. 19. 4. Turn ye not
unto Idols, nor make to your selves Molten Gods. 2. Kings. 19. 18. They have
cast the Gods of the Nations into the Fire for they were no God, but the work
of men's hands, wood and stone; All the Gods of the Nations are Idols Isai. 44.
16. 17. He (i e^ the Carpenter) Ps. 69. 5.
burn^th part of the wood in the Fire etc. And the residue thereof he makes a
God, even his Graven Imag^: He falls down unto it, and worshippeth it, and
prays unto it, and says, deliver me, For thou art my God. The same is avowed
by the Prophet Jeremy. 2. 27. They have said, to a stock, Thou art my Father,
and to a stone, Thou have brought me forth* With them agrees the Author of the
Book of Wisdom, (if you think he may be credited) when he says chapter 14. that
One preparing to sail, calls upon a piece of wood more r^tten than the Vessel
that carries him; and again. c. 15. v. 15. They counted all the Idols of the
Heathens to be Gods, In fine the chief argument which Demetrius the
Silver-smith. Acts. 19. 26. availed himself of to raise a tumult against S.
Paul at Ephesus, was to tell those of like occupation with him, that h^
persuaded and turned away much people saying, that they be no Gods, which are
made with hands. And can any thing be said more expressly, than it is in these
places that the Heathens worshipped their Molten Images, as Gods? surely if Dr.
Still's words, when he says, It cannot enter into his mind how God should have
declared a thing by more Express and Emphatical words, than he has done, may
be applied without temerity to any Texts of Scripture, it may be to these: And
therefore if Scripture be the Rule of his Faith, and his meaning be Express
Scripture when it is to be had, I see not but it ought to be an Article of
Faith with him, that the Heathens, (not an inconsiderable number of them
neither, but the Generality of them) worshipped their Images as Gods. This I
dare affirm, that He that sees it not plainly assirmed in these Texts of
Scripture, (to which I could add many out of the Fathers no less clear and
Express,) must have no better eyes than the Images ^. Iren. Li. 3. c. 6. S.
Cypr. li. 3. ad Quir.
themselves. But Dr. St. is none of those, for in the very place (p. 700.)
where he thrusts in that kind Parenthesis Arnob. li. 1. min. Fell. in Oct. S.
Aug. in Ps. 41. and li. 2. q. sup. Exodus q. 71. S. Cyril. li. 6. cont. Jul.
(if at least any considerable number of the Heathens ever did so) speaking of
the Idolaters who worshipped their Images as Gods, he tells us it was upon this
account, that they supposed some Spirit to be incorporated in the Image, and so
to make together with it a Person fit to receive worship. And here though he
cite not so much as a Covie S. Aug. li. 8. de civ. Dei. c. 23. 26.
of one Father, yet I shall do him that right as to acknowledge he speaks their
Sense; yet cannot but question his Sincerity, Arnob. li. 1. adv. Gent. Eusebius.
li. 3. de vit a Constable. S. Athan. Orat. cont. Gent. S. Chrysostin Genethl. apud
Theodoret. Dial. 1.
who when he knew that the Arguments of the Fathers against the Images of the
Heathens, taken from the vileness of the matter of which they were made, etc.
went all upon this Supposition (at length too acknowledged by himself) viz,
that the Heathens held them to be Gods; could yet throw all the same reproaches
upon the Images of the Church of Rome, which he knows expressly denies any
divinity to be in them, Def. p. 613.
for himself relates the very words of the Council of Trent in which it is
denied.


Cathar. I confess I know not what can be opposed to such express Texts of
Scripture. And therefore granting the Arguments of the Fathers to have been
conclusive against the first sort of Idolaters who worshipped their Images as
Gods, I desire you to proceed to the rest.


Eun: But first for the same reason, you must grant them also not to be
conclusive against those, who do not worship them as Gods.


Cathar. Pray content your self,) Good Eunomius) with what I have granted in
relation to the Heathens, and proceed in your designed Discourse.


Eun: I shall obey you The Generality of the Heathens, and their
publickly-authorized worship being thus beat down by the Arguments of the
Fathers, some of Dr. Sts. Wiser ones came in to their aid, and affirmed, that
they did not worship the Images as Gods, but the Deities represented by them.
To this the F^thers returned, that Jupiter himself and the rest of that rabble
were Originally Men: that they had Fathers and Mothers, and Uncles, and Aunts,
as other mortals have: that the Places of their Birth were known, their
Sepulchers extant, and their Practices known to be such, as showed them to be
Monsters or devils, rather than Men. And when the Heathens to remove these
reproaches from their Gods, and from themselves replied, that these were the
Fictions of the Poets: The Fathers proved the Pretense to be false. 1. From the
common belief of the Heathens, who Lact. li. 1. c. 11.
acknowledged Jupiter to be the Son of Saturn and Ops, Aesculapius to be the
Son of Apollo etc. 2ly From the nature of Poetry, which is not to invent
downright Lactan. li. 1. c. 11.
lies, but to set off things that were done, with certain Artificial
Representations; S. Aug. li. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 23. and S. Athanas. ^rat.
as also from the Iatent^on of the Poets, which certainly was not to defame
their Gods, but to add luster to their Actions by the Additional Lact. S.
Athan. contr. Gent.
advantage of some counterfeit colors: By which it appears that in reality,
they were not the Actions of Jupiter and the rest, which were the Fictions of
the Poets, but the Titles they gave to them as Gods, and to him as the Supreme
God, as Lactantius shows by many Examples. Loc. Sup. Cit.
And here I cannot omit to give you the words of S. Athanasius upon this
subject they are so full to the purpose, Some Orat. contr. Gent.
of the Heathens, says he, are wont to affirm, that the Poets ^y when they
relate any wicked actions of the Gods: but that in setting forth their Praises
they do not faign, but speak truth, as when they give to Jupiter the titles of
Father of the Gods, and of Supreme, and Caelestial, and make him reign in
heaven. This I hope is just as the Dr. would have it; But what says S.
A^hanasiu^? That not only himself (a man of so much understanding, as he was)
but every man of common Sense will easily see this very reason principally to
make against them. For Truth will again d^f^nd it self against them with the
former demonstrations, I have b^ought; because the Actions indeed conv^nce them
to have been men; but the Praises transcend the measure of Human Nature. But
these two are contrary and inconsistent with each other: For neither is it
proper for Celestial Gods to do such things, nor lawful to Supplicate such
Gods as do them. What then remains to be understood but that the Praises were
false, and feigned out of Flattery, but that the Actions were truly delivered
to their perpetual shame. And this the common custom easily shows to be true:
For there is hardly, any one to be found, who intending to praise others,
accuses their life and manners; but rather extolls them with praises ^o hide
the foulness and wickedness of their actions. 3dly From the Relations Lact.
Aid. S. Aug. li. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 23.
of their own most Ancient and most Authentic Historians. 4thly From the
Judgment of the most learned among S. Aug. li. 4 de civ. Del. c. 23.
them, as Varro, Scaevola, Cicero, etc. 5thly From the Images of their Gods and
Goddesses in their Temples, particularly Lact. in Loc. cit.
that of Juno, as sister and Wife to Jupiter S. Aug. li. 1. de cons. Evang. c.
23. and de civ. Dei. (...). 4. c. 30.
and of Jupiter himself with an Eagle at his feet carrying Ganimede upon his
back. Lastly from the Plays which were instituted for their worship, in which
those very debaucheries were represented S. Aug. li. 4. de Civ. Dei. c. 26.
in honor of them. These I take to clear and solid Convictions, that Jupiter
and the rest whom they commonly worshipped were not Gods, but Men and the most
wicked of Men. And therefore.

The Philosophers to ward off the blow, took another way, which was to turn the
Gods with their Images, and the Stories related of them to Natural and Mystieal
Interpretations, as that by Jupiter they meant the Fire, by Juno Athen^g.
Legate. p. 66.
the Air, by Neptune the Sea, etc. But here also the Fathers show^d evidently
S. Aug. de cons. Evang. li. 1. c. 23. and li. 20. cont. Faust. c. 9. 19.
from the very Interpretations which themselves gave, that they did not serve
Creator, but the Creatures, viz, the Fire, Ay^, water, etc. And when others,
who thought themselves yet more learned and Wise pretended that they did not
worship either the Images, or the Creatures which they said were signified by
them, but the I^visible Deities which resided in the one, and presided over the
Other, the Father* evinced those supposed Deities to be no other than Wicked
Spirits or devils, from their exacting Sacrifice to be offered to S. Aug. in
Ps. 96. and 113. and li. 4. de civ. Dei. c. 26. and li. 10. c. 4.
them which was due only to God, and commanding Obscene Plays to be represented
in their honor. And for Jupiter in particular they proved him not to be the
true God, (as Dr. St. would have him thought to be) 1. From the Testimony of
Nature forcing the very Heathens Tertull. de Testim. Animae.
in the midst of their Idolatries in all their dangers or necessities to recu^^
to God, not to Jupiter. 2. From the Al^ars they erected and Sacrifices they
Minuc. Fell. p 17. Agell li. 2. c. 28. apul. Voss li. 1 de I. dol. c. 2.
offered to the Unknown God in time of Earthquakes etc. the manner whereof is
related by Agellius. 3. From the C^ntradictions they run themselves into, who
made him to be the Supreme God, as when Virgil (who, as you heard before, was
so Nice and exact in all matters that concerned their Religion, as if h^ had
been po^t fex Max.) gives him the Title of Father Almigh^y, and at the same
time makes im to be the Ether, and to have a Wif^ also. Tanc P^te^ Omnipot^us
faecundis imbribus Ether
Conjugis in gremium latae descendit.


And Plau^us in like manner in the same verse makes him to be the Supreme God,
and an A^ulterer when speaking of Alcumena he says. Vtrinque g^avida and ex
viro and ex Summo Jove.
-- Et hic nunc intus hic cum illa cubat.


4. From the filthy and abominable Actions he not only permitted, but exacted
S. Aug. li. 2. d^ civ. c. 13. and li. 4. c. 26.
to be represented in his honor. And lastly from the Confession of Jupiter
himself, that he was a devil, as you heard before out of Minucius Felix and
Tertullian. And I take his own Testimony in this matter to outweigh all those
of the Poets and Orators cited by Dr. St.

As for those who seriously and soberly asserted one Supreme Being, Creator and
Governor of the world, Invisible, unbegotten, Omnipotent etc. but called him
by the name of Jupiter, the F^thers 1st Proved by the above said and other
Arguments, that it as not He who was worshipped in the Capitol, as you have
heard; and then condemned them not only as absurd in so Orig. cont. Cells. li.
4. and 5. Lact. li. 1. c. 11. S. Aug. li. 4. d^ civ. Dei. c. 27.
doing, but as contum l^o^s and ^ap^ous for applying to the true G^d the name
of ^o abominable a Wretch, whether man or lev^l Lastly they justly charged even
Plato himself and the rest of them, at least with external Idolatry for
concurring with the Vulgarin the worship S. Aug. li. 10. de civ. Dei. c. 3.
of many Gods. And the matter of fact is confessed by Vossius. Li. 1. de Idol.
c. 4. p. 12. 13. and li. 1. c. 41. p. 151.


And now, Catharinus, I hope by this time you see, that which way soever the
Heathens turned themselves they were unanswerably confuted by the Fathers; And
the very Sequel makes it manifest, viz, the Subversion of all the Several
kinds of Idolatry, and the Conversion of the world to Christianity, which
certainly had never followed had the Fathers been such unequal Matches to the
Wiser Heathens, and their arguments even those from the Poetical Fables to weak
and frivolous as Dr St. would have them thought to have been, that he might
estab^ish Jupiter Capitolinus in the throne of the Supreme God. For, as S.
Augustine says, if those relations were true, they prove him to have Li. 2. de
civ. Dei. c. 1 3. and li. 4. c. 26. 27. 28. and li. 6. c. 6.
been a most wicked man; and if they were False, and only feigned by the Poets,
they prove him to be a devil, who exatted and took delight to have such
abominable practices ascribed to him and represented in his honor.


Cath. I cannot but thank you for this Short, yet clear Account you have given
me of the Heathens Theology, and the Several ways which the Fathers took to
refute it. Had you deduced the whole matter at large, cited the Passages of the
Fathers, and dilated upon them with your own Animadversions, I think you might
have out done the Dr. himself in being Voluminus. Yet whilst you studied
brevity, me thinks there is one Principal part of it omitted by you; And that
is Varro's Opinion who believed the same God to be worshipped by the Jews and
the Romans, as S. Augustine confesses, but under another name, and with Li 4.
de civ. Dei* c. 9. and li. 1. de Cons. Evang. c. 22.
this difference, that the Romans worshipped him by an Image, but the Jews
would admit of no Image in his Worship.


Eun: You have done well to mind me of this, because he was, (as the same S.
Augustine calls him) the most Acute and learned of all the Romans. And if such
a man erred, much more may we think the Vulgar did. Now that what he asserted
was not true, S. Augustine shows by Arguments which cannot be answered. 1.
Because the Romans, who received the Gods of other Nations S. Aug. de Cons.
Evang. li. 1. c. 17. 18.
whom they had conquered, would never admitinto their Religion the worship of
the God of the Jews. 2. Because the God Ibid. c. 18* and 22.
of the Jews forbad any other Gods to be worshipped besides him; but Jupiter
forbad not even Saturn himself, and that, after he had driven him out of his
kingdom, to beworshipped as a God, though he stood in competition with him for
the Title of Supreme; as being thought by others to be the God of the Jews,
Ibid. c. 22. 23.
and that Deity, into whom the Philosophers resolved their Interpretations. 3.
Because, had the Romans believed Jupiter Id. li. 4. de civ. Dei. c. 9.
to be the same with the God of the J^ws, they would not have treated him so
contumeliously at Rome, as to make a Simulacre to him. Perhaps you will check
at the new-fashioned word Simulacre, but you must know, first that it comes
from France where it is in use, among Authors of great note. 2. That the
fashion of it is the same with that of Spectre, used by Dr. St. p. 682. and 3.
That the word Simulachrum seems to be used here by S. Augustine in the common
acception of the Heathens, that is, for such an Image as by Dedication was
believed by them to have some divinity incorporated in it, for which it ought
to be worshipped, and the making such an one to Jupiter, had the Romans
believed him to be the same with the God of the Jews is what as S. Augustine
says, would have been a contumely to him. 4. Because Varro, who, had he been
free from the prejudice Ibid. cap. 31.
of custom which involved him also in the worship of many Gods, would have
asserted the Worship of one only God, and that without a Simulacre, yet himself
believed and taught this God to be no other than the Soul of the world, whereas
the true God, as S. Augustine replies upon him; was not the Soul of the world,
(if there were any such thing) but the Maker and S. Aug. de cons. Evang. li. 1.
c. 23.
Creator of it. And then lamenting as it were that so great a man should come
so near the Truth, and miss it, he expresses that favorable Opinion of him,
that had he been advertised of the Mutability of a S^ul, together with the
Impious and Irreligions Consequences, which followed Li. 4. c. 12.
from his Assertion, and could have born up against the Tyranny of an old
Error, he would in all likelihood much rather have believed that Incommutable
Being, which created the Soul it self, to be the true God. And with these and
the like Arguments he triumphed over that great Dictator of the Romans in all
kind of learning.


Cathar. These Arguments indeed seem to me convincing. But I am yet to seek,
whether these and the rest also produced by the Fathers may not be looked upon
by Dr. St. as casts of their former employment, when he so carnestly maintains
Jupiter Capitolinus to be the true God; and I doubt whether they would have had
the same success, had he been then alive to manage the Cause.


Eun: You may think as you please of the Dr's wit and abilities in this Point.
But thus much I think is evident to any man of Common Sense, that if the
Fathers did not most grossly contradict themselves, or were not (to use the
Dr's Phrase) such a pack of Def. p. 494. 495.
Hypocrites and Impostors, as to impugn in others what they believed
themselves, the Passages alleged by him out of them, to show it to have been
their Sense, that Jupiter who was worshipped in the Capitol was the true God,
must be misrepresented, or corrupted by him.


Cathar. That if you please shall be tried at our next meeting.


Eun: Pray pick out the choicest and most convincing Testimonies you can. For
you know, as the Dr. himself has told us, that this Point is very material
toward the true understanding the nature Def. p. 24.
of Idolatry.


Cathar. You need not recommend that to my care, I shall give you enough to make
a full consent of the Fathers.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Particular Testimonies of Minucius Felix, Clemens Alexandrinus, S.
Augustine, and T^rtullian, cited by Dr. St. to prove it to have been their
Sense, that the Heathen's Jupiter was the true God, brought to the Test; And
the design of the said Fathers shown to be either misrepresented, or both
their Words and Sense corrupted by him.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. EVn: Good morrow, Catharinus: I see you are breaking
your Fast this morning with the Dr. Have you met with the Places you desired.


Cath. I have, though with more difficulty, than I imagined, they were so
intermingled with those other passages, which as you observed, proved no more,
than either that the H^athens acknowledged one Supreme God: or that it was the
Sense of the Heathens, that their Jupiter was He. Yet I have met with some, and
those of great Authority, which prove it so clearly to have been the Sense of
the Fathers also, that Jupiter was the Supreme God, that I think it cannot be
denied.


Eun: And was it not artificially done of the Dr. to in-lay his Testimonies in
such a manner, that the unwary Reader, hearing the Supreme God spoken of in
some of them, and Jupiter in others, might think the Fathers acknowledged
Jupiter to be the Supreme God. But this is what I deny. And doubt not before we
part to make you see, either that the meaning of the Fathers is
misrepresented, or both their words and Sense corrupted by him. You may
produce them if you please.


Cath. Well then Eunomius, what can be more clear than the Testimony of
Minucius Def. p. 8.
Felix? when he says (and as Dr. St. observes) wisely in this case. They who
make Jove the chief God, are only deceived in the name, b^t agree in the Power.
Surely he was far enough from thinking their Jupiter Father of Gods and Men
(which he applauds the Poets for saying) to have been the Arch-Devil


Eun: This indeed comes something more home to the purpose, if it be true what
the Dr. says. But what if he have corrupted both the Sense and words of
Minucius, to make him speak as he would have him? To make this out, there will
need no more, than to acquaint you with the design of Minucius in that place,
and to set down his words exact^y as they are in the Oxford Edition 1631. His
design was there to convince the Heathens, that p. 51. 52. 53. 54.
the world was governed by one only God* not many. To do this he makes use of
the Examples of Monarchical Government among men, of one king among the Bees,
and one Leader amongst the herds of Irrational Creatures: from whence he
inferrs, that much more ought we to acknowledge one Supreme and undivided Power
in Heaven. This he confirms again from the Practice of the Heathens themselves,
who were wont to lift up their hands to heaven, and say, God is Great, and God
is true. And then adds for their further Conviction, the words (as they should
have been) cited by the Dr. viz, Those also who will have Jupiter to be the
Prince or Chief, are dece^v^d in the name, but agree as to the Unity of Power:
I hear the Poets also ext^lling One Father of Gods and Men. By which it is
plain, that himself intended nothing less than to assert Jupiter to be the one
Supreme God; but that he argued only ad hominem (as we say) from what the wiser
Heathens pretended they thought of Jupiter, that they ought to acknowledge, but
One Supreme God, Maker and Governor of the world. As for his own thoughts
concerning Jupiter, you have heard before what they were, p. 89. where he
expressly affirms Saturn, Serapis, and Jupiter himself to be Devils; and proves
them to be so from their own Confessions. So far was He from thinking the
Heathen's Jupiter to be the Supreme God, as Dr. St. would make his Reader
believe; which he could not otherwise do, than by corrupting the very Text. For
the words in Minucius are these. Et qui Iovem Principem volunt, f^lluntur in
nomine, sed de una potestate consentiunt, that is, Those also who will have
Jupiter to be the Prince o^ Chief, are deceived in the name, b^t agree as to
the Unity of Power, i. e^. that there is one Supreme God by whom the world is
governed: and not as they are translated by the Doctor. They who make Jove the
Chief God, are only deceived in the name, but agree in the Power. Where if you
compare the English with the Latin, you will find, that first he translates the
word Volunt (by which Minucius intimates what the Heathens would have, but he
would not grant,) by the term mak^, as if Minucius assented to it. Then he
coggs the word ONLY into the Text, They are only says he deceived in the name,
as if the name did not carry the Person along with it in his Judgment who makes
Jupiter to be a Devil: And lastly leaves out the word VNA, s^il potestate,
which plainly showed the design and Sense of Minucius to be, that although they
were deceived in their pretense of assigning Jupiter to be the Supreme God; yet
by what they affirmed of him, viz, that He was the Prince or Chief, and the
Poets setting forth one Father of Gods and Men, they were sufficiently
convinced, that they ought to acknowledge but one Supreme and un-divided Power,
not many, by Which the world was made and governed; which was the Point that
Minucius was proving in that place. Here then you see, Catharinus, that the Dr.
has not only misrepresented the meaning of Minucius, but corrupted the very
Text, by put^ing in and leaving out what he thought might make for his
advantage. Neither does he applaud the Poets for their magnifying Jupiter as
the Father of Gods and men, but cites them against the Heathen's Opinion of
Plurality of Gods, as acknowledging o^e Father of All. The Dr. observes that
what Minucius said was wisely said; and so it was, because he convinced the
Heathens, by the Testimony of those who were esteemed the wisest amongst them:
But whether it were Wisely or Honestly done of him thus to corrupt the words
and Sense of Minucius, I leave to your Judgment; But am very sure, that this is
not the way to break T. G. of his bad custom.


Cath. But the following Testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, who allows Defense
p. 77. 78.
and applauds the Heathens for giving to Jupiter the Title of the Supreme God,
both in his Admonition and Misce lanies, may I hope serve to do it. For having
shown that Thales conf^ssed God's Omnipotency and Omnisciency, that Epicharmus
attributed Omnipotency to him, and Homer the Creation of the world, which he
described in the Shield of Achilles, he makes this Observation, (as if it were
purposely intended says he for T. G.) He that is called both in Verse and
Prose Jupiter carries our apprehension to God, (not to the Arch-Devil as T. G.
saitb.) And then cites the Testimonies of Euphorion and Aeschilus about
Jupiter, which for T. G 's better information he sets doWn both in Greek and
English, viz, Jupiter is Ether and Earth and Heaven and all things, and if
there be any thing above all, Jupiter is it: Which Clemens is so far from
thinking an improper speech, that he says it was spoken with a great deal of
decency and Gravity concerning God. And now I pray tell me, Eunomius, if Dr.
St. had not a great deal of reason to subjoyn as he does; By this it appears
that those who boast so much of the Fathers are not over-conversant with them;
but Father Bellarmin, and Father Coccius serve them for a whole Jury of them.
And then commends T. G. for his modesty, that when he had said, this was the
Sense of the Fathers, he produced no more but good Father Origin; and is so
kind-hearted to him, that though I believe, says the Dr. he has heard how he
has been condemned for an Heretic, yet he with great judgment supposes that
what he said was the Common Sense of the Fathers. What say you to this Eunomius.


Eun: That we have here a Second Part to the same tune, or another Fit of
ranting like that of the two God fathers, and Covie of one, But what has
Clemens done either in his Admonition or Miscellanies to put the Dr. into it?
He says indeed that what the Poets say about Jupiter's being all things, was
spoken with a great deal of decency and gravity concerning God, and that He who
is called both in Verse and Prose Jupiter, does under the glorious Titles
Attributed to him of Omnipotent, Omniscient etc. carry our Apprehension to God;
but does it follow from hence, that it was the Sense of Clemens himself that
Jupiter who was worshipped in the Temples, was that true God? Cannot I say, it
was spoken with a great deal of decency and Gravity by Dr. St. of himself, that
his design, as he says, is to represent the matters in difference truly, to
report faithfully, Praef. to Rom, Idol.
and to argue closely, and that these things spoken of him carry my
Apprehension to an Ingenuous and Sincere Writer of Controversy, but it must be
my sense, that Dr. St. of whom they are said, must be the Man? This was the
case of Clemens. His design in his Admonition was (and the Dr. could not be
ignorant of it, for he cites the words) to show that there is a certain Def. p.
^6.
Divine Influence distilled upon all men, especially on those who apply
themselves to learning, by virtue of which they are forced to confess One God,
incorruptible and unbegotten, who abides for ever above the highest Heavens.
And in the Fifth Book of his Miscellanies he falls upon the same Subject again,
viz, that there is a Natural knowledge of one Omnipotent God among all
considering men. For proof whereof he cites many passages of the Philosophers
and Poets, and some of them applying to him under the name of Jupiter, those
things which truly and only belong to the One Supreme God: From whence he
draws this Conclusion at the End of the Book, that the East and West, the North
and South have one and the same inbred notion of the Government of one Supreme
Disposer of things. But far more the Inquisitive Philosophers of Greece, who
attribute a Wise Providence to him who is Invisible, and the only most
Powerful, and most Skilful Contriver of things. By which it appears, that when
Clemens said, that He who is called Jupiter both in Verse and Prose carries our
Apprehension to God, and that what Aeschilus said of Jupiter's being all things
was spoken with a great deal of decency and gravity concerning God; his meaning
was not to assert Jupiter to be that Supreme Being; but from the Epithets and
Titles of Omniscient, Omnipotent etc. (Which their own Philosophers and Poets
attributed to Jupiter, or to God under his name,) to convince them, that there
was but one only Supreme Being, Maker and Governor of the World. For, whether
they did Wisely or no in calling him Jupiter, yet the things they said of him,
did evidently oblige them to acknowledge such a Being to be the Contriver and
disposer of all things; not that Clemens himself asserted them to belong to the
Jupiter, who was worshipped by them: As (to make use of the former Parallel)
when Dr. St. ascribes to himself, Fidelity, Exactness, Closeness in arguing
etc. whether he do wisely or no in doing so (of which by this time you may have
some cause to doubt) yet most certainly it follows from his applying them to
himself that he acknowledges them to be the true and laudable Qualities of a
Cont^^vertist; not that I who cite him saying so of himself, acknowledge them
to be found in him: For I think I have evinced the contrary by many Arguments
already, and foresee if you hold on in your design, I shall have occasion to do
it farther. As for the Judgment which Clemens himself made of the Heathen's
Jupiter, you heard before, how he affirms not only the lesser Gods p. 29^.
to be Devils, but the more Honorable among them, viz, Apollo, Diana, Latona,
Ceres, Proserpina, Pluto, Hercules, and (as though ^t were purposely intended
for Dr. St.) ipse Jupiter even Jupiter himself, to be Magni Doemones, Great
Devils, and not that He was the true God, Blessed for evermore, as Dr. St.
says. Here perhaps the Dr. will say, that Clemens runs out after his way;
because he runs not the same way Def. p. 75.
with him. But by what has been said it appears, that they who boast so much
of giving a full account of the Fathers, are not overconversant with them,
unless the meaning be that they are too bold with them, in making them speak
quite contrary to their meaning as the Dr. does here with Clemens. Are there
any more, whom you think fit to produce?


Cathar. I know not what to say to these things, unless I should take the pains
my self to examine the Books, which I think I shall not do.


Eun: And so did Dr. St. too; otherwise he would never have given us such a
full account of them, as he has. But pray tell me, Are there any more, whom
you think fit to produce?


Cath. Yes: The Great S. Augustine, Def. p. 44.
in his 4th Book of the City of God. cap. 9. where, as Dr. St. says, he
confesses that the Romans believed him whom they worshipped in the Capitol to
be the King of the Gods as well as Men: And to represent that, they placed a
Scepter in his hand, and built his Temple upon a high Hill; and that it is he
of whom Virgil says, Jovisomnia plena; and the same in Varro's Opinion that
was worshipped by some without an Image, by whom the same S. Augustine says, he
meant the Jews. Can you deny these to be the words of S. Augustine? And if not,
can any thing be more plain?


Eun: What to do? To prove it to be the Sense of S. Augustine, that Jupiter whom
the Romans worshipped in the Capitol, was the true God? This Ideny. They prove
indeed that the Heathens endeavored to save themselves from the shame of
worshipping a Devil by these pretended Arguments; But what is that to the
Question, which is not what was the Sense of the Heathens, but of the Fathers?


Cath. You are very precise I see in keeping to the State of the Question.


Eun. And it is but necessary, when if a Father chance, (though but by way of
an Objection, as these words of S. Augustine are) to cite the Testimony of a
Poet or Philosopher, wherein they either profanely ascribed to Jupiter the
Attributes of the true God, or fondly and absurdly applied to the true God the
name of Jupiter, presently it must be believed that the Fathers acknowledged
Jupiter that was worshipped in the Capitol, to be the true God. But S. Augustine
was so far from thinking him so, that he looks upon it as no other than a
Pretense of the Heathens to save themselves from confusion, as manifestly
appears. 1st From the word Volunt (for we have that unlucky word here too,
Ipsum, (se. Iovem) Deorum omnium dearumque Regem esse volunt:) which as I said
before signifies what they would have, but S. Augustine would not grant, viz,
their Jupiter to be the King of the Gods as well as Men, as the Dr. reads it.
Hence in the 17th chapter of the same Book, he says, Iovem Deorum Regem pro
sua Opinione confingunt, that they faign Jupiter in their own Opinion, (not
his) to be the King of the Gods: and in the 25th chapter he shows that
themselves believed Happiness not to be given by Jupiter, but by some God whom
they did not know. And if he proved the very pretense in them to be false,
surely he was far enough himself from thinking the thing to be true, viz that
their Jupiter was the true God. 2. From the words immediately foregoing those
cited by the Dr. For there he derides the Heathens, (and it was his way too)
for ascribing the greatness and conti^uance of the Roman Empire to Jupiter:
Nimirum ergo Jovis hoc opus est. This then, without any peradventure says he,
is the Work of Jove, for they will have him to be the King of all the Gods and
Goddesses, and then 3. Having in the same Ironical way proposed the Arguments,
made use of that time by the Heathens to support their pretense (and now
brought in anew by the Dr. to support the same) viz, that they put a Scepterin
his hand, and built his Temple upon a high hill etc. he sets himself to confute
them as absurd and foolish. And first he shows the Opinion of Varro, (who
believed Jupiter to be the same with the God of the, Jews, to be contradicted
by the practice of the Romans; If it be so, says he, why is He so ill treated
Li. 4. de civ. Dei. c. 9.
at Rome, as to make or dedicate a Simulacre to him? Then in the very next
chapter He proves at large that which way soever they take Jupiter, either as
c. 10.
the Son of Saturn, and the Brother and Husband of Juno, according to the Poets
and Historians; or so as to understand by Jupiter the Fire, and by Juno the Air
according to the Philosophers, non est ille de quo dictum est, Iovis omnia
plena, It is not He of whom it is said, All things are filled with Jove, if
Juno also fill some part, and therefore Virgil must contradict himself, when he
said not as a Poet, but as a Philosopher, as S Augustine notes. Tunc Pater
Omnipotens foecundis imbribus Ether
Conjugis in gremium laete descendit.


After this he proceeds for diverse chapters together to refute the Several
Interpretations, which the Learneder Heathens had devised to make their
Pretense appear plausible, as that all the Gods were but one and the same
Jupiter; that God is c. 11.
the Soul of the world, that those whom they c. 12.
c. 24.
called Gods, were but Divine Gifts etc. And although the Dr. may slight these
arguments of S. Augustine also as casts of his former employment, (for I believe
he has heard of him that he was a Rhetorician before his Conversion, as well
as T. G. of Origin that he was thought to be Heretical,) yet they evidently
evince at least, that it was not his own Sense, that the Heathen's Jupiter was
the true God. And if what I have said here, and before, be not sufficient p.
296. 297.
to convince you of it, hear what he says in the 17th chapter of the same Book
c. 17.
where he argues against Jupiter's being the Supreme God from their making
Victory a Goddess. Will they say, says he, that Jupiter sends the Goddess
Victoria, and she in Obedience to the King of Gods takes part with them to whom
she is sent, this says he, is truly said, not of that Jupiter, whom in their
Opinion they faign to be the King of the Gods, but of Him who is the true King
of Ages. As for their Jupiter you heard before what his Verdict was, where he
said, Psalm. 96.
that none but wicked Spirits, or Devils, were worshipped in their Temples; not
so much as King Jupiter himself excepted. And now, pray tell me Catharinus if
the Dr. had not great reason to vaunt, that he had given a full and clear
Evidence Def. ^ 102.
of the consent of all the Fathers in this matter, and that not taken from any
single or incoherent passages, but from the Series and Design of their
discourses, when he imposes upon us for the Sense of S. Augustine, what S.
Augustine proposes as an Objection of the Heathens and sets himself to confute
with all the wit and learning he had. And your self as yet have not been able,
nor I am confident, ever will be able to pick out of all the Testimonies of the
Christian Fathers alleged by him, so much as a Covie of one, who asserts it as
his own Sense, that the Heathen's Jupiter was the true God?


Cath. Here you bring the matter indeed to a Pinch. But give me leave to tell
you, that for all your confidence you may be, and are mistaken. For there is
one yet behind whose Authority may stand for many.


Eun: Who is that I pray?


Cath. No less a man than Tertullian.


Eun: Tertullian? Though I believe the Dr. has heard how he also has been
condemned for an Heretic, as well as Origin; yet if you can show, that he
acknowledged Jupiter that was worshipped in the Capitol to be the true God, I
shall resign my Iudgmens so far, as to suppose that what he said was the
Common Sense of the Fathers.


Cath. And if I do not manifestly prove it out of him from the Testimonies
alleged by the Dr. I shall willingly, for what I am concerned in it. yield up
the Cause.


Eun: Let us then bring the matter to an Issue, and hear what it is, that
Tertullian says.


Cath. First, as Dr. St. observes, He appeals to the Consciences of men for the
Def. p. 62. Tertull. Apolog. c. 17.
clearest Evidence of one true and Supreme God. For in the midst of all their
Idolatries, says he, they are apt upon any great occasion to lift up their
hands and Eyes to heaven, where the Only True, and Good God is. Then he
mentions Id. de Test. Animae.
their common Phrases, God gives, and God sees, and I commond you to God, and
God will ^estore: All which do show the Natural Testimony of Conscience as to
the Unity and Supreme Excellency of God. And in his Book ad Scapulam, (Pray
mark it well) God, says he, Ad Scap. c. 4.
showed himself to be the Powerful God, by what he did upon their Supplications
to him under the name of Jove. Now although the two first passages prove no
more, but that the Heathens had a Notion of one Supreme Being ingrafted in
their minds by nature, (which you will not allow to come home to the Question)
Yet this last clearly evinces that Jupiter, whom they worshipped in the
Capitol, was this one Supreme Being, both from the Testimony of Tertullian, and
of God himself, by the Miracle he did upon their Supplications (i. e^. the
Supplications of the Heathens) made to him under the name of Jove.


Eun: A Miracle! Here you have brought the matter to a brave Issue indeed. But
did Tertullian then in good earnest say that God did a Miracle to show himself
the Powerful God upon the Supplications the Heath^ns made to him under the name
of Jove? Dr. St. you know is not over fond of proving doctrines by Miracles,
and I cannot but wonder he should now make use of one to establish a doctrine
so contrary to that of the Holy Scriptures both Old and New. For what I read
there is, that All the Gods of the Heathens Ps. 96. Ps. 105.
are Devils, as the Septuagint translate it, that they sacrificed their sons
and daughters to Devils; and again, (as if Dent. 32. 1. Co^. 10.
it were purposely intended for Dr. St.) They Sacrificed to Devils, and not to
God. What the Heathens offer in Sacrifice, they offer to Devils, and not to
God. Methinks it might have sufficed to have laid this Infamous Brat of
Jupiter's being the true God Blessed for evermore, at S. Paul's door, and not
to father it upon God himself. Such bad customs as these are to be broken,
least they grow up into open Blasphemy; and I shall endeavor to make the right
Father stand for his own child. But first are you sure Catharinus, that it was
upon the Supplications of the Heathens that the Dr. avouches Tertullian to say,
that God did this Miracle?


Cath. Yes* for he makes this Preface before the Testimony of Tertullian, that
he will now look into the Sense of Writers of the Latin Church against the
Heathens Idolaters; and accordingly it is of them that he speaks in the two
former passages, and the particle their (viz Supplications) evidently relates
to them. Besides, when was it ever heard that Christians made their
Supplications under the name of Jove? Origin, as the Dr. notes, says that by
reason of the abundance of filthy and obscene Fables, Def. p. 9. Orig. contr.
Cells. li. 4.
which went of their Jupiter, the Christians would by no means endure to have
the true God called by his name. And S. Paul, as your self observed, though he
cited a place out of Aratus, where he had mentioned Jupiter twice before, yet
would not himself make use of the name. Nor do I believe that Dr. St. himself
will ever think fit to put into his Letany, or to conclude any of his Works
with that Invocation of Paterculus, Jupiter Capitoline, Auctor and Stator
Romani nominis. There is a decorum to be observed in the use and application of
words by reason of the change they are subject to from time and other
Circumstances; as it would be absurd at present to make use of the Old
Translation of those words of the Apostle, Paulus Servus Jesu Christi, Paul the
Knave of Jesus Christ.


Eun: Very well. It was then upon the Supplications of the Heathens to God
under the name of Jove, that Dr. St. avouches Tertullian to say, that he did
the Miracle. But what will you say, Catharinus, if Tertullian expressly affirm,
that it was done upon the Supplications of the Christians made to God, but that
the Heathens after it was done, would have ascribed it to Jove?


Cath. Marry then will I never trust Testimony of Father more for Dr. St's sake.


Eun: You mean I suppose cited by him; and you have reason to do so from the
experience you have had in ^ther Instances, but in none more f^lly, not more
foully than in this, where he has corrupted the words and Sense of Tertullian,
in so subtle, and yet palpable a manner, as is not easy to be found in any
other. Have you the works of Tertullian?


Cath. Yes, here they are, the Place cited by the Dr. is Lib. ad Scapulam. cap.
4. Pray turn to it.


Eun: Lo, here it is. And the words are these. Marcus quoque Aurelius in
Germanica expeditione, Christianorum militum Orationibus ad Deum factis, imbres
ins^i illa impetravit. Quando non geniculationibus and Jejunation^bus nostris
etiam siccitates sunt depulsae? Tunc and Populus adclamans Deo Deorum and qui
solus Potens, in Iovi's nomine Deo nostro testimonium reddidit, that is to say
if I have not forgot my Grammar, that Marcus Aurelius in the German Expedition,
when his Army was ready to perish for want of water, obtained rain by the
Supplications of the CHRISTIAN SOVLDIERS made to God. And indeed says he when
were not such Kind of calamities removed by the Prayers and Fasting of us
Christians? Then the People also with their Acclamations to the God of Gods,
and who alone is Powerful, gave Testimony to our God under the name of Jove.
These are the words; and the design of Tertullian if I mistake not, in this
passage was to convince Scapula, that he ought not to persecute the Christians,
by whose Prayers so miraculous a^ Benefit had been obtained of God; and the
more, because the very Heathens themselves, though according to their custom,
they made their acclamations to Jove, yet under that name by the Titles they
gave him of God of Gods, and alone most Powerful, they gave Testimony to the
God of the Christians, who had wrought the Miracle. Now what does Dr. St? He
jumbles together the Supplications of the Christian Soldiers, and the
Acclamations of the Heathens, the God of the Christians and Jupiter, and makes
the Sense to be, that God showed himself to be the Powerful God by what he did
upon the Supplications of the Heathens to him under the name of Jove. And can
any thing be more contradictory to the words and Sense of Tertullian than this
is? Tertullian says expressly that what God did, was upon the Supplications
Christianorum militum Orationibus ad Deum factis.
of the Christians made to him. Dr. St. makes him say, it was upon the
Supplications of the Heathens. Tertullian says that the Heathens by the
Acclamations they made to the God of Gods as they called Jove, gave Testimony
to the God of the Christians under that name. Dr. St. makes him say, that God
wrought the Miracle upon their Supplications to him under the name of Jove.


Cath. The First part of this is plainer than I could wish it for Dr. St's.
credit. For I see the words in Tertullian are, Orationibus CHRISTIANORVM ad
Deum factis, by the Prayers of the Christians made to God, not of the Heathens.
But I do not so well understand the latter. For when Tertullian says they gave
Testimony to our God under the name of Jove, what can his meaning be, but that
they intended to honor him under that name, to whom they had before addressed
their Supplications?


Eun: No such matter I can assure you, Catharinus: but what the Heathens meant
was to rob the God of the Christians of the honor, and transferr it to their
Jove by giving to him the Title of God of Gods etc. but in so doing, they gave
Testimony to our God that he alone was the most Powerful, who had done this
Miracle upon the Supplications of the Christians; This is what Tertullian meant
to tell us not that the Heathens, had addressed their Supplications to the true
God under the name of Jove. And that you may see this was his Sense, pray hear
what he says in the 40th chap. of his Apologetick against the Heathens, where
he describes both the manner of their Supplications, and to whom they made
them, and reproaches them with their bad custom of ascribing to their false
God Jupiter, what the Christians had obtained of the only true God by their
Prayers When there is fear, says he, of a bad year through too much drouth,
you (speaking to the Priests of the Heathens) wallowing in luxe and wantonness,
offer sacrifices for rain to Jupiter, command the People to go barefoot, and
seeking Heaven in the Capitol, expect the Clouds to shower down from the Roof,
averse in so doing both from G^d and Heaven. But we (Christians) in the mean
time depriving our selves of all sustenance, and even dried up with fasting.
and rolling our selves in Sackcloth and Ashes, strike Heaven with Envy, and
move God himself with compassion. Et cum misericordiam extorferimus, Jupiter
honoratur. And when we have by these means extorted mercy, Jupiter must have
the honor. Where you see he evidently distinguishes the God of the Christians
from their Jove to whom they intended the honor. And that it was so in this
very passage we are upon, is acknowledged by Dr. St. himself, Def. p. 47.
when speaking of it in another place, he says, that by those words of
Tertullian, [Then the whole Army made this Exclamation, Deo Deorum] it is
evident, says he, they intended this honor to their own Jove: And now I hope
Catharinus, you are satisfied of the Sense of Tertullian, that he makes both
the Acclamations, and Supplications of the Heathens to have been directed not
to the true God under the name of Jove, but to that Deity whom they believed to
reside in the Capitol, as distinct from him. But what will the Dr. do to save
himself from the shame of so notorious a Falsification of the words and Sense
of Tertullian, as to make him ascribe that to the Supplications of the Heathens
made to Jove, which Tertullian expressly says was obtained by the
Supplications of the Christians made to God?


Cath. I doubt not but he will find a elew to bring himself out of this
Labyrinth, though I confess I am lost in it my self.


Eun: Will he cite Julius Capitolinus and Dio? The former of which attributes
the miracle to the Prayers of M. Aurelius himself; the latter to a particular
Providence of God, yet mentioning withal a report that it was done by the
Magical Operation of one Arnuphis. These indeed are two of his Faihers, but
will not serve his turn, so well as Father Bellarmin, and Father Coccius do T.
Gs. For Eusebius tells us, that this miraculous Event was delivered Hist. Eccl.
li. 5. c. 5.
to Posterity, both by the Heathen and Christian Writers, but with this
difference, that the Heathens as being averse from Faith, relate it in such a
manner, as it does not evidently appear, that it was obtained by the Prayers of
the Christians; But the Christian Writers, as being Lovers of Truth recount the
matter plainly, but truly as it was done; viz upon the Supplications of the
Christian Soldiers, and then cites Apollinarius and Tertullian for it. So that
if the Christian Fathers may be credited rather than the Heathen, this
miraculous deliverance was obtained by the Prayers of the Christians.

But now, (as I remember he says of Def. p. 6.
T. G. (I have reason to consider the temper of the Person I have to deal with.
Who knows but the Testimony of one Heathen Father, (especially such a one as he
describes M. Aurelius to be) may weigh more with him, than the p. 11. 31. 32.
Testimonies of t^enty Christian, whom he can send to school again, when he
pleases, to learn to explain themselves better, as he does the Christian Cicero
Lactantius p. 43. Let us then hear how M. Aurelius himself relates the matter
in his Letters to the Senate. And thus it was, that being in great distress for
want of water, he sent for those who are called Christians in his Army, and
entreated their help. And when they had cast themselves upon the earth, they
not only prayed for me, says he, but also for the whole Army, that some
Redress might be given to the Hunger and Thirst, with which we were pressed,
for it was five days, that we had not taken so much as a little water, because
none was to be had, we being then in the midst of Germany shut in with
Mountains on every side. But as soon as they had cast themselves upon the
earth, and made their Supplications to that God, whom I was ignorant of (it
seems then it was not Jove,) presently there fell upon us from heaven a very
cool and refreshing shower, but upon our Enemies Hail in the likeness of Fire,
and Flashes of Lightning. And that God who cannot be resisted nor overcome
presently heard their Prayers and Supplications. Wherefore, says he, let us
from henceforward permit them to be Christians, least by their Prayers they
obtain like Arms against us. And then commands that no man presume to inform
against Vid. Eusebius li. 5. c. 20. apud Baron.
them upon the account of their being Christians, under the penalty of being
burnt alive. This is what M. Aurelius himself related to the Senate. And what
An. 176. and Rescriptum l. apud Pamel. in Tertull. Apol. c. 5.
will the Dr. say to the Testimony of so Eminent a Father? Will he criticize as
his custom is in like cases, upon the Mountains, and the five days want of
water, and the Hail in the likeness of Fire, to make the story seem Improbable,
and the letters to have been forged by the Christians? That will not do his
work; for Dio another of his Fathers confesses that M. Aurelius did write of
this miraculous deliverance to the Senate, though he omit to set down the words
of the letter, out of the like good will, we may suppose, to the Christians, as
he had before omitted to declare that it was obtained by their Prayers,
although he went not so far (as the Dr. does) as to affirm it was done upon
the Supplications of the Heathens. But Tertullian in his Apologetick against
the Heathens affirms expressly, that the Cap. 5.
Letters of M. Aurelius were extant in his time, in which he ascribes his
deliverance to the Prayers of the Christians, who, as it happened, served in
that Expedition. And in this he is approved by Eusebiu^ in his Chronicon. Now I
appeal to your self, Catharinus, if you can imagine, that so grave a man as
Tertullian, who evermore made the Sincerity of the Christians one main Article
of his Apology, would tell a lie in so notorious a matter of Fact, and of which
there were some yet alive who might convince him; or insolently dare, upon an
uncertain report of letters written by M. Aurelius attribute that Victory to
the Prayers of the Cbristians, which had been obtained by his own prayers, were
it true what Father Julius Capitolinus relates, or upon the Supplications of
the Heathens, as Dr. St. will have it.

This is the Sum of what Baronius has delivered at large concerning this
Baron. ad An. 176.
matter, with so great Evidence, that which way soeuet the Dr. turn himself, he
must needs find himself like M. Aurelius, shut in with Mountains, and stand in
need of the Prayers of good Christians to God to help him out; unless he think
the Supplications of the Heathens to Jove, may be as available for him, as he
makes them to have been for Aurelius. And indeed whoever considers, how
prodigal he is both of his pains and credit to Apologize for them, must needs
see the great obligation they have to give him the Assistance of their Prayers.

But I have not yet done with the Dr. upon this Point. Scapula to whom
Tertullian wrote that Book was President of Carthage, a man that threatened
utter destruction to the Christians, unless they would renounce Christ, and
offer Sacrifice to the Gods. To appease his fury Tertullian writes this Book,
wherein he first exposes the Innocent life of the Christians, and then the Li.
ad Scap.
Punishments, which had fallen upon many of those, who had persecuted them, and
the great Blessings and Benesits, which others had received, who had treated
them with clemency, and amongst the rest the miraculous Victory given to M.
Aurelius in the German expedition, the passage cited by Dr. St. This being the
Scope of Tertullian in that Book, I would gladly know if any man of Common
Sense can conceive him to have been so Senseless, as to think to persuade
Scapula not to compel the Christians against their Conscience to burn Incense
to Jove, by telling him that God had shown himself to be the Powerful God by
what he did in the aforesaid Expedition upon the Supplications of the Heathens
to him under the name of Jove. This surely had been the ready way not to allay,
but to enslame the Fury of the Persecuter, to see a People so obstinate that
whereas they acknowledged the miraculous effect of Prayers made to God under
the name of Jove they would not burn Incense nor sacrifice to him under the
same name. Nor can I see how the Primitive Christians were excusable in their
sufferings, any otherwise than as Weak Brethren who wanted good information,
when as Origin says, they were ready to undergo any torments rather than to
confess Jupiter to be God. Was this then an Apology for so Wise a man as
Tertullian to make? No; But it is such an One, as Dr St. it seems would have
thought fit to make had he been in those Circumstances. Otherwise he would
never have taken so much pains to fix it upon Tertullian, though he could not
do it but by corrupting his words as you have seen, and affirming what He says
was done by the Prayers of the Christians to God, to have been done upon the
Supplications of the Heathens to him under the name of Jove. So foul a Passage
as this was never fetched from the Storehouses of Father Bellarmin, or Father
Coccius, but of a much more Primitive Father, than either of them; of whom the
Prophet Esaias cites a saying [I will be like to the most High] which afterward
served for an Original for the Poets and Orators to write by, when they gave to
Jupiter the Title of Pater Omnipotens and Supremus.


Cath. Hold there, Good Eunomius. You know very well Humanum est labi. Every
slip. is not a kick with the Cloven-foot. The Wisest man may be over-seen in
the Sense of an Author, through have or inadvertence, or heat of disputation:
And this is the utmost which I think you ought or can impute to Dr. St. in this
case.


Eun: In this I confess you speak like a Good Christian. And I should be ready
to close with you in the same Judgment, were I not well assured, that Dr. St.
knew the contrary of what he affirmed, to be the Truth. What if I show you his
own words some pages before in which he affirms expressly, that what was done
at that time, was obtained by the Prayers of the Christians to God, and that
the Heathens intended to rob him of the honor, and give it to their own Jove,
and that this was the Sense of Tertullian in the very place cited now by him in
favor of the Heathens?


Cath. This will seem to me as strange, as the Hail which fell in the likeness
of Fire.


Eun: Pray take his Book; It lies there before you, and read what he says of
this matter. Page 47. -- Pray read it out.


Cath. When the miraculous Victory was obtained by M. Antoninus over the Dr.
St's. Def. p. 47.
Marcomanni by the Prayers of the Christians, (as Tertullian and Apollinaris
say upon good grounds, although the Heathen Historians attribute it to the
virtue of Antoninus, or to some Magicians with him) the whole Army made this
Exclamation, says Tertullian, Deo Deorum and qui solus Potens, whereby they
did says he, in Jovis nomine Deo li. ad Scap. c. 4.
nostro Testimoninm reddere: by which it is evident they intended this honor
to their own Jove; for in the whole Army only the Legio Fulminatrix are
supposed to have been Christians; And besides this upon Antoninus his Column at
Rome, Baronius tells us there is still to be seen the Essigies of Jupiter
Pluvius, destroying men and horses with Thunder and Lightning.


Eun: Behold here a very fair Confession, and Conviction too from Dr. St's. own
mouth. For 1st it is here confessed by him, that the Victory was miraculous.
2ly That it was obtained by the Prayers of the Christians made to God.

3. That this is so affirmed by Tertullian in the very place alleged by him.

4. That he acknowledges it was so affirmed by him upon good grounds, which
were chiefly the letters of M. Aurelius to the Senate. 5. That he judged the
Grounds upon which he spoke to be Good, notwithstanding that the Heathen
Historians attributed it to the virtue of Antoninus, or to some Magicians with
him, as you heard before out of Julius Capitolinus and Dio. 6. That the whole
Army by their Exclamation Deo Deorum and quisolus Potens, intended to give the
honor to their own Jove; and confirms it farther himself from the Effigies of
Jupiter Pluvius still to be seen upon Antoninus his Column at Rome. And now
after so clear a Confession of all these things, what could move so subtle a
^it as Dr. St. to make Tertullian say, that God showed himself to be the
Powerful God by what he did upon the Supplications of the Heathens to him under
the name of Jove? Had he first said this, and afterward told us, that the
Victory was obtained by the Prayers of the Christians, as he confesses
Tertullian says upon good grounds it was, I might have thought he had
corrected himself upon a Second Consideration of the Grounds, upon which
Tertullian says it. But having first acknowledged them to be good
(notwithstanding the Pretensions of the Heathen Historians) after this I say in
spite of those grounds, to make Tertullian say, that God gave the Victory upon
the Supplications of the Heathens to him under the name of Love, is an argument
to me not so much that Dr. St. was grown very sl^epy when he wro^e this, or
that be wrote it in a drea^, Def. p. ^20.
(as he says of T. G.) as that he wilfully shut his eyes, when he was broad
awake. And therefore I hope, Catharinus, you will not forget. 1st What you
stipulated with me, when we entered upon the Examination of this Place, viz,
never more to trust Testimony of Father cited by Dr. St. For were not the
Instances so many, and so pregnant, as has been showed, of his f^ul Play in
this Kind; yet th^s alone is so notorious, that it may suffice in the Judgment
of all Impartial men to implead him guilty of having forf^^ted all R^ght of
ever hereafter being believed in any Testimonies he alleges. 2dly That upon
the whole you will confess, that after all his vapouring of the fall Account he
would give us of the Sense of the Fathers in this Point, and after the brave
Covie of Partridges he tells us he had found, he has not produced so much as a
poor Covie of one Christian Father, who asserts it to be his Sense, that the
Heathen's Jupiter (or as he calls him, their own Jove) was the true God; but
all the Testimonies he brings out of them are either impertinent to the
Question, or their design misrepresented, or the very Text it self corrupted,
as has been showed. And so with your leave I bid you once more Farewell.


Cath. For the present I am content. But I cannot let you go so for good and
all. You must promise to let me see you again.


Eun: And again if you please. Now I have passed my time, a day or two or three
more or less will break no squares. I will attend you.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
CAtharinus waves the Question of Jupiter's being the true God: and inforces
the Parallel from the Heathen's acknowledgment of one Supreme Being, to which
Dr. St. contends, that they ref^rred the worship of their Inferior Deities.
Another notable Instance of his unfaithful reporting a passage of Thomas
Aquinas; and the Generality of the Heathens shown by most evident Arguments to
have believed and worshipped a multitude of Gods properly so called and
esteemed by them. What kind of Notion the Vulgar Heathens had of the Divinity
explained, and the Parallel between their worship, and that of the Church of
Rome shown to be unjust, and rejected as such by Eminent Divines of the Church
of England.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. EVn: I perceive by the desire you expressed of seeing me
again, there is something still behind, which you have a mind to propose. I
shall bewilling to hear it, but hope you will not trouble your self or me any
more with the Dr's Fathers; I dare assure you, it will not be at all for his
Credit.


Cathar. It Is a Transport which Great Wits are too often subject to out of a
desire of Glory, to advance a Paradox, and endeavor to make it plausible by
Artifices of Rhetoric and gain credit to it by unexpected Explications of
Ancient Authors, especially when they have a fair Occasion of catching an
Adversary nodding, if not fast a sleep. as Dr. St. presumed he had done T. G.
when he asserted the Heathen's Supreme God Jupiter, to be according to the
Fathers an Arch-devil, and produced none for it but Father Origin.


Eun: Wits then you see as well as Soldiers must have care how they go a
catching of Tartars, as I think Dr. St. has done, whilst he endeavored to set
Jupiter in the Throne of God. But what is it, that you have to propose?


Cathar. Perhaps I may be mistaken in the Conjecture I have made; but whatever
it were that engaged the Dr. in that Controversy, I do not see but he might
have waved it without any prejudice to his main Argument against T. G. For
whether the Heathen's Jupiter were the Supreme God or no, it is certain from
the Testimonies of the Fathers, that the Heathens acknowledged a Supreme Being,
Maker and Governor of the world. And if they worshipped their Inferior
deities, but as his Ministers, and their Images, but as Symbols or
Representations of Him and Them, and yet were charged by the Fathers with
Idolatry for so doing, t^is evident that T. G. will never be able to excuse
himself, and those of the Church of Rome from Idolatry, by pretending they
referr the worship they give to Saints and Images to God, but He must upon the
same Principle excuse the Heathens also. This I take to be the Sum and Force
of the Dr's discourse, and I think it will prove a Tartar to T. G.


Eun: A Tartarian Argument indeed, or such an one as a Tartar, were he as
subtle a Disputant as Dr. St. would bring to defend himself from becoming a
Christian. But where the force of it lies I cannot see. For if we consider the
Whole, it can be no Just Ground to charge either the Heathens in that
Supposition, or the Romanists, with Idolatry, till it be proved to be Idolatry
to give an Inferior degree of Worship or Veneration to any thing for the
relation it has to the only true God. Here it was, he should have laid the Axe
to the root, but it was impossible for him to make it enter, either in respect
of the Heathens in the aforesaid Supposition, or of those of the Church of Rome.

1. Not in respect of the Heathens. For from whence should he show it? Not from
the light of nature; for that teaches us, that although no Irrational and
Inanimate Beings be capable of that real Excellency, as to deserve any honor
from us for it is own sake, much less divine, yet even such things may have a
Relation to matters of so high a nature, as to deserve a different usage an I
regard from other things, yea a Reverence, and if I may so call it, with the
Dr. a Reli^ious Respect. Nor from the Law of Moses, at least for all those
Heathens who lived before it was given, and consequently could not be judged by
it. Nor yet for the rest, because the Apostle declares them also not to be
under the Law, any farther than the light of Nature manifested to them, that
what they did was Good or Evil in its self, Of which kind the Dr. supposes the
knowledge of Idolatry as to the Heathens to be none, when he says, From whence
should they kn^w the sinfulness of it, but from the Law of God?

2 Nor in respect of those of the Church of Rome. 1 Because the Law of Moses no
where forbids to give an Inferior degree of Reverence and respect to other
things for the Relation they bear to God. 2. Because in case it had, the Law is
evinced in that part to be a Positive Precept only, by God'^, dispensing with
the Jews to give it to the Ark, with relation to him; and so not to oblige
Christians. 3. Because those of the Church of England, and all others who give
an Inf^riou^ respect and Veneration to Sacred Things and Places for the
relation they have to God, must be Idolaters on the same account, and therefore
Eminent divines (as I showed before) of the Part. 1. p. 33. 34.
Church of England free the Church of Rome from Idolatry in that respect. This
then was first to have been done by the Dr. to make those of the Church of Rome
Idolaters by paralleling them with the Heathens in the aforesaid Supposition
viz, he ought to have shown it to be Idolatry in the nature of the thing
independently of any Positive Prohibition, (in case there were any such, which
is denied) to give an Inf^riour degree of respect or Veneration to other things
besides God for the relation they have to him But this he neither has done,
nor ever will be able to do, and consequently this mighty Argument, which the
Dr. spent so much time and pains to build up and adorn with the choicest
Paint^ng and Sculpture his Wit and Ar^ could devise, falls to the Ground for
want of a Foundation to bear it up.


Cathar. Yet still me thinks the Argument holds good against T. G. unless he
will set as little by the Fathers, as you make Dr. St. to do. For if they
acknowledged one Supreme Being, and referred all their worship both of
Inferior (...) and Images to him, and were notwithstanding charged by the
Fathers with Idolatry for so doing, those of the Church of Rome must fall under
the same charge.


Eun: To this I thought I had given you a sufficient Answer in the Account
Part. 3. p. 330. etc
I gave you of the Heathen's Theology, and the Arguments made use of by the
Fathers to impugn it; from all which it appears, that it was not their design
to charge them with Idolatry for giving an inferior degree of worship to
things relating to God, but for worshipping the Creatures, not the Creator,
(mark that, Li. 6. de Civ. Dei c. 1.
though they could not but have a natural and inbred knowledge of him) with
that worship which is due only to the One true God, as S. Augustine expressly
lays the charge. But because I see you are not yet fully satisfied in this
Point (so hard it is to shake off a prejudicate Opinion) I shall desire you as
you are a Lover of Truth to answer me ingenuously but to this one Question,
which I take to be very material toward the true Understanding the nature of
Idolatry, viz, Whether you do not think, that the Heathens, at least the
Generality of them (Those I mean who followed the Religion of the State, and
squated both their belief and worship according to the Rules of it, for of the
Wiser one we may have occasion to speak afterward) did not acknowledge and
worship more Gods than One?


Cath^r. To this I shall give you a very clear and direct Answer, in the words
of One, against whom T. G. himself will not except. I mean Thomas Aquinas, in
the Book he purposely wrote against the Gentiles, li. 1. c. 4. Where as Dr. St.
Def. p. 12.
has well observed he confesses, that most of the Gentiles did acknowledge One
Supreme God, from whom they said all those others whom they called Gods did
receive their being; and that they ascribed the name of divinity to all
Immortal substances, chiefly by reason of their Wisdom, Happiness and
Government. Which custom of speaking, says he, is likewise found in
Scripture, where either the Holy Angels or men, and Judges are called Gods, I
have said, ye are Gods, and many other places. By which you see, that if those
of the Church of Rome will give any credit to their own great Dr. Aquinas, in
his Book so highly applauded Des. p. 18.
by Possevin and others for the best account of the Christian Religion in
opposition to Heathenism, they must confess also that although the Heathens
gave the name of Gods, to others besides the Supreme God, yet they did not
believe them to be properly Gods, but Analogically only and by participation.


Eun: What I expected, Catharinus, was your own Judgment in the case, and not
of Thomas Aquinas; and I was in hope you would have troubled us no more with
the Dr's citations. But by what I now experience in you, I see I had done well
to have kept you in the good humor you were in of laying wagers, though you
had staked but a Guiney at a time.


Cathar. I suppose you would have gotten but little by the bargain at present,
had you done so. For the Book is so frequent among all those of the Church of
Rome who pretend to learning, that I cannot believe the Dr. would hazard his
credit so apparently, as either to corrupt the Text, or cite the passage in
such a manner, as to mis-represent the design of the Author.


Eun: This is indeed what ought to have weighed with him. But have you (...)
seen the Place your self? for you promised me from the former discoveries I
had made of his Insincerity, in this kind, never to trust Testimony more cited
by Dr. St.


Cathar. I confess I have not.


Eun: Give me leave then to tell you what it was, that Aquinas was treating of
in that place, and your self shall be Judge, whether ^he Dr. have dealt fairly
by him or his Readers in representing him in the manner he does. The Title of
the Chapter cited by the Dr. is, Quod Deus sit unus, that th^re is but One God.
Tlo^. Aquin. ^i. 1. cont. Gent. c. 42.
This Aquinas proves by many Excellent reasons, to which he shows the
Testimonies of H. Scripture to be agreeable. And among other reasons he gives
this for one; because if there be two Gods, the name of God must be attributed
to both, either Aequivocally, or Vnivocally. If equivocally, says he, it is
beside he present Intention (mark that) for nothing hinders, but that any thing
may be called equivocally by any name, if the use and custom, of the Speakers
admit it. But if it be said of both Vnivocally, the reason for which it is
said, must be the same in both, which he shows there to be Impossible. Having
thus declared his Intention to be to prove that there is but one God properly
so called, and established it by the plainest demonstrations, as a most certain
Truth, the Corollary he inferrs from these Premises is, that by virtue of this
Truth Hac veritate ^epelluntur Gentiles Deorum multitudiuem confitentes;
qua^vis plures eorum unum Deum Sum mum esse dice^ent, a quo omnes alios, quos
Deos nuncupabant, creatos esse asserebant, omnibus substantiis Sempiternis
Divinitatis nomen ascriben^es and e. Quae quidem consuetudo loquendi etiam in
S. Scriptura invenitur, dum Sancti Angeli, ^ut etiam homines vel Judices Dij
nominantur.
the Gentiles who acknowledged a multitude of Gods, were convinced to be in an
Error, although, says he, (and then follow the words cited by the Dr) plures
eorum, many of them did acknowledge one Supreme God, from whom they said all
those Others, whom they called Gods, did receive their being; ascribing the
name of Divinity to all Immortal Substances, and that chiefly by reason of
their Wisdom, Happiness, and Government, which eustome of speaking, he says,
is likewise found in Scripture.

This is the Sum of Aquinas his discourse in that Chapter: And what can be
more plain, than that his meaning was to tell us, that although the
Philosophers, particularly the Platonick^ (whom he means by his quamvis plures
eorum) did aknowledge one Supreme God, from whom they said all those others,
whom they called Gods, did receive their being, and therein agreed with the
like custom of speaking found in Scripture; yet the Generality of the Heathens
did acknowledge a multitude of Gods properly so called: and consequently that
this was the Error which he had convinced them of, by showing that it is
impossible there should be more than One God properly so called. This I say is
plain both from the declaration he makes, that to speak of Gods equivocally so
called was beside his purpose, and from his opposing the Opinion of the
Philosophers to that of the Generality of the Heathens, as an Exception from
the General Opinion they had of them. And now I pray Catharinus be Judge your
self whether it were fairly done of the Dr. to suppress the General
Proposition, viz, [The Heathens erred in acknowledging a multitude of Gods] and
the word Quamvis, although, which made the Exception, and then translate the
words Plures eorum, by the most of the Gentiles, as if Aquinas had spoken of
the Generality of them, when he spoke only of the Philosophers, who though they
were many, or if you will, a great many, which is the most can be made of the
word Plures in that place, yet they were far from being the most of the
Gentiles, as Dr. St. according to his excellent faculty in translating renders
it. Is it not plain that here he mis-represents, to say no more, the meaning
and design of Aquinas? And yet upon such perverted Testimonies as these it is,
that he builds his Chimerical Assertion, that the Generality of the Heathens
were charged with Idolatry by the Fathers for giving an Inferior degree of
worship and Veneration to others besides the one only true God, for the
relation they bare to him; when it is evident from the very Testim^ny he cites,
that they were charged with Idolatry for acknowledging and worshipping more
Gods than One, properly so called. I could here give you as good an account of
the Admirable work he makes for 15 Pages together with the Testimony of
Athenagoras, from whose discourse he pretends chiefly to infer the Heathen's
Relative worship, as 1. how he omits some of Deo praetermisso, Elementorum
m^tationes deificant; perinde ac si Navigium aliquis quo vectus sit,
gubernatoris loco haberet. Athenag. p. 61. 68. Def. p. 69. 62.
the expressions of that Author which evidently show that they did not referr
their worship to the true God. 2. How he employs all the little arts of
Sophistry and Rhetoric to debauch his Sense in others; and lastly how after
all finding the whole Series and Design of that Father point blank opposite to
what he would have it, he sormes the very Assertions of Athenagoras into
Objections under the name of T. G. and sets himself to confute him as a down
right Adversary: But as I said before I hope we have done with the Dr's
Testimonies; and you will tell me now wha^ you think your self of the Question,
Whether the Heathens did believe and worship more Gods properly so esteemed by
them, or not?


Cathar. I see it is troublesome for an Author to fall into the hands of such
Readers, as have both Curiosity and Patience to examine his Citations, and
therefore shall trouble you no more upon that account. But for the Question you
propose; I had rather hear what you will say of it, than produce my own
thoughts, which I confess are somewhat perplexed by what you have already
discoursed.


Eun: Well then, since you put me to answer my own Question, I shall not
trouble you with long discourses, but only offer to your consideration these
few following Observations, which I hope will be sufficient to satisfy you,
that the Generality of the Heathens did believe them whom they publicly
worshipped to be truly and properly Gods, and not in name only.

The First is, that the whole Christian world till Dr. St. did ever condemn the
Heathens as guilty of Polytheism; which they could not justly have done, had
the Heathens believed one only true God, and the rest to be only called so: For
upon the same account both the Jews and Christians might be accused of
Polytheism for giving the name of Gods to Angels and Men; yea even God himself,
for it was he that said, I have said ye are Gods.

2. That the Heathens accused the Christians of Atheism, because they denied
Athenagoras legate. pro Christ. p. ^3.
them to be Gods who were publicly worshipped.

3. That they persecuted the Christians to death, and the Christians willingly
suffered death, for maintaining there was but one only true God, who deserved
Divine Honor to be given to him.

4. That they erected Temples, instituted Priests, and appointed Sacrifices to
be offered to them, which if not by the Law of nature, yet by the common
consent of mankind were the Exte^^our Signs of the acknowledgment of true
divinity; and thereupon is so often urged by the Fathers against them, as who
affirmed them to deserve those honors.

5. That the Fathers bring infinite arguments to prove that those whom the
Heathens called Gods, were not really and truly Gods, which had been a
superfluous labor, if the Heathens had not believed, as well as called them
Gods.

6. That those who made use of these arguments against them, had many of them
been Heathens themselves, as Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Lactantius, and Arnobius,
who without doubt understood very well what themselves were taught and had
practiced while they were Heathens, and cannot in reason be supposed to have
charged them with more in this matter than they were guilty of, only that they
might have occasion to give some casts of their former employment.

7. That the Devils, as S. Augustine says, by prodigious but fallacious signs
and De civ. Dei. li. ^. c. 22. and li. 10. c. 1.
predictions, persuaded maximae parti, which I think may be truly translated,
the most of the Heathens, that they were Gods, and although the Platonists knew
them, not to be so, from their vicious practices, yet they durst not pronounce
them neither, to be altogether unworthy of divine honor, for fear says S.
Augustine, of offending the People by whom they saw them served with so many
Rites and Temples.

8. That the Wisest of the Heathens, as Varro, Scaevola, Seneca and Cicero, not
only concurred with the Vulgar in the external practice of worshipping many
Gods, (as the Platonicks also did) but looked upon it as a Point of prudence or
State Policy, to keep the People in S. Aug. ^bid. li. 8. c. 12.
Ignorance, and not let them know, they were no Gods whom they worshipped. The
first part is evident from what S. Augustine says of Varro, that knowing Li. b.
c. 2.
the Vanity and falsi^y of the Gods who were publicly worshipped, yet for fear
of offending the people he worshipped them himself, and maintained that they
ought to be worshipped; and therefore reproaches him for suffering himself to
be overborn wi^h the custom and Laws of the City; as he does Seneca also for
that saying of his, Omnem istam ignobilem Li. b. c. 10.
Deorum turbam, All this ignoble multitude of Gods, which long Superstition
has for a long time heaped together, we will so worship, as remembering the
worship of them to belong more to custom, than Truth. And whereas Philosophy
had in a manner set him at liberty to deride the Errors of the Vulgar, yet
because he was an ^llustrious Senator of the Roman People, overawed by the
Laws of the City and the customs of men, he worshipped what he reprehended;
practiced, what he reproved, and adored, what he blamed, and this, not as Actor
upon the Theater, but as a devote in the Temple, so much more culpably, says
S. Augustine, for that he performed, those actions against the inward Sense of
his mind, in such a manner that ^he People judged him to do them with a real
intention. The 2d part also is no less manifest Li. 4. c. 17.
from what the same S. Augustine says of Scaevola, that he affirmed some things
would be hurtful for the people to be informed of, as that Hercules;
Aesculapius etc. were not Gods; and of Varro, that it was expedient the People
should be deceived in Religion. And upon this account Li. 2. c. ^. n. 3.
it is, that Lactantius declaimes in this wise against Cicero. To what purpose
is it, says he, to preach in this sort to the Vulgar, and Illiterate. People,
when we see Learned and Wise men, who understood the Vanity of these Religions,
to persist nevertheless, by I know not what perverseness, in worshipping the
very things they condemn? Cicero understood these things to be false which men
adored, and yet after he had advanced many things, which were of force to
overthrow the Common Religions, he says that those things were not to be
discoursed to the Vulgar, least such kind of disputations should extinguish the
public received Religions, or worship of many Gods. Nothing the^ I think can
be more plain, than that the Generality of the Heathens did not only give the
name of Gods, according to the custom found in H. Scripture, but did really
and truly believe them to be Gods, whom they worshipped, and that it was the
State-Religion of that time to believe and worship them as such. Yet least any
doubt should yet remain in you from the confusion, which the Dr every where
makes between the Vulgar and the Wiser Heathens, I shall add one Observation
more, which I am sure ought and will weigh more with you than all the rest. And
it is this.

9. That God himself forbids the J^ws to have any other Gods besides him, and
yet was so far from forbidding the name of Gods to be given to Angels and Men,
that himself by the mouth of David pronounces of the Rulers, I have said, Ps.
^^. Exodus 22. 28.
ye are Gods, and accordingly Moses forbids to revile the Gods, or curse the
Ruler of the People. By which it appears that the meaning of the Commandment
was not to forbid them to give the nam^ of Gods to others besides himself, but
to esteem them to be truly and properly Gods, as the Heathens did.


Cathar. These Observation. I confess are so clear and home, that I think what
you infer from them cannot be denied or doubted by any man of Common Sense.
And so I freely grant that the Vulgar Heathens did truly and really S. Hi^ron
^n Dan. 2. Error. Gentilium omne quod supra se est, Deos putant. S. Aug. li. 1.
de Cons. Evang. c. 27. Majores and Minores Deos colun^ quos Deos pu^^^^.
esteem them to be Gods, whom they worshipped. But I see not yet the reason,
why you were so earnest with me to speak to this Question.


Eun: Pardon me there, Good Catharinus; What was it made you so backward to
speak to it, but that you saw, that to answer this Question would be to answer
the Argument you proposed, in which you supposed the Heathens to referr all
their worship, both of their Inferior Deities and Images to the true God, and
upon that account to have been charged by the Fathers with Idolatry, that so
you might make the Parallel complete between the worship of the Heathens, and
that of the Church of Rome? For if the Generality of the Heathens did truly and
properly esteem those to be Gods, whom they worshipped, as has been showed,
it is evident that they did not referr the worship they gave to them to the true
God, but worshipped each of them as an absolute Deity. And this being the
Fundamental Principle of the State-Religion at that time, was that with which
the Fathers primarily charged the Heathens, and that in such terms as evidently
exclude from their thoughts the Dr's Chimerical Imagination of Relative
worship; as when S. Athanasius Oratcon^ Gentil.
charges them, for turning away from the true God, and giving all the honor of
the Divinity to the creatures; S. Augustine for giving divine honor creaturae,
De civ. Dei li. 6. c. 1.
non Creatori, to the creature, not to the Creator, and praetermisso vel
praeterito Deo, passing by God, and making Gods of the Elements, in like manner
as if one should take the Ship in which he (...) Leg^^. pro C^r. p. 61.
is carried, for the Pilot that governs it, as Athenagoras expresses it. And
the same is confessed by Vossius in his first Preface, where he acknowledges
that the Heathens did relicto Deo in naturae Veneratione consistere, forsaking
God stay in the worship of the creatures. By all which it appears, that the
Parallel between the worship of the Heathens, and that of the Church of Rome,
like a House built of Cards, when one of the Suppo^ters is drawn away, falls
down in great confusion. And this is confessed also by Eminent Doctors of the
Church of England; as (...). Ha^mond, who makes the Heathen Idolatry to have
been the Of Idolatry p. 42.
worshipping of the many false Gods first, and then of the Images of them; and
then adds, that those of the Church of Rome are not said or thought to be
guilty of the former, He might have added, nor upon the same account of the
latter neither, for if they do not worship many false Gods, they do not worship
the Images of them. And Arch Bp. Whitgift, (whom Dr. St. will by no means
suffer to be thrown away to the Puritans,) when he makes his third kind of
Idolatry to be, the worshipping false Gods either in heart, mind, or in
external creatures Dr. St. ^n his Pr^f. to Romans Idol.
living or dead, and altogether forgetting the worship of the true God;
ingenuously confesses, that for all that he can see or learn, the Papists are
not in this third kind of Idolatry.


Cathar. And I can be contented to hope at least with these Learned men, that
taking Idolatry in this Sense the Parallel does not hold with the Papists: but
yet not so as to free them from the guilt of Idolatry upon another account, if
it be true what T. G. says, that it is the giving the Sovereign worship of God
to a creature; For though the Heathens gave divine worship to their Inferior
deities, yet they gave Sovereign worship only to the Supreme God, and the
Mat^rs sacrificed their lives on this Principle, Def. p. 70.
that divine worship (and not merely Sovereign worship) is to be given to none
but the Supreme God. So that either the Heathens must be excused from Idolatry
in what they did, and the Primitive Martyrs not be deemed so wise as they might
have been; Or the Papists, at least those who give Latria to the Cross and the
Images of Christ, must be involved in the same crime.


Eun: I cannot easily think that the Dr. intended to be serious when he put in
that subtle Parenthesis (not merely Sovereign worship) and yet because it is a
string he often harps upon, I must not pass it by as a Trifle, though in
reality it be no other, as to the present dispute, whether we consider it with
respect to T. G. or to the Heathens. And first for T. G. Def. p. 5.
the Dr. having been so charitable to him as to suppose him to believe the
Supreme Being Maker and Governor of the world to be the true God, it seems
plain to me that he meant the same by Sovereign, and by divine worship. Nor do
I see what ground Dr. St. had to fancy he made any distinction between them,
when he confesses the definition of Idolatry according to T. G. to be, the
giving the worship due only to God to a p. 4.
creature, more than he has to make him distinguish between God, and the
Supreme Being, which in this case is just none at all. For if God and the
Supreme Being be adequately the same with him (and I never heard he made more
Gods than On^) it is manifest that by the worship due to the Supreme Being (that
is, Sovereign worship) he meant no other than the worship due to God alone, i.
e^. divine worship. By this it appears that the distinction had no ground in
any thing that T. G. said: It was the Dr's Proper Invention; and so if he
please, ^ Def. p. ^19.
let it be writ upon his Monument, that he may not be unprovided of an
Inscription, as well as T. G. Hic jacet Author hujus distinct^onis.


Cathar. But if T. G. intended no distinct on by these terms, why does he call
it Sov^raign worship?


E^n: Not to distinguish it from the worship due only to the one true God, but
with intention to have avoided, if possible, the Equivocation the Dr. had
brought upon the word, divine, by his applying it to that Relative and
Inf^riour kind of worship, which some of the School men call latria and assert
to be due to the Cross and the Images of Christ. And I should have thought he
might have expected to have found the Dr. favorable here, after so serious a
Profession that he loves not to wrangle abo^t words; but I see that rocks
sometimes lie under the smoothest waters: and a man through too much care may
fall upon Scylla, whilst he endeavors to avoid Charybdis.

2. As for the Heathens, they may indeed be conceived to mean by divine
worship, not only the worship due to their Supreme God Jupiter, but the honor
due to any thing, which according to their Erroneous Fancy they believed to
have true divinity in it, of which sort they had good store, whom they believed
to be truly and properly Gods, as I showed before. But what was this to the
Christian Martyrs? who were not to regulate their actions by the Errors of the
Heathens, but by the truth of Christianity, which as it believes, that true
divinity belongs to none but to the only one Supreme Being so it teaches that
true divine honor is to be given to none but him. And therefore upon the same
account, that they were bound to Sacrifice their lives on this Principle, that
there were no more true Gods but one; they were bound also to do it upon that
other that true divine worship is to be given to none but the Supreme God: But
then again, what is this to those of the Church of Rome, who do not believe
either the Saints or Images to be Gods, or to have any divinity in them; but
give an Inferior respect or Veneration only to the former for the Sanctity
they have received from the only true God, and to the latter for the relation
they beat to their Prototypes, viz the same true God, or his Servants?


Cathar. I must confess I was afraid there was something like that we call
Scholastic Fooling in this distinction as applied to T. G. when I first read
it. But still there remains a Scruple with me, concerning the Heathens, and I
should be glad you could remove it; how, if they acknowledged one Supreme
Being. Maker and Governor of the world, they could think any others to be
truly and properly Gods besides him? For this seems to me so palpable and gross
a Contradiction, that nothing that has the use of reason could fall into it.


Eun: For the Heathens contradicting themselves, I think we need not be much
concerned, when we see some Christians can so easily run into it. But by this
Scruple of yours, Catharinus, I perceive you imagine the Generality of them to
have had as clear and distinct a Notion of the one Suprea^ Being, maker and
Governor of the world, as the Wise Philosophers had, if not as we Christians
have now adays. And this indeed is what Dr. St. has labored to instill into
the minds of his Readers, by representing what the Philosophers said of God,
and the wisest too among them, as if it had been the constant belief of the
Vulgar, or as if they had as thoroughly believed the first Article of the
Creed, I believe in one God Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things Visible and Invisible, as Christians do. That this was his Practice,
to dress up the Parallel he intended to make between their worship, and that of
the Church of Rome, is manifest from the very Testimonies he cites to prove
that the Heathens did acknowledge one Supreme Being; as you have seen already
in that of Thomas Aquinas, who speaks not there of the most of the Gentiles, as
the Dr translates it, but of the wisest of the Philosophers. And the like is to
be observed in the Testimonies he cites out of Justin Martyr. Def. p. 25.
Athenagoras p. 60. Clemens Alexandrinus p. 76. Origin. p. 81. S. Augustine p.
97. For what these Fathers allege out of the Philosophers and P^ets concerning
the V^n^ty of God etc. to prove against the common Religion that more Gods than
one were not to be believed and worshipped, the Dr. very artificially
insinuates into his Reader, as the N^tion of the Heathens in general, as if
they had as clear and distinct a knowledge of the one Supreme Being, as the
Wisest of the Ph^losophers. And had this been so, supposing the Wisest to have
had a right notion of the one only true God, it is a hard matter indeed to
conceive, how this Judgment remaining entire in them, they could fall into so
manifest a Contradiction, as the believing many Gods properly so called: or how
Idola^ry, (as the Dr. himself observes Def. p. 63.) for that part of it which
lies in the inward esteem of our minds, could consist with such an
Acknowledgment of one Supreme Being.

But whether this were possible or no, 1st it is nothing to the Question we are
now upon, for whether it be or be not, the matter of Fact is certain, as I
showed before, that the Genera^ity of the H^athens did believe and worship many
God properly so esteemed by them, and were upon this account charged with
Idolatry by the Fathers, which is sufficient to show the disparity between
their belief and practice, and that of the Church of Rome, as you heard but
even now confessed by divines of the Church of England.

2. It concerns not the case of the Vulgar Heathens, for the notion they had of
the divinity, was not clear and distinct like that of the Philoso^hers, who
therefore denied those whom the People worshipped to be Gods; but rude, confuse
and imperfect, Tertull. li. de spect. non penitus Deum norunt, nifi de
longinquo, non de proximo.
like that of men, who see a thing at a distance, but know not what it is, or 2
like that of blind men who feel something of the Sun's Influence, but see not
the body of light, Lactant. li. 2. c. 1. Adeo ipsa veritas, cogente natura, ab
invitis pe^toribus erumpit. Clem. Alex. in Protr. vel inviti fatentur. Athenag.
p. 15. vel inviti consentiunt.
a knowledge not settled and cultivated by sober and serious Reflection, but
constrained by the force of nature, like the Natural Testimony of Conscience
which the 2. S. Aug. Ep. 120. ad Honor. sicut nec ilia lux videtur, oculis
praesentata coecorum.
most Atheistical and debauch^d sinners fee at times, even against their Wills;
Tertull. ubi supra. Deum non penitus no^unt. S. Aug. Tract. 106. in ^o. Non
omni modo esse potuit hoc nomen (Deus) ignotum, non omnino ac penitus possit
abscondi Lactant. li. 2. c. 1. Quem p^o^^us igno^ari ab homine fas non est.
not a clear light but a faint glimmering* In fine, Tertull. li. de Test.
Animae. E^ voce (s^il, Deus) and aliquem esse significas, and omnem ilii
confite^is potestatem. Clem. Alex. in strom. propefinem. Potestate quidem
Dominus and Deus omnium, cogniti^ne autem non omnium, neque enim id quod est,
neque quo modo Dominus and Pater and creato^, no^unt, nisi ab ipsa veritate
didicerint. vid. S. Aug. li. 1. de Cons. Evang. ^. 25.
not a c^rtain and steady knowledge of him who is the true God, but a General
Notion of a divine Power, hanging as it were in the air like an Ind^viduum
Vagum, and so differently app^ied by each one to the God, or Gods he worshipped.

This is the Account which the Fathers give of the Notion, which the Vulgar
Heathens had of the divinity, Li. 1. de Idol. c. 2. and 4.
with whom Vossius also agrees, affirming the knowledge they had ^f God, to be
C^gnitus confuse and potentia, Ignotus distinct and actu, etc.
confused and undetermined, and that in part they received him, but in part
rejected him, so that even when they knew God, they knew him not to be Go^. And
it cannot be doubted but so dim and imperf^ct a N^tion as this was, would
easily be laid aside o^ f^rgotten, where Fancy, Passion and Intere^t gave Laws
to R^ason, though upon occasions it would show it self in their words and
actions, against their wills. And what Errors would not such Masters lead them
into, especially under the direction of so cunni^g a Sophister, as the Old
Serpent? One of the first Propositions he made to our first Parents, was that
they should be lik^ Gods, inspiring into their minds an affectation of
divinity. And they being delighted and pl^ased with it, as S. Augustine says,
what was the consequence like to be in Li. 14. de civ. Dei c. 13.
their Posterity, but that they should be seduced to believe more Gods than One.

That this was their belief de facto is undeniable, and supposing what has
been said of the confused notion they had of God, that they knew him but in
part, and that so rudely, that the Apostle of the Gertiles oftentimes
affirms, that they did not know him, and Gal. 4. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
the Inscription to the Unknown God, will stand as an E^ernal Memorial of it,
it is no hard matter I think to conceive, how they might fall into the
Ervoneous Belief of many Gods. For as men who never had seen that body of light
which we call the Sun, beholding only the beams he sends before him at his
r^sing could not but infer from thence, there was a Light which enlightened the
world, but would be to seek whether it were one or many, or rather apt to
believe from what they experienced in sublunary Lights, that one Taper alone
was not sufficient for the whole Universe, So though the Heathens before the
rising of the Sun of Justice, could not but see by the beams he sent before him
in the Creation, that there was a Superior Power which governed the world, yet
being led wholly by Sense, and judging of Heavenly things by what they saw pass
in Humane, they might be at a loss to know whether this divine Power resided in
one or many; or if one were Chief, whether there were not others, who had the
right and power of Absolute Lords and Governors over such and such things, or
such and such parts of the Universe; And not being able to comprehend, how so
vast a Machin as Heaven and Earth with the variety of creatures in them, could
be governed by One, they inclined rather to assign him Partners in the
Government of it, some of whom, (as Godwin observes in his Roman Antiquities)
they I i. 2. Sect. 1. c. 1.
fancied to have possession of Heaven by their own Right, and these they called
Dij majorum Gentium o^ Select Gods; and others, no otherwise than by right of
donation, as the Semidei or Indigetes.


Cathar. You have given us here Eunomius a pleasant kind of Hypothesis, not
unlike those invented by the Philosophers to explicate the alterations which
appear in the Universe, some of them placing the cause of them in the motion of
the Heavens, others of the Earth and others of both. But how does it appear
that this was the Conceit which the Heathens made?


Eun: If a Second cause, not clearly and distinctly known have given occasion
to the Wise Philosophers to frame such strange (and some of them such odd)
hypot^eses to explain the common Phenomenon of the world, how can it be
expected, but that the Vulgar Heathens, must have raised much stranger
concerning the Government of it, upon so dim and confuse a knowledge as they
had of the divinity. As for the Hypothesis it is self, of the Divine Power
residing in many, it appears to have been theirs from the defenses they made
for themselves, when the Fathers pressed them with the absurdities they run
into by asserting more Gods, than One; For as Lactantius says, some of them
said, Li. 1. c. 3
that their many G^ds were such, (or as much) is Christians would have the one
to be: And others that they presided so over several things and parts of the
Universe, that there was but one Rector Eximius, Supreme Ruler. And therefore
speaking afterward of the division of kingdoms between Jupiter, Neptune, and
Pluto, ^. 11.
and having compared the share which sell to Neptune to that of M. Antonius to
whom the Senate had given the command of all the Sea Coast, he showe'th how the
Poets (to whom the People as Varro says, were apt to give credit) by giving
the name of Heaven to the Eastern Part which belonged to Jupiter, and of Hell
to the Western, which was the Portion of Pluto, and by other Fictions they
added, raised it from a terrene power to a divine in the Apprehension of the
Vulgar; which was the more confirmed in them by the many prodigious, but
fallacious signs, as S. Augustine says, which Evil Spirits wrought in their
names, and their exacting sacrifice, which by the common consent of mankind was
held only due to divinity, to be offered to them. Hence the Question between
the Heathens and the Fathers, was not whether the One Supreme God used the
Ministry of Angels to execute his commands, for in this, Lactantius says,
that the Christians were ready to agree Id. cap. 7.
with them as to the thing, though they denied those whom the Heathens
worshipped to be those Angels or Ministers; but whether their many Gods were
not the same which Christians would have their One to be; or as Minucius Felix
states the Question to his Friend Caecilius p. 51. 52.
whether the Heavenly Empire were governed by the (undivided) power and
Authority of one or by the A^bitrement of many; by which he understands, and he
understood the Heathens to do the like, not a Ministerial Power, such as Tu in
caelo summam potestatem dividi credas and scindi ve^i illius ac divini Imperij
totam potestatem?
is given to the Angels, but a sharing of the One true and divine Empire, by a
division of the whole Power among many? And that which made them fall into this
Error, was as I said before, that they could not comprehend, how the Universe
could be governed by one, but looked upon it as the most extravagant and
Senseless Position in the world, as appears by the Objection made by Caecilius,
What monstrous things, says he, do the p. 29.
Christians faign of that their One God, when they make him busily pry into the
manners, the actions, the words, and even the Secret thoughts of all men, as
one that runs up and down, and is every where present. They will have him to be
unquiet, importune, and curious even to Impudence: For they make him present to
all that is done, and to insinuate himself into all corners, whereas he can
neither sufficiently provide for Each particular, being encumbered with all: nor
have sufficient care of all, being intent upon particulars: Here you see the
Fundamental Error of the Heathens and that which made them multiply the number
of their Gods without number, assigning the care of each S. Aug. li. 4. de civ.
Dei. c. ^.
thing to the proper office of some Deity, as to the Goddess S^getia the care
of the corn to Flora of the Flowers, to Rusina, of the Hills, to Vallonia, of
the Valleys, and so of the rest, which Varro affirms to have exceeded thirty
thousand. And Id ibid. c. 22.
the same Varro thought he had done a singular piece of service to the Romans,
in not only giving them a Catalogue of the Gods they ought to worship, but in
teaching them also, what was the particular Power and Virtue of each Deity in
order to the Parts of the Universe. For by this, says he, we may know, what
God we ought to invocate for each thing, and not do, as Comedians are wont,
when they jest, ask water of Bacchus, and wine of the Nymphs. A great benefit
doubtless, says S. Augustine deriding after his way the fopperies of this great
man; but withal adding, that he had deserved thanks indeed, had he showed what
was Truth, and taught the One true God, from whom all good things are, to be
worshipped by Men.


Cathar. You are careful I see to avoid the rock which T. G. run upon, when
citing the Testimony only of good father Origin, he cried out the Fathers, the
Fathers. But admitting all this to be so, as you have said, I do not see yet
how the Heathens were chargeable with Idolatry in T. Gs. Principles, 1. because
they gave but divine worship to their Inferior Deities, and Sovereign alone to
Jupiter, 2 because however they imagined the divine Power to be divided among
many, yet without doubt what they referred their worship to, was that which
they had in their minds when they pronounced the word God, how rudely soever
conceived by them.


Eun: Much good may the Spoils of such a wrack do the Dr. I know none will envy
them. But for what you object, to the first I answer, that by what name soever
you call the worship the Heathens gave to their Inferior Deities, yet
professing, as they did, that they worshipped them as Sharers with Jupiter in
the Divine power and Authority and upon that account believed them to be t^uly
and prop^rly Gods, in whose power it was to bestow those benefits upon them,
which they desired, they were justly charged with Idolatry by the Fathers for
so doing. For this being a Perfection peculiar to God, that he is the Sole
Author of every good Gift, the giving worship to any other besides him, as a
Sharer with him in it though but in this or that particular, will be Idolatry:
And in this consideration, (were there no other) they might be justly charged
with it by the Fathers. But the case is far different with those of the Church
of Rome, who believe and profess every good and perfect Gift to descend from
the Father of Lights, whom they acknowledge to be the only true God; and
address themselves to the Angels and Saints, as his Ministers and Servants, not
to obtain of them the benefits they desire, but of God alone by their
Intercession through his only Son and our only Redeemer Jesus Sess. 25^
Christ, as the Council of Trent has declared.

As for what you add of the Heathens referring their worship to what they had
in their minds, when they pronounced the word God, how rudely soever conceived
by them: I answer that as the Manichees, Manichaei Solemn istum oculis carneis
visibilem expositum and though they professed to believe and worship Christ,
yet for giving that worship to the Sun, whom they believed to be him, were
charged with Idolatry: publicum non tan^um hominibus sed etiam pecoribus ad
videndum, Christum Dominum esse putaverunt. S. Aug. Tract. 24. in Io.
So the Heathens also though they pronounced the word God, yet fixing the
notion they had of him, upon Jupiter, as the Dr. says they generally did, (at
least the Greeks and Romans) or upon the Sun as the Persians, or upon the Soul
of the world as the Stoics, or upon any other created person or thing, they
were in like manner guilty of Idolatry: And the reason of both is, because what
the Manichees and Heathens had in their minds and Intentions to worship was not
Him, who was the true God; but in reality a man, or a devil, or some other
creature, to whom they applied the notion, and whom they erroneously, and
without reason, believed to be him. And here the case also is quite different
with those of the Church of Rome: For they neither believe the Saints to be
Gods nor any divinity to be in Images, nor Bread in the Eucharist to be Christ,
but believe the Saints to be but his Servants, the Images but Representations,
and the Bread not to be at all, but to be changed into the Body of Christ: so
that the Object of their worship, that is, what they have in their minds and
purposes to give divine worship to, being no other than the one only true God
they can never be justly charged with Idolatry, as T. G. has f^lly and clearly
shown, Cath. no Idol. p. 327. etc. As for the Heathens, if at any time they
worshipped God under the general notion of a Power Superior to the Universe,
or as Maker and Governor of the world, without placing it upon any creature,
to make that the Object of their worship, as it is likely they did not, when
they used those expressions, God sees,, and I commend it to God, and God will
restore, and the like: for t^e^ as Tertullian O Testimonium animae naturaliter
Christianae. Tertull. Apol. c. 17.
says, they lifted up their Eyes to Heaven, and not to the Capitol, and so
calls it the Testimony of a Soul naturally Christian, I do not find they were
charged with Idolat^y by the Fathers in this precise consideration, Nor do I
see any reason why they should, if they joined nothing to that notion which was
destructive of it. And thus much I hope may suffice to remove the prejudice you
had taken against those of the Church of Rome, from the imaginary Parallel of
their worship with that of the Vulgar Heathens. I know you have a mind to be
doing also with the Philosophers, but I shall beg you will let them alone till
to morrow.


The End of the Fourth Dialogue.
THE FIFTH DIALOGVE.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Dr's Parallel from the Practice of the Wiser Heathens, shown to be
Un-parallel upon many accounts: and the Argument from God's Appropriation of
certain external Acts to his Worship, a mere Sophism made up of Equivocations,
False Suppositions, and Self-contradictions, and after all to conclude nothing
against the doctrine of the Church of Rome, or the definition of Idolatry given
by T. G.

CATHARINVS, EVNOMIVS. CAthar. However the Vulgar. Heathens were such Fools, as
to believe their Inf^riour deities to be truly and properly Gods, and to
worship them as such; yet the Wiser of them did not so, at least the
Platonicks, of whom Aquinas according to your own Interpretation of his words
confesses that they did acknowledge one Supreme God, from Supr. p. 403.
whom they said all those others, whom they called Gods, did receive their
Being, and that they ascribed the name of divinity to them, in the manner that
Holy Angels and men in Scripture are called Gods. Nevertheless the Fathers
charged them also with Idolatry for the worship they gave to these Gods, and to
their Images as Symbols and Representations of them. And upon this Supposition
it is, viz, that they were not mistaken as to the Objects of their worship,
that the Dr urges T. G. to answer whether they were to blame, or no, in the
manner of serving God by Images, in such a way as they describe. For if they
were not to blame, the Fathers certainly were for charging them with more than
they were guilty of; and if they were to blame, how come those of the Church of
Rome to be excused?


Eun: Here indeed I think you have driven the Point to the head. And admitting
the Supposition to be as Dr. St. would have it, me thinks T. G. gave a very
direct Answer to the Question, when he said that they were yet to blame Cathno
Idol. p. 108.
upon a double account. 1. Because the Images being instituted by public
Authority for the worship of false Gods they concurred, (as the Dr. himself
acknowledges) with the Vulgar in all the external Practices of their Idolatry,
and consequently were guilty at least of the exterior Profession of Idolatry.
2. Because though in the Schools they denied them to be Gods, yet as Origin
answered Celsus, (one of the Dr's wiser Heathens,) they gave divine honor to
them so far, as that the People by their example, who were esteemed Wise and
knowing men, were led into error, and their Souls so far depressed with a
False Religion that they could not endure to hear any one deny them to be Gods,
whom they were accustomed to worship. And this says Origin is the crime with
which we charge Celsus, and all those who confess they are no Gods.


Cathar. A very learned Answer doubtless, but as Dr. St. says has not one
wise word in it. For as he tells T. G. All Def. p. 468. p. 4^^.
the Question is, how this External worship comes to be Idolatry, supposing
they acknowledged one Supreme God, and gave only a Relative and Inferior
worship to other Beings created by him, or to the Images of them. Wherein I
pray did this Idolatry consist?


Eun: A very learned Question indeed, but such as either has no Sense at all
in it, or it must be in the present circumstances, how the Philophers
compliance with the Vulgar in the External practices of their Idolatry, comes
to be the External Prof^ssion of Idolatry? For Internal Idolatry being excluded
from their minds by the very Supposition of their acknowledging one Supreme
Being and giving only a Relative worship to other Beings, to ask how they come
to be guilty of Internal Idolatry, will be Nonsense at best, if not a perfect
Contradiction. It Is to the Question then in the former Sense, viz how the
compliance of the Wiser Heathens with the Vulgar, comes to be an External
Profession of Idolatry, that T. G. is to answer; and I think there needs no
more than a little Mother-Wit to do it. For this External worship being given to
those who were believed by the Vulgar, to be truly and properly Gods, and were
by public Authority worshipped every where as such, it is manifest I think to
any man of the meanest Understanding, that whatever esteem the Wiser ones had
of them, or however they directed their Intention, yet the complying with the
People, (who were internally also Idolaters) in all the external Practices of
their Idolatry, and that in such a manner, that they were judged to do that
really, which they did but counterfeit, was at least an Exterior Profession of
Idolatry; as much as, and indeed much more than going to Church once a month
here in England, and doing all other Religious Actions exteriourly as
Protestants do, whatever the inward Sense of the Doer be, is an Exterior
Profession of Protestantism, This is a very clear Solution of the Question as I
take it in T. G's. Principles, who makes Internal Idolatry to depend upon the
Intention or Interior acts of the Understanding and Will terminating the
exterior worship upon something, as esteemed worthy of divine honor, which in
reality has no Excellency in it to deserve it. For as the doing of this is
true Internal Idolatry, and External also, so the complying with those who do
it, in the manner before expressed, will be an External Profession of Idolatry.
But it were worth the while to know how the Dr. will solve the Question in his
own Principles; ^or it being Idolatry according to him, to make any thing so
far the Object of Divine worship, that Men do bow down before it, it must be
so either in the nature of the thing* and then Bowing before the Altar also
will be Idolatry; or by virtue only of the Positive Law of God, and then the
Heathens who did it to their Idols, were not upon that account guilty of
Idolatry, because not under the Law.


Cathar. I shall not digress at present to answer for the Dr. But if this be
all the defense you can make for T. G. in answer to this Question, viz that the
People had other notions of the False Gods, than the Philosophers had, and yet
these latter also were justly charged with Idolatry for complying with the
People in the external acts of worship; I think you have brought the business
home enough to the Papists, and in particular to T. G. himself. For as Dr. St.
has well observed upon this answer, This is just the Case of the Roman Def. p.
4^5.
Church: Their learned men have complained that the People worship the Images
as Gods among them. But does T. G. says he think himself guilty of external
Profession of Idolatry in using the same external acts of worship with the
People, though with another Intention? If not, why shall not the same excuse
hold for Titius, which holds for Sempronius?


Eun: Were the case the same, it were but reason the same Excuse should hold or
not hold for both. But here the case is so different that nothing but the
Admirable Faculty which the Dr. has of making Parallels could have put them
together. For supposing the matter of the complaint to be true, what
consequence is it, because the public custom among the Heathens of
worshipping Jupiter, Juno, Venus etc as Gods, made it an Exterionr Profession
of Idolatry in some private men to comply with them in their practices;
therefore the abuses committed by some private men in the Church of Rome, where
the Public Profession is quite contrary, make the common custom to be an
Exterior Profession of Idolatry? A wider Consequonce surely was never seen.
But with your leave, Catharinus, I shall give you a case in the Church of
England, much more parallel to the Dr's. than his of the Divines of the Church
of Rome to that of the Philosophers. And it is this. Some learned men of the
Reformation have complained that not only the People, but the Wiser sort make
an Idol of the Altar in making it so far the Object of Divine worship as to
bow down before it. But does Dr. St. think himself guilty of external
Profession of Idolatry in using the same External act of worship with them? If
not, why shall not the same excuse hold for Sempronius, that holds for Titius?


Cathar. Methinks you have as good a faculty in making Paralels, as the Dr. But
I pray tell me, Eunomius, what excuse can those of the Church of Rome give for
themselves, which the Philofophers might not have given? Will they undertake
(as Dr. St. there adds) to defend the follies of the Ignorant people? No. They
do not think themselves bound to do it, but blame them for their ignorance and
Superstition, and say the Church is free, because it has taken Def. ^ 456.
care to instruct them better. And might not the Philosophers have said the
very same thing' We are not bound to answer for the madness of the rabble; we
instruct them better, and our Schools are open for them to learn: But since the
nature of such actions depends upon the Intention of the D^ers, we declare our
Intention to be to honor the Supreme God in the first place, but all others
whether Celestial Deities, Aerial d^mo^s, or the Souls of deified men with a
worship Inferior to his: And according to the worship we give to the Beings
represented, we give worship to the Images or Representations. And if you allow
the distinctions of Divine worship into sovereign and subordinate, into
ab^olute and relative, what harm is there in all that we do? Indeed, if it be
unlawful to Worship God by an Image; if it be unlawful to give any divine
worship to any creature, we are then to blame, and are justly condemned; other
wise we think we stand upon equal terms, with those who make use of the same
distinctions, and only change the names of some, and the Persons of others.
Thus T. G. may see the Parallel is not so extravagant, as he would make it to
be.


Eun: Here it is we have another of the Dr's Figures of Rhetoric, but grounded
upon as many false suppositions almost as there are words: as 1st that the
Follies of the People of the Church of Rome are equal to those of the
Heathens, that is, that they believe the Saints to be truly and properly Gods,
cha^ging only the names of some, and the Persons of others, and give worship to
their Images as such. 2ly That they are proposed as such by the Profession of
that Church, and their Images publicly Instituted to be worshipped on that
account. 3ly That the Philosophers took as much care to instruct the People
better, by their Public Prof^ssions, Catechisms, and Sermons, as the Divines
of the Church of Rome do. 4thly That those of the Church of Rome give the same
external acts of worship to the Saints, which the Heathens did to their
Inf^riour deities, as ordaining Priests, offering Sacrifices, and performing
other Religious Rites, which by the public custom of that time, and the
common consent of mankind, were understood to be due only to true divinity.
5thly That the Philosophers used the distinctions of Soverain and Subordinate,
Absolute and Relative worship in the same Acts, and with the same determination
of circumstances, as to the Exterior Profession of Idolatry, which those of
the Church of Rome do. 6thly That the sole Intention of the Doers is according
to T. G. sufficient to free them from it. 7thly That it is unlawful to worship
the true God by any Image. 8thly That it is unlawful to give any divine
worship, (though equivocally so called because given for his sake) to any
creature. When the Dr. has proved all these Suppositions, and they must all be
proved to make the Parallel hold, it will be time for him to tell us, that the
Philosophers stood upon equal terms with those of the Church of Rome, as to the
Exterior Profession of Idolat^y, which is the Point we are now upon; till then
he must give me leave to think the Parallel is altogether as extravagant as T.
G* would make it.


Cathar. The concern I see you have to free the Papists from the note of
Idolatry makes you seek and catch at every petty circumstance, though never so
remote and Invisible, which may seem to make a difference between them and the
Heathens. But when all is done, you will never be able to save them. For if
there be some peculiar external acts of worship appropriated to God, the giving
of them to any creature, as the Papists do to Saints and Images, will be not
only an exterior Profession of Idolatry, but very Real Idolatry. For as Dr. S.
says very well, It belongs to God Def. p. 269.
to appropriate acts of worship to himself, and having appropriated them they
become due only to him: And therefore they who do those Acts to any besides
himself do give to the creature the worship due to God alone, which is the very
definition of real Idolatry T. G. contends for.


Eun: I cannot deny, but that I have as great a concern to see any Christians
charged with more than they are guilty of, by Dr. St. or any other; as himself
has for the Fathers doing it, as he supposes, to the Heathens: for as I told
you before, I love not to see People represented worse than they are. And
besides I see, that whenever the matter is brought to a trial, those of the
Church of England will be forced to make use also of the distinctions of
Sovereign and Subordinate, Absolute, and Relative worship to salve the
Reverence or Religious respect as I may call it, they show to Holy Places and
things, and particularly that of bowing to the Altar, for the Relation they
have to God; and the Philosophers will stand as much upon equal terms with
them, as with those of the Church of Rome; of which I have given you a
sufficient Specimen in the agreement as to this matter I showed there was
between the Dr. himself and Card. Lugo. See Pages 228. 229. 230.


But now for this mighty Argument of God's appropriation of external acts to
his worship, although I have already Supra. p. 148. and
shown the ruin it throws upon the other Argument he draws from the Practice
of the Heathens, or rather how it serves for an Apology to free them from the
note of Idolatry; yet because I see you think the Dr. has done wonders in it
against those of the Church of Rome, I shall let you see tha^ the only thing to
be wonderd at in it, are the many Equivocations, false Suppositions, and
self-co^tradictions contained in it And to proceed with greater clearness, pray
tell me what it is you understand by Gods appropriating Acts of worship to
himself; for more or less may be required, and so the term be Equivocal.


Cathar. What I understand by it, and what I suppose Dr. St. means, as appears
to me from his own words, is 1. God's Def. p. 270.
appointing certain external acts to be used in his worship, 2. his tying us to
perform them to him, and 3. restraining us from doing them to any other; For by
his appointment and command they become due to him; and by his Prohibition to
give them to any other they become due only to him.


Eun: This is a very clear description so far as it goes, but still methinks
there is something wanting to make the Argument conclusive, against those of
the Church of Rome, and that is, that God has so tied these acts to his own
worship, that in all cases, and upon all accounts imaginable they become
incommunicable to any other, and this so fastened to them, that it cannot be
separated from them. For if in some cases, or upon some accounts they may be
communicable to others besides God, Sempronius may come in for his Share, as
well as Titius, and if the Appropriation may be separated, the Romanists may
and will pretend it is.


Cathar. I do not remember that this is any where expressed by the Dr. but I
suppose it is sufficiently implied in the three forementioned conditions, for I
do not see how the argument can conclude without it.


Eun: But here then, Catharinus, either you are mistaken, or the Dr.
contradicts himself, when he affirms, that Def. p. 192. 193.
although the outward acts be the same (for example of bowing or kneeling etc)
yet the external circumstances which do accompany men's acts, are those which do
so circumscribe and limit them, that from thence they become either Civil or
Religious. For if they may be communicable to others besides God, as limited
with such and such Circumstances, they are not absolutely appropriated to God
in all cases and upon all accounts imaginable; and so the Argument does not
conclude, but leaves the Romanists at liberty to plead as much for the
lawfulness of bowing to Images, from the Circumstances or upon the Account,
with which they do it, as the Dr. thinks himself to be for the lawfulness of
bowing to the Altar. Hitherto then we are to seek what it is the Dr. means by
God's appropriating acts of worship to himself, farther than as he says, it is
his tying us by his Command to perform them to himself, and restraining us from
doing them to any other. But it may be some farther light may be gathered from
the Acts themselves. Pray what are they?


Cathar. The Dr. reckons six, viz, Sacrifice, Religious Adoration, Solemn
Invocation, Erecting Temples and Altars, Burning of Incense, and making Vows.


Eun: He might have added more if he had pleased as Swearing by the name of
God, Instituting of Festival days, and the like: But do you not think he has
reckoned too many already. What think you, Catharinus, has God tied us by his
command to offer Sacrifice, or burn Incense, or make Vows to him? I do not
believe you will grant he has, nor the Dr. neither. What kind of proceeding
then is it in him to argue the Romanists guilty of Idolatry upon the Account of
giving acts appropriated to God to others besides him, when himself, if put to
it, will deny that God has commanded them to be done at all to him?


Cathar. But the Papists acknowledge them to be due to God, and all external
acts of worship due to God, being forbidden to be given to creatures, it is an
Argument, as you call it ad hominem against them.


Eun: But the same Papists, as you call them, do not give to creatures those
acts which they hold absolutely due to God, nor any other, as they are due to
God, that is, as they are signs of the inward submission of our minds to him,
but as they are not appropriated to God, that is, as they are signs of an
Inferior respect and Veneration, and so the Argument is not ad hominem to
them, unless you can prove that God has commanded them to be given to himself
and forbidden them to be given to any other in all cases and upon all accounts
whatsoever, and then that they give them so appropriated to any creature.


Cathar. This I think is sufficiently plain in the Law of Moses, and of Christ
also: because, as the Dr. has well observed, Asts appropriated to the worship
p. 261. 262.
of God by his own appointment, must continue so, till himself has otherwise
declared, and Christ has no where made it lawful to give any acts that were
before appropriate to the worship of God, to any creature.


Eun: As for the Law of Moses, not to enter into dispute about Particular acts
(as that of Bowing, which is an external Act of Adoration and yet was done by
the Jews to the Ark) I answer in general that not any thing of that Law being
obligatory to any besides the Jews, precisely as commanded by that Law, but as
it was contained in the Law of nature, and the force of that Law being taken
away by the Promulgation of the Gospel, it is evident it can oblige Christians
no otherwise than in virtue of the Law of nature, unless some express command
or Prohibition of Christ intervene: And therefore whatever is not obliging, by
the Law of nature, or some such express declaration of the will of Christ, is
left at liberty for the Church to use conformably to the Light of Nature, and
the design of Christ's doctrine. For as Dr. St. now upon second thoughts Supra.
^. 47.
says, In the worship of God, all things are lawful that are not forbidden. As
for what you urge, that Christ has no where made it lawful to give any acts
that were before appropriate to the worship of God, to any Creature, it is but
a Negative Argument from Authority, and of no force, especially in the present
case, where a Positive declaration is necessary.


Cathar. And such a one I shall give you: For as the Dr. says, Christ has
Def. p. ^6^.
not only nowhere given the least Intimation, that any Acts which before were
peculiar to God, may now be given to any else besides him; but instead of this
he lays down the same Fundamental Precept of worship which was in the Law, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only ^halt thou serve: And he explains
it more clearly to avoid all ambiguity in it, by expressing that restrictive
particle only which was employed before.


Eun: But what is this, but to thrust the sword into his own Bowels? For if the
Argument be good, he must confess himself obliged to offer Sacrifice, and burn
Incense, and make Vows to God, which I believe he will not do. For this, as now
managed by the Dr. is a Point that concerns not only those of the Church of
Rome, but all Christians, if the Precept be to be understood as a
Reestablishment of those Acts, in the new Law, which he says, were before
peculiar to God in the old, and Christians will be as much tied by virtue of
this Precept to give them to God, as not to give them to any other. But if the
fore mentioned particular Acts of Sacrifice burning Incense, etc be not
re-established by this Precept, what Consequence is it, that they are forbidden
to be given to any other besides God, because they were appropriate to him in
the Law of Moses, the force of which Law is now taken away by the Preaching of
the Gospel? Surely none at all, unless he will acknowledge those very acts to
be due to God by the Law of nature also, or upon some other account than that
of the Law of Moses.

By what has been said, you see what a Mass of Equivocations, False
suppositions and self-Contradictions are here jumbled together by the Dr. not
un like the Ingredients of the Poets Chaos, non been junctaru^ discordia
seminarerum, to make up a piece of plausible Sophistry to surprise such as are
carried away with the sound of words, and are not able or willing to penetrate
into the sense and meaning of them. But that which is most of all to be
admired, is that admitting the Argument to be good, it proves nothing against
those of the Church of Rome, who neither give any act abso^utely appropriated
to God to any else besides him; nor any other in the manner it is appropriated
to him. For the Appropriation they had or may be supposed to have had by the
law of Moses being taken off by the Abrogation of that law, and no n^w one
produced by the Dr. in the law of Christ, as has been shown, those of the
Church of Rome cannot be convinced of Idolatry for those they use toward
Saints and Images by virtue of any Appropriation from any positive law of God.
The Argument then you see such it is, whether good or bad concerns not those of
the Church of Rome.


Cathar But I hope it concerns TG, for supposing the forementioned Acts to be
due to God, the givi^g all or any of them to any besides himself will be to
give to the crea^u^e the worship due to God alone, which is the very definition
real Idolatry T. G. contends for.


Eun: To this Janswer, that supposing (not granting) the fore mentioned
external acts to be now due to God by this law, the giving them to any besides
himself will be to give to the creature the worship due to God, if it be done
with an intention to give them to a creature as esteemed worthy of divine
honor; I grant it is the very definition of real Idolatry which T. G. contends
for. If without such an intention I deny it: For as it will not be Real
Religious worship, but fictitious to give them to God himself, if it be not
done out of a true esteem of his supreme excellency as worthy of it, So to
give them to any else besides him without an intention to do it out of afalse
esteem of the object's worthiness, will not be real Idolatry in the nature of
the thing but Fictitious, though from the Appropriation they have by the law of
God, (Supposing such a law to be in force) or other circumstances, it may and
ought in reason to be interpreted to be real Idolatrous worship, as an
Hypocritical act of worship may and ought from the circumstances to be esteemed
truly and realy Religious till the contrary be made evident. And the reason of
this is, because Idolatry is a sin directly opposite to Religion, as a False
worship to a true one, not as Hypocrisy which counterfeits to worship the true
God, (and the Dr himself if you remember distinguishes it from Idolatry, though
how agreably to his Principles I know not:) nor as worshipping the true God
after an unlawful manner, for no man I think will condemn the I ews at present
of Idolatry for worshipping the true God with the Rites and ceremonies of the
Law of Moses: but (to use the words of an eminent divine of the Church of
England Dr. Tailor) as a sorsaking the true God Lib of. Proph. Sect. ^, n. 26.
and giving divine worship to a creature, or to an Idol, which says he, is
that kind of superstition, which by divines is called the superstition of an
undue object. And thereupon acquits those of the Church of Rome from the guilt
of Idolatry in the worship they give to the Host, in case they should be
mistaken in their belief of the Bread being changed in to the Body of Christ:
because ^h^object of their Adoration (that says he, which is represented to
them in their minds and thoughts and purposes in the B. Sacrament) is the only
true and Eternal God hypostatically joined with his Holy Humanity. Hence though
the Divines make Idolatry, as I said to be directly opposed to Religion, yet
they say that concomitantly it is opposed to Faith, or supposes an Error in
Faith. For as Card. Tolet has well observed, as there is not S^^. Cas. lib. 4.
c. 14. ^. 4.
the true worship (which is Religion) unless Faith be supposed in the
understanding by which we acknowledge the Excellency of the object (God) to
which we submit our selves: So also there is not the false worship which is
Idolatry, unless there be a precedent error in the understanding by which we
judge that to deserve divine honor which does not. And this is so manifest Def
^. q. 6
that the Dr. himself confesses it was well observed by the Cardinal, that
although Idolatry do suppose an Error in the mind, yet that Error lies in
judging that to deserve divine horour which does not: and grants it may be
consistent with the belief of the supreme Excellency of God. By which I see (to
use his own words) that after all he is a good natured ^. 276.
man too, and although he will show a thousand tricks, rather than be thought
to have it forced from him, yet let him alone, and be will give as much as a
man would desire. For what could T. G. wish for more than he here grants? 1.
that the Errou^ which Idolatry supposes, lies in judging that to deserve Divine
honor, which does not. And 2. that it may be consistent wi^h the belief of one
supreme God. For the former destroys the chimerical notion of Idolatry he
contends for, [viz of an Image^s being made so far the object of divine
worship that men do bow down before it, in case God have forbidden it by his
law] For now it is not Real with him, unless it be done out of an erroneous
judgment as to a thing that deserves divine honor. And the latter quite
ouerthrows the Parallels he draws from the practice of the Heathens, because it
being now granted by him, that the Erroneous belief of a creatures deserving
divine honor when it does not, may be consistent with the belief of one
supreme God, if the vulgar Heathens did believe those whom they worshipped to
deserve divine honor, (as most certainly they did) their case is manifestly
different from those of the Church of Rome, who do no such thing. And if
Idolatry suppose such an erroneous belief in the mind, the mere giving external
acts of worship to a creature without such a judgment in the Wiser Heathens,
could not according to him be Real Idolatry, but Pictitious only and
Hypocritical. And it is very observable, that when he first began this
controversy he did not charge all those of the Communion of the Church of Rome
absolutely with Idolatry, but that they must be guilty either of Hypocrisy, or
Idolatry either of which, he says are sins inconsistent with salvation; which
sufficiently insinuates he thought the mere external compliance with those who
were truly Idolaters, not to be real Idolatry, but Hypocrisy, though by reason
of the circumstances it might and ought to be presumed to be real. But then
again in case the Dr. with all his subtilty could make it out to be real
Idolatry to give external acts of divine worship to a creature or an Idol,
merely for fashion's sake, or out of fear, or some other Passion, without such
an Erroneous judgment, it would signify just nothing to those of the Church of
Rome, who neither give external worship to those who are falsely believed to be
Gods, and commonly worshipped as such; nor any Act appropriated to God by his
law, either absolutely, or in the manner they are appropriated to him whilst
the Appropriation lasts, as has been showed. Finally it appears to me after
all, that all that dust which the Dr. has ra^^^d to make it seem Idolatry to
give to a creature external acts of worship appropriated to God, comes at
length to be a dispute about words, for as much as concerns the cause of the
Church of Rome; For Whether it be Idolatry or no the thing which the Dr.
himself means by the word, and of which he accuses the Church of Rome, is
confess't by the Romanists, themselves to be a sin inconsistent with salvation,
and if the Dr. can prove them guilty of it I shall confess he has done his own
work and theirs too.


Cathar. In this I think you have reason, for this would be sufficient to make
all those who have a care of their Salvation to abhor their Communion. And I
shall endeavor at our next meeting, (which I intend shall be our last upon
this account,) to make it appear from Principles laid by the Dr. that they are
guilty of damnable sin at least, if not of Idolatry for giving to creatures
Acts appropriated to the worship of God.


Eun: This I confess will be to smite the Church of Rome under the fifth ribb
if it can be proved. But in the mean time I hope you will remember how all the
fine things which the Dr. has said of God's appropriating external acts of
worship to himself, as, that it belongs to him to do it, and having done it,
they become due to him; and being become due to him, must continue so till
himself has otherwise declared; and that in stead of declaring otherwise, he
has confirmed the Appropriation anew by laying down the same Fundamental
Precept of worship in the newlaw etc if they be of any force at present to make
it to be Idolatry, to bowdown before the Image of Christ with intention to
worship him by it, they will have the same force to conclude the practice of
bowing to the Altar, to fall under the same crime. For if bowing be one of the
Acts which God has appropriated to his own worship; and having appropriated
it, it becomes due only to him, They who do this Act to the Altar do give to
the creature the worship due to God alone which the Dr. says is on all sides
confessed to be Idolatry: So necessary it was for the Dr. to have taken the
^aution which Mr. Thorndike gives to those who will be charging the Church of
Rome with Idolatry. It is necessary says he, to provide, that we contradict
not our selves.


Cathar. And therefore, I confess; were I as the Dr. I would not so much as nod
with my head, to it, much less worship it with my whole Body.


Eun: Perhaps you may scruple the having either of them done to your self; and
so without farther Ceremony at present Ibid you farewell.


The End of the Fifth Dialogue.
THE SIXTH DIALOGVE
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Church of Rome not justly chargeable either for not reserving any External
Act of Re^igious worship proper to God, or for giving a^y appropriate to God,
to Creatures. The Dr. un happy again in his citing of Card. Lugo; and his
arguments from the Text. Matthew. 3. 10. and the term, Religious worship, solved
by his own distin^tions. No succou^ to^ his cause from the determination of
Circumstances, as ass^gned by him. Mr. Dai^les doctrine, that signs instituted
by men to signify any thing, though of Religion, are to be interpreted by the
publik Practice of those who use them, a very Just Discharge to the Dr's unjust
Charge of Idolatry, in the particular Instances, of Invocation, Erecting
Temples burning Incense, etc* as tbey are practiced in the Chapter of Rome: and T,
Gs. Answer to the Dr's old Scruple, why Sacrisice may not be used to the
Saints, in like manner os other External acts are, shown to have been pertinent
and satisfactory. A Friendly Advice to him out of St. Augustine.

EVNOMIVS. CATHARINVS, EVn. It was agreed between us as I remember, at our last
parting, that although those of the Church of Rome could not be convicted of
Idolatry, yet if they could be proved guilty of damnable sin in the manner of
their worship, it would be sufficient to make all those who have a care of
their Salvation to abhor the Communion of that Church. But how this can be made
out I am yet to seek. For particular Abuses that may happen, they are not the
subject of our present debate; but speaking of the doctrine of the Church of
Rome in her Councils, and the practice conformable to that doctrine, I do not
remember that Mr. Thorndike any where charge it with ^in, if rightly
understood and put in practice accordingly. If you have met with any thing in
the Dr. which you think evinces it, I pray let me hear it.


Cathar. Enough I think and more than enough; For a man may sin against the
virtue of Religion two manner of ways; either by not giving to God the worship
due to him, or by giving the worship due only to him to creatures. And I take
those of the Church of Rome to be guilty in both. For 1. as Dr. St. says, Def.
p. 1^9.
although in the general they confess that there ought to be some peculiar acts
of Divine worship, as most agreeable to Gods incommunicable Excellency: yet
when they deliver their minds freely, they reserve p. 204.
no one act of External Adoration as proper to God, and to be performed by all
Christians, as Cardinal Lugo, he says, expressly affirms, whom he the rather
mentions, because of his great Authority and Eminency, and writing since the
rest. 2. They give all the external acts of Adoration to Saints and Images
which they do to God, where as the doing of this is absolutely forbidden by
Christ p. 1^9.
himself, when he said Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
Matthew. 3. 10.
thou serve; which was certainly understood of an External act of worship, for
the devil had said to him Fall down and worship me: A place so Evident that it
blinds the Papists with the light of it.


Eun: Here Catharinus, to be sure not to miss, you have loaded your Gun with a
double charge. But still I see no Execution done, the former only cutting the
air, and the latter losing its force against the hard wall. To make this clear,
I shall lay down these three Postulata's, and I call them so because I think
the Dr. himself will not deny them.

The First is, that the Law of nature See Dr. St. Def. p. 199.
teaching, that man ought to use some External acts to testify his submission
to God, there ought in reason to be some peculiar external Acts appropriated to
the worship of God, as most agreeable to his incommunicable Excellency.

The 2. That the Appropriation which any such External acts had only by the
Ibidem. p. 26^.
Law of Moses, being taken away by the ceasing of that Law, they are left to
their own nature, unless appropriated a new by the Law of Christ, or some
lawful Authority under him.

The 3. That the Church having Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, where
nothing does appear contrary in the ^9. Art. Art. 20. Dr. St. Def. p. 869. and
in his Ans. to N, O, p. 268.
Law of Christ, it belongs to her also to declare the Use and Signification of
them: and if after this any Scrupulous Conscience boggle at the doing of them,
The Advantage is on the Churches side, and her Authority ought to overrule the
practice of those who are her members.

These things supposed clear and undeniable, as being either expressly
asserted, or implied by the Dr. in the Places cited in the margent, J answer to
the double charge you have made: that the Word Adoration, as the Dr. himself
has observed, (and by this at present as well as Des. p. 223.
some other distinctio^s he afterward gives the world may see he knew very well
how to answer his own Arguments though he thought fit to leave the Application
of them to others:) The word Adoration, I say, may according to him, be taken
either for all the External Acts of Religious worship, as John 4. 20. Acts 8.
27. (as it is usually taken by Controvertists in the matter of Idolatry, which
may be committed in them all.) Or it may be taken more strictly, (as it is in
the disputes of the Schools) for that Act of Religious worship which is
performed by the motion of the body, as bowing, kneeling, Prostration, and the
like. If it be taken the first way it is certain, that those of the Church of
Rome have one external Act at least of Religious worship proper to God, viz the
Sacrifice (as they call it) of the Mass, or the Oblation of the Body and Blood
of Christ our Lord in the Eucharist, which they deny may be given to any
creature, and whereas the Dr. cites Cardinal Lugo, asserting that there is no
one external act of Adoration De Mist. Incarn. disp. 34. n. 24.
which is proper to Latria, or the worship peculiar to God, the Jesuits will
say that he evidently abuses both his Authority and his Eminency. For the
Cardinal does not say this, as denying Sacrifice to be an external act of
worship proper to God, (which is what the Dr. insinuates by his unfaithful
relation of his words) but because he thinks it not properly an act of
Adoration as taken in it is stricter sense, but of another kind distinct from
it, yet so that he acknowledges it to be truly and properly an act of Religious
worship, and such an one to use his own express words, qui non potest offerri
nisi soli Deo, as may not be offered but to God alone. So unhappy is the Dr in
his citations to say no worse at present: and I can not but wonder to see you
after so much Experience to build any thing upon them. But who is there, that
will take the pains to compare them? The Romanists then have one external Act
of Religious worship viz Sacrifice which they acknowledge so proper to God,
that it may not be offered but to him alone, And I see no reason, why the
Solemn Prayers they make, at the time of offering the Sacrifice, to God as the
Supreme and only Author of our being, and given of every good and Perfect Gift,
(many of which are inserted in to the Liturgy of the Church of England, and are
esteemed the Principal Part of the Religious worship she gives to God,) may not
by the Institution and Use of them in that Church to God alone, be reckoned for
another. And so the Church of Rome has one external act of Religious worship
appropriated to G^d, if the Eucharistical Sacrifice be truly and properly such,
as they say it is, more than I believe you will allow the Church of England to
have.

But then, if Adoration be taken in the stricter scnse for those acts of
Religious worship which are performed merely by, the motion of the body: they
may be understood either all of them to be absolutely so appropriated to G^d,
that it is not lawful upon any account to give any of them to any other, and
then the Quakers will be the only Christians in the world not chargeable with
sin for doing them especially when there is no necessity at all of doing them
to any other; as Des. p. 854*
Dr. St. agreably to the Genius of that people objects to T. G. upon a like
occasion. Or only some of them and not other^, as kneeling and prostrating but
not bowing: And then the Dr. must tell us* what makes the discrimination
between the one and the other. Or they may be understood, as qualified with
such a determination of circumstancet, as makes them to be signs and tokens of
the worship proper only to God: and then those of the Church of Rome deny they
give any such to any but to God: and think they are as much at liberty to use
them toward Images or Saints, when they are understood by the Church's
declaration, as expressions of an inferior worship, as the Church of England
is to use bowing to the Altar; and why kneeling or prostrating may not be so
circumstanc'd as well as bowing, I do not understand. As for the words of
Christ* Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
which you say are so evident that they blind the Papists with their light, I
grant they were understood not only o^ an In^ernal but an External act also:
but the Occasion was such as the Dr himself tells us, as required p. 232.
no respect of any other kind: And who is so blind as not to see, that the
Prohibition of the Law fell upon it as determined to be a sign of Religious
worship by the circumstances in which it was required. And consequently where
there is no such a determination of Circumstances, the Law is not concerned.


Cathar. I like not these d^stinctions of yours Eun^mius, nor indeed any
distinctions at all, where God interposes in the Def. p ^ 250. 25
case: for I see if we admit any, we shall be driven at last to submit to the
Judgment of the Church, rather than of any private man: and this will spoil
all. Has not God forbidden any Religious worship to be given to any besides
him when he commands that all Religious worship without distinction be given to
himself, as it is plain he has by that Law, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. And where the Law does not distinguish what
presumption is it in us to do it?


Eun: This is another excellent Principle of the Drs to uphold the Quakers in
their absurd fancy of denying to give any External honor to a creature. And
although he call this a Venomous insinuation in T. G. yet it follows clearly p.
31^.
from the general Principle upon which he goes for if the Law commands all
worship to be given to God alone without distinction, what presumption will
they say is it in us to distinguish between Civil and Religious where the Law
does not? But what matters it whose cause we uphold, if we can but throw down
that of the Church of Rome? And yet I do not so much wonder at this in the Dr.
as to see him presume to distinguish where the Law does not, even in Religious
worship, when God himself, as he says, has commanded that all Religious
worship without distinction be give^ to himself. For it is he that tells us,
that worship may be said to be Religious two ways. 1st. as it is required by
the Rule of Religion and so the worship given to Magistrates is p. 32^*
Religious. 2. In its nature and circumstances, as it consists of those acts
which God has appropriated to his worship, or is attended with those
circumstances which make it a Religious performance, and thus it is not to be
given to Princes or any creatures, but only to God himself. So that here we
have two sorts of Religious worship, the one properly, the other improperly so
called. In like manner he aknowledges that the Reverence given to Holy Places
and Things may be called a Religious Respect upon Def. p. 603. p. 287. 251.
account of the Relation they have to God. Again the honor, says he, we have
for the Saints may be called Religious honor, because it is upon the account
of those we may call Religious Excellencies, as they are distinguished from
mere natural Endowments and Civil Accomplishments. And now if the divines of
the Church of Rome when they call the Respect they give to Saints and Images
Religious, declare they do it not, but upon some of the fore mentioned accounts
given by the Dr. viz either as those External Acts are required by the Rule of
Religion, or for such Excellencies as he grants we may call Religious, or for
the Relation the things to which they are given have to God, which is the very
reason himself gives, why that may be called Religious respect, which is given
to the Altar, I would gladly know why the same distinction may not be allowed
to Sempronius, which is to Titius.


Cathar. The reason I conceive is because nothing will serve the Papists for
their Saints and Images but Religious worship, and although the Dr. do grant.
that the Reverence given to Holy Places and Things may be called a Religious
Respect, and the Honor we give to the Saints a Religious Honor; yet he will
not admit of Religious worship to any but to God alone, because that includes
submission as to a Superior. And accordingly where he calls that a Religious
Respect, which was given by Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel Dan. 2 46. he p. 132.
says it was done out of an Opinion of great sanctity without superiority. So
also he p. 193.
grants that the mere External Act of Adoration in bowing or kneeling may be
given both on the account of Excellency and superiority, as some of the
Patriarchs he says bowed to Angels, as a token of honor of their
Excellencies, and not out of Religious worship: and men may bow and kneel to
their Sovereign Princes on the account of Civil worship: and Children to their
Parents in token of their subjection to them, as well as Creatures to their
Creator in their solemn Acts of de^otion, but, he says, that in all these
cases, the different signification of these Acts is to be gathered from the
Circumstances of them.


Eun: Here Catharinus you have heaped many things, or rather words together.
Among the rest you say, the Dr. will not admit any worship to be called
Religious, but what is due to God alone. And I dare undertake the Church of
Rome will never refuse him Communion for it. For where I pray, do you find,
that that Church has declared Religious worship to be due to Saints and
Images? There is no such Expression in any of the Decrees of her Councils
obliging those of her Communion so much as to call it so: nor any mention at
all made of it in them. And if some of the Schoolmen use that term, it is (as
they declare them selves) upon some of the former accounts acknowledged by the
Dr. himself to be sufficient to give the denomination of Religious, as of
Relation to God or the Saints when done to Images, or of some Supernatural
Excellency, when given to Saints. But I do not see why according to his own
Principles there may not be a Religious worship due upon some account to a
creature, as well as a Religious Rspect, or a Religious Honor. For, may there
not be a middle kind of Superiority, as well as Excellency? Such I take the
Authority of Bishops to be, whom the H. Ghost, as the Apostle says, has
placed to govern the Church; not Divine, because that is incommunicable to any
creature, nor merely Civil or Natural because not founded upon any such
Accounts, but of a middle rank or nature between both. And if the honor given
for Such an Excellency, may be called Religious honor, why may not the
worship due to such a superiori^y be called Religious worship? The Dr. indeed
tel^s us, that when Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel? he
did it out of an Opinion of great Sanctity without superiority: But it is but
his saying, and the Intention of the giver being secret, I wonder how the Dr.
could know so precisely how far it went: and the more, because the Prostration
there given was an act of Adoration; for the Text says not that he honored,
but that he worshipped Daniel, and then adds withal, that he commanded that
they should offer an Oblation and sweet Odours (or Inconse) to him, which by
the consent of mankind at that time were understood to be aknowledgments of
superiority. But to let that pass, Put case, that God had constituted Daniel
the God of Nebuchadnezzar as he did Moses the God of Pharaoh, in that cass I
suppose the act of Prostration might have been given upon the account of his
Superiority, as well as Sanctity, and so would have been an Act of Religious
worship, as given upon account of Superiority, which was neither divine nor
Civil; as well as of Religious Respect, because given upon account of such an
Excellency.

Again, the Dr. granting (as he does,) that the mere External Act of Adoration
in bowing or kneeling may be given both on the account of honor and worship i.
e. upon the account of Excellency, as when some of the Patriarchs bowed to
Angels, and of superiority, as when men bow and kneel to their soveraing
Princes, and Children to their Parents, and that in all these cases the
different signification of these acts is to be gathered from the Circumstances
of them, I would gladly know, why an act Account of Religious worship given
upon the Account of such a superiority as I have described, may not be
discerned, not to be properly Religious, as well as an act of Religious Respect
upon the account of a like Excellency? But how comes the Dr. after all the
great bustle he makes about God's appropriating external acts of worship to
himself, to put the Trial of his cause at last upon the determination of
Circumstances? I confess he must needs see it would come to this at length, all
Appropriation by virtue of the law of Moses being taken away, and no express
declaration of the Will of Christ produced by him, appropriating them anew. But
then again he could not be ignorant how hazardous is must be for him to venture
upon it: For if the External acts of worship given to Creatures in the Church
of Rome chance to prove accompanied with such Circumstances by which they may
and generally are understood ^ot to be Acts of divine worship, but of an
inferior Veneration, I do not see but that they are to be acquitted not only
of Idolatry, but of sin in doing them, according to the Dr's own Principles.


Cathar. Here you touch upon a Point, wherein the Dr. comes up close indeed
with the Papists, and utterly confounds them. For as he has well observed, the
worship for example I give to the King, Des. p. 192.
does not take its denomination from my Intention, but from the nature of the
Act, which being Civil, the worship continues to bear that name. By which we
see, says he, that the External circumstances, which do accompany men's Acts,
are those which do so circumscribe and limit them, that from thence they become
either Civil or Religious. And he freely ^. 232.
acknowledges, that there is the same nature in these Acts, that there is in
words of different significations, which being taken in general are of an
Equivocal sense; but being considered with all their particular circumstances,
they have their sense so restrained, and limited, that it is easy to discern
the one from the other. That therefore, says he, we call Religious Adoration
which is performed with all the circumstances o^ Religious worship, as to time,
place, occasion, and such like; as if men used prostration to any thing within
the Courts of the Temple (wherein some of the Jews thought that posture only
lawful,) If it were done in the time of Sacrifice or devotion: if the Occasion
were such as required no respect of any other kind, as when the devil demanded
of Christ to f^ll down, and worship him. In these and such like circumstances,
we say, says he, that Adoration has the determined signification of Religious
worship, and is an appropriate sign of it by Gods own Institution. And upon
this account it is, that he charges those of the Church of Rome for the
Adoration they give to Saints and Images by bowing, kneeling, etc. in the
Church, and in the most solemn Acts of devotion.


Eun. This is one of those Popular discourses which take much with the Vulgar.
But how impregnable soevet it may appear to those who judge of things by the
show they make, yet upon Examination it will be found as incoherent and weak as
an Adversary would wish. For 1. If it be true, as the Dr. says, that the
worship takes it denomination from the nature of the Act, I confess I do not
see, how it follows from thence, (though the Dr. say he does) that the External
Cirhouse cumstances which do accompany men's acts, are those which do so
circumscribe and limit them that from thence they become either Civil or
Religious. Those who have but peeped through Aristotle's keyhole, (as he says)
tell us that Acts take their nature from the formal Reason or Account upon
which they tend to their Objects, and that from thence they become either Civil
or Religious, though they may receive another denomination from the
circumstances which do accompany them. But I question much whether the mere
Circumstances of Time, and Place, and such like, as assigned by the Dr. be
sufficient in the present case to give such a denomination* For

2. If these be the Circumstances, which do so restrain and limit the
signification of External Acts, that it is easy to discern one worship from
another, how will he make it out, that the People did not give Religious
worship to David, when in a most solemn Act of Devotion, wherein David having
blessed the Lord before all the Congregation and exhorted the People to do the
like, saying, Now ^. Chron. ^9. 10.
Bless you the Lord God: it follows immediately, And all the Congregation
blessed the Lord God of their Fathers, and bowed down their heads, and
worshipped the Lord and the king. Where we see the same act and at the same
time, a time of solemn devotion, given to God and the king, and the People
never charged for giving Religious worship to the king.

3. In case the first Christians being met together to pray, and St James their
Bishop passing by, they should have kissed the hemme of his garment, and
desired his Benediction in the posture they were in upon their knees, (and the
same is of a child at his Prayers, to his Father,) I cannot think that the Dr.
himself, had he been present, would have condemned them of damnable sin for it,
or even scrupled the doing of it himself.

4. When Naaman desired to be permitted by the Prophet to go with his Heathen
Master into the house of Rimmon (of which I shall give you a farther account by
and by out of Dr Hammond,) and (when the master worshipped there, and leaned
upon his hand) to bow in the house of Rimmon, the Prophet bad him Go in peace;
which surely he would not have done, had the very bowing in the and presence of
an Idol, and in the very time of worship, been Religious worship or Idolatry.

5. The External Act of bowing to the Ark among the Jews was, and to the Altar
in the Church of England is performed in the time and place of divine worship,
and yet the Dr. denies them to be Religious worship; it is not then from those
Circumstances precisely that worship becomes Religious.

6. Lastly, if there be the same nature in these Acts, that there is in words
of different signifieations; as those words being differently applied, may bear
the same significations in Religious matters, which they do in others, whether
they be spoken in the Church or else where; in the time of divine service, or
out of it; as the word Father applied to God, or to him from whom we received
our Being under God, or the word Light applied to Christ himself, or his
disciples; or the words, Give; Help, etc. applied to God, or to Angels and men;
and the same is of the words, Advocate, Mediator, Intercessor, etc. as applied
to Christ, or to Holymen: As these, I say, and the like words being thus
differently applied bear the same significations in Religious matters, which
they do in others; So also the Acts of bowing, kneeling etc. being differently
applied, may signify the same in the time and place of Religious worship, as
being so applied they would do out of it, as you have seen in the Examples
before alleged, of the People to David, of Naaman to his Master, of the Jews
to the Ark, and of Christians to the Altar in solemn Acts of devotion. And
consequently, although the Circumstances of time and place may contribute in
due occasion to show the difference of one Act from another; yet it is, as they
stand under other Qualifications, which afford a sufficient Ground to judge of
the nature of the Acts, whether they be Civil or Religious, and whether
properly Religious, or improperly only, for some Excellency or Superiority not
merely Natural or Civil. And those are. 1. The different Objects to which they
are applied, as to God, or the Saints, or the King, etc. 2. Some Public
Profession or Protestation, manifesting that they are applied to such Objects
upon different accounts. 3. The eommon consent or Use by which such Acts are
generally understood to be applied to such Objects, upon such different
Accounts. And where th^se three conditions co^curr, they give sufficient ground
to make a different judgment of the Acts, be the Circumstances of time Of Idol.
^ 29. 30.
and place what they will, as Dr. Hammond himself confesses in the
aforementioned case of Naaman. For having observed, as he does, (and he says
it is an Ordinary Observation) that Aliens, Proselytes of other nations were
not bound to that strictness of submitting to every rite and positive precept
of the Law, as the Jews were, instancing particularly in that of not bowing to
the king in the presence of an Idol, which the Jews he says, at least
accounted themselves obliged not to do, and supposing it to be the Common
custom and practice in Syria to pay Veneration, even Prostration to the king,
he tells us, that Naaman was permitted by the Prophet to go with his Heathen
Master into the house of Rimmon, and (when the Master worshipped there, and
leaned upon his hand) to bow himself in the house of Rimmon 2. kings 5. 18.
upon this ground, 1. that he never went into the Idol-Temple, but to wait upon
his Master in the Office which he had. 2ly, that he profess't himself to all
(even to that Heathen Master, and those that werein his Court) to be a
worshipper of none, but of the true God; and to that end carried two mule-loads
of earth out of Palestine with him v. 17. in honor of him, whose name was
great there, and to build an Altar according to the Prescript Ex. 20. 24 by
which it was s^fficiently clear to the beholders, (as by an Interpretative
Protestation) that when his Master worshipped, he only bowed and then his bowing
was only Civil to his Master the king, not Religious to Rimmon or Saturn, or
his Image there. And therefore to his Question, whether God would be offended
with him in that matter, the Prophet answers him with a [Go in peace.] I cannot
think so irreverently of the Prophet, as that he should make that answer
Ironically to his new Convert, (any more then I can believe N^aman's scruple
belonged only to the former part of his life (reading it in the Praeter sense:)
For sure that had been guilty of the worshipping the Idol, and not only bowing
in the house of Rimmon:) but that he meant in earnest, what alone the words
import, that in thus doing, and no more, he need not fear that he should be a
breaker of that law, which in this particular was not given to him, or any, but
those of that Nation, or People of the Jews. Where you see that the whole
Resolution of the case in the judgment of that Eminent divine of the Church of
England, depends upon the three afore-mentionned conditions of the Object to
which the act of bowing was applied, the common practice in Sy^ia of paying
that Veneration to the king. and a Public Pr^testation that he intended not
that worship to the Idol, but to his Master, and not on the Circumstances of
time and place, which in that occasion were overruled by those other. The
Fundamental reason of this is given by Monsieur Daille an Eminent divine of the
Reformed Church in France; and because his Authority may sway much with you, I
shall give it in his own words. Signs, says he, instituted by Apol. c. 14. p.
118.
men to signify any thing, whether of nature or Religion, are to be interpreted
by the public and common practice of those who use them, and not by the secret
and particular Intentions of this or that Person. I grant, says he, that of
themselves and of their own nature, very many of them do not signify one thing
more then another; and that those which have a natural relation to the things
signified, have it not so necessarily annexed to them, that it might not have
been lawful from the beginning to have used them otherwise. But after that the
Will of man, which is the Mistress of such Institutions, has addicted and
dedicated them to a certain signification, and Public Use has confirmed it,
Iaverr, that afterward to use them in anotbersense is Intolerable
Impertinency, and that he that so uses them, is to be accounted for a Fool and
a Liar among all Wise men etc. Thus Monsieur Daille.

And now to come to the case of the Church of Rome; Although the R^manists do
give those External acts of Adoration, which are performed by the motion of the
body, as bowing, kneeling, etc. to Saints and Images, and that in the Church,
and in the solemn acts of devotion: Yet these Signs being such as of their own
nature are Equivocal, and so subject to the will of men, and there being extant
a Public Profession of that Church, and that confirmed by the Public and
common Practice, not only of the Roman, but of the whole Christian world before
Luther, (and of the far greater part of it still,) that when applied to Saints
or Images; they are used as Tokens or Expressions of an Inferior respect or
Veneration, I see if we mete with Monsieur Dailles measures, it can be no other
than Intolerable Impertinencie, to restrain and limit them to another Sense,
and They who will needs take them in such a restrained sense, that they may
charge those who use them in the manner above declared, with Idolatry or other
damnable Sin, will fall within the number of those who by his verdict are to be
accounted for F^ols or Liars among all Wise men; Atleast if we weigh with Mr.
Thorndike's Weights, they must be guilty of a strange Uncharitable
Opiniatorness in supposing them to contradict themselves.


Cathar. I confess^, if it be true what Mr. Dail^e says, that Signs instituted
by M^^ to signify any thing, whether of Nat^re or Religion, are to be
interpreted by the common and Public Practice of th^s^ who use them, I do not
see but the Papists have as f^ir* (if not a fairer Plea^,) that they ought to
be understood in the Sense they declare themselves* as the Church of England
has for bowing to the Altar by it is declaring; that they intend not thereby to
give any Religious worship to the Communion Table. For if Number and
Continuance weigh any thing in this Case (as certainly they ought in such
Institutions as depend upon the Will of men) I conceive the Public Profession
and Agreement both of the Eastern and Western Churches for so many ages
together in performing those external acts of Adoration toward Saints and
Images, will outweigh without comparison the Declaration and agreement of the
Church of England for bowing to the Altar. But then again, What color soever
you may pretend from the Will of Men, (which you say, is the Mistress of such
Institutions) to smooth over the practice of the Papists in giving such
External Acts of Adoration as are performed by the motion of the body, as
bowing, kneeling, etc to Saints and Images, (they being in their own nature
such as the Dr. grants may be used to God and the creatures): Yet this will not
serve for those other acts of Religious worship, as Sacrifice, Building of
Temples and Altars, Burning of Incense, Solemn Invocation, and making of Vows,
which God himself has appropriated to his own worship. And who dares alter
what God himself has appointed? Def. p. 261.



Eun. No man surely I think will be so hardy: but then we ought to consider,
how and in what manner the appointment is made. Otherwise the Proposition [who
dares alter what God has appointed?] crudely and unlimitedly taken, as it is
put by the Dr, is that very Principle, upon which the Anabaptists ground
themselves for not swearing, and the Quakers for not calling any man Master.
For if God, say they, have commanded not to swear at all, and forbidden his
disciples to be called Masters, who dares alter what God himself has
appointed? But this by the by, to let you see what kind of Principles the Dr.
makes use of to combat the Church of Rome.

As for the Objections themselves, although they have been answered a hundred
times over by those of the Church of Rome, yet because you press them anew, I
answer, that the Appropriation which all or any of these acts are supposed to
have had only by the Law of Moses, being taken away by the ceasing of that Law,
as I showed before, and no new appropriation or Prohibition by any express Law
of Christ produced hitherto by the Dr. they are to be reckoned in the number of
those Rites and Ceremonies which the Church has power to decree and use as she
judges expedient, and their signification is to be taken from the Public
Profession and Agreement of those that use them. No new Appropriation, I say,
produced by the Dr. which I desire you to observe, because those of the Church
of Rome maintain their Sacrifice of the Mass, to be of Christ's own
Institution, and so not to be given to any Creature.

Here then it is, that we are to consider in what sense it is that those of the
Church of Rome give the rest of these external acts to the Saints. For the Will
of men being the Mistress of such Institutions, they ought both in reason and
Charity to be understood, as they declare they use them: This I think cannot be
denied by the Dr. himself, when to justify the lawfullness of bowing to the
Altar, he appeals to the declaration of the Church of England, as your self but
even now observed. Let us then see in what sense it is that these acts are used
by those of the Church of Rome to the Saints. And

1. For the Invocation of Saints, they declare they mean no more by it, then
having recourse to their aid and assista^c^ to obtain by their Intercession
Benefits of God through the merits of his only Son and our only Redeemer Jesus
Christ.

2. For the building of Temples and Altars, they declare, that the structures
so called, may be considered, either as Places designed for the offering of
Sacrifice and so they ^rect none but to God alone, as they offer Sacrifice to
him alone, though in memo^y and honor of the Saints: Or as more Noble
Monuments to preserve their Relics and Memory, and more affectuously implore
their Intercession. And that they are commonly called Temples or Churches, and
Altars from the relation they have to the Sacrifice, which is offered in them
to God alone, and that Solemn Invocation which is made to him, as the only
Giver of every good and perfect Gift.

3. For the burning of Incense, the Appropriation it had by the Law of Moses
being taken away, and Idoiatry extirpated, which made use of it as an act of
Religious worship to Palse Gods, (both of them sufficient reasons, whilst they
subsisted, for Hezekiah's breaking to pieces the brazen serpent, when he saw
the people offer Incense to it) and so the act left to its own nature, which
the Dr. himself grants to be the same with that of the outward acts of
Adoration, and that T. G. was so far in the right when he said, that burning
of Incense Def. p. 242.
w^t a Ceremony of the like nature with bowing, those of the Church of Rome
declare that they do not use it to Saints and Images as a sign of Religious
worship, but either as a Ceremony to signify the sweet odor the Prayers of the
Saints are, or the like: or as a token of an Inferior respect and Veneration.

4. Lastly for making of Vows, they declare, they do not promise any thing to
the Saints, in the same sense they do to God, but what they promise to God they
promise in token of Gratitudo as to the Author and Give^ of all good things;
and what they promise to the Saints, they promise only in token of Gratitude to
them for their Intercession to God.

Now whateuer Cavils men of the Critical Employment may make against this
manner of using either these acts or words, and how many ^^^sts soever they may
give us of their Office from E^ymologies or the like, it is manifest that the
Public Profession and common Practice of those who use them, will overruled
all. For after that th^se kind of signs are addicted to such a signification by
the will of men, which is the Mistress of such Institutions, where no
Appropriation is made by God, and Public use has confirmed it, I confess I do
not see but it must be, as Mr, Daille says, Impertinency or Folly to limit and
restrain the^ to another sense. Nor is this to alter what God has appointed,
as Dr. St. obiecteth against Des. p. 259.
Bellarmin when he confesses that the name of Vow is always taken in
scripture for a promise made to God. For what God has appointed is not that we
shall not call a Promise made to a Saint in token of Gratitude for his
intercession, a Vow: but that we shall not make any such Promise to the^ as the
Authors or Givers of the benefits we have received, or expect to receive by
their Intercession; nor that we shall not call a structure erected in Memory of
a Saint, a Temple or Church from the Sacrifice and solemn Invocation that is
offered in it to God, but that we shall not erect any such to offer Sacrifice
to the Saint, or invocate him as Author of what we ask: it In like manner what
God has appointed* is not that we shall not perform such other acts to Saints
as may serve to testify the Respect and Esteem we have for the Exclelencies
they are endowed with (and the same is of Images for the Relation they bear to
God) but that we shall not give them to any besides himself, as tokens of that
inward submission of our souls which is proper to him; or as they may
rationally be understood to be such, which I do not conceive can ever happen in
the case of the Church of Rome toward Saints and Images whilst there is exta^t
a Public Prof^ssion of that Church determining and declaring them to be used
to them, as tokens only of an I^f^riour Respect or Veneration, and the Practice
supposed conformable to the Profession; which we must necessarily do, unless as
Mr Thorndike says, we will suppose Just Veights chapter 16.
them to contradict themselves: And then the whole Question will be, whether
their Adversaries words are to be taken before theirs, that is, whether their
Adversaries understand what they mean, better than they do themselves?


Cathar. Here Eunomius, I think I may say to you what the Priests and Elders
Matthew. 21. 23.
did to Christ, but with agreat deal more reason: By what Authority do men
these things? And who gave them this Authority? For if this be not to alter
what God has appointed, and to put it in the Power of man to change those
things which God has made peculiar to himself, I know not what is.


Eun: And here I think I may ask you a like Question to that which Christ Luke
18 19.
made to the man that called him Good, Why call thou me Good? None is good,
save one that is God? By what Authority do you give the name of Good to a man
whom you esteem Righteous, and some times for fashion's sake too, if God have
appropriated the name of Good to himself? Again if God have expressly forbidden
to call any man our Father upon Matt 9. 23. 9.
the earth, by what Authority do you give the name of Father to any man upon
the earth? And if he have forbidden his disciples to be called Masters, by v.
10^
what Authority do you take it your self, or Dr St. give it to the Reverend
Master Baxter? when you have answered these Questions, Catharinus, you will
see, and perhaps confess what hitherto you would not, that the different
applying of words, (and it is the same of acts in their own nature Equivocal,)
is not to alter what God has appointed, nor to put in the Power of man to
change what God has made peculiar to himself, but to leave them to God in the
Sense, in which they are appropriated to him, and apply them only in another
sense to the Creatures.


Cathar. This I confess is more than hitherto I reflected on. But still there
is one thing behind which seems to defeat all that you have said, and if you
can give me a satisfactory Account of it, I shall give you no farther trouble.
And it is, why the same may not be done in Sacrifice, that is, in other
External acts of worship as bowing or kneeling, Erecting of Temples, or burning
of Incense? Why may it not be made common as well as Vows. And though it be
offered only Def. p. 259.
absolutely to God, why may it not be offered relatively to the Saints or
Images? p. 857.
In a word, I desire to know with the Dr how a sacrisice does come to signify
p. 230.
this absolute worship more than Adoration?


Eun: This is a Scruple, which has troubled the Drs notions from the
beginning; and because he repeats it so often in his Defense. I perceive you
think it has not been answered. But J am of another mind. For, if you
remember, Cath. no. Idol. p. 132.
though T. G. tell him, that he will better understand it, when he is become a
Proselyte; yet with all he says, that in the mean time it may suffice him to
know that the Church of God has no such custom; and that Sacrifice is used
and taken by the Public Use and Custom of the Church for an acknowledgment of
the absolute worship due to God, and not of Relative to an Image. And I do not
see why he might not have been satisfied with this Answer.


Cathar. I cannot but wonder to hear you say so. For as the Dr replies very
home upon him: I do not ask, says he, whether the Church of Rome have any Def.
p. ^57.
such custom (the Church of God I know has not) but whether it may not have
that, as well as some others, and upon the same grounds of Relative worship.
But if I must not understand this till I become a Proselyte, I hope I shall be
always contented with my Ignorance. If I can be no oth^rwise informed, I am
not sorry to see such Evidence of their Inability to answer, who make such
put-offs.


Eun. And I cannot but wonder more, why the Dr. should call that a Put-off,
which seems to me to be a very Pertinent Answer to the Question, for as much as
concerns the Dispute between him and T. G. And that you may see this more
clearly, let us suppose T. G. to have admitted, that possibly Sacrifice might
be used, in like manner as other external acts are; all the Dr could in^err
from thence to his purpose would be, that in such case the Church of Rome might
possibly have no external act of worship appropriated to God, if* she have none
but Sacrifice; but whilst she has no such custom de facto, as offering
Sacrifice to Saints and Images, but to God alone; it is manifest he cannot accuse
them in that point of having no External Act of worship proper to God, or of
giving it to any besides him, which I take to be sufficient to repel the Drs
charge of actual Idolatry; and why T. G. was bound to any more unless men must
be condemned as actual Idolaters, because it is possible they may be so; or
what design the Dr proposed to himself by demanding more, I do not understand.


Cathar. The design was, as I conceive, to provoke T. G. by often casting this
Question in his way to give some reason, why Sacrifice might not be applied to
creatures, in like manner as other External Acts are. For whateuer reason he
should give, why this may not be lawfully done in Sacrifice, would equally show
the unlawfulness of doing it in the rest: And therefore the Dr so carnetly
presses to know how a sacrifice does come to signify this absolute worship more
then Adoration, that is, bowing, or Des. p. 230.
kneeling, or such like acts performed by the motion of the body?


Eun: This was a Cunning device indeed, but such a one, as it seems T. G* was
not afraid to speak to. For he tells Cath. no. Idol. p. 319.
the Dr 1st that Sacrifice in general is both by the custom of the Church, and
the consent of all mankind (as St Augustine teaches) appropriated to signify
the De Civ. Dei. lib. 10. c. 4.
absolute worship due only to God. And 2ly for the particular Sacrifice of the
Body and Blood of Christ, the nature p. 1^8.
and dignity thereof, he says, requires that it be offered to God alone. And
this I take to be a very plain and positive answer, how a Sacrifice does come
to signify this absolute worship more than Adoration. But since the Dr. is not
satisfied with it, I must desire you when you see him next, to tell him that a
Friend of yours desires to know, why Invocation (which he will have to be as
much the Proper act of Religious worship in the Church of England, as those of
the Church of Rome account Sacrifice to be) may not be applied to Creatures, as
well as Supplication, which St Paul reckons among the acts Phil. 4. 6.
of Relig^o^s worship due to God; and why that may not be made common, as well
as Go^d, and Father and Master are, which by Christ's own command in the new
Law are appropriated to himself. He cannot recurr to Nature, because he knows
words do not signify naturally, but by the Will of men, and are frequently
changed by custom. If he have recourse to the Imposition and Custom of men
determining the word Invocation to signify that sort of address which is proper
to God; those of the Church of Rome have the same and in a more Vniversel
manner, for a like determination of the external act of Sacrifice in general to
signify the absolute worship of God. If to God's Institut^on, they acknowledge
the same for the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of our Lord, which, they say,
was instituted by Christ himself at his last supper. Lastly if he fly to
distinctions, Sempron^us will think he has as much r^ght to make use of them,
as T^t^us.


Cathar. This is another of those you call Arguments ad hominem. But still
methinks you come not up to what the Dr would hau^: If Sacrifice do signify the
Absolute worship of God more than Adoration, is it for that of it self it does
more properly signify our inward and total Def. p. 226.
subjection of our selves to God than the other does? Methinks as the Dr says,
it would become T. Gs learning to i^ form us in this matter.


Eun: well; as if T G were bound for the Dr's pleasure to give such reas^ns, as
he would have; and not what himself thought most proper for the present
dispute? Does not the Dr himself in that very place, honor them with the title
of the best learned of the Roman divines, who confess that Sacrifice does not
naturally Def. p. 226.
or of it self, signify any worship of God, but by the Imposition of men? And
do not those other Divines who maintain it to signify the ^orship proper to God
upon the account of nature, ackno^ledge that it does so also by the common
consent of Mankind? What necessity was there then, that T. G. in a debate with
an Adversary, whose Genius and Cause both lead him to multiply Controversies
without end, should allege any other reason, than that in which they all
agree? Whether this consent of mankind, in using the destruction of creature^
to signify the supreme dominion of God over life and death, and their
Subjection to him, owe it is Origin to nature, or to some Inspirat^on or
command of God given to men in the beginning, or were taken up by their own
Voluntary Election, and so propagated to Posterity, the Dr is at liberty to
dispute with the Schoolmen, o^ his own thoughts, as he pleases. It concerns not
T. G. It was enough for him that he had the consent of mankind on his side,
that Sacrifice was to be offered to none but God.


Cathar. But do you remember what the Dr adds in that very place now cited by
you? How comes the destruction of any Des. p. 226.
Creature, says he, under our command to signify the inward subjection of our
selves to God? What pleasure can we conceive the Almighty should take in seeing
us to destroy his creatures for his sak^? Our minds may be as far from
submitting to God, as these things are of themselves from signifying such a
submission. Nay how comes a sacrifice to stand so much in our stead, that
because we take away the life of that, therefore we own God as our Lord? It
might rather of it selfsignify that we have the power of life and death over
Beasts, than that God has it over us.


Eun: I remember the passage very well; but I do not remember where T. G. said
that the destruction of a creature does of it self signify our subjection to
God. What he says is that this material action may be done for several ends
and Intentions; and is not the Institution of Cath. n^ Idol. p. 182.
God, or the Imposition of men sufficient to determine it, when used as an act
of worship, to signify the absolute worship due to God, but that it must be
determined of it self? Who ever heard any thing more trifling and frivolou? Is
this to reason like a Master in Israel? Pray tell me, Catharinus; do you not
think Moses would have been put shrewdly to it, had Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
instead of seeking the Priest hood, quarreled at the Sacrifices, and made the
same demands to him, which the Dr does to T. G.? For might they not have said
to him (and surely it would have become Moses his learning to have informed
them in this matter,) How comes the destruction of any creature under our
command to signify the inward subjection of our selves to God? What pleasure
can we conceive the Almighty should take in seeing us to destroy his creatures
f^r his sake? Our minds may be as far from submitting to God, as those things
are of themselves from signifying such a submission. Nay how comes a Sacrifice
to stand so much in our sto^d, that because we take away the life of that,
therefore we own God as our Lord? It might rather of it self signify that we
have the power of l^fe and death over Beasts, than that God has it over us.
But alas poor men, they were not acquainted with these subtilties. They took it
upon the Common consent of all Mankind, that sacrifice was an External Act of
worship due to God alone, and so quarreled not the offering it to him, as
Nonsensical, but affected themselves to have a share in the honor and Office
of the Priesthood.


Cathar. Be it so, if you will of the Jewish sacrifices: But, (as the Dr goes
p. 227.
on) of all things in the world, it would never have come into my mind, nor I
think into any man's well in his senses, to offer up God himself unto God as a
Sacrifice, in order to the testifying the devoting of our selves unto him; and
yet this, after all their talk, comes to be that external sacrifice, wbich is
the only appropriate sign of the absolute worship of God, viz, the Sacrifice of
the Mass, wherein the Priest is believed, to offer up God himself under the
species of Bread and Wine to the Eternal God in token of our subjection to him.
M^thinks yet it were some what more reasonable to offer up brute Creatures that
are under us, than God that is so infinitely above us, and such is the weakness
of my understanding, that this seems to be rather an Argument of our Power over
God, than of our subjection to him. But since the Formal Reason of a sacrifice
is said to lie in the destruction of it. Good Lord! What thoughts must these
men have (if they have any) when they th^nk it in their power, first to make
their God by speaking five words, then to offer him up as a sacrifice, then to
suppose him destroyed, and all this to testify their submission to God. I want
words, says he, to Express the intolerable Blasphemy and Absurdity of these
things.


Eun: This I confess, is such a passage which I could not read without horror,
as being not only trifling and Frivolous as the former, but highly Injurious to
that inestimable Sac^ifice, which Christ himself offered upon the Cross. For
what was it, the Jews were scandalized at in it but the offering of God to God.
We preach, says St Paul, Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and
to the Greeks 1. Cor. 1. 23.
Foolishness. And then again Chapter 2. v. 7. We speak the Wisdom of God, which
had the Princes of this world known they would not have crucified the LORD of
GLORY. And could the Dr find no Stone to throw at the Mass, but that at which
the Jews stumbled, and which his Wiser Heathens derided as Foolishness? I
wonder he was not afraid of that saying of the same Apostle 1. Cor. 1. 18, The
preaching of the Cross is to them that perish Foolishness; but unto us which
are saved, it is the Power of God, when he durst say, Of all things in the
world it cannot enter into my mind, nor I think into any man's well in his
senses to offer ^y God himself unto God as a Sacrifice? For although he talk of
the making and destroying of God in the Mass, yet he knows very well, there is
no such thing done or believed to be done there, but that the same Christ who
is in Heaven is believed to be whole under either Species; and his Blood to be
separated from his Body not really, but Mystically only and in Representation.
But these bugg words were to be thrust in to give a color to his Exorbitancie.
The main thing he insists upon is the Intolerable Blasphemy and Absurduy, as he
calls it, of offering up God himself unto God as a Sacrifice. But Good Lord!
What thoughts must he have (if he have any) of the Sacrifice of the Cross? Can
it enter into his mind, that Christ himself (with Reverence be it spoken and
trembling too) was not well in his senses, when he offered up God himself to
God as a Sacrifice? Or that those who were at the foot of the Cross, might not
have offered him up to his Father, who voluntarily offered himself for them, in
order to the testifying the devoting themselves as sacrifices to (him if he
should please to require it,) without losing their senses? If not, why must
those be out of their senses, who offer up the same sacrifice to him, and with
like devotion upon the Altar? This is such an Argument as might have been
expected from the Pen of a Crellius. But I will not suppose the Dr, either to
deny with him that Christ was the High God, because he was so kind to T. G. as
to Def. p. 5.
suppose he would not deny the Creator and Governor of the world to be the
true God; or that Christ did not offer up himself to God, when St Paul says so
Ephesians. 5. 5. 2.
expressly, that he gave himself for us, as an offering and a sacrifice to God
for a s^eet smelling savor, and that he who is the Brig^tness of his Fathers
Glory, purged Hebr. 1. 3.
our sins by himself: Or that he thinks it as much for the honor of God and
the good of our souls to offer the blood of brute Creatures, viz, of Bulls and
of Goats, as the Blood of Christ who offered Hebr. ^. 14.
himself without spot to Go^. These things I leave, yet withal I cannot omit
to tell you, that I see another ground from whence this kind of transport may
proceed, and at what it levels.


Cathar. Pray let me know what it is.


Eun: It is that he cannot with any patience endure to hear of the Sacrifice of
the Altar, though he be content to bow to it. That must down, though the
Sacrifice of the Cross fall with it. And this was it, which when T. G. had
said, Cath. n^. Idol. p. 391.
that that Religion (speaking only in general) which admits no external Visible
sacrifice, must needs be deficient in the most signal part of the Public
worship of God, made him so sollicitous and eager to repel the very suspicion
of having any such sacrifice from the Church of Des. p. 22^.
England. What External Visible sacrifice have you, says he (speaking to those
of the Church of Rome) that we have not, besides that os God himself, whom you
believe to be personally present (as if the Church of England did not) as the
Object of divine worship under the species of Bread and Wine? But was this to
speak like a Champion of the Church of England? How far he dissents herein
from the sentiments of the true and genuin Sons of this Church, that is
(according to his own Paraphrase in his General Preface) the most remote from
all suspicion of dis-affection to her, or Inclination to Puritanism, may easily
appear Mr Thorndike Epil l. 3. c. 5. p. 44.
from what that Person of ^reat learning and Excellent Piety, Mr. Thorndike,
(as the Dr himself acknowledges him to have been), has delivered upon this
subject. Having maintained, says he, that the Elements are really changed from
Ordinary Bread and Wine, into the Body and Blood of Christ, mystically present
as in a Sacrament, and that in virtue of the Consecration, not by the Faith of
him that receives; I am to admit and maintain, Whatsoever appears duly
consequent to this Truth; namely, that the Elements so consecrated are truly
the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, in as much as the Body an Blood of
Christ are con^ained in them. And then farther adds (p. 46.) that the
sacrifice of the Cross being necessarily Propitiatory and Impetratory both, it
cannot be denied, that the sacrament of the Eucharist in* as much as it is the
same sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, -- is also both Propitiatory and
Impetratory. The same is asserted by Dr He^^lyn in his Necessary Introduction
to Cyprianus Anglicus. Assuredly, says he, if the Priest and Dr. H^ylyn. (...)
duct. ^: 24.
Altar be so near, the Lamb for the Burnt-offe^^^g cannot be far of, even the
most Blessed Lamb of G^d, which takes away the sins of the world, (as the
Scripture s^yles him) whose Passion we find commemorated in the sacrament,
called therefore the sacrament of the Altar; and for the same reason called by
S. Augustine in his E^chiridion Sacrificium Altaris, the Sacrifice of the Altar;
by the E^glish Liturgy in the Prayer next after the Participation, the
Sacrifice of Praise and Thankes-giving (Sacrificium laudis;) By Chrysostom, The
remembrance of a Sacrifice, and by many learned Writers among our selves, a
Commemotative Sacrifice. For thus says Bp Andrews in his Answer to Card. (...)
Andrevvs.
Bellarmin, c. 8. Tollite de Missa Transsubstantiationem vestram, nec diu Resp.
ad Apol, Bell.
nobiscum lis erit de sacrificio. Which the said Dr Heylyn translates in this
manner, Take from the Mass your Transubstantiation, and we will have no
difference with you about the sacrifice: declaring thereby how consequent he
thought the admitting of a Sacrifice to be, to the belief of the Real Presence
of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, which he there shows to have
been the constant doctrine of the Church of England, both from her Liturgy and
Catechism, n. 25. 26
and the writings of the best learned of her divines; among whom he cites that
Profession of Bp Andrews in the name of the Church of England to Card.
Bellarmin. Praesentiam credimus non minus quam vos veram; de modo praesentiae
nil temere definimus. We acknowledg^ a presence as true and Real as you do: but
we determine nothing rashly of the manner of it. From which and the Testimonies
of some other divines he says, It seems it is agreed on both sides (that is to
say, the Church of England and the Church of Rome) that the^e (...) true and
(...) of Christ in the Holy Eucharist, the disagreement being only in the (...)
P^ae^entiae, the manner of the Presence.

This is what the true and genuin sons of the Church of E^gland teach both
concerning the Rea^ Presence, and the Sacrific^ of Christ's Body and (...) in
the Sacrament of the Altar, as well knowing how great a ^efect it would be for
a Church to want the most signal Part of the P^blick worship of God as that of
^acr^fice is 1st They assert the Person of Christ to be as t^uly and Really
present there, as those of the Ch^^ch of Rome do. 2. They assert it also to be
there* as he Object of divine worship; for Mr Th^rndike speaking of the
Adoration Epil. P. ^. p. ^51
of Christ in the Eucharist, says, I do believe that it was so practiced, and
done in the Ancient Church, which I maintain from the beginning t^ have been
the true Church of Christ. And Bp Andrews Resp. ad Apol. Bellar. c. 8.
tells Cardinal Bellarmin very plainly, that the King (King James, and did not
he understand wha^ he said, Rex Christum in Eucharistia vere praesentem*
and what they of the Church of England did?) holds Christ to be truly present
in the sacrament, and there also to be truly adorabl^. Lastly they assert the
Eucharist vere and adorandum statuit.
to be no^ only a Sacrament, but a Sacrifice, and the very Sa^e sacrifice of
Christ upon the C^^ss. How comes the Dr then to contradict all these Points
when he said speaking to t^ose of the Church of Rome, What exte^nal Visible
sacrifice have you that we have no^, besides God himself, w^om you believe to
be pe^sonally present, as the Object of divine Worship, under the species of
Br^ad and Wine? Was it to show his excellent ^k^ll in the affairs and doctrine
of tha^ Church he pretends to defend? No, he could not be ignorant of so
evident a matter. The very names of Priest and A^tar put him daily in mind of
it. What made him then tell those of the Church of Rome that the Church of
Eng^and has no such Sacrifice, as that of Christ personally present in the
Sacram^nt, as the Object of divine Def. p. 282.
worship? O, it was the Intolerable Blasphemy and Absurd^^y, as he calls it, of
offering up God himself as a sacrifice to God. For of all things in the world,
it could never have come into his mind, nor he thinks into any man's well in
his senses (by which it seems he thinks Bp Andrews, Dr Heylin, Mr Thorndike,
and the rest to have been crazed at least) to offer up God himself unto God as
a sacrifice in order to the testifying our devot^ng our selves to him. But if
this be B^asph^my, and the Drs definition must obtain against that of the two
General Councils of Nice and Ephesus. I know no way but to renounce my Creed.
For I do not see, but it is alike blasphemous, to say, that God was born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, as
that he offered himself upon the Cross, or is off^red by us upon the Altar. And
now has not the Church of England great reason to glory in such a Champion,
who under a specious pretense of impugning the Mass, fears not to traduce the
most excellent part of her Religious worship (as it is understood by the best
Learned of her divines) as blasphemous and absurd, and so wound both her, and
the Common Christianity to the very heart, through the side^ of her Enemies?


Cathar. Let the Dr and the Church of England agree about these things as They
can. I do not see after all their sine talk of the nature and dignity of their
sacrifice of the Mass, as due only to God, but that themse^ves in their
practice offer it to Creatures also. For as the Def. p. 218.
Dr has well observed out of their own Mass-books, they offer it in honor of
the Saints: and although they pretend they do it to God in thanksgiving for the
Graces he has bestowed upon the p. 219.
Saints, yet Dr St desires to know of them, whether this be not more than
giving God thanks for their virtues; when a Propitiatory sacrifice is offered
up p. 220*
to God for their honor? moreover at the same time they pray, that the Saints
would intercede with God for them. And What is joining creatures together with
God in the honor of sacrifice, if this be not? Again supposing that they offer
it only to God, yet as Cajetan observes, Def. p. 205*
it cannot reach to all Christians, but only belongs to the Priests to offer
it. And so they reserve no one act of External Adoration as proper to God, and
to be performed by all Christians.


Eun: To what miserable shifts are men put, when they would have such Trivial
kind of arguing as this to pass for solid Reasoning. Either the Dr was netled
without cause for T. G's. telling him upon occasion, that he would understand
better what belongs to a sacrifice, when he was become a Proselyte, Or it must
be a hard world, when a man of his abilities must be forced to fain that he
does not know how the same sacrifice may be a Propitiation for sins, and a
Thank^giving for Benefits: especially the Sacrifice of the Altar, being the
same with that of the Cross, in which all the differences of the legal
sacrifices were fulfilled. I cannot conceive but that in his frequent
Researches into Bellarmin he must have met with that lib. 2. de Pu^g. c. 18.
famous passage of S. Augustine, where he says, that when the sacrifice of the
Enchirid c. 110.
(Altar, which he there calls the sacrifice of the Mediator,) is offered in the
Church for all the faithful departed, it is to such as were good, but not
perfecty good, a sacrifice of Propitiation: but for the perfectly Cath. no.
Idol. p. 394.
good, of Thanksgiving. And I thought T. G. had given him a very home-Example
how this might be for the honor of a Person, when he desired him to reflect,
whether it would not be for his honor, that his whole Party should keep a
solemn Day of Thanksgiving for his great performances against the Popish Cause,
although the Thanks were given to God and not to him. And indeed it was so home
that he p. 221.
does not deny it would have been for his honor. But then to return, as he
says, the kindness of T. G's twitch by a foreign example fetched from Persia,
where Prostration was appropriated to their King, as a sign of subjection to
him alone, how strange, says he, would is have been thought among them, for a
man to have said to the King, I fall down before you in honor of the Captain
of your Guards? A very notable example I can assure you. Yet there is this
difference, that how strange soever it might have appeared among the Persians
to hear this said to their King, (as it does now to Country People to hear one
say, I kiss your hands, instead of I thank you,) it seems it is not so among
those of the Church of Rome to say to God. We offer this sacrifice to thee in
the honor of St Michael, to testify their application of it in thanksgiving
for the favors and Graces bestowed on him; and why they may not use other
manners of expression, as well as of habits or gestures from those of the
Persians, I do not undestand: and as little why they ought not to be understood,
as they declare themselves to mean, the Will of men being the Mistress, and
Custom the Confirmer of such forms of speaking. But still the Question is,
says the Dr, if sacrifice be appropriated to the sol^ honor of God, how ^he
honor of Saints comes to be declared by it? But granting, as he does, that it
is for the honor of a Person to praise (or give thanks to) God for him, this I
say being granted, the Question as I take it can be no other than to ask,
whether the offering of a Present, (as sacrifice is) in token of Gratitude, be
to diminish or add to the Act of Thanksgiving? For if it be a greater
Declaration of Thanksgiving, it must consequently be a greater Declaration also
of the honor of the Person for whom it is offered. O but at the same time that
they offer the sacrifice in honor of the Saints, they pray that they would
intercede with God for them. This is more than the Dr finds in their
Mass-books, at least from the Offertory, where the Priest begins to apply
himself to the Action of sacrifice: for from thence forward the Prayers are all
directed to God. But in case they did so, would it therefore follow that the
sacrifice is offered to the Saints because they are desired to join their
Prayers with the People to obtain the blessings they ask of God? This surely is
something beyond Trifling, for the Dr might as well have said that the
sacrifice is offered to the People because the Priest after the Offertory turns
to them, with, Orate f^at^es, and desires them to Pray that it may become
acceptable to God; and if you have nothing of more moment to propose, I think
it is high time we make an End indeed.


Cathar. But you have forgot to speak to what I proposed in the last place;
that supposing they offer it only to God, yet this, as Cajetan observes, cannot
reach to all Christians, but only belongs In 2. 2. q. 86. art. 4.
to the Priests to offer it; and so they reserve no one external act of
Adoration as proper to God, and to be performed by all Christians.


Eun. You did well to call upon me, Otherwise I confess I had passed this over,
as a thing not worthy the taking-notice of; for there is nothing more notorious
than that those of the Church of Rome are bound on every sunday and Holy Day to
hear Mass (as they call it) by that External Act to testify the uniting their
Intention with the Priest as the Public Officer of the Church in the Oblation
of the Sacrifice. And what is it the Dr would have more? Would he have the City
of London when they make a Present to the King at his Coronation in order to
the testifying their subjection to him, to go every one in Person, and deliver
it with his own hands? Is it not enough that some Public Person be deputed, as
the Lord Mayor, or the Recorder to do it in their names, and the King accepts
it as offered by each one? If this be so in things belonging to men, how much
more in those belonging to God, where as St Paul, says: Every High Priest
taken from among men is ordained for men, Heb. 5. 1. 3.
that they may offer both Gifts and sacrifices for sins, and that both for
himself and for the People? And if this did not hinder in the old Law, but that
both Princes and People are said to have offered those sacrifices to the (...),
why must it in the new? I do not except against the Dr's Citation out of
Cajetan, though I do not find it in the place quoted by him. But this I dare
affirm, that Cajetan was not so silly a divine as to deny it belonged to the
People to offer the Sacrifice by and with the Priest; but that it belo^gs not
to them to Consecrate it, any more than it did in the old Law to kill and lay
it upon the Altar. The very Mass Book. it self would have informed him better,
in which the Priest calls it their sacrifice as well as his, Meum as Vestrum
sacrificium, and desires of God to accept it for all those, pro quibus tibi
offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium. For whom we, says he, offer,
or who offer this sacrifice to thee. And I can imagine but two reasons, why this
should not hold as well in the new Law, as the Old; The First given by Korah
and his Accomplices, when they told Moses and Aaron. Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all Number. 16 3.
the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them,
where fore then lift ye up your selves about the Congregation of the Lord?
Which was no other that to teach the People to invade the Priesthood; Or 2ly
that there is no sacrisice offered in the new Law, and this contradicts not
only the Practice of the Church of Christ in the Primitive times, but the sense
also of the best learned divines of the Church of England. But it is not in
this Point alone, that the Dr does it, but in many others, as I have shown in
the fore going Conferences, which if you think fit to Communicate to him, I
conceive you will do well at the same time to advise him as a Friend, both for
his own credit, and that of the Church he pretends to defend, to take in good
part the Counsel which St Augustine gives to some Endless, because wordish
disputers of his time. Let Lib. 5. de Civ. Dei c. ul^.
him consider all things diligently, and if perhaps judging impartially he
perceive Considerent omnia diligenter, and si forte sine studio partium
judicantes talia esse perspexerint, quae potius exagitari, quam convelli
possint. quasi Satyrica vel Mimica levitate, cohibeant suas nugas, and potius a
prudentibus emendari, quam laudari ab imprudentibus eligant.
them to be such, as may rather be played upon and made seemingly ridiculous or
blasphemous by a Satirical or Mimical kind of Levity, than solidly confuted,
let him surcease to trifle, and choose rather to be amended and reformed by the.
Wise than to be extolled, and applauded by those who are otherwise.


Cathar. But do you hope then, Eunomius, that Dr St will ever become a true
Church-of-England-Man, in the sense you understand it? that he will retract his
charge of Idolatry, and acquit at least the doctrine of the Church of Rome from
the Guilt of it in the worship of Images, the Invocat^on of Saints, and
Adoration of the Host? That he will ever swallow the Contradictions of Christ's
Personal Presence in the Sacrament? nay first adore him, then offer him
believing him to be God in sacrifice, and after all eat him? When this comes to
pass, I think the Papists will have little or no reason to despair of his coming
over and joining with them.


Eun. How ^estingly soever you say this, Catharinus, yet I think in good
Earnest I may tell you that the very Principles he admits, if followed home,
would lead him thither? For granting, as he does, 1st. that the Church of Rome
is a true Church, and does not err against any Fundamental Point of Faith; 2ly
that the Gates of Hell have not prevailed against the whole. Christian Church;
and 3ly that a Christian by virtue of his being so is bound to join in
Communion with some Church or Congregation of Christians: I do not see, but he
is bound either to assign some other true Church of Christ in the world before
Luther besides that of Rome, or else by virtue of his Christianity he is bound
to join in Communion with it.


Cathar. Yet still the Dr has this refuge left him, why we ought not to join
with the Roman, because if she be guilty of Idolatry, our Communion with See
Dialog. 3. 4. 5. of the First Part.
her wo^ld be a sin.


Eun. As for the Charge of Idolatry, I hope you have been made sensible, how
un-maintainable it is, both from the strange Consequences that follow from it,
even to the subversion of all lawful Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of
England: as also from the Extravagant Ways the Dr is forced to make use of at
any rate to uphold it, as Apologizing for the Heathens, asserting their Jupiter
to be the true God, mis-representing and corrupting Authors, denying the
Personal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and contradicting not only the
true and Genuin Sons of the Church of England, but most of all himself. This
therefore can be no good ground to maintain the Separation.


Cathar. What then can, I pray?


Eun. That Is a Point which requires more time than I have at present to spend
upon it. To morrow morning I begin my Journey without fail.


Cathar. I wish you a good one; and beg your pardon for having detained you so
long.


FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT FROM THE PUBLISHER
A Friend, to whom I had given this Treatise to peruse, Whilst the Printer was
setting the folloving Table, having taken notice that the Author had not
particular^y replied to the Parallel which the Dr draws from the Practice of
the Modern Heathens in the East and West indies, as to the worship they give to
their Inferior deities and Images, with that of the Church of Rome, and the
Printer informing me there would be two or three leaves left Vacant in the last
sheet, I thought it not amiss to acquaint the Reader with the Reasons why the
Author thought it not necessa^y: which were these.

1. Because the Dr himself reduces the worship of these Heathens, to one of
these two Principles, viz that of the Def. p. 113.
Platonists, that God has committed the Government of the world under him to
some Inf^riour deities; Or that of Varr^ and the Stoics, that God is the soul
of the world, and therefore the Parts of it deserve divine honor: And the
Author having shown the Stoics to be Supra. p. 349.
guilty of true Internal Idolatry for worshipping a Creature instead of the
Creato^; and the Platonists, at least of Part. 3. Dial. 5.
the Exterior Profession of it, for coucurring with the Vulgar in the External
Practice of their Idolatry, it would have been but actum agere to repeat the
same things over again.

2. Because the force of the Parallel lies altogether in Citations; and the Dr
had already forfeited all right to be Part. 2. Dial. 4. Part. 3. Dial. 3.
believed in things of that kind, by his notorious mis-representing and
corrupting the Fathers. Nor can it with reason be presumed he would treat these
modern Relators with more sincerity, than he had done those Venerable Persons:
Or that he would be more Exact in citing any of them, than of Triga^tius, by
reason of what had been objected to him formerly by T. G. upon account of that
Author; which it seems he laid up so carefully in his Memo^y, that having a
good Occasion as he thought of citing ^ passage out of him relating to a
certain Sect of the Chinezes, which he delivers in these words, Certum Triadis
modum De Christ Exped. apud Sinas. l. 1. ^. 10.
inducit, quo tres Deos in unum deinde Numen coalescere fabulatur; by which,
speaking of the dogmata or Tenants, as he there does, of that Sect, one would
think were meant some Fabulous Story they had devised (in resemblance of the
Trinity) of three distinct Gods, who afterward grew into one Deity, Dr St
translates the words in this manner. Cer^um Triadis modum inducit, They wo^^h^p
the Trinity after a certain manner, quo tres Deos in unum deinde Numen
coalescere fabulatur, with an Image having Three Heads and one Body. And then
desires T. G. once m^re to make use of his Friends kindness for Trigautius,
that he may see whether he have translated him right, or no. Now although an
Ordinary Reader perhaps will find here neither head nor foot, Yet because the
Dr assures us that the Translation is exact, the Author says he is contented
to let it pass for such: but not so another passage which the Dr. cites some
leaves after out of the same Def. p. 130.
Trigautius. For whereas Trigautius after he had described the Veneration De
Christ Exped. apud Sinas l. 1. c. 10.
which the Learned Chinese give to Confutius, the Author of their Sect, by
bowings, wax-candles and Incense, in token of Gratitude sor the learning found
in his Books, he farther adds speaking of the same Sect, that they have
likewise Temples to Tutelar spirits for every City and Tribunal, where the
Magistrates take their solemn oath to do Justice; and that they make Oblations
to them also, and burn perfumes, but not with the same kind of worship which
they give to their Master Confutius, for they acknowledge, says he, a certain
divine Power to be in these spirits, to punish perjured Persons, and to reward
the upright. His words are these. Alia quoqu^ ejusdem Sectae Fana visuntur
Tutelaribus spiritibus Vrbium singularum and Tribunalis cuique Magistratui
propria. In co Sacramento se solemni astringunt ad jus fasque seruandum. -- His
etiam Fercula offerunt and odores incendunt, sed non eodem quo supra cultu; nam
in his agnoscunt perjuros plectendi probosque remunerandi Divinam quandam
inesse facultatem. By which it appears, that whattever resemblance may be
conceived in the manner of the worship they gave to Confutius, as there
expressed, with that used toward Saints in the Church of Rome, yet that which
they give to these Tutelar Spirits is shown by Trigautius to be plainly
different from it, both from the belief they have of a Divine Power residing in
those Spirits, and the Religious Ceremony of the Magistrates taking their
solemn Oath before them, as having ^ower to reward and punish them. Now what
does Dr St. do that he may set up a Parallel, not only between the wor^hip they
gave to Conf^t^us but between this also they give to the Tu^elar Spirits, and
that given in the Church of Rome to Saints and Angels? He translares the words
of Trigautius in this manner. They have likewise Temples, says he, to Tutelar
Spirits for every City and Tribunal, wh^re they make Oblations, and burb (...),
acknowledging these to have po^er to reward and punish. Where. 1. he omit* the
Ceremony of the Magistrates taking their solemn Oath to or before these Tutelar
Spirits, as those who had power to reward or punish them. Then again he leaves
out what Trigautius expressly affirms, viz that the worship they gave to these
spirits is not the same they give to Confutius: and lastly he slides over the
words Nam and Divina^, which import the reason of this Assertion to be, because
they believed the Power that was in them to be divine. And now if this be the
Dr's way of drawing Parallels from the Relations of Authors, to suppress the
Emphatical words that show the difference, the Reader will easily judge, it is
no very good one; and withal how little reason there was to spend a month or
two's time in seeking and examining his other Testimonies, when he deals in
this manner with Trigautius, whom for his former ill success in citing him, and
the reparation of his credit, he ought to have treated with more Caution and
exactness than the rest.

A third Reason is, hecause although the Wiser sort of these Modern Heathens
make use, when they are pressed, of the same Artifices and Pretenses, which the
old ones did in the time of the Fathers, to elude the Arguments of the
Christians, yet it appears from many of the Citations alleged by the Dr
himself (and you may be sure he would mince the matter on that side as much as
he could) that they themselves, or at least the Generality, either worshipped a
False God for the true one, as those who held God to be the Soul of the world,
or to have produced all things out of his own substance so that the world and
all the things in it, are but one and the self same thing which is God himself?
or that they worshipped False Gods together with Des. p. 124.
the t^u^ one, if they worshipped him at all, as may be seen by what the
particular Relations cited by the Dr report of the Chinese, p. 129. of the
Tartars, p. 140. Of the Peruans, p. 145. 148. Of the Mexicans, p. 151. Of the
Negros of Africa, p. 152. Of the Indians of Narsinga etc. p. 154. 155. Of the
Northern Nations, p. 158 159. Of the Laplanders, and Inhabitants of Samogitia,
p. 160. 161.

4. Lastly, because speaking abstractedly and in general, as the Author argued
formerly concerning the worship Supra p. 115.
which the ancient Heathens gave to their Inferior Deity and Images, so here
again, it may be said of the worship which the Modern Heathens give to theirs;
that either it is the same which those of the Church of Rome give to Saints and
Images, or not. If it be not the same (as it appears by the Relation of
Trigautius had he been truly cited, and of many Others, as they stand cited by
the Dr himself, it is not) the Parallel See his Def. p. 129. 144. 146. 149. etc.
is lost. If it be the same, that is, if any of them give no more but an
Inf^riour respect and Veneration such as is due upon the account of Virtue and
Sanctity without any mixture of Divine honor, or what may rationally be
understood to be such, (though it be unlawful to give it to a false Object)
yet the manner of the worship, which is what the Dr. charges with Idolatry,
though given to the B. Virgin herself, whose Supr^ p. 33. 34.
Sancti^y I suppose he will not question, is excused from the note of it by
Eminent Divines of the Church of England. And I cannot but wonder, how the Dr
could ever hope, that his own bare Relation of a Decree made at R^me, against
the using external acts in themselves unlawful and superstitious to or before
the Altar of an Idol or False Saint, though the Intention were directed te a
Crucifix hidden upon it (of which decree he sets down the Resolutions of the
7.th 8.th and 9.th Queres to be nullatenus licere etc. without telling us in
particular what the Quaeres were) I say it is a wonder to me, how he could hope
that such a Relation as this, should yet be of sufficient credit to make any
man of common sense believe, that the Cardinals de propaganda Fide, (not with
the halfonly, but with the f^ll consent of the Pope) had condemned the giving
external acts of worship to Saints and Images as Idolatrous, or that when they
gave these Resolutions, they had nothing represent^d to them in the practice of
the converted (...) of China, which might make their worship unlawful (...)
from what themselves Def. p. 314. p. 129.
practic^^ every day at Rome; especially when the Dr himself confesses, that
the Congregation c^ll, the Image of the Tutel^^ Spirit an Idol, and tells us
farther out of (...) in his Hist: of China chapter 18. that they have Temples for
Heaven an^ Earth in Nankin and Pekim, i^ which the K^^g himself offers the
Sacrifice; And in the C^ics they have Temples for Tutelar Spirits, to which the
Mandarms do sacrifice, as to the Spirits of the Rivers, Mountains, and four
Parts of the world, etc.

When the Impartial ^eader has duly weighed and considered these things I
suppose he will find there is enough said of this matter: and I may take my
leave for the present.

THE ARGUMENTS OF THE DIALOGUES.
THE FIRST PART.
The First Dialogue.
EVnomius declares his dis-satisfaction with the Charge of Idolatry, and Dr
Stillingfleet's pretending it to be the Sense of the Church of England. The
Dr's Endeavors in that part shown to be Insufficient, particula^l^ as to the
Book of Homilies, and the Rubric for kneeling at Communion. The sad account of
History we are like to have from him, when he denies Robert Abbo Bishop of
Salisbury to have been never till now suspected f^r a Puritan. H^^ ch^rge of
Idolatry d^fferent from shat of the true and Genuin Sons of the Church of
England; diverse of whom vindicate the Doctrine of the Second Council of Nice
concerning the worship of Images, from the note of Idolatry. The true State of
the Controversy concerning that Point. page 1.

The Second Dialogue.
A Farther Declaration of the Sense of the Church of England concerning the
Charge of Idolatry, in answer to what Dr. St. urges from the Testimony of Arch
Bishop Whitgift, and the 39. Articles. The Lambeth Articles suppressed by Q
Eliz. And rejected by K. James: The Dr. desired to reconcile the doctrine of
his Irenicum, viz, that nothing is lawful in the worship o^ God but what he
has expressly command^d, with that in his Answer to N. O. that All things are
lawful which are no^ fo^bidden. The true meaning of the 22th. Article
concerning the worshipping and Adoration of Images asserted. page 39.

The Third Dialogue.
Several important Consequences, urged by T. G. as following from the charge of
Idolatry, which the Dr. passes by in silence. His obligation either to deny, or
assign a distinct Church in all Ages, preserved from Heresy and Idolatry, with
which Christians were bound to ioyn in Communion. T. G's Arguments to show the
Roman Church to be that Church, not answered by the Dr, nor the Question
proposed by T. G. concerning the necessity of joining wi^h the Church of
England. His I renicall Doctrine, Of the lawfulness of Non-Communion with any
Church, that imposes doubtful or suspected Practices. The charge of Idolatry
not maintainable upon the Dr's Principles without gross self-contradiction.
pa^g. 64.

The Fourth Dialogue.
Mr. Thorndike's Judgment of the Charge of Idolatry, with Dr. St's. Honorable
Encomium of him. In stead of justifying the Separation he brings the Guilt of
the Schism upon himself and the Church of England. A farther displey of his
Omissions and Contradictions. His Parallel between the worship of the Heathens,
and that of the Church of Rome shown to be Impertinent, and the Worship of God
by an Image not to be expressly prohibited in the 2d Commandment. page 98

The Fifth Dialogue.
The Charge of Idolatry not maintainable without subverting all lawful
Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England. Dr St's Doctrine in his
Answer to N. O. concerning the Power and Authority of the Church; He is left at
liberty to choose whether he will have it be a R^tractation or Contradiction of
what he asserted in his Irenicum, set down in the 3d Dialogue. His mistake of
the Validity of Ordination for the lawful Authority to Exercise the Power
conferred by it, shown to be Inexcusable. A Recapitulation of what has been
discoursed in this, and the foregoing Dialogues. p. 131

THE SECOND PART.
The First Dialogue.
ADiscovery of the Vanity of Dr. St's Endless discourses in his late Defense,
in Rela^io^ to T. G. His Excellent Gloss of the Canon of the Church of England,
concerning Bowing to the Altar; which the Author of a late Treatise, entitled
Patronus Bonae Fidei, by Arguments cast in the Dr's own moulds, contends to be
Idolatry, worse than that of the Romanists, or Egyptians. p. 167.

The Second Dialogue.
What Dr S ought to have done to maintain his Charge. The first thing was to
have laid down the true Notion of Idolatry in the Nature of the thing,
antecedently to any Positive Prohibition. The Notion he gives of it shown to be
insufficient; and the Heathens not justly chargeable with Idolatry by virtue of
it. The Consequence ho urges from the worship of Images to a like worship of
all other beings declared useless: and a Specimen given of his rare Insight in
Mystical Theology page 192

The Third Dialogue.
The Second Thing Dr St ought to have done, to maintain his Charge of Idolatry,
in the worship of Images, was to show the doctrine of the Church of Rome in her
Councils to be Idolatrous. The doctrine of the Second Council of Nice in that
Point, as stated by himself, not Idolatrous; and the Practice of bowing to the
Altar, according to his Principles, flat Idolatry. An Instance of his reporting
faithfully the Authorities he alleges, laid open in a passage cited by him out
of Cardinal Lugo. p. 212.

The Fourth Dialogue.
Another Instance of D^ Sts reporting faithfully, shown in a passage he cites
out of S. Gregory Nyssen in the case of the Arians. The doctrine of the same S.
Gregory concerning an Inferior Respect due to the Saints, and their Relics.
The Argument the Dr. brings from the practice of the Arians, shown to be
Incongruous, and manifestly different from that of Roman-Catholiks toward
Saints and Images. His Excellent Defense of a Testimony out of Arnobius
formerly misrepresented by him, and Subtle Observations upon the doctrine of
the Council of Trent in the matter of Images. The Remedies devised by him for
avoiding Idolatry in the worship of Images* equally applicable to bowing to the
Altar, or the Chair of State. p. 233

THE THIRD PART.
The First Dialogue.
THe Notion of the Heathen's ^dolatry imposed on T. G. by Dr. S^ refuted from
the Places out of which is was pretended to be gathered. The (...) Question
brought to try all, viz whether the Heathen's Jupiter were according to the
Fathers, the true God, o^ a Devil? The fo^mer asserted by Dr. St, the latter by
T. G. and proved by plain and undeniable Testimonies of mo^e t^an a whole Jury
of Fathers besides Origin. The Dr's mighty Argument from the Inscription to the
Unknown God, shown to be not only Impertinent, but against himself. p. 275

The Second Dialogue.
The greatest part of the Testimonies of the Fathers produced by Dr. St, that
is, all those which import no more, than either that the Heathens had a natural
knowledge of one Supreme God, or that it was their Sense that their Jupiter was
He, ^h^wn to be Impertinent to the Dispute between him and T. G. from the true
State of the Question. His injurious usage of the Fathers, blaming them for
charging the Heathens with more than they were guilty of, or themselves could
prove, (being indeed a tacit Consession that he looked upon them as Opposite to
him) laid open in a clear account of the Heathen's Theology, and the several
ways the Fathers took to refute it, all of them convincing, as is made manifest
both from the arguments themselves being rightly applied to their due subjects,
and the success they had. page 307

The Third Dialogue.
The Particular Testimonies of Minucius Felix, Clemens Alexandrinus, S.
Augustine, and Tertullian, cited by Dr. St. to prove it to have been their
Sense, that the H^athen's Jupiter was the true God, brought to the Test; And
the design of the said Fathers shown to be either misrepresented, or both
their Words and Sense corrupted by him. p. 352*

The Fourth Dialogue.
Catharinus waves the Question of Jupiter's being she true God: and inforces
the Parallel from the Heathen's acknowledgment of one Supreme Being, to which.
Dr. St contends that they referred the worship of their Inferior Deities.
Another notable Instance of his unfaithful reporting a passage of Thomas
Aquinas; and the Generality of the Heathens shown by most evident Arguments to
have believed and worshipped a mult^tude of Gods properly so called and
esteemed by them. What kind of Notion the Vulgar Heathens had of the Divinity
explained, and the Parallel between their worship, and that of the Church of
Rome shown to be unjust, and rejected as such by Eminent Divines of the Church
of England. page 392.

The Fifth Dialogue.
The Dr's Parallel from the Practice of the Wiser Heathens, shown to be
Unparallel upon many accounts: and the Argument from God's Appropriation of
certain external Acts to his worship, a mere Sophism made up of Equivocations,
False Suppositions, and Self-contradictions, and after all to conclude nothing
against the doctrine of the Church of Rome, or the definition of Idolatry given
by T. G. p. 435

The Sixth Dialogue,
The Church of Rome not justly chargeable either for not reserving any External
Act of Religious worship proper to God, or for giving any appropriate to God,
to Creatures* The Dr. un happy again in his ci^ing of Card. Lugo; and his
arguments from the Text. Matthew. 3. 10. and the term, Religious worshsp, solved
by his own distinctions. No succor to his cause from the determination of
Circumstances, as assigned by him* Mr. Dailles doctrine, [that sign instituted
by men to signify any thing, though of Religion, are to be interpreted by the
publik Practice of those who use them,] a very Just Discharge to the Dr's
unjust Charge of Idolatry, in the particular Instances, o^ Invocation, Erecting
Temples, burning Incense, etc. as they are practiced in the Church of Rome: and
T, Gs. Answer to the Dr's old Scruple, why sacrifice may not be used to the
Saints, in like manner as other External acts are, shown to have been pertinent
and satisfactory, and his denying Christ himself to be offered, as a Sacrifice
upon the Altar, shown to be repugnant to the Sense of the true and genuin Sons
of the Church of England. A Friendly Advice to him out of St. Augustine. p. 464.

EXTRAICT DV PRIVILEGE du Roy.
PAr grace and Privilege du Roy, done a Versailles le 29. jour de Juillet,
I'an de grace 1677. and de notre regne le 35. sign par le Roy en son Conseil
D'ALENCE', il est permis a RENE' GUIGNARD Marchand Libraire a Paris, de fair
imprimer, vendre and debiter par tout le Roya^me de France un Livre en Anglois
intitule A Just Discharge to Dr Stillingsleet's unjust Charge of Idolatry
against the Church of Rome, id est, Justa co^futa^io injustae accusationis
Doctoris Stillingsleeti, quae Romanam Ecclesiam Idolatriae ream agere conatur,
en tell Volume and caractere que bon luy semblera, and ce pendant le temps de
dix annees entieres: Et deffenses sont faites a tous autres d'en vendre ny
distribuer d'autre Impression que de celle dudit RENE' GUIGNARD sous peine de
trois mill livres d'amande, confiscation des Exemplaires, and de tous depens,
dommages and interest.

R^gistresur le Livre de la Communaute le 9. Aout 1677. E. COUTEROT Synd.


