REPORTS OF Certain Cases, ARISING In the several Courts OF RECORD at
WESTMINSTER; In the Reigns of Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and the late King
CHARLES.

With the Resolutions of the Judges of the said Courts, upon Debate and solemn
Arguments.

Collected by very good Hands, and lately Re-viewed, Examined, and Approved of
by the late Learned Justice GODBOLT.

And now Published by W: HUGHES of GRAYS-INNE Esquire.

With two TABLES, one of the Cases, the other of the Principal Matter therein
contained.

Quid juvat Humanos scire and cognoscere Casus;
Si fugienda facis, and facienda fugis.
London, Printed by T. N. for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and Gabriell Bedell, M.DC.LII.

An Alphabeticall Table of the Cases.
A
ALlen and Patshals Case, 162 Adams and Wilsons Case 244 Althams Case 262
Ayliff and Browns Case 337 Astley and Webs Case 411 Arnolds Case 455 Ashfield
and Ashfields Case 456
B
BVshies Case 32 Braches Case 69 Barker and Treswells Case 84 Bilford and
Deddingtons Case 89 Bonefant and Sir Richard Grenfields Case 92 Brayes Case ib.
Barber and Topseils Case 115 Bare and Mounslowes Case 127 Braggs Case 156
Buckhursts Case 161 Burton and Edmunds Case 164 Blagrave and Woods Case 175
Burton and Harvyes Case 184 Birryes Case 190 Basset and Bassets Case 197 Barker
and Finches Case 209 Bridges Case 212 Bristow and Bristows Case 227 Boswells
Case 234 Berryes Case 237 Bury and Tailors Case 253 Browns Case 278 Bond and
Greens Case 310 Bagnall and Plots Case 322 Bradley and Jones Case 333 Brookers
Case 336 Baldwyne and Girryes Case 341 Buggs Case 342 Blithman and Martins Case
347 Bagnall and Harvies Case 366 Blanfords Case 367 Brook and Gregory's Case
368 Bisse and Tyters Case 369 Barnwell and Palsies Case 384 Bret and
Cumberlands Case 391 Bishop and Turnors case 395 Blackston and Heaps case 396
Brown and Pells case 402 Bronkers case 407 Bridges and Mills case 414 Butlers
case 416 Bowen and Jones case 417 Bullen and Shoters case 437 Bridges and
Nichols case 441 Brown and Greens case 442 Bendloes and Hollydayes case 456
Busher and Murryes case 457 Baspool and Longs case 458 Bellamy and Balthorps
case 462 Brookers case 465 Buckleys case 468 Bowden and Jones case 488 Baker
and Blackmoors case 493 Bailiffs of Yarmouth and Cowper, 506 Baxter and the
King 510 Beles case 514 Blands case 516 Brownloes case 517 Barker and Tailors
case 518 Butcher and Richmonds case 516 Barrel and VVheelers case 480
C
CArter and Crofts case 41 Cropps case 43 Cotsill and Hastings case 96 Countess
of Darbies case 96 Sir Jarvis Cliftons case 103 Costard and VVickfields case
110 Culpepers case 136 Conyers case 144 Cross and Casons case 223 Candict and
Plomers case 228 Chalk and Peter's case 235 Cullingworth^ case 245 Claypoole and
VVhestons case 253 Colgat and Blythes case ibid. Carles case 257 Coxe and
Grayes case 264 Cook and Fishers case 267 Cottons case 273 Cooks case 294
Charkes case 299 Chawner and Bows case 312 Cunden and Symmons case 325 Clay
and Barnets case 328 Cowper and Andrews case 329 Colt and Gilberts case 335
Cross and Stanhops case 343 Cartwrights case 344 Crook and Averins case 349
Claydon and Sir Jerome Horseys case 350 Cloathworkers of Ipswiches case 351
Cowley and Legates case 355 Clerks case 364
D
DIke and Dunstons case 65 Dighton and Clerks case 74 Denny and Turnors case
98 Duke and Smiths case 189 Doylyes case 239 Dethick and Stokes case 255 Dean
of VVinsors case 301 Dockwray and Beales case 353 Dudleys case 359 Davers case
413 Dean of Carliles case 463 Days case 470 Dcane and Steels case 498 Done and
Knots case 423
E
EDelses case 36 Earl of Kents case 87 Eglinton and Aunsels case 99 Sir Ralph
Egertons case 172 Edwards and Dentons case 261 Evesque de York and Sedgwicks
case 287 Evesque de Chichester and Strodwicks case 326 Evesque de Salisburies
case 357 East and Hardings case 456 Erish and Iues case 458 Euers and Owens
case 496 Earl of Pembrook and Bostocks case 505 Eveley and Estons case 508
Edwards case 510 Edwyn and Wottons case 516
F
FVtter and Bosoms case 42 Fullers case 106 Fraunces and Powels case 272
Fortescue and Cooks case 276 Fleetwood and Gotts case 284 Fial and Variars
case 334 Fox and Medcalfs case 356 Froswel and Welshes case 373 Franklins case
375 Fines case 415 Favels case 416 Farthing and Duppers case 422 Fleetwoods
case 435 Fish and Wisemans case 461 Friar and Dewes case 485 Fisher and Warners
case 494 Floyd and Cannons case 503
G
GOmersal and Gomersals case 69 Giles case 70 Green and Harris case 147 Giles
and Newmans case 159 Gage and Peacocks case 200 Grissel and Sir Christopher
Hodsdayes case 210 Grivel and Stapletons case 235 Goodman and Goors case 270
Greenway and Barkers case 275 Garven and Pyms case 286 Gage and Smiths case 298
Gippes case 342 Grubs case 348 Greenway and Barkers case 359 L^ Gerards case
365 Godfrey and Dixons case 388 Grayes case 389 Garrawayes case 416 Gorge and
Sir Robert Lanes case 433 Godbolts case 435 Glede and Wallis case 454 Gunter
and Gunters case 466 Green and Moodies case 472 God and Winches case 499 Guyn
and Guyns case 515
H
HArwood and Highams case 46 Herolds case 59 Hobbies case 82 Hollinshead and
Kings case 109 Hoody and Winscombs case 130 Hardings case 169 Haltons case 174
Harlow and Woods case 208 Heydon and Smiths case 239 Hughes and Keens case 262
Hardings case 271 Herrenden and Tailors case 277 Hutchinsons case 288 Hatch and
Capels case 290 Hughes case 306 Hill and Grubhams case 320 Sir Christopher
Heydons case 345 Hurlston and Woodroofs case 386 Hill and Wades case 387
Hobbies case 388 Hewet and Byes case 428 Hawksworth and Davies case 431 Haddon
and Arrowsmiths case 456 Hardings case 456 Holmes and Wingraves case 460
Heninghams case 465 Hoskins case 4^1 Hern and Webbs case 483 Hunts case 49
Harvy and Reignolds case 497 Hill and Farlies case 501 Hill and Wades case 502
Huet and Overies case 504 Hemsers case 512 Hye and Dr. Wells case 514 Humfries
and Studfields case 519 Hawkford and Russels case 67
I
JOyces case 68 Johnsons case 206 James and Ratcliffs case 279 Jennour and
Alexanders case 297 Ireland and Barkers case 300 Jurks and Cavendishes case 324
Jugin and P^ynes case 381 Jermyn and Coopers case 382 Jones and Ballards case
512
K
KItleys case 39 Kingston and Hulls case 187 Kerchers case 243 Kirby and
Walters case 394 Killigrew and Harpers case 432 Knollys and Dobbins case 436
Kite and Smiths case 444 Kellawayes case 446 Knights case 447
L
LVddingdon and Amners case 36 Lovell and Gulstons case 83 Leeds and Cromptons
case 104 Knightleys case 126 Lewknor and Fords case 136 Leonard and Stephens
case 170 Langley and Colsons case 196 Lee and Swons case 211 Lee and Lees case
285 Leighton and Greens case 292 Lee and Colshills case 303 Laistons case 319
Lamberts case 339 Lynsey and Ashtons case 352 Lambert and Slingbyes case 361
Londons case 374 Ludlow and Stacies case 377 Loxe case 345 Lee and Grissels
case 442 Leonards case 451 Lone and Hills case 458 Litfield and Melhers case
459 Langley and Stotes case 478 Lancaster and Kigleys case 507 Lovegrave and
Brewens case 514
M
MOuntjoyes Case 24 Macrowes Case 38 Marsh and Palfords Case 53 Megods Case 77
Miller and Gores Case 122 Mayes Case 173 Mannocks Case 191 Me^r and Ridouts
Case 241 Marriots Case 248 Morris Case 265 Mounteagle and Pemeddocks Case 266
Meades Case 274 Miller and Reignolds Case 293 Manwoods Case 301 Mayor of Yorks
Case 360 Mildmays Case 416 Morgans Case 416 Morris and Clarks Case 435 Mellon
and Herns Case 435 Mills Case 464 Marshes Case 465 Manns Case 471 Mutle and
Does Case 480 Mole and Carters Case 484 Monk and Butchers Case 508 Moor and
Hawkins Case 486
N
NOrris and Salisburies case 154 Newton and Richards case 240 Newmans case 242
Newman and Babbingtons Case 250 Norton and Lysters case 291 Norton and Symms
case 303
O
OSborne and Trittels Case 99 Occoulds case 268 Owen alias Collins case 363
Owfield and Sheirts case 430 Ognels case 483 Offlies case 517
P
POles case 13 Prideaux case 44 Plymptons case 116 Proctors case 168 Pinders
case 185 Peto and Chitties case 193 Perepoints case 217 Piggot and Goddens case
221 Pitts and Wardels case 230 Prrrot and Kebles case 281 Porters case 302
Pains case 308 Piggot and Pigots case 330 Prat and Lord Nor^hs case 358
Paginton and Huets case 370 Plotts case 380 Pollyes case 403 Sir John
Parkingtons case 416 Pritchard and Williams case 423 Philpot and Fielders case
427 Pie and Bonners case 443 Peter's case 456 Pits and Horkley's case 458
Proctor and Cliffords case 468 Pain and Colleges case 490 Parks case 502
Palmers case 509 Perpoynt and Thimblebys case 513 Pages case 717 Plats case 518
L. Pagets case 510
Q
Quodds case 246
R
ROots case 139 Rushwels case 186 Royley and Dormes case 260 Read and Hewes
case 269 Rosse^ and Walshes cass 296 Reorsbies and Cuffs case 316 Roe and
Gloves case 332 Roberts and Hills case 434 Randal and Harveys case 452 Royden
and Moulstons case 458 Roper and Roydons case 491 Roy and Hills case 517
S
Skipwiths case 22 Savel and Cordels case 35 Sydenham and Worlingtons case 40
Savacres case 47 Stargies case 75 Smith and Smiths case 88 Shotbolts case 91
Stransam and Colborns case 97 Strangden and Barcels case 163 Sayland and
Ridlers case 177 Skipwith and Sheffields case 178 Stowels case 182 Sir John
Spencer and Poyntz case 203 Stebbings case 239 Stones case 247 Sancford and
Havels case 263 Sprat and Nicholsons case 283 Seymors case 307 Stowhridge and
Archers case 311 Smiths case 317 Sherloes case 347 Sheriff and Bridges case 349
Simpsons case 364 Smith and Staffords case 379 Slyes case 390 Spicer and
Spicers case 398 Stewry and Stewryes case 410 L. Sheffield and Ratcliffs case
417 Sadlers case 417 Snell and Bennets case 426 Shooter and Emets case 435
Stone and Roberts case 435 Sely and Flayles case 448 Seignior and Wolmers case
453 Stanton and Barneys case 458 Sherrington and Worsleys case, 465 Suttons
case 476 Symmes case 477 Samson and Gatefields case 482 Scots case 487 Summers
case, 489 Shortridge and Hills cases 492 Shirtford and Berrowes case 502 Syms
and Smiths case 513 Simpsons case 518 Shackbolts 495 Spurlings case 479
T.
THrogmorton and Terringhams case 37 Tailor and Ribera's case 90 Tailor and
James case 195 Traherns case 321 Totnam and Hoskins case, 445 Tailor and Askies
case, 455 Tollyn and Tailors case 469 Tanfield and Hirons case 486 Treventries
case 488 Tucker and Carrs case 491 Tailor and Tomlyns case 511 Tennants case
507 Tompsons case 369
U.
VIcar of Pancras case 63 Vernon and Grays case 145 Vaughans case 327 Veseys
case 406 Vrry and Bowyers case 479 Vinior and Viniors case 515
W.
Webb and Potters case 25 Windsmore and Hulberts Case 64 Wiseman and Wallmyers
case, 107 Wood and Ashes case 135 Warrens case 138 Widdal and sir John Ashtons,
case 142 Winkefields case 152 Warners case 183 Whitlock and Hartwells case, 184
Wilson and Wormels case 226 Woolseys case 249 Wekers case 257 Wright and
Wrights case 262 Wetherell and Greens case 280 Wedlock and Hardings case, 295
Wheelers case 315 Wormleighton and Hunters case, 338 Whorewoods Case, White and
Moors case, 340 Wrotesley and Candishes case 354 Winscomb and Dunches case 376
Webb and Tucks case 392 Wait and Inhabitants of Stokes case 397 Webb and
Paternosters case 401 Williams and Gibbs case 409 White and Edwards case 412
Wiseman and Denhams case 424 Waterer and Montagues case, 429 Wheeler and
Appletons case, 434 Waterman and Cropps case 467 Whittie and Westons case 479
Willis case 483 Williams and Floyds case 495 VValdrons case 509
Y.
YArram and Bradshawes case, 145 Yate and Alexanders case 408 Young and
Englesfields case, 422
Z.
ZOuch and Bramports case, 165 Zouch and Mitchels case 225 Zouch and Moors
case 491
Mich. 17. Eliz. In the Kings Bench. 1.
THis Case was moved to the Court. If an Abbey has a Parsonage appropriate in
D. which is discharged of payment of Tithes, and afterward the Abbot purchases
part of the lands in the same Town and Parish where the Parsonage is: That this
land so purchased is discharged of Tithes in the hands of the Abbot; For the
Tithes were suspended, during the possession of the Abbot, in his own hands.
But after that, the Abbey was surrendered into the hands of the King, Anno 30. H.
8. And afterward the same possessions etc. were given to King H. 8. by the
Statute of 31. H. 8. cap. 13. as they were in the hands of the Abbot. The
question was, Whether the Land so purchased by the Abbot before the surrender,
were discharged of payment of Tithes by the Statute, or not. And the opinion of
Mr. Plowden was, That they were not discharged of Tithes by the Statute: For
that no lands are discharged by the Statute, but such lands as were lawfully
discharged in right, by composition, or other lawful thing. And the lands in
this case were not discharged in right, but suspended during the possession of
the Abbot, in his own hands. And so he said it is, when the Land is purchased
by one, and the Parsonage by another, the right of Tithes is revived, and the
lands charged as before the purchase of the Abbot. And so, he said, it had been
adjudged.

Pasc. 17. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 2.
A Man makes a Lease for Life, and afterward makes a Lease unto another for
Years, to begin after the death of Tenant for life; The Lessee for years dies
intestate; The Ordinary commits Administration; The Administrators and the
Tenant for life join in the purchase of the Fee-simple: Two questions were
moved; The first was, Whether the Fee were executed in the Tenant for life for
any part? 2. Whether the Term were gone in part, or in all? And the opinion of
the Justices was, That the Fee was executed for a moitie. Manwood. If the Land
be to one for life, the Remainder for years, the Remainder to the first Tenant
for life in Fee, there the Fee is executed; so as if he lose by default, he
shall have a Writ of Right, and not Quod ei deforceat; for the term shall be no
impediment that the Fee shall not be executed: As a man may make a lease to
begin after his death, it is good, and the Lessor has Fee in possession, and
his wife shall be endowed after the Lease. And I conceive, in the principal
case, That the term shall not be extinct; for that it is not a term, but
interesse termini, which cannot be granted nor surrendered: Mounson. If he had
had the term in his own right, then by the purchase of the Fee, the Term should
be extinct. But here he has it in the right of another as Administrator. Dyer.
If an Executor has a term, and purchases the Fee, the term is determined: So,
if a woman has a term, and takes an husband who purchases the Fee, the term
is extinct. Manwood. The Law may be so in such case, because the Husband has
done an act which destroys the term, viz. the purchase. But if the woman had
entermarried with him in the Reversion, there the term should not be
extinguished; for the Husband has not done any act to destroy the term; But
the marriage is the act of Law. Dyer. That difference has some color. But I
conceive, in the first case, That they are Tenants in common of the Fee.
Manwood. The Case is a good point in law. But I conceive the opinion of Manwood
was, That if a Lease for years were to begin after the death, surrender,
forfeiture or determination of the first lease for years, that it shall not
begin in that part, for then perhaps the term in that part shall be ended,
before the other should begin.

Pasc. 20. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 3.
A Man seized of Copyhold land descendable to the youngest Son by Custom; and
of other Lands descendable to the eldest Son by the common Law; leaseth both
for years: The Lessee covenanteth, That if the Lessor, his wife and his heirs
will have back the land, That then upon a years warning given by the Lessor,
his wife or his heirs, that the Lease shall be void. The Lessor dies; the
Reversion of the customary Land descends to the younger son, and the other to
the eldest, who grants it to the younger; and he gives a years warning
according to the Covenant. Fenner. The interest of the term is not determined,
because a special heir, as the youngest son is, is not comprehended under the
word [Heir;] but the heir at common Law, is the person who is to give the
warning to avoid the estate by the meaning of the Covenant. But Manwood and
Mounson, Justices, were clear of opinion, That the interest of the term for a
moity is avoided; for the Condition, although it be an entire thing, by the
Descent, which is the act of Law, is divided and apportioned; and the warning
of any of them shall defeat the estate for a moity, because to him the moity of
the Condition does belong: But for the other moity, he shall not take advantage
by the warning, because that the warning is by the words of the Condition
appointed to be done by the Lessor, his wife, or his heirs: And in that clause
of the Deed the Assignee is not contained. And they agreed, That if a Feoffment
of lands in Borough-English be made upon condition, That the heir at common Law
shall take advantage of it. And Manwood said, that he would put another
question, Whether the younger son should enter upon him or not? But all Actions
in right of the Land, the younger son should have; as a Writ of Error to
reverse a Judgment, Attaint, and the like. quod nota.

Pasc. 22. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 4
IT was holden by Meade and Windham, Justices of the Common Pleas, That a
Parsonage may be a Manor: As, if before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum,
the Parson, with the Patron and Ordinary, grant parcel of the Glebe to diverse
persons, to hold of the Parson by diverse Services, the same makes the Parsonage
a Manor. Also they held, That a Rentcharge by prescription, might be parcel of
a Manor, and shall pass without the words cum pertinentiis. As, if two
Coparceners be of a Manor and other Lands, and they make partition, by which
the eldest sister has the Manor, and the other has the other Lands; and she
who has the Lands grants a Rentcharge to her sister who has the Manor, for
equality of partition. Anderson and Fenner Srjeants, were against it.

Hill. 23 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 5.
THis Case was moved by Sergeant Periam; That if a Parson has Common appendant
to his Parsonage, out of the lands of an Abbey, and afterward the Abbot has
the Parsonage appropriated to him and his Successors: Whether the Common be
extinct? Dyer, That it is: Because he has as high an estate in the Common as
he has in the Land. As in the case of 2 H. 4. 19. where it is holden, That if
a Prior has an Annuity out of a Parsonage, and afterward purchases the
Advowson, and then obtains an Appropriation thereof, that the Annuity is
extinct. But Windham and Meade Justices, conceived, That the Abbot has not as
perdurable estate in the one as in the other; for the Parsonage may be
disappropriated, and then the Parson shall have the Common again. As if a man
has a Seignorie in fee, and afterward Lands descend to him on the part of the
Mother; in that case the Seignory is not extinguished, but suspended: For if
the Lord to whom the Land descends dies without issue, the Seignorie shall go
to the heir on the part of the Father, and the Tenancy to the heir on the part
of the Mother; And yet the Father had as high an estate in the Tenancy as in
the Seignory. And in 21 E. 3. 2. Where an Assize of Nuisance was brought for
straightning of a way which the plaintiff ought to have to his Mill: The
defendant did alledg unity of possession of the Land, and of the Mill in W. and
demanded Judgment, if etc. The plaintiff said, that after that, W. had two
daughters, and died seized; and the Mill was allotted to one of them in
partition, and the Land to the other, and the way was reserved to her who had
the Mill: And the Assize was awarded. And so by the partition the way was
revived, and appendant as it was before: and yet W. the Father had as high an
estate in the Land, as he had in the Way.

Hill. 23 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 6.
A Man makes a Feoffment in Fee of a Manor, to the use of himself and his Wife,
and his heirs: In which Manor there are Underwoods usually to be cut every one
and twenty years; and afterward the Husband suffers the wood to grow five and
twenty years, and afterward he dies. The question was, Whether the Wife,
being Tenant for life, might cut that Underwood? And it was moved, What shall
be said seasonable Underwood, that a Termor or Tenant for life might cut? Dyer
Chief Justice, and all the other Justices held, That a Termor or Tenant for
life, might cut all Underwood which had been usually cut within twenty years.
In 11. H. 6. 1. Issue was taken, If they were of the age of twenty years, or
no. But in the Wood-Countries they may fell seasonable wood which is called
Sylva caedua, at six and twenty, eight and twenty, thirty years, by the custom
of the Country. And so the Usage makes the Law in several Countries. And so it
is holden in the books of 11. H. 6. and 4. E. 6. But they agreed, That the
cutting of Oaks of the age of eight years, or ten years, is Waste. But by
Meade Justice, the cutting of Hornbeams, Hasels, Willows, or Sallows of the age
of forty years, is no Waste, because at no time they will be Timber. Another
question which was moved was, That at the time of the Feoffment it was
seasonable Wood, and but of the growth of fourteen or fifteen years: If this
suffering of the Husband of it to grow to 25 years, during the Coverture,
should bind the Wife, so as she cannot cut the Woods. Gaudy Sergeant said, That
it should not bind the Wife; For if a Warranty descend upon a Feme Covert, it
shall not bind her. So if a man seized of Land in the Right of his Wife be
disseised, and a Descent be cast during the Coverture, it shall not bind the
Wife, but that she may enter after the death of the Husband: But by Dyer Chief
Justice, and all the other Justices, This Permission of the Husband shall bind
the Wife, notwithstanding the Coverture; for that the time is limited by the
Law, which cannot be altered, if it be not the custom of the Country. As in
the case of 17. E. 3. Where a man makes a Lease for years, and grants that the
Lessee shall have as great commodity of the Land as he might have.
Notwithstanding these words, he cannot dig the land for a Mine of Cole or
Stone; because that the Law forbids him to dig the land. So in the principal
Case, The Wife cannot fell the Wood, notwithstanding that at the time of her
estate she might; and afterward by the permission of the Husband, during the
coverture; the time is incurred, so as she cannot fell it, because the Law does
appoint a time, which if it be not felled before such time, that it shall not
be felled by a Termor, or a Tenant for life, but it shall be Waste.

Hill. 23. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 7.
A Man makes a Lease of a Garden, containing three Roodes of Land, and the
Lessee is ousted, and he brings an Ejectione firm, and declares that he was
ejected of three Roods of Land; Rodes Sergeant, moved, That by this Declaration
it shall be intended, that he was ejected of the Garden, of which the Lease was
made, and so the Ejectione firm would lie. And it was holden by the Lord Chief
Justice Dyer, That a Garden is a thing which ought to be demanded by the same
name in all Precipes; as the Register and Fitz. N. Brevium is. And this Action
is greater then an Action of Trespass, because by Recovery in this Action, he
shall be put into Possession. But Meade and Windham Justices, contrary: And
they agreed, that in all real Actions, a Garden shall be demanded by the name
Gardinum; otherwise not. But this Action of Ejectione firm is in the nature of
Trespass; and it is in the Election of the Party to declare, as here he does;
or for to declare of the Ejectment of a Garden; for a Garden may be used at one
time for a Garden; and at another time be ploughed and sowed with Corn. But
they conceived that the better order of pleading had been, if he had declared
that he was ejected of a Garden containing three Roodes of Land, as in the
Lease it is specified.

Hill. 23. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 8.
SErgeant Fenner moved this case. That Land is given to the Wife in tail for
her Jointure, according to the Statute of 11. H. 7. The Husband dies, the Wife
accepts a fine, Sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. of a Stranger: And by the
same fine grants and renders the Land to him for an Hundred years; whether this
acceptance of a Fine and Render by the Wife were a forfeiture of her estate, so
as he in the Reversion or Remainder might enter by the Statute. Mead and Dyer
Justices; it is a forfeiture, and Mead resembled it to the Case in 1 H. 7. 12.
where it is holden, That if Tenant for life do accept of a Fine Sur conusans de
droit come ceo, etc. that it is a forfeiture, and the Lessor may enter. But
Fenner asked their opinions, what they thought of the principal case, But
haesitavernut, because they said it was a dangerous case, and is done to
defraud the Statute of 11. H. 7.

Pasch. 23. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 9.
A Man made a Feoffment in Fee to two, to the use of himself and his wife, for
the term of their lives, without impeachment of waste during the life of the
Husband; the remainder after their decease to the use of I. his son, for the
term of his life. And further by the same Deed, Vult and concedit, that after
their three lives, viz. of the Husband, Wife, and Son, that I. S. and I. D. two
other Feoffees, shall be seized of the same Land, to them, and their heirs, to
the use of the right Heirs of the body of the Son begotten. It was moved, That
by this deed, the two later Feoffees should be seized to the use of the right
Heirs of the body of the Son begotten, after the death of the Husband, Wife,
and the Son. But it was holden by all the Justices, That the second Feoffees
had not the Fee, because by the first part of the Deed, the Fee-Simple was
given to the first Feoffees; and one Fee-Simple cannot depend upon another
Fee-Simple: Notwithstanding, that after the determination of the former uses
for life, the Fee-Simple should be vested again in the Heirs of the Feoffer;
and that the words, That the second Feoffees should be seized, should be void.
But Dyer Chief Justice, and the other Justices, were against that, because
there wanted apt words to raise the later use: As if a man bargain, and sell
his Reversion of Tenant for Life, by words of Bargain and Sale only, and the
Deed is not Enrolled within the six months, but afterward the Tenant for Life
does attorne, yet notwithstanding that, the Reversion shall not pass, because
[Bargain and Sell] are not apt words to make a Grant: And that Case was so
adjudged in the Common Pleas as the Lord Dyer said. So in the principal Case,
and therefore the later Use was utterly void, and shall not be raised by
intendment. But otherwise it had been, if it had been by devise.

Pasch. 23. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 10.
IT was holden by all the Justices of the Common Pleas, That the Queen might be
put out of her Possession of an Advowson by two Usurpations; And she shall be
put to her Writ of Right of Advowson, as a common person shall be, because it
is a transitory thing; and that the Grant of that Advowson made by the Queen
after the two Usurpations, should be void; and that was so adjudged upon a
demurrer in the point. And so it is holden in 47 E. 3. 4. b.

Psch. 23. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 11.
AN Indenture of Covenant was made betwixt I. S. and I. D. in which I. S. did
Covenant to Enfeoffe I. D. of his Manor of D. In consideration of which, I. D.
by the same Indenture, did Covenant with the said I. S. to pay him 100 li. The
Question is, If I. S. will not make the Feoffment, whether I. D. be bound to
pay the money? It was holden by the Lord Dyer Chief Justice, and Justice Mead,
That he is not, because the money is Covenanted to be paid Executory to have
the Feoffment made; and therefore if he will not make the Feoffment, he shall
not have the money. As if I Covenant with one, That I will marry his Daughter;
and he Covenants with me, That for the same cause, he will make an Estate to me
and his Daughter, and to the Heirs of our two bodies begotten, of his Manor of
D; he shall not make it until we are married. But if I Covenant with a man,
That I will marry his Daughter; and he Covenants with me, To make an Estate to
me and his Daughter; if I marry another woman, or if the Daughter marryeth
another man, yet I shall have an Action of Covenant to compel him to make the
Estate, because in this later Case, the Covenant was made for another Cause.
And this difference was so taken by the whole Court, 15 H. 7. 10. So if A.
grant to B. all the ancient Pale, and for that, B. grants, That he will make a
new Pale; it is holden in 15. E. 4. 4. by Catesby, and affirmed by Littleton,
That if B. cannot have the ancient Pale, that he shall be excused from making
the new Pale. But if two things are given by two Persons, one for the other,
there if one of them detain the one, the other cannot detain the other, as is 9
E. 4. 20. and 15 E. 4. 2. It is holden, That if one grant Tithes in Fee, by one
Deed, and by the same Deed, for the same Grant, the Grantee grant to the same
Person an Annuity of 20 li; That if the Grantor of the Tithes, enter into the
Tithes, yet the Grantee cannot detain the Annuity, because the grant of the
Tithes is executed in him, and he may have an Action for them, if the other
enter upon them. But in the principal Case; The Covenant was but Executory for
the other, and then if one be not performed, the other shall never be
performed: Windham and Periam Justices, conceived the contrary: and therefore
the case was adjourned, and a demurrer in law upon it.

Pasch. 23 Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 12.
TEnant in tail, the Remainder in Fee; the Tenant in tail makes a Lease for
life according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. and afterward dies without issue:
and before any entry, he in the remainder grants his Remainder by Fine:
Whether the Conusee of the Fine may enter upon the Tenant for life, and avoid
his Lease, was the question. Fenner Sergeant, He cannot: because when a
Freehold is given by Livery, it cannot be defeated without Entry, As, If a
Parson make a Lease for life, rendering rent, and dies, and his successor
accept the rent, the lease is affirmed, as it is holden in 11. E. 3. and 18. E.
4. The Case was, That a man made a Lease for life, the remainder in Fee; Tenant
for life granted over his estate: and then a Formedon was brought against the
Grantee, and then the first Tenant for life died: And by all the Justices
(except Littleton, and diverse Sergeants) the Writ shall not abate, if he in the
Remainder has not entered. So in the principal case, When he had made a Lease
for life, and afterward died without issue, living the Tenant for life,; his
estate is not defeated before entry of him in the Remainder: And then, when
before entry, he in the Remainder grants his Remainder, the Grantee shall have
it but as a Remainder; for so is his grant: and so the estate of Tenant for
life which was but voidable, is made good: And so was it holden by Windham and
Periam, Justices: but Meade, and Dyer Chief Justice did conceive, that by the
death of Tenant in tail without issue, his Lease made to him for life, was
void, and not voidable; because by the death of Tenant in tail, his estate, out
of which the estate of the Tenant for life was derived, is determined; and
therefore the estate for life is determined also; Et cessante causa cessat
effectus. And Meade compared it to the Case of 21. H. 7. 12, where it was
holden, That if a man do make a Lease for life upon condition, that if he pay
unto the Lessee ten pounds at such a day, that his estate shall cease. Now by
the performance of the Condition, the estate is determined without entry.

Mich. 24. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
13. POLES Case.
THomas Pole one of the Clerks of the Chancery, married a woman who was
Executrix to her Husband: and in an Action of Debt brought against them in the
Common Pleas, the said Pole brought a writ of Privilege, to have removed the
said Action into the Chancery: And by all the Justices the Writ was disallowed,
and the defendants ruled to answer there, because the Wife was joined in the
Action with the Husband; and she could not have the privilege, and therefore
not the Husband. And so it is adjudged by the whole Court, 34. H. 6. 29. and
35. H. 6. 3. But see 27. H. 8. 20. where the case was, That a man brought an
Action in the Common Pleas against Husband, and at the pluries returned, he and
his Wife were arrested into an inferior Court veniendo to Westminster; and
because the Husband has privilege, therefore his Wife shall be in the same
condition. But Dyer said, That the reason there was, because the Wife came in
aid of her Husband to follow his suit: And therefore it is not like the
principal Case at the Bar.

Mich. 24. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 14.
IN Debt upon a Bond of Forty pound, for the Payment of Twenty pound at a Day
and Place certain: The Defendant pleaded, That he had paid the said Twenty
pound, according to the Condition, upon which they are at Issue; and at the
Nisi Prius, the Defendant gave in Evidence, That he had paid the Money to the
Plaintiff before the day, and that the Plaintiff had accepted of it; all which
Matter the Jury found specially, and referred the same to the Justices: And it
was said by the whole Court, That that payment before the day was a sufficient
Discharge of the Bond; but because the Defendant had not pleaded the same
Specially, but Generally, that he had paid the Money according to the
Condition; the Opinion was, That they must find against the Desendant, for that
the Special Matter would not prove the Issue: and the Lord Dyer Chief Justice
said, That the Plaintiffs Council might have demurred upon the Evidence.

Mich. 24. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 15
AN Action was brought upon the Statute of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. And the
Statute is, That no Distress shall be driven out of the Rape, Hundred,
Wapentake or Laith, where such distress is, or shall be taken, except it be to
the Pound Overt within the said County, not exceeding three Miles distant from
the place where the Distress was taken; and the Plaintiff declared of a
Distress taken in a Hundred, in such a County, and that he drove it six miles
out of the County; and because a Hundred may be in diverse Counties, and the
Statute is, That the driving ought not be more then 3 miles out of the Hundred;
and that it might be that the driving was six miles from the place where the
Distress was taken in another County, and yet not three miles from the Hundred
where the taking was, for that Cause it was not adjudged against the party; And
that was after Verdict, in arrest of Judgment.

Pasch. 24. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 16.
A Feme sole seized of a Manor to which there were Copyholds; One of the
Copyholders did entermarry with the woman, and afterward he and his wife did
suffer a Recovery of the Manor, unto the use of themselves for their lives, and
afterward to the use of the heirs of the wife. The Question was, Whether the
Copyhold were extinct; And Anderson the Chief Justice said, That if a
Copyholder will join with his Lord in a Feoffment of the Manor, that thereby
the Copyhold is extinct. The same Law is, if a Copyholder do accept a Lease for
years of his Copyhold: which was agreed by the whole Court.

Pasc. 24. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 17.
I. N. Does Covenant with I. S. by Indenture, to pay him forty pounds yearly
for one and twenty years, and afterward I. S. does release to I. N. all
Actions. The Question was, Whether the whole Covenant were discharged. And it
was holden by all the Justices, that only the Arrerages were discharged,
because the Covenant is executory, yearly to be executed during the Term of one
and twenty years, for he may have several Actions of Covenant for every time
that it is behind; and if it be behind the second year, he may have a new
Action for that, and so of every year during the Term, several Actions: for
nothing shall be discharged by the release of all Actions, but that which was
in Action, or a Duty at the time of the release made, As in 5. E. 44. and L.
5. E. 4. 41. In debt for Arrerages of an Annuity; the defendant pleaded a
release of all Actions, which bore date before any arrerages were behind; And
the opinion of the Justices was there, That it was no Plea, and so it was
adjudged; for it is not a thing in Action, nor a Duty, until the day of
payment comes. And it is there holden by Arden, That if a man make a Lease for
two years rendering Rent, and that the Tenant shall forfeit twenty shillings
nomine poenae* for not payment at the day, there a release of all Actions
personals made to the Tenant before the penalty be forfeited, is no Bar; for it
is neither Duty, nor thing in Action before the failer of payment. And in 42.
E. 3. 33. A man did release to his Tenant for term of life all his Right for
the Term of the life of the same Tenant for life; And that he nor his heirs
might any right demand, nor challenge, or claim for the life of the Tenant for
life, in the said Land; and afterward he died, and the Tenant committed Waste,
and the heir brought an Action of Waste, and the Tenant pleaded the same
Release, and it was holden no Plea, for nothing was extinct by the same Release
but that which was in Action at the time of the Release made, and that the
Waste was not. Rhodes Serjant put a Case, which he vouched to be adjudged. 4.
Eliz. which was, That if a man Covenant with I. S. that if he will marry his
daughter, that then he will pay him twenty pounds; If a Release were made by I.
S. before the marriage, the same will not determine the twenty pounds if he
marry her afterward, because it was not a Duty before the marriage: So in the
principal Case, notwithstanding that the Covenant was once broken for the
non-paiment at the first day; yet because a several Action of Covenant lies
for every day that it was arreare, the Release shall extinguish but only that
which was Arreare at the time of the Release made: And so Note, That a Release
does not discharge a Covenant which is not broken.

Pasch. 24. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 18.
UPon a special Verdict in an Action of Debt; The Case was this: I. S. and I.
N. did submit themselves to the Award, Order, Rule and Judgemant of A. and B.
for all Matters, Quarrels and Debates, and the Bond was made to perform the
Award, Order, Rule and Judgment meant made by them: And they Award, Order, Rule
and Adjudge, That I. S. shall pay to W. N. who was a Stranger, twenty
shillings. The first Question was, Whether the Award were good: And it was
holden by Anderson Chief Justice, Meade and Periam Justices, That the Award was
void, because it was out of their Submission, for they cannot Award a man to do
a thing which does not lie in his power, for in this Case W. N. to whom the
money is to be paid, is a Stranger, and it is in his Election, if he will
accept of the money or not. And so it is holden in 22. H. 6. 46. and 17. E. 4.
5. but vid. cont. 5. H. 7. 2. Then if the Award be void, The second Question
was, If yet the Bond to perform it be good or not; And it was holden by the
whole Court, that it was void also, against the Book of 22. H. 6. 46. because
that the Condition was to perform that which was against the Law (Quaere that
Case, for it seems not to be Law at this day.) And it was then holden, That
Awards concerning Acts to be performed by them which have not submitted, are
void: And in all Cases where each of the parties which submit have not some
thing, the Award is void.

Pasch. 24. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 19.
IN an Action upon the Case upon a Promise, The consideration was* Where I. S.
had granted a Term to I. D. That afterward upon the request of I. S. I. D. did
make to W. an Estate for four years, upon which W. brought his Action: And
after Verdict it was moved in stay of Judgment, that there was no good
consideration, and a difference taken, where the Promise was upon the Grant;
and where afterward: If it were before, then the Condition was good; but if it
were afterward, it was not good: And it was adjudged, That the Plaintiff,
Nihil capiat per billam.

Pasch. 24. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 20.
AN Action upon the Case upon a Promise was: The Consideration was, That in
consideration that the Plaintiff Daret di^m solutionis, the Defendant Super se
assumpsit; and because he does not say in facto, that he had given day, It was
adjudged that no sufficient Consideration was alleged: But if the
Consideration were Quod cum indebitatus, etc. the same had been a good
Consideration without any more; for that implies a Consideration in it self.

Pasch. 24. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 21.
IT was said by Cook, That the Chancellor, or any Judge of any of the Courts
of Record at Westminster, may bring a Record one to another without a Writ of
Certiorare, because one Judge is sufficiently known one to the other, as 5. H.
7. 31. where a Certificate was by the Chancellor alone; and to this purpose is
11. H. 4. But that other Judges of base Courts cannot do, nor Justices of the
Peace, as 3. H. 6. where the certificate by Suitors was held void.

Pasch. 25. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 22. SKIPWITH'S Case.
IT was found upon a special verdict in an Action of Trespass, that the place
where, etc. was Copyhold land: And that the Custom is, That quaelibet foemina
viro cooperta poterit devise lands whereof she is seized in Fee, according to
the custom of the Manor, to her Husband, and surrender it in the presence of
the Reeve and six other persons. And that I. S. was seized of the land, where,
etc. and had issue two Daughters, and died, and that they married husbands; and
that one of them devised her part to her husband by Will in writing, in the
presence of the Reeve and six other persons: and afterward at another day she
surrendered to the Husband, and he was admitted; and she died, and her Husband
continued the possession. And the Husband of the other Daughter brought an
Action of Trespass. Rodes Sergeant, The Custom is not good, neither for the
Surrender, nor for the Will, for two causes: One; for the uncertainty of what
estate she might make a Devise, and because it is against reason, that the
Wife should surrender to the Husband. Where the Custom shall not be good, if
it be uncertain, he vouched 13. E. 3. Fitz. Dum fuit infra aetatem. 3. The
Tenant says, that the lands are in Dorset, where the Custom is, that an
Enfant may make a Grant or Feoffment, when he can number twelve pence. And it
was holden, that because it is uncertain when he can so do, the Custom is not
good. 19. E. 2. in a Ravishment of Ward, the defendant pleaded, that the
custom is, that when the Enfant can measure an ell of cloth, or tell twelve
pence, as before, that he should be out of Ward: and it is holden no good
custom for the cause aforesaid. 22. H. 6. 51. a. there a man prescribed, That
the Lord of D. had used to have Common for him and all his Tenants; And because
it is not showed, what Lord; whether the Lord mediate or immediate, it is
adjudged no good custom. And as to the Surrender, it is against reason, that
the Wife should give to the Husband; for a Wife has not any Will but the Will
of her Husband: For if the Husband seized in the right of his Wife, make a
Feoffment in Fee, and the Wife being upon the land, does disagree unto it,
saying, that she will never depart with it during her life; yet the Feoffment
is good, and shall bind during the life of the Husband, as it is holden in 21.
E. 3. And therefore it is holden in 3. E. 3. Tit. Devise, Br. 43. That a Feme
covert cannot devise to her Husband; for that should be the Act of the Husband
to convey the land to himself. And in the old Natura Brevium, in the Additions
of Ex gravi quaerela, it is holden so accordingly. And the Case in 29. E. 3.
differs much from this Case: For there a woman seized of lands devisable, took
an Husband, and had issue; and devised the lands to the Husband for his life,
and died, and a Writ of Waste was brought against him as Tenant by the
Courtesy; and it was holden that it did lie, and that he is not in by the
Devise; for the reason there is, because he was in before by the Courtesy: But
as I conceive, that Case will disprove the Surrender; for in as much as he had
it in the Right of his wife, he could not take it in his own Right. Also he
took another Exception in the principal Case, because that the wife was not
examined upon the Surrender; but none of the Justices spoke to that Exception:
but when the Record was viewed, it appeared, that it was so pleaded: Further,
He said, That the devise was void by the Statute of 34. H. 8. Cap. 5. where it
is said, It is enacted, That Wills and Testaments made of any Lands, Tenements,
etc. by women Coverts, or etc. shall not be taken to be good, or effectual in
Law. And he said, That this Statute does extend to customary Lands; And as to
that all the Justices did agree, That it is not within the Statute. And as to
the Statute of Limitations, And^rson chief Justice said, That if a Lease for
years, which perhaps will not endure sixty years, shall be taken strong, this
shall. Anderson moved, That if the Lord Lease Copyhold land by Word, Whether
the Lessee might maintain an Ejectione firm: and he conceived not; for in an
Ejectione firm^, there ought to be a Right in Fact: And although it be by
conclusion, it is not sufficient, for that the Jury or Judge are not estopped
or concluded: And he conceived, That if Tenant at Will make a Lease for years,
that it is no good lease betwixt him and the Lessor; but that he may well
plead, that he had nothing in the land: Meade contrary; but they both agreed,
That the Book of 14. E. 4. which says, That if Tenant at Will make a lease for
years, that he shall be a Disseisor, is not Law. Anderson said, That the
prescription in the principal Case was not good, for it is Quod quaelibet
foemina viro cooperta poterit, etc. and it ought to be, that feme Coverts
possunt, and by the Custom have used to devise to the husband, and therefore
the prescription is not good, that Potest ponere retes upon the land of another
upon the Custom of the Sea; for prescription must be in a thing done: also by
him the devise is not good according to the Custom, for that is, that she may
devise and surrender; and that ought to be all at one time, and that in the
presence of the Reeve and six other persons, as well as the Surrenderer; and
the words of a Custom shall be so far performed as they may be. Meade
contrary: And that these Witnesses shall be referred to the surrender only,
for a devise may be without Witnesses. And he said, that sometimes the latter
clause shall not refer to all the precedent matter, but unto the latter only,
as 7. H. 7. is, Where a Praecipe was brought of lands in A. B. and C. in Insula
de Ely: the Clause (in Insula de Ely) is referred only to C. And it was said,
That if in the principal Case the Will were good, that then the husbands are
Tenants in common; and then the Action of Trespass is not maintainable.

Pasch. 25. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 23.
THis Case was moved by Serjant Gaudy. Thomas Heigham had an hundred Acres of
lands, called Jacks, usually occupied with a house; and he leased the house and
forty Acres, parcel of the said hundred Acres, to I. S. for life, and reserved
the other to himself, and made his Will, by which he does devise the house and
all his lands, called Jacks, now in the occupation of I. S. to his wife for
life; and that after her decease, the remainder of that, and all his other
lands pertaining to Jacks, to R. who was his second son; Whether the wife shall
have that of which her husband died seized for her life, or whether the eldest
son should have it, and what estate he shall have in it. Meade. The wife shall
not have it; for, because that he has expressed his Will that the wife shall
have part, it shall not be taken by implication, that she shall have the whole
or the other part, for then he would have devised the same to her; And
therefore it has been adjudged in this Court betwixt Glover and Tracy; That if
Lands be devised to one and his heirs males; and if he die without heirs of his
body, that then the land shall remain over, that he had no greater estate then
to him and his special heirs, viz. heirs Males: and the reason was, because the
Will took effect by the first words. Anderson Chief Justice; It was holden in
the time of Brown, That if lands were devised to one after the death of his
wife, that the wife should have for life: but if a man seized of two Acres,
devises one unto his wife; and that I. S. shall have the other after the death
of the wife, she takes nothing in that Acre for the Cause aforesaid: For the
second matter, If the Reversion shall pass after the death of the wife to the
second son; we are to consider what shall be said land usually occupied with
the other, and that is the land leased with it. But this land is not now leased
with it, and therefore it cannot pass. Windham. The second son shall have the
Reversion; for although it does not pass by these words, Usualy Occupied; (as
Anderson held) yet because the devise cannot take other effect, and it
appears that his intent was to pass the land, the younger son shall have it
Anderson. Jacks is the entire name of the house and lands; And that word when
it has reference unto an entire thing called Jacks, and is known by the name
of Jacks, shall pass to the second son; for words are as we shall construe
them: And therefore, If a man has land called Manor of Dale, and he devises
his Manor of Dale to one, the land shall pass, although it be not a Manor:
And if I be known by the name of Edward Williamson; where my name is Edward
Anderson, and lands are given unto me by the name of Edward Williamson; the
same is a good name of purchase. And the opinion of the Court was, that the
Reversion of the land should pass to the second son.

Pasc. 25. Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
24. The Lord MOUNTJOY, and the Earl of HUNTINGTON'S Case.
NOte, by Anderson Chief Justice, and Periam Justice. If a man seized of any
entry Franchises, as to have goods of Felons within such a Hundred, or Manor;
or goods of Outlaws, Waifes, Strares, etc. which are causual; There are not
Inheritances deviseable by the Statute of 32. H. 8. for they are not of any
yearly value, and peradventure no profit shall be to the Lord for three or four
years, or perhaps for a longer time. And such a thing which is deviseable ought
to be of annual value, as appears by the words of the Statute. And also they
agreed, that the said Franchises could not be divided; and therefore if they
descend to two coparceners, no partition can be made of them. And the words of
the Statute of 32. H. 8. are, That it shall be lawful, etc. to divise two
parts, etc. and then a thing which cannot be divided, is not diviseable. And
they said, That if a man had three Manors, and in each of the three such
Liberties, and every Manor is of equal value, that yet he cannot devise one
Manor and the Liberties which he has to it, Causa, qua supra: but by them an
Advowson is deviseable, because it may be of annual value. But the Lord
Chancellor, smiling, said, That the Case of the three Manors may be doubted.
And there also it was agreed by the said two Justices, upon Conference had with
the other Justices, That where the Lord Mountjoy by deed, Indented and
Enrolled, did bargain and sell the Manor of ^amford to Brown in Fee; and in
the Indenture this Clause is contained, Provided always, And the said Brown
Covenants, and Grants to, and with the Lord Mountjoy, his Heirs and Assigns,
that the Lord Mountjoy his Heirs and Assigns, may digg for Ore within the land
in Camford, which was a great Waste; and also to digg Turffe there to make
Allome and Coperess, without any contradiction of the said Brown, his Heirs and
Assigns. They agreed, That the Lord Mountjoy could not devide the said
Interest, viz. to grant to one to digg within a parcel of the said Waste. And
they also agreed, That notwithstanding that Grant, That Brown, his Heirs and
Assigns, owners of the Soil, might digg there also, like to the Case of Common
Sans number. The Case went further, That the Lord Mountjoy had devised this
Interest to one Laicott for one and twenty years, and that Laicott assigned the
same over to two other men: And whether this Assignment were good or not, was
the Question; forasmuch that if the Assignement might be good to them, it might
be to twenty; and that might be a surcharge to the Tenant of the soil. And as
to that the Justices did agree, that the assignement was good; but that the two
assignees could not work severally, but together with one stock, or such
workmen as belonged to them both. And Cook, who reported the opinions of the
Justices, was of Counsel with the Lord Mountjoy. And note, in that case it was
said, That Proviso being coupled with other words of covenant and grant, does
not create a Condition; but shall be of the same nature as the other words with
which it is coupled.

Pasch. 25. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
25. WEB and POTTER'S Case.
In an Ejectione firm the Case was this:

JOhn Harris gave Land in Frankmarriage to one White: And the words of the Deed
were, Dedi and concessi I. W. in liberum maritagium Joannae filiae suae,
Habendum eidem J. W. and haeredibus suis in perpetuum, tenendum de Capitalibus
Dominis f^odi, etc. with warranty to the Husband and his heirs: Periam Justice,
although the usual words of gift in Frankmarriage are not observed; yet the
Frankmarriage shall not be destroyed (for the usual words are, In liberum
maritagium cum Joanna filia mea; in the ablative case): And it was holden by
all the Justices, that notwithstanding that, the Frankmarriage was good. Also a
gift in Frankmarriage after the espousals, is good, as it was holden by all the
Justices. And see Fitz. Tit. Tail 4. E. 3. and 2. H. 3. Dower 199. And he
said, That a gift in Frankmarriage before the Stat. of Donis, etc. was a
Feesimple, but now it is but a special tail: and if it should not be in law a
gift in Frankmarriage, then the Husband and Wife have an estate but for their
lives; for they cannot have an estate tail, for that there are not words of
limitation of such estate in the gift. And he cited 4. E. 3. and 45. E. 3. 20.
to prove his opinion: and he much relied upon the intent of the Donor, which
ought to be observed in construction of such Gifts according to the Statute.
And because the Habendum is repugnant to the premises, and would destroy the
Frankmarriage, it is void, and the premises shall stand good: and to prove
that, he cited 9. E. 3. 13. E. 1. 32. E. 1. Tit. Tail, 25. 3. H. 4. by Hill.
And he took this difference; Where a Remainder is limited upon a Gift in
Frankmarriage to a stranger, and where it is limited to one of the Donees; for
in the first case, the Remainder is good for the benefit of the stranger; but
in the second case it is void. And he said, that if a Rent be reserved upon
such a Gift, that it should be void during the four degrees, but afterward the
Reservation should be good. And if the Donor grant the Reversion over, and the
Donee in Frankmarriage attourn, now he shall pay rent to the Grantee; for by
Littleton, he has lost the Privilege of Frankmarriage, viz. the Aquitall; and
no privitie is betwixt the Grantee and the Donees. 10. Ass. 26. and 4. H. 6.
That it is not any tail, if it be not Frankmarriage, Windham Justice: Although
it be no estate in Frankmarriage, yet is it an estate tail: and he cited 8. E.
3. although there want the word Heirs. Also if a man give lands to another and
semini suo, it is good; 45. E. 3: Statham, tail. If it be not Frankmarriage,
yet it is a good estate in tail. 19. Ass Land was given to Husband and Wife in
Frankmarriage, infra annos nubiles, and afterward they are divorced; the Wife
has an estate in tail. Meade Justice did agree with Windham, and said, That
although there be not any Tenure, nor any Aquitall, yet it may be a good
Frankmarriage; as if a Rent, Common, or Reversion be given in Frankmarriage, it
is good; and yet there is not any Tenure nor aquitall. Dyer Chief Justice
conceived, That it is not Frankmarriage; because that the usual words in such
Gifts are not observed: for he said, that the gift ought to be in liberum
Maritagium, and not Joannae filiae suae; for that is not the usual form of the
words: And he said, That if the word [Liberum] be omitted, that it is not
Frankmarriage; for that he said, is as it were a Maxim: and therefore the
usual words ought to be observed. And by the same reason such a Gift cannot be
with a man, but ought to be with a woman: also such a Gift ought to be with one
of the blood of the Donor, who by possibility might be his Heir. Also there
ought to be a Tenure betwixt the Donor and Donee, and also an Aquitall. And if
these grounds and ceremonies be not observed, it is not Frankmarriage. Also if
it once take effect as a Frankmarriage, and afterward the Donor grants the
Reversion over, or if the Reversion does descend to the Donees, yet it shall
not be utterly destroyed, but shall remain as an estate tail, and not as an
estate for life; because it once took effect in the Donees and their issues as
a Frankmarriage, 31. E. 1. tail 116. If a man give lands in Frankmarriage, the
remainder to the Donees and the heirs of their bodies; yet it is a good
Frankmarriage. And if a man give Lands in Frankmarriage, the Remainder to
another in tail, it shall not destroy the Frankmarriage, because that the
Donor has the Reversion in Fee in himself, and the Donees shall hold of him,
and not of him in the Remainder in tail; but if the Remainder had been limited
to another in Fee simple, then it had been otherwise. Also if the Donor grant
the Services of the Donees in Frankmarriage, reserving the Reversion to
himself, it is no good Grant, although that the Donees attourne; for that the
Services are incident to the Reversion: but if he grant the Reversion, then
they do pass. And he concluded, That the Husband had the whole, and that the
Wife had nothing: for she was no purchaser of the premises, because that the
Gift did not take effect as a gift in Frankmariage: And he said, that he does
not construe it so by the intent of the Gift; for here is an express
limitation of the Fee to the Husband and his heirs, which shall not be
contradicted by any intendment; for an Intendment ought to give way to an
express Limitation, as a consideration employed ought to give place to a
consideration expressed. And afterward this year it was adjudged, that it was
not a Frankmarriage, nor a Gift in tail, but that it was a Fee simple. And the
Justices said, that although the old books are, That where it takes not effect
as a Frankmarriage, that yet it shall take effect as an estate tail, those
Books are against Law. But they agreed, That where once the Gift does take
effect as a Frankmarriage, that by matter ex post facto, it might be turned to
an estate in tail.

Pasch. 26. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 26.
MEade and Windham (the other Justices being absent) were of opinion, That a
Copyholder in Fee, who by the Custom might surrender in Fee, might make a
surrender in tail, without any special custom so to do: and he who may
prescribe to make a Feoffment in Fee, might make a Lease for life, and it
should be good, quia omne majus continet in se minus.

Pasch. 26 Eliz. In Communi Banco. 27
IN a Writ of Dower, the Defendant made her demand de tertia part liberae
faldae: and Sergeant Gaudy moved if it were good, without setting in certain
for what cattle: And it was held not good; for if it be not of a certain
number, she shall not be thereof endowed, no more then of a Common uncertain.
And if she do demand Common which is certain, yet she shall not be endowed, if
she do not show the certainty of it. Windham said, That if the Common be
uncertain, that the woman shall be allowed for it: But Meade said, He does not
know how the allowance shall be made.

Pasch. 25 Eliz. In the Exchequer Chamber. 28
IT was holden in the Exchequer Chamber, before the Treasurer and the Barons,
in the case of one Pelham, That whereas the Queen had granted to him by Letters
Patents, That he should not be Bailiff, Constable, nor other Officer or
Minister, licet eligatur: That if the Queen make him Sheriff of a County, that
he shall not be discharged by that Patent, for that such Offices do not extend
to Royal Offices: as a grant of Amerciaments shall not extend to Amerciaments
Royal. And also the making of a Sheriff is not by election, but only by
denomination of the Queen. So that if he have not these words besides (licet
eligatur per Nos) he shall be Sheriff. And that they said was also the opinion
of Bromley Lord Chancellor.

Mich. 26 Eliz. In the King's Bench. 29
IT was holden by the Court, That if a man bind himself to perform the last
Will of I. S. and he is made Executor, that he is bounden to pay Legacies
without any demands. Vide 11. E. 4. 10. a. 14. E. 4. 4. a. 20. E. 4. 28. Yet it
was said, That Pasch. 25. Eliz. they put a difference, where a man is bound to
perform the last Will, and when to perform the Legacies; for in the later case
the Law is ut supra.

Hill. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 30.
IF I be bound, that my Lessee shall take, reap, and carry his Corn peaceably
without interruption: and afterward in Harvest, when he is reaping, I come upon
the land, and say to him, that he shall not reap any corn there; but otherwise
I do not disturb him: The opinion of all the Justices was, that for these words
spoken by me upon the Land, that I have forfeited my Bond. And yet it was urged
by Sergeant Puckering, That I was bound to suffer him to do three things, scil.
to take, to reap, and to carry, and all these things he has done. See the Case
47. E. 3. 22. where the saying to a Tenant by one Coparcener, that he ought not
to pay any thing to the other, was a Disseisin.

Pasch. 26. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 31
A Man was bound in a Recognizance for his good behavior: and it was showed,
that he was arrested for suspicion of Felony by a Constable, and that he
escaped from him; to which he pleaded, Not guilty: Exception was taken, because
it was not showed that a Felony was committed, which might cause suspicion, for
that is traversable: and per Curiam it need not; for although no such felony
was committed, and although the arrest were tortious, yet the Recognizor had
forfeited his Recognizance, by making an escape, which is a Misbehaviour.

Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 32 BUSHEY's Case.
PAul Bushey Vicar of Pancras leased his Vicarage to Doctor Clark, the Glebe
land, and the Church, and all things to the same belonging (Excepting the
housing) reserving twenty pound rent yearly, at Lammas, and Sancti Petri
advincula, by equal portions: and if the Rent be behind by the space of a
month, that then it should be lawful for the Vicar to distrein: And the Lessee
was bound to peform all Covenants, Articles and Agreements contained or recited
within the same Indenture. And (...) rent not paid the 29 of August 25. Eliz
the Vicar brought Debt upon the Bond: To which the Defendant pleaded, That the
Rent was not demanded the 29 day of August: upon which they were at issue: and
the Jury being ready at the Bar, Walmesley said, That the Enquest ought not to
be taken for three causes: First, He has made a lease of the Vicarage except
the housing, and the Plaintiff has alleged the demand to be general super
terras glebales, and has not showed where. To that the Justices said, It had
been better to have said, At such a gate, or hedge, or highway; but
notwithstanding they did not allow of that Exception; for if it were not well
demanded, it ought to be showed of the other side. The second exception was,
because the Enquest were all de Vicincto de Pancras, and it might be that some
of the Lands appertaining to the Vicarage did extend to Islington: but that
Exception was disallowed also. The third Exception was, because that the V^nire
facias did not well recite the Issue, for the exception of the housing was left
out: and per Curiam, it is not needful that all be recited: But if another
issue then that upon which they were at issue had been recited, it had not been
good. And afterward the Enquest was taken, and found for the Plaintiff. But
nothing was spoken, whether there needed any demand in such case, or not.

Pasch. 26 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 33
IF a man be presented unto a Benefice, which is not above the value of six
pound per annum, and afterward he is presented unto another of twenty pounds;
and afterward is deprived for cause of Plurality: The Ordinary must give
notice to the Patron; for that is at the common Law: and until Deprivation it
is no Cession.

Trinity 26 Elizab. In the Common Pleas.
34 THROGMORTON and TERRINGHAM's Case.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant did avow the taking of the cattle, by reason
that one A. held of him an Acre of land in the place where, etc. by fealty, and
sixteen shillings rent, the rent payable at two Feasts of the year, etc. And
the Plaintiff said, that he held the same acre, and two others of the Avowant
by fealty, and sixteen shillings payable at one day, absque hoc that he held
the said (...) by the services payable at two days, etc. Snagg. The tenure
cannot be traversed: and 21 E. 4 the last case is the same case; where the
Avowry is made for 12 pence at four days; and the Plaintiff said, that he held
by twelve pence payable at one day, without that that he held by the Services
payable at four days. And there it is holden, that the same cannot be an
Encroachment, because they agree in the Services. Walmesley, He shall have the
traverse for the mischief which otherwise would follow: for if he should
traverse the seisin, thereby he should confess the Tenure. Periam concessit,
and said, That the difference which is commonly taken in our Books, is, That
where they agree in the Tenure, there the Seisin is traversable; but where they
do not agree in the Tenure, there the Tenure is traversable. So is 26. H. 8. 6.
7. E. 4. 27. 12. E. 4. 7. 20. E. 4. 16. And he conceived here, that the payment
at two days does alter the tenure; so as now it is another tenure then before.
Also he said, That if Wh. acre and Bl. acre be adjoining, and are holden the
one of I. S. and the other of I. D. and I. S. distrein and avow for both acres,
that he may well traverse the tenure. Meade. 8. H. 7. 5. a. It is said by
Brian, That if avowry be made for a tenure of two acres by twenty shillings,
and the Plaintiff says, that he holds these two and two other acres by
twelve shillings, without that, that he holds the two acres by twenty
shillings: that that is good, for that he cannot do otherwise. And it is no
reason, that for a false avowry, the Plaintiff should be at a mischief. But
the Book is not ruled, for Keble is contrary. Vide Librum.

Trinit. 26 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
35 SAVELL and CORDELL's Case.
HEnry Savell Lessee for years of the Manor of M. grants the same Manor,
Habendum for so many years, which should be to come after his death, to Cordell
Master of the Rolls, if Dorothy his Wife so long should live: And afterward
Henry Savell, and he in the Reversion levied a Fine. The Case went by many
Conveyances further. But two points were here moved: 1. If it were a good Grant
for so many years, etc. Shuttleworth argued that it was. But Cook contrary.
And Cook said to that which has been said, That Leases which have uncertain
beginning, may be by act of matter ex post facto, made certain, and so good. As
a lease for so many years as I. S. shall name; if he name, it is a certain
lease: but if the Lessor die before I. S. name, and after he name, all is
void, as it is in the Commentaries put by Weston, and granted by Dyer 273. And
the reason is, that it behooves that the interest pass out of the Lessor during
his life, and the Deed ought to have its perfection in the life of the Lessor.
But in our case here, the Lessor or Grantor is dead before the certainty of
the beginning is known, and before any perfection of interest out of him: and
therefore the reason in the common case, 40 Ass. and 16. E. 3. that there
behooves to be Attornment in the life of the Lessor, proves our case: for the
reason of that is, that it behooves that some interest pass out of the Lessor
or Grantor during his life; and that perfection of his Grant be in his life or
else the Grant is void. Vide 31. E. 3. alb. 20. and 33. E. 3. Confirmation 22.
If the Chapter confirm the Grant of the Bishop after his death, it is void; for
it ought to have perfection in the life of the Bishop, otherwise it is void.
And upon that reason is the case put by Popham, Com. 520. b. That where a man
grants all his term which shall be to come after his death; that it is a void
Grant, because no interest passes during the life of the Grantor. And to this
purpose is 7. E. 6. Br. Leases. 66. Temps. H. 8. 339. If a man will take by
Livery within the view, it behooves the Feoffee to enter during the life of the
Feoffor: and yet that is a more strong case; for by the Livery, being a
ceremony of the Law, it is presumed that the land passed; and yet there ought
to be an entry to fortify the Grant, otherwise it is void. The second point
was, If by the Fine levied, the possibility as well as the right of possession
of the term did pass: And I conceive, that it does; therefore we see in many
cases, a man may grant by his Deed a possibility to come. As 19. H. 7. 1. where
a man seized in the right of his Wife, made a Feoffment in see, and after they
had issue, and the Wife died; that he should not be Tenant by the Courtesy,
and yet the Wife was remitted: but by his own Grant he had granted from him the
possibility he might have had to be Tenant by the courtesy. And here, If
Cordell had entered, and made a Feoffment in fee, or levied a Fine, the
possibility which he had to have the term, had been clearly gone. 39. H. 6. 43.
If I disseise my Eather, and make a Feoffment in fee, and afterward my Father
dies; although that a new Right descends unto me, yet I shall be barred of
this possibility which I had at the time of the Grant: But otherwise it had
been, if this discontinuance or grant had been defeated by entry or otherwise,
in my life, by my Father or any other; in that case I may show the special
matter, as 15. E. 4. 5. is, and so avoid my own Deed. And 44. E. 3. 4. is, That
tenant for years and he in the Reversion disclaim, and it is holden a good
Disclaimer; which proves, that a possibility may also pass by Disclaimer. And
21. E. 3. and 35. H. 6. is, That if he who has cause to have a Writ of Error,
if he enter into the Land, and make a Feoffment, the Writ of Error is gone for
ever; so by these Cases it is proved, and appears, That a Possibility may
pass by grant: And so in the Principal Case, the Possibility to have the
term, is by this Fine granted; and the Grant is a good Grant, And it was
adjourned.

Pasch. 26. Eliz. in the Kings Beneh.
36. LUDDINGTON and AMNER'S Case.
Intratur Mich. 25. Eliz. Rott. 495.
IN a Writ of Error, the Case was this; Perepoynt possessed of a Lease for 99
years, devised the same unto his Wife for Life; and that after her Decease,
that it should go to his Children unpreferred; the Wife took Sir Thomas Fulster
to her Husband, and the Lease was put in Execution by Fiery facias for the Debt
of Sir Thomas Fulster, and afterward Sir Thomas died, and the Wife died: The
Administrators of Sir Thomas Fulster did reverse the Judgment, upon which the
Lease was taken in Execution: And afterward A. the Daughter of Perepoynt
entered, supposing her self to be the only Daughter of Perepoynt alive,
unpreferred by her Father in his life time. And the Pleading was, That the Wife
of Perepoynt was his Executrix, and that she entered into the Lease after the
death of Perepoynt, Virtute legationis and donationis praedict. Cook. There is
a difference in our Books, That the Devise of the Occupation of a Term, may be
with the Remainder over, but not a Devise of the Term with the Remainder over.
And the Devisee of the Occupation of a Term has one special Property, and the
Remainder another Property: As if a Lease be extended upon a Statute, the
Conusee during the Extent has one Property, and he who is to have it
afterward, another Property, and the reason of the difference is apparent,
when the Occupation is devised, and when the term is devised; for in the first
Case, he puts but only a confidence in the Devisee, as it appears in Welkdens
Case. But in the other Case all the Property goes, and there is no confidence
reposed in the Devisee. And there is a Case in the very Point, with which I was
of Council, and was decreed in the Court of Chancery; it was one Edolf's Case;
Where the Devise was of a term, the Remainder to another, and he made the
Devisee his Executor, and he entered Virtute donationis; as in this Case; and it
was decreed, That the Executor might alien the Term, and that the Remainder
could not be good: And to this purpose Vid. 33. H. 8. 2 E. 6. 37 H. 6. 30. But
if there might be a Remainder, yet Incertae Personae nulla donation, for if all
the Children be preferred, then the Remainder is void; and then the Property of
the Lease is in the Wife; and she might prefer her at any time during her
life, and the general property cannot be in another, but in the Executor, for
the Legatee cannot enter, although that 27 H. 6. seems to be contrary. And if
the whole Property be in the Wife, her Husband might alien it, and therefore it
may be extended for his Debt, as 7. H. 6. 1. is. But it may be objected, That
the Cases before put, are of a devise of a Term, and this is of a Lease. That
makes no difference, for in Wro^^sl^y's Case, Lease there is said to contain,
not only a term, but also the years to come in the term. Then the Question
is, If by the sale of the Sheriff upon the Fieri facias, if the term be so
gone, that the Wife shall not have it by the Reversall of the Judgment by
Error? for the Judgment is, that the Party shall be restored to all that which
he has lost: It is very clear that it shall never return, for if it should be
so, then no sale made by the Sheriff might be good, unless the Judgment be
without Error, which would be a very great damage to the Common Wealth. And
also by reason, and by the Judgment in the Writ of Error it should not be so
restored, for the Judgment is, That he shall be restored to all that which he
has lost, ratione judicii; and here the Defendant has not lost any thing by
force of the Judgment, but by force of the Execution: For the Judgment was to
have Execution of 200 li and of the 200 li. he shall be restored again, and not
of the Lease: And therefore in 7. H. 7. If a Manor be recovered, and the
Villains of the Manor purchase Lands, and afterward the Judgment is reversed
by Error, the Recover or shall have the Perquisite, and the other shall not be
restored to it: And 7. H 7. A Statute was delivered in Owell maine, and a
recovery was by the Conusee upon Garnishment of the Conusor, and the Conusee
had Execution; and afterward the Judgment is reversed by Error; yet the
Conusor shall not be restored to the Land taken in Execution, but only the
Statute shall be redelivered back where it was before: And in this Case if the
party should be restored to the term, it should be great inconvenience. Also if
I give one an Authority upon Condition, and the Party does execute the
Authority, and after the Condition is broken, the Act is lawful by him who had
Authority upon Condition. And so was the Lord of Arundels Case, where the
Feoffee upon Condition of a Manor, granted Coppies; it was holden, That the
Grants made by him were good, notwithstanding the Condition was afterward
broken. And in 13 E. 3. Bar 253. That a Recovery was Erroneous, and the Party
being in Execution, the Jailer suffered him to escape, and after the Recovery
was reversed for Error, yet the Action lay against the Jailer. Also by him, the
Jury have given an imperfect Verdict, so as we cannot tell whether the Party
were preferred or not, for the Will was (unpreferred generally) and the Jury
find that she, viz. A. the daughter, was not preferred by her father in his
life time, so as the Preferment by the tail is limited generally; so as if any
other prefer her, she shall not have the Remainder. And the Jury have found,
that she was not preferred by one certain, viz. by her Father; nor in a certain
time, in his life time; which is as much as to say, That she was preferred by
the Uncle, Aunt or Mother; and if it were so, then the Remainder is not good to
her. Also they find no preferment in the life of the father, and it may be that
the Father has given her preferment by Will, and that was no preferment in his
life, but is consummate only by his death; and so she might be preferred by him
by Implication, by his Will. So as upon the whole Matter, I conceive, That the
Judgment ought to be reversed. Note, that this Case was afterward adjudged at
Hertford Term; and the Judgment was, That the Issue of the Wife had Judgment
for her Term; and that the Judgment upon which the Execution was, was
Erroneous, and reversed by the Writ of Error; and that the opinion of the
Justices was, That the Term was not to be restored, but so much for which it
was sold upon the Execution. And the Daughter of Perepoynt brought an Action
for it, and had Judgment.

27 Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 37.
ONE had certain Mineral Lands Leased to him for years, with liberty to dig,
and make his Profit of the Mine. The Lessee afterward dug for Mine, and
sold the Gravel which came of it: And by the Opinion of the whole Court, This
sale was no Waste, for no Sale is Waste, if the first act be not Waste: As the
Sale of Trees by Tenant for life or Years is not waste, if the Cutting and
Felling down of them was not Waste before, for the Vendition is but a secondary
Act, and but subsequent to the Act precedent; which Act, if it were lawful,
the Sale also is lawful, for the Sale alone is not waste. But they said, That
if the Lessee fell or cut Timber Trees, and sell them, it is waste Non quia
vendebat, sed quia scindebat; For if he suffer them to be upon the ground,
without doing any thing with them; yet it is waste; but he may use them for the
Reparation of his house, and then it is no waste: And yet when he fels them
with an intent for Reparations, and afterward sells them, it is waste Non
propter Venditionem only, but for the felling; for by this Act done, it is
plain from the beginning to be unlawful, for the Sale is only a Declaration
of his ill intent, and a means that his meaning was, by felling of the trees,
to benefit himself by the hurt and injury of another. But in the Principal
Case, because he ought to dig the Land, and that was lawful for him to do,
the Act subsequent cannot be unlawful: And so it was adjudged.

27. Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
38. MACROWE's Case.
MAcrowe brought Debt upon a Bond which was endorced upon Condition to pay a
less sum: The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 13. Eliz. That all Covenants,
Contracts and Bonds, made for the enjoying of Leases made of Spiritual
Livings, by Parsons, etc. were void; And averred, that that Bond was made for
enjoying of such a Lease: But because the Condition expressed of the Bond, was
for payment of money, The Justices held it clear for Law, That the Bond was
good, and out of the Statute: And so it was adjudged.

27. Eliz. in the Common Pleas
39. KITTLEY's Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought against Eustace Kittley, and Charles Kittley,
Executors of the Will of Francis Kittley: The Defendants pleaded, That they had
fully Administered; and upon a special Verdict the Case was this, Francis
Kittley made the Defendats his Executors, who being within age, Administration
was committed unto another until they came of full age; and after they were of
full age, the Jury found, That in the hands of the Administrator Fuerunt bo^a
and debita Testatoris, to the value of 4000. li. To which Administrator the
Defendants Executors did release at their full age all Demands; the which
Release, whether it were Assets in the hands of the Executors or not, the
Jurours prayed the Opinion of the Court. Puckering the Queens Sergeant; It is
not Assets, for a Release of a thing which is not Assets in the hand of an
Executor cannot be said Assets, and things in Action before they come in
Possession, cannot be said Assets: But a Gift of Goods in Posssession is
Assets, and a Devastavit of the Goods of the dead. Also there is a difference
betwixt a certain thing released and a thing uncertain; of a certain it is
Assets, for by such means he has given such a thing which is Assets; but
contrary, of an uncertain. A^^ this Difference is proved by 13. E. 3. Execut.
91. where it is holden, That if Executors release to the Debtor, he shall
account for such Sum before the Ordinary; by Parne. But True, He shall not
account: But the whole Court was against Puckering. And first Anderson, It is a
clear Case, That this Release is Assets, for he has thereby given away that
which might have been Assets: And the Law does intend, That when he release^,
that he has Recompense and Satisfaction from the Party to whom the release is
made: And he denied the Difference of certain and uncertain, put by Puckering;
and be it in Account or Trespass, a Release is Assets. And it is not requisite
that every Assets be a thing in Possession, or in the hands of the Testator;
for a thing may be Assets, which never was in the Testators hands, if those
things (...) in (...) of the thing which was in the hands of the Testaor, as
Money for Land or other Goods so^d: Or if they came by reason of another thing
which was in the hands of the Testator, as increase of Goods by the Executors
in their hands, by Merchandising with the Goods of the Testator, or Goods
purchased by the Villain of the Testator after his death, shall be Assets. So
money received by the Executor of the (...) of the Testator after his death,
shall be said Assets. Windham Justice, So it is, if the Testator have Sheep,
Swine, or Cowes, and dies, and they have young Lambs, Pigs, or Calves, they
are Assets for the reason aforesaid: And he agreed, that the Release is Assets;
and he said, It had been so here adjudged, and he denied also the difference
taken by Puckering. Periam agreed with the rest in all, and also denied the
difference. And by him, Things in Action or Possession certain or uncertain, if
they be released, they are Assets: And he said, That the uncertainty must be
such, that the same cannot be proved to the Court, or unto a Jury; that the
thing released might not by Possibility have been Assets. For if Trespass be
done to the Testa^^^ by taking his goods and he dies, and the Executors
release all Actions, the same is Assets, because (...) might be proved to the
Jury, That had they not released but had brought their Action of Trespass, De
bont^ asportatis in vita testatoris, etc. that they might have recovered
Damages, which would have satisfied the Debts or Legaces of the Testator, and
therefore it shall be Assets: And yet the thing recovered was not in the
Testator, or a thing in Possession, or certain in the hands of the Executors*
with whom Rodes agreed. And Periam conceived, That such Administrators made
Durante minori aetate of the Executor, could not by our Law, neither Sue nor be
Sued; For, as he conceived, the Infant was the Executor, and an Infant Executor
may either Sue or be Sued, and may release if there be a sufficient
Consideration given him: and therefore Administration for such defect is but
idle: Wherefore, he said, That if an Infant does release where he has no
cause, nor good consideration, he shall be answerable of his own goods, when he
comes of full age, for the wasting of the estate; and such Release shall be
Assets: And it was holden, That a Release before probate of the Will, is good*
and it is Assets also. And the same Term Judgment was given, that the Release
of the Enfant Executor was Assets.

27. Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
40. SYDENHAM and WORLINGTON's Case.
SYdenham brought an Action upon the Case upon an Assumps^t against Worlington
for 30 li, and alleged for Consideration, that he, at the request of the
Defendant, was Surety and Bail for J. S. who was arrested into the Kings Bench
upon an Action of 30 li, and that afterward, for the default of J. S. he was
constrained to pay the said 30 pounds. After which, the Defendant meeting with
the Plaintiff, promised him for the same consideration, that he would repay
that 30 pound: upon which promise and consideration, the Plaintiff brought this
Action. Walmesley. This Consideration will not maintain this Action, because
the consideration and the promise did not concur and go together; for the
consideration was long before executed, so as now it cannot be intended that
the promise was for the same consideration. As if one give to me an Horse, and
a month after I promise him for the said Horse ten pounds; for that he shall
neither have Debt nor Assumpsit, for it is neither a Contract nor a sufficient
Consideration, because it is executed. Anderson. The Action will not lie, for
it is but nudum pa^^^^ because the supposed contract was determined, and not in
esse at the time of promise. But he said it was otherwise upon a consideration
of Marriage, for that is always a present consideration, and always a
consideration, because the party is always married. Windham to the same
intent; and compared it to the Case of 5. H. 7. If one sell an horse to
another, and after at another day will war^ant him to be good and sound of limb
and member, it is void warranty; for it ought to have been at the same time
that the horse was ^old Peri^m Justice contrary: for he said, This case is not
like to any of the cases which have been put; because there is a great
difference betwixt Contracts and this Action; For in Contracts, the
consideration, and promise, and sale ought to concur, because a Contract is
derived of con and trahere, which is a drawing together: so as in Contracts
every thing requisite ought to concur; as the consideration of the one side,
and the promise or sale of the other side. But to maintain an Assumpsit, it is
not requisite, for it is sufficient if there be any moving cause or
consideration precedent, for which cause or consideration the promise was made;
and that is the common practice at this day: For in Assumpsit, the Declaration
is, That the Defendant, for and in consideration of ten pounds to him paid
(post^a, silicet,) a day or two after, super se assumpsit, etc. and that is
good; and yet there the consideration is executed. And he said, that Hunt and
Baker's case (which see 10. Eliz. Dyer 272.) would prove it. The case was this:
The Apprentice of Hunt was arrested when Hunt was in the Country; and Baker one
of Hunts neighbors, to keep the Apprentice out of the Counter, became his
Bail, and paid the debt. Afterward Hunt returning out of the Country, thanked
Baker for his neighbourly part, and promised him to repay him the said sum:
Upon which Baker brought an Action upon the Case upon the promise: And it was
adjudged that the Action would not lie; not because the consideration was
precedent to the promise, but because it was executed and determined long
before. But there the Justices held, That if Hunt had requested Baker to have
been surety, or to pay the debt, and upon that request Baker paid the debt, and
afterward Hunt promises for that consideration, the same is good; for the
consideration precedes, and was at the instance and request of the Defendant.
So here, Sydenham became bail at the request of the Defendant, and therefore it
is reason, that if he be at loss by his request, that he ought to satitfie
him. And he conceived the Law to be clear, that it was a good consideration,
and that the request is a great help in the Case. Rodes Justice agreed with
Periam, for the same reasons, and denied the Case put by Anderson. And he said,
That if one serve me for a year, and has nothing for his service, and
afterward, at the end of the year, I promise him ten pounds for his good and
faithful service ended; he may maintain an Assumpsit, for it is a good
consideration: But if the servant has wages given him, and the Master, ex
abundantia, as he said, promises him ten pounds after his service ended, the
same promise shall not maintain an Assumpsit; for there is not any new cause or
consideration preceding the Assumpsit. And Periam agreed to that difference,
and it was not denied by the other Justices: but they said that the principal
Case was a good case to be advised upon; and at length, after good advice and
deliberation had of the cause, they gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, that the
Action would lie. And note, That they very much relied upon Hunt and Bakers
Case before cited. See Hunt and Baker's Case in 10. Eliz. Dyer 272.

Pasc. 27. Eliz. in the Common Pleas.
41 CARTER and CROST's Case.
CArter brought an Action of Detinue of a chain against Crosts, and declared,
That Thomas Carter his brother, was thereof possessed, and died Intestate; for
which cause the Bishop of Cork granted him Letters of Administration; and that
the Chain came to the Defendants hands by Trover, etc. And declared also, That
he was as Administrator thereof, possessed in London: To which the Defendant
Crosts pleaded the General Issue; and the Jury gave a special Verdict, and
found that the Administration was committed to Carter in London by the Bishop
of Cork in Ireland here, and did not find that Carter was possessed of the
chain in London. And upon this special Verdict, first it was moved, That the
Bishop of Cork in Ireland, being in England, might commit administration of
things in Ireland; And it was held clearly by the Court, That he might of
things within his Diocese in Ireland, because it is an Authority, Power, or
Matter that follows his Person; and wheresoever his Person is, there is his
Authority: As the Bishop of London may commit Administration, being at York;
but it ought to be always of things within his Diocese; and therefore they
held, That the Declaration was good in that point, That the Bishop of Cork did
commit Administration in London, although there be no such Bishop of England.
The second point was, If an Aministrator made by a Bishop of Ireland, might
bring an Action here as Administrator; and it was holden, That he could not,
because of the Letters of the Administration granted in Ireland, there could be
no trial here in England; although that Rodes Justice said, That Acts done in
Spiritual Courts in Foreign places, as at Rome, or elsewhere, the Law says,
That a Jury may take notice of them; because such Courts, and the Spiritual
Courts here, make but one Court; and he proved it by the Case of the Miscreancy
in 5. R. 2. Trial 54. where a Quare Impedit was brought by the King against
the Clerk of a Church, within the Bishopprick of Durham, and counted that the
Bishop who is dead, presented his Clerk, and that the Clerk died, and the
Chapter collated a Cardinal, who for Miscreancy and Schism, was deprived, the
Temporalties being in the Kings hands. Burgh, He has counted of an Avoidance
for Miscreancy at the Court of Rome, which thing is not tryable here. Belknap
Chief Justice, I say for certain, That this Court shall have Conusans of the
Plea, and that I will prove by Reason; for all Spiritual Courts are but one
Court; and if a man in the Arches, be deprived for a Crime, and appeal to Rome,
and is also there deprived, that Deprivavation is triable in the Kings Court,
in the Arches. And if a man be adhering unto the Kings enemies in France, his
Lands are forfeitable, and his adherence shall be tried where his Land is, as
oftentimes it has been for adherence to the Kings enemies in Scotland: And so
(by my faith) if one be Miscreant, his Land is forfeitable, and the Lord
thereof shall have the Escheat, and that is good reason. For if a man who is
out of the Faith of the King, shall forfeit his Land for the same; a for^iori,
he who is out of the faith of God; and that he swore to be Law, Whereupon Burgh
said, Respondes ouster: And so says Fitzherbert, Trial 54. by that Plea and
Judgment, Miscreancy and Deprivation at Rome shall be tried here: And there
the Venire facias was awarded to the Sheriff where the Church was, and not to
the Bishop of Durham; and so the Miscreancy and Deprivation shall be tried
where the Church is. The third Point was, Whether an Administrator might count
of his own Possession, although he was never possessed: and the whole Court
were of Opinion that he might, if the Intestate at the time of his death was
possessed; The Administrator may declare of Goods taken out of his own
Possession, although he was never possessed; for of transitory things, the Law
casts upon him a sufficient possession to maintain an Action Possessory, as the
Lord before seisin may have a Ravishment of Ward, etc. But otherwise it is, if
one take the Goods of the Intestate out of his Possession before he dies, for
then but only a bare right comes to the Administrator. And that is to be meant
when the Goods are taken Transgressive, and not Destrictive. The fourth Point
was, Whether the Jury might find matter done out of the Realm; and if that
should abate the Writ or not. And they held also clearly, That upon a general
Issue, the Jury may find a Foreign matter, as a thing done out of the Realm;
but it shall not abate the Writ, if it be not matter of substance, and pleaded
before: But here the finding of the Letters of Administration, is more then
they had in Issue; and also is but matter of Evidence; for the substance in
this Case was the Possession, and not the Administration, for he might have an
Action of his Possession without showing the Letters of Administration: And
afterward Judgment was given for Carter the Plaintiff.

Mich. 27. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
42. FUTTER and BOOROMES Case.
THE Case was, that the Queen by her Letters Patents anno 12. of Reign, ex
certa scientia and mero motu, etc. did grant to B. totam illam portionem
decimarum and Garbarum in L. in Com. Norf. una cum omnibus aliis decimis suis
cujuscunque generis and speci^i fu^rint in L. nuper in possessione Johannis
Corbet, or his Assigns, nuper Abath. d^ Wenly, pertinent. etc. And in facto the
Parsonage of L. was parcel of the Abbey of Wenly, and out thereof was a portion
appertaining to another Church; And this Rectorie came unto the Queen by the
Statute of dissolution of Abbyes: The question was, whether the Rectorie do
pass by the Grant, totam illam portionem: there being also words in the Patent,
viz. Non obstante any misnosmer, misrecital, or other such things which are
recited in the Statute for confirmation of Patents. Hamon: the Grant is good;
for this word (portion) shall not be said a thing severed from the Church and
Rectorie; And all the Tithes are parcel of the Rectorie: for as 44. E. 3. 5.
is, before the Council of Lateran, a man might give his Tithes to what Church
he pleased; And when any thing is given to the Church, it is a portion
belonging to the Church; as the Glebe is, which is but a clod of Earth, which
is parcel of the Rectorie and a portion of it. And a case in this Court in the
time of this Queen, was argued, and there in a Rectorie there were many
Priests, and each of them knew his portion, so as they were called portionary
Priests, which was in respect they had each of them interest in the Church, and
not because their portions were severed each from the other. And 22. E. 4. 24.
by Pigot it is said, If a Parson has any Tithes in another Parish, as
appertaining to his Church, it is called a portion; so as portion is not meant
that which is severed by it self as in gross; But by portion is meant all the
Tithes appertaining to the Rectorie, or the Rectorie it self. For as 22. Ass.
9. is, If the King have Tithes of those Lands which lie out of any Parish, if
he grant totam portionem decimarum, etc. I conceive, that the Tithes shall pass
thereby: And yet it is a thing severed from other Tithes; but it does contain
all the quality of Tithes in that place. And also if the King grant his
Rectorie of D. to J. S. saving to him the Tithes, and afterward grants totam
portionem Decimarum, etc. I conceive clearly (under correction) that the Tithes
shall pass. And in the principal case, If the Tithes shall not pass by this
word (portion;) yet the Non obstante in the Letters Patents de male nominando,
etc. shall make it to be a good grant, and that so the Tithes shall pass
thereby. We are also to consider, if by any words subsequent in the Patent, the
grant be not good. viz. by these words, cum omnibus aliis Decimis etc. in
tenura and occupatione Johannis Corbet etc. Whereas in truth John Corbet was
never Occupier of them: And as to that, I conceive, That the words before,
cum^omnibus, etc. pass the Tithes; And that the words after, shall not abridge
or control the largeness of the precedent words; and to that purpose is the
Case 39. E. 3. 9. of the Grant of the King to the Earl of Salisbury, etc. In
the end of which Grant were these words, Quas nuper concessimus patri, etc.
although that the thing granted, was never granted to the Father; yet the Grant
was good, and not restreined by those words coming after. 2. E. 4. A Release
was pleaded of a right which the party had in Lands of the part of his Father,
etc. there, although he had the Land from the part of his Mother, yet the
Release was good. In the Case of the Bishop of Bath and Wells, which was lately
argued in the Exchequer Chamber; There it was agreed, That if the King grant a
Fair in such a place, or elsewhere in the County of Somerset; if he mistake
the County, in putting one County for another, yet the Grant is good, and all
that coming after the alibi shall be void. He further argued, That all the
matter appearing by special Verdict, is not well found; for the Jury find,
That no Tithes were in the Occupation of John Corbet at the time of the Grant;
and no mention is in it, that they were not in his Occupation nor in the
Occupation of his Assigns; for they might be in the Occupation of his Assigns,
although that they were not in his own Occupation: For in a Verdict, if it
strongly imply any thing not expressed (as in the Case of Trivilian: where the
Jury found a devise of Land, without saying, That the Land was holden in
Socage) it is a good finding of the Jury; for no devise could be, if it were
not of Land holden in Socage, and therefore that tenure is employed. Contrary,
When a man is to plead a Devise; but where the Verdict does not strongly imply
a thing, it shall not be good; as in Scolasticas Case, Plo. Com. 411. Exception
was taken that the Jury did not find, That the Devisor had not any Heir Male
alive praeter the said John and Francis; for if he had, the wife of the
Plaintiff had no cause of Action. And it was there holden by Harper, That it
was not a good Verdict for the incertainty; so in our Case. Cook contrary: 1.
The Grant is not good, and the Rectory is no part of it; nor can they pass by
the word [Portion.] 1. By the Etimology of the word; for Portion is a thing in
gross by it self, and cannot pass by that thing which is intended Nomen
Collectivum, as a Rectory is. So of a Manor; if a man grant totam illam
portionem Manerii, he being seized of a Manor, nothing passes; for portio is
no more then partio, as the Latinists say; and then if a man grant all that
part of his Manor, or part of his Tithes in D. and he be seized of the whole
Manor of D. or of the Rectory of D. nothing passes. Also the words after
expound the Queens mind, for the words precedent are coupled with a Cum) after,
scil. Cum omnibus aliis, etc. So as the first part shows the grant of Tithes,
and the later part shows what Tithes; viz. those which were in the Occupation
of John Corbet* so as but part is granted: and in the Kings Grant, a part shall
not be taken for the whole; and so in no case, if not by the Figure Synecdoche,
which cannot be in cases of Grants at the common Law. Also the words are, totam
illam portionem, etc. and not totam meam portionem, etc. and the word [illa] or
[that,] ought to have a word [What;] which is a word showing in whose
possession the portion was. Also the Kings Letters Patents ought for the most
part be taken according to the meaning of the King; for the case was in the
Exchequer: That where the King granted all his Tenements in D. that nothing
passed by that Grant, but the Houses. Otherwise it is in the case of a common
person. So 22. Ass. where the King grants goods of Felons quorumcunque
damnatorum, it shall not extend to Treason, nor to murder of the Kings
Messenger. So 8. H. 4. 2. If the Grant be of all the goods of those who pro
aliqua transgressione sive delicto, etc. forisfacere deberent; it shall not
extend to those who are felo de se. Also the Non obstante does not help the
matter; For I take this difference, When nothing passes by the words
precedent, Ex vi termini, there nothing is helped by the Non obstante: But if
any thing pass by the precedent words, Ex vi termini, there a Non obstante may
make the thing good, which otherwise should be void: As if the King grant to J.
S. the Manor of D. Non obstante that he is seized for the term of life thereof;
it is a void Grant: But if the Grant were of the Manor of D. notwithstanding
that I. S. has it for life, here the Non obstante makes the Grant good; which
otherwise should be the ignorance of the King to make a Grant of that of which
he is excluded by the Non obstante; because thereby he takes knowledge of the
particular estate, and so he is not deceived. As to the matter moved against
the Verdict, I conceive, that it makes against the other side; for it was on
his part to prove the Occupation: and if there be no Occupation at the time of
the Lease, the Grant is void: and he was to prove it, being in the affirmative.
And then, in re dubia majus inficiatio quam affirmatio intelligenda: and [a May
be] may be intended in every case. And if such construction should be in
special Verdicts, I dare affirm, that by such [May bees] all special Verdicts
shall be quashed: But the Law is, to give a favorable construction of them,
according to the meaning of the Jurours. Snagg contrary: and by him these
words, [cum omnibus aliis, etc.] are void in the Kings case: and vouched the
case of 29. E. 3. 9. before vouched; Where the King had granted to the Earl of
Salisbury the custody of the Lands of the Prior of Mountague, being seized into
the Kings hands as a Prior Alien: and afterward the Earl died, his Heir within
age, whereby the said Lands, and others, and Advowsons, came to the Kings hand
by reason of minority; and afterward the King granted to the Son all the Lands
and Advowsons which were Patris sui, ac omnes terras, ac omnes advocationes of
the said Prior, which the King had before given to the father of the said son.
And it was there holden, That although that the Advowsons passed not to the
Father, yet by that grant they did pass; and that these woads [which he
granted to his father] were merely void. Cl^nche Justice. Nothing passes by
this word [Portion] for it is a thing in gross, and a thing in gross cannot
contain another thing, and a word which signifies a thing in gross cannot
pass another thing: As if a man grant all his Services in D. it is to be
intended Services in gross; and if he have not any Services, but those which
are parcel of a Manor, nothing shall pass by those words. But I conceive,
That those Tithes which are parcel of the Rectory shall pass by these words,
Cum aliis, etc. For although that the words are, in the tenure of John Corbet,
yet if they were not in his tenure, the Non obstante will help it; for it is,
Non obstante any misnaming of the Tenants, or of the quantity or quality of the
Tithes; so as these words imply as much as if the Grant had been in the tenure
of John Corbet, or of any other in L. or elsewhere. Gaudy Justice, If the words
Totam illam portionem were left out of the Book, the other words, Cum omnibus
aliis, shall pass nothing; and those words Totam illam portionem, are as
nothing to pass a thing not in gross; and by consequence nothing shall pass
by the other words: And afterward Judgment was given, That nothing passed by
the Letters Patents.

Hill. 28 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
43. CROPP's Case.
CRopp made a Lease for years, reserving rent at Mich. upon Condition, That if
the rent be behind at Mich. and a Month after, that he might enter. The Lessee
after Mich. and before the Month ended, sent his servant to the house of Cropp,
to pay the money to Cropp; the servant coming to Cropps house; found him not,
for he was not at the House; the Servant delivered the Rent to one Margery
Briggs, who was his Daughter in Law, to deliver the same to Cropp the Lessor.
And the same Margery at one or two days before the payment of the said Rent,
had received the Rent in the like manner, and had paid it to Cropp, and he had
accepted of it: But now he refused to receive it of her, but at the last day of
the Month he went to the Land, and there demanded the Rent, and because it was
not paid, he entered. Laiton argued for the Lessor. That his entry was lawful,
for, he said, That the Tender made by Margery Briggs to the Lessor was not
sufficient: 1. Because the Servant of the Lessee had Authority to deliver it to
the Lessor; therefore when he delivers it to another, he has not pursued his
Authority. 19. H. 8. and 27. H. 8. Letter of Attorney made to diverse to give
livery of Seisin. If one make Livery alone, it is void; 34. H. 6. If a Capias
be to many Coroners, and one execute it, it is void; 18. E. 4. If one has a
Letter of Attorney to make Livery, he cannot transfer this Authority to another
to make Livery for him. Also, if in this Case a Stranger had tendered the Rent,
the Lessor was not bound to receive it; as upon a Mortgage, if a Stranger
tender the Money, the Mortgagee is not bound to accept of it. 21. E. 4. In case
of Corporal Service, as Homage or Fealty, the demand is to be made of the
person; but of Rent, the demand is to be made upon the Land, because the Land
is the Debtor. Clenche Justice conceived, That if the Lessee himself had
delivered the Rent to Margery Briggs, that it had been good, but it is a doubt
if good, made by the servant, for he could not transfer his Authority to
another. Wray Chief Justice, If it were upon a Bond, the Obligee was not bound
to accept of it before the day; so if it were payable at Mich. only, there the
Lessor is not bound to accept of it before the day: but in as much as it is
after the day, the Month is a Liberty and Benefit for the Lessee; and it was
due at Mich. therefore I conceive, That being tendered to him within any part of
the Month, that he is bound to accept of it. And as to that, That his servant
cannot transfer his Authority over, and therefore Margery Briggs is but a
stranger in that act: that is not so, for now she is a servant in that, to the
Lessor himself; and therefore there is privity enough: also she has received
the Rent for him before. What then, said Laiton? We can prove a special
commandment for the time before that she received it. At another day the Case
was moved again* and it was ruled against Cropp the Lessor, because the rent
was due at Mich. and the month after was given because of the penalty of
Re-entry; and the Tender and Refusal after the Rent was due, and within the
month, saves the penalty; and also Laws ought to be expounded Secundum ^quum
and bonum, and good conscience; and the Lessor was at no prejudice, if he had
accepted of it, when his Daughter in Law tendered it unto him; and therefore it
was conceived, That he had an intent to defraud the Lessee of his Lease; and
the Law does not favor Frauds; and therefore it was adjudged against Cropp the
Lessor.

Hill. 28 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
44 PRIDEAUX's Case.
IN this Case it was moved, Where a man marries a woman who is an
Administratrix, so as the Suit is to be in both their names, Whether they shall
be named in the Writ Administrators or not? Wray Chief Justice, They shall be;
for by the Entermarriage, the Husband has Authority to entermeddle with the
Goods, as well as the Wife* but in the Declaration, all the special matter
ought to be set forth; and so some said is the Book of Entries, That both of
them shall be named Administrators.

Hill. 28. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 45.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for these words, viz. Thou art a Cozener
and a Bankrupt, and have an Occupation to deceive men by; the words were spoken
of a Gentleman, who had One hundred Pound land per annum to live upon; and
therefore although he used to buy and sell Iron, yet because he was not a
Merchant, nor did not live by his Trade, the better Opinion of the Court was,
That the words were not actionable, and so adjudged.

Hill. 28. Eliz* in the King's Bench.
46 HARWOOD and HIGHAM's Case.
ONE had Houses and Lands which had been in the tenures of those which had the
Houses: and he devised his Houses with the Appurtenances; and it was holden,
and so adjudged by the whole Court, That the Lands did pass by the words,
[With the Appurtenances:] For it was in a Will, in which the intent of the
Devisor shall be observed.

Trinit. 28. Eliz. Rot. 1130. in the Common Pleas.
47 The QUEEN and SAVACRE's Case.
IN a Quare Impedit by the Queen against Savacre Clerk, the Case was this; The
Queen presented to a Parsonage which was void, by the taking of another
Benefice by the said Savacre; and the said Savacre for to enable him to have
two Benefices, pleaded, That he was the Chaplain of Sir James a Crosts,
Controller of the Queens House, who, by the Statute of 21. H. 8. cap. 13. might
have two Chaplains, and might qualify them to take two Benefices; to which it
was replied, That the said Sir James a Crossed had two other Chaplains, which are
qualified to have two Benefices, and have also two Benefices by reason of that
qualification, and also are alive; so as he is a third Chaplain, who could not
be qualified by that Statute. To which it was answered; That one of those two
Chaplains is removed and discharged by the said Sir James a Crossed to be his
Domestical Chaplain: scil. Capellanum familiarem, as it was pleaded, and so he
has now but two Chaplains, of which the Defendant was one; upon which there
was demurrer joined. Three Points were in the Case: 1. If the qualification,
Sub sigillo, be sufficient within the Statute, without the Signature or name of
Sir James a Crossed. 2. When two Chaplains are qualified, and one is removed out
of service, if he might qualify another by the Statute, the party being alive
who was qualified. 3. Whether he remain his Chaplain, notwithstanding such
removal during his life. Upon which Points, after perusal of the Statute, it
was agreed by the whole Court, That the Queen ought to have Judgment, and so
they gave Judgment presently: And the reasons of their Judgment were, for the
first Point, Because that the Defendant S^v^cre was not qualified, Sub Signo
and Sigillo praedict. Jacobi a Crossed, but only Sub Sigillo; and the words of
the Statute are, viz. Under the Sign and Seal of the King or other their Lord
or Master, etc. Which words, Or other their Lord or Master, shall be referred
to Sign and Seal, which is limited to the King. And as to the second Point,
they held the Law to be clear, That after that he has retained as many as by
the Law he may retain, and they are sub Signo and Sigillo testified to be his
Chaplains, and by reason thereof have qualification to have two Benefices, and
have two Benefices by virtue thereof, although that afterward they are removed
for displeasure or otherwise out of service; yet during their lives, their
Master cannot take other Chaplains, which may by this Statute be qualified; for
so every Baron might have infinite of Chaplains which might be qualified, which
was not the meaning of the Statute; and of that opinion is the Lord Dyer in his
Reports. And as to the third Point, they held, That although he were removed
from the Domestical Service of the Family, yet he did remain Chaplain at
large; and so a Chaplain within the Statute: And further, the Opinion of the
Court was in this Case, That if the party qualified to die, the Queen, or other
Master mentioned in the Statute, might qualify another again: Quod nota. The
Case was entered Pasch. 28. Eliz. Rot. 1130. Scot.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 48.
ONE made a Deed in this form, Noverinit, etc. that I have demised and to
Farm letten all my Lands in D. to I. S. and his Wife, and to the Heirs of
their two Bodies for thirteen years. And it was moved, That it was an Estate in
tail, and 5. E. 3. and 4. H. 4. were vouched. But Clenche Justice (who was
only present in Court) was of Opinion, That it is but a Lease for years,
although it was put that Livery was made secundum formam chartae: and his said,
That if one make a Lease for forty years to another, and his Heirs, and makes
Livery, that it is but a Lease for years; and he said, It is no Livery, but
rather a giving of Possession. But he would have it moved again when the other
Justices came.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 49
AN Action upon the Case was brought against an Innkeeper upon the Custom of
England, for the safe keeping of the things and Goods of their Guests; and he
brought his Action in another County then where the Inn was; and it was said by
Clench Justice, That if it be an Action upon the Case, upon a Contract, or for
words, and the like transitory things, that it may be brought in any County;
but in this Case he said, It ought to be brought where the Inn is.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 50.
ONE charged two men as Receivers; The Question was, Whether one of them might
plead, Ne unque son Receiver; and it was moved, That he could not, but ought to
say, N^ unque son Receiver, absque hoc, that he and his Companion were
Receivers. Clenche and Suit Justices held, That it was well without Traverse,
and Vide 10. E. 4. 8. Where an Account was brought against one, supposing the
receipt of Two hundred Marks by the hands of I. P. and R. C. The Defendant (as
to One hundred Marks) pleaded, That he received it by the hands of I. P.
tantum, without that, that he received it by the hands of I. P. and R. C. And
as to the other One hundred Marks, he received them from the hands of R. C.
only, without that that he received I. P. and R. C. And there it was doubted,
Whether it be good or not. But in the end of the Case, by Fitz. Account. 14. If
an Account be brought against two, and one says* He was sole his Receiver, and
has accounted before such an Auditor, if the Plaintiff answer unto his Bar,
he shall abate his Writ, because the Receipt is supposed to be a joint Receipt:
And it is not like unto a Praecipe quod reddat against two.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 51.
AN Action upon the Case was brought against one, for that he said to another,
I will give thee Ten Pound to kill such a one; and the Question was, Whether
the Action would lie. It was said, by Sir Thomas Co^kaine, that such a Lady had
given poison to such a one to kill her Child within her; that the words were
not Actionable. Also one said, That another had put Gunpowder in the Window of
a house, to fire such a house, and the house was not fired; adjudged that the
words were not Actionable. The Case was betwixt Ramsey of Buckinghamshire and
another, who said, That he lay in wait to have killed him; it was found for the
Plaintiff, and he had Forty Pound Damages given him. But of the Principal
Case the Court would advise.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 52
IT was holden by the Court, That the Habeas corpus shall be always directed
to him who has the custody of the Body: Therefore whereas in the case of one
Wickham, it was directed to the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, Exception was
taken unto it, because the pleas were holden before the Mayor, Bailiff and
Steward: but the Exception was dissallowed: But otherwise it is in a Writ of
Error; for that shall be directed to those before whom the Judgment was given.
In London the Habeas corpus shall be directed Majori and Vicecomit. London,
because they have the custody, and not to the whole Corporation: But I
conceive, that the course is, that the Writ is directed Majori, Aldermannis,
and Vicecomitibus, etc.

Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas.
53 MARSH and PALFORD's Case.
OWen moved this Case, That one had an upper chamber in Fee, and another had
the nether or lower part of the same house in Fee; and he who had the upper
chamber pulled it down, and he which had the lower room, would not suffer him
to build it up again. But the opinion of the Justices was, that he might build
it up again, if he did it within convenient time. And there it was said, that
it had been a Question, Whether a man might have a Freehold in an upper
chamber?

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 54.
A Question was moved to the Court, Whether Tithe should be paid of Heath,
Turf, and Broom? And the opinion of Suit Justice was, That if they have paid
tithe Wool, Milk, Calves, etc. for their cattle which have gone upon the Land,
that they should not pay tithe of them. But some doubted of it, and conceived,
That they ought to say, that they have used to pay those Tithes for all other
Tithes; otherwise they should pay tithe for Heath, Turf, Broom, etc.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 55.
TWo Parsons were of two several Parishes, and the one claimed certain Tithes
within the Parish of the other, and said, That he and all his Predecessors,
Parsons of such a Church, scil. of D. had used to have the Tithes of such Lands
within the Parish of S. and that was pleaded in the Spiritual Court: and the
Court was moved for to grant a Prohibition: And Suit and Clenche Justices, He
shall have a Prohibition, for he claims only a portion of Tithes, and that by
prescription, and not merely as Parson, or by reason of the Parsonage, but by a
collateral cause, viz. by Prescription, which is a Temporal cause and thing.
And it is not material, whether it be betwixt two Parsons. Vide 20. H. 6. 17.
Br. Jurisdiction 80. and 11. H. 4. and 35. H. 6. 39. Br. Jurisdiction 3. Where
in Trespass for taking of Tithes, the Defendant claimed them as Parson, and
within his Parish: and the Plaintiff prescribed, That he and his predecessors,
Vicars there, had had the Tithes of that place time out of mind, etc. And the
opinion of the Court was, that the right of Tithes came in debate betwixt the
Vicar and the Parson, who were Spiritual persons, who might try the right of
Tithes: And therefore there the Temporal Court should not have the Jurisdiction.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench. 56
IN an Indictment upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. of Forcible Entry, the Case was
this: One was Lessee for years, and the Reversion did belong unto the Company
of Goldsmiths: And one was indicted for a forcible Entry, and the words of the
Indictment were, That expulit and disseisivit the Company of Goldsmiths, and
quendam I. S. tenentem expulit. Cook took exception to the Indictment, and
said, that a disseisin might be to one although not in possession, as to a
Reversioner upon a term for years, or upon a Wardship; but he could not be
expulsed if he were not in possession, for privati^ praesupponit habitum: And
after it says, that the Tenant was expulsed; and two cannot be expulsed where
one only was in possession: therefore it ought to have said, that the Tenant
of the Freehold was disseised, and the Termor expelled; and it applies the
word expulit to both. And Fuller took another Exception, that the Cart is set
before the horse: For he who had the Freehold could not be disseised, if his
Termor were not first ousted: and the Indictment is* That the Tenant of the
Freehold was expulsed and disseised, and then the Termor was expelled. But Sui
Justice, as to that, said, that the later clause, scil. et quendam I. S.
tenentem, etc. is but surplusage: For if one enter with force, and expel the
Tenant of the Freehold, it is within the Statute of 8. H. 6. Then Fuller
moved, that the Indictment does not show the place where he expelled him. But
Cle^ch Justice said, that that was not material, for he could not expel him at
another place then upon the Land: As a man cannot make a Feoffment by livery
and seisin at another place, but upon the Land, unless a Feoffment with Livery
within the view. And as to the Objection of Cook, that the Indictment is, that
he disseised and expelled the Tenant of the Freehold out of the possession of
the Freehold: To that he answered, that the possession of the Termor is the
possession of him in the Reversion.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 57
A Man seized of a Copyhold in Fee, made his Will, and thereby he devised the
same unto his Wife for her life; and that after her death, his Wife or her
Executors should sell the Land: He surrendered to the use of his Wife, which was
entered in hac forma; viz. to the use of his Wife for life, Secundum formam
ultimae voluntatis. The Woman sold the Land during her life: The question was,
Whether she might sell or not? Suit Justice said, That the intent does appear
that she might sell during her life; for when it says, That she or her
Executors should sell after her death, it is meant the Estate which is to come
after her death, for the Wife after her death could not sell. The second Point
was, When the surrender is to the Wife for life, secundum formam ultimae
voluntatis, Whether here she have the Land for life, and the Fee also to sell.
Clenche, If she had not the Fee to sell, then the words Secundum formam ultimae
voluntatis, should be void; for the Surrender to the use of the wife for life,
gives her an Estate for life, without any other words. Suit, If it were ad usum
ultimae voluntatis, without speaking, what Estate the Wife should have; no
doubt but she should have for her own use for life; and that afterward she
might sell the Land; but he said, As the Case is put, it is a pretty Case: And
it was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 58
THis Case was moved in Court. A Copyholder committed Waste, by which a
forfeiture accrued to the Lord, who afterward did accept of the Rent: The
question was, Whether by this acceptance he were concluded of his Entry for
the Forfeiture. Cook said, He was not, for it is not as the Case 45 E. 3. where
a Lease is made upon Condition that the Lessee shall not do Waste, and he
commits Waste, and then the Lessor accepts the Rent, there he cannot enter; But
otherwise is it of a Copyhold, for there is a condition in Law, and here in
Fait; and a condition in Fait may save the Land by an Acceptance, but a
condition in Law cannot; for by the condition in Law broken, the Estate of the
Copyholder is merely void. And the Court agreed, That when such a Forfeiture is
presented, it is not to Entitle the Lord, but to give him notice; for the
Copyhold is in him by the Forfeiture presently without any Presentment. A man
made a Lease for years, upon condition that he should not assign over his
Lease, and it was reserving Rent; and after he did assign it, and then the
Lessor accepted the rent, there he shall not enter for the condition broken.
Lessee for years, upon condition, that he should not do Waste, and the Lessor
accepts of the Rent for the quarter in which the Waste was done, yet he may
enter; but if he do accept of a second payment of the Rent, then it is
otherwise; but if it were upon condition, That if he do waste, that his Estate
shall cease: There no acceptance of the Rent by the Lessor can make the Lease
good. It was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 59
THE Lord Admiral did grant the Office of Clark or Register of the Admiral
Court, to one Parker and Herold for their lives, and eorum diu^ius viventi: And
Herold bound himself in a Bond of Five Hundred Pound to Parker, that the said
Parker should enjoy the Office, cum omnibus proficuis during his life; And
afterward Herold did interrupt the said Parker in his Office; upon which he
brought an Action of Debt upon the Bond. The Defendant pleaded, That such is
the custom, That the Admiral might grant the same Office for the life of the
Admiral only; and that he is dead, and so the Office void; and that he did
interrupt him, as it was lawful for him to do; and demanded Judgment of the
Action. Upon which Cook did demur in Law; and he took diverse Exceptions to
Herolds Plea. 1. That he has pleaded a Custom, and has so pleaded it, that
no Issue can be taken upon it; for he says, Quod Vsitatum est, quod Admirallis
pro tempore existens non potest concedere Officium praedict. nisi pro termino
vitae suae; and does not show where the Court is holden; and does not say Quod
^alis habetur consuetudo in curia, as he ought, and as it is in 4. and 5 Phil.
and Mar. Dyer 152. in an Assize brought of the same Office of Registership of
the Admiralty: for there he brought Assize de libero tenemento suo in
Ratcliffe; and alleged, Quod per consuetudinem in curia Admiral. a tempore,
etc. And he said, That the Court has been used to be holden time out of mind,
etc as well at Ratcliffe as elsewhere. And if the place be not alleged, then
it cannot be known from what place the Visn^ shall come: See also that form
observed in the Book of Entries 75. b. So in an Assize of the Office of
Philizer in the Common Pleas it was alleged where the Bench was, viz. in Com'
Midd' as it is in my Lord Dyers Reports. Also 2. he does not say, That Curia
Admirallis is an ancient Court, etc. as he ought; for in 22. H. 6. it is said,
That where a prescription is alleged and pleaded in a Court, he ought to say,
That is is an ancient Court, in qua habetur talis consuetudo, etc. for a
Prescription cannot be in any Court, if it be not an ancient Court. The third
matter was, Because that in the Condition of the Bond it is said, That they are
seized of that Office to them for their lives, and eorum diutius viventi:
therefore he shall be estopped to say, That it is good only for the life of the
Admiral, as in 18. E. 4. 4. He cannot speak against the Condition of the Bond,
although it be but a supposal or recital. The fourth matter was, Because he
has bound himself, that the other should enjoy the same all his life without
interruption: although that the Office become void by Forfeiture or otherwise,
yet he cannot have it against his own Bond. And Cook said, There is a Case in
my Lord Dyers Reports; where, if the Lessor warrant the Estate of the Lessee,
if he be ousted by a stranger without Title, he shall have no action of
Covenant: But if the Covenant be, That he shall quietly enjoy it against him,
although that the Lease become void; yet the Lessor shall not take advantage
against him. Clenche Justice, If the Party occupy the Office by right or by
wrong, it is not material; he is not to interrupt him against his own Bond.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 60
AN Action of Debt was brought for an Amerciment in a Court Baron: And the
Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant was amerced at the Court Baron of the
Farmor, of the Manor of Cinkford: and exception was taken, because it might be
that he was amerced at another Court of the Farmor; and therefore he ought to
have said; At the Court Baron of the Manor, and not at the Court of the Farmor
of the Manor. Another Exception was, That he said, That at such a Court holden
before the Steward there, he was amerced: Whereas, in truth, the Court Baron is
holden before the Suitors, because they are the Judges, and not the Steward;
and for that was vouched 4. H. 6. and Fitz Not. in the Writ of Moderata
Misericordia. Suit Justice. True it is, that the Suitors are Judges in Real
Causes, not in Personal. Another Exception was taken, That he does not show,
That he had requested or demanded the Amercement. But to that it was answered,
That [Licet sepius requisitas] was in the Declaration, and that is sufficient,
because it was a Duty before the Request; but if it first begin upon the
Request to be a Duty, then it ought to be alleged In facto that there was a
Request. Another Exception was, That no Custom was alleged that they might
amerce, for it is not incident of common right unto a Court Baron ^or to
amerce, but to distrain or seize; therefore Custom ought to warrant it. The
Case was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 61.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon a Concessit Solvera, according to the Law
Merchant, and the custom of the City of Bristow, and Exception was taken,
because the Plaintiff did not make mention in the Declaration of the custom:
But because in the end of his Plea he said, Protestand^, se s^qui querelam
secundum consuetudinem civitatis Bristow; the same was awarded to be good; and
the Exception disallowed.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 62.
SVit Justice said, That if the custom of a Manor be, That the Homage might
make By-Lawes, it shall bind the Tenants, as well Freeholders, as
Copyholders: But Tanfi^ld, of Council in the Case, said, That it is no good
nor reasonable custom: But such By-Lawes may be made by the greater number of
the Tenants, otherwise they shall not bind them

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
63 The Vicar of Pancras Case.
THE Vicar of Pancras sued one in the Spiritual Court for Tithes; And he
pleaded, That some of them, for which the Vicar did sue, did belong to the
Parson; and that he had paid them to the Parson, and prayed a Prohibition.
Cook, He shall not have a Prohibition; for by this Plea he has put in Debate
the controversy of the Tithes, betwixt the Parson and Vicar; and then when
both are Spiritual Persons, the common Law shall not hold Plea of them, as is
35. H. 6. 39. and 31. H 6. Also by this Plea a Modus decimandi is not in
question, but the right of the Tithes, and that does appertain to the common
Law. And there Cook said, That is holden in 11. H. 7. That Unions and
Endowments of Vicarages do appertain to the Spiritual Law. Also the
prescription of the Defendant was, That he had used, time out of mind, etc. to
have for horses a gi^tment, her bage, 3. d. ob. q. and after that they had used
to pay for every Cow to the Vicar 4. d. and for the Calfe and Milk of every
Cow, 6. d. And Cook took exception that such prescription was double and
repugnant in it self, for he prescribes that he paies for herbage; and then he
prescribes, That he paies for every Cow 4 d. which cannot be meant but for
herbage of the Cow, for it is not for Milk or Calfe of the Cow, for he
prescribes to pay for them 6. d. He took another Exception, That he prescribes
that he has used to pay, but does not show that he has paid; for so he ought
to do, for otherwise he shall out the Spiritual Court of Jurisdiction, and yet
not give any remedy in this Court. Also, he says, That he has paid, but does
not show where; and the other may say, n^n solvit, and so an issue shall be,
and no place from whence the Visne shall come. Godfrey contrary. If one be a
lay man, and the other a spiritual man, then the trial shall be at the common
Law, as it is holden 31. H 6. and 2. E. 4. And the defendant here is a lay man,
who makes prescription of a Modus decimandi, for the discharge of Tithes in
kind. As to that which Cook said, That he prescribes that he has used to pay
to the Parson, and does not say, That it was due to the Parson; and if he pay
the Vicars Tithes to the Parson, he does wrong to the Vicar; He says, That he
has paid, and used to pay 4 d. to the Parson in full satisfaction, etc. and
redd^ndo singula sing^lis* it is good enough. As to the doubleness or
repugnancy of the Prescription, he said, That the prescription is set forth
according to the truth of the matter. As to the place, for that, no issue can
be taken upon it; he answered, That he conceived the issue will be upon the
Custom or Modus decimandi. And Gaudy Justice agreed to that. Suit Justice,
There is no Modus decimandi alleged; for when he says, That he has paid to
the Parson that which the Vicar demands, that is no answer. Gaud^ Justice, The
prescription is repugnant, as Cook said; and he said, That the herbage is for
all Kine, as well for those which have Calves, as those which have not. No
Prohibition granted.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
64. WINDSMORE and HULBORD's Case.
THe Case was this. A man gave lands to J. S. Habendum to him, and to three
other for their lives, ^t eorum diutius viventi successive: The question was,
What estate J. S. had: and if after his life there were any occupancy in the
Case? Cook, That J. S. had an estate but for his life only, because he cannot
have an estate for his life, and for the life of another, where the interest
commenceth both in praesenti: but he may have an estate for his own life in
present interest, and the remainder thereof for another life: But this
Habendum by no means can create a Remainder. And he said, that as a Lease to
one for life, Habendum to him and primog^nito filio suo, was no Remainder
primogenito filio (although some held to the contrary.) So a Lease for years,
Habendum to him and to another, was no Remainder to the other. Also the word
successive does not make a Remainder, as 30. H. 8. Br. Joyn^ts 53. where a
Lease for life to three, or for years to three, Habendum successive; yet they
have a joint estate: and successive is void: for he said, It is uncertain who
shall have it first, and who secondly. Also one cannot have an estate for his
own life, and for the life of another at the same time in present interest; for
the greater will drown the lesser: But if the greater be in praesenti, and the
less in futuro, as a lease for his own life, the Remainder to him for another
man's life, it is otherwise. As a lease for his own life, the Remainder for
years, is good. But if I make a lease to you for your own life, and 100 years,
both to begin at the same time, the Lease for years is drowned: and an estate
for his own life is greater then an estate for another life, and shall drown
the estate for another life. Vide 19. E. 3. Surr. 8. where Tenant for life of
a Manor did surrender to Tenant for life in Reversion. And 12. H. 7. 11. and
Perkins 113. That if there be a Lease for life to one, the Remainder to another
for life, and the Lessee for life does surrender to him in the Remainder, it is
good. So Dyers Reports. A lease is made to one for the term of another man's
life, without impeachment of Waste, the Remainder to him for his own life; he
is now punishable for waste, for the first estate is surrendered. Gaudy Justice,
If a lease be made to one for his life, and so long as another man shall live,
quaere what estate he has. 2. If there can be any Occupancy in the Case: for
if the estate be void, the limitation upon the estate is void: therefore if the
estate for the other man's life be drowned in the estate for his own life, that
can be no Occupancy. Also the Occupancy is pleaded, That such a one entered, and
does not say, claiming as occupant. For if one come hawking upon the land, he
shall not by such entry be an Occupant; and in the book of Entries it is
pleaded that he entered clayming as Occupant. Clenche Justice, Every Occupancy
ought to be in possession; for otherwise the Law casts the interest of it upon
him in the Reversion. But Gaudy and Suit Justices were utterly against him in
that; for then they said, there should be no occupancy, if the party were not
in by Lease, or such like means.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
65. DIKE and DUNSTON'S Case.
IN an Action of Trespass brought, the defendant did justify as Lessee to the
Lord Mountagu, and said, that the Lord Mountagu for him and his Farmors, had
used to have a way over the land in which the trespass is supposed to be done:
And that by rooting of a cart wheel the way was so dug and drowned, that he
could not so well use his way as before, and that therefore he did fill up the
cart roots, and dug a trench to let out the water: upon which the plaintiff
did demur in law: For 15. H. 7. is, that a Commoner cannot meddle with the
soil: so is 12. and 13. H. 8. So he who has Warren in the land of another man
cannot meddle with the soil: and as to that, that he could not use his way so
well as before, it is not good: for he ought to have said, That he could not
use his way at all: otherwise the plea is not good. As 6. E. 4. One is to lop
his tree, and he cannot do it unless it fall upon the Land of another, there he
may well justify the felling of it upon the others Land, because otherwise he
could not lop it at all. So if I give to one all the fish in my Pond, he cannot
dig a Trench to draw out the water, unless he cannot otherwise take the fish,
as with Nets, etc. Also he justifies, by reason that the Lord Mountagu for him
and his Farmors, etc. And he was a Lessee and paid no rent, therefore no
Farmor. Cowper contrary, He shall not have an Action of Trespass, for it is no
loss or hinderance unto him, but it is for his profit, for the Land is the
worse being drowned with water. If a man do disseise me, and fells trees upon
the Land, and does repair the houses; in an Assize brought against him, the
same shall be recowped in damages; because that which was done was for his
Commodity: also it is incident to one who has a way for to mend it. All
Prescriptions at the first did begin by Grants. And if one grant to me his
trees, the Law says, That I may come upon the Land to fell them and carry them
away off from the Land, and I shall not be a Trespassor: And by 9. E. 4. and
Perkins, If one grant to me liberty to lay a Conduit Pipe in his Land, I may
afterward mend it toties quoties it shall want mending 32. E. 3. If one grant
to me a way, if he will interrupt me in it, I may resist him; and if he dig
Trenches in the way to my hinderance in my way, I may fill them up again: The
books of 12 and 13. H. 8. are not adjudged. If Lessee for years be of a Meadow,
he may dig to avoid the water, and may justify so doing in Waste brought
against him. But it was said, That in that Case the Lessee has an interest in
the soil; so has not he who claims the way in this Case. Clenche Justice held,
That he could not dig the Soil. Then the Defendant demanded, What remedy he
should have. Suit Justice, If he went that way before in his shoes, let him
now pluck on his boots. Gaudy, The pleading is not good, for he says, That he
could not use his way so well as before, which is not good; but he ought to
plead, that he could not use the way at all.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 58
IN an Ejectione firm The party ought to set forth the number of the Acres;
for although he give a name to the Close, as Green Close, or the like, it is
not sufficient; because an habere facias seisinam shall be awarded: But in
Trespass the same may be Quare clausum suum fregit, etc. without naming the
number of the Acres: And so it was said it was adjudged in a Shropshire Case.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. In the Kings Bench. 67.
IN an Action upon the Case, because that the Defendant had made a Gate in one
Town, for which he could not go to his Close in another Town. Cook took
Exception that the Writ was Vi and armis; and it was agreed per curiam, that
for that cause it was not good: Also the Visne was of one Town only, whereas
it should have been of both; for he said, That in Hankford and Russels Case,
The Nuisance was laid in one Town per quod his Mill in another Town could not
grind; and upon Not guilty pleaded, the Visne came from one Town only, and it
was adjudged, that it was not good.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King Bench.
68 JOHN JOYCE'S Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought against John Joyce, Innkeeper of the Bell
at Maidstone in Kent, for not scowring of a Ditch which ran betwixt the house
of the said John Joyce and of another man; and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff against the Defendant Joyce, and a Writ of Error was brought to
reverse the Judgment, and diverse Errors were assigned. The first Error which
was assigned was, That the Plaintiff does prescribe, That all the Inhabitants
of the Bell etc. had used to scowre the Gutter, etc. And it was said, That that
was no good form of prescription, as in 12. H. 4. 7. Br. Pres^ription 16.
Where the Plaintiff said, That the Defendant, and omnes alii tenuram illam
priushabentes, mundare debuere and consuevere talem fossatam; and therefore the
Writ was abated, for it ought to have been quod ipsi and praedecessores sui de
tempere cujus contrarium, etc. Or that such a one and his Ancestors or
Predecessors, whose Estate the Defendant has, etc. Also if a Copyholder
prescribe, That he and all his Tenants tenementi praedict' have used to have
estovers in such a Wood, etc. it is not good: but he ought to prescribe in the
Manor. The second Error was, That the Prescription was uncertain, for it is,
That all Tenants, etc. which extends to Tenants in Fee, in Tail, for Life,
or years; and the Prescription is the foundation and ground of the Action, and
therefore it ought to be certain: As if one make Title for entry for Mortmaine,
he ought to show that he has entered within the year and day. 7. E. 6. Br.
Prescription 69. It is holden, That Tenant for years or at will cannot
prescribe for common; for the prescription ought to be alleged in the Tenant
of the Free hold: or to allege a Corporation, or the like: In reason, Tenant
for years cannot prescribe, for his Estate has a certain beginning, and a
certain end, therefore it is not of long continuance. The third Error was, That
the Plaintiff has not alleged, That the Defendant was Tenant at the time of
the Action brought, as in the Case of Clerkenwell and Black-Fri^rs; where the
Plaintiff brought his Action upon the Case, for that the Defendant had turned
the course of the water of a Conduit Pipe, and the Declaration was, Quod cum
querens seis^^us existat, and does not say existitit; and so the Plaintiff was
not supposed Owner of the Site and Message of Blackfriars, but only at the
time of the Action brought, and not at the time of the diversion of the Water:
But Judgment was given, and Error brought upon it. The fourth Error was,
Because it was for scowring a Gutter betwixt the houses, etc. and does not say,
That the house was contigue adjacens to his house. 22. H. 6. Where Cattle
escape into the Plaintiffs Close, and thereupon Trespass brought, the
Defendant said, That it was for want of Fence of the Plaintiffs Close, and it
was holden no Plea, if he do not say that the Plaintiffes Close was adjacens.
Clench Justice. The Prescription ought to be, That such a one, and all those
whose Estate he has, etc. have used for them and their Farmors to repair the
Gutter. Cowper. When the Prescription runs with the Land, then he may prescribe
in the Land, as all those who have holden such Lands, have used to scowre such
a ditch, and the same is good. Gaudy Justice. If he had said, All those who had
occupied such a house, had used to scowre, it had been good. Godfrey, If a man
will allege a Prescription or Custom, he ought to set forth, That it was put
in use within time of memory. In the Prescription of Gavelkind, the party ought
to show, that the Land is partable, and so has been parted. Also he prescribed
That omn^^ illi qui tenuerunt, and does not allege a Seisin, but by way of
Argument. Suit Justice held the pleading not good, because the words were not
contigue adjacens. And for these causes the first Judgment was reversed.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
69 GOMERSALL and GOMERSALLS Case.
IN an Action of Account the Plaintiff charged the Defendant as Bailiffe of
his Shop, curam habens and administrationem b^norum. The Defendant answered as
to the Goods only, and said nothing to the Shop. And Tanfield moved the same
for Error in Arrest or Judgment, as 14. H. 4. 20. One charged another as
Bailiffe of his house, and cu^am habens bonorum in ^^^existentium, the Traverse
was, That he was not Balivus of the house prout: that is good, and goes to
all; but he cannot answer to the Goods, and say nothing to the house. so 49. E.
3. 7. Br. Account. 21. A man brought an Account against the Bailiffe of his
Manor habens curam of twenty Oxen and Cowes, and certain Quarters of Corn. And
by Belknap, If he have the Manor and no Goods, yet he shall account for the
Manor, and it shall be no Plea to say, That the Plaintiff sold him the Goods
without Traversing, without that, that he was his Bailiffe to render Account;
and as to the Manor, he may say, That the Plaintiff leased the same to him for
years, without that, that he was his Bailiffe. And he took another Exception,
That the Plaintiff charge him with Moneys ad Merchandizandum; and he
Traverseth that he was not his Receiver denariorum ad computandum prout. And so
he does not meet with the Plaintiff, and so it is no issue; and if it be no
issue, it is not helped by the Statute of Jeofailes, 32. H. 8. but mis-joyning
of Issue is helped by that Statute. 19. Eliz. W. Attorney of the Common Pleas
did charge another Attorney of the same Pleas with a Covenant to have three
years board in marriage with the Defendants Daughter; and he pleaded, That he
did not promise two years board, and so issue was joined and tried; and the
same could not be helped by the Statute, because it was no issue, and did not
meet with the Plaintiff. So if one charge one with debet and detinet, and he
answer to the debet only, it is no issue, and therefore it is not helped. In
29. H. 6. in Trespass for entering into his house and taking of his Goods, the
Defendant pleaded non intravit, and the issue was tried, and Damages given; and
because the taking of the Goods was not also in issue, all was void, 4. E. 3.
One shall not account by parcells, because the Action is entire. Vid. 3. E. 3.
8. acc. lib. Deuteronomy. 202. A President 14. H 7. That the Verdict was not full, and
did not go to the whole, and therefore was not good. Hel^ contrary. And he
said, as to the first, That there is a Case 9. E. 3. Account 35. Where the
Plaintiff charge the Defendant in Account as Bailiffe of his house, and that
he had Administration of his Goods, viz. forty Sacks of wool: And the Jury
found that he was not Bailiffe or his house, but they found that he had
received the Sacks of Wool to render account etc. and he had judgment for the
Goods, although it was not found for the house. Vide 5. H. 7. 24. a. Where if a
Jury be charged with several issue, and the one is found, and the other not, it
makes no discontinuance; or if one be discontinued, yet it is no discontinuance
of the whole. But if the same be not helped by the common Law, yet it is helped
by the Statute of 32. H. 8. which says, Non obstante Discontinuance or
miscontinuance. Daniel ad idem. And he said, That the books before of 14. H. 4.
and 49. E. 3. were not ruled; in the one book, the Defendant pleaded, That the
Plaintiff gave the goods to him; in the other, that he sold them to him, and
demanded Judgment of the Action; and it is no good answer, for they are Pleas
only before the Auditors, and not in an Action of Account; and although the
Verdict be found for part only, yet it is good, for no Damages are to be
recovered in an Account. In Trespass it is true, if one be found and not the
other, and joint Damages be given, the Verdict is naught for all; but if
several Damages be given, it is good, as it is ruled in 21. H. 6. Cook 26. H.
8. is, That he cannot declare generally of an house, curam habens and
administrationem bonorum; but he ought further to say, viz. Twenty Quarters of
Corn, and the like, etc. In the Principal Case it is a joint charge, and one
charge for the Shop and Goods, and he answers unto one only; but he ought to
answer to all; or else it is no answer at all: See 10. E. 4. 8. But Cook found
another thing, scil. That there is thing put in issue which is not in the
Verdict, nor found, nor touched in the Verdict; and that makes all that which
is found, not good, and that is not helped by any Statute. I grant that
discontinuances are helped by the Statute of 32. H. 8. of Jeofailes, but
imperfections in Verdicts are not helped. It was a great Case argued upon a
Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber; and it was (...) Case. An Information
was against Brache for entering into a house and one hundred Acres of Land in
Stepney; he pleaded, Not guilty; the Jury found him guilty for the one hundred
Acres, and said nothing for the house; upon which Error was brought, and the
Judgment reversed; and he said, That it was not a discontinuance; but no
Verdict for part. Daniel That was the fault of the Clark, who did not enter it;
and it has been the usge to amend the default of the Clark in another term.
All the Justices said, True, if the Postea be in, and not entered: but here it
is entered in the Roll in this form. Daniel, Where I charge one in Account with
so much by the hands of such a one, and with so much by thehands of such a one;
although there be one absque hoc to them all, yet they are several issues. The
Court answered, Not so, unless there be several issue joined to every one of
them. But by Gaudy Justice, If there be several issues, yet if one be found
and the other not, no Judgment shall be given. Clenche Justice, It is not a
charge of the Goods, but in respect of the Shop, therefore that ought to be
traversed. Suit Justice, The traverse of the Shop alone is not good. The Queens
Solicitor said, That the books might be reconciled, and that there needed not a
traverse to the goods, for the traverse of the Shop prout answers to all: but
now he charges him as Bailiffe of his Shop and Goods, and he takes issue upon
the Goods only, which issue is not warranted by the Declaration. And he said,
That if one charge me as Bailiffe of his Goods ad merchandizandum, I shall
answer for the increase, and shall be punished for my negligence. But if he
charge me as his Receiver, ad computandum, I shall not be answerable but for
the bare money, or thing which was delivered.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
70 GILE'S Case.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in an Action upon the
Case. The Action upon the Case was brought against one, Quare exaltavit
stagnum, per quod suum pratum fuit inundatum; and he pleaded Not guilty; and
the Jury found Quod erexit stagnum; and if Errectio be Exaltatio, then the Jury
find, that the Defendant is guilty; and thereupon Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff. Glanvile alleged the general Error, That Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff, where it ought to have been given for the Defendant. And he
said, That erigere stagnum, est de novo facere: Exaltare, est erectum majoris
altitudinis facere; Deexaltare is ad pristinam altitudinem adducere:
prosternere stagnum, est penitus tollere. And the precise and apt word
according to his Case, in an Action upon the Case, ought to be observed; that
he may have Judgment according to his damage and his complaint, viz. either
Deexaltare or Posternere, etc. 7. E. 3. 56. An Assize of Nusans, Quare
exaltavit stagnum ad nocumentum liberi tenementi sui; The Defendant pleaded,
That he had not inhaunced it after it was first levied. And by True, There is
not any other Writ in the Chancery, but Quare exaltavit stagnum. Herle said,
That he might have a Writ Quare levavit stagnum; and there by that book Levare
stagnum, and exaltare stagnum do differ: And therefore he conceived, That the
Writ should abate, for using one word for another, 8. E. 3. 21. Nusans 5. by
Chauntrell. In a Writ of Nusans Quare levavit, if it be found that it was
tortiously levied, the whole shall be destroyed: But in a Writ Quare exaltavit,
nothing shall be pulled down if it be found for the Plaintiff, but the
inhauncing shall be abated only: So 8. Ass. 9. Br. Nusans 17. the same Case and
difference is put, and 16. E. 3. Fitz. Nusans 11. If the Nusans be found in any
other form then the Plaintiff has supposed, he shall not recover. And in 48.
E. 3. 27. Br. Nusans 9. The Writ was Quare divertit cursum aquae: etc. and
showed that he had put Piles and such things in the water, by which the course
of the water was streitned; wherefore, because he might have had a Writ Quare
coarctavit cursum qquae, the Writ was holden not to be good. Cook took another
Exception, viz. That the Assize of Nusans ought to be against the Tenant of the
Freehold, and therefore it cannot be (as it was here) brought against the
Workmen, and it is not showed here, that the Defendant was Tenant of the Soil;
for 33. H. 6. 26. by Moile, If a way be streitned and impaired, an Action upon
the Case; lies; but if it be altogether stopped, an Assize of Nusans lies. But
Prisoit said, If the stopping be by the Terr-Tenant, an Assize of Nusans lies;
but if it be by a Stranger, then an Action upon the Case; but for common
Nusanses no Action lies, but they ought to be presented in the Leet or Turn.
Drew, We have showed That he who brought the Assize of Nusans has a Freehold
in the Land; and if the Tenant be named, it is sufficient, although it be not
showed that he is Tenant of the Freehold. And to that, all the Justices seemed
to incline. But then it was showed to the Court, that one of the Plaintiffes in
the Writ of Error had released. And if that should bar his Companions, was
another question? And it was holden, That the Writ of Error shall follow the
nature of the first Action; and that Summons and Severance lies in an Assize
of Nusans; and therefore it was holden, that it did the like in this Action;
therefore the Release of the one was the Release of the other. But then it was
asked by Glanvile, What should become of the Damages, which were entire? Note,
Pasch. 29. Eliz. the Case was moved again, and Drew held exaltare and erigere
all one; and that erigere is not de novo facere, for that is Levare. But the
Justices were against him, who all held, That erigere is de novo facere, and
exaltare is in majorem altitudinem attollere, and at length the Judgment was
affirmed, That Erectio and Exaltatio were all one: For the Chief Justice had
turned all his Companions when he came to be of Opinion, that it was all one.
And so the Case passed against Glanviles Client.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 71
THE Lady Gresham was indicted for stopping the Highway; and the Indictment
was not laid to be contra pacem. And Cook said, That for a mis-feasance it
ought to be contra pacem; but for a non-feasance of a thing, it was otherwise;
and the Indictment was for setting up a gate in Osterly Park: And Exception
also was taken to the Indictment for want of Addition; for Vidus was no
Addition of the Lady Gresham; and also Vi and armis was left out of the
Indictment: And for these causes she was discharged, and the Indictment quashed.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 72.
IN an Ejectione firm, Exception was taken because the Plaintiff in his
Declaration did not say, Extratenet: For in every Case where a man is to
recover a possession, he ought to say, extra tenet. And in Debt he ought to
say, Debet and d^tinet: And in a Replevin, Averia cepit, and injuste detinet.
But all the Justices agreed, That in an Ejectione firm those words were not
material: For if the Defendant do put out the Plaintiff, it is sufficient to
maintain this Action. And Kempe Secondary, said, that so were all the ancient
Presidents; although of late times it has been used to say in the Declaration,
Extra tenet: and the Declaration was holden to be good without those words.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 73
IN a Case for Tithes, the Defendant did prescribe to pay but ob. q for the
Tithes of all Willows cut down by him in such a Parish. Cook, It is no good
prescription; for thereby, if he cut down all the Willows of other men also,
but ob. q. should be paid for them all. But he ought to have prescribed for all
Willows cut down upon his own land, and then it had been good: But as the
prescription is, it is unreasonable; and of that opinion was the whole Court.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
74 DEIGHTON and CLARK'S Case.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, the Condition of the Bond was, That whereas
the Plaintiff was in possession of such Lands, If I. S. nor I. D. nor I. G. did
disturb him by any indirect means, but by due course of Law, that then, etc.
The Defendant pleaded, That nec I S. nec I. D. nec I. G. did disturb him by any
indirect means, but by due course of Law. Godfrey, The plea in Bar is not good:
for it is a Negative pregnans, viz. such a Negative which implies an
Affirmative, which yet seems to be repugnant to a Negative, as in 21. H. 6. 19.
In a Writ of Entry, the Defendant pleaded the deed of the Demandant after the
darrein Continuance: The Demandant said, It was not his deed after the darrein
Continuance: And that was holden a Negative pregnans: wherefore he was
compelled to plead and say, he made it by dures, before the darrein Continuance
such a day, absque hoc, that he made it after the darrein continuance, and then
Issue was taken upon it. The same Case is in 5. H 7. 7. But there it is said,
That in Debt upon a Bond to perform an Arbitrament, Non fecerunt Arbitrementum
per diem is no Negative pregnans: The same Law, that non deliberavit arbitrium
in Script. 38. H 6. in Formedon Ne dona pas in tail is a Negative pregnans.
Vide 39 H. 6. The Case of the Dean and Chapter. The second Exception was, That
he has pleaded neque such, nor such, nor such had disturbed him by any
indirect means, but only by due course of Law: And that cannot be tried,
neither by Jury, nor by the Judges. Not by the Jury; because it is not to be
put to them, whether they had disturbed him by indirect means, or by due course
of Law: for they shall not take upon them the construction, What is an indirect
means, and what is the due course of Law; for it appertains to the Justices
to adjudg that. Not by the Judges, because he has not put it certain, that it
was a due course of Law by which he disturbed him. As 22. E. 4. 40. In Debt
upon a Bond, the Defendant says, that it is upon condition, That if the
Defendant, or any for him, came to Bristow such a day, and there showed to the
Plaintiff or his Council a sufficient Discharge of an Annuity of forty
shillings per annum, which the Plaintiff claims out of two Messuages of the
Defendant in D, that then, etc. The Defendant said, that A. and B. by the
assignement of the Defendant, came the same day to Bristow, and tendered to
show to N* and W. of the Plaintiffs Council, a sufficient Discharge of the
Annuity, and that they did refuse to see it, and demanded judgment of the
Action. The Plaintiff did demur upon the Plea. And after a long argument, it
was adjudged by all the Justices to be no Plea, etc. because it lay in the
judgment of the Court to judge of it: and he did not show in certain, what
discharge he tendered, as a Release. Unity of possession, etc. If a man be
bound to plead a sufficient plea before such a day, in Debt upon such a Bond;
it is no plea to say, That he has pleaded a sufficient plea before the day;
but he ought to show what plea he has pleaded: For the Court cannot tell
whether it be a sufficient plea or not, if it do not appear what manner of plea
it is. 35 H. 6. 19. The Condition of a Bond was, That where the Plaintiff was
indebted to J. S. in one hundred pounds; If the Defendant acquit and discharge
the Plaintiff, that then, etc. The Defendant pleaded, That he had discharged
him etc. and the Plaintiff did demurre upon the plea, because he did not show
how; and it was holden no good plea. So 38. H. 8. Br. Condition 16. per curiam
in the Kings Bench; where a man pleaded, That he had saved him harmless; it
was no Plea, without showing how, because he pleaded in the Affirmative;
contrary, if he had pleaded in the Negative, as Non damnificatus est. Suit and
Clenche Justices said, That if he had pleaded, That he was not disturbed by any
indirect means, it had been good enough. Gaudy, If he had said, That he was not
disturbed contra formam conditionis praedict', it had been good; as upon a
pleading of a Statute, Ne entra pas contra formam Statuti. Clench, If I be
bound to suffer I. S. to have my house, but not I. D. I ought to answer, That I
have suffered the one, and not the other to have it. Suit Justice, They are
both several issues, and one shall not be repugnant to the other.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
75 STURGIE'S Case.
A Case was moved upon the Statute of 5. Eliz. Cap. 14. The Case (as I
conceive) was thus: Grandfather, Father and Daughter; Land descended from the
Grandfather to the Father, who made a Lease for one hundred years; the Father
died, and the Daughter forged a Will of the Grandfather, by which he gave the
Land to the Father for life, the Remainder to the Daughter in Fee; and the same
was forged to have avoided an Execution of a Statute Staple, the Lease being
defeated; and if it were within the Statute of 5. Eliz. was the question.
Solicitor, That it was within the statute, and within the first Branch; viz. If
any shall forge any deed, etc. to the intent that the Estate of Freehold, or
Inheritance of any person, etc. in or to any Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, Freehold or Copyhold, or the right Title or Interest of any etc.
of, in, or to the same, or any of them; shall or may be molested, etc. Lessee
for years has a Title, has an Interest, has a right; therefore within the
words of the Statute; and those words shall be referred to the words Lands,
Tenements, etc. But Cook said, They shall be referred to the words precedent,
viz. Estate of Freehold or Inheritance; and then a Lease for years is not
within them. Also by the Solicitor, A Testament in writing is within the words
of the Statute, and therefore he recited a clause in the end of the Statute;
viz. and if any person plead, publish, or show forth, etc. to the intent to
have or claim thereby any Estate of Inheritance, Freehold, or Lease for years:
And also he said a Statute Staple is an estate for years, although it be not a
Lease for years, because it is not certain. Cook. If she should be within both
branches, then she should be twice punished, which Law will not suffer. And the
Statute is, whereby any Estate for years shall be claimed; and she would not
claim, but defeat an Estate for years; and a Statute Staple is not a Lease for
years; and the Statute is not to be taken by Equity, because it is a Penal
Law. Solicitor, When the Statute is extended, then it is an Estate for years,
although it be uncertain. If a man forge a Lease for years, it is directly
within the Statute. But if a man have a Lease, and another is forged to defeat
it, it is a question whether it be within the Statute: And all the doubt of
this Case is upon the reference of these words, Right, Title, Interest: And it
was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 76
THE Vicar of Pancras Case was argued again by Godfrey: And he said, That no
Plea shall be allowed in the Ecclesiastical Court which tends in discharge of
Tithes: And to prove that, he cited 8. E. 4. 14. Br. Tithes 11. And a Case in
6. and 7. E. 6. Dier 79. d. But admit the Plea should be allowed in the
Ecclesiastical Court (as many of the Doctors have certified the Justices) yet
because the Modus decimandi is a thing pertaining to the common Law, the
Prohibition will lie. By Fitz. Herb. and the Register, If a Parson grant to one
of his Parishoners, That he shall be discharged of Tithes, he may peradventure
plead the same in the Spiritual Court, yet there is good cause that a
Prohibition do lie: So 22. E. 4. 20. Br. Prohibition 14. The Abbot of Saint
Albans kept the wife of I. S. in his house two hours against her will, to have
made her his Harlot, and the Husband spoke of it; for which cause the Abbot
sued him for slander in the Spiritual Court; and because the husband for that
act might have a false imprisonment, therefore a Prohibition was granted So if
I swear to pay I. S. 10^. and he sues for it in the Spiritual Court, a
Prohibition lies; for he may have an Action of Debt in the common Law for it;
for where the common Law may have Jurisdiction, there the Spiritual Court
shall not intermeddle with the matter. So if an Abbot rob I. S. and he speaks
of it, and the Abbot sues him in the Spiritual Court, a Prohibtion will lie.
He said further, That the Case was betwixt the Vicar and a Parishoner, and
therefore one of them a Temporal person. If the Suit be betwixt the Farmer of
the Parson and another, a Prohibition shall be granted. Also he said, The right
of the Tithes does not come in question, but only the Modus dicimandi. C^^k.
The Modus decimandi does not come in question there, therefore it cannot be
traversed; for if it be due to the Parson, that is the question, as in 40. E.
3, 4. In a Replevin, the Defendant says, That the place where etc. is Ancient
Demesne, and pleads to the Jurisdiction; Char l', that is a Trespass, and
Personal Action, and therefore it is no plea; and yet it was agreed by the
Court to be a good plea: for by the Avowry, the realty might come in debate in
the Replevin, Atkins, If there be contention de Jure Decimarum Originum, habens
de jur^ Patronatus, tunc spectat ac Legem Civilem. And in this case, it was
said, That de mero jure, The Parson is to have all the tithes, if there be not
any Endowment of the Vicarage.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
77. MEGOD'S* Case.
THe Case was, That a Feoffment was made unto another man, ad eam intentionem,
that he should convey the same to such a one, to whom he sold it; and he sold
the same to another, and did refuse to convey it, and therefore the other
brought an Action upon the Case. And Gaudy Justice held, that the Action would
lie. But Suit Justice held the contrary. Wray Chief Justice did agree with
Gaudy: for he said, It was a Trust, that he should assure it to another. And it
is a good consideration in the Chancery: the conveyance of a Trust, and
thereupon, an Action upon the Case will lie.

Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Kings Bench. 78.
ALtham of Grays-Inne, took many Exceptions to an Indictment of Murder. The
first was, because the Indictment said, Quod capta fuit inquisitio coram
Coronatore in Comitatu, etc. and does not say, de Comitatu. And a Crowner in a
County is a Crowner in every County in England, as it is holden, 9. H. 5. 24.
b. Also de and in do much differ, as in 15. E. 4. 15. Where a Scire facias was
brought against the Master and Scholars Beatae Mariae, and Sancti Nicholai in
Cantabrigia, where the foundation was de Cantabrigia, and not in Cantabri^gia,
And the Writ was abated; For there is a difference betwixt [in] and [de.] For a
thing may be [in] and not [of,] as Saint Sepulchers is in London, but not of
London. A second Exception was, because it said, Inquisitio capta per
Sacramentum, etc. and did not say, Jurati; and therefore the party is not
charged upon it; and by 13. E. 4. If Jury be charged upon one, and they find
another felon, it is void; because they were not charged upon him. And 1. R. 3.
4. by Hassey. If in Assize the Record be such, viz. Quod jurati exacti
comperuerunt, quorum 12. supra Sacramentum suum dicunt, And give their verdict,
If it does not say, Quorum 12. Electi and jurati, it is error. For it does not
say in facto, that they were sworn, and yet it is employed by the words
Sacramentum suum, that they were sworn. The third Exception was, That it does
not say, That he was in pace Dei, and dict' Dominae Reginae; for it might be
that the party was a Traitor, and that he was flying, and in such case he
might justify the killing of him; and perhaps also it was se defendendo;
therefore those words are very necessary. An other Exception was, because the
Indictment is, percussi^, and it is not said, ex malitia praecogitata, for so
an Indictment of Murder ought to be, as in 2. E. 4. The Indictment was, quod
Cepit and abduxit fel^nice, where it ought to have said, Felonice cepit and
abduxit; and therefore it did abate. A fifth Exception was, because it says,
^t dedit ei plagam mortalem; and does not say, cum gladio p^aedicto. And in the
Statute de Coronatore, there is a charge given him, That he find what weapon
it was which gave the stroke. See the Statute of 4. E. 1. Rastall Coroners. 2.
The sixth Exception was, That the Indictment was, That the pan of the knee was
cut out, and it does not show, the length, depth, and breadth of the wound: he
granted that if one single member be cut off, it is not necessary to show the
breadth, etc. but here was no amputation of any member, nor a cutting off, but
the cutting of the pan of the knee. Sa^g to the same purpose, and he finds
there is a great difference betwixt cut off, and cut out. And he said, That as
to that which the Solicitour has answered unto, to the difference of [in] and
[de,] viz. that it is all one, as if I grant a thing percipiena' de Man^rio, or
in Maneri^, that is all one. To that he answered, that that cannot be; and in
W^mbish^s case, in Plo. Co^. 75. the same Exception was taken in a Writ. But in
our Case, he said, It is an Indictment, which is favored, because the life is
in question. And he took another Exception, because that the Indictment says*
Tempore feloniae and murdredi praedict', and there is no such word murdredum:
To that the Sollicitour said, That it was in equal degree, murdum and
murdredum, for none of them are found amongst the Latinists. Snag said, What
then? yet one is a word which is received in the Law, and is vox artis, but the
other not; and therefore it is not in the same degree. Also he said, That when
the Indictment comes to the Accessories, It said, Felonice praesentes,
abb^ttentes, and assistentes: and felonice cannot be applied to (praesente^.)
Also when it comes to the Accessories, it does not say, Ex malitia praecogitata
abbet^entes and assistentes, etc. Cook contrary; and he said, That if
Indictments have sufficient substance, they are not to be overthrown for
trifles: As to the first he said, If you will have it to be (coram Coronatore
de Comitatu,) perhaps it was a Liberty; and then coram Coronatore of the
Liberty, cannot be coram Coronatore of the County. Gaudy Justice said, that was
no answer. But as to this point, the Justices desired that Presidents might be
searched; and said, that they would follow the greater number of them. Clenche,
If one say, that such a one is a Justice of Peace in Hertfordshire; it is all
one, as if he had said a Justice of Peace of Hertfordshire. As to the 2d.
Jurati, that is no Exception; for it is true, that it must be so in an Assize,
but not in an Indictment: also no President can be showed, where ex malitia
propensa sua shall be applied to every word, when it runs in sense to all by
Conjunctions copulative. As to the Exception, that there ought to be the
length, breadth, etc. Kempe the Secondary said, That it was not worth the
standing upon: and as to the word Murdredi, if it had been left out, the
Indictment had been sufficient, and that shall not make the Indictment void;
for if it be left out, it does no hurt to it: For if many come together to make
an Assault, ex malitia praecogitata; and one of them only strikes the party
mortally, and he dies, it is murder in them all. And that was Doctor Ellis
case in the Commentaries; and the Indictment needs not say, that they were
praesentes, abbettantes and auxiliantes: and as to the word felonice, it goes
to all the words, although not particularly applied. Note, all the Justices did
incline that the Indictment was good notwithstanding the Exceptions; but yet
they said, they would advise of it, and look upon Presidents.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 79.
A Writ of Error was brought against two, upon a Recovery in a Precipe quod
reddat, etc. and one of them died. The question was, Whether the Writ should
abate? Cook moved, that it might not abate; for he said, That the Writ of Error
is but a Commission for to examine the Record, and the party shall recover
nothing thereby, but shall be only discharged from the first Recovery: and he
said, It is not like unto a Precipe. Then the Justices demanded of him, if the
Recovery were in a real Action; and he said, that it was: Then they said, that
3. H. 7. 1. is, That if Error be brought upon a Recovery in a personal Action,
that death shall not abate the Writ; but otherwise, if it were upon a real
Action: for there the Judgment shall be, that he shall be restored to the
Land. Quere.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 80
AN Appeal of Mayheme was, that Percussit super manum dextram viz. inter manum
dextram and brachium dextrum. And Exception was taken to it, that it was
repugnant; for if it was inter brachium and manum dextram; therefore it could
not be super manum dextram; for the word [inter] excludes both. Cook. It is
certain enough, because it says, Super manum dextram, And an Indictment shall
not abate for form, if it be sufficient in substance of matter; and also being
upon the Wrist, it was upon the rising of the hand.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 81
A Man made a Lease for years, rendering rent at the Feast of Saint Michael
th'Arch-Angel; and if it were behind by ten days after, being in the mean time
lawfully demanded, and no sufficient distress to be found upon the Land, that
then it might be lawful for the Lessor to re-enter. The last of the ten days
at the hour of two afternoon the Rent was demanded, and there was a sufficient
distress upon the Land before the Demand, but not after; and whether the
Lessor might enter or not? was the question. Daniel, These words [Sufficient
distresse] ought to be referred to the time of the Demand, viz. to the last
instant, at which time the Demand is only material: Upon a Cessavit, if there
be a sufficient distress, the last instant of the two years, it is sufficient.
Clenche Justice held, That there ought to be a sufficient distress upon the
Land for all the ten days. But Suit Justice held. That it was sufficient if
there were a distress for a reasonable time, so as it might be presumed, that
the Lessor might have knowledge of it. But if a distress be put upon the Land
only for an hour, or by nights, he held it was not a sufficient distress.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
82 Sir EDWARD HOBBYE'S Case.
IN this Case the question was, Whether the Death of one of the Defendants,
should abate the whole Writ of Error. Cook, The Writ shall not abate, for no
Defendant is to be named in the Writ; which see in the form of the Writ of
Error; and 2 R. 3. 1. it is holden, That the Writ shall not abate, for it is in
its nature but a Certiorari, and Judgment only is to be reversed. Atkins,
Although that the Defendants have not day in Court by the Writ of Error, yet by
the Scire facias which is sued upon it, as in our Case it is, they have day;
and see 3. H. 7. and 14. H. 7. a difference, where it is a Writ of Error upon a
real Action, and where upon a personal. Cook. That holds, Where the first
Writ is abated, and so is 3. H. 7. See the Case a little before, Gaudy and
Clench Justices, bring a new Writ of Error for that is the surest way.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
83 LOVELL and GOLSTON'S Case.
IN a Writ of Error brought upon a Record removed out of the Court of Kingston,
where the first Judgment was given in an Action of Debt for an Amercement in a
Court Baron: The first Error which was assigned, was, That he in the Action of
Debt did declare, That whereas at a Court holden before William Fleetwood
Steward, etc. whereas it ought to have been holden before the Suitors, for they
are the Judges. The second Error was, That the Presentment upon which the
Amercement is grounded, says, That Golston the Defendant had cut down more
Trees quam debuit, extra boscum Domini. 1. That it is repugnant; for he could
not cut wood extra boscum, but in b^sco. 2. When it says many, and does not
show what trees, nor how many he might cut, and that he has cut down more then
he ought, and also he does not show when the cutting of them was. Vide 6. E. 4.
By prescription they may prescribe to hold a Court before the Steward; but if
there be no custom or Prescription to warrant it, then as 4. H. 6. is, it is
coram Senescalio, and Sectatoribus. Gaudy, Every Court Baron is to be holden
before the Suitors, if there be no Prescription to the contrary: But a Leet
always before the Steward. The Action of Debt was upon the Presentment; and
the Error is brought upon the defects in the Presentment; for if that be not
good, all is naught. Notwithstanding it was said by one at the Bar, That the
form of pleading in the book of Entries is, That the Court was holden before
the Steward, if the Action be for debt or Trespass for Amercements or such
personal things: But if the Action be brought for real things, then it is
before the Suitors. But notwithstanding that, the Judgment for the Causes
aforesaid was reversed.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
84 BARKER and FLETWEL'S Case.
BArker of Ipswich brought an Action of Covenant against the Assignee of his
Lessee for years, one Fletwell. And set forth, That whereas he had made a Lease
for years reserving Rent, with re-entry for non-payment of the Rent; and that
the Lessee did covenant to build a house upon the Land within the first ten
years; and that he assigned over his term: And he brought the Action against
the Assignee, who pleaded, That the Lessor did enter, and had the Possession
for part of the ninth year; and if thereby the Covenant were discharged, was
the demurrer in Law. Godfrey, Who argued for the Lessor, said, That by this
entry of the Lessor, the Covenant was not suspended. As 20. E. 4. 12 BY.
Extinguishment 34. The Abbot of D. did grant to W. S. a Corrodie; viz. so much
bread, etc. for the term of his life, faciend' talia servitia prout J. N. and
alii usi sunt focere; The Grantee leased back again the Corrodie unto the Abbot
for 10. years, rendering 3^. rent per annum, and he brought Debt for the rent;
and the Abbot said, That he did not the Services; and the Grantee said, That he
was not bound to do them, for that by the Lease the Corrodie was suspended: And
it was holden, that it was not suspended. Godf^^y held the reason to be,
because that the service is a Collateral thing: And therefore he said, He
ought to do it, notwithstanding that the Abbot had the Corrodie: So in 8. H. 7.
7. Br. Conditions 134. Where Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment in Fee, and
takes back an estate in Fee, and afterward was bounden in a statute Merchant,
and then made a Feoffment in Fee upon Condition, and died, his Issue within
age, who enters for the Condition broken; he was remitted notwithstanding that
execution upon the statute was sued against the Father in his life. So if Lease
be made of a Manor, except Herriots, Fines, and Amercements; and that the
Lessee shall collect them during the Term, although that the Lessor enters,
yet the Lessee ought to collect them during the term. Also he pleades here,
That Barker did enter, and that general pleading is doubtful; and the Plea
shall be taken strictly against him that pleads it; and it may be that he
entered by wrong; and so it may be that he entered by right, viz. for not payment
of the Rent, as in truth his entry was: And if Barker did enter lawfully, then
it was no suspension or extinguishment of the Covenant: As 19. R. 2. If Lessee
for life commit waste, and afterward alieneth, and the Lessor enters for the
Alienation, yet after his entry he shall have an Action of Waste against the
Lessee: So 8. H. 6. 10. Waste 8. but with this difference, If the Lessor enter
wrongfully, there, although Waste be done before, he shall not have Waste to
punish it; but otherwise if he enter for the Forfeiture done by the Tenant.
Also if the Covenant was suspended, it was only for the time that the Lessor
had the Possession, and the Party has not answered for the time before or
after. As 16. H. 7. If one be bound to find a Chaplain to say Divine Service
within such a Chapel, and the Chapel fall down, it is a good excuse for the
time; but if it be built again, he must find a Chaplain there. Clarke contrary;
If Lessee for years covenanteth to repair the houses, I grant that the same
shall charge his Assignee. But a Collateral thing, (as if the Lessee covenant
to pay such a sum in gross, or to enfeoffe him of the Manor of D) the same
shall not charge the Assignee; no more shall a Covenant to build a new house:
But here it was said, That he had time to build it both before and after the
entry of the Lessor Barker. To that he answered, Not so; for if he once
disturbed, the Covenant is destroyed. Godfrey, This Case was this Term in the
Common Pleas. Lessee for five years covenanted to build a Mill within the
term; and because he had not done it, the Lessor brought an Action of
Covenant, and the Defendant pleaded, That within the last three years, the
Lessor forcibly held him out, etc. so as he could not build it; and by the
Opinion of all the Justices, he ought to plead, That the Lessor with force held
him out, otherwise it would be no Plea. Cook, As amicus curiae, vouched 35. H.
6. Tit. Bar. If one be bounden to enfeoffe me of such land before Michaelmas,
there the Obliger in Debt brought upon the Bond, pleaded, That the Obligee
(before the day) had entered with force into the land, so as he could not
enfeoffe him; and there it was holden, That he ought to prove that he was
holden out by force. Gaudy, In the principal Case he ought to have showed,
That he would not suffer him to build: And the other Justices seemed to be of
the same Opinion; but yet they said, That they would advise upon the Case.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 85
OWen took Exception to a Declaration in an Ejectione firm, because it was a
Possessione sua ejecit; where it ought to be, according to the supposal of the
Writ, Quod a firma sua ejecit. Also it was of three closes, naming them with a
Videlicet, containing, by estimation, 30. Acres; and that, he said, did contain
no certainty; where he ought to have alleged in Fact, that they did contain so
many Acres. But it was holden by all the Justices, That although he does not
put in the Declaration the certainty of the Acres; if he give a certain name to
them, as Green-Close, etc. that it is good. And as to the other Exception, viz.
Ejecit a Possessione [inde], that the word [inde] had relation to the Farm;
and shall be as much as if he had said, a Possessione firmae; and the
Declaration was ruled to be good, notwithstanding the Exceptions.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 86
A Man was indicted upon the Statute of 5. Elizab. of Perjury, in a Court Leet;
and the Indictment was, That he at the Court Leet of the Earl o^ Bathe, Super
Sacramentum suum coram Senescallo, etc. And Exception was taken, because it
said, At the Leet of the Earl of Bathe, Whereas every Leet is the King's
Court, although that another has the profit and commodity of it: And it was
said, That the Steward of a Leet was an Officer of Record; And also his Oath
was, if he had made any Rescous or not, with which he was charged. Drew, It is
not within the Statute of 5. Eliz. for then it ought to be before a Jury in
giving of Evidence, or upon some Articles: But the Court was clear of Opinion
against him.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
87 The Earl of KENT's Case.
THE Case was this, Three several persons did occupy three several houses in
Brackley, to which another man had right; and he who had right, went to one of
the houses, and entered, and afterward went away, leaving him who occupied the
said house upon the land; and then he entered into another of the houses, and
then went from that, leaving him who occupied the same before, upon the land;
and then he entered into the third house, and there sealed a Lease for years
unto another man of that house, and naming the two other houses and the Lessee
brought an Ejectione firm for the two houses in which the Lease was not
delivered, and the Opinion of the Court was against him, that he was barred in
the Action; for the entry or continuance of him who occupied the same before,
did defeat the entry of the Plaintiff or Lessor; and the Plaintiff was
forced to be Nonsuit.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
88 SMITH and SMITH's Case.
ONE I. S. did assume and promise, That whereas I. N. was indebted to J. D in
Forty Pounds by Bond, That if J. D. ne implacitaret the said J. N. that if the
money be not paid such a day, that J. S would pay it to J. D. The money was not
paid: and after the day, J. D. brought an Action upon the Case, upon the
promise, and showed Quod ipse non implecitavit, etc. Kingsmill, He cannot have
his Action upon the Case till J. N. be dead, for during his life there is a
time in which he might implead him. As if I promise unto another, That if he
will be Nonsuit in his Action, which he has against a third person, that if he
does not pay the money before such a day, that then he will pay the money
there; if the day of payment be before the time that he can be Nonsuit, as
before the Term begins, yet he cannot presently have his Action before that
he is Nonsuit. And therefore in the principal Case he ought to show; That he
has discharged the other of the Bond, and then the Action lies, for then he
cannot implead him; but as this Case is pleaded, though he has not yet
impleaded pleaded him, yet in posterum he may implead him. Clench Justice, That
is implied, that he will never implead him, and then he ought to show the Bond
discharged. Suit, That is not so: for if hereafter he sue him against his
promise, then the other to whom the promise was made shall have his Action upon
the Case, and shall recover to the value of the sum in the Bond.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
89 BILFORD and DODDINGTON's Case.
A Writ of Error was brought by Richard Bilford against Robert Doddington, to
reverse a common recovery in the City of Worcester, upon a Writ of Right
Patent: And for Error it was assigned, 1. That no Warrant of Attorney was
entered, but that such a one posuit loco suo W. H. and did not write the name at
length, but in the Plea Roll it was at length. The second Error was, That the
Writ was, De tribus messuagiis sive tenementis, and that does contain no
certainty, for [sive] is a word uncertain. The third Error: It was in the time
Philippi and Mariae, and petit processum Domini Regis and Reginae: and it was
^orundum Regis, and that was in the default of Voucher, that the Recovery was
had; but if it were in the Recovery, in which he did appear and plead, it was
otherwise. The Counsel of the other side, as to the first, said, That all the
Records of the City are of the same form, viz. That such a one Po^uit loco suo
W. H. etc. and if it were not good, they should be all overthrown and avoided;
and if it should be otherwise, it should be contrary to the ancient custom of
the City. As to the second, Quod petit processum corundum Regis the same is the
misrecitall of the Clark; for the Writ upon which it is grounded is well; and
as to the Process, the party did appear gratis. As to the word [sive] the same
is good, for tenementum is but Surplusage; As in an Action of Waste, if the
party do express some things which are not waste, and some things which are;
those which are not waste, are but Surplusage. Also he said, That the Writ of
Error by which the Record is removed, is insufficient; for the Writ is, That
there is Error manefestus. and does not say [ut dicitur,] and therefore it is
not good, for otherwise the King should forejudge us; And also in the Writ, it
does not say Errorem siquis fuerit; and it ought not precisely to say, That
there is Error. Also the Writ of Error is to certify a Record de tribus
messuagiis and tenementis; and the Record is, De tribus messuagiis sive
tenementis; and therefore the Record is not well removed; for it is not such
Record. As 12. Ass. 2. in Attaint, Exception was taken, that the Writ of
Attaint did not agree with the first original; but because it did agree with
the Record, it was good, although it did not agree with the first Original;
for the first Original was of the Manor of Ansti, and the Attaint was of
Anesti, and so was the whole Record. But if the Attaint had disagreed with the
Record; it had been Error. Also the Writ was good, although tenementis were out
of the Writ, for it is but surplusage. And also Tenementum is not a thing
demandable; as 11. H. 7. 25. it is said, That Tenementum is not a name to
demand a Message by: but in Trespass, of Nuisance to it, there Tenementum is
sufficient. Suit Justice, The Record is now before us, and therefore the Writ
of Error is not material: For if my Lord Anderson bring before us a Record,
although no Writ of Error be awarded, yet we may proceed to examine Whether
there be Error in it or not. Also he said, that the Warrant of Attorney was
not good, although it was usual, for that they ought to follow the course of
the common Law. Clenche Justice, There ought to be Writ of Error before that
any Judgment upon the Errors can be given for to reverse the first Record. The
reason wherefore the certain name of the Attorney ought to be put, is, because
if one appear as my Attorney without my Authority, I may have my Action of the
Case against him, which I cannot have against W. H. It was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
90 TAILOR against REBERA.
Tailor brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond of 800l, against Rebera; which
Bond was endorsed with this Condition, That if the Plaintiff did bring such a
Ship to such a place in Greece, and at the same place should stay for the space
of forty days, or so long of the forty days as should please the Defendant,
so as he might freight the Ship; the Defendant should freight the Ship within
forty days, and should bring it to such a Port in England: And because he had
not freighted the ship, and the ship was there by the space of forty days, he
brought his Action upon the Bond: The Defendant pleaded, that within those
forty days, viz. by the space of four and twenty days, the said ship was
laden with Hoops, so as the Defendant could not freight it: And the Plaintiff
did demurr in Law upon the plea. Clark for the plaintiff: The Defendant has
not answered to all the time, but to part only; and he had sufficient time,
although the ship were laden with Hoops for the space of four and twenty days:
as 35. H. 6. Bar. 162 The Master of S. Katherines leased three houses by one
Indenture, upon condition that the Lessee should not suffer nor harbor any
lewd woman within the same houses, if he were warned thereof by the Master or
his servant for the time, etc. And if he did not put her out within six weeks
after such warning, that then it should be lawful for the Master and his
Successors to enter. And it was showed, That the Lessee did suffer a lewd woman
there to continue: wherefore such a one, servant of the Master, gave him
warning, etc. and the Lessee did not put her out of the house, and that
therefore the Master did enter: which matter, etc. The Lessee said, that after
the said warning given, that the Master commanded her to enter, and to dwell
there for six weeks after, without that, that she continued there by the
Defendant. And it was ruled by the whole Court, that the Replication was not
good, because the Indenture is, That he should not suffer any lewd woman, etc.
As if I be bound to enfeoff you of an Acre of La^d by such a time, within which
time you disseise me, the same is no plea, for that the Feoffer has not color
to enter; therefore I may enter upon him, and make the Feoffment. So in that
case, the Master had no color to put her into possession, therefore it was no
plea, without showing the special matter: Wherefore he said, That he did put
her out, and that the Master with force, etc. against the will of the Lessee,
did put her in; and there made her to stay with force and violence, against the
will of the Lessee, for the six weeks etc. and that was holden to be a good
plea. So in the principal case, he does not show, that he was kept out with
force, but that he might cast out the Hoops; and therefore the plea is not
good. So 3. H. 4. 8. Br. Condition 35. There was a Covenant betwixt the Lessor
and Lessee, That the lessor during the lease might be four days in a year in
the house without being put out, upon pain of one hundred pounds: and the
Lessor came to enter, and the Lessee shut the doors and the windows; It was
held, that was no breach of the Covenant, without saying, that the lessee put
him out. Atkins contrary: The ship was to remain there to be freighted, for so
many days as it should please the Defendant of the forty days for to freight
her: therefore the first act is to arise on the plaintiffs side; and the same
ought to be showed specially to have been done. As 14. H. 8. 18. Br. Condition
42. Debt upon a Bond, upon Condition That if the Defendant resign the Benefice
of D. unto the Plaintiff upon a Pension, as they may agree by a certain day,
That then, etc. The Defendant said, that he was always ready to resign to him
the Benefice, and yet is, in case the Plaintiff would assure him the Pension.
It was no Replication for the Plaintiff, That he offered him a Pension, unless
he show, that he offered him a Deed thereof. So 33. H. 6. A condition was, That
if I may enjoy such goods, I will give to you such a sum of money; I ought
first to enjoy the goods, before that I shall pay any money. Also in the
principal Case, it is not showed, That the ship was ready there by the space
of forty days; and it is a general rule in Conditions, That if the Plaintiff
himself be the cause of Disablement, so as the Condition cannot be performed,
that he shall not take advantage of a Condition; as in the Case of 9. H. 7.
Where one is bounden to enfeoffe such a woman before such a day, and the
Obligee before the day does marry the woman: 35. H. 6. and 7. H. 4. If I be
bounden to pay a pension to one, until he be promoted to a Benefice, and he
disables himself to take the Benefice, I shall no longer pay the pension.
Besides, he said, That in the principal Case, the matter could not be tried
here; for the Jury cannot take notice of a thing done ultra mare: But 11. H. 7.
16. a difference is taken: If the thing be all to be done beyond the sea, then
it cannot be tried here; but if part be to be done here, and part beyond sea;
so as it is mixed, it may be tried here; As a Bond with condition, That if the
Obligor bring the Merchandises of the Obligee from Norway beyond the sea, to
Lynn here, that then, etc. So contrary, If to carry goods delivered here, to
Bordeaux, etc. It was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
91. SHOTBOLTS Case.
A Man brought an Action upon the Case against another, because he caused him
to be indicted, and arraigned, etc. to his damage, etc. And it was for a
robbery; and the Plaintiff did not show in his Declaration, that he was
legitimo modo acquietatus; The Defendant by way of Bar said, That he was
acquitted modo and forma, as the Plaintiff had said; and in truth, he does not
say that he was acquitted. Cook, If the Declaration be insufficient, and
wants substance, then there is no cause of Action. Clench Justice, A man
shall not have an Action without cause; and if he were convicted, then there is
no cause of Action: and he has not showed whether he was convicted or
acquitted. And he said, that there was no difference betwixt an Action on the
Case, and a Conspiracy, in such case, but only this, That a Conspiracy ought
to be by two at the least; and an Action upon the Case may lie against one; and
he said, that in both, he ought to show, that he was legitimo modo acquietatus.
See 11. H. 7. 25. An Action of Conspiracy founded upon the Statute of 8. H 6.
Cap. 10. where it is grounded upon a Writ of Trespass brought against one
only; But such a Conspiracy which is grounded upon an Indictment of Felony,
must be against two at the least; for the same is an Action founded upon the
Common Law.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
92. BONEFANT against Sir RIC. GREINFIELD.
BOnefant brought an Action of Trespass against Sir Richard Greinfield: The
Case was this: A man made his Will, and made A. E. I. O. his Executors, and
devised his Lands to A. E. I. and O. by their special names, and to their
heirs, and further willed that his Devisees should sell the Land to I. D. if he
would give for the same before such a day an hundred pound; and if not, that
then they should sell to any other to the performance of his Will, scil. the
payment of his debts; I. D. would not give the hundred pound. One of the
Devisees refused to entermeddle, and the other three sold the Land; and if the
Sale were good, or not, was the question. Cook. The Sale is not good. 1. Let
us see what the Common Law is, At the Common Law it is a plain case, that the
Sale is not good, because it is a special trust, and a joint trust, and shall
never survive: for perhaps, the Devisor who is dead, reposed more confidence in
him who refused, then in the others. Vide 2 Eliz. the Case of the Lord Bray,
who covenanted, That if his son marry with the consent of four, whom he
especially named: viz. A. B. C. and D. that then he would stand seized to the
use of his son, and his wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten;
One of the four was attainted and executed; The other did consent that he
should marry such a one; he married her, yet no estate passed, because the
fourth did not consent, and it was a joint trust. 38. H. 8. Br. Devises 31. A
man wills that his Lands deviseable shall be sold by his Executors, and makes
four Executors: all of them ought to sell; for the trust which is put upon
them, is a joint Trust. But Brook conceives, that if one of them dies, that
the others may sell the Lands. The Case betwixt Vincent and Lee, was this; A
man devised, That if such a one dies without issue of his body, that then his
Sons in law should sell such Lands: and there were five sons in law when the
Testatour died; and when the other man died without issue, there were but three
sons in law, and they sold the Lands, and it was holden that the Sale was good;
because the Land was not presently to be sold. Also he said, that in the
principal Case here, they have an Interest in the Lands, and each of them has
a part; therefore the one cannot sell without the other. But if the devise
were, that four should sell; they have not an Interest, but only an Authority.
As to the Statute of 21. H. 8. Cap. 4. he said, that that left our Case to the
Common Law: For that Statute, as it appears by the preamble, speaks only of
such Devises by which the Land is devised to be sold by the Executors, and not
devised to the Executors to sell. And goes further, and says, Any such
Testament, etc. of any such person, etc. therefore it is meant of such a devise
made unto the Executors; and then no Interest passes, but only an Authority,
or a bare Trust: But in our Case, they have an Interest, for he who refused,
had a fourth part; Then when the other sell the whole, the same is a disseisin
to him of his part. If a Feoffment be made to four, upon condition that they
make a Feoffment over; and two of them make the Feoffment, it is not good. Also
the words of the Will prove, that they have an Interest; for it is, that his
Devisees shall sell, etc. Laiton contrary, And he said, That although the
Devise be to them by their proper names, and not by the name Executors; yet the
intent appears that they were to sell as Executors, because it was to the
performance of his last Will; and that may be performed as well by the three,
although that the other does refuse; and the Sale of the Land does refer to
the performance of his Will, in which there are diverse Debts and Legacies
appointed to be paid. 2. H. 4. and 3. H. 6. A man devised his Lands to be sold
for the payment of his debts, and does not name who shall sell the same, the
Lands shall be sold by his Executors. 39. Ass. A Devise is of Lands unto
Executors, to sell for the performance of his Will, the profits of the Lands
before the Sale shall be assets in the Executors hands. 15. H. 7. 12. is, That
if a man devise, that his Lands shall be sold, they shall be sold by his
Executors. Also if I devise that my Executors shall sell my Lands, and they
sell, it is an Administration, and afterward they cannot plead, that they
never were Executors, nor never administered as Executors; And although there
are diverse Authorities to be executed, yet it is but one Trust. 39. Ass. 17. is
our very Case. A man seized of Lands deviseable, devised them to his Executors
to sell, and died, having two Executors, and one of them died, and the other
entered and sold the Land; and the Sale was good. 49. E. 3. 15. Isabell
Goodcheapes Case; Where a man devised, that after an Estate in tail
determined, that his Executors should sell the Lands, and made three Executors,
and one died, and another refused, the third after the tail determined, sold
the Land; and the Sale was holden good, and that it should not escheate to the
Lord, for the Land was bound with a Devise, as with a Condition; as to the
Statute of 21. H. 8. Cap. 4. the preamble of the Statute is, as it has been
recited: and although for exmaple, the Lands in use are only put, yet the
Statute is not tied only to that; As in the Statute of Collusion of Malbridge;
Examples are put only of Feoffments and Leases for years, yet there is no doubt
but that a Lease for life, or a gift in tail to defraud the Lord, is within
the Statute. So the Statute of Donis Conditionalibus puts only three manner of
estate tails. But Littleton says, That there are many other estate tails,
which are not recited in the Statute: So here, our Case is within the Mischief
of the Statute of 21. H. 8. Cap. 4. although it be not within the Example. So
the Statute of West. 1. is, That if the Gardien or Lessee for years, makes a
Feoffment in Fee, Tam Feofator quam feofatus habeantur pro disseisoribus: yet
22. Ass. is, That if Tenant by Elegit make a Feoffment, it is within the
Statute. Also it may be a doubt, Whether Land devisable only by custom be
intended in the Statute of 21. H. 8. Cap. 4. And whether Land devisable by the
Statute of 32. H. 8. be within it or not, viz. If a Statute of a pu^sne time
shall be taken by Equity within a more Ancient Statute: and I conceive it may;
as 12. H. 7. the Statue of 4. H. 7. which says that the heir of Cestuy que
use shall be in Ward, shall extend to the Statute of Praerogativa Regis; for if
he be in Ward to the King, he shall have Prerogative in the Lands, to have
other Lands by reason thereof. Gaudy Justice did rely very much upon the word
[Devisees,] viz. that they have an Interest, and that the Sale was not good.
Suit Justice, They are both Executors and Devisees of the Lands; Devisees of
the Lands, and Executors to perform the Will. Cook, he who refused to sell,
cannot waive the Freehold, which is in him by a refusal in pars, as 7. H. 2.
and 7. E. 4. but ought to waive it in a Court of Record; therefore he has an
Interest remaining in him. Clenche Justice; What if he had devised the Lands to
four, and made one of them his Executors, and willed that he should sell; could
not he sell? All the Court agreed that he might. Cook, When a man devises that
his Executors shall sell, the Fee descends to the heir; yet they may sell that
which is in another: but the same is not like to our Case. It was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 93.
A Judgment was given upon a Bond for four thousand pound; And the Scire
facias was sued for three thousand pound, and he did not acknowledge
satisfaction of the other thousand pound. Haughton moved, That the Scire facias
should abate. As if a man brings Debt upon a Bond of twenty pound, and shows a
Bond for forty pound, and does not acknowledge satisfaction for 20l, it is not
good: The Justices would advise of it. And at another day it was moved again,
Whether the Scire facias was good; because it does recite Quod cum nuper such a
one, recuperasset four thousand pound, and does not show in what Action, or at
what day the Judgment was given, or the Recovery had. Piggot, That is not
material, for such is the Form in an Audita querela, or Redisseisin. As to the
other, That he does not acknowledge satisfaction, as in the Case before cited
by Haughton, which Case is in 1. H. 5. That is not like to an Execution, for an
Execution is joint, or several, at the will of him who sues it forth; as in
19. R. 2. Execution 163. he may have part of his Execution against one in his
life time, and if he dies, other part against his Heir or Executor. Note, the
Execution was of the whole, but because the Defendant had not so much, he had
but part against him who had no more; and therefore of the residue he had
Execution against the Heir. Gaudy Justice, I conceive that he cannot have an
Execution, unless he acknowledge Satisfaction. There is no difference, as to
that betwixt the Action of Debt upon a Bond and a Scire facias; and the
intendment, viz. that it shall be intended that he was paid, because he sued
but for Three thousand Pound, will not help him. Piggot, as to that, vouched a
Case out of 4 and 5. Mary, in Dyer, which I cannot find. Suit Justice said,
That if the Defendant in the Scire facias say nothing by such a day, that
Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff. Quod executio fiet.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 94
Judgment was given against an Infant by default in a real Action of Land:
And a Writ of Error was thereupon brought; and it was argued, That it is not
error; for in many cases an Infant shall be bound by a Judicious act, as 3. E.
3. Infant 14. Where an Infant and a Feme Covert bring a Formedon; and the woman
was summoned and severed: And it was pleaded, That where the Writ does suppose
the woman was Sole, she was Covert; and Judgment was demanded of the Writ, and
that the Infant could not gainsay it, but confessed it; this Confession of the
Plea which abated his Writ, was taken. And 3. H. 6. 10. Br. Saver Default 51.
An Infant shall not save his default, for he shall not wage his Law; See there,
that the Default shall not be taken against him; therefore that book seems
rather against it, then for it. Vide 6. H. 8. Br. Saver Default 50. That Error
lies upon a Recovery by default against an Infant: otherwise, if it be upon an
Action tried, so is 2 Mar. Br. Judgment 147. It was said, That a general Act
of Parliament shall bind an Infant, if he be not excepted. The Justices did
seem to incline, That if Judgment be given by default, that it shall bind an
Infant; but there was no rule given in the Case.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 95
A Clark of the King's Bench, sued an Officer of the Common Pleas, and he of
the Common Pleas claimed his Privilege, and could not have it granted to him;
for it is a general rule, That where each of the persons is a person able to
have Privilege; he who first claims it, viz. the Plaintiff, shall have it,
and not the Defendant; As if an Attorney of the Common Pleas sueth one of the
Clarks of the Kings Bench; yet he of the Kings Bench shall not have Privilege,
although the Kings Bench be a more high Court, because the other is Plaintiff,
and first claims it.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 96
AM Action upon the Case upon a Promise was brought; but the Case was so long
that I could not take it: But in that Case, Tanfield, who argued for the
Defendant, said, That it is not lawful for any man to meddle in the cause of
another, if he have not an Interest in the thing, for otherwise it will be
Maintenance. But if a Custom be in question betwixt the Lord of the Manor and
Copyholder; all the other Copyholders of the Manor may expend their money in
maintenance of the other and the Custom; and the Master may expend the money
of the servant in maintenance of the servant: So he in the Remainder may
maintain him who has the particular Estate. Maintenance is an odious thing in
the Law, for it does increase troubles and Suites. He argued also, How that
Bonds, Obligations, and Specialties, might be assigned over, how not. 34. H. 6.
30. Br. Maintenance 8. If J. S. be indebted to me, and I be indebted to J. D. I
may assign that Debt to J. D. with the assent of J. S. otherwise not, as I
conceive. And there also another difference is taken, That Damages which are to
be recovered for Trespass, Battery, etc. cannot be assigned over, because they
are as yet uncertain; and perhaps the Assignee may be a man of great power, who
might procure a Jury to give him the greator Damages. If a Bond be for
performance of Covenants contained in an Indenture of Lease, if he assign the
Lease, he may assign the Bond also, because they are concomitants; and he has
an Interest in the Lease, and therefore he may sue the Bond: But if the
Covenants be first broken, and afterward he assign over the Lease, if the
Assgnee sue the Bond, it is directly Maintenance: but if he assign over the
Lease, and afterward the Covenants are broken, if he sue there it is no
Maintenance: But if he assign over the Bond, and reserve the Lease in his own
hands, and then the Covenants are broken, and the other sue the Bond for the
performance of Covenants, it is Maintenance: And to all that Cook agreed. The
second Point; An Elegit is awarded to the Sheriff, and he extends the Lands,
and does not return it; Whether it be a lawful Execution to the party or not?
is the question. It is a good Execution, unless the words of the Writ be
conditional, for then there must be a return of the Writ; as a Fieri facias
must be returned, otherwise the Execution is not well done, for it is
conditional, viz. Ita quod habeas pecuniam in curia, etc. So is it of a Capias
ad satisfaciendum, Ita quod habeas corpus hic. But an Elegit is not
conditional. Yet Kemp the Secondary said, That in the end of the Elegit is, Et
de eo quod inde feceris nobis in dicta cancellaria tali die ubicunque tunc
fuerit sub Sigillo distinct and aperte constare facias, etc. And so is the
form of the Writ in Fitz. Not. Br. 266. Tanfield. That is true, but it does
not make the Writ conditional: but that is the Entry of the Court and the
Sheriff, and not the Entry of the Party and the Sheriff. 11. H. 4. 59. by
Hankford, who was a man of great knowledge, and lived in learned times. If the
Recognisee of a Statute Merchant sueth Execution of it, although the Writ be
not returned, and the Recognisee has Execution, and afterward the Recognisor
purchases other Lands; and afterward the Recognisee comes and says, That the
Writ is not returned, and sues forth another Writ, the Recognisor shall have an
Audita querela in that Case, and shall surmise in Fact, how that execution was
done by the first Writ, and yet there is no Record that execution was done by
the first Writ. So 19. E. 3. Brief 370. A Writ issued to have Execution in
forty Towns, and an Extent was made, and delivered of Lands in forty Towns; and
the Return made mention but of Execution in eight Towns, and therefore the
Party would have had a new Writ; and the other Party was received to aver
against the Record of the Return, that the Extent was in forty Towns. 12. E.
3. Scire facias 117. Upon an Elegit the Sheriff returned extendi feci, and did
not say, deliberavi; and in truth, he did deliver the Lands in extent, and
therefore he could not have a new Execution. 20. Eliz. betwixt Colsill and
Hastings. Colsill had an extent upon the Lands of Hastings, and the Sheriff
being a friend to Hastings, did not deliver full Possession to Colsill, but
gave him Possession in one part in the name of all the others. Hastings
continued Possession of all the rest, and being upon Election of new Sheriffs,
Colsill was not over hasty to put him out, for he was in hope to have a more
favorable Sheriff; and the first Writ was not returned, and there being a new
Sheriff, he sued forth a new Writ to have Execution. The Defendant said, That
he had before sued forth the like Writ, and had Execution. And Colsill said,
That the first Writ was not returned; and yet the Opinion of the whole Court
was, That it was a good Execution, and so it was ruled; but the Case was
overthrown afterward upon another Point. So the Earl of Leicester had a
Statute extended upon the Land of Mr. Tanfields Mother; and it was not
returned; and yet when he would have sued forth another Execution, he could not
have it allowed him by the rule of the Court, because the first Execution was a
good Execution, although it were not returned. 15 Eliz. It was the Case of the
Countess of Derby, who married the Earl of Kent: in an Habere facias seisinam
in a Writ of Dower, Execution was served, but not returned, and therefore she
prayed a new Writ, but could not obtain it, because the first was well
executed, although it was not returned. So also was the Lord Morleyes Case in
the Kings Bench, in 28. Eliz. the Writ was not returned, and yet the Execution
was well done: And therefore he concluded, That the Execution was good,
although the Writ was not returned. Cook contrary, An Elegit ought to be
returned, and it is void if it be not returned. As to the Case before cited of
19. E. 3. which began 9. E. 3. 450. And all the other Cases put out of the old
Books, They are upon extents of Statutes; and there is a great difference
betwixt an Elegit and Extents upon Statutes; as 15. H. 7. 14. It was agreed,
That where a man recovers Debt or Damages, or has a Recognisance forfeit unto
him, his Executors shall not have Execution, without a Scire facias first sued;
contrary upon a Statute Staple or Merchant; and the like if the Defendant
dies, the Plaintiff shall not have an Execution by Fieri facias against his
Executors, but he must first have a Scire facias: So if the Court change, as if
the Record comes into the Kings Bench by Error, and Judgment be affirmed; the
Plaintiff who recovered, shall not have a Fieri facias against the Defendant,
but must first have a Scire facias: But otherwise it is of a Statute, like the
Case of 14. H. 7. 15. Br: Execution 59. The Case of 12. E. 3. does not speak of
Elegit, but of Statutes and Extents. Also the Elegit and the Extent differ in
the Entry; for the Elegit has a special and precise Entry, as Elegit sibi
executionem, etc. And a man shall not have a Capias after an Elegit; as 15. H.
7. is: And being a special Entry of Record, it ought to be returned; for
otherwise it does not appear that Execution is done; and so there shall be
great mischief, because infinite Executions may issue forth. There is not any
Book in the Law directly in the Point: But I will put you as strong a Case: A
Judgment is given upon an Exigent by the Coronor; yet by 28. Ass. 49. If there
be no Return of the Exigent, it is no sufficient Out-lawry; and one Pleaded
the same in the plainplaintiffe, and said, that it appeared by the Record, and
vouched the Record: and because the Exigent was not returned, it was not
allowed. And so was the Case of Procter and Lambert, 4 and 5. Philip and Marie
adjudged. As to the Reports which are not printed, vouched by Tanfield, eadem
facilitate negantur qua affirmantur. Upon an Elegit, if there be goods
sufficient, the Sheriff is not to meddle with the Lands; and if there be not
sufficient goods, yet he is not to meddle with the beasts of the plough. If a
man have an Authority, and he does less then his Authority, all is void; as
here the Return of the Writ is part of his Authority. As 12. Ass. 24. If a man
have a letter of Attorney to make Livery and Seisin to two, and he makes it to
one, all is void, and he is a disseisor to the Feoffor. So 4. H. 7. If he have
a letter of Attorney to make Livery of three Acres, and he makes only Livery
of two Acres, and not of the third Acre, it is void for the whole. Also the
Elegit is, Quod extendi facias and liberari, quousque the Debt be satisfied:
and therefore if the land be extended only, and there be no delivery made of
the land, ut tenementum suum liberum, according to the Writ, then there is no
execution duly done. And in the principal Case, there was no delivery made of
the land. It was adjourned.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
97 STRANSAM against COLBURN.
STransam brought a Writ of Error against Colburne, upon a Judgment given in a
Writ of Partitione facienda; and diverse Errors were assigned. The first Error
assigned was, That the party does not show in his Writ, nor in his Declaration,
upon what statute of Partition he grounds his Action. And there are two
Statutes; viz. the Statute of 31. H. 8. chap. 1. and the Statute of 32. H. 8.
chap. 32. And yet he groundeth his Action upon one of the Statutes. As 3. H.
7. 5. Where the servants of the Bishop of Lincoln were indicted of Murder, eo
quod ipsi in Festo Sancti Petri (2. H. 7.) felonice apud D. murdraverunt etc.
and because there are two Feasts of Saint Peter, viz. Cathedrae, and Ad
vincula, therefore the Indictment was not good. 21. E. 3. One brought a
Cessavit by several Precipes, viz. of one Acre in D. and of another in S. and
of the third in Villa praedicta: and because it was uncertain to which,
praedict. shall be referred, it was not good. 5. H. 7. Br. Action upon the
Statute 47. An Information was in the Exchequer for giving of Liveries, and the
party did not declare upon what Statute of Liveries; and Exception was taken
to it, and the Exception was not allowed, because that the best shall be taken
for the King; but if it had been in the Case of a common person, it had not
been good. So, if a man bring an Action against another, for entry into his
Land against the form of the Statute, it is not good, because he does not
show upon what Statute he grounds his Action: Whether 8. H. 6. which gives
treble damages; or 2. H. 2. which gives Imprisonment, and single damages. The
second Error which was assigned by Weston, was, That the Declaration does show
Quod tenet pro indiviso; and does not show what estate they held pro indiviso.
And there is a Statute* which gives Partition of an estate of an Inheritance.
viz. 31. H. 8. Cap. 1. And another which gives partition for years, or for
life; and he does not show in which of the Statutes it is. As if one claim by
a Feoffment of Cestuy que use, as 4. H. 7. is, he ought to show, that the
Cestuy que use was of full age at the time of the Feoffment, etc. for it is not
a good Feoffment, if he be not of full age. So here he ought to show, that he
is seized of such an estate, of which by the Statute he may have a Writ of
Partition. For in many Cases there shall be Joynt-Tenants, and yet the one
shall not have a Writ of Partition against the other by any Statute. As if a
Statute Merchant be acknowledged to two; and they sue for the execution upon
it, I conceive, that the one shall not have partition against the other. So if
two Joynt-Tenants be of a Seignorie, and the Tenant dies without heir, so as
the Lands escheat to them, they are Joynt-Tenants, and yet Partition does not
lie betwixt them by any Statute: Therefore one may be seized pro indiviso, and
yet the same shall not entitle him to a Writ of Partition. Shuttleworth,
contrary. The Statute does not give any form of Writ, but the Writ which was
at the Common Law before; And therefore it is not to be recited, what kind of
Writ he is to have. As to the second point, It is not necessary to show the
estate, because it cannot be intended, that he has knowledge of the estate of
the Defendant. For* if one plead Joynt-tenancy on the part of the Plaintiff,
he shall not show of whose gift: but if the Defendant or Tenant plead
Joynt-tenancy of his part, he ought to show of whose gift, and how, 7. E. 6.
Plo. Com. Partridges case. In a Case upon the Statute of Maintenance. The
Plaintiff may say, That he accepted a Lease, and shall not be forced to show
the beginning or the end of it, or for what years it is. In the Case of the
Indictment before: and the Case of several Precipes of several Acres in
several Towns, that lies in the Plaintiffs Cognizance. But here, how can the
Plaintiff know the Defendants estate, because he may change it as often as he
pleases; and therefore it is uncertain; for if before he had a Fee, he might
pass away the same unto another, and take back an estate for years. Also the
Plaintiff has appeared, and pleaded to the Declaration; And therefore he
shall not have a Writ of Error. Gaudy Justice, That is not so. Shuttleworth;
True, if there be matter of Error apparent. Gaudy Justice, Cannot you take
notice of your own estate? Cook. The Declaration is not good; therefore the
Writ of Error is maintainable. By the Common Law, No partition lies betwixt
Tenants in common, as these are. And the Statute of 31. H. 8. gives Partition
only of an estate of Inheritance, and prescribes also that the Writ shall be
devised in the Chancery: there he conceived the Ancient Writ is not to be used.
I grant for a general rule, That if a Statute in a new Case give an old Writ;
he shall not say Contra formam Statuti, because it is not needful to recite
the Statute, or make mention of it. And the Statute of 32. H. 8. Cap. 32.
says, That the Writ shall be devised upon his, or their Case, or Cases; If
one bring a Writ upon the Statute of 31. H. 8. It is not necessary to show of
what estate he is seized, but de haereditate generally. But upon 32. H. 8. he
ought to show of what estate, viz. for years, or for life. As it was in the
Case where Sir Anthony Cook, and Temple, and Wood were parties; which Case is
in Bendloes Reports, Mich. 7. and 8. Eliz. which was a great Case twice stood
upon, and argued. And the reason there is given, That every Case is not within
the Statute; and if at the common Law, and not within the Statute, the Writ
shall not be grounded upon the Statute. For in the Case before, they might have
Partition at the common Law, as one Co-parcener against the Alienee of the
other Co-parcener may have. Also he said, That several Judgments are to be
given as the Case is, upon the several Statutes: for the Judgment upon the
first Statute of 31. H. 8. of Inheritances is, Sit firma partitio in perpetuum;
but upon the Statute of 32. H. 8. it is not so; for Judgment given upon that
Statute shall not bind him in the Reversion; for there is a Proviso in the
Statute in the end of it, That Partition made by force of that Statute shall
not be prejudicial or hurtful to any persons, other then such who be parties
to the said Partition, their Executors, or Assigns. But here it is observed,
That by intendment he cannot have knowledge of his estate. Answ. That is at his
peril: For if he cannot have knowledge of his estate, there cannot be any
Partition upon any of the Statutes. If he will have benefit of the Statute, he
ought to show that he is within the Statute; and if he cannot show it, then it
must remain at the common Law. But it has been objected, that we have
confessed the Declaration to be good, because we have appeared and pleaded: I
answer, That if the Declaration want substance, it shall never be made good by
Plea, or Confession. But if it want circumstance, that perhaps may be made
good by pleading, or confession. Tanfield contrary. Two principal things are
alleged for Error; That the Declaration is uncertain in the Estate, and
that it is uncertain in the Statute. I may know my own Estate, but not the
Estate of my Companion, for it is uncertain, and he may secretly change it when
he pleases. But then Cook said, It must remain as at the common Law. Itane?
Then farewell Statute; for it may easily be defrauded, and no use of it; for if
I cannot know the Estate, I cannot have an Action upon the Statute; but our
Case is better, for our Case is, that recusat facere partitionem contra formam
Statuti in hoc casu provisam: and that is according to the Statute; for be the
Estate an Estate of Inheritance, Freehold, or Lease for Years, we leave it
indifferent to be referred to the consideration of the Law; and according as
our Case shall fall out. Also it is but an Incertainty, and you have pleaded to
it, and therefore it is no Error; but I grant that if it were matter of
substance, that it were Error. Yet Fitz. Not. Br. 21. d. In a Writ of Entry
Sur disseisin, if the Original Writ want these words, viz. Quam clamat esse
jus and haereditatem suam: If the Tenant do admit of the Writ, and plead to the
Action, and loses, he shall not assign the same for Error, because he has
admitted the Writ to be good by his Plea. So in Detinue of Charters concerning
Lands, if the Plaintiff in his Count or Declaration does not declare the
certainty of the Land, etc. if the Defendant does admit of the Count or
Declaration, and plead, the Declaration is made good. As to the Judgment, If
the word Inperpetuum be in it, either in the one Case or in the other, it shall
be construed, to be but during the Estate. In a Writ of Partition there are two
Judgments; the first, That Fiet Partitio; Secondly, When the Partition is made
and returned; the Judgment is, That stet firma and stabilis Partitio. Gaudy
Justice, The Writ is to be devised upon his or their Case or Cases, therefore
the Party ought to show his Case in special, and what Estate he has. And it
is no answer, that he cannot know the Estate of the Defendant: for in a Precipe
at the common Law, he ought to take notice of the Estate of the Tenant, or
otherwise his Writ shall abate for the misprision of it; for if he bring it
against a Termor it is not good. And if the Statute of 31. H. 8. had only been
made, and not the Statute of 32. H. 8. If he had brought a Writ of Partition
upon the Statute; he ought to have showed that he had an Estate of Inheritance
against whom he brought the Writ. Suit Justice agreed with Tanfield in the
whole. Gaudy was strongly of the other side, That he ought to show within the
purview of which Statute he was; and if he will enable himself by Law to bring
the Writ, he must enable himself to be within the Law. And he said, That
Temples Case was adjudged, as it was accordingly vouched by Cook before.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
98 DENNIE and TURNER's Case.
AN Action was brought upon the Statute of 5. Eliz. for Perjury; and the
Plaintiff did declare, That where an Action of Debt was brought Hill. ultimo
praeterito, 27. Elizabeth whereas in truth the Action in which he was perjured
was, Hill. 28. Eliz. And so the recital did miss the Record. Bartlet argued
upon the Case put in Leicester and Heydons Case, in Plowdens Commentaries,
where time, place, and number, ought to be observed, otherwise all is void;
also he said, That if the party should recover here, upon a Perjury, committed
upon a Record of 27. Eliz. and should also recover in another Action upon the
Statute of 5. Eliz. for a Perjury in an Action begun 28. Eliz. that he should
be double charged. Cook, He cannot be double charged, for it is betwixt the
same Parties, and in the same Cause; and only a Circumstance is mistaken.
Clench Justice, It is needful to show in what Action the first Perjury was
committed; for if he say in Trespass, whereas in truth it was in Debt, all is
naught. Gaudy Justice, If no Action be alleged, he cannot sue upon the Statute
of 5. Eliz. But the Case was upon a special Verdict, and the Verdict did find
that the Action was brought at another time then any of the Parties had
alleged: And that Variance was first found by Verdict, and no mention made of
it before; and therefore Cook said it was void; for he said, That by the book
of 22. Ass. 17. The Jury cannot find any other thing then the Parties have
alleged: For there the Jury found a dying seized after Judgment in a
Recovery; whereas a dying seized was alleged, and did not say after a Recovery.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
99 EGLINTON and AUNSELL'S Case.
IN an Action upon the Case for Words; the words were these, Thou art a
Cosening Knave, Crowner, and have cosened many of thy Kindred of their Lands.
Cook, It is adjudged, That Cosener will bear no Action; for the words are too
general. And the word [Cosener] does not go to the Office in the Principal
Case: also the word [Cosening] is a word abused; 30. H. 8. Br. Action upon the
Case 104. False perjured man bears an Action; but false man without [Perjured]
will bear no Action, and is nothing else but false and fraudulent. There was a
Case, as Cook said, betwixt Osborne and Frittell; You did robb me, and took
away my Evidences and a Sub pena. And it was ruled, That no Action did lie for
them: And there it was holden, That the word [And] was a Copulative. Kir^y^'s
Case, Thou art a crafty cosening Knave, and have cosened many of thy Kindred:
Adjudged not Actionable. Snagg Sergeant contrary, That the Action lies; for he
said, That a Crowner is sworn to do his Office; and if he be false and
deceitful in his Office, then he is forsworn; and the word [And] here begins a
new sentence, and does not expound the precedent words, as the words [because]
or [in that] etc. Clench Justice If the word Cosener had been left out, it had
been a clear Case that the words would not have born an Action: And if one do
call him cosening Crowner, it is clear, the words are Actionable. Gaudy
Justice, We are to go strongly against these kind of Actions: If the words
[Cosening] shall go and extend to the word Crowner, then clearly an Action does
lie, in respect of the Office: And then if [And] and all the subsequent words
had been left out, yet the Action would lie. Suit Justice, If there were words
sufficient before the word [And] to maintain an Action, the subsequent words
shall not overthrow those that went before: But if the words had been, Thou art
a Cosening Knave, Crowner, in cosening of thy Kindred; the Action had not been
maintainable: but the word [And] is not a word explantory as the word [in] is.
The better Opinion of the Court was, That the words were not Actionable.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 100
A Man brought an Action upon the Case for speaking these words of him, viz. He
has aided Pirates, contrary to the Laws of the Realm, and against a
Proclamation in that behalf. Snag said That the words are not Actionable,
because there wants the word [Scienter] for an honest man may unwittingly do
so: And if a man charge one in an Action upon the Statute of 5. Elizabeth,
and declare that he said, That he was perjured, contrary to the form of the
Statute; he also ought to say, That he did it willingly and corruptly. Cook,
True, if a man bring an Action upon the Statute of 5. Elizabeth. But if he
says, Such a one is a perjured man generally, an Action upon the Case will
lie, without saying willingly and corruptly. Also those words, viz. [Contrary
to the Laws of the Realm) do imply Scienter; for if it were not Scienter, it
could not be contrary to the Laws of the Realm. Clenche Justice, I conceive
that the word [Scienter] is a material word in this Case; and vouched the Lord
Shandoes Case, where one said, That he was a maintainer of Thieves, and it was
adjudged that the Action would lie. It was one Sidenhams Case, Where one said,
That a Robbery was done, and that such a one smelt of it; and an Action was
brought for the words, and adjudged, That an Action would lie. And the words
here are as forcible, as if he had said Scienter; and the Case was adjourned
for the search of presidents until the next Term.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 101
IF two men be partners of Merchandises in one Ship; and one of them appoints
and makes a Factor of all the Merchandises; It was moved by Godfrey, and not
denied by the Justices, That both of them may have several Writs of Account
against him, or they may join in one Writ of Account, if they please. Quaere
of that.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench 102
A Man made a Contract with another man, when he dwelt in the City of London;
and afterward he who made the Contract went from the City and dwelt within the
cinque Ports; and he being afterward impleaded in the Kings Bench upon the
Contract, claimed the privilege of the cinque Ports; which according to 12. E.
4. is, That those of the cinque Ports shall not be sued elsewhere then within
the cinque Ports. Suit Justice said, That that was true, for any matter or
cause arising within the cinque Ports: But otherwise, if a man do enter upon a
Bond of One hundred, or One thousand Pound, and then go and dwell in the cinque
Ports; perhaps so the Obligee might lose his Debt. And it was adjudged: That
the Defendant should not have Privilege.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
103. Sir JERVIS CLIFTON's Case.
IN a Quo Warranto. The Information was, That where the Defendant was seized of
a Manor, and of a House within it, That he claimed to have a Court or View of
Frankpledge infra messuagium praedictum; and further it was, that Sine aliqua
Concessione sive authoritate usurpavit Libertates praedictas. The Defendant
pleaded, That Non usurpavit Libertates praedict' infra Messuagium praedictum,
modo and forma. Piggot, The Plea is not good; for the natural Answer to a Quo
Warranto is, either to claim or disclaim, and he does do neither of them; And
if a man will tender a general issue, he ought so to tender it as the Nature
of the Action does require. That he was never seized after time of memory is no
plea in Rescous. In Debt rein arere, is no plea, but he ought to answer to the
Debet. The special matter alleged in the Action, ought to be answered, and
the general not to be pleaded; as it is pleaded here, Non usurpavit, etc. as
in 21. E. 3. Detinue of Charters was pleaded in a Writ of Dower; and she said.
That such a one was seized, and did enfeoffe her, and her Husband; and so the
Deeds did belong unto her. The Party shall not traverse, that they did not
belong unto her; but must answer unto the especial matter; viz. the Feoffment.
Also he said, Quod non usurpavit, etc. infra Messuagium praedictum; where he
ought to have said, Infra Manerium praedictum. An Account was brought upon a
Receipt for seven years, and the Defendant pleaded to two of the years; and
issue was joined upon it: And it was adjudged error. Godfrey. He ought to say,
Non usurpavit Libertates praedictas, nec earum aliquam: for he ought to answer
singulatim, as 4. H. 7. Where one was bounden that he, and his servants should
keep the Peace; he shall not say generally, that he and his servants have kept
the Peace; but he ought to answer for every one particularly; So here he ought
not to answer generally, Non usurpavit Libertates praedicts, etc. without
saying, Nec earum aliquam. Also it is naught, because he says, Non usurpavit
infra Messuagium praedictum, etc. For although it be sufficient for us to say,
Quod usurpavit infra Messuagium praedictum; because if he has usurped upon
any part of the Manor, Vsurpavit infra Manerium; yet it is not good for him to
answer so: for if he has usurped in any part of the Manor, although not in
the Message, it is sufficient for us: as 33. H. 8. Br. Traver^ sans ceo. 367.
Information was in the Exchequer, eo quod the Defendant had bought certain
Wools of W. N. contra formam Statuti, where he is not a Draper, nor was a
Draper. It is no issue, that he did not buy them of W. N. but he ought for to
answer, that he did not buy them modo and forma. For whether he bought them of
W. N. or of I S. it is not material, for that is not traversable; but the
buying contrary to the form of the Statute is the matter traversable: Besides,
he does not answer, that he has these Liberties Concessione, or Authoritate
Regia. And it follows, necessarily, That if he has them not by Royal
Authority, that then he has usurped them: as 3. H. 6. and 33. H. 6. One
alleged a Devise, that the Lands were devisable in such a Town, etc. And the
other pleads, That the Lands are not devisable; it is no plea, because he does
not answer to the Custom of the Town. So here he pleads, Non usurpavit, but
he does not answer, Whether he has them Authoritate Regia, or not. Cook, The
Queen demands Quo Warranto? He says, Non usurpavit, Does not that answer the
question? Doubtless it is a direct Answer: as 3. E. 3. Itin. North, If he does
not use any Liberty, a Quo Warranto, does not lie. And as to that Objection,
That he ought to answer directly to your question, it is not so; for 31. E. 3.
Voucher. I may vouch in a Quo Warranto, yet there I do not directly answer to
your question. So in Tempore E. 1. ibidem, in a Juris utrum, is a Question, Who
has right: yet he is not bound directly to answer the question. 17. E. 3. he
may plead the general issue. And it is a general rule: Where a thing is
material, without which you cannot have an Action; that there I may traverse
it; as 8. H. 6. and 21. H. 6. upon the Statute of Maintenance. Ne mainteina
pas, is a good plea, and yet it does not answer to the special matter
alleged. And upon Non usurpavit, all the special matter may be given in
evidence. 14. H. 4. Where one is charged as Bailey of a Manor, Curam habens and
administrationem bonorum; there it is a good plea to say, That he was not his
Receivor modo and forma; and that shall go to the goods as well as to the
Manor: and so is 49. E. 3. But it was objected, That the issue is multiplex
and uncertain, for he might usurp by Misuser, or non user; because it had been
used, and now it is not used; To that I answer; That upon Non intrusit, or Not
guilty; he may give in evidences 100. titles; and the Court might be enveigled
therewith as well as in this issue. But then it was objected, That he ought to
say, Non usurpavit Libertates praedictas, nec earum aliquam. I answer, That he
ought not so to do; for if a Quo Warranto be brought of 100. Manors, or
Liberties: Non usurpavit modo and forma goes to them all. And he shall not say,
Non usurpavit in hoc, nec in illo, nec in illo; The book before vouched by
Godfrey. 33. H. 8. of buying of Wools of I. S. is not Law; But then it was
further objected, That he does not answer whether he has them Authoritate
Regia, or not? To that I answer, That is answered in these words, Modo and
forma. But now let us see if the Information be good, or not. For it was
showed, that the Defendant was seized of a Manor, within which there is an
house, within which house he claims to have a Court with view of Frankpledg,
and to summon the Tenants ad ^and^m Curiam; and this is uncertain, where he
says, ad eandem Curiam: for there are two alleged before, and therefore it is
uncertain to which it shall be referred. Also he says, that he claims to
have a Court, and it may be it is a Court of Pipowders, or Torn; as 10. E. 4.
15. Where it is said, That an Indictment was taken at the Court or view of
Frankpledg, and there holden it was not good; for it cannot be intended what
Court. And as to that, that he says, that he clayms to have a Court etc. infra
Messuagium praedictum, etc. and to call twelve men to it, and that these twelve
men ought to be of the Jury: there is an ancient Reading which goes under the
name of Frowicks Reading upon the Statute of Quo Warranto: And there it is
holden, That a Quo Warranto does not lie of the claim of a thing which cannot
be claimed; as to claim Felons goods, or to pardon Felons: for those are things
which lie only in point of Charter. If the claim be within the Message, then
he cannot call men out of the Message: as if he claim within the Manor, he
cannot call men out of the Manor. But a man may have a Leet belonging to a
house, or within a house. Suit Justice, It is Habere and tenere infra
Messuagium praedictum: and that he may well do. A Quo Warranto contains but two
things in it: First, it is demanded quo Warranto he claymes such Liberties.
Secondly, It charge him with a tortious usurpation of them. And here in the
principal Case he has answered to the usurpation of them; but he does not
answer, nor show by what title he clayms them. And the like Case was adjudged
here in this Court; That Non usurpavit modo and forma was no sufficient Answer.
The Case was adjourned

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. Intratur Trinit. 28. El. Rot. 256.
104 LEEDES and CROMPTON'S Case.
A Lease was made to A. B. and C. upon Condition that they nor any of them
should alien without license: And the Lessor made a License that A. B. or C.
might alien: the same is a good license, notwithstanding the uncertainty; and
thereby they have several authorities to alien: As a Letter of Attorney to A.
or B. to make Livery; but a gift to A. or B. is void for the uncertainty. But
if a license be to A. and B. or C. some conceived that A. or B. might alien;
but not C. Et e^converso.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 105
IT was agreed by the whole Court, That a Partition made by word betwixt
Joyntenants, is not good. See Dyer 29. Pl. 134. and 350. Pl 20. does agree; and
see there the reason of it.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 105
IT was holden by the whole Court, That if the Father do devise Lands unto his
Son and Heir apparent, and to a stranger, that it is a good Devise; and that
they are Joyntenants for the benefit of the Stranger.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 106 FULLER'S Case.
A. Promises unto the eldest son, that if he will give his consent that his
Father shall make an Assurance unto him of his Lands, that he will give him ten
pounds: If he give his assent, although no assurance be made, yet he shall
maintain an Action upon the promise. But at another day Periam Justice said,
that in that case the son ought to promise to give his assent, or otherwise A.
had nothing, if his son would not give his consent. And so where each has
remedy against the other, it is a good Consideration. In Hillary Term after,
Fenner spoke in arrest of Judgment upon the special Verdict, That because that
the Assumpsit is but of one part, and the other is at liberty, whether he will
give his consent or not; that therefore although that he do consent, that he
shall not recover the ten pounds. Also he said, That the promise was, that if
he would give consent that his Father should make assurance to him: and here
the assurance is made to A. to the use of the Defendant and his Wife in tail,
so as it varies from the first Communication; and also it is in tail.
Shuttleworth contrary; in as much as he has performed it by the giving of
consent, then when he has performed. It is not to the purpose, that he was not
tied by a cross Assumpsit to do it; but if he had not given his consent, he
should have nothing. At length Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. And Periam
Justice said in this Case, That if a covenant be to make an Estate to A. and it
is made to B. to the use of A. that he doubted whether that were good or not.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Intratur Hill. 28. Eliz. Rot. 1742.
107 WISEMAN and WALLINGER'S Case.
A Man seized of two Closes called Bl. Acre, makes a Lease of them rendering Ten
Shillings rent: The Lessee grants all his Estate in one of them to A. and in
the other to B. The Lessor does devise all his Land called Bl. Acre in the
tenure of A. and dies. The Devisee brings an Action of Debt for the whole Rent
against the first Lessee. And the Opinion of the whole Court was, That the
Action would not lie, because they conceived, That but the Reversion of one
Close passed, and also that the rent should not be apportioned in that Case,
because a term is out of the Statute; and a Rent reserved upon a Lease for
years shall not be apportioned by the act of the Lessor; as where he takes a
Surrender of part of it. But otherwise by Act in Law; as where the Tenant
makes a Feoffment in Fee of part of the Land, and the Lessor enters. And at
another day Anderson Chief Justice said, That if the Lessor of two Acres
grants the Reversion of one Acre, that the whole Rent is extinct.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas 108
A Lease for years is made of Land by Deed rendering Rent; the Lessee binds
himself in a Bond of Ten Pound to perform all Covenants and Agreements
contained in the Deed; the Rent is behind, and the Lessor brings an Action of
Debt upon the Bond for not payment of the Rent; the Obligor pleads performance
of all Covenants and Agreements; the Lessor say, That the Rent is behind; it
was holden, That it is no Plea for the Obligor to say, That the Rent was never
demanded: But in this Bar he ought to have pleaded, That he had performed all
Covenants and Agreements, except the payment of the Rents. And as to that, That
he was always ready to have paid it, if any had come to demand it; but as the
first Plea is, it was held not to be good. And as to the demand of the Rent,
the Court was of opinion, That it was to be demanded, for the payment of the
Rent is contained in the word [Agreements] and not in the word [Covenants]: and
then if he be not to perform the Agreements in other manner then is contained
in the Deed; of that agreement the Law says, That there shall be a demand of
the Rent: But if the Lessee be particularly expressed by covenant to pay the
Rent, there he is bound to do it without any Demand.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 109 HOLLENSHEAD against KING.
THomas Hollenshead brought Debt against Ralph King upon a Recovery in a Scire
f^cias in London, upon a Recognizance taken in the Inner or Ouster Chamber of
London; and does not show, That it is a Court of Record; and that they have
used to take Recognisances and Exception was taken unto the Declaration, and a
Demurrer upon it; and diverse Cases put, That although that the Judgment be
void, that yet the Execution shall be awarded by Scire facias, and the party
shall not plead the same in a Writ of Error. But Periam Justice took this
difference, Where Execution is sued upon such a Judgment, and where Debt is
brought upon it: for in Debt it behooves the Party that he have a good Warrant
and ground for his Action, otherwise he shall not recover; but upon a voidable
Judgment he shall recover, before it be reversed.

Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Intratur Trinit. 28. Eliz. Rot.
507. 110 COSTARD and WINGFIELD'S Case.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant did avow for Damage Feasans by the commandment of
his Master the Lord Cromwell: The Plaintiff by way of Replication did justify
the putting in of his Cattle into the Land, in which, etc. by reason that the
Town of N. is an ancient Town, and that there has been a usage, time out of
mind, That every Inhabitant of the same Town had had common for all his cattle
Levant and Couchant in the same Town; and so justified the putting in of his
cattle. The Defendant said, That the house in which the Plaintiff did
inhabit in the same Town, and by reason of Residency in which house he
claimed common, was a new house built within 30 years, and within that time
there had not been any house there; and upon that Plea, the Plaintiff did
demurr in Law. Shuttleworth Serdeant for the Plaintiff, That he shall have
common for cause of Resiance in that new house; and the Resiancy is the cause
and not the Land, nor the Person; and to that purpose he cited 15 E. 4. 29. And
he agreed the Case, That if the Lord improve part of the Common, that he shall
not have common for the Residue, because of the same Land newly improved; for
he cannot prescribe for that which is improved by 5. Ass 2. But here he does
prescribe not in the person, or in, or for a new thing; but that the usage of
the Town has been, That the Inhabitants shall have common, and that common is
not appendent, nor appertinent, nor in gross, by Needham 37 H. 6. 34. b.
Besides he said, That if the house of a Freeholder who has used to have such
common fall down, and he build it up again in another place of the Land, that
he shall have common as before. And he put a difference betwixt the case of
Estovers, and this Case; where a new Chimney is set up, for that makes a new
matter of charge: and he much stood upon the manner of the Prescription. Gaudy
Sergeant contrary, and he took Exception to the Prescription; for he says,
that it is antiqua villa, and does not say time out of mind; and such is the
Prescription in 15. E. 4. 29. a. and if it be not a Town time out of mind, etc.
he cannot prescribe that he has used time out of mind, etc. And he said, That
if it should be Law, that every one who builds a new house should have common,
it should be prejudicial to the Ancient Tenants, or impair the common: And so
one who has but a little land might build 20 houses, and so an infinite
number, and every house should have common, which were not reason Anderson
chief Justice, He who builds a new house cannot prescribe in common, for then a
prescription might begin at this day, which cannot be; and he insisted upon the
general loss to the ancient Tenants. P^riam Justice, If it should be Law, that
he should have common, then the benefit of improvement which the Statute gives
to the Lord shall be taken away by this means by such new buildings, which is
not reason: So as all the Justices were of opinion, That he should not have
common: but Judgment was respited until they had copies of the Record. And
Hillary Term following, the Case was moved again; and Anderson and Periam were
of Opinion as they were before, and for the same reasons. But Windham Justice
did incline to the contrary: But they did all allow, That he who new bulids an
old Chimney shall have Estovers, so a house common. So if a house fall down,
and the Tenant build it up again in another place. Periam, If a man has a Mill
and a Watercourse time out of mind, which he has used to cleanse; if the Mill
fall down, and he set up a new Mill, he shall have the liberty to cleanse the
Watercourse as he had before. And that Term Judgment was given for the
Defendant, to which Windham agreed.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 111
IN a Replevin, the parties were at Issue upon the Property, and it was found
for the Plaintiff, and Damages entire were assessed; and not for the taking by
it self, and for the value of the Cattle by themselves; for the Judgment upon
that is absolute and not conditional; and also if the Plaintiff had the
Cattle, the Defendant might have given the same in Evidence to the Jury, and
then they would have assessed Damages accordingly, viz. but for the taking.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 112
A. bargains with B. for twenty Loads of Wood, and B. promises to deliver them
at D. if he fail, an Action upon the Case lies. But Periam Justice said, That
upon a simple contract for wood upon an implicative promise, an Action upon the
Case does not lie. Rodes Justice, If by failer of performance the Plaintiff be
damnified, to such a sum; this Action lies.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 113
A Lease of Lands is made excepting Timber-Woods, and Under-woods. And the
question was, Whether Trees Sparsim growing in Hedge rows and Pastures, did
pass. And difference was taken, betwixt Timber-wood being one Wood, and Timber
Woods being several Words (although it be Arbor dum crescit, lignum dum
crescere nescit) yet in common speech that is said Timber, which is fit to make
Timber. Then it was moved, Who should have the Lops and Fruits of them, and the
Soil after the cutting of them down; and also the Soil after the Under
Woods; and as to that, a difference was taken, where the words are generally,
All woods; and where they are his woods growing. And in speaking of that case,
another case was moved: viz. If a stranger cut down woods in a Forest, and
there is no fraud or collusion betwixt him, and the owner of the Land; Whether
the King should have them, or the owner of the Soil? And it was holden, That
the owner of the Soil should have them; and yet the owner could not cut them
down, but is to take them by the Livery of one appointed by the Statute.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 114.
A. makes a Lease of Lands to B. for ten years, rendering rent. And B. covenants
to repair, etc. Afterward A. by his Will, devises, that B. shall have the
Lands for thirty years after the ten years, under the like Covenants as are
comprised in the Lease. Fenner moved it as a question, If by the Devise those
which were Covenants in the first Lease, should be Conditions in the second;
for they cannot be Covenants for want of a Deed; And if they should not be
Conditions the heir of the Lessor were without remedy, if they were not
performed. A Devise for years paying ten pounds to a stranger, is a Condition,
because the stranger has no other remedy. Gaudy Justice, By the Devise to him
to do such things as he was to do by the Lease, makes it to be a Condition:
which was in a manner agreed by all the other Justices. Yet Periam and Rodes
Justices, said, That the first Lease was not defeisable for not performance of
the Covenants; nor was it the intent of the Devisor, that the second should be
so, notwithstanding that his meaning was, that he should do the same things:
Periam, The Covenant is in the third person, viz. Conventum, and Aggreatum est.
And see 28. H. 8. Dyer, where the words, Non licet to the Lessee to assign,
make a Condition.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 115. BARBER and TOPESFEILD'S Case.
A. being Tenant in tail of certain Lands, exchanged the same with B. B.
entered, and being seized in Fee of other Lands, devised several parcels
thereof to others, and amongst the rest a particular estate unto his heir;
Proviso, That he do not re-enter nor claim any of his other Lands in the
destruction of his Will And if he do, that then the estate in the Lands devised
to him to cease. A. dies, his issue enters into the Lands in tail, and
waives the Lands taken in Exchange; and before any other entry, the heir of B.
enters upon the Land which was given in Exchange; and the opinion of the whole
Court was, That it was no breach of the Condition, because that was not the
Land of the Devifor at the time of the devise; therefore, it was out of the
Condition.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 116. PLYMPTON'S Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought by one Plympton and his wife, Executors of one
Dorrington, upon a Bond with Condition to perform Covenants, of an Indenture of
Lease, whereof one Covenant was, That he should pay forty shillings yearly at
the Feast of the Annunciation, or within fourteen days after. And the breach
assigned was for not payment at such a Feast in such a year. The Defendant
said, That he paid it at the Feast; upon which they were at issue. And upon
evidence given to the Jury, it appeared, That the same was not paid at the
Feast, but in eight days after it was paid. And the opinion of the Court was,
That by his pleading, that he had paid it at such a day certain, and tendering
that for a special issue, That he had made the day part of the issue, and
then the* Defendant ought to have proved the payment upon the very day. But if
the Defendant had pleaded* That he paid it within the fourteen days, viz. the
eighth day, etc. that had not made the day parcel of the issue; but then he
might have given evidence, that he paid it at another day, within the fourteen
days: Then for the Defendant it was moved, That the Plaintiff had not well
assigned the breach; in saying that he had not paid it at the Feast; without
saying, Nor within the fourteen days. But the Court said, That the Jury was
sworn at the Bar, and bid the Council proceed and give in their evidence;
for the time to take exception was past.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 117.
IT was the opinion of Anderson Chief Justice, and so entered by the Court,
That if a Copie-holder does surrender to him who has a Lease for years of the
Manor, to the use of the same Lessee, That the Copie-hold estate is extinct:
For the estate in the Copie-hold is not of right, but an estate at will,
although that custom and prescription had fortified it. And Wray said, That it
had been resolved by good opinion, That if a Copie-holder accept a Lease for
years of the Manor, that the Copie-hold estate is extinct for ever.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 118.
Anderson Chief Justice, and Periam Justice, being absent in a Commission upon
the Queen of Scots, Shuttleworth moved this case to the Court. If the Queen
give Lands in tail to hold in Capite, And afterward grants the Reversion,
how the Donee shall hold? Windham Justice, and Fenner Serjant, The tenure in
this case is not incident to the Reversion; and the Donee shall hold of the
Queen, as in gross; and so two Tenures in Capite, for one and the same Land.
And thereupon, Windham Justice cited 30. H. 8. Dyer 45, 46. That the Queen by
no way can sever the tenure in chief from the Crown. And therefore, if the
Queen do release to her Tenant in Capite, to hold by a penny, and not in
Capite, it is a void Release; for the same is merely incident to the Person and
Crown of the Queen. But Rodes Justice, held the contrary, viz. That the Tenure
in Capite does not remain. But it was said by Windham, That if the Queen had
reserved a Rent upon the gift in tail, the Grantee of the Reversion should have
it; Also he said, That the Queen might have made the Tenure in such manner:
viz. to hold of the Manor, or of the Honor of D. Shuttleworth. If Lands holden
of the Manor of D. come to the King, may he give them to be holden of the
Manor of S? that should be hard. Windham, I did not say, That Lands holden of
one Manor may be given to be holden of another Manor; perhaps that may not
be, but Lands which is parcel of any Manor, may be given Vt supra.

Mich. 28, 29* Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 119
Sergeant Fenner moved Case: If Lands be given to the Husband and Wife, and to
the heirs of their two bodies, and the Husband dies leaving Issue by his Wife,
and the Wife makes a Lease of the lands, according to the Statute of 32. H. 8.
If the Lease be good by the Statute? Windham and Rodes Justices, conceived,
that it is a good Lease. Fenner, The Statute says, that such Lease shall be
good against the Lessor and his Heirs* and the Issue does not claim as Heir to
the Wife only, but it ought to be Heir to them both: and he cited the case,
That the Statute of R. 3. makes Feoffments good against no heirs but those
which claim only as Heirs to the same Feoffors, etc. So here. Rodes Justice,
There the word [only] is a word efficacy; And Windham agreed clearly, That the
Lease should bind the issue by the said Statute of 32. H. 8.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 120
WAlmesley Sergeant moved this Case, If a man devises Lands in tail, with
diverse Remainders over, upon condition that if any of them alien, or etc. that
then he who is next heir to him to whom the land ought to come after his
decease, if the said alienation had not been made, might enter, and enjoy the
land as if he had been dead. (But Ady of the Temple said, That the words of the
Devise are, viz. That if any of them alien, or etc. that then his estate to
cease, and he in the next Remainder to enter and retain the land until the
aliener were dead.) Rodes Justice, The Devise is good; and an estate may cease
in such manner, so as it shall not be determined for ever, but that his Heir
after him shall have it. And he put the case of Scholastica, Plow. Com. 408.
where (Weston fo. 4. 14.) was in some doubt, that if the Tenant in talle had
had Issue, if the Issue should be excluded from the land; or whether he should
have the land by the intent of the Devisor? And therefore if it were necessary
to show that the Tenant in tail had not Tssue? But Dyer said, that the words
of the Will were, that such person and his Heirs who alien, or etc. should be
excluded presently; so as the estate by express words is to be determined for
ever. But it is otherwise in this Case. Windham doubted of the Devise. Fenner
cited the Case, 22. E. 3. 19. Where a Rent was granted, and that it should
ce^se during the Nonage of the Heir of the Grantee, and it was good. Windham,
When a thing is newly created, he who creates it may limit it in such manner as
he pleases. Fenner 30. E. 3. 7. Det. 10. A Feoffment was made, rendering Rent,
upon Condition that if the Rent be behind, the Feoffor might enter, and retain
quousque: there the estate shall be determined pro tempore, and afterward
revived again. Windham, There the Feoffor shall have the land as a distress,
and the Freehold is not out of the Feoffee. Fenner: The Book proves the
contrary; for the Feoffor had an Action of Debt for the Rent.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 121
IN a Formedon, the Tenant pleaded a Fine with proclamations: The Plaintiff
replied, No such Record. It was moved, that the Record of the Fine which
remained with the Chyrographer, did warrant the Plea; and the Record which did
remain with the Custos Brevium did not warrant the Plea: and both the Records
were showed in Court; and to which the Court should hold, was the question?
Shuttleworth, To that which was showed by the Custos Brevium: and he cited the
Case of Fish and Brocket, where the Proclamations were reversed because that it
appeared by the Record which was showed by the Custos Brevium, that the third
proclamation was alleged to be made the seventh day of June; which seventh day
of June was the Sunday: and yet he said, It appeared by the Record certified
by the Chyrographer, that it was well done, and yet the Judgment reversed.
Rodes Justice There is no such matter in the same case. And 26. El. by all the
Justices and Barons of the Exchequer, in such case the Record which remains
with the Custos Brevium shall be amended, and made according as it is in the
Record of the Office of Chyrographer. Windham agreed. And afterward the said
President was showed, in which all the matter and order of proceedings was
showed and contained, and all the names of the Justices who made the Order. And
by the command of the Justices it was appointed, that the said President should
be written out, and should remain in perpetuam rei memoriam. And the reason of
the said Order is there given, because the Note which remains with the
Chyrographer is principale Recordum.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 122.
AN Infant was made Executor, and Administration was committed unto another,
durante minore aetate of the Executor; and that Administrator brought an Action
of Debt for money due to the Testator, and recovered, and had the Defendant in
Execution; and now the Executour is come of full age. Fenner moved that the
Defendant might be discharged out of Execution, because the Authority of the
Administrator is now determined; and he cannot acknowledge satisfaction, nor
make Acquittances etc. Windham Justice, Although the Authority* of the
Plaintiff be determined; yet the Recovery and the Judgment do remain in
force. But perhaps you may have an Audita querela. But I conceive, That such an
Administrator cannot have an Action; for he is rather as a Bailiff to the
Infant Executor, then an Administrator. Rodes agreed* with him, and he said, I
have seen such a Case before this time, viz. Where one was bound to such a one
to pay a certain sum of money to him, his* Heirs, Executors, or Assigns: And
the Obligee made an Infant his Executor, and administration was committed
during his minority, and the Obligor paid the money to that Administrator; And
it was a doubt whether the same was sufficient, and should excuse him, or not.
And whether he ought not to have tendered the money to them both. Fenner, That
is a stronger Case then our Case: One who is Executor of his own wrong, may pay
Legacies, and receive Debts, but he cannot bring an Action. Windham, Does it
appear by the Record, when the Infant was made Executor, and that
Administration was committed as before? Fenner, No truly. Windham, Then you
may have an Audita querela upon it. Fenner said, So we will. Note Hill. 33.
Eliz. in the Exchequer. Miller and Gores Case, An Infant pleaded in a Scire
facias upon an Assignement of Bonds to the Queen, That Saint-Johns and Eley
were Administrators during his minority. And it was holden by the Court to be
no plea. But he ruled to answer as Executor.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 123
SUggestion was made, that a Coroner had not sufficient Lands within the
Hundred; for which a Writ issued forth to choose another; and one was chosen.
It was moved by Sergeant Snag, If the^eby the first Coroner did cease to be
Coroner presently, until he be discharged by Writ. Rodes and Windham Justices,
He ceases presently, for otherwise there should be two Officers of one
Coronership, which cannot be. Also the Writ is Quod loco I. S. eligi facias,
etc. unum Coronatorem; and he cannot be in place of the first, if the first do
not cease to be Coroner. So if any be made Commissioners, and afterward others
are made Commissioners in the same cause, the first Commission is determined.
Snagg said, That in the Chancery they are of the same Opinion; but Fitz. Not.
Brevium 163. N. is, That he ought to be discharged by Writ.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz in the Common Pleas. 124
IN an Action of Debt brought against Lessee for years for rent; he pleaded,
That the Plaintiff had granted to him the reversion in Fee, which was found
against him. Walmesley Sergeant moved, Whether by that Plea he had forfeited
his term or not. Rodes and Windham Justices, He shall not forfeit his Term;
and Rodes cited 33. E. 3. Judgment 255. Where in a Writ of Waste the Tenant
claimed Fee, and it was found against him, that he had but an Estate for life,
and yet it was no Forfeiture. Fenner and Windham, It is a strong Case, for
there the Land it self is in demand, but not so in our Case. Rodes, The Tenant
shall not forfeit his Estate in any Action by claiming of the Fee-Simple, but
in a Quid juris clamat. Walmesley and Fenner, Where he claims in Fee
generally, and it is found against him, there perhaps he shall forfeit his
Estate; but where he shows a special conveyance, which rests doubtful in
Law, it is no reason that his Estate thereby should be forfeited, although it
be found against him. Rodes, 6. R. 2. Quid juris clamat 20. The Tenant claimed
by special conveyance, and yet it was a forfeiture. But in the principal Case
at Bar, he and Windham did agree clearly, That it was no forfeiture.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 125
AN Action upon the Case was brought, because that the Defendant had spoken
these words, viz. That the Plaintiff has said many a Mass to J. S. etc.
Anderson Chief Justice, Prima facie, did seem to incline, That no Action would
lie for the words, although that a Penalty is given by the Statute against such
Masse-Mongers. For he said, That no Action lies for saying, That one has
transgressed against a Penal Law. Periam Justice contrary. Anderson, If I say
to one, That he is a disobedient Subject, no Action lies for the words.
Windham Justice, That is by reason of the generality. Puckering, No Action
lies for the slandering of one in a thing, which is but malum prohibitum.
Periam, The saying of Mass is Malum in se. Puckering, If I say to one, That he
has eaten flesh on Fridayes, an Action does not lie for that. Periam, Is that
like this Case? Note, the Declaration was uncertain, viz. The places where the
Masses were said, etc. were not alleged, nor the day when they were said, etc.
And therefore Periam said, that the Action did not lie, for it might be that
the Masses were celebrated in France, or some other place out of the Kingdom:
And the Statute does not appoint any penalty, If they be not indicted thereof
within the year and a day, etc.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 126
An Act of Common Council, according to the Custom of the City of London,
was, By which it was Decreed, That none should bring any Sand, nor sell, nor
use any within the City or Suburbs of London, but that only which was taken out
of the River of Thames, etc. And that if any did the contrary, that he should
forfeit for the first fault five Pound, and for the second fault Ten Pound, to
be recovered in an Action of Debt, wherein no Essoine, Protection, or Wager of
Law should be allowed. And such a Plaint, for the forfeiture of One hundred and
twenty Pound, was removed out of London into the Common Pleas by a Writ of
Privilege: and it was debated amongst the Justices and Sergeants, Whether the
Plaint should be remanded or not. Anderson Chief Justice, Windham and Periam
Justices, did greatly speak against the said Act, not only for the matter and
substance of the Act, but also for the form of it. 1. They were informed by
Snagg Sergeant, That the said Thames Sand was a great deal worse then the Land
Sand, and yet the price of the same was greater, and the measure of it less:
For of the Thames Sand there were but eleven Bushels to make a Load: and of the
other Sand there were eighteen Bushels, which, he said, was a very great Deceit
and Mischief. And 2. they said, That is against reason, that any Freeman should
be so restrained from Merchandising and selling. And also it might concern the
Inheritances of some who might have Sand in their Lands. Also the said Justices
said, That they were very presumptuous in making Acts so Parliament-like, viz.
That no Essoine, Protection or Wager of Law should be allowed, etc. and that
they did arrogate to themselves too high Authority: And they stirred up the
Plaintiff at the next Parliament to exhibit a Bill against them for it, and
to sue them in the King's Bench for their presumption and insolency in that
their dealing; and said, That it would shake their Liberties, and grow to a
greater matter then they thought or were aware of. And thereupon Anderson cited
the Case 22. H. 8. Where Sir Edward Knightly, Executor of Sir William Spencer,
made certain Proclamations in certain Towns, That Creditors coming in, and
proving their Debts; that they should be paid; and for that Presumption he was
committed to the Fleet, and was fined Five hundred Marks. And he said, That
such were the Misdemeanors of Empson and Dudl^y.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 127 BOX and MOUNSLOWE'S Case.
THomas Box brought an Action upon the Case against John Mounslowe, That the
Defendant had slandred him, in saying, That the said Thomas Box is a Perjured
Knave, and that he would prove, That he the said Thomas Box had forsworn
himself in the Exchequer, etc. and supposed the said words to be spoken in
London 4. Feb. 28. El. Et praedict' John. Mounslowe, per Johannem Lutrich,
atturnat' suum venit and defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc. Et dicit quod
praedict' Thomas Box actionem suam versus cum habere non debet, quia dicit,
quod praedict' Thomas Box being one of the Collectors of the Subsidies before
the speaking of the said words, viz. M. 27. and 28. Eliz. in Curia Scaccarii
apud Westminst'. did exhibit a Bill against the said John Mounslow, containing,
That the said John being assessed in ten pounds in goods, The said Thomas Box
came to him, and demanded sixteen shillings eight pence, which the said John
Monuslow did refuse to pay, etc. And that demand and refusal was supposed to
be in London in Breadstreet. Et pro verificatione praemissorum ad tunc and
ibidem Sacrament' corporale per Barons praefat' Thomas Box praestito. The
said Thomas Box swore the said Bill in substance was true, ubi revera the said
John Mounslow did not refuse, etc. per quod the said John Mounslow postea, viz.
praedicto tempore quo etc. dixit de praefato Thoma Box praedicta verba, etc.
prout ei been licuit. The Plaintiff replied, that the Defendant spoke the
words de injuria sua propria, absque Causa per praefat' Johannem Mounslow
superius allegata, etc. Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per Curiam: praedict'
defendens similiter. And a Venire facias was awarded to the Sheriff of London,
and it was found for the Plaintiff, and damages four hundred pound. And now it
was moved in arrest of judgment, that there was no good trial, nor the issue
well joined; for the issue does consist upon two points tryable in several
Counties: viz. the Oath which was in the Exchequer, and that ought to have been
tried in Middlesex, and the matter which he affirmed by his oath to be, viz.
the demand and refusal to pay the Subsidy, etc. and that was alleged to be
in London, and therefore is there is to be tried. And the issue viz. de injuria
sua propria absque tali causa goes to both; for the ubi revera will not mend
the case, as Periam Justice said, and both are material; for the Defendant
ought to prove, that the Plaintiff made such oath, and also that the substance
and matter of the oath was not true, for otherwise the Plaintiff cannot be
proved perjured. And therefore the Counties here (if they might) should have
joined in the trial. And the opinion of the Court was against the Plaintiff;
for Anderson and Windham said, That if this issue could have been tried by any
one of the Counties without the other, It should be most properly and naturally
tried in Middlesex, where the oath was made; for the perjury (if any were) was
in the Exchequer. But they said, that the issue here was ill joined, because it
did arise upon two points triable in several Countries, which could not join:
whereas the Plaintiff might have taken issue upon one of them well enough, for
each of them did go to the whole; and if any of them were found for the
Plaintiff, that he had sufficient cause to recover. Gaudy moved, that it
should be helped by the Statute of Jeofailes, which speaks of misjoyning of
issues. Anderson, the issue here is not misjoyned; for if the Counties could
join, the issue were good: but because that the Counties cannot join, it
cannot be well tried: But the issue it self is well enough. Windham and Rodes
were of the same opinion, that it was not helped by the Statute: but Periam
doubted it. Anderson said, That if an issue triable in one County be tried in
another, and judgment given upon it, it is error. And afterward Lutrich the
Attorney said, That it was awarded, that they should re-plead, Nota quia mirum:
for 1. The Statute of 32. H. 8. Cap. 30. speaks of misjoyning of process, and
mis-joyning of issues; and admit that this case is not within any of those
clauses, each of them being considered by it self; yet I conceive, it is
contained within the substance and effect of them, being considered together.
Also I conceive, That it is within the meaning of both Statutes viz. 32. H. 8.
Cap. 30. and 18. Eliz. Cap. 14. for I conceive the meaning of both the Statutes
was to oust delays, circuits of actions and molestations, and that the party
might have his judgment, notwithstanding any defect, if it were so, that
notwithstanding that defect sufficient title and cause did appear to the
Court. And here the Plaintiff has sufficient cause to recover, If any of the
points of the issue be found for him. For if it be found, that the matter and
substance of the oath be found true (which might be tried well enough by those
in London) the Plaintiff has cause to recover; Wherefore I conceive, that the
verdict in London is good enough, and effectual: And note, That Rodes said
that he was of Council in suh a case in the Kings Bench betwixt Nevell and
Dent.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 128
IN an Action of Trespass, the Defendant pleaded, that at another time before
the Trespass, he did recover against the same Plaintiff in an Ejectione
firm, and demanded judgment. And the opinion of the whole Court was, That it
is a good plea, prima faci^, and that the possession is bound by it; for
otherwise the recovery should be in vain and uneffectuall. And Anderson chief
justice, said, That if two claim one and the same Land by several Leases, and
the one recovereth in an Ejectione firm against the other; that if afterward
the other bring an Ejectione firm of the same Land, the first recovery shall
be a bar against him. Rodes said, That he can show authority, that a
recovery in an Ad terminum quem praeteriit shall bind the possession.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 129
IN Trespass, the Defendant did justify as Bailiffe unto another, The
Plaintiff replied that he took his cattle of his own wrong; without that that
he was his Bailiffe. Anderson chief Justice, If one have cause to distreine my
goods, and a stranger of his own wrong, without any warrant or authority given
him by the other, take my goods not as Bailiff, or servant to the other. And I
bring an Action of trespass against him; can he excuse himself, by saying,
that he did it as my Bailiffe or Servant? Can he so father his mis-demeanours
upon another? He cannot; for once he was a trespasser, and his intent was
manifest. But if one distrein as Bailiffe, although in truth, he is not
Bailiffe; if after he in whose right he does it, does assent to it, he shall
not be punished as a trespassour; for that assent shall have relation unto the
time of the distress taken; and so is the book of 7. H. 4. And all that was
agreed by Periam. Shuttleworth, What if he distraine generally, not showing
his intent, nor the cause wherefore he distrained? etc. ad hoc non fuit
responsum. Rodes came to Anderson, and said unto him, If I having cause to
distrain, come to the Land, and distraine, and another ask the cause why I do
so? if I assign a cause not true or insufficient, yet when an Action is
brought against me, I may avow or justify, and assign any other cause.
Anderson, That is another case; but in the principal case clearly the taking
is not good; to which Rodes agreed.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 130 HOODIE and WINSCOMB'S Case.
IN an Attaint brought by Hoodie against Winscombe, etc. One of the Grand Jury
was challenged, because he was a Captain, and one of the Petie Jury, was his
Lieutenant; And it was holden by the whole Court, that that was no principal
challenge. Windham, It has been holden no principal challenge,
notwithstanding that one of the Jurours was Master of the Game, and one of the
Petit Jury was Keeper of his Park. And in that case, it was holden by all the
Justices, That if a man make a Lease, rendering rent upon condition, that if the
rent be behind, and no sufficient distress upon the Land, that then the Lessor
may re-enter; If the Rent be behind, and there be a piece of lead, or other
thing hidden in the Land, and no other thing there to be distrained, the Lessor
may re-enter; for the distress ought to be open, and to be come by; for if it
should be otherwise said a sufficient distress, one might enclose money, or
other things within a wall; and thereby the Lessor should be excluded of his
re-entry.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 131
IN a Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff counted, That the Defendant being Parson of
the Church in question, was presented to another Benefice, and inducted 15
Aprilis, and that the other Church became void, etc. The Defendant said, That
he was qualified at such a day, which was after 15 Aprilis, without that, that
he was inducted 15 Aprilis. And the Court was of opinion (Anderson being
absent) that it was no good Traverse, for he ought to have said generally;
without that, that he was inducted before the day in which he is alleged to be
qualified. As if one declare in Trespass done 1 Aprilis, and the Defendant
plead a Release 1. Feb. he ought to traverse without that, that the Trespass
was done before the Release, by Periam Justice.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 132 HALES and HOME'S Case.
IN an Avowry for Damage feasance, one pleaded a Lease made unto him by I. S.
the other said, that before the Lease, ^. S. did enfeoff him; the other replied
and maintained the said Lease absque hoc quod J. S. sei^itus feoffavit. Gaudy,
The Traverse is not formal, for the word seisitus is idle, and ought to be
left out* for he cannot enfeoff if that he were not seized; and it has never
been seen that the seisin in such Case has been traversed; but generally in
Pleading the Traverse has been absque hoc, that Feoffavit, without speaking of
seisin, which is superfluous. And so was the opinion of the whole Court.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 133
THE Queen granted Lands unto the Earl of Leicester by her Letters Patents;
the Patentee made a Lease of the Land unto another. Shuttleworth moved it to
the Court, Whether the Patentee ought to show the Letters Patents; and he
conceived, He need not, because he has not any interest in them, but the same
do belong only to the Earl. As if a Rent be granted to one in Fee, and he
takes a wife and dies, and the Wife brings a Writ of Dower, she is not
bound to show the first Deed by which the Rent was granted to her Husband,
because the Deed does not belong unto her. So he who sues for a Legacy, is
not tied to show the Will, because the same belongs to the Executor, and not
him. Periam Justice, The Cases are not alike, for they are Strangers and not
Privies, but the Lessee in the principal Case deriveth his interest from the
Letters Patents, and therefore he ought to show them. Rodes Justice remembered
Throgmorton's Case, Com. 148. a. where a Lease was made by an Abbot to J. S.
and afterward the same Abbot made a Lease unto another to begin after the
determination of the first Lease made to J. S. and exception was taken, That he
ought to have showed the Deed of the first Lease, and the Exception was
disallowed by the Court. Periam, That case, is not like this case; and he said,
That, as he conceived, the Lessee in this case ought to show forth the letters
Patents; and if any Books were against his Opinion, it was mavelous.

Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 134
ONE intruded after the death of Tenant for life, and died seized, and the land
descended to his Heir; and a Writ of Intrusion was brought in the Per against
the Heir; and Gaudy Sergeant prayed a Writ of Estrepment against the Tenant.
And first the Court was in doubt what to do; but afterward when they had
considered of the Statute of Gloucester, Cap. 1. in the end of it, Anderson
said, If the Writ be in the Per, take the Writ of Estrepment; but if the Writ
be not in the Per, we doubt whether a Writ of Estrepment will lie or not.

Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 135 WOOD against ASH and FOSTER.
CErtain Lands with a Stock of Sheep was leased by Indenture; and the Lessee
did covenant by the same Indenture, to restore unto the Lessor at the end of
the Term, so many Sheep in number as he took in Lease, and that they should be
betwixt the age of two and four years. Afterward the Lessee granted the same
Stock unto a Stranger, viz. to Elizabeth Winsor, who was the wife of Ash;
whereas in truth, all the ancient Stock was spent. And it was holden by all the
Justices upon an Evidence given unto a Jury at the Bar, That when such a Stock
of Sheep is leased for years, the principal Property does remain in the
Lessor, as long as those Sheep which were in esse at the time of the Lease,
should live; but if any of them do die, and other come in their rooms, then
the property of those new Sheep does belong to the Lessee; and therefore they
held, that the second Lessee should have so many of the Sheep as were left, and
did remain at the end of the Lease, and no other. And yet it was objected by
Walmesley, That the Stock was entire, and that as soon as any other came in the
room of the ancient Sheep which were dead, that they were accounted part of the
same stock; and although they be all dead, and so changed successively two or
three times; yet (he said) it shall be said the same stock. And he resembled
the same to the case of a Corporation, which although all the Corporation die,
and other new men come in their places, it shall be said the same Corporation.
But notwithstanding his Opinion, all the Justices were of opinion as before.
Walmesley said, That agreeing with his opinion was the opinion of all the
civil Lawyers: but the Court was angry, and rebuked him, that he did in such
manner cross their opinions, and that he cited the opinion of Civilians in our
Law; and they resolved the contrary; and they said, there is a difference
betwixt the Lease of other Goods; and a lease of live Cattle; for in the first
Case if any thing be added for mending, repairing, or otherwise by the Lessee,
at the end the Lessor shall have the additions, for of them he has always the
property, and they are annexed to the principal; but Lambs, Calves, etc. are
severed from the principal, and are the Profits arising of the Principal,
which the Lessee ought to have, else he should pay his Rent for nothing: And as
to the issue upon the Cepit by Foster, it was showed, That he did but stay the
Sheep in his Manor, where he had Fellons Goods, Waifes, and Strayes, and that
the Sheep were stayed upon a Huy and Cry; and that he had taken Bond of one, to
whom he had delivered the Sheep, to render them to him who had the right of
them. And that stay was holden by the Court to be out of the point of the
Issue; For that he who does stay, does not take.

Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 136. The Heirs of Sir ROGER LEWKNOR
and FORD's Case. Intratur Pasch. 28. El. Rot. 826.
SIR Roger Lewknor, seized of Wallingford Park, made a lease thereof unto Ford
for years, and died: the Lessee granted over his term to another, excepting the
Wood: the term expired; and now an action of Waste was brought against the
second lessee by the two Coparceners and the Heir of the third Coparcener, her
Husband being tenant by the courtesy. And Shuttleworth and Snag Sergeants did
argue, that the action would not lie in the form as it was brought. And the
first Exception which was taken by them was, because the action was general,
viz. Quod fecit Vastum in terris quas Sir Roger Lewknor pater praedict' the
plaintiffs, cujus haeredes ipsae sunt, praefat' defend' demisit, etc. and the
Count was, that the Reversion was entailed by Parliament unto the Heirs of the
body of Sir Roger Lewknor; and so they conceived, that the Writ ought to have
been special, viz. cujus haeredes de corpore ipsae sunt. For they said, that
although there is not any such form in the Register, yet in novo casu novum
remedium est apponendum: And therefore they compared this case to the case in
Fitz. Not. Brevium 57. c. viz. If land be given to Husband and Wife, and to the
Heirs of the body of the Wife, and the Wife has issue and dies, and the
Husband commits Waste, the Writ in that case and the like, shall be
special, and shall make special recital of the estate: And so is the case
26. H. 8. 6. where Cestuy que use makes a lease, and the lessee commits Waste:
the action was brought by the Feoffees, containing the special matter; and it
was good, although there were not any such Writ in the Register, cujus haeredes
de corpore: and we are not to devise a new form in such case, but it is
sufficient to show the special matter to the Court. Also the words of the Writ
are true; for they are Heirs to Sir Roger Lewknor: and the count is sufficient
pursuant and agreeing to their Writ: for they are Heirs, although they are not
special Heirs of the body: and so the Court was of opinion that the Writ was
good, notwithstanding that Exception. And Anderson and Periam Justices, said,
That the case is not to be compared to the case in F. Not. Br. 57. c. for there
he cannot show by whose Demise the Tenant holds, if he does not show the
special conveyance; viz. that the land was given to the Husband and Wife, and
the Heirs of the body of the Wife: Nor is it like unto the case of 26. H. ^. 6.
for the same cause: for always the demise of the Tenant ought to be especially
showed and certainly; which it cannot be in these two cases, but by the
disclosing of the Title also to the Reversion. Another Exception was taken,
because that the Writ does suppose quod tenuerunt, which (as they conceived) is
to be meant, that tenuerunt jointly; whereas in truth they were Tenants in
common. Walmesley contrary; because there is not any other form of Writ: for
there is not any Writ which does contain two Tenuerunts. And the words of the
Writ are true, quod tenuerunt, although tenuerunt in Common. But although they
were not true, yet because there is no other form of Writ, it is good enough.
As Littleton, If a lease be made for half a year, and the Lessee does waste,
yet the Writ shall suppose, quod tenet ad terminum annorum: and the count shall
be special, 40. Ed. 3. 41. E. 3. 18. If the Lessee does commit waste, and
grants over his term, the Writ shall be brought against the Grantor, and
shall suppose, quod tenet; and yet in truth, he does not hold the Land. 44. Ed.
3. and Fitz. If one make diverse leases of diverse lands, and the Lessee does
waste in them all, the Lessor shall have one Writ of waste supposing quod
tenet; and the Writ shall not contain two Tenets: And such was also the opinion
of the Court. The third Exception was because that the Writ was brought by the
two coparceners, and the Heir of the third coparcener, without naming of the
Tenant by the Courtesy. And thereupon Snagg cited the Case of 4. Ed. 3. That
where a Lease is made for life, the Remainder for life, and the tenant for life
does waste, he in the Reversion cannot have an Action of waste during the life
of him in the Remainder. So in this case, the Heir of the third coparcener
cannot have waste, because the mean estate for life is in the Tenant by the
courtesy: And to prove that the Tenant by the courtesy ought to join, he
cited 3. E. 3. which he had seen in the Book it self at large, where the
Reversion of a tenant in Dower was granted to the Husband, and to the Heirs of
the Husband, and the tenant in Dower did waste, and they did join in an Action
of waste, and not good. And so is 17. E. 3. 37. F. N. B. 59. f. and 22. H. 6.
25. a. Walmesley contrary: for here in our case there is nothing to be
recovered by the tenant by the courtesy, for he cannot recover damages,
because the disinheresin is not to him; and the term is expired, and therefore
no place wasted is to be recovered: and therefore it is not like unto the Books
which have been cited; for in all those the tenant was in possession, and the
place wasted was to be recovered, which ought to go to both according to their
estates in reversion. But it is not so here; for in as much as the term is
expired, the land is in the tenant by the courtesy, and so he has no cause to
complain. And such also was the opinion of the whole Court, viz. that because
the term was ended, that the Writ was good notwithstanding the said Exception.

Then concerning the principal matter in Law, which was, Whether the Writ were
well brought against the second Lessee, or whether it ought to have been
brought against the first Lessee; It was argued by Shuttleworth, that it ought
to have been brought against the first Lessee; for when he granted over his
term, excepting the trees, the Exception was good: Ergo, etc. For when the Land
upon which the trees are growing, is leased out to another, the trees pass
with the Lease as well as the Land, and the property of them is in the Lessee
during the term; and therefore when he grants his term, he may well except the
trees, as well as the first Lessor might have done. And that is proved by the
Statute of Marlebridge, Cap. 23. for before that Statute the Lessee was not
punishable for cutting down the trees, and that Statute does not alter the
properties of the trees, but only that the Lessee shall render damages if he
cut them down, etc. Also the words of the Writ of Wast proves the same, which
are, viz. in terris, domibus etc. sibi dimissis. Also the Lessee might have cut
them down for reparations, etc. and for firewood, if there were not sufficient
underwoods; which he could not have done, if the trees had been excepted. And
in 23. H* 8. in Brook, It is holden, that the excepting of the trees, is the
excepting of the Soil. And so is 46. E. 3. 22. Where one made a Lease,
excepting the woods, and afterward the Lessee did cut them down, and the
Lessor brought an Action of Trespass quare vi and armis clausum fregit, etc.
and it was good, notwithstanding that Exception was taken to it. And it is
holden in 12. E. 4. 8. by Fairfax and Littieton, That if the Lessee cut the
trees, that the Lessor cannot carry them away, but he is put to his Action of
Waste. Fenner and Walmesley Sergeants contrary: and they conceived, that the
Lessee has but a special property in the trees, viz. for fire-boot,
plough-boot, house-boot, etc. And if he pass over the Lands unto another, that
he cannot reserve unto himself that special property in the trees, no more
then he who has common appendant can grant the principal, excepting and
reserving the Common; or grant the Land, excepting the foldage. The grand
property of the trees does remain in the Lessor, and it is proved by 10. H. 7.
30. and 27. H. 8* 13. etc. If Tenant for life, and he in the reversion, join
in a Lease; and the Lessee does wast, they shall join in an Action of Wast,
and Tenant for life shall recover the Freehold, and the first Lessor the
damages; which proves that the property of the trees is in him. As to that that
he was dispunishable at the common law, that was the folly of the Lessor; and
although it was so at the common law, yet it is otherwise at this day. For when
the Statute says, That the Lessor shall recover damages for the Wast, that
proves sufficiently that the property of the trees is in him, as the Statute of
Merton Cap. 4. enacts. That if the Lessor do approve part of the Wast, leaving
sufficient for the Commoners; and they notwithstanding, that bring an Assize,
they shall be barred in that Case; and the Lord may have an Action of Trespass
against them if they break the Hedges by force of that Statute, as it has been
adjudged; for the intent of the Statute was, to settle the Inheritance of the
Land approved without interruption of the Commoners: And so in this case. But
Note, that by the Statute of Marlebridge, the Lessor shall recover damages for
the houses, etc. which are wasted, etc. and yet a man cannot infer thereupon,
that therefore the Lessee has no Interest or property in them; and such
interest has he in the trees, notwithstanding the words of the Statute, (which
is contrary to this meaning, as it seems.) And therefore Quaere, If there be
any difference betwixt them, and what shall be meant by this word [Property.]
But the damages are given by the Statute in respect of the property which the
Lessor is to have in reversion, after the Lease determined. Anderson Chief
Justice, The Lessor has no greater property in the trees, then the Commoner
has in the soil. Walmesley, 2. H. 7. 14. and 10. H. 7. 2. The Lessor may give
leave to the Lessee to cut the trees, and the same shall be a good plea in an
Action of Wast; and the reason of both the books, is, because the property of
them is in the Lessor; and to this purpose the difference is taken in 2. H. 7.
betwixt Gravel and trees. 42. H. 3. If a Prior license the Lessee to cut
trees, the same shall discharge him in Wast, brought by the Successor. But if
the Lessee cutteth down the trees, and then the Prior does release unto him,
the same shall not bar the Successor; and so is 21. H. 6. Also he cited
Culpepers case, 2 Eliz. and 44. E. 3. Statham, and 40. Ass. 22. to prove that
the Lessor shall have the Wind-falls. If a stranger cutteth down trees, and the
Lessee brings an Action of Trespass, he shall recover but according to his
loss, viz. for lopping and topping. As to that which was said, That if the
Lessee cut down trees, that the Lessor cannot take them away, that is true* for
that there is a contract of the Law, that if the Lessee does cut them down,
that he shall have the trees; and the Lessor shall have treble damages for
them. Also he said, That the trees are no part of the thing demised, but are as
servants, and shall be for reparations. As if one has a Piscarie in the land
of another man, the land adjoining is as it were a servant, viz. to dry the
Nets; So, if one have conduit-pipes lying in the land of ather, he may dig the
land for to mend the pipes, and yet he has no Interest, nor Freehold; To that
which was said, That by the excepting of the trees, the land upon which they
stood is excepted; It is true, as a servant to the trees, for their
nourishment, but not otherwise; for if the Lessor sells the trees, he
afterward shall not meddle with the land, but it shall be wholly in the
Lessee, quia sublata causa, tollitur eff^ctus; And if the Lessee tieth a horse
upon the land, where the trees stood the Lessor may distraine the same for his
rent, and avow as upon land within his distress, and Fee, and holden of him;
And he said, that the lessor may grant the trees, but so cannot the lessee; and
therefore he said, That the property is in the lessor, and not in the lessee:
Also if the lessor grants them, they pass without Atturnment: But contrary,
if the lessor had but a Reversion in them: Also if the lessor cutteth them
down, his Rent shall not be apportioned, and therefore they are no part of the
thing demised: For 16. H. 7. and temps E. 1. Fitz. Waste, in two or three
places it is holden, That if the Waste be done Sparsim in a Close or Grove, the
lessor shall recover the whole: Then admit that the trees excepted are cut down
sparsim; if the Exception shall be good, how shall the thing wasted be
recovered, and against whom? quod nota. Anderson Chief Justice did conceive
that the Exception was void, and that the Action was well brought; and he said,
It was a Knavish and Foolish demise; and if it should be good, many mischiefs
would follow, which he would not remember. Windham Justice was of the same
opinion, and he said, The lessor might have excepted them, and so take from the
lessee his fire wood and Plough bote, etc. But the lessee could not grant his
estate excepting the trees, because he had but a special interest in them,
viz. for his fire-bote, etc. which shall go with the land. Periam Justice
agreed, That as to such a special property, none can have it, but such a one
who has the land; and therefore the exception of the Wood by the lessee was
void. But as to the other things, perhaps if they were Apple trees, or other
Fruit Trees, the exception had been good. Also although the trees are not let
directly, yet they are after a sort by a mean, as annexed to the land; and if
the Action be brought against him who made the exception, he cannot plead that
they were let unto him, and therefore he doubted of the exception. Rodes
Justice also said, That he doubted of the Exception* And he said, That the Book
of 44* E. 3. is, That the lessee should have the Wind-falls, and he did not
much regard the Opinion of Statham. But Anderson Chief Justice was of opinion,
that the lessor should have the Wind-falls. Note, the Case was not adjudged at
this time.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench 137
EXceptions were taken by Fuller to an Indictment upon the Statute of 1. Eliz.
cap. 2. for the omitting of the Crossing of a Child in Baptising of him. The
Case was, That a Minister out of his Cure, at another Church, viz. at
Chelmesford in Essex, did Baptize a Child without the Sign of the Cross; for
which he was indicted. The first Exception was, That the Statute speaks of
Ministers which do not use the administering of the Sacrament in such Cathedral
Churches, or Parish Churches, as he should use to administer the same; that
this was not the Parish Church in which he should use the same. Suit Justice
was of opinion, That it was good, notwithstanding that; for otherwise the
Statute might be greatly defrauded. The words of the Statute are farther [Or
shall wilfully or obstinately, standing in the same, use any other Rule,
Ceremony, Order, Form, etc.] 2. He took another Exception upon those words;
For the omitting of the Crossing only is put, and it is not showed that he used
any other rite or Ceremony, etc. for there ought to be some Positive thing. 3.
He does not show the Place or Parish where he persisted in it, and that is
material and issuable. The fourth Exception was, Because it was Inquisitio
c^pta coram Johanne Peter, Waltero Mildmay, and so named four of them, by
virtue of a Commission directed to them and to others, and does not show what
others, nec quod illi fuerunt praesentes; and then if the Commission were to
them all jointly, and two only were present, then it was coram non judice, and
so void. 5. The Statute says, That if any Parson or Vicar; but does not say,
being Minister Dei. The sixth was, That it was at another Church, etc. Wray
Chief Justice, If this Evasion should be allowed, the Statute were not to the
purpose. The seventh was, That it does not show where the persisting was, for
that is a special thing, and material and issuable. Wray Chief Justice
conceived, That that only was a material Exception, and that the other
Exceptions were but frivolous; and were not good.

Hill. 29. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
138 WARREN's Case.
ONE Warren demanded by a Writ of Debt in the Common Pleas Forty Pound, and
upon his Declaration did confess himself satisfied of Twenty Pound, and
thereupon Error was brought in the King's Bench: And the Judgment reversed,
because by his Declaration he had abated his Writ; and he ought to have
Judgment according to his Writ, and not according to his Declaration. The
Error assigned was in the Outlawry; and it was holden by all the Justices, That
if the principal Record be reversed for Error, that the Outlawry which is
grounded upon it shall be reversed also.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
139 ROOTE's Case.
THE Case was in a Prohibition touching Tithes; and the libell in the
Spiritual Court was for Corn and Hay, and other things: and the Tenant of the
land did prescribe to pay in one part of the land, the third part of the tenth;
and in another part, the moity of the tenth of Corn, for all manner of Tithes.
And the Court did incline that the same was a good prescription. And a
Prohibition was granted to the Ecclesiastical Court.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 140
A Man was possessed for the term of six years of a Tavern in London, and
leased the same unto another for three years; and it was convenanted betwixt
them, that during the three years, quolibet mense, monthly the lessee should
give an Account to the lessor of the Wine which he sold, and should pay unto
him for every Tun sold, so much money. And afterward the lessor granted the
three years which were remaining of the six years to another; and he did
request the lessee to account, and he would not; whereupon he brought an Action
of Covenant; and the Defendant pleaded, That he had accounted to the Assignee
of the three years: and upon that there was a Demurrer joined. And the better
opinion of the Court was, that it was no Plea, because it was not a Covenant,
which did go with the land, or the Reversion; but was a collateral thing, and
did not pass by the assignment of the three years.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 141
IT was adjudged. That the bringing of a Writ of Error to reverse a Fine by an
Infant, during his nonage, is not sufficient; but the Fine by Judgment in the
Writ of Error must be reversed during his Nonage.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 142 WIDALL and Sr. JOHN ASHTON's Case.
A Writ of Error was brought by Widall, against Sr. John Ashston, because in
the other action being an action of Wast: The Plaintiff there did declare, that
he was seized, and so seized demisit pro termino annorum, etc. and did not show
of what estate he was seized; And yet he did suppose that it was ad
exhaeredationem ejus, etc. And the same by Beamount was taken for an exception:
as 7. H. 6. A man pleaded a Feoffment to two and haeredibus, and does not say,
suis, it is uncertain: And in the principal Case it shall be supposed, that he
has but an estate for life, for it shall not be intended that he has an
estate of Inheritance, without expressing of words to carry an Inheritance. As
7. Ass. If I grant a Rent to I. S. and do not name what estate he shall have in
it, he shall have but an estate for life. But he said, that the Presidents are,
that if the word [seised] had been left out, it had been good enough; For by
the Book of Entries, a man may say [demisit] without saying that he was seized
and demisit: But if a man will plead a thing which is not necessary to be
pleaded, and mistake it, it shall make his Plea naught: as in Patridges Case:
Where a suite was upon the Statute of Maintenance, It is sufficent to say,
contra formam Statuti. But if he will plead specially, the day and place of the
Statute, and mis-plead it, it makes all naught. Suit Justice, I conceive that,
that is a fault incurable. But upon the other side it was argued, that in 21.
H. 7. It is holden, that he might plead quod demisit, without that, that he was
seized and demisit, as there in an Action of Debt. And therefore it is but
surplusage in the principal Case. Vide 15. E. 4. A good Case, where surplusage
shall not hurt, because it is not traversable: And he urged that by the Statute
of 18. El. the Declaration does not abate for matter of form: And he said that
Counts and Declarations shall be taken by Intendment; and it shall be intended,
that if brings Wast, that he has such an estate, that he may maintain such
Action. In Adams Case, in the Commentaries, One showed that such an Abbot was
seized, and that the Land came unto the King by Dissolution, and that the King
being seized, did grant the same, and did not show of what estate the King was
seized, and yet it was holden good. See a good Case to this purpose, 18. E. 3.
Formedon 58. And he said that the Defendant had pleaded Null wast fait, and
therefore he had by his Plea affirmed the Declaration to be good. Beamount, He
ought to have said, reversione inde sibi and haeredibus, etc. Clenche Justice,
I conceive that the Statute of 18. El. helps that. Suit Justice, No truly. It
was adjourned.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 143
AN Action of Covenant was brought by a Man, against another who had been his
Apprentize. The Defendant pleaded that he was within age. The plaintiff did
maintain his Action by the Custom of London: Where one by Covenant may bind
himself within age; And Exception was taken to it, That that was a Departure.
Daniel, It is no Departure, for by 18. R. 2. an Infant brought an Action
against Guardian in Socage, and the Guardian pleaded, that the plaintiff was
within age; And the plaintiff did maintain his Declaration, that by the Custom
of such a place, An Insant of 18. years might bring an Action of Account
against his Guardian in Socage, and it was there holden to be no Departure. I
conceive, that an Infant cannot have an Account against his Guardian, before his
full age: But I conceive that they held, that it was by Statute, That an Infant
should not have an Account against Guardian in Socage, until he was of the age
of 21. years. Wray Chief Justice was of opinion, that it was no Departure; For
he said, it should be frivolous to show the whole in his Declaration. viz. That
he was an Infant; And that by Custom he might make a Covenant which should
beinde him; But quaere of his opinion, for that many doubt of it. Vide the Case
118. R. 2.

Hill. 29 Eliz. in the King's Bench 144 CONEY's Case
AN Action of Trespass was brought against John Coney, for digging of the
plaintiffs Close, and killing of 18. Coneys there: The Defendant Pleaded as to
all the Trespass, but killing of two Coneys, Not Guilty; And as to them he said,
that the place where etc. the Trespass is supposed, is a Heath in which he has
common of pasture, and that he found them eating of the Grass, and that he
killed them and carried them away, as it was Lawful for him to do, etc. Cook,
The Point is; Whether a commoner having common of pasture, may kill the Coneys
which are upon the ground; and he said, hemight not. And first he said, it is
to be considered what interest he who has the Freehold, may have in such
things as are ferae Naturae. Secondly, What authority a commoner has in the
ground in which he has common: To the first, he said, that although such
Beasts are ferae Naturae, yet they are reduced to such property when they are
in my ground, by reason of my possession, which I then have in them, that I may
have an action of Trespass against him who takes them, as 42. E. 3. 24. If one
have Deer in his Park, and another takes them away, he may have an action of
Trespass forth taking. 12. H. 8. If a Forrester follow a Buck, which is chased
out of the Park or Forest, although that he who hunteth him, kills him in
his own ground, yet the Forrester or Keeper may enter into his ground, and
retake the Deer, for the property and possession which he has in it by the
pursuit. 7. H. 6. 38. It is holden, that if a wild Beast go out of the Park,
then the owner of the ground has lost the property in it. Brook thereupon
collects, that he had a property in it whilst it was in his Park. 18. E. 4.
14. It is doubted whether a man can have property in things which are ferae
Naturae; But 10. H. 7. 6. It is holden, that an Account lies for things ferae
Naturae. Vide 14. H. 8. 1. The Bishop of Londons Case, and 22. H. 6. 59. as
long as they are in his ground, they are in his possession, and he shall have
an Action of Trespass for the taking of them, and the Writ shall be damas suas,
by Newton. And in the Register 102. It is Quare ducent's cuniculos suos precij
etc. cepit. But it is said, that he has common there: What then? Yet he cannot
meddle with the Wood, Sand, Grass, but by taking of the same with the mouths
of his Cattle: If he who has the Freehold bring an action against the Commoner
for entering into his Land; If he plead, Not guilty, he cannot give in Evidence,
that he has Common there. 22* Ass. A Commoner cannot put in Cattle to Agist:
So is 12. H. 8. And of late it was holden in this Court, That where the
Commoners did prescribe, that the Lord had used to put but so many of his
Cattle upon the Lands; That it was a void prescription. Godfrey, Contrary. That
it is Lawful for the Commoner to kill them: And he agreed the Cases which were
put by Cook And he said, that the owner of the ground had not the very
property, but a kind of property in them. 3. H. 6. and F. N. B. If the Writ
of Trespass be, Quare cuniculos suos, etc. The Writ shall abate; And yet he
has a property in them, or rather a possession of them. I grant, that against
a stranger he might have this Action of Trespass, but not against the Commoner:
for he has a wrong done unto him, by their being upon the Land, and therefore
he may kill them, although he may not meddle with the Land, because he has not
an Interest in it; and yet he may meddle with the profit of it: as 15. H. 7. A
Commoner may distrain damage feasant 43. E. 3. Coneys dig the Ground and eat
the Grass of the Commoner, etc. I grant, that it is not lawful for the Tenant
for life for to kill the Coneys of him, who has a free Warren in the ground.
For if a man bring an Action of Trespass, Quare Warranem suum intravit and
cuniculos suos cepit, etc. It is no Plea, that it is his Freehold. L. 5. E. 4.
In Trespass, Quare clausum fregit and cuniculos cepit. The Defendant said, that
the plaintiff made a lease at will unto such a man, of the Land; and he as his
Servant did kill the Coneys, and it was holden no Plea, and yet it is there
said, that by the grant of the Land the Coneys does not pass; but the reason
(as I conceive) is, because it tends to his damage, and therefore that he may
kill them. And so in this Case, 2. H. 7. and 4. E. 4. If I have Common of
pasture in Land, and the Tenant plougheth the Land, I shall have my Action upon
the Case in the Nature of a quod permittat. 9. E. 4. If one has Land adjoining
to my Land, and levy a Nusans, I may enter upon his Land and abate the Nusans.
So if a man take my goods and carry them into his own Land, I may enter
thereupon and retake my goods. So if a Tenant of the Freehold plough the Land,
and sow the same with Corn, the Commoner may put in his Cattle, and there whit
eat the Corn growing upon the Land, and may justify the same, because the
wrong first begins by the Tenant; So if a man do falsely imprison me, and put me
in his house, I may break his house to get forth. 21. H. 6. in Trespass, All
the Inhabitants of such a Town do prescribe to have Common in such a field
every year after harvest: And one froward fellow amongst the rest will not
gather in his Corn within convenient time, If the Townsmen put in their Cattle,
and they eat the Corn, he has no remedy for it; And he asked what remedy
the Commoner should have for the eating of the Grass, which his Cattle is to
have, if he should not kill the Coneys? He cannot take them damage feasants,
for he cannot impound them; Nor does a Replevin lie of them. 19. E. 3. and F.
N. B. If the Lord surcharge the Common, the Commoner may have an Action against
him: but in this Case, he can have no Action. Gaudy, Chief Justice. He cannot
kill the Coneys, because he may have other remedy. Suit Justice, A Commoner
cannot take or distrain the Cattle of a Freeholder damage feasants; And
therefore he cannot kill or destroy the Coneys, and he has a remedy; for he
may have an Action upon the Case, or an Assize against him for putting in of
the Coneys, if he do not leave sufficient Common, for the Commoner. Judgment
was afterward given for the Plaintiff.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
145 YARRAM and BRADSHAWE's Case.
YArram and Wilkenson, Sheriffs of the City of Norwich, brought an Action upon
the Case against Bradshawe, because that they being Sheriffs of N. A Capias ad
satisfaciendum (and showed at whose Suit, and in what action) was awarded unto
them; And they, 20. Feb. Anno 25. El. directed their Warrant in writing to
three Sergeants of the same City to arrest him; by force of which the Sergeants
the 26. of Feb. in the same year, did Arrest him in Execution, and that he was
rescued and escaped: And that they had spent diverse sums of Money in enquiring
after him, ad grave damnum eorum, etc. The Defendant pleaded, Not Guilty; And
upon Trial of the issue, a special Verdict was found, that about 20. Feb. Anno
25. such a Warrant was made by them unto the Sergeants, but not 20. Feb. and
that the Sergeans by force thereof, about 26. Feb. did Arrest him, but not the
26. of Feb. and upon the whole matter, there was a demurrer in Law. Tanfield,
for the Defendant, and he said, It was no Lawful Arrest. For by 8. E. 4. A
Bailiff without a Warrant in writing may take goods in Execution, and it is
good, if it be by commandment, by word only of the Sheriff; but he cannot
Arrest the body of a man without a Warrant in writing, and sigillo signatum,
which is not showed here in the plaintiffs Declaration: If one in debt declare
per factum suum obligatorium, and does not say, sigillo suo sigillatum, it is
not good. Quaere of that, for the Book of Entries is not so. Secondly, he said,
it must be a present loss or damage to the plaintiffs, or else they cannot
maintain the action: They are chargeable, but not charged; for if the Sheriffs
dye before he begin any Suit against them, their Executors shall not be
charged: But if the plaintiffs have been Arrested, then they are endamaged.
Thirdly, as to the Verdict, the foot and foundation of the action is the wrong;
and the wrong here is not found certain; for it is supposed to be 26. Feb. And
also that the Warrant was Circa 26. Feb. but not 26. Feb. and if it were any
day before, then the action is maintainable; but not, if it were any day after.
A man brings an action, of Trespass, supposing by his writ the same to be done
1. May; If in truth the Trespass was before, then it is good, but if it were 2.
May or at any time after 1. May, then it is not good. It was a great Case
betwixt Vernon and Gray, in an Ejectione firm, The Ejectment was supposed 1.
May, and the Jury did find the Ejectment to be Circa first May, and adjudged
not good. If an Ejectione firm be brought upon a lease made 1. May, and the
Jury find the Ejectment to be circa 1. May, it is not good. Also here they
could not take him in Execution again, although they had found him. For if a
man be once out of Execution by 14* H. 7. He shall not be taken again in
Execution for the same cause. The Court held it not material whether he showed
or not that the Warrant was sub sigillo sigillat', and therefore thy did not
speak to it. Godfrey, for the plaintiff, What if they be not charged, but
chargeable? yet they shall have their action upon the Case, for the wrong done.
viz. The Rescous and the Escape, because the Defendant shall not take advantage
of his own wrong; and so is the opinion of Frowick 13. H. 7. 1. Reporter.
Quaere, For Frowick says, He shall have an action upon the Case or Trespass for
breaking of prison, against him, and shall recover in damage as much as he lost
by the escape, and so he shall be helped, and not by taking of him again: And
Fitzherbert, in his Natura Brevium, in the Writ of Ex part talis, holds, that
upon an Escape the Jailer shall have a special Writ upon the Case against the
Prisoner to answer for the Escape, and the damages which the Jailer shall
sustain thereby: and it was holden in a great Case, viz. One Holts Case: That
it is not necessary to show that there was a recovery against them. Tanfeild,
but there it was after a Suit begun, although before recovery. Godfrey, they
have also put it in their Declaration, that they have expended great sums of
Money in looking for him; therefore they have showed that they were damnified.
Tanfeild, it was foolish for them to spend their Money, for they could not have
taken him again, although they had found him. Godfrey, A man shall have an
action for fear of vexation, or trouble, or charge, as one shall have a
Warrantia Charta, before he be impleaded. A man shall have a Curia Claudenda,
before any breach of the enclosure: As to the Verdict, It is certain enough,
for it says, Quod tunc and ibidem seipsum recussit; and that cannot but be
referred to a time certain before. viz. 26. Feb. Tanfeild, It shall be referred
to circa, and therefore ad tunc and ibidem do remain uncertain. Suit Justice,
Presently by the escape, there was a wrong done, therefore for that he may have
an action. Clenche Justice said, That he had experience in a Case of Trespass:
And it was the opinion of almost all the Judges of England, That if the
Trespass should be done after the day wherein it is supposed to be done by the
Writ; Yet the Writ shall not abate, and therefore he said, That the difference
of the Trespass done before and after the day supposed by the Writ, is to no
purpose: Further he said, that it stands them upon to have their action
before they be sued by the party, at whose Suit he was in Execution: for
perhaps, he who was in Execution might dye, and other changes might happen, so
as they might lose all. Tanfeild, What damages shall the Sheriffs have here, if
they shall recover before any action be brought against them, when as it is
uncerrain whether ever they shall be sued or not; and so uncertain how much
they shall be damnified? But notwithstanding all which was said by Tanfeild,
Judgment was given for the Plaintiffs.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 146
LONDON does prescribe to have a Custom, That after Verdict given in any of the
Sheriffs Courts, or such like Court there, that the Mayor may remove any such
Suit before himself, and as Chancellor secundum bonam and sanam conscientiam
moderate it, and it was moved, whether it were a reasonable custom or not,
because that after trial by ordinary course at Law, he should thereby stay
judgment. Gaudy Justice, It ought to be before judgment, otherwise it cannot
be, for the Statute of 4. H. 4. is, that judgment given in any Court shall not
be reversed, but by Error or Attaint; Vide Rastal, Tit. Judgment.

Mich. 28. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. Rot. 2619. 147 GREEN and HARRIS Case.
IN an Ejectione firm upon a special Verdict, it was found, that one John
Brenne was seized of a Manor where there were Copyholders for life, and by
Indenture leased a copyhold called Harris Tenure, parcel of the Land in
question, to Peter and John Blackborow, for eight years, to begin after the
death of Brenne and his Wife; and by the same Indenture leased all the Manor to
them as before: The Copyholder did surrender, and Brenne granted a copy to hold
according to the custom of the Manor. Brenne and his Wife died: So as the lease
of Blackborow was to begin; Peter entered and granted all his Interest unto a
stranger, and died. John entered into the whole as Survivor, and made a lease
thereof to the Plaintiff, and the Copyholder entered, and he brought the action.
Shuttleworth for the plaintiff: The question is, whether the plaintiff shall
have Harris Tenure, as in gross, or as parcel of the Manor? and he conceived,
that because it is named by it self, that it shall pass as in gross; for so
their intent appears to be. In 33. H. 8. Dyer 48. A Feoffment was made of a
Manor to which a Villein was Regardant, by these words, viz. Dedi unam acram,
etc. And further, Dedi and concessi Villanum meum: and there it was holden that
the Villein should pass as in gross, and that they were several gifts, although
there was but one Deed. The same Law shall be of an Advowson appendant. 14. and
15. El. Dyers* Husband and Wife were joint-tenants in Fee of a Manor out of
which the Queen had a Rent of twenty pound per annum, and she by her Letters
patents, in Consideration of Money paid by the Husband, did give, grant,
release, and remise unto the Husband and his heirs the said twenty pound Rent,
habendum and percipiendum to him and his heirs; The Husband did devise the Rent
unto another and his heirs, and dyed: There it is debated, whether the Wife
should pay the Rent or not; and it was holden that she should pay it, for the
deed having words of grant and release, it shall be referred to the Election of
the Husband, and for his best avail how he will take it; and there is no
necessity that the Rent be extinguished in his possession; for it is a maxim
in Law, that every grant shall be taken beneficially for the grantee: so is it,
if it contain words of two intents, he may take that which makes best for him.
21. and 22. H. 6. A deed comprehending Dedi and concessi, was pleaded as a
Feoffment. In 5. E. 3. A Rent issuing out of Lands in Fee was granted to Tenant
by the courtesy, to have and to hold to him and his heirs; It shall not be
taken as extinct, but the Rent shall go to his heirs, although he himself
could not have it; Then in our Case, because it is more beneficial for the
Termor, he shall have it in gross; And so he shall avoid the Estate of the
Copyholder afterward; and here is an Election made by Peter so to have it by
the grant of his Interest over. Our Case is not like unto the Case of 48. E. 3.
14. Where a Cessavit was brought, supposing that the House was holden of the
Plaintiff by five Shillings, and the Defendant pleaded, that the Ancestor of
the Plaintiff, by his deed, which he showed forth, gave the house to him and a
shop, which are holden by one entire service, and demanded judgment, etc. And
there it was holden, that that deed did not prove, but that the shop might be
parcel of the house, and not a shop in gross by it self. And there Finchdon
says, That if a man grant the Manor of F. to which an Advowson is appendant,
and the Advowson of the Church of F. so as it is named in gross, yet it shall
pass as appendant; I yield to that, for there it is not more beneficial for him
the one way or the other, as it is in our Case. It may be perhaps objected,
That the Plaintiff here shall not recover at all for the cause alleged in
Plo. Comm. 424. in Bracebridges Case, because that the action is brought for a
certain number of Acres, as one hundred Acres, and it is found that the
Plaintiff has right but to a moyty of them: But it has been ruled against
that; viz. that he shall recover. Walmesley Sergeant contrary. Notwithstanding
that this Copyhold be twice named; yet it shall pass as parcel of the Manor,
and not as a thing in gross, and there is but one Rent, one Tenure, and one
reversion of both. 45. E. 3. A Fine was levied of a Manor unto which an
Advowson was appendant, wherein a third part was rendered back to one for life,
with diverse Remainders over, And so of the other two parts, with the advowson
of every third part, as abovesaid; and there it is debated who shall have the
first avoidance. And it is holden notwithstanding the Division as aforesaid,
and the naming of one before the other, that they are all Tenants in common of
it: So as if they cannot agree to present, that Lapse shall incur to the
Bishop; and there no Prerogative is given to him who is first named, nor any
prejudice to the last named; for being by one Deed, it shall pass uno flatu.
14. H. 8. 10. A Lease was made for a year, Et sic de anno in annum, etc. And
there it was debated, whether it were a several Lease for every year; and it
was ruled, That an Action might be brought, supposing that he held for one and
twenty years, if in truth by force of the same Demise the Lessee occupy the
Land so long: And if I by my Deed grant unto A. and B. the services of I. D.
and by the same Deed the services of I. S. are also granted unto them, they are
Joyn-tenants of the Services or Seignories: So if I lease a Manor, reciting
every parcel of the Land of the Manor, for the whole consists in several
parcels; In 33. H. 8. (before remembered,) It is said, That the Advowson shall
be appendant, if the whole Manor be granted, etc. But if it be admitted that
there be several Leases, and that it passes as a thing in gross; yet in the
interim during the life of Brenne, and his wife, it is one entire Manor. For if
Blackborow had levied a Fine thereof before entry, his Interest in the Land had
not passed. And if a Fine be levied of the Manor, and the Conusee render back
part to one for life, and another part to another for life, the remainder of
the whole to a third; until the Two enter, it is one entire Manor in the hands
of the Conusee. If I devise that my Executors shall sell such Lands which are
parcel of a Manor, and dye; until they sell, it remains parcel of the Manor:
So if the heir sells the Manor, that Land shall pass, for it is but
executory, and remains parcel until it be executed. Wherefore in the
principal Case here, the Copyhold is good. The reason of the Case 33. H. 8.
Dyer 48. is, because before the grant, the advowson was not appendant to that
acre only, but to the whole Manor, and to that acre as parcel of it. Also he
said, that the Copyhold shall be good against the Lessee, being granted before
execution of his term, when as the Manor was entire: For he who has a Manor
but for one year, may grant Copies, and the grant shall be good to bind him in
the Reversion. And if one recovereth an acre, parcel of a Manor before
execution, it is parcel of the Manor, and by grant of the Manor shall pass.
Periam Justice, But yet now being executed by the death of the Lessor and his
wife, it is no part of the Manor if they be several Leases. Walmesley, But the
Defendant is in by Custom, by one who is Dominus pro tempore. Anderson Chief
Justice, The Case of 48. E. 3. is like our Case. And I conceive clearly here is
no severance; but if there had been any severance, it had been otherwise; but I
doubt of the other point. Periam Justice, In 13. H. 4. the difference is taken
betwixt a grant of a Manor una cum advocatione; and a grant of a Manor, et
ulterius, a grant of the Advowson. In 14. Eliz. Dyer 311. in the Case of the
Lord Cromwell and Andrews, it is moved, If a man bargain and sell, give and
grant a Manor and Advowson to one, and afterward levieth a Fine, or inrolleth
the Deed, Dyer held, that the Advowson shall pass by the Bargain and Sale, as
in gross before that the Deed be enrolled. But I conceive, that it cannot pass
if the Deed be not enrolled, and then it shall pass as appendant, by reason of
the intent of the parties: and so in this Case. And for the last matter, I
conceive, very strongly, that when the Lease which is executory takes effect,
that it shall avoid the Copyhold; for although at once, viz. during the
expectancy of the said Lease, to begin at a day to come, the Copyhold be not
extinct; yet now he may say, That all times, as in respect to him, the
Copyhold Custom was broken. I hold, That a Tenant in Dower shall not avoid a
Copyhold made during the Coverture; and so it has been adjudged in the Kings
Bench. But I conceive, there is a difference betwixt that Case, and the Case in
question; for in that Case the title of the wife to have Dower is not
consummate till the death of the Husband. Anderson Chief Justice, I can show
you an Authority, That if I grant unto you such Land* and the Manor of D. there
the Land shall pass as parcel of the Manor* Periam, True there, for it does
enforce the first grant. But here the intent of the parties does appear, and
the same is to be respected. Anderson, But their intent ought to be according
to the Law: as in 19. H. 8. it is holden it shall be in a Devise. Anderson,
upon the Argument of this Case, said, That if a Warranty be to a whole Manor,
and also to an Advowson, the party cannot have Two Warrantia Chartae. Periam,
If he had further said in the Deed, That his intent was that it should be
several, the same had altered the Case. Anderson, No truly; because his
intent did not stand with the rule of Law. As if a man devise that his Lands
shall be sold, and does not say by whom, it is void, and yet the intent is
expressed. If the Lease had been by several Deeds, Periam said, The Copyhold
had been severed. Windham denied that, If both the Deeds be delivered at one
time. It was adjourned.

Hill. 29. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 148
AN Information was upon the Statute of 5. and 6. E. 6. for buying of seed
Corn, having sufficient of his own, and not bringing so much unto the Market of
his own corn; and a general issue was found upon it. And it was delivered for
Law to the Jury by the Justices, That a Contract in Market, for corn not in the
Market, or which was not there that day, is not within the Branch of the
Statute. But if corn or grain be in the Market, although that the Contract be
made in a house out of the Market, and delivered to the Vendee out of the
Market, yet it is within the Statute. And in the Argument of that Case,
Anderson said, That the Market, shall be said, The place in the Town where it
has used to be kept, and not every place of the Town: And a Sale in Market
overt in London, ought to be in a Shop which is open to the street, and not in
Chambers or inward rooms, otherwise the property is not altered. And so it is
of all Statutes in open Markets. And the Recorder of London said, That such was
their Custom in London.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 149
It was holden by Anderson chief Justice, That if one devises Lands to the
heirs of I. S. and the Clerk writes it to I. S. and his heirs, that the same
may be helped by averrment, because the intent of the Devisor is written, and
more; And it shall be naught for that which is against his intent, and against
his will, and good for the residue. But if a Devise be to I. S. and his heirs,
and it is written but to the heirs of I. S. there an averrment shall not make
it good to I. S. because it is not in writing, which the Statute requires: an^
so an averrment to take away surplusage is good, but not to increase that which
is defective in the Will of the Testator.

Mich. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 150
A Feoffment was made unto A. unto the use of him, and his wife, dis-punishable
of Wast during their lives; one died, and the Survivor committed Wast; It was
the opinion of the whole Court, that an Action of Wast would not lie by him in
the Reversion; for it is a Privilege which is annexed to the Estate, which
shall continue as long as the Estate does continue.

Mich. 29 Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 151
A. grants annualem redditum out of Lands in which he has nothing. The opinion
of the Court was, That it is a good grant of an Annuity by these words
(annualem redditum.) But whether the Husband shall have a Writ of Annuity after
the death of the wife for an Annuity, during the Coverture, they were in some
doubt; because it is but a thing in Action, as is an Obligation: Otherwise were
it of a Rent which she had for life: Note, in pleading for a Rent, he shall
plead, That he was seized, etc.

Mich. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 152 WINKFEILD'S Case.
Winkfeild devised Land in Norfolk, to one Winkfeild of London, Goldsmith, and
to his heirs in Fee. And afterward, he made a Deed of Feoffment thereof to
diverse persons unto the use of himself for life, without impeachment of waste,
the Remainder unto the Devisee in fee. But before he sealed the Deed of
Feoffment, he asked one, if it would be any prejudice to his Will; who
answered, No. And the Devisor asked again, if it would be any prejudice,
because he conceived that he should not live until Livery was made. And it was
answered, No. Then he said, that he would seal it, for his intent was, that
his Will should stand; And afterward Livery was executed upon part of the
Land, and the Devisor died. Rodes and Periam Justices; The Feoffment is no
Countermand of the Will, because it was to one person: but perhaps it had been
otherwise, if it had been to the use of a stranger, although it were not
executed. Anderson Chief Justice, and others, the Will is revoked in that part
where the Livery is executed. And he said, It would have been a question, if he
had said nothing. And all the Justices agreed, That a man may revoke his Will
in part, and in other part not. And he may revoke it by word; and that a Will
in writing may he revoked by word. Periam said, It is no revocation by the
party himself, but the Law does revoke it; to which Windham agreed. But he
said, That if the party had said nothing when he sealed the Feoffment, it had
been a revocation of the party, and not of the Law. Periam, If the Witnesses
dye, so as he cannot prove the words spoken at the sealing of the Feoffment,
the Feoffment will destroy the Will; and so he spoke to Anderson, who did not
deny it. All this was delivered by the Justices upon an Evidence given to a
Jury at the Bar.

Mich. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 153
NOte; That it was said by Anderson Chief Justice. That if one intrude upon
the possession of the King, and another man enters upon him, that he shall not
have an Action of Trespass; for he who is to have trespass, ought to have a
possession; and in this case he had not, for that every Intruder shall answer
the King for his time; and therefore he shall not answer to the other party: To
which, Walmesley and Fenner, Sergeants agreed. Periam doubted of it; for he
conceived, That he had a possession against every stranger. Snagg Sergeant
conceived, That he might maintain an Action of Trespass; but Windham and Rodes
Justices, were of opinion that he could not maintain Trespass. Walmesley, he
cannot say in the Writ, Quare clausam fr^git, etc. Rodes vouched 19. E. 4. to
maintain his opinion.

Mich. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 154 NORRIS and SALISBURIE'S Case.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, the Case was this, Norris was possessed of
wools, for which there was a contention betwixt the Defendant, and one A. And
Norris promised A. in consideration that the goods were his; and also that he
should serve process upon Salisbury out of the Admiral Court, that he would
deliver the goods to A. And afterward he delivered the goods to Salisbury the
Defendant, who gave him Bond with Condition to keep him harmless from all
losses, charges and hindrances, concerning and touching the said wools.
Afterward A. served process upon him, and he did not deliver to him the
goods: for which A. brought his Action upon the Case against Norris, who
pleaded, That he made no such promise, which was found against him. And
afterward, Norris brought an Action of Debt upon the Bond against Salisbury,
because he did not save him harmless in that Action upon the Case. And the
opinion of the whole Court was, That the Action of Debt would not lie, because
that the Action upon the Case did not concern the wools directly; for the
Action is not brought but for breach of the promise; And that is a thing of
which the Defendant had not notice, and it was a secret thing not concerning
the wools. but by circumstances, and so out of the Condition. Anderson Chief
Justice said, That if A. promise B. in Consideration, that B. is owner of
goods, and has them, to deliver them to C. the same may be a good
consideration; yet he somewhat doubted of it. But Walmesley did affirm it to
be a good Consideration.

Mich. 29 Eliz in the Common Pleas. 155
IT was holden by the whole Court, That in an Action of Trespass, It is a good
plea in bar, That the Plaintiff was barred in an Assize, brought by him
against the Defendant, and issue joined upon the Title; But otherwise, if it
were upon the general issue; viz. Null tort, null disseisin; For then it might
be that the Plaintiff was never ousted nor disseised; and so no cause to
recover: In which case, it was no reason to put him from his Writ of Right.

Mich. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. Intratur Mich. 27. Rot. 1627. 156 BRAGG'S
Case.
A Woman having cause to be endowed of a Manor in which are Copyholders, does
demand her Dower by the name of certain Messuages, certain Acres of land, and
certain Rents; and not by the name of the third part of the Manor, and she does
recover, and keeps Courts, and grants Copy-holds: It was holden by the whole
Court, that in such Case that the Grants were void, for she has not a Manor,
because she has made her demand as of a thing in gross. Otherwise, if the
demand had been of the third part of the Manor, for then she had a Manor, and
might have kept Courts and granted Copies. And the pleading in that Case was,
That she did recover the third part of the Manor per nomen of certain
Messuages, and Acres, and Rents; which was holden to be no recovery of the
third part of the Manor.

Hill. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 157
NOte, it was holden for Law, That the Justices may increase, but not decrease
damages, because the party may have an Attaint, and so is not without remedy.
But note, contrary by Anderson and Periam Justices.

Hill. 39. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 158
Sergeant Fenner moved this Case, That the Lord of a Manor does prescribe, That
if the Tenant do a Rescous, or drive his Cattle off from the Land when the Lord
comes to distrain, that the Tenant shall be amerced by the Homage; and that the
Lord may distrain for the same. Anderson Chief Justice did conceive it might be
a good custom: and so also was the opinion of Rodes Justice; and he vouched 11
H. 7. where the Lord had Three Pound for Pound-breach. Fenner, It is extortion,
if the amercement be not for a thing which is a common Nusans; and cited 11 H.
4. to prove it. Periam Justice said, That he said well.

Pasch. 28 Eliz. In the Common Pleas. Rot. 1962. 159 GILE'S and NEWTON'S Case.
THE Case was, That the Queen seized of the Manor of Gascoigne, and of the
Graunge called Gascoigne Graunge in D. did grant all her Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments in D. and it was adjudged by the whole Court, that the Manor did
not pass. And so Anderson Chief Justice said it is, if it were in the Case of a
common person; but an Advowson shall pass by the Feoffment of the Manor
without Deed, without the words cum pertinentiis, for that is parcel of the
Manor; which the whole Court granted.

Pasch. 23. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 160
J. S. was arrested by force of a Latitat out of the King's Bench, at the Suit
of J. D. and the Sheriff took an Obligation of him with two Sureties, upon
condition that he appear such a day in the King's Bench, and also that ad tunc
and ibidem he answer the said J. D. in a Plea of Trespass. It was moved by
Rodes Sergeant, That the Obligation was void by the Statute of 23. H. 6. by
which Statute no Obligation shall be said to be good, if not for appearance
only; and this Obligation is for appearance, and also that he shall answer to
J. D. which is another thing then is contained in the Statute, and therefore it
is void. But all the Justices were of opinion, That the Obligation was good,
notwithstanding that; because that the words of the Writ directed to the
Sheriff, are Quod capias such a man, It a quod habeas corpus ejus hic, such a
day, ad respondendum tali, in a Plea of Trespass; and so nothing is contained
in the Bond, which is not comprised within the Writ directed unto him, but if
any other collateral thing be put into the Obligation, then the Bond shall be
void for the whole.

31. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 161 BUCKHURST'S Case.
LEssee for ten years granted a rent charge unto his Lessor for the years:
Afterward the Lessor granted the Remainder in Fee to the Lessee. It was the
opinion of the whole Court that the rent was gone and extinct, because the
Lessor who had the rent, is a party to the Destruction of the Lease, which is
the ground of the Rent.

29. Eliz. In the King's Bench.
162 ALLEN and PATSHALL'S Case.
A Copyholder does surrender unto the use of a Stranger for ever; and the Lord
admits the Surrendree to have and to hold to him and his Heirs. It was adjudged
in this Case; That if it were upon a devise, that such a one should have the
Copyhold in Fee; and afterward a surrender is made unto the Lord to grant the
Copyhold according to the Will; and he grants it in Fee to him and his Heirs,
that the Grant is good. But quaere in the first Case, for it was there but a
bare Surrender only.

Mich. 27, 28. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
163 STRANGDEN and BARNELL'S Case.
AN Action of Trover and Conversion was brought of Goods in Ipswich; the
Defendant pleaded, That the Goods came to his hand in Dunwich in the same
County; and that the Plaintiff gave unto him the goods which came to his hands
in Dunwich, absque hoc that he is guilty of any Trover, and Conversion of Goods
in Ipswich. And by the opinion of the Court, the same is a good manner of
Pleading by reason of the special Justification. Vide 27. H. 6. But when the
Justification is general, the County is not traversable at this day. Vide 19.
H. 6. 6, and 7.

Mich. 27. Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
164 BARTON and EDMOND'S Case.
AN Infant and another were bounden in a Bond for the Debt of the Infant: The
Infant at his full age did assume to save the other man harmless against the
said Bond; afterward the Infant died. It was resolved by the whole Court, that
upon this Assumpsit an Action upon the Case would lie against the Executors of
the Infant. But if a Feme Covert, and another at her request had been bounden
in such a Bond, and after the death of her Husband, she had assumed to have
saved the other harmless against such Bond, such Assumpsit should not have
bound the Wife.

Trinit. 29. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 165 ZOUCH and BAMPORT'S Case
THis Case was moved, When the Defendant pleads in Bar to the Action, and the
Plaintiff replies, and the Defendant does demur specially upon the
Replication, and the Bar is insufficient, Whether the Justices shall give
Judgment upon the Replication, or shall resort unto the insufficient Bar, the
Replication being also insufficient? And the opinion of the Court was, That
when the Action is of such a nature, that the Writ and the Count does
comprehend the Title, as in a Formedon and the like, then because there is a
sufficient title for the demandant by the Writ and the Count, so as the Judges
may safely proceed to Judgment for the Plaintiff, there they shall resort to
the Bar. Contrary in Cases where the Title does commence only by the
Replication, as in Assize, Trespass, and the like.

40. Eliz. in the Exchequer. 166
NOte, it was said by Sir Francis Bacon the King's Solicitor, That it was
adjudged 40. Eliz. in the Exchequer, That where the King had made a Lease for
life, who was ousted by a Stranger, that the same should be said a Disseisin of
the particular estate, against the common ground, which is, That a man cannot
be disseised of less estate then of a Fee-Simple.

40. Eliz. in the Kings Bench. 167
IT was holden and adjudged by Popham Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, That
where a Lease was made unto the Husband and Wife for their lives, the remainder
to the Heirs of the Survivor, that the same was a good remainder,
notwithstanding the uncertainty, and that in that Case the Husband after the
death of the Wife should have Judgment to recover the Land*

33. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 168 PROCTER'S Case.
IT was adjudged in this Case, That the Lachess of the Clark in not entering of
the Kings Silver, shall not prejudice the King or the Crown.

30* Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
169 HARDING'S Case.
IT was holden by the whole Court of Kings Bench (as it was reported by Sir
Robert Hitcham Knight) That if a man make a Lease of Copyhold land, and of
Freehold land, rendering Rent; and the* Copyhold descends to one, and the
Freehold to another, that the rent shall be apportioned.

Trinit. 25. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. Rot. 1702. 170 LEONARD and STEPHEN'S
Case.
IN Trespass, the issue joined was, Whether it were a Feoffment or not; and
upon Evidence to the Jury, the Case appeared to be, viz. That there was Lessee
for years, and afterward the Lessor made a Deed of Feoffment, in which were
words of Confirmation, and in the end of the Deed, there was a special Letter
of Attorney to make Livery to the Lessee for years, and his heirs. And it was
agreed by all the Justices, That the Lessee for years had Election to take the
same by way of confirmation, or by Feoffment; and that the Law does suspend and
expect until he has declared his pleasure. And it was further adjudged, That
when he has made his Election, to take it by Livery, that it shall be a
Feoffment, ab initio; and by the delivery of the Deed in the mean time, nihil
operatur.

Mich. 31. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 171
A Copyholder did allege the custom to be, That the Lord of the Manor might
grant Copies in Remainder with the assent of the Tenants, and not otherwise:
and that Copies in remainder otherwise granted should be merely void. The
question was, Whether it were a good custom? The Justices did not deliver any
opinion in the point. But Walmesley* Sergeant, said, That it was a void
custom; for a Copyhold Estate is an estate of which the Law does not take
notice, and Copyholders are mere Tenants at will by the common Law; and
therefore to say, That he who has not an interest should have me at his
pleasure, as well as I who am interessed should have him at my pleasure, is
preposterous and repugnant to reason: as 2. H. 4. 27. A custom that the
Commoner shall not use his Common before that the Lord has put in his Cattle,
is not good, for the Commoner has an interest in the Common, which is not
reasonable to be restrained at the pleasure of another; and 19. Eliz* Dy^r 257.
A custom that a man shall not demise or lease but for six years is a void
custom. Shuttleworth Sergeant contrary, and he said, That the reason that this
Copyhold is not within Littletons Estates by Copy, is no reason; for by the
same reason you may overthrow all Copyhold Estates. And he said, That this
custom might have a lawful beginning, and it seems to be grounded upon the
reason of the common Law, that a remainder should not be without the assent of
the particular Tenant, and therefore it is a good custom. And so is the
custom, that a Woman shall not have Dower if she do not claim it within a year
and a day. And a custom, that a free Tenant shall not alien without a
surrender in the Court of the Lord, is a good custom. It was adjourned.

31. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
172 Sir RALPH EGERTON'S Case.
UPon a special Verdict the Case was this, A man being Tenant for life in the
right of his Wife, he made a Deed of Feoffment Habendum to the Feoffee and his
Heirs, ad solum opus and usum of the Feoffee and his Heirs for the life of the
Wife; and the Court was clear of opinion, that it was a forfeiture, because the
Habendum is absolute; and the use is another clause; and although he does not
limit the use but for life, yet the Law limits the remainder of the use to the
party who makes the Feoffment.

Trinit. 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench.
173 MAYE'S Case.
IF a man sends a Letter by a Carrier to a Merchant for certain Merchandises
to send them to him by the Carrier, receiving certain moneys; and the Merchant
sends the Goods by the Carrier, without the receipt of the Money, the same
shall not bind the Buyer (as it was holden by the Court) because it was but a
conditional Bargain, and it was the folly of the Merchant to trust the
Carrier; and therefore in that Case the Vendee was admitted to wage his Law.
And so if one writes for Wares, and the party sends them by the same Carrier,
yet if the Carrier does not deliver them, the other may wage his Law in such
Case.

Mich. 30. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 174 HALTON'S Case.
THE case was, That a Recognizance was acknowleged before Sir N. Read, one of
the Masters of the Chancery. The Recognizee died before the same was enrolled.
And whether it might be enrolled at the Petition of the Executors of the
Recognizee was the question? And it was agreed by all the Justices, That the
same might be enrolled; for it was like unto the Conusans of a Fine before a
Judge, which might be removed out of the hands of the Judge by a Certiorari,
and yet it is no record until it be perfected. And at that time, it was
doubted whether the Chancery might help a man who was a purchaser for valuable
consideration, where there wants the word [heirs] in the Deed of purchase:
But it was agreed by all the Justices, That after a Fine is levied of Land,
That the Chancery may compel the Tenant to attorne.

Trinit. 31. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. Rot. 1704. 175 BLAGROVE and WOOD'S Case.
IN Trespass, the Question was, If a Copyhold was surrendered, or not. And the
custom was alleged to be, That a Copyholder might surrender out of the Court
to the Steward out of the Manor* And the Steward was retained only by word,
but had no Patent. Walmesley, He may be Steward by word well enough. But
Windham and Anderson held, That he might be Steward by word only in
possession, that is, when he holds a Court in possession; But he cannot be
Steward out of Court without a Patent, because he is then out of possession;
And therefore, it was the opinion of the whole Court, That the surrender out of
Court to the Steward by word, was not good.

Hill. 36. Eliz. in the Common Pleas. 176
THe Summons of a Copyholder to appear at the Lords Court was at the Church;
and thereupon the Copyholder did not appear: And it was the opinion of the
whole Court, that the same was no cause of forfeiture of the Copyhold, because
it was not especially showed to be the Custom: And it shall be hard to make it
a Forfeiture; for perhaps the Copyholder had not notice of it; And to that
purpose was vouched the Lord Dacres and Harlesto^s case. And they held, that
notice ought to be given to the person; and the Refusal must be wilful; for
if a Copyholder be demanded his rent, and he says, that he has it not, the
same is no forfeiture, but the denial ought to be a wilful denial; and so it
was said to have been adjudged in one Winters Case.

Trinit. 1. Jacobi in the Common Pleas. Rot. 854. 177 SAPLAND and RIDLER'S Case.
AFter long Arguments on both sides, It was adjudged by all the Justices in
this case: That where the Custom of a Copyhold Manor was to admit for life,
and in remainder for life, at any time when there was but one Copyholder for
life in possession; and during the minority of the Heir within fourteen years,
the Guardian in Socage in his own name did admit a Copyholder in Remainder for
life, That the same was a good admittance according to the Custom: And that he
was a sufficient Dominus pro tempore as to this purpose. Although it was
objected by Walmesley, That the Guardian is but Servus, and not* Dominus. But
because it was agreed that he had a lawful Interest, the admittance was good,
and so it was adjudged.

33. Eliz. In the Common Pleas. 178 SHIPWITH and SHEFFIELD'S Case.
THe Custom of a Copyhold Manor was, That a feme Covert might give Lands to
her Husband. And if it were a good Custom, or not, was the Question?
Fleetwood. The Custom is good, and vouched 12. E* 3. That in York there is such
a custom, That the Husband might give the Land of his own purchase to his wife
during the Coverture; and it is a good Custom, That an Infant at the age of
fifteen years may make a Feoffment, 29. E. 3. and the same is good at the
Common Law; and yet the same all began by custom. But the Court was of
opinion, That the Custom is unreasonable, because it cannot have a lawful
Commencement. And Anderson Chief Justice said, That a Custom that an Infant
at the age of seven years might make a Feoffment, is no good custom; because
he is not of age of discretion. And in this case at Bar, It shall be intended
that the wife being sub potestate viri, did it by the* Coherison of her
Husband; The same Law is of a Custom, That the wife may lease to her Husband.
Fleetwood urged, That the custom might be good, because the wife was to be
examined by the Steward of the Court; as the manner is upon a Fine, to be
examined by a Judge. To which the Court said nothing.

31. Eliz. in the King's Bench 179
AN Action upon the Case upon an Assumpsit was brought. And the Plaintiff laid
his Action, That such a one did promise him, in respect of his labor in
another Realm, etc. to pay him his contentment. And he said, That Twenty five
Pound is his contentment, and that he had required the same of the Defendant.
Cook moved in arrest of Judgment; it being found for the Plaintiff, upon Non
Assumpsit pleaded, that no place was alleged where the contentment was showed:
And the opinion of the Court was against him; for Gaudy and Wray were of
opinion, that he might show his contentment in any Action; and so it is, where
it is to have so much as he can prove, he might prove it in the same Action.
Cook said, That it had been moved in stay of Judgment in this Court upon an
Assumpsit, because the request was not certain. And that case was agreed by the
Justices, because the request is parcel of the Assumpsit; and the entire
Assumpsit together in such case is the cause of the Action; but in this case,
that he should content him, is not the cause of the Assumpsit, but only a
circumstance of the matter; and it was resembled to the Case of 39. H. 6. where
a Writ of Annuity was brought for Arrerages against an Abbot pro consilio, etc.
And the Plaintiff declared that the Council was ad proficuum Domus, and was
not alleged in certain; and it was holden that the same was not material,
although it were uncertain, because it was but an induction and necessary
circumstance to the Action: And so the Plaintiff recovered and had Judgment.

Mich. 29 Eliz. in the King's Bench. 180
THE Statute of 23. Eliz. cap. 25. is, Quod non licuit alicui to engrosse
Barley, etc. and in the Statute there is a Proviso, That he may so do, so as he
convert it into Malt. The question was, If in an Information upon that Statute,
That the Defendant had converted it to Malt, he might plead the general Issue,
Not guilty, and give in Evidence the special matter, or whether he ought to
plead the special matter. Clench Justice, He may plead, Not guilty, etc. for
the Proviso is parcel, and within the body of the Statute, as 27. H. 8. 2.
where, upon an Information upon the Statute of Farmors, it is holden by
Fitzherbert, That the Vicar may plead, Non habuit seu tenuit ad firmam, contra
formam Statuti, etc. and yet the Statute in the premises of it, restrains every
Spiritual Person to take in Farm any Lands, etc. and afterward by a Proviso
gives him liberty to take Lands for the maintenance of his house, etc. As upon
the Statute of R. 2. If he do plead, That he did not enter contra formam
Statuti, he may give in* Evidence that he entered by Title, as that his father
was seized and died: and the same is not like unto the condition of a Bond, for
that is a several thing; But the Proviso and the Statute is but one Act.

Mich. 29. Eliz. in the King's Bench. 181
NOte; It was said by Master Kemp Secondary of the King's Bench, That there is
a Court within the Tower of London, but he said, That it was but a Court Baron;
and said, That he can show a Judgment, That no Writ of Error lies of a
Judgment given there. And it was a question, Whether Process might be awarded
to the Lieutenant of the Tower for Execution upon a Judgment given in the Kings
Bench, because the Defendant was removed and dwelt within the Liberty of the
Tower? And it was said, It could not; but the Writ ought to be awarded to the
Sheriffs of London; and if they return the Liberties of the Tower, then a Non
omittas shall be awarded. But some Counselors said, That although a Non
omittas be awarded, yet the Sheriffs durst not go unto the Liberties of the
Tower to serve the Process.

2 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 182 The Lady STOWELL'S Case.
IT was adjudged in this Case, That the wife who is divorced causa adulterii,
shall have her Dower.

3. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 183 WARNER'S Cafe.
LEssee for twenty years does surrender, rendering rent during the term. It was
adjudged a good rent for so many years as the term might have continued.

3. Jacobi, in the King's Bench.
184 WHITLOCK and HARTWELL'S Case.
TWO Joint-Tenants for life, the one demised and granted the moyty unto his
companion for certain years to begin after his death. Adjudged void, because it
is but a possibility. And so is it of a Covenant to stand seized to the use,
etc. as it was adjudged in Barton and Harvey's Case, 37. Eliz.

3. Jacobi, In the Kings Bench.
185 PINDER'S Case.
A. devised lands in Fee to his son, and many other lands in tail: And
afterward he said, I will that if my son die without issue, within age, that
the lands in Fee shall go to such a one. Item, I will that the other lands in
tail shall go to others; and does not say in the second Item, if the son dies
without issue, within age. It was adjudged, That the second. Item should be
without condition.

3 Jacobi, in the Star Chamber. 186 RUSWELL'S Case.
A Man took away Corn in the night time to which he had a right, and was
punished for a Riot in the Star Chamber, because of his company only.

Hillar. 3. Jacobi. 187 KINGSTON and HILL'S Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for saying these words, viz. Thou art an
arrant Papist, and it were no matter if such were hanged; and thou, and such as
thou, would pull the King out of his Seat if they durst. Adjudged that the
words were not actionable: Et quod querens nihil capiat per Billam.

Pasch. 3* Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 188
NOte; It was holden by the Court, That if a Fierifacias go to the Sheriff to
do Execution, and he levieth the money, and delivers the same to the party;
yet if it be not paid here in the Court, the party may have a new Execution;
and it shall not be any Plea to say, That he has paid the same to the party;
for it is not of Record without bringing of the money in Court. Vide 11. H. 4.
50. ar.

Pasch. 3. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 189 DUKE and SMITH'S Case.
NOte; That if he in the reversion suffer a recovery to diverse uses, his Heirs
cannot plead, That his father had nothing in the Land at the time of the
recovery; for he is estopped to say, That he was not Tenant to the Praecipe.
And it was agreed, ^That it was a good recovery against him by estoppel. Quaere
this case.

Mich. 3. Jacobi, in the King's Bench* 190 BIRRY'S Case.
BIrry was committed by the High Commissioners, and removed by Habeas corpus
into the Kings Bench: They returned the Writ with a Certificate, That they did
commit him for certain causes Ecclesiastical; which general cause the Court
did not allow of. They certified at another time, That it was for unreverent
Carriage and saucy Speeches to Doctor Newman. The Court also disallowed of
that cause. Birry put in Bail to appear de die in diem, and was discharged. It
was holden. That if Birry did not put off his Hat to him, or not give him the
wall, the same were not sufficient causes for them to commit him. And it was
agreed by the whole Court, That whereas the said Commissioners took Bonds of
such as they cited to appear before them, to answer unto Articles, before that
the party had seen the Articles, that such Bonds were void Bonds.

Mich. 3. Jacobi, in the King's Bench.
191 ANN MANNOCK'S Case.
ANN Mannock was indicted in Suffolk, upon the Statute of 1. El. cap. 2. for
not coming to Church twelve Sundays together; which Indictment was removed
into the Kings Bench; and Exceptions taken unto it. 1. That the Statute is,
That all Inhabitants within the Realm, etc. and it is not averred in facto,
that she did inhabit within the Realm; and the Exception was disallowed, for
if it were otherwise, it ought to be showed on the Defendants part. The second
Exception, That by a Proviso of the Statute of 28. Eliz. cap. 6. it is
ordained, That none shall be impeached for such offense, if he be not indicted
at the next Sessions; and it appears by the Indictment, That the Offense was
almost a year before the Indictment, and in the mean time many Sessions were,
or debuerunt to have been. And that Exception was also disallowed, for perhaps
the truth is, That there was not any Sessions in the mean time, although there
ought to have been. The third Exception, That the Indictment was, That she was
indicted Coram A. B. and sociis* Justices of Peace, and it does not name them
particularly. The Exception was disallowed, for that it does not appear that
there were any other Justices there, and what was their names. And therefore it
was said, That it differs from the Case of 1. H. 7. of a Fine levied C^ra^ A.
B. and ^^^iis suis, The fourth Exception was, That the words of the Statute
are, Ought to abide in the Church till the end of Common Prayer, Preaching, or
other Service of God in the Disjunctive: and the Indictment was in the
Conjunctive. The Exception was disallowed, for although the words are in the
disjunctive, yet a man cannot depart so soon as the Service is ended if there
be preaching but he ought to continue there for the whole time.

Pasch. 4. Jacobi, in the King's Bench. 192
AN Enfant did acknowledge a Statute, and during his Nonage brought an Audita
querela* to avoid the Statute, and had judgment; The Conusee at the fall age of
the Enfant brought a Writ of Error and reversed the judgment given in the
Audita querela, and the Enfant the Conusor prayed a new Audita querela; but it
was denied by the whole Court.

Mich. 4. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 193 PETO and CHITTIE'S Case.
IT was adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas in this Case; That concord with
satisfaction is a good plea in Bar in an Ejectione firm.

Mich. 5. Jacobi, in the King's Bench. 194
TWo Men were bound jointly in a Bond, one as principal and the other as
surety; the principal dyed Intestate, the surety took Administration of his
goods; and the principal having forfeited the Bond, the surety made an
agreement with the Creditor, and took upon him to discharge the Debt: In Debt
brought by another Creditor, the question was upon fully administered, pleaded
by the Administrator, If by showing of the Bond, and that he had contented it
with his own proper Money, whether he might retain so much of the Intestates
estate: and it was adjudged that he might not: For Flemming Chief Justice said,
that by joining in the Bond with the principal, it became his own Debt.

Pasch. 5. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 195 TAILOR and JAMES' Case.
IN a Replevin by John Tailor, against Richard James, for taking of a Mare and
a Colt in Long Sutton, in a place called H. in the County of Somerset; The
Defendant did avow the taking, and showed. That Sir John Spencer was seized of
the Manor of Long Sutton, whereof the place where etc. is parcel, and that he
and all those whose estate he has in the said Manor etc. have had all Estrayes
within in the said Manor; and showed that the Bailiff of Sir John Spencer
seized the said Mare and Colt as an Estray, and proclaimed them in the three
next Market Towns, and afterward the Bai^iff did deliver them to the Defendant
to keep in the place where etc. And if any came and challenged them, and could
prove that the same did belong to him, and pay him for their meat, that he
should deliver them unto him; and then showed how that the Plaintiff came, and
claimed them for his own; and because he would not prove that they did belong
unto him, nor pay him for their meat etc. he would not deliver them; upon
which plea there was a Demurrer in Law. After argument by the Sergeants, Cook
Chief Justice, said, that it was a plain Case for the Plaintiff: the reason of
Estrayes was, because when there is none that can make title to the thing, the
Law gives it to the King, if the Owner does not claim it within a year and a
day; and also because the Cattle might not perish, which are called Animalia
vagantia etc. But the Defendants plea is not good, because the Defendant is to
keep them until proof be made unto him, and the Law does not take notice of any
proof, but by twelve Men, which the Defendant cannot take, 7. H. 2. Bar* 241.
But if the Owner can make any reasonable proof, as if he show the Marks etc.
it is sufficient, and the party suo periculo ought to deliver to him the
Estray. Secondly, It is not sufficient to keep the Estray within the Manor, but
it ought to be kept in a place parcel of the Manor. Thirdly, It ought to be in
Land in the possession of Sir John Spencer, and not of any other; and it does
not appear that that Land was in his possession. Fourthly, If they do go in the
Land of Sir John Spencer; Yet it is absurd to maintain that the Bailff might
delegate his power to another to keep them until he be satisfied. Walmesley
Justice, agreeeth; for when it is spoken generally of proof, it shall be taken
for judicial proof, which needs not in his Case, for these Vagrant Beasts;
and the party shall not be his own Judge, but as it has been remembered upon
the Statute of Wrecke, si docere poterit, if he can instruct him, and give him
any reason wherefore the Estray does appertain unto him, he ought to deliver it
suo periculo. Also it is clear, that agreement ought to be made with the party
for the victual, and the quantity thereof shall be tried in this Court if it
come in question, as the quantity of Amends in a Replevin. Warbarton agreed,
and said, That an Estray ought not to be wrought, but the party must agree for
his meat; also the Lord cannot put the Owner to his Oath; but if the party
does tell the Marks, it is sufficient, and he ought to deliver it at his peril:
and if he require more then belongs to him for the Meat, it is at his peril,
for this Court shall jugde of that. Daniel agreed, and said, That the Lord
ought to proclaim them, and in his Proclamation ought to show of what kind the
Estray is, whether sheep, Ox, Horse, etc. and ought to tell his name who
seized them, so as the Owner might know whither he might resort for his Cattle;
and then it ought to be kept within the Lordship and Manor, which may extend
into several Counties. Cook said, that the Owner ought not to be pressed to his
Oath, Pr. Cases. 217.

Pasch. 5. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 196 LANGLEY and COLSON'S Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought by Langley against Colson, for these
words, viz. Richard Langley is a Bankrupt Rogue, I may well say it, for I have
paid for it: and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff; for by all the Justices
the first words are Actionable, although the word Bankrupt be spoken adjective,
because they scandalize the Plaintiff in his Trade. At the same time another
Action was brought by another Man for speaking these words, viz. Thou art a
Bankruptly Knave, and can not be trusted in London for a Groat; and it was
adjudged that the words were not Actionable, because the words were spoken
adjective and adverbialiter, and are not so much as if he had called him
Bankrupt Knave, but Bankruptly, viz. like a Bankrupt.

Pasch. 5. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 197 BALLET and BALLE'TS Case.
AWarrantia Charta was brought by Thomas Ballet the younger, against Thomas
Ballet the elder; and the Writ was of two Messuages and the moytie of an Acre
of Land, unde Chartam habet etc. and declared, whereas himself and the
Defendant and one Francis Ballet were seized in the new Buildings, and of one
piece of Land adjoining etc. in the Tenure etc. containing from the East to the
West twenty foot by assize, and from the North part to the South thirty foot,
and the said Thomas the elder, and Francis did release unto him all their Right
in etc. the said Thomas the elder for him and his heirs, did Warrant tenementa
praedict' to the said Thomas the younger and his heirs: The Defendant did
demand Oyer of the deed, and thereby it appeared that the said Thomas and
Francis and one R. did release to him all their Right in, etc. And that Thomas
the elder for him and his heirs did Warrant tenementa praedict' to Thomas the
younger and his heirs, and that Francis by another clause for him and his heirs
did Warrant tenementa praedict' to Thomas the younger and his heirs: upon which
it was Demurred in Law, and after Argument by the Sergeants, some matters were
unanimously agreed by all the Justices. First, that upon such a release with
Warranty, contra omnes gentes, a Writ of Warrantia Charta lies. Secondly,
although that every one passes his part only, viz. a third part, yet every
one of them does Warrant the whole: and because they may so do, and the words
are general without restraint by themselves, the Law will not restrain them.
The words are, that they do Warrant tenementa praedict', which is, all the
premises. Thirdly, For the reason aforesaid, It needs not to be showed how
they hold in jointure. Fourthly, that the Writ is well brought against one
only, because the Warranties are several; But if they had been joint
Warranties, then it ought to have been brought against them both so against the
Survivor and the heir of one of them; and if they had both dyed, against both
their heirs; so as it differs from an Obligation personal which only binds the
Survivor. Fifthly, that the Writ was well brought for the things as they are in
truth, without naming of them according to the Deed. Sixthly, that if there be
new Buildings of which the Warranty is demanded which were not at the time of
the Warranty made, and after the Deed is showed, the Defendant shall not have
any benefit by Demurring upon it; But if he will be aided, he ought for to show
the special matter, and enter into the Warranty for so much as was at the time
of the making of the Deed, and not for the residue: Vide Fitz. Warrantia Charta
31. Seventhly, that a Warrantia Charta does not lie of a piece of Land, no more
then a Praecipe quod reddat, nor of a Selion of Land.

Mich. 5. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 198
AN Action upon the Case was brought for these words, viz. Thou have spoken
words that are treason, and I will hang thee for them. It was adjudged by the
whole Court, that the words were actionable.

Mich. 5. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 199
A Man was bound to pay twenty pound to another, when he should be out of his
Apprentiship, and he died within the time, the Executors shall not have the
money; otherwise, if the Bond had been to pay money, after the expiration of
ten years. Adjudged.

Mich. 5. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
200 GAGE and PEACOCK's Case.
IT was adjudged in this case: That if Lessee for years of a Manor take a Lease
of the Bailiwick of the Manor, that it is no surrender of his term, because it
is of a thing which is collateral.

Mich. 5. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 201
IF a Parson have a Benefice above the yearly value of eight pound; and
afterward he takes another Benefice with a dispensation, and afterward he
takes a third Benefice; his first Benefice is only void. Adjudged per Curiam.

Mich. 5. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 202
A Man, in consideration of Marriage, does assure and promise to do three
several things: For the not performance of one of them, the party to whom the
promise is made, brings an Action upon the case; and to enable him to the
Action, says, That the Defendant in consideration of Marriage, did promise him
to perform the said thing, for which the Action is brought, without speaking
of the other two things: The Defendant by plea in bar said, Non assumpsit
modo and forma. And the opinion of the Court was, that it was a good issue; For
the Contract being entire, if it be not a good plea, the Defendant might be
charged for the several things; which cannot be, being but one contract by
word: But it is otherwise of several contracts in writing.

Trinit. 5. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
203 Sir JOHN SPENCER and POYNT's Case.
SIr John Spencer made a Lease for years unto Sir John Points, rendering rent by
Indenture: The Lessee covenants, that if the rent be behind at any time of
payment according to the form of the Indenture, that the Lessor shall have two
hundred pound Nomine poenae, for such default. The rent is behind, Sir John
Spencer brought Debt for the Nomine poenae. The Question was, Whether without
Demand of the rent, debt did not lie for the Nomine poenae: And the better
opinion of the Court was, that the Action of Debt did not lie. Vide: Fitz N. B.
120. seems contrary.

5. Jacobi, at the Sessions at Newgate. 204
IT was adjudged upon the Statute of 1 Jacobi, of desperate Stabbing to be
Felony without Clergy, That because that the party had a cudgel in his hand,
That that was a weapon drawn within the intent of the Statute. And the party
was thereupon arraigned of Felony, and not of Murder, and admitted to his
Clergy.

Mich. 5 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 205
NOte, It was holden by the whole Court, That if a man appears upon a Scire
facias, That he shall not have an Audita Quereba, because he had notice in
facto; otherwise if he had appeared upon the 2. Nichil returned, which amounts
to a Scire feci, for there he has not notice in fact; But it was said, That
the course is otherwise in the Common Pleas.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
206 JOHNSON's Case.
IN an Account, the Defendant was adjudged to account; and the parties were at
issue before Auditors, and the Plaintiff was Nonsuit: The Question was,
Whether he should have a Scire facias against the Defendant to account upon the
first Original; and the better opinion of the Court was, That he should not;
but should be put to a new Writ of Account according to the opinion of
Townsend, in 1. H. 7. against 21. E. 3. and 3. H. 4.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the King's Bench. 207
NOte, It was holden by Justice Williams, and not denied by any other of the
Justices, That if Lands be given to one, and his heir, that the same is a
Fee-simple, because the word (Heir) is Collectivum.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
208 HARLOW and WOOD's Case.
IN an Action of Trover and Conversion, the Case was, A stranger delivered the
Horse of Harlow to an Inholder: Harlow came to him, and demanded his horse, who
refused to deliver it to him if he would not save him harmless and
indamnified. But because the pleading was, Quod quidem homo did deliver to him,
and did not show his name certain; The Plea was adjudged not to be good.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
209 Sir ROBERT BARKER and FINCHE'S Case.
A Man made a Lease for years rendering Rent at Michaelmas and the Annunciation
of our Lady; he in the reversion bargained and sold the same to a Stranger, who
gave notice thereof to the Lessee; The day of the payment came, the Lessee paid
the rent to the Bargainor, and then the Deed was enrolled. The question was,
Whether the Bargainee should have the rent by relation, so as the Bargainor
should be charged in account to the Lessee for the rent first paid. And the
Court was of opinion, That the Bargainee should not have the rent. Dodderidge
Sergeant, If the rent be paid to an administrator who has right for a time,
and afterward a Will is found and proved, so as it appears upon the matter
that there was an Executor, and by consequence no administration could be; the
rent shall be paid by him again to the Executors. Quaere.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
210 Grissell and Sir Christopher Hodsdens Case.
IN this Case it was agreed for Law, That if two Lords be Tenants in Common of
a Waste, and each of them has a Court, in which are diverse By-lawes made; it
ought to be presented by the Homage, That such a one has not any thing in the
Common ad exhaeredationem Domini, and no Dominorum, notwithstanding that they
are Tenants in common.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
211 LEE and SWAN'S Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for speaking of these words, viz. The
Plaintiff being a Town Clark, took forty shillings for a Bribe. And by the
whole Court the words adjudged Actionable.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the King's Bench.
212 BRIGG'S Case.
ACtion for the Case for words, You have bought a Roan stolen Horse, knowing
him to be stolen. It was adjudged, That the words were Actionable.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 213
IT was adjudged in this Court, That an Ejectione firm does lie de aquae cursu.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 214
A Man was indicted for a common Barrator, Anno Regni Domini nostri Jacobi
sexto; and the word [Regis] was left out of the Indictment, and for that cause
the Indictment was quashed. It was Nelson and Toys Case.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 215
IT was adjudged in this Court, That if the Wife of a Lessee for years does
assent a to Livery made of the house in the absence of her Husband, although
that the servants and children be, and continue in the house, that it is a good
Livery. Quaere, If the wife notwithstanding her assent does continue in the
house. But if a man does commit his house to his servants, and the one does
assent to the Livery, and departs the house, if the other do continue there,
and Livery be made, it is no good Livery of Seisin.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 216
IT was holden for Law in this Court, That if a man do offend against any Penal
Law, the Informer ought to begin his Suit within one year after the Offense
done, otherwise he shall not have the moity of the Penalty. And if the Informer
has put in his Information, although that the party be not served with Process
to answer it, yet the same does appropriate the Penalty unto him.

Hill. 6. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 217 PEREPOYNT'S Case.
PErepoynt procured one to convey the daughter of a Gentleman, and to marry her
to a Ploughman in the night, and procured a Priest to marry them, and was there
present, for which matter he was excommunicate by the Ordinary of the Diocese;
and after absolution he was for the same committed to Prison by the High
Commissioners. It was holden by the Court, That matters concerning Tithes,
Marriage, or Testaments, are not examinable before them: yet because that he
had suffered imprisonment for such things; and that neither the Statute of 23.
H. 8. nor the Cannon does extend to the High Commissioners; it was resolved,
That if upon submission to the Commissioners, they would not set him at
liberty, that this Court would do it.

Mich 6. Jacobi, in the Star Chamber. 218
IT was resolved by the whole Court of Star Chamber, That if a man does assist
one who is a Plaintiff in that Court, that it is not maintenance, because that
it is for the benefit and advantage of the King: But if a man do assist an
Informer in another Court, in an Information upon a Penal Law; the same is
such a Maintenance for which he may be punished in this Court.

6. Jacobi in the Common Pleas. 219
IT was adjudged in this Court, That if Land which was sowed be leased to one
for life, the Remainder to another for (...) That if the Tenant for life dies
before the severance of the Corn, (...) in the Remainder shall have the Corn.

Mich. 6. Jacobi, in the King's Bench. 220
THE Lessee of a Copyholder was distrained for rent behind in the time of his
Lessor; and the Lessee did assume and promise, That he would satisfy the Lord
his rent, if he would surcease the suing of him. It was adjudged by the whole
Court, That it was a good Assumpsit, and a good consideration.

Mich. 7. Jacobi, in the King's Bench.
221 PIGGOT and GODDEN's Case.
NOte; It was in this Case agreed by the whole Court, and so adjudged, That in
an Ejectione firm a man shall not give color, because the Plaintiff shall be
adjudged in by title.

Mich. 7. Jacobi, in the King's Bench. 222
TWo Tenants in Common brought an Action upon the Case for stopping of a water
course against a Stranger, whereby the profits of their Lands were lost, and it
was showed in pleading that the water had run time out of mind, and ante diem
Obstructionis: and Judgment was given for the Plaintiffs: And two Exceptions
were taken by Coventry. First, that Tenants in Common ought to have several
Actions, and not have joined. Secondly, that the Custom ought to have been
pleaded to continue ante and usque die Obstructionis, and both the Exceptions
were dissallowed by the Court; and it is not like the Case of Falsefails; in
which Action they must join because the same is in the Realty.

Mich. 7. Jacobi, In the King's Bench.
223 CROSS and CASON's Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon due Obligation, the condition of which was,
that the Obligee the 18. of August anno 4. Jacobi, should go from Algate in
London to the Parish Church of Stow-Market in Suffolk, within 24. hours; and
the Obligee showed, that he went from Algate to the said place, and because he
did not show in his Declaration in what Ward Algate was: It was holden not to
be good.

Mich. 7. Jacobi, in the King's Bench. 224
NOte, That it was adjudged to be Law by the whole Court, that if a man bail
goods to another at such a day to rebail, and before the day the Bailee does
sell the goods in market overt: Yet at the day the Baylor may seize the goods,
for that the property of the goods was always in him; and not altered by the
Sale in market overt.

Mich. 7. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 225 ZOUCH and MICHIL's Case.
AN Enfant Tenant in tail did suffer a Recovery by his Guardian; It was holden
by the Court, that the same should bind him, because he might have remedy over
against the Guardian by Action upon the Case: But otherwise if he suffer a
Recovery by Attorney, for that is void, because he has not any remedy over
against him, as it was adjudged 4. Jacobi, in Holland and Lees Case.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 226 WILSON and WORMAL's Case.
IN an Evidence given to a Jury, it was admitted without Contradiction, that if
judgment in an action of Debt be given against Lessee for years, and afterward
the Lessee alieneth his Term, and after the year the Plaintiff sueth forth a
Scire facias, and has Execution; That the Term is not liable to the
Execution, if the Assignement were made bona fide. Also in that Cook Chief
Justice said, that if Lessee for years assignee over his Term by fraud to
defeat the Execution: And the Assignee assigns the same over unto another
bona fide, that in the hands of the second Assignee, it is not liable to
Execution: Also in this Case it was said for Law, That if a Man who has goods
but of the value of 30. pound, be endebted unto two Men, viz. to one in 20.
pound, and to another in 10. pound: and the Debtor assigns to him who is in
his debt 10. pound, all the goods which are worth 30. pound, to the intent that
for the residue above the 10. pound debt, he shall be favorable unto him: This
Assignement is altogether void, because it is fraudulent in part. But Foster
Justice said, that it shall not be void for the whole, but only for the
surplusage, as Twynes Case, C. 3. part. 81. Quaere.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 227 BRISTOW and BRISTOWE's Case.
IN an Action of Covenant, the Case was this, Lessee for 90. years made an
Assignement for part of the Term, viz. for 10. years, and the Assignee
covenated to repair etc. The first Lessee devised the Reversion of the Term,
and dyed; the Devisee of the Reversion brought an Action of Covenant against
the Assignee for 10. years; and the question was, If the Devisee of the
Reversion being but a Termor, were within the Statute of 32. H. 8 of
Conditions? Secondly, whether the Action would lie, because no notice was given
of the grant of the Reversion. Dodderidge Sergeant, to the first point said,
that this grant of the Reversion was not within the Statute; for the Statute
is, that the grantee shall have such remedy as the said Lessors or Grantors
themselves or their heirs or successors should have had, so as the Statute
shall be intended of a Reversion in Fee; for the Statute does not provide, but
in case where heirs or successors shall have Action, and not in case where the
Action does belong to Executors. For the second point, he relied upon Mallories
Case, where it is said, that the Tenant is to have notice of the Assignement of
the Reversion. Cook Chief Justice, I hold that the Assignee of the Reversion
for years in this Case shall have an Action of Covenant by the Statute: It was
Leonards Case in the time of the Lord Dyer, when I was a Reporter in this Court
In Leonards Case Lessee for years leased over part of the Term upon condition
(which is so much as a Covenant,) and afterward granted the Reversion: and it
was ruled, that the grantee might enter for the condition broken, and the
reason (as I remember) was, because that Executors are named in the Statute;
(but I will not charge my memory with the reason,) but I am well assured that
the Case was ruled as I have said. Dodderidge, It is so, that within the
Statute Executors are named, but not the Executors of him* who has the
Reversion, but only the Executors of the Lessee, and therefore the naming of
Executors in the Statute does not make against us. But the Lord Cook said, What
answer you to Leonards Case? For the third point, Cook Chief Justice, and
Foster Justice held, that there needed not any notice in this Case; because
there is not any Penalty in the case, as was in Mallories case: For there was a
condition. Warbarton Justice, I doubt the first point, for he who brings the
Action upon the Statute, ought to have the whole Reversion: and so is Winters
case, in Dyer 309. Cook and Foster said, It needs not that he who is to take
advantage by this Statute, should have the whole Reversion; for it has been
adjudged, That if the Reversion be granted in tail, that the grantee shall take
advantage of this Statute, and shall enter for the condition broken.

Pasch. 8. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 228 CANDICT and PLOMER's Case.
THe Parishoners had used time out of memory of man, etc. to choose the Parish
Clark of the Church of St. Austins in Canterbury; and the old Clark being dead;
they chose a new Clark, and the Parson by force of a new Canon chose another
man for the Clark: upon which, the Clark chosen by the Parishoners was sued in
the Spiritual Court, and he had a Prohibition: And afterward he was sued again
in the Spiritual Court, for setting of the Bread upon the Communion Table, and
for singing in another Tune then the Parishoners and the other Clark did, and
was deprived by Sentence there. Haughton Sergeant moved for a Prohibition, and
said, that although the last Suit in the Spiritual Court was not directly for
the using of the Office of Clark, yet by the matters contained in the Libell,
it is drawn in question, whether he were lawful Clark or not, and therefore
prayed a Prohibition. Cook, You shall have a Prohibition, for the Canon is
against the common Law. For particular customs are part of the common Law: and
said, that the Canon Law would not endure Gunshot. And he said, that by the
Suit in the Spiritual Court, they would examine whether he were a Lawful Clark
or not: For if he be a Lawful Clark, then he has good authority to set the
Bread upon the Communion Table. Haughton, But what shall we do? for we are
deprived by Sentence given there* Cook, There is no question; but that the
Prohibition lies notwithstanding the Sentence there; and for the Deprivation,
it is merely void. For the Clarkship is a Lay Office, and may be executed by a
Lay Man, and therefore the Ordinary has no power to deprive him. But he may
have an Action as Clark notwithstanding the Deprivation, for so is the Book in
8. Ass. 29. for an Hospital. And I wish, that an Information be drawn against
them for holding plea of a thing, which is a mere Lay thing: as it was in
temps. H. 8. Br. Cases. Walmesley Justice, The Office is Lay, and the
Deprivation by the Ordinary is void; For he cannot deprive him because he has
nothing to do in the Election: and a Prohibition was granted. At another day,
the Case was moved again, and the Court was of the same opinion, that the Clark
could not be deprived, because the Clarkship was a Lay Office. And 3. E. tit.
Annuity 40. was cited, and 18. F. 3. Where a Formedon was brought of the Office
of Serjeancy of the Church of L. But Cook said, the same day in another case,
which was moved in Court, and gave it for a rule, that after Sentence given in
the Spiritual Court, he would not grant a prohibition, if there were not matter
apparent within the proceedings; For I will not allow, that the party shall (to
have a Prohibition) show any thing not grounded on the Sentence to have a
Prohibition, because he has admitted of the Jurisdiction; and there is no
reason for him to try if the spiritual Court will help him, and afterward at
the common Law to sue forth a Prohibition. All which was agreed by the whole
Court.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 229
A Writ of Estrepment was granted in Waste, because that for Waste done pendant
the Writ, the Plaintiff cannot recover damages. Per totam Curiam.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 230 PITS and WARDAL's Case.
PIts the Butler of Lincolnes-Inne brought an Action of Debt against Wardall;
and declared upon a Bond with Condition indorsed for the performance of an
Arbitrament: The Defendant pleads in bar, That the Arbitrators nullum
fecerunt arbitramentum; the Plaintiff replied, That they did make an
Arbitrament: viz. That the Defendant and one of the Arbitrators should enter
into a Bond of eight pound to the Plaintiff; And that after the Bond entered
into, that the Plaintiff and Defendant should release all Actions each to
other, and said, That the Defendant and the Arbitrator did not enter the Bond
to the Plaintiff; The Defendant did maintain his bar; viz. quod nullum
fecerunt arbitramentum; upon which issue was joined, and it was found for the
Plaintiff. Dodderidge for stay of judgment, said, That upon the Plaintiffes
own showing, it appears, That the Arbitrament is void; for the Arbitrament
is, that a stranger, viz. one of the Arbitrators, should enter Bond, and also
that after the Bond entered into, That the Plaintiff should release all
actions, whereby the Bond should be released, and therefore it was void; and a
void arbitrament is no arbitrament. It was admitted by the Court, that the
arbitrament was void as to the Bond, to be entered into by the Arbitrator, and
also that it was void as to the extinguishment of the Bond, by the release of
all Actions: But the Court conceived, That the Arbibitrament did consist of two
matters which were distinct, and might be severed. For although that the
Arbitrament be void as to one matter, yet it shall stand good, and shall be a
good Arbitrament for the other matter. And Foster Justice said, That in that
case, the Award to make the Release might be severed; viz. That it should be
good for all Actions except the Bond. Cook contrary, And said, That it is so
entire that it cannot be divided. But the Court conceived, That the Arbitrament
was good as to the Bond to be made by the Defendant, although it were void as
to the Arbitrator. At another day Dodderidge said, That the Plaintiff had not
alleged any Breach of the Arbitrament: for he has put it, That the Defendant
and the Arbitrator had not entered into the Bond; and although they two jointly
had not entered into the Bond; yet it might be that the Defendant alone had
entered into the Bond, and it needed not that the Arbitrator enter the Bond; for
as to him, the Arbitrament was void. And that Exception was allowed as a good
Exception by the whole Court. For they said, That the Plaintiff ought for to
show, and allege a breach according to the Book of L. 5. E. 4. 108. And they
said, That although it be after verdict, yet it is not remedied by the Statute.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 231 FOLIAMBES Case.
IN a Writ of Dower brought by the Lady Foliambe, It was agreed by the whole
Court. That if the Husband makes a Lease for years, rendering rent, and dies;
the wife shall recover her Dower, and shall have present Execution of the Land,
and thereby she shall have the third part of the Reversion, and of the Rent,
and execution shall not cease: And all the Justices said, That the Sheriff
should serve execution of the Land as if there were not any Lease for years,
for it may be that the Lease for years is void; And although it be showed in
pleading, that there is a Lease for years, the wife cannot answer to it; and it
may be there is not any Lease, and therefore the Execution shall be general;
And he who claims the Lease for years, may reenter into the Land,
notwithstanding the Recovery and the Execution of the Dower. And if he be
ousted, he shall have his Action: Nichols Sergeant, who was of Council against
the Demandant, said, That he would agree that the Case in Perkins 67. was not
Law. But the Justices said, That there is a difference betwixt the Case of
Perkins, and this Case: for in the Case in Perkins, the Husband had but an
estate in Remainder, so as no rent or attendancy was due; so as the wife during
that Term could not have any benefit. Also in this case, it was agreed by the
Court, That after judgment for part, the Demandant might be Nonsuit for the
residue, and yet have execution of that part for which he had judgment.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 232 RAPLEY and CHAPLEIN's Case.
IT was ruled by the whole Court, That if a Custom be alleged, That the
eldest daughter shall solely inherit, that the eldest sister shall not inherit
by force of that Custom. So if the Custom be, That the eldest daughter and
the eldest sister shall inherit, the eldest Aunt shall not inherit by that
Custom; And so if the Custom be that the youngest son shall inherit, the
youngest brother shall not inherit by the Custom. And Foster Justice said,
That so it was adjudged in one Denton's Case.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 233 SEAMAN's Case.
BArker Sergeant prayed the opinion of the Court in this Case. Lessee for an
hundred years made a Lease for forty years to Thomas Seaman, if he should live
so long; and afterward he leased the same to John his son, Habendum after the
Term of Thomas for 23. years, to be accounted from the date of these presents:
The Question is, If the Lease to John shall be said to begin presently, or
after the Term of Thomas. And the Justices were clear of opinion, That the
Lease to John shall not be accounted from the time of the date, but from the
end of the Term of Thomas, because, that when by the first words of the
Limitation, it is a good Lease to begin after the Term of Thomas; it shall not
be made void by any subsequent words. And Cook Chief Justice said, That this
is no new reason, for there is the same reason given in 2. E. 2. Grants. And he
put the Case in Dyer 9. Eliz. 261. and said, That if the Limitation be not
certain when the Term shall begin, it shall be taken most beneficial for the
Lessee.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 234 WARD and POOL's Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for speaking these words, Thou may well
be richer then I am, for thou have coined thirty Shillings in a day, thou art a
Coiner of money, etc. I will justify it: It was moved in arrest of Judgment,
That the words were not Actionable, because he might have a good Authority to
coin Money; for men who work in the Mint, are said to coin Money, and are
called Coiners of Money; And so it was adjudged, Quod Querens nihil capiat per
Billam.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 235 CHALK and PETER's Case.
CHalk brought a Replevin against Peter; the Defendant did avow the taking as
Bailiff of Sir Francis Barrington in sixteen Acres of wood in Hatfield Chase;
and showed that an Arbitrament was made by the Lord Burghley late Lord
Treasurer, betwixt the Lord Rich and the Ancestors of Sir Francis; by which it
was awarded, That the said Ancestors of the said Sir Francis Barrington and his
Heirs should have the herbage of a certain number of Acres within the said
Chase; and also that he should have to him and his Heirs the Trees and Bushes
of the said number of Acres within the said Chase; and that he might fell and
cut sixteen Acres every year of the said Acres; and that he should enclose them
according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm; and that Assurance was made by
the Lord Rich accordingly; and that the same was confirmed by a special Act of
Parliament, with a saving of the right and interest of all strangers; and said,
That Sir Francis Barrington did enclose and cut down sixteen Acres, and did
enclose the same, and there took the Defendants cattle Damage feasants; upon
which the Defendant did demurr in Law. The Question in the case was, If by the
Statute of 22. E. 4. cap. 7. or the Statute of 35. H. 8. c^p. 17. which give
Authority to make enclosures of Woods, the Commoner shall be excluded. Harris
Sergeant, I conceive, That the Commoner shall be excluded by the Statute of 22.
E. 4. cap. 7. which gives Authority to enclose and exclude all Beasts, and
therefore the Commoner shall be excluded: But it will be objected, that the
Statute is, that the Owners of the Ground may enclose: But Sir Francis
Barrington is not Owner, for the Lord Rich is the Owner of the Ground; I say,
that Sir Francis Barrington is the Owner, for he has the Herbage and the
Trees, so as he has all the profit, and he who has the profit shall be said
to have the Land it self: and he vouched Paramour and Yardleys Case in Plow.
Com. and Dyer 285. and 37. H. 6. 35. and 17. E. 4. 16. Also the Statute is in
the disjunctive, viz. the Owner, or the Vendee: and although he be not Owner of
the soil; yet he is Vendee of the Trees. Secondly, It will be objected, that
the same is not a general Law of which the Judges are to take notice, and
therefore he ought to plead it: I hold it to be general enough, of which you
are to take knowledge although it be not pleaded: and he cited Hollands Case.
Thirdly, It will be objected, that by such general Law the particular interest
of a private man shall not be destroyed. To that I say, that such general
Statutes will include such particular interests, and therefore the Case betwixt
Sir Foulke Grevill and Stapleton was adjudged, that where Willoughby, Lord
Brooks had Lands to him by Act of Parliament, with authority to make Leases
for one life, and no more. By the Statute of 32. H. 8. of Leases, that
authority is enlarged, and he might make Leases for three lives. Haughton
Sergeant, Although he be Owner of the profits, he is not Owner of the soil, and
there is a difference betwixt the same and the soil. And the Statute speaks of
Trees growing in his own soil. Foster Justice, The Arbitrament, the Assurance,
and the especial Act of Parliament is nothing to the purpose in this Case, and
to plead them was more then was needful; For by the Arbitrament and the
Assurance, the Commoner being a third person, cannot be bounden in which he was
not a party; And by the special Act of Parliament he shall not be bound,
because the Act is against the Lord Rich, and his Heirs, so as a stranger shall
not be bound by the Act: And therefore upon the Statute of 18. Eliz. cap. 2. of
Patents, the Case was, That the Queen made a Lease for years, which was void
for not reciting of a former Lease; and afterward she granted the Inheritance
unto another. And then came the Statute of 18. Eliz. which confirmed all
Patents against her, her Heirs and Successors; by that Statute the Grantee in
Fee was not bounden, but he might avoid the Lease for years, for the Statute is
against the Queen and her successors; and that case was adjudged. But our case
is without doubt, as to that point, for the right and interest of estrangers is
saved by the Act: then all rests upon the Statute of 22. E. 4. and I conceive
that the same is a special Act, and ought to be pleaded; for it is not
generally of all Woods, but only of Woods in Forests and Chases. But admitting
it to be a general Act, yet I conceive, That it was not the meaning of it to
exclude a Commoner; and that appears fully by the later words of the Statute,
viz, Without license of etc. which excludes only the Owners of the Forest; and
it was not the meaning that he might enclose without the leave of the Commoner.
One thing has troubled me in the Statute, because it is said that before that
time he could not enclose more then for 3. years; so as before that statute he
might enclose for 3 years, as it seems, without License, and now by the
Statute, for 7 years. Also for another cause I conceive, that the Defendant
shall not take advantage of the Statute as he has pleaded; for he has pleaded
that he did enclose and cut, whereas the statute says, that he shall enclose
after the Cutting: so as I hold clearly, that he has not pursued the
authority of the Stat. for upon the St. of 35. H. 8. which is penned contrary to
this Stat. scil. that the Owner of the wood shall make enclosure and division
for the Co^moner, and then he is to cut, I hold clearly that after the felling
he cannot make any enclosure. Also admitting that by the Stat. the Co^moner
shall be excluded, I hold that by the Stat. of 35. H. 8. that that Stat. is
repealed in that point; for the Stat. of 35. H. 8. is, That no man shall fell
woods wherein Commoners have Interest by Prescription until he has divided the
fourth part: so that the Authority, if any were, is restrained by that Stat. if
he be a Co^moner by Prescription, as he is in our Case. But if it had been a
Common by grant, it had not been within the Clause of Restraint. And Leges
posteriores priores contrarias abrogant, especially the Stat. being in the
Negative, as it is here: For by a Negative Statute the Common Law shall be
restrained: otherwise, if the Stat. were in the affirmative: and for these
reasons I conclude, That the plaintiff ought to have Judgment. Warburton
Justice contrary. All the matter rests upon the Statute of 22. E. 4. First, I
hold that the same is a general act, although it be particular in some things.
So you may say of all statutes, which are particular in some one point or
other. I hold also, That the Stat. of 22. E. 4. is not repealed in this point
by the Stat. of 35 H. 8. because they were made to several purposes: The one
was for Forests and Chases, the other only for other particular Woods: And I
hold, that the Co^moner shall be excluded; for otherwise the Stat. should be
void and contrary; viz. to give power to one to enclose and exclude all beasts;
and yet to permit another to put in his cattle. And by the words of the
Statute, which exclude all beasts and cattle, the Deer shall not be excluded
or intended, for they shall not be said beasts or cattle. As in 30. E. 3. One
who chaseth a cow in a Park shall be said within the Statute de Malefactoribus
in Parcis: And then if the authority of enclosure be not to exclude the Deer,
it shall be to exclude the cattle of the Commoner, and other the like
estrangers, or otherwise it should be to no purpose. As to that which has been
said, That there is not a person who may enclose by the Statute; the Statute
is, that the Owner shall enclose, or he to whom the Wood shall be sold: so that
although that he be not Owner, yet he is to have the Trees and the profits;
and the Statute does intend, that he may enclose who ought to have the profit:
and although the sale be not for money, yet such a person may be said Vendee
well enough; Wherefore I conclude, that Judgment ought to be for the Defendant.
Walmesley Justice, I hold, that he has not authority by the Statute to
enclose: For the Statute is, When any man fels trees in his proper soil: so
that he not being owner of the ground, he is not within the Statute: and that
was the effect of his argument. And as to the other point, he did not speak at
all. Cook chief Justice: I hold, that the plaintiff ought to have judgment:
all the matter does consist upon the Statute of 22. E. 4. which is to be
considered. And first is to be considered, what was the common Law before that
Statute; and that was, That one who had a Wood within a Forest, might fell it,
as it appears by the Statute de Forresta: and the Statnte of 1 E. 3. 2. by
license: and also he might enclose it for three years, as it appears by the
Statute of 22. E. 4. but the enclosure was to be cum parvo fossato and haia
bassa, as it appears by the Register in the Writ of Ad quod damnum: so as
before that Statute, there was an enclosure. But the Law is clear, That before
that Statute, by the enclosure, the Commoner shall not be excluded. Then we
are to consider of the Statute: And first, Of the persons to whom the Statute
does extend: and that appears by the preamble, to be betwixt the King and
other owners of Forests and Chases, and the owners of the Soil: so as a
Commoner is not any person within the meaning of the Statute. And for the body
of the Statute, you ought to intend, that the sentence is continued, and not
perfected until the end of the Statute; and the words [Without license, etc.]
prove, That no persons were meant to be bounden by the statute, but the Owners
of the Forests and Chases, and not the Commoners: Like the case in Dyer. And
although you will expound the words of the body of the Statute generally; yet
they shall be taken according to the intent of the preamble; and therefore the
Case of 21. H. 7. 1. of the Prior of Castleacre, although it be not adjudged in
the Book, yet Judgment is entered upon the Roll; which Case is Pasch. 18. H. 7.
Rot. 460. By which case it appears, that although that a Statute be made
which gives Lands to the King; yet by that statute the Annuity of a stranger
shall not be extinguished. And the Case which has been put by Justice Foster
upon the Statute of 18. Eliz. was the case of Boswel, for the Parsonage of
Bridgwater, That although that one who has a lease for years of the King,
which was void for misrecitall, might by the said Statute hold it against the
King; yet the Patentee in Fee shall not be prejudiced by the said Statute: So I
conclude, That the Commoner is not a person within this Statute of 22. E. 4
Secondly, It is to be considered, if a Wood, in which any one has Common, be
within the Statute: and I hold, it is not, but only several Woods: For (as I
have said) the Wood which before the Statute might be enclosed for three years,
was only a several Wood, and not such a Wood in which any one had common. And
the statute of 22. E. 4. does extend only to such Woods which might be felled
and enclosed for three years: and I conceive (contrary to my Brother Warburton)
That the Deer of the Forest shall well enough be said to be beasts and
cattle. And whereas by the common Law, before this statute, the enclosure was
only to be (as I have said) cum parvo fossato and haia bassa, by which the
Deer were not excluded: now by this statute I hold, that they may make great
hedges, to exclude as well the Deer as other beasts. And I agree with Justice
Foster, that if he will take advantage of the Statute, that he ought to have
pleaded, that first he felled, and afterward enclosed; and e contra, upon the
Statute of 35. H. 8. scil. that he ought first to divide, and afterward to
fell, etc. And also I agree with him, that in that point the Statute of 35. H.
8. being contrary, does repeal the Statute of 22. E. 4. if by that Statute the
Commoner shall be excluded. But I am of opinion with my Brother Warburton
clearly, That he is a Vendee of the Trees, and so within the Statute: for it
is not neeessary, that in the Grant there be the word [Sell,] or that money by
given, nor that it be a contract for a time only, and not to have cantinuance,
as it is in our case. But he who has the Trees to him and his heirs, shall be
said to be a Vendee well enough. As to the other matter which has been moved,
Whether the Statute of 22. E. 4 be a general law or not: I hold clearly, that
we are to take knowledge of it although it be not pleaded, because it concerns
the King; for it is made for the Kings Forests: and of all the Acts made
between the King and his subjects, we ought to take knowledge: for so was
Stowel's Case. And also it was adjudged, that we ought to take knowledge of the
act concerning the Creation of the Prince, because it concerns the King. And
Cook in his argument said, That if there had not been a special proviosin for
the Commoner in the Statute of 35. H. 8. the Commoner had not been excluded by
that Statute. And afterward Judgment was entered for the plaintiff.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 236
NOte, That it was holden by three of the Justices, viz. Walm^sley, Warburton
and Foster (Cook and Daniel being ab^ent) for law clearly, That a Tenant at
will cannot by any custom make a Lease for life by license of the Lord: and
that there cannot be any such custom for a lease for life, as there is for a
lease for years.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 237 BERRY's Case.
NOte, That upon an Evidence given to a Jury, in a Case betwixt Berry and New
College in Oxford, it was ruled by Walmesley, Warburton and Foster, Justices,
in an Action of Trespass, If it appear upon the Evidence that the plaintiff
has nothing in the land but in common with a stranger; yet the Jury ought to
find with the Plaintiff; and if the Defendant will have advantage of the
Tenancy in common in the plaintiff, he ought to have pleaded it. Nichols
Sergeant was very earnest to the contrary, and took a difference, where the
Plaintiff and Defendant are Tenants in common, and where the Plaintiff is
tenant in common with a stranger. But he was overruled; the action was an
action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, etc. Cook and Daniel were absent.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 238
IT was holden by Walmesley, Warburton, and Foster, Justices, That if a Rent be
granted to one and his heirs for the life of another man, and the grantee
dies; that his heir shall not be an occupant of the Rent. And Foster said,
that the reason was, because he cannot plead a Que estate of a Rent. And
Warburton held, that the heir should have the Rent as a Freehold descended; and
for that he cited 26. H. 6. Statham Recognizance. But Foster said, that he
should not have the Rent at all. Warburton and Walmesley doubted whether the
Rent were devisable by the Statute; and they said, that although the heir
should have it by descent, yet it should not be in the nature of a descent of
Inheritance; for he should not have his Age. Cook and Daniel were absent.

Pasch. 8. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 239 HEYDON and SMITH's Case.
IN an Action of Trespass the Plaintiff declared of breaking of his Close, and
cutting down of a Tree, viz. an Oak. The Defendant pleaded, that it was his
Freehold; The plaintiff in his Replication showed that he held of the
Defendant by Copy of Court Roll a Tenement, whereof the place in question is
parcel: And that the Custom of the Manor is, That all the Copyholders within
the Manor have used to take wood for house-bote, hay-bote, etc. et pro ligno
combustibili in dicto tenemento. And said, that he had always preserved the
wood and trees growing upon the said Tenement; And that he had nourished and
fostered the said Oak; And that sufficient wood was not left upon the said
Tenement for house-bote etc. upon which, the Defendant did demurre in Law.
Foster Justice, Judgment ought to be given for the plaintiff; I hold that a
Copyholder, of common right, without any Custom, shall have wood for
Reparations and for fire-bote, and so is 9. H. 4. Fitz. Wast 59. the opinion of
Hall; And I hold that the plaintiff has an Interest in the Trees, according to
Palmers Case. C. 5. part. And 2. H. 4. 12. is, That a Coppy-holder may bring An
Action of Trespass for the Trees. And I hold, That without a Custom, the Lord
cannot fell the trees growing upon the Copyhold no more then upon a Lease for
years. But in this Case by Implication of Custom, the Lord may take the Trees,
if he leave sufficient for Reparations, etc. For the Custom is, That a
Copyholder shall have sufficient for Reparations; by which is employed, that he
shall not have more, and then the Rest the Lord shall have. And I am of
opinion, that in this Case, and in case where the trees are excepted upon a
Lease, that the Lord and the Lessor may enter and take the Trees, although
there be not any clause of ingresse, or regresse. But in the principal Case,
because there are not more Trees then are sufficient for Reparation, the Lord
cannot take them, but Trespass lies against him. Warburton Justice, The
matter of prescription is not material in this case: for of common right a
Copyholder ought to have Trees for Reparations, and to that purpose, he has a
special property. But the only question in this Case (as I conceive) is, If
one who has a special property, may bring an Action of Trespass against him
who has the general property? And I conceive, that he may well enough. As if
I lend my horse for a week, and within the week I take him again, Trespass
lies. Walmesley Justice, For the substance, I am of opinion for the Plaintiff,
but I doubt; For I would not that Copyholders have so great liberty; and he
has prescribed to take all trees: and to take them ad libitum, is too great a
liberty. And I hold, that a Copyholder has no greater property then one who
ought to have Estovers: And in this case he ought to have said, quando opus
fuerit: and he ought to have showed, that the houses were in decay for want of
Reparations, for which cause opus fuerat, etc. And so for the pleading, I hold
that it is not sufficient.

Cook chief Justice, The Plaintiff ought to have Judgment: For I hold clearly,
That the Lord cannot take trees without leaving sufficient for Reparations, no
more then he can pull down or overthrow the house of the Copyholder. For of
common right, without Custom or prescription, the Trees do belong unto the
Copyholder for Reparations, and for that purpose he may take them without any
Custom; and the Lord cannot take the Trees without leaving sufficient for the
Copyholder, if there be not a special Custom so to do. But I hold, that
without any custom the Lord may take the Trees, if he leave sufficient to the
Copyholder for the Reparations. Mich. 25. and 26. Eliz. Doylies Case. A
Copyholder, who has used to take Timber for Reparations, brought an action of
Trespass. Trinit. 26. Eliz. An action of Trespass was brought by a Copyholder
against the Lord. Pasch. 37. Eliz. the Case of Mutford Wood. Trinit. 40. Eliz.
Stebbings Case; but there the action was an action upon the Case. To the
Exceptions taken by Justice Walmesley, that the Plaintiff ought to have showed
that the houses wanted Reparations; I hold, as he said, That if the action had
been brought against him, and he justify the cutting, he ought to have
showed that the houses wanted Reparations. But in our Case he brings the Action
against another, which lies, although that the houses were not then in decay.
And for the signification of the word House-boot, etc. Bote is an ancient Saxon
word, which signifies in some case Recompense, and in some case Reparatio. For
the manner of prescription, That all the Tenants may take wood pro ligno
combustibili in dicto Tenemento, the same is no good prescription, That all
shall take to burn in that Tenement. But for the reasons beforesaid, Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 240 NEWTON and RICHARD's Case.
IT was ruled by the whole Court in an Action of Trespass, Quare clausum
fregit, and cuniculos suos vel ipsius A. etc. cepit, etc. was good.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 241 MEERES and KIDOUT's Case.
UPon an Evidence to a Jury in this Case, it was Ruled by the whole Court, That
if there be Copyholder for life, and the Lord leaseth for years, and the
Copyholder commit a forfeiture, that the Lessee may enter for the forfeiture.
And Cook Chief Justice said, That if there be Tenant for life, the Remainder
for life; If the Tenant for life commits a forfeiture, he in the Remainder
for life may enter; and that the Case 29. Ass. 64. is not Law. For the
particular estate in possession is determined by the forfeiture. And if he in
the Remainder could not enter, then it should be at the will of the Lessor
whether he should ever have it. The same Law is, if the Remainder be for
years. Foster Justice, The reason that is given for an Entry for a forfeiture,
is, because that the Reversion or Remainder is divested by the Feoffment. But
in this Case, because it is but interesse termini, nothing is divested: For
notwithstanding the Feoffment, the Interesse termini may be granted: to which
Cook agreed. But Foster said, that he did agree in opinion with Cook, because
that the particular estate was determined. The cause of forfeiture was, because
that the Copiholder had made a lease for life.

Pasch. 8. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 242 Dr. NEWMAN's Case.
IN this Case it was said by Cook Chief Justice, That it had of late time been
twice adjudged, that if Timber trees be oftentimes topped and lopped for fuel,
yet the tops and lops are not Tithable; for the body of the trees being by law
discharged of Tithes, so shall be the branches: and therefore he that cutteth
them, may convert them to his own use, if he please.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi. In the Exchequer Chamber. 243 KERCHER's Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought in the Common Pleas, upon a simple
contract made by the Testator; which afterward came into the Exchequer Chamber
before all the Judges. Cook in the Common Pleas was of opinion, that the Action
would lie. Tanfield Chief Baron, said, That in these cases of Equity it were
most reason to enlarge and affirm the Authority of the Common law, then to
abridge it, and the rather, because the like Case had been oftentimes adjudged
in the Kings Bench, and there was no reason (as he said) that there should be a
difference betwixt the Courts; and that it would be a Scandal to the Common
Law, that they differed in opinion. Afterward at another day the Case was
moved in this Court; And Walmesley Justice doubted if as before. But Foster
held that the Action was maintainable; And Cook desired that Presidents might
be searched; And he said, That he could not be persuaded, but if the Executor
be adverred to have Assetts in his hands sufficient to pay the specialties, but
that he should answer the debt. Note, the money demanded was for a Marriage
portion promised by the Testator.

Pasch. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 244 ADAMS and WILSONS Case.
Note, It was said, That when a false Judgment passes against the Defendant,
he may pray the Court that it be entered at a day peremtory; so as he may have
Attaint, or a Writ of Error. And Cook Chief Justice said; That if Judgment in
the principal Action be reversed, the Judgment given upon the Scire facias
shall also be reversed, because the one does depend upon the other. Walmesley
in this Case said, That it had been the usual course of this Court, That if one
deliver a plea unto An Aturney of the Court as the Last Term, and it is not
entered, that now at another Term the Defendant might give in a new plea if he
would, because the first is not upon Record.

Pasch. 8. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 245 CULLINGWORTH's Case.
IF one be bounden in an Obligation, That he will give to J. S. all the Goods
which were devised to him by his father; in Debt brought upon such an
Obligation, the Defendant cannot plead, that he had not any Goods devised unto
him, for the Bond shall conclude him to say the contrary; Vide 3. Eliz. Dyer
196 Rainsford Case.

Pasch. 8. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 246 QUOD's Case.
QVod had Judgment in an Action upon the case at the Assizes, and damages were
given him to Thirty Pound. Hutton Sergeant moved in Arrest of Judgment, That
the Venire facias was de duodecim, and that one of them did not appear, so as
there was one taken de circumstantibus; and the entry in the Roll was, That the
said Jurour exactos venit; but the word Juratus was omitted: And for that cause
the Judgment was stayed.

Mich. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 247 STONE's Case.
STone an Attorney of the Court was in Execution in Norfolk for One thousand
Pound, and by practice procured himself to be removed by Habeas corpus before
Cook Chief Justice at the Assizes in Lent. and escaped to London; and in Easter
Term the Bailiffe took him again, and he brought an Action of false
Imprisonment against the Bailiffe: and it was holden by the Court, That the
fresh Suit had been good although he had not taken him in the end of the year,
if enquiry were made after him; and so by consequence the Action was not
maintainable.

Mich. 8. Jacobi, in the Star Chamber. 248 MARRIOT's Case.
NOte: It was agreed in this Case for Law, That the Sheriff cannot collect
Fines or issues after a general pardon by Parliament; and therefore one
Thorald, the under Sheriff of N. who did so, was questioned and punished in
the Star Chamber.

Mich. 8 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 249 JOLLY WOOLSEY's Case.
JOlly Woolsey of Norfolk brought an Action of Trespass against a Constable, of
Assault and Battery, and Imprisonment: the Defendant as to the Assault and
Battery pleaded, Not guilty, and justified the imprisonment by reason of a
Warrant directed unto him by a Justice of Peace for the taking, and to imprison
the Plaintiff for the keeping of an Alehouse, contrary to the Statute 12 Feb.
5. El. whereas the Statute was 12 Feb. 5. Ed. 6. and the matter was found by
special Verdict. And it was holden by all the Justices, That the misrecitall
of the Act was not material, for it being a general Act, the Justices ought
to take knowledge of it. And Cook Chief Justice said, That a man cannot plead
Null tiel Record against an Act of Parliament, although that in truth the Record
be imbezelled if the Act be general, because every man is privy to it.

Mich. 8. Iacobi, In the Common Pleas. 250 NEWMAN and BABBINGTON's Case.
IT was resolved in this Case, That if Debt be brought against an Executor, who
pleads, that he has fully administered; and it is found that he has Assets to
40l. whereas the Debt is 60l, that a Judgment shall be given for the 60l.
against the Defendant; and upon that Judgment, if more Assets come after to the
Executors hand, the Plaintiff may have a Scire facias.

Mich. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 251 WALLER's Case.
NOte; It was said by Cook Chief Justice, That if the King present one to a
Benefice, and afterward presents another, who is admitted, instituted, and
inducted, the same is a good repeal of the first presentation. And he said,
That if the Lord does present his Villain to the Church, the same is no
enfranchisement of him, for that presentation is but his commendation. And if
the King will present a French man, or a Spaniard, they shall not hold the
Benefice within this Realm, for that the same is contrary to a special Act of
Parliament.

Mich. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 252
NOte; It was holden by all the Justices, That Perjury cannot be committed in
the Court of the Lord of Copy-holds, or in any Court which is holden by
Usurpation; otherwise is it in a Court Leet, or Court Baron, which is holden by
Title.

Trinit. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 253 BURY and TAYLOR's Case.
IN an Ejectione firm brought upon Not guilty, pleaded by the Defendant, it
was given in Evidence to the Jury to this effect; viz. That one J. S. who did
intend to entermarry with Alice S. by Indenture did covenant with J. D that he
would marry the said Alice, being then of the age of seventeen years; and that
after the marriage had betwixt them; that they would levy a Fine of diverse
Lands, which said Fine should be unto the use of the said J. D. and his Heirs;
and accordingly after the entermarriage the said J. S. and Alice his Wife did
levy a Fine unto the said J. D. and his Heirs, without any other use implied or
expressed, but what was contained in the said Indenture before marriage; and
according to the said Fine, the Conusee continued the possession of the said
Lands for a long time: viz. for thirty years. Cook Chief Justice said, That
this continuance of possession was a strong proof, and could not otherwise be
intended, but that the Conusee came to the possession of the said Lands by the
said Fine, which was so levied to him, and his heirs. And he said, That it was
adjudged in this Court in the Case betwixt Claypoole and Whestone, That in a
Recovery, the Covenant did not lead the use of the Recovery, for that it was
but an evidence that such was the intent of the parties. And in this Case it
was agreed by the whole Court, and was so said to be resolved in Clogat and
Blythes case, 30. Eliz. That when no use is expressed or employed by Indenture,
or other agreement, that it shall be to the ancient use, viz. to the use of the
Conusor. As if Husband and wife be seized of one moytie of the Land in the
right of the wife, and the Husband of the other moytie by himself; and they
join in a Fine generally, the Conusee shall be seized to the former uses, as
it is agreed in Beckwiths case, C. 2. part. And so it was agreed, That if the
Husband does declare the use, and the wife does not disagree, or vary from it,
that the declaration of the Husband shall bind the wife. And Cook said, That it
is not always necessary that the wives name be set to the Indenture, which
does declare an use. And further Cook said, That if a Fine be levied of Lands,
yet the uses may be declared by subsequent Indentures. And it was said (Obiter)
in this Case, That if a man for valuable consideration does purchase a Lease
for years; and he names two of his servants as joynt-purchasers with him in
the Deed; and afterward the Master would sell the Lands alone, and the
servants do interrupt the sale, or will not join with him; that he has no
remedy to compel them to do it, but by a Bill of Chancery.

Trinit. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 254
A Vicar was endowed in the time of King Henry the 3d. of diverse Tithes; and
afterward he libelled for those Tithes in the spiritual Court; The Defendant
alleged a M^dus Decimandi, and prayed a Prohibition, and day was given to the
party to show cause, why the same should not be granted; and at the day the
Deed of Endowment was produced, and showed in Court. By which it did appear,
That the Vicar was endowed of Hay. viz. of the tenth part of it; and so of the
remnant of the Tithes for which he libelled; whereupon the Court refused to
award a Prohibition; Quaere Causam. For as I conceive, a Modus Decimandi may
accrue after the Endowment.

Trinit. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 255 Sir W. DETHICK and STOKE's Case.
STokes libelled against Sir William Dethick in the spiritual Court, for
calling of him Bald Priest, Rascally Priest, and for striking of him; and for
those offenses he was fined by the spiritual Court an hundred pound, and
imprisoned. And the opinion of the whole Court was, That neither the Fine nor
Imprisonment were justifiable, because the Statute of Articuli Cleri, is, Non
imponant poenam pecuniariam, nisi propter redemptionem, etc. And Cook said,
They might only excommunicate: and thereupon a Writ de Excommunicat^ capiendo,
might be awarded; and that is their only course, and then the Party may have
his Cautione admittenda; And the Court said, That if the spiritual Court would
not enlarge the party upon sufficient Caution offered them, that then the
Sheriff should deliver him.

Trinit. 8. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 256
IT was the opinion of the whole Court, That if a man have a Judgment against
two men upon a joint Bond; That he cannot have several Executions; viz. a
Capias ad satisfaciendum against the one, and an Elegit against the other; for
he ought to have but unicam satisfactionem, although he sue them by several
Actions. And if he sue forth several Executions, an Audita Querela will lie.

Mich. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 257 CARLE'S Case.
NOte, it was adjudged in this Case, That if a man say of another, that he has
killed a man, an Action upon the case will not lie for those words; for he may
do it as Executioner of the Law, or se def^nde^do; So if one say of another,
That he is a Cutpurse, an Action will not lie; for that a Glover does, and a
man may cut his own purse, and the same Term it was holden in the Kings Bench,
That an Action will not lie for calling one Witch.

Mich. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 258
IT was holden by the whole Court, That a Commoner cannot generally justify
the cutting and taking away of Bushes off from the Common; but by a special
prescription he may justify the same. So he may say, That the Commoners have
used time out of mind to dig the Land, to let out the water, that he may the
better take his Common with his cattle; and it was agreed, That if the Lord of
the Waste does surcharge the Common, that the Commoner cannot drive his cattle
off the Common, or distraine them damage feasance, as he may the cattle of a
stranger. But the remedy against the Lord, is either an Assize, or an Action
upon the Case.

Mich. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 259
IT was agreed by the whole Court, That if a man devises unto his daughter an
hundred pound when she shall marry, or to his son, when he shall be of full
age, and they die before the time appointed, that their Executors shall not
have the money; otherwise, if the devise were to them to be paid at their full
ages, and they die before that time, and make Executors; there the Executors
may recover the Legacy in the spiritual Court.

Hill. 9. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
260 ROYLEY and DORMER's Case.
TWo Boys did contend and fight near unto their houses, and the one stroke the
other, so as he did bleed; who went and complained to his father, who having a
rod with him, came to the other boy, and beat him; upon which he died. And the
opinion of the whole Court was, That it was not murder.

Mich. 9. Jacobi, in the King's Bench.
261 EDWARDS and DENTON's Case.
UPon a special Verdict, the Case was, that a Man was seized of the Manor of D.
and of a house called W. in D. and also of a Lease for years in D. and he did
bargain and sell unto another his Manor of D. and all other his Lands and
Tenements in Dale; and in the indenture did covenant that he was seized of the
premises in Fee (which was left out of the Verdict) and if the Lease for years
should pass by the general words, was the question; Quaere of the case, because
Trinit. 10. Jacobi, the Court was divided in opinion in this Case.

Mich. 9. Iacobi, In the King's Bench.
262 HUGHES and KEENE's Case.
THe Plaintiff declared, that whereas he was possessed of a Message for years
which had ancient lights, and the Defendant possessed of another House
adjoining, and a Yard, that the Defendant upon the said Yard had built a House,
and stopped his lights; The Defendant pleaded, that the custom of London was,
that every man might build upon his old Foundation, and if there be not any
agreement, might stop up the Windows of his Neighbor; upon which the Plaintiff
did demurre in Law: and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, because that the
Defendant did not answer the Plaintiffs charge, that he had built upon the new,
and not upon the old Foundation. And it was holden by the whole Court in this
Case, that a man may build upon an old Foundation by such a custom, and stop up
the lights of his Neighbor, which are adjoining unto him, and if he make new
Windows higher; the other may build up his house higher to destroy those new
Windows: But a man cannot build a House upon a place where there was none
before, as in a Yard, and so stop his Neighbors lights: And so it was adjudged
in the time of Queen Elizabeth, in Althans Case, upon such a custom in the City
of York. And it was said by Cook Chief Justice; That one prescription may be
pleaded against another, where the one may stand with the other, as it was
adjudged in Wright and Wrights Case. That a Copyholder of a Bishop did
prescribe, that all Copyholders within the Manor have been discharged of
Tithes: But not where one prescription is contrary to the other; whereas one
prescribes to have lights, and the other prescribes to stop the same lights.
Quaere.

Hill. 9. Iacobi, in the King's Bench.
263 SAMFORD and HAVEL's Case.
IN an Action of Trespass for 30. Hares, and 300. Coneys hunted in his Warren,
taken and carried away, which Trespass was laid with a continuando, from such a
time, till such a time: the Defendant justified, because he had common in the
place where, etc. to a Message, six Yard Lands for 240. Sheep, and that he and
all those whose estate he has, time out of mind, have used at such time as the
Common was surcharged with Coneys, to hunt them, kill and carry them, as to his
Message appertaining: upon which the Plaintiff did demurre in Law, because a
man cannot make such a prescription in the Free Warren, and Freehold of
another Man: And secondly, because a man cannot so prescribe to hunt, kill, and
carry away his Coneys, as pertaining to his Message: But a Man may prescribe
to have so many Coneys to spend in his House: and for these causes in the
principal case, the prescription was holden for a void prescription; and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Hill. 9. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 264 COX and GRAY's Case.
IT was adjudged upon a Writ of Error, brought upon a Judgment given in the
Marshalsey, in an Action of trover and conversion of goods: That if none of the
parties be of the Kings household, and judgment be given there that the same is
Error, and for that cause the Judgment was reversed.

Hill. 9. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 265 MORRIS's Case.
IN an Action upon the case for putting of cattle upon the common, it was
adjudged; that if the cattle of a Stranger escape into the common, the Commoner
may distrain them damage feasance, as well as where the cattle are put into the
common by the stranger.

Pasch. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 266 The Lord MOUNTEAGLE and
PENRUDDOCK's Case.
IT was holden by the whole Court in this case, and agreed by all the Sergeants
at the Bar, That if two men submit themselves to the arbitrament of I. S. And
the Arbitrator does award, that one of them shall pay ten pound, and that the
other shall make a release unto him, that the same is a void Award, if the
submission be not by Deed; and he to whom the Release is to be made by the
Award, may have remedy for it, for otherwise the one should have the ten pound,
and the other without remedy for the Release. And it was resolved, That upon
submission and arbitrament, that the party may have an Action upon the Case for
not making of the Release. And Cook chief Justice said, That it was wisely done
by Manwood chief Baron, when he made such award, That a Lease or such like
Collateral thing should be done, To make his Award, that he should make the
Release, or pay such a sum of money, for which the party might have a remedy. I
conceive, that the reason is, That no Action upon the case upon an Arbitrament
lies; because it is in the Nature of a Judgment. At another day, the opinion
of the Court was with Cook, and 20. H. 6. and 8. E. 4, 5. cited to the purpose,
that there ought to be reciprocal remedy. It was also said in this Case, That
by the Statute of 5. H. 5. A man cannot be Nonsuit after verdict.

Pasch. 10. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 267 COOK and FISHER's Case.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant did avow for rent granted to him by a private Act
of Parliament. The Plaintiff did demand Oyer of the Act; and the opinion of
the Court was, that he ought to have Oyer: for they held, that the Oyer of no
Record shall be denied to any person, in case he will demurre. And the Record
of the Act shall be entered in haec verba.

Pasch. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 268 The Bakers Case of Gray's-Inne
against Occould.
AN Action of Debt was brought in London against Occould late Steward of
Gray's-Inne: upon a general indebitatas assumpsit, without showing the
particulars, which plea was removed into the Common Pleas. And it was holden by
the Court, That the Action as it was brought, would not lie, for the
inconvenience which might follow. For the Defendant should be driven to be
ready to give an answer to the Plaintiff to the generality. And therefore the
Plaintiff ought to bring a special Action for the particular things; The like
Case was in the Marshalsey; and because they did not declare in a special
manner, Exception was taken to it, and adjudged, the Action upon a general
Indebitatas assumpsit did not lie. Quaere.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 269 READ and HAWE's Case.
IN a Replevin, Trinit. 10. Jacobi, R^t. 2504. The Plaintiff counted, that the
Defendant, Cepit avena of the Plaintiff apud Occould: and does not say, In
quodam loco, etc. upon which the Defendant did demurre in Law. Hutton Sergeant
argued for the Plaintiff, and said, That notwithstanding the many presidents
which had been showed, that yet the Declaration was well enough: For he said,
That the presidents did not prove, that it was necessary that it should be
therein showed, in quodam loco vocat', because the Defendant upon the matter is
the Actor; and therefore he best knows the place where he took the Cattle. And
in 9. E. 4. In a Homine replegiando, the Town only was named; and it is not
there debated whether the same were good without mentioning in quodam loco. 49.
E. 3. 14. and 24. 9. H. 6. and 3. H. 6. There the traverse was of the taking at
Dale, sans ceo, etc. that the same was at Sale, and in quodam loco is not
expressed, Cook Chief Justice said, That there is no book which takes this
Exception: and said, That notwithstanding the Presidents cited, that it was
well enough: For he said, There is a difference betwixt Presidents, which are
the Inventions of Clarks, and of judicial Presidents: And the effect of the
Suit in this case, is not the showing of the place, but the having of the
Cattle; and it is on the part of the Defendant to show where he took the
Cattle, for perhaps the Plaintiff does not know where he took them: and if he
did know the place where they were taken, yet perhaps he has not witnesses to
prove the same; and so by this means the Plaintiff should be at a great
mischief, and delayed in his Suit. Whereas a Replevin is festinum remedium, to
have his Cattle again, which perhaps are his plough Cattle. Warburton Justice
said, That there is a difference betwixt Actions brought in the King's Bench,
and in this Court: For there in an Action of Trespass the same may be abutted,
because it is no Original Writ as it is here, and he said, That there
although the place be not certainly abutted, yet it may be good. And he
compared the Case at bar, to the pleading of a Joynt-tenancy; for he said, In
case it be pleaded of the part of the Tenant himself, he is to show how the
Joynt-tenancy came, because it lies in his knowledge; but contrary, if it were
on the Plaintiffs part. And in this Case, he who best knows when the taking
was, ought to show it, and that is the Avowant; for it is no reason that the
Plaintiff for missing of the place, not being the substance, should be triced.
Cook, If one in the night drive my Cattle into his Land, and afterward does
distrein them, it is no lawful distress. At another day, Cook said, That in
the Book Nov. Narration', it is said, That the Town, place, and color of the
beasts ought to be showed by the Plaintiff in the Replevin; and he said, If
the Color had been left out, he would have given credit to the Book; but
because it is clear that the Color is not needful to be showed, therefore he
did not approve of the Authority for the place. And he cited 4. E. 3. 13. where
the Defendant said, it was in the Hamlet. And 18. E. 3. 10. E. 3. and 49 E. 3.
14. where the Towns only are mentioned. And it was said, That in an Ejectione
firm brought in the Kings's Bench, the usual course is to abutt the Land, yet
he said, It might be omitted in Trespass, although the same be the usual
form of that Court; and it may be general: but if a place be alleged, then
the same is material, and the Plaintiff does thereby give an advantage unto
his Adversary.

At another day Haughton Sergeant argued for the Defendant, That the expressing
of the place where the taking was, is material in the Declaration; and he
said, That as the Register is the rule for Original Writs, from which form a
man may not vary; so, he said, The Book of Entries and Presidents of the
Courts, were rules for pleadings, from which there ought to be no variance; and
therefore he cited 33. H. 6. 14. Where in a Writ of Entry, in the nature of an
Assize, the Demandant counted, How that A. gave Lands unto J. S. his Cosen,
whose Heir he is in tail, and showed the descent. And Exception was taken unto
the Count, because it was not the form of the Pleading in that Court;
wherefore it was awarded, That he should count, that ipse fuit seisitus ut de
libero tenemento, which is not repugnant, although that he had an Estate in
tail, because the same was the Ancient form used in the Court. So he said in
the principal Case, the ancient used form of the Court ought to be observed,
which was to express in the Count the place in which the taking was; and he
cited 35. H. 6. 40. Where Exception was taken by the Defendant, because the
Plaintiff in the Replevin did not allege the place where the taking was; and
therefore per curiam the Plaintiff took nothing by his Writ: and he denied the
opinion of 9. E. 4. 41. and said, That in reason the place ought to be showed,
because if the Defendant would plead any matter to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, the place must be showed; and he said, That those Records which were
showed on the other side were but of later times; and the Point in question, in
none of those Cases came in debate judicially; wherefore he concluded for the
Defendant. Hutton Sergeant argued again, and said, That the Forms of Original
Writs are certain, from which a man is not to vary; but he said, That Counts
and Declarations are to be according to the matter. And in the principal Case
he conceived, That it was not necessary that the place where the taking was, be
showed; and he cited 4. Ed. 3. 13. in a Replevin, the Plaintiff declared of
the taking of his Cattle in Holme, without saying, In quodam loco vocat', etc.
and it was holden good, because the Town or Hamlet is sufficient certain; and
21. H. 7. 22. a. in a Replevin, the Plaintiff declared of a taking at D. the
Defendant said, That he took them at S. and not at D. and avowed, and no
Exception was taken thereunto for want of expressing the place in quo, etc. And
he said, That in 9. Ed. 4. 41. and 25. it is said, That in a Replevin the use
is to declare in a certain place; but if the place be omitted, yet it is good
enough; and that Book is after 33. H. 6. 40. and he said, That the cause of
the Judgment in 33. H. 6. might be, because there were Blanks left for the
place; and the Plaintiff had begun to allege the certain place; for the Record
is, In quodam loco vocat', without expressing the place, but Blank, which he
could not affirm; and therefore it was adjudged against the Plaintiff; as in
a Valor Maritagii; if the Defendant will show that he tendered a marriage,
whereas it is not needful for him so to do, yet if the same be not true, and
issue be taken upon it, Judgment shall be given against him; wherefore he
concluded for the Plaintiff. The principal Case was adjourned.

Trinit. 10 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 270 GOODMAN and GORE's Case.
GOodman brought an Assize against Gore and others, for erecting of two houses
at the West end of bis Windmill per quod ventus impeditur, etc. And it was
given in Evidence, That the said houses were situate about eighty feet from the
said Mill; and that in height it did extend above the top of the Mill, and in
length it was twelve yards from the Mill; and notwithstanding this neernesse,
the Court directed the Jury to find for the Defendant. And in that Evidence it
appeared by a Deed, procured by the Plaintiff himself, That his Wife was
Joint-tenant with him; and therefore it was holden by the Court, That the
Assize brought in his own name alone, was not well brought. And Cook Chief
Justice also said, That the Count was not good, by reason of these words, viz.
Per quod ventus impeditur; for he said, That these were the words of an Action
upon the Case, and not of an Assize. But the Clarks said, That such was the
usual form, ad quod non fuit responsum: and in that Case it was said obiter
by Cook Chief Justice, That if the Husband and Wife be Joint-tenants, and the
Husband sowes the Land and dies, and the Wife does survive, that she shall
have the embleements.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 271 HARDINGHAM's Case.
IN an Action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, the Defendant did justify,
That he did enter and distrain for an Amercement in the Sheriffs Torn, which
was imposed upon the Plaintiff for enchroaching upon the Kings Highway,
without showing that the same was presented before the Justices of Peace at
their Sessions, as the Statute of 1. E. 4. cap. 2. requires. Haughton Sergeant
for stay of Judgment in this Case, said, That the Statute is, That the
Justices of Peace shall award Process against the person who is so indicted
before the Sheriff, which was not done in this Case. And he said, That the
Statute did not extend to Amercements only in Trespasses, Quare vi and armis,
but to every other Trespass; for the Statute speaks of Trespasses, and other
things, which shall be extended to all Trespasses. Cook Chief Justice said,
That the Statute of 1. E. 4. cap. 2. did not extend to Trespasses which were
not contra pacem (as the encroachment in this Case is) for otherwise the Lord
of a Leet could not distrain for an amercement without such presentmennt before
Justices of the Peace. And although the Statute speaks of Felony, Trespass,
etc. the same is to be meant of other things of the same nature; which is
proved by the clause in the Statute, viz. That they shall be imprisoned; which
cannot be in the principal Case at Bar. Warburton and Winch Justices, agreed
in opinion with Cook Chief Justice.

Trinit. 10. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 272 FRAUNCES and POWELL's Case.
IT was moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court, for citing the
Plaintiff out of his Diocese upon the Statute of 23. H. 8. and by the Libel it
appeared, That Powell the Defendant had complained against the Plaintiff in
the Court of Arches, for scandalous words spoken in the Parish of Saint
Sepulchers, London. Cook Chief Justice held, That a Prohibition would lie,
unless the Bishop of London had given liberty to the Archbishop of Canterbury
to entermeddle with matters within London; for, he said, that in the Statute of
23. H. 8. there is a clause of exception in case where such liberty is given by
the inferior Diocesan; and therefore a day was given by the Court to procure a
certificate of the opinion of the Civilians, whether such authority given by
the Inferior Ordinary to the Archbishop, were Warranted by there Law or not;
for the Statute of 23. H. 8. is so; and then if the authority be lawfully
granted, no prohibition will lie. And Cook said; that the Statute of 23. H. 8.
was made but in affirmance of the common Law, as appears by the books of 8. H.
6. and 2. H. 4. For there it is said, that if one be excomenge in a foreign
Dioces, that the same is void, and coram non judice; and he said, that the
principal cause of making of the said Statute, was to maintain the Jurisdiction
of Inferior Diocesses. But it was holden, that if the Plaintiff had defamed
the Defendant within the Peculiar of the Archbishop, that in such case he
might be punished there, although that he did inhabit within any remote place
out of the Peculiar of the Archbishop: and in this Case it was said, that the
Archbishop had in thirteen Parishes in London Peculiar Jurisdiction. It was
adjorned.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Court of Wards. 273 COTTONS Case.
SIR John Tirrel Tenant in Capite, made a Lease unto Carrel for 1000. years;
and further covenanted with Carrel and his Heirs, that upon payment of five
Shillings, that he and his heirs would stand seized of the same Lands unto the
use of Carrel, and his Heirs: And in the Deed there were all the ordinary
clauses of a conveyance bona fide; viz. That the Lessee should enjoy the Lands
discharged of all Encumbrances, and that he would make further assurance, etc.
Carrel assigned this Lease to Cotton, who died in possession, his Heir within
age; and in two Offices, the Jury would not find a Tenure, because it was but a
Lease for years. And in a que plura, the matter came in question in the Court
of Wards: And Cook Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Tanfeild Chief Baron
of the Exchequer, were called for Assistants to the Court of Wards, and they
were of opinion, that because it was found by the Offices, that Cotton died in
possession, that the same was sufficient to entitle the King to Wardship of the
Lands. But before the Judges delivered there opinions, the Lessee was compelled
to prove the Sealing of the Lease by witnesses, which was dated 12. years
before: For if they have no sufficient witnesses to prove the Sealing of the
Lease, without all doubt, there was sufficient matter found to entitle the
King, viz. that the party died in possession; which shall be intended of an
estate in Fee simple, till the contrary be proved; But the two Justices moved
the Attorney, That he would not trouble himself with the proof of a matter in
fact: For they said, It was confessed on all sides, that there was such a
Lease, and that the Assignee of it died in possession of the Land: and
therefore they said, that they were clear of opinion, that the Heir of such a
Lessee who died in possession should be in Ward: For Cook Chief Justice said,
that all Offices which are found to deceive the Crown of such an ancient flower
of the Crown as Wardship, should be void, as to that purpose, and most
beneficial for the King. And he cited the Case in 36. H. 8. Where the Kings
Tenant made a Feoffment, and took back an estate unto himself for life, the
Remainder to his Grandchild for 80. years, and died; that in that Case the
Heir was in Ward: and they said, that in the case at Bar the Heir had power
of the Inheritance upon payment of five Shillings; and if the Lease for years
be found, and proved by witnesses, yet it carries with it the badges of fraud.
And Tanfeild Chief Baron said, that if a Lease for 100. years shall be
accounted Mortmain, a fortiori this Lease for 1000. years, shall be taken to be
made by fraud and collusion: And Cook said, that the Lord Chancellor of
England would not relieve such a Lessee in Court of Equity, because the
beginning and ground of it is apparent fraud. Note, the lands did lie in
Springfield in Essex.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 274 MEADES Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon a Bond against Meade, who pleaded, that the
Bond was upon condition, that if he paid ten pound to him whom the Obligee
should name by his last will, that then etc. and said, that the Obligee made
his Will, and made Executors thereof, but did not thereby name any person
certain to take the ten pound. Sherley Sergeant moved, that the Executors
should have the ten pound, because they are Assignees in Law, as it is holden
in 27. H. 8. 2. But the whole Court was of opinion, that the Executors were not
named in the Will for such a purpose. viz. to take the ten pound; For they
said, It is requisite that there be an express naming who shall take the ten
pound, otherwise the Bond is saved, and not forfeited. And Cook put this Case,
If I be bounden to pay ten pound to the Assignee of the Obligee, and his
Assignee makes an Executor, and dies, the Executor shall not have the ten
pound. But if I be bounden to pay ten pound to the Obligee, or his Assignees,
there the Executor shall have it, because it was a duty in the Obligee himself;
the same Law, if I be bound to enfeoffe your Assignees, etc. Wherefore it it
was adjudged for the Defendant.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 275 GREENWAY and BAKER's Case.
IT was moved, and afterward resolved in the Case of a Prohibition, prayed to
the Court of Admiralty, That if a Pirat takes goods upon the Sea, and sells
them; that the property of them is changed no more, then if a theife upon the
Land steals them, and sells them. And in this Case it appeared by the
Libell, That bona piratica fuerint infra Portam Argier super altum mare. And
for that cause a Prohibition was denied, because Argier being a foreign Port,
the Court could not take notice whether there were such a place of the Sea
called the Port, or whether it were within the Land, or not: Afterward upon
the mediation of the Justices, the parties agreed to try the cause in the
Guild Hall in London, before the Lord Chief Justice Cook.

Trinit 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 276. Sir FRANCIS FORTESCUE, and
COAKE's Case.
UPon an Evidence in an Ejectione firm betwixt the Plaintiff and Defendant,
The Court would not suffer Depositions of witnesses taken in the Court of
Chancery, or Exchequer, to be given in Evidence, unless affidavit be made,
that the witnesses who deposed were dead. And Cook Chief Justice said (nullo
contradicente) That it is a principal Challenge to a Jurour, That he was an
Arbitrator before in the same case, because it is intended, that he will
incline to that party to which he inclined before: but contrary is it of a
Commissioner, because he is elected indifferent. And it was also said in this
Case, That one who had been Solicitor in the Cause, is not a fit person to be a
Commissioner in the same Cause.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 277
BArker Sergeant, in Arrest of Judgment, moved, That the Venire facias did
vary from the Roll in the Plaintiffs name; for the Roll was Peter Percy, and
the Venire facias, John Percy, and the postea was according to the Roll, which
was his true name. The Court doubted whether it might be amended, or whether it
should be accounted as if no Venire facias had issued, because it is betwixt
other parties. But it was holden, That in case no Venire facias issues, the
same is helped by the Statute of Jeofailes, and in this case it is in effect as
if no Venire facias had issued forth; and so it was adjudged. And Cook Chief
Justice said, that if there be no Venire facias, nor habeas Corpora, yet if the
Sheriff do return a Jury, the same is helped by the Statute of Jeofailes.
Warburton Justice contrary, vide C. 5. part Bishops case. And Harris Sergeant
vouched Trinit. 7. Jacobi, Rot. 787. in the Exchequer, Herenden and Tailors
case to be adjudged as this Case is.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 278 BROWN's Case.
IT was holden by the whole Court in this case, That if a man has a Modus
Decimandi for Hay in Black-acre; and he sows the said acre seven years
together with corn, that the same does not destroy the Modus Decimandi, but the
same shall continue when it is again made into hay. And when it is sowed with
corn, the Parson shall have tithe in kind; and when the same is hay, the Vicar
shall have the tithe hay, if he be endowed of hay.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 279 JAMES and RATCLIFF's Case.
IN Debt upon a Bond to perform such an agreement, The Defendant pleaded Quod
nulla fuit conclusio-sive agreeamentum: The Plaintiff said, Quod fuit talis
conclusio and agreeamentum, and de hoc ponit se super patriam. The Court held
the same was no good issue, because a Negative and an Affirmative.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 280 WETHERELL and GREEN's Case.
IT was said by the Pronothories, That if a Nihil dicit be entered in Trinity
Term, and a Writ of Enquiry of Damages issues the same Term, that there needs
not any continuance; but if it be in another Term, it is otherwise. The Court
said, If it were not the course of the Court, they would not allow of it; but
they would not alter the course of the Court: the words of continuance were,
Quia vicecomos non misit brev.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 281 PARROT and KEBLE's Case.
A Man levied a Fine unto the use of himself for life, the remainder in tail,
etc. with power reserved to the Conusor to make Leases for eighty years in
Possession or Reversion, if A. B. and C. did so long live, reserving the
ancient rent; afterward he granted the Reversion for eighty years, reserving
the ancient rent: The question was, Whether he had pursued his Authority,
because by the meaning of the Proviso a Power was, That the Conusor should have
the rent presently, or when the Term did begin. But the opinion of the Court
was, That he had done less then by the Proviso he might have done, for this
Grant of the Reversion does expire with the particular estates for life. But if
he had made a Lease to begin after the death of the Tenants for life, the same
had been more then this grant of the Reversion. And Cook chief Justice said,
That the Grantor may presently have an Action of debt against the Grantee of
the Reversion for the rent. But because it was not averred that any of the
Cestuy que viei were alive at the time when the Grantor did distrain for the
rent, Judgment in the principal case was respited.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 282
UPon the Statute of Bankrupts, this Case was moved to the Court, If a Bankrupt
be endebted unto one in Twenty Pounds, and to another in Ten Pounds; and he
has a Debt due to him by Bond of Twenty Pounds; Whether the Commissioners may
assign this Bond to the two Creditors jointly; or whether they must divide it,
and assign Twenty Marks to the one, and Twenty Marks to the other. And the
Court was of opinion, That it was so to be divided as the words of the Statute
are, viz, to every Creditor a portion, rate and rate like, etc. And then it was
moved, How they might sue the Bond, whether they might join in the Suit or
not? ad quod non fuit responsum by Cook. Warburton Justice said, That when part
of the Bond is assigned to one, and part to another, that now the Act of
Parliament does operate upon it, and therefore they shall sue severally; for he
said, That by the custom of London, part of a debt might be attached: And
therefore he conceived part might be sued for.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 283 SPRAT and NICHOLSON's Case.
SPrat Subdeacon of Exeter, did libel in the Spiritual Court against Nicholson
Parson of A. pro annuali pensione, of Thirty Pound, issuing out of the
Parsonage of A. and in his Libel showed, How that tam per realem compositionem,
quam per antiquam and laudabilem consuetudinem, ipse and predecessores sui
habuerunt and habere consueverunt praedictam annualem penfionem out of his
Parsonage of A. Dodderidge Sergeant moved for a Prohibition in this Case,
because he demands the said Pension upon Temporal grounds; viz. prescription
and real composition. But Cook Chief Justice, and the other Justices were of
opinion, That in this Case no Prohibition should be granted; for they said,
That the party had Election to sue for the same in the Spiritual Court, or at
the common Law, because both the parties were Spiritual persons; but if the
Parson had been made a party to the Suit, then a Prohibition should have been
granted; Vide Fitz. Not. Brev. 51. b. acc. And they further said, That if the
party sueth once at the common Law for the said Pension; that if he afterward
sue in the Spiritual Court for the same, that a Prohibition will lie, because
by the first Suit he has determined his Election. And Cook cited 22. E. 4. 24.
where the Parson brought an Action of Trespass against the Vicar for taking of
Under-Woods, and each of them claimed the Tithes of the Under-Woods by
prescription to belong unto him; and in that Case, because the right of the
Tithes came in question, and the persons were both of them Spiritual persons,
and capable to sue in the Spiritual Court; the Temporal Court was ousted of
Jurisdiction. But he said, That if an issue be joined, whether a Chapel be
Donative or Presentative, the same shall be tried by a Jury at the common Law.
And in this case it was said by the Justices, That the Statute of 34. H. 8.
does authorize Spiritual persons to sue Laymen for Pensions in the Spiritual
Courts; but yet they said, That it was resolved by all the Judges in Sir
Anthony Ropers case, That such Spiritual persons could not sue before the High
Commissioners for such Pensions; for that Suits there must be for enormious
Offenses only: And in the principal case the Prohibition was denied.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 284 Sir BAPTIST HIX, and FLEETWOOD
and GOT's Case.
FLeetwood and Gots by Deed indented, did bargain and sell Weston Park, being
three hundred Acres of Lands, unto Sir Baptist Hix, at Eleven Pound for every
Acre, which did amount in the whole to Two thousand five hundred and thirty
Pounds: and in the beginning of the Indenture of Bargain and Sale, it was
agreed betwixt the parties, That the said Park, being much of it Wood-land,
should be measured by a Pole of eighteen foot and a half. And further it was
covenanted, That Fleetwood and Gots should appoint one Measurer, and Sir
Baptist Hixe another, who should measure the said Park; and if upon the
measuring it did exceed the number of Acres mentioned in the Indenture of Sale;
that then S. Baptist Hixe should pay to them acording to the proportion of 11l.
for every Acre; and if it wanted of the Acres in the deed, that then Fleet' and
Gots should pay back to S. Baptist the surplusage of the money according to the
proportion of 11. l. for every Acre. And upon this Indenture Sir Baptist Hixe
brought an Action of Covenant against Fleetwood and Gots, and assigned a
Breach, that upon the measuring of it, it wanted of the Acres mentioned in the
Deed 70 Acres: And upon the Declaration, the Defendants did demurre in Law; and
the cause of the Demurrer was, because the Plaintiff did not show by what
measure it was measured. And therefore Sherley Sergeant, who was of Council
with the Defendants, said, that although it was agreed in the beginning of the
Deed, that the measure should be made by a Pole of 18 feet and a half: Yet when
they come to the covenants, there it is not spoken of any measure at all; and
therefore (he said) it shall be taken to be such a measure which the Statute
concerning the measuring of Lands speaks of, viz. a measure of sixteen foot and
a half to the Pole; and he said, that by such measure there did not want any of
the said three hundred Acres mentioned in the Deed. Dodderidge Sergeant
contrary for the Plaintiff, and he laid this for a ground: That if a certainty
does once appear in a Deed, and afterward in the same Deed it is spoken
indefinitely, the same shall be referred to the first certainty, and to that
purpose he vouched the case in Dyer: Lands were given by a Deed to a man, and
haeredibus masculis; and afterward in the same Indenture it appeared, that it
was haeredibus masculis de Corpore, and therefore it was holden but an estate
in tail, because the first words were indefinite, and the later words were
certain, by which his intent did appear to pass but an estate in tail. He also
cited 4. E. 4. 29. B. The words of an Obligation were Noverint universi per
praesentes, me I. S. teneri, etc. W. B. in ten pound solvendum eidem I. And it
was holden by the whole Court, that the same did not make the Bond to be void,
because it appeared by the promises of the Bond, to whom the money was in Law to
be paid, and the intent so appearing, the Plaintiff might declare of a
solvendum to himself; and the word (I) should be surplusage. And 22. E. 4. 9.
A. B. The Abbot of Selbyes case: Where the Abbot of Selby did grant annualem
pensionem to B. ad rogatum I. E. illam scilicet quam I. E. habuit ad terminum
vitae suae, solvendum quousque sibi, etc. de beneficio provisum fuerit, and it
was holden by the whole Court in a Writ of annuity brought, that [sibi] did
refer to B. the grantee, and not to I. E. And Cook Chief Justice said, that
the original Contract does lead the measure in this Case; and to that purpose
he cited Kiddwellies case in the Commentaries, where a Lease was made rendering
Rent at Mich. at D. and if it were behind by a month after demand, that the
Lessor might reenter; the demand must be at the first place, which is in that
case alleged to be certain: viz. at D. The case was adjorned.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 285 Sir Henry Lea and Henry Leas Case.
SIR Henry Lea was committed to the Fleet, for the disobeying of a Decree made
in the Court of Requests: and having Suits depending in the Court of Common
Pleas, he prayed a Writ of hab^as Corpus, which was granted; and upon the
return of the Writ, the cause of his Commitment appeared to be for a contempt
for not performing of the said Decree, and no other cause appeared in the
return: and the Court were of opinion, that they could not deliver him, because
that no cause appeared in the return to warrant their delivery of him: And the
Court said, that if the return be false, yet they cannot deliver the party; But
the party may have his Action of false Imprisonment, if the Imprisonment be not
Lawful: But then it was showed by Mountague Sergeant to the Court, that the
Decree was made in the Court of Requests upon a Bill containing this matter,
viz. That Henry Lea pretending Title unto Lands which Sir Henry Lea held by
descent from his Uncle Sir Henry Lea; showed his Title to the Kings Majesty,
and thereupon the King upon the Petition of Henry Lea, sends for Sir Henry Lea,
and had speech with him, that he would give unto the said Henry Lea some
recompense for his Title which he pretended to have to the said Lands: And that
thereupon the said Sir Henry Lea, at the instance of the Kings Majesty, did
promise the King, that if the said Henry Lea would not molest him for any of
the said Lands, which he had by descent from his said Uncle; that then he the
said Sir Henry Lea would give unto the said Henry Lea two hundred pound per
Annum: And for not performance of this promise made to the King, Henry Lea
Exhibited his Bill in the Court of Requests, upon which the said Decree was
grounded: The said Sir Henry Lea answered, that he did not know of any such
promise he made to the Kings Majesty; and pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the
Court: But upon a Certificate made by the Kings Majesty, that he made such a
promise unto him, the Court of Requests made the said Decree, which Certificate
was mentioned in the body of the said Decree: And Mountegue prayed, that
because it appeared that the said Henry Lea had remedy by way of Action upon
the case at the common Law, upon the said promise, That this Court would grant
a Prohibition in this case unto the Court of Requests, and deliver the party
from his Imprisonment. But the Court said, that they would advise of the Case,
because they never had heard of the like case. But Cook Chief Justice advised
Sir Henry Lea to agree the matter betwixt Him, and his Kinsman Henry Lea; For
he said, that he had learned a Rule in his youth, which was this, viz.

Cum pare luctare dubium, cum Principe stultum est;
Cum puero poena; cum Muliere pudor.
Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 286 GARVEN and PYM's Case.
GArven libelled against Pym for a Seat in the Church before the Bishop of
Exeter, in the spiritual Court there; which by Appeal was removed into the
Court of Arches; And the Defendant did surmise in the Court of Common Pleas,
That he and his Ancestors have used time out of mind, etc. to have an Isle with
a seat in the said Church, for himself and his family; and thereupon prayed a
Prohibition. But because it did appear upon Examination of the party himself,
That the Parish have always used to repair the said Isle and seat, the Court
would not grant a Prohibition in this case, for that proves that his Ancestors
were not the Founders of the said Isle and Seat; Also another man has always
used to sit with him in the same seat, which also proves that it does not
belong to him alone. Cook chief Justice said, That if a Gentleman with the
assent of the Ordinary, has built an Isle juxta Ecclesiam, for to set
convenient Seats for him and his family, and has always repaired the same at
his own costs and charges; In such case, if the Ordinary place another man with
the Founder, without his consent, in the same Seat, that he may have his Action
upon the Case against the Ordinary: And if he be impleaded in the spiritual
Court for such Seat, that a Prohibition will lie: And he said, That the Heydons
in Norfolk have built such an Isle next to the Church, and placed convenient
Seats there for them, and their family. But he said, That if a man with the
assent of the Ordinary, set up a Seat in navi Ecclesiae for himself, and
another man does pull up the same, or defaceth it, Trespass vi and armis will
not lie against him, because the Freehold is in the Parson; and he has no
remedy for the same, but to sue the party in the Ecclesiastical Court. And 9.
E. 4. 14. the Dame Wiches Case was vouched, where she brought an Action of
Trespass against the Parson, for taking away her Husbands Coat Armor, which
was fixed to the Church at his Funeral, and it was adjudged that the Action
would lie; and so will an Action in such case brought by the heir. And Cook
said, That the Ordinary has the only disposing of Seats in the Body of the
Church; with which agrees the opinion of Hassey, in 8. H. 7. And if the
Ordinary long time past has granted to a man and his heirs such Seat, and he
and his heirs have used to repair the said Seat: If another will libell against
him in the Spiritual Court for the same Seat, he shall have a Prohibition. And
he said, That he had seen a Judgment in 6. E. 6. That if Executors lay a Grave
Stone upon the Testator in the Church, or set up his Coat Armor in the Church;
If the Parson or Vicar does remove them, or carry them away, that they, or the
heir, may have their Action upon the Case against the Parson or Vicar. Note, in
the principal, no Prohibition for the reasons before.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 287 The Archbishop of York and
Sedgwick's Case.
THe Archbishop of York and Doctor Ingram, brought and exhibited a Bill in the
Exchequer at York, upon an Obligation of seven hundred pound, and declared in
their Bill, in the nature of an Action of Debt brought at the common Law: which
matter being showed unto the Court of Common Pleas by Sedgwick, the Defendant
there; A Prohibition was awarded to the Archbishop, and to the said Court at
York. And Cook chief Justice gave the reasons, wherefore the Court granted the
Prohibition. 1. He said, because the matter was merely determinable at the
common Law; and therefore ought to be proceeded in according to the course of
the common Law. 2. Although the King has granted to the Lord President, and
the Council of York to hold pleas of all personal Actions; yet (he said) they
cannot alter the form of the proceedings. For as 6. H. 7. 5. is, The King by
his Grant cannot make that inquirable in a Leet, which was not inquirable there
by the Law; nor a Leet to be of other nature then it was at the common Law. And
in 11. H. 4. it is holden, That the Pope, nor any other person can change the
common Law, without a Parliament. And Cook vouched a Record in 8. H. 4. That
the King granted to both the Universities, that they should hold plea of all
Causes arising within the Universities, according to the course of the Civil
Law; and all the Judges of England were then of opinion, That that grant was
not good, because the King could not by his Grant alter the Law of the Land;
with which case agrees 37. H. 6. 26. 2. E. 4. 16. and 7. H. 7. But at this day,
by a special Act of Parliament, made 13. Eliz. not printed. The Universities
have now power to proceed and judge according to the Civil Law. 3. He said,
That the Oath of Judges, is, viz. You shall do and procure the profit of the
King, and his Crown, in all things wherein you may reasonably effect and do the
same. And he said, That upon every Judgment upon debt of forty pound, the King
was to have ten shillings paid to the Hamper, and if the debt were more, then
more. But he said, by this manner of proceeding by English Bill, the King
should lose his Fine. 4. He said, That if it was against the Statute of Magna
Charta, viz. Nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi per legale
judicium parium suorum, vel per legem terrae. And the Law of the Land, is, That
matters of fact shall be tried by verdict of twelve men; but by their
proceedings by English Bill, the party should be examined upon his oath; And
it is a Rule in Law, That Nemo tenetur seipsum prodere: And also he said, That
upon their Judgment there, no Writ of Error lies: so, as the Subject should
by such means be deprived of his Birthright. 5. It was said by all the
Justices, with which the Justices of the King's Bench did agree; That such
proceedings were illegal. And the Lord Chancellor of England would have cast
such a Bill out of the Court of Chancery: And they advised the Court of York so
to do: and a Prohibition was awarded accordingly.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 288 Doctor HUTCHINSON's Case.
DOctor Hutchinson libelled in the Spiritual Court against one of his
Parishioners for Tithes; The Defendant there showed, that the Doctor came to
the Parsonage by Symony and Corruption: And upon suggestion thereof made in the
Common Pleas, prayed a Prohibition. Doctor Hutchinson alleged that he had his
pardon, and pleaded the same in the Spiritual Court. And notwithstanding that,
the Court granted a Prohibition, because the Pardon does not make the Church to
be plena, but makes the offense only dispunishable. But in such case, If the
King does present, his presentee shall have the Tithes.

Trinit. 10. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 289
NOte, by Cook Chief Justice, that these words, viz. Thou would have taken
my purse from me on the high way, are not actionable; But Thou have taken my
money, and I will carry thee before a Justice, lay felony to thy charge, are
actionable.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 290 HATCH and CAPEL's Case.
IN an Action upon the Case upon an Assumpsit brought against the Defendant,
The Plaintiff declared, How that one Hallingworth who was the Defendants
Husband, was indebted unto the Plaintiff eight pound ten shillings for beer;
and that he died, and that after his death the Plaintiff demanded the said money
of the Defendant his wife; and she, in consideration that he would serve her
withbeer, promised that she would pay unto the said Plaintiff eight pound ten
shillings, and for the rest of the beer, at such a day certain. And the
Plaintiff did averr, That he did sell and deliver to her Beer, and gave her
day for the payment of the other money, as also for the Beer delivered unto
her; and that at the day she did not pay the Money. Cook and all the other
Justices agreed, That the Action would well lie, and that it was a good
Assumpsit, and a good consideration; for they said, That the forbearance of the
money is a good consideration of it self; and they said, That in every
Assumpsit, he who makes the promise ought to have benefit thereby; and the
other is to sustain some loss. And judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 291 NORTON and LYSTERS Case.
IN the Case of a Prohibition, the Case was this, Queen Elizabeth was seized of
the Manor of Nammington, which did extend into four Parishes, viz. Stangrave
and three other. And the Plaintiff showed, That he was seized of three Closes
in Stangrave; and prescribed, That the said Queen, and all those whose Estate
he has in the said Closes, had a Modus decimandi for the said three Closes,
and for all the Demeanes of the said Manor in Stangrave. And whether the Venire
facias should be de parochia de Stangrave, or of the Manor, was the question.
And it was resolved by the whole Court, That the Visne should be of the Parish
of Stangrave and not of the Manor. And the Difference was taken, when one
claims any thing which goes unto the whole Manor, and when only to parcel of
it; for in the one Case the Visne shall be of the Manor, in the other not; Vide
9. Eliz. Dyer. ar. But it was said, That in this Case the Modus did extend only
to things in Stangrave, and therefore the Visne should be of Stangrave only.
Nichols Justice said, That although the Parish be a Town, and of one name, yet
the Visne shall be from the Parish, to which the Court agreed. And in the
principal Case, the Pleading was, That the Manor was in Parochia, and the
Modus alleged to be in Parochia, and the Prohibition de Parochia; and
therefore the Venire facias ought to be de Parochia, and not de Manerio, or de
Vill^^. Cook cited 4. E. 4. and 23. E. 4. that in Trespass de Parochia is a
good addition, for it shall not be intended, that there are two Towns in one
Parish: And it was said by the Court in this Case, That before the Statute of
2. E. 6. all Prohibitions to the Spiritual Court were quia secutus est de
Laico feodo: for when a man had a Modus dicimandi, the Corn and other things
were lay things. Then it was moved by a Sergeant at Bar, That at the Assizes
where the trial of the Modus decimandi was, one of the principal Panel did
appear only upon the Venire facias; and the question was, If in such Case a
tales might be awarded de circumstantibus. And it was holden by the Court, that
such tales might be well awarded; and 10. Eliz. Dyer vouched to prove the same.
It was also said by the Court, That at the common Law (if not in appeal) the
tales might be of odd number, as quinque tales, or novem tales; but now since
the Statute of 35. H. 8. the tales may be even or odd, as pleases the party.
But it was adjudged in this Case, That in no Case where a trial is at the Bar,
shall any Tales de circumstantibus be awarded. And so are all the Presidents.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 292 LEIGHTON against GREEN and GARRET.
THomas Leighton an Administrator durante minori (...) of J. S. did libell in
the Court of Admiralty against the Defendants; and showed in the Libel, That
there were Covenants made betwixt them by a Charter party, they being Owners of
the Ship called the Mary and John of Lynn, that the Defendants should victual
the said Ship for a Voyage into Denmark; and that the Ship should be staunch
and without leak. And showed in his Libel, that the Ship being upon the Seas
did spring a leak, by reason of which the Plaintiff did lose a great part of
the Freight of the said Ship, consisting in diverse Commodities, viz. Coney
skins. The Defendant pleaded, That the Covenants were made infra Portum de
Lynn: And further pleaded, That the Plaintiff had before that time brought an
Action of Covenants against the same Defendant, upon the same Deed, in which
Action the Plaintiff was Nonsuit; and it was adjudged, That it was a good
Plea in Bar; and thereupon a Prohibition was awarded to the Court of Admiralty.
Cook Chief Justice in this Case said, That charter party, est charta partita,
and is all one in the Civil Law, as an Indenture is in the Common Law. And in
this Case it was adjudged, That the Trial should be there where the contract
was made; and so was it adjudged in Constantine and Gynns Case. Where the
Original Act was in England, and the subsequent matter upon the Sea, the
Trial shall be where the Original Act is done. And so it was agreed in this
Case, that the Trial should be.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Star Chamber. 293 MILLER against REIGNOLDS and BASSET.
SIr Henry Mountagu the Kings Sergeant did inform the Lords in the
Star Chamber, How that the Defendants had conspired and practiced Malitiose to
draw the Plaintiffs life in question, being a man of One thousand Pounds per
annum, and otherwise very rich. The Case was shortly thus, Basset the Defendant
was Tenant unto the Plaintiff of a house in R. in Kent, rendering a Rent; the
rent was behind, and the Plaintiff demanded his Rent of him; the Defendant told
him, That he was not able to satisfy him the Rent, but he promised to give
unto the Plaintiff all his Goods in satisfaction of the Rent, or so many of
them as should countervaile the Rent; and it was agreed betwixt the Plaintiff
and the Defendant Basset, that the Goods should be apprised by two men, which
was done accordingly, and the Plaintiff came to the Defendants house at the
time the said Goods were apprised, but it was deposed and proved, did not go
out of the room where the apprisement was made at the time he was in the said
house, which was the 10 of May 7. Jacobi, ar. Afterward the Defendants,
Reignolds (being an Atturny at Law) and Basset, did conspire to accuse the
Plaintiff, because that when he came to the Defendant Bassets house at the
time of the apprising of the said Goods, that the Plaintiff went up into an
upper Chamber in the said house, and broke up a Chest, and out of the same took
a Gold Ring, 10. s. in Money, and the Defendant Bassets Lease of his house; and
thereupon brought the Plaintiff before diverse Justices of the Peace, who upon
Examination of the matter, found no ground of suspicion against the Plaintiff,
and therefore they did not bind him over to the Sessions to answer the same
Accusation. After this the Defendants made several motions to the Plaintiff
that he would give unto them 300l. and so he should be acquitted, and there
should be no proceeding against him; and because the Plaintiff refused so to
do, they told him that diverse Courtiers had begged his Estate of the King, and
that the same was granted unto them; when as in truth, there was not any thing
moved to any Courtier of any such matter, but all this was said in a show only,
to the end they might get great sums of money from him. And in that matter they
laid the scandal upon S. Rob. Car then Viscount Rochester, that he was made
privy to it, who then was the Kings Maj. great Favorite. And when all this
could not prevail to gain any Composition from the Plaintiff, the Defendants
did prefer a Bill of Indictment at the Assizes in Kent against the Plaintiff;
and there, upon Evidence given unto the Grand Jury, they found an Ignoramus
upon the Bill: and diverse other plots and divises were contrived by the
Defendants, and all to the end, the Plaintiff might lose his life and his
estate. And this matter came to Sentence before the Lords, and the Bill proved
in every point and circumstance, as well by the confession of the Defendants
themselves, as by diverse writings, depositions of witnesses, and letters read
and showed in open Court; and it was said by the whole Court of Lords in this
case, that this was a very great offense, and an offense in Capite* and that if
such practices should be suffered and go unpunished, that no man's life was in
safety, but in continual jeopardy: And therefore in this case, it was said,
that pregnant presumption had been sufficient to have acquitted the Plaintiff;
but here the case was very clear, because the matter was confessed by the
parties Defendants themselves. And in this case, Cook Chief Justice, and the
Lord Chancellor said, that a conspiracy ought not to be only false, but
malitiose contrived, otherwise it will not be a conspiracy, and such malice
ought to be proved* For if a poor Man traveling upon the Highway, be robbed
by another Man, and he knows not the party, if afterward he do accuse such a
one of the Robbery, and the party accused be found not Guilty; he shall not
have an Action of conspiracy against the accuser; for although he was falsely
accused, yet he was not maliciously accused; and it might be, that he took him
to be the Offender, because he was like unto him who robbed him. Secondly, It
was said by them, that by the Law, no Man may Beg the Lands or Goods of
another man upon such an accusation, until the party be convict of the fact;
and that for diverse causes. 1. Because before conviction, the King has not an
Interest in them; for the goods are not forfeit. And 2. Because the party till
his conviction, ought to have his goods to maintain himself with them. And 3.
Because the goods cannot be seized upon for the Kings use before conviction,
although they may be put in salva custodia; and therefore they said, that this
was a very great slander which the Defendants laid upon the Lord Viscount
Rochester, viz. that he had begged the Plaintiffs goods of the King before he
was convicted; and it was said, that if such goods should be begged before
conviction of the party, that the same would be a main cause, that the Jury
will not find the Indictment against the party, when they are sure his Lands,
goods, and other estate shall be in another person, and so by consequence
should be a great cause that the King might be defrauded of the forfeiture of
the goods of Fellons: and further, it would be a great cause of Rebellion, if
such Lands and goods should be seized upon and given away before conviction of
the party accused. And as the Lord Chancellor said, the same was the cause of
the great Rebellion in the time of King Henry the sixth, because the goods of
diverse were given away to other men before the parties were convicted: And Cook
said, that it appears, that this was not only a scandal of diverse Gentlemen
of Worship whom the Defendants had abused in this thing, But even of the King
himself: And it was not only scandalum Magnatum: But scandalum Magistr.
Magnatum: And he said, that it appears in Britton, that if a Rebel or base
fellow do strike a Man of Dignity, that he shall lose his right hand: a
fortiori, in such case when they defame and scandalize them by such impudent
practices, that they be grievously punished: And it should be a very unhappy
estate to be a Rich-Man, if such Offenses should not severely be punished, and
multi delicti propter inopiam. The Sentence against the said Defendants was
this: Reignolds being an Attorney to be degraded, cast over the Common Pleas
Bar, and both the Defendants to lose their Ears; to be marked in the Face
with a C. for Conspirators, to stand upon the Pillory with Papers of there
Offenses, to be Whipped, and each of them fined to the King in 500. pound: and
according to this Sentence, Reignolds the same Mich. Term was cast over the
Common Pleas Bar by the Cryers of the Court; and the other part of the
Sentence executed on them both.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 294 COOKS Case.
IN a Writ, Quare intrusit, maritagio non satisfacto: It was found for the
Plaintiff, but no damages were assessed by the Jury; and the value of the
Marriage was found to be 500. pound. And now the question was, whether the same
might be supplied by a Writ of Enquire of Damages, and the Court prima facie
seemed to doubt of the case: For where the party may have an attaintment, there
no damages shall be assessed by the Court, if the same be not found by the
Jury; and therefore the Court would be advised of it: but afterward in the
same Term it was adjudged, that no Writ of Enquire of damages should Issue; But
a venire facias de novo was granted to try the Issue again. Vide 44. E. 3. the
opinion of Thorpe acc. Note, this was the last Case that Cook Chief Justice did
speak to in the Common Pleas, for this day he was removed from that Court, and
made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 295 WEDLOCK and HARDING's Case.
THE Case was this: a Man seized of a Message holden in Socage in Fee, by his
will in Writing devised the same to his Cosen by these words, viz. I devise my
Message where I dwell to my Cosen Harding, and her Assigns, for eight years.
And also my Cosen Harding shall have all my Inheritances. if the Law will. And
it was adjudged by the whole Court without argument, That this was a devise of
the Message in Fee by these words, and that all his other Inheritances passed
by the said Will by those general words.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 296 ROSSER against WELSH and KEMMIS.
IN an Action of Debt brought against the Defendants, upon several Praecipes
one Judgment is given; and the Plaintiff takes forth a Capias against one of
them, and arrests his body, and afterward he takes a Fieri facias against the
others: And the question was, Whether the several Executions should be
allowed? and the Court was of opinion, they should not; for that a man shall
have but one satisfaction. And therefore in the principal Case, because that
upon the Fieri facias twenty five pounds was levied; if the other who is in
prison upon the Execution will pay the other twenty five pound, (the whole
Judgment being but fifty pound) the Court awarded that the prisoner should be
discharged: and the Court was clear of opinion, that the party cannot have a
Fieri facias against one, and a Capias ad satisfaciendum against the other: But
it was agreed, That he might have a Capias against them both. As if a man has
one Judgment against seven persons, he may take all their bodies in execution,
because the body is no satisfaction, but only a gage for the Debt; and
therewith agrees 4. H. 7. 8. 5 E. 4. 4. and C. 5. part Bamfeild's Case.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 297 JENOAR and ALEXANDER's Case.
IT was moved for a Prohibition to the Court of Requests, because that the
Court held plea of an Attornment; for the complaint there was to compel a man
to attorn upon a Covenant to stand seized to uses. And per Curiam a Prohibition
shall be awarded. And Cook chief Justice said, That there were three Causes in
the Bill, for which a Prohibition should be granted, which he reduced to three
Questions. 1. If a Copyholder pays his rent, and the Lord makes a Feoffment
of the Manor, Whether the Copyholder shall be compelled to attorn? 2. If a man
be seized of Freehold Land, and Covenants to stand seized to an use, Whether in
such case an Attornment be needful? 3. If a Feoffment be made of a Manor by
Deed, Whether the Feoffee shall compel the Tenants to attorn in a Court of
Equity? And for all these Questions, It was said, That the Tenants shall not be
compelled to attorn; for upon a Bargain and Sale, and a Covenant to stand
seized, there needs no attronement. And Cook in this case said, That in 21. E.
4. the Justices said, That all Causes may be so contrived, that there needed to
be no Suit in Courts of Equity; and it appears by our books, That a Prohibition
lies to a Court of Equity, when the matter has been once determined by Law.
And 13. E. 3. Tit. Prohibition, and the Book called the Diversity of Courts,
which was written in the time of King Henry the eighth, was vouched to that
purpose: And the Case was, That a man did recover in a Quare Impedi^ by
default; and the Patron sued in a Court of Equity, viz. in the Chancery: and a
Prohibition was awarded to the Court of Chancery.

Mich. 11: Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 298 Sir JOHN GAGE and SMITH's Case.
AN Action of Waste was brought, and the Plaintiff did declare, that contrary
to the Statute, the Lessee had committed Waste and Destruction in uncovering of
a Barn, by which the timber thereof was become rotten and decayed; and in the
destroying of the stocks of Elmes, Ashes, Whitethorn and Blackthorn, to his
damage of three hundred pound. And for title showed, That his Father was seized
of the Land, where etc. in Fee, and leased the same to the Defendant for one
and twenty years, and died; and that the Land descended to him as his son and
heir; and showed, that the Waste was done in his time, and that the Lease is
now expired The Defendant pleaded the general issue, and it was found for the
Plaintiff, and damages were assessed by the Jury to fifty pound. And in this
case it was agreed by the whole Court, 1. That if six of the Jury are examined
upon a Voyer dire, if they have seen the place wasted, that it is sufficient,
and the rest of the Jury need not be examined upon a Voyer dire, but only to
the principal. 2. It was agreed, if the Jury be sworn that they know the
place, it is sufficient, although they be not sworn that they saw it; and
although that the place wasted be showed to the Jury by the Plaintiff's
servants, yet if it be by the commandment of the Sheriff, it is as sufficient,
as if the same had been showed unto them by the Sheriff himself. 4. It was
resolved, That the eradicating of Whitethorn is waste, but not of the
Blackthorn; according to the Books in 46. E. 3. and 9. H. 6. but if the
blackthorn grow in a hedge, and the whole hedge be destroyed the same is Waste by
Cook chief Justice. It was holden also so, that it is not Wast to cut Quick-set
hedges, but it shall be accounted rather good husbandry, because they will grow
the better. 5. It was agreed, That if a man has under-woods of Hasell,
Willowes, Thorns, if he uses to cut them, and sell them every ten years; If
the Lessee fell them, the same is no wast; but if he dig them up by the roots,
or suffers the Germinds to be bitten with cattle after they are felled, so as
they will not grow again, the same is a destruction of the Inheritance, and an
Action of wast will lie for it. But if he mow the Stocks with a wood-sythe, (as
he did in the principal Case) the same is a malicious Wast; and continual
mowing and biting is destruction. 6. It was said, That in an Action of Wast a
man shall not have costs of Suit, because the Law does give the party treble
damages. And when the general issue (Null. Wast) is pleaded, and the Plaintiff
counted to his damages 100l. the Court doubted whether they could mitigate the
damage. But 7. It was agreed, That in the principal Case, (although the issue
were found for the Plaintiff;) that he could not have judgment, because he
declared of Wast done in 8. several closes, to his damage of 300l. generally,
and did not sever the damages. And the Jury found, That in some of the said
Closes there was no Wast committed. Wherefore the Court said, he could not have
judgment through his own default. But afterward at another day, Hobart then
chief Justice, and Warburton Justice, said, That the verdict was sufficient,
and good enough; and so was also the declaration, and that the Plaintiff might
have judgment thereupon. But yet the same was adjourned by the Court until the
next Term.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 299 CLARK's Case.
NOte, It was said by Cook, chief Justice, and agreed by the whole Court, and
41. and 43. E. 3. etc That if a man deliver money unto I. S. to my use, That I
may have an Action of Debt, or account against him for the same, at my
election. And it was agreed also, That an Action of Trover lies for money,
although it be not in bags: but not an Action of Detinue.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 300 IRELAND and BARKER's Case.
IN an Action of Wast brought, the Writ was, That the Abbot and Covent had made
a Lease for years, etc. And it was holden by the Court that it was good,
although it had been better, if the Writ had been, That the Abbot with the
assent of the Covent made the Lease, for that is the usual form; but in
substance the Writ is good, because the Covent being dead Sons in Law, by no
intendment can be said to make a Lease; But the Dean and Chapter ought of
necessity to join in making of a Lease, because they are all persons able; and
if the Dean make a Lease without the Chapter, the same is not good, per curiam,
if it be of the Chapter Lands. And in Adams and W^o^^stey's Case, Harris
Sergeant observed, That the Lease is said to be made by the Abbot and Covent;
and it is not pleaded to be made by the Abbot with the assent of the Covent.

Mich. 11 Iacobi, In the Common Pleas. 301 The Dean and Canons of Winsor and
WEBB's Case.
IN this Case it was holden by the Court, That if a man give Lands unto Dean
and Canons, and to their Successors, and they be dissolved; or unto any other
Corporations; that the Donor shall have back the Lands again, for the same is a
condition in Law annexed to the Gift; and in such Case no Writ of Escheat
lies, yet the Land is in him in the nature of an Escheat. And the principal
Case was, That a prescription was showed of a discharge of Tithes in an Abbot,
Prior, and Covent, and that the Corporation was afterward dissolved, because
all the Monks died, and the Abbot also. And it was holden by the Court, That he
who is now Owner of it, and holds the Lands, shall pay Tithes; for a Lay man
cannot prescribe in Non decimando; and the Prescription continues no longer
then the Lands continued in the Abbot and Covents hands. And in this Case it
was said by Cook. That there are only three manner of Escheats: 1. Abjurat
Regnum. 2. Quia suspensus per collum. 3. Quia utlagatus: But because they sued
for the treble value in the Spiritual Court, a Prohibition was awarded; but the
Parson may sue for the double value in the Spiritual Court, and no Prohibition
will lie, for that is given by the express words of the Statute of 2. E. 6.
and so it was adjudged in Manwoods Case in the Exchequer. And the word
[Forfeiture] in the Statute does not give the treble value to the King, but to
the Parson himself. Also it was holden by Cook and Warburton, Justices, That if
a Rent be granted to one and his Successors, and the Corporation be dissolved,
that the Rent shall revert to the Donor: and there is no difference as to the
matter, betwixt things which lie in Prender, and things which lie in render
Nichols Justice contrary, That the Rent extinguishes in the Land it sel^* And
in the principal Case, because they sued in the Spiritual Co^^ for the treble
value, a Prohibition was granted (...)

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 302 PORTER's Case.
IN a Writ of Dower brought, the Defendant was essoygned, and had the view, and
afterward pleads tout temps prist to render Dower; and they were at issue,
which was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. It
was holden by the whole Court, That before Execution be awarded, the Plaintiff
in Dower may aver, That her husband was seized to have Damages; and therewith
agrees the books 14. H. 8. 25. 22. H. 6. 44. b.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 303 Sir DANIEL NORTON and SYMM's Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon a Bond, which was conditioned to perform
Covenants in an Indenture; and it was showed there were diverse Covenants in the
Deed, some of which were Covenants against the Law, and some not; and for
breach, the Plaintiff alleged, That it was covenanted by the Indenture, that
Chamberlain, for whom the Defendant was a Surety, being under Sheriff to the
Plaintiff, should save the Plaintiff harmless, and should discharge all
manner of escapes, and should also save him harmeless from all Fines and
Amercements to which he should be liable by reason of any escape. And showed,
^ow that one was arrested in execution by the said Chamberlain, and evasit. And
another Covenant was, That he should not serve any Execution above Twenty
Pounds, without Warrant from the Plaintiff; and also that he should not return
any Juries without his Privity. Hutton Sergeant argued for the Defendant and
said, That this Indenture of Covenants was against the Law, for it is as much
as if he had said, That he should not he under Sheriff. And by the Statute of
27. El. under Sheriffs are ^^orn to return Juries* and process of Courts, and
therefore these Covenants are both against the common Law and Statute Law; also
the Covenants are in delay of Justice; for Non constat when the Sheriff will
give him warrant to return Juries, or to execute the Kings Writs. Also the
Covenant is too general, viz. That he shall save him harmless from all
Escapes, and of any other matters whatsoever; and there the Bond taken to
perform such Covenants is void. Vide 7. H. 7. and 8. ^. 4. 13. where a Bond
taken to save ^^man harmless against all men, is vo^id: but contrary if it be
to save ^^rmelesse against one particular person: so here, to save harmeless
from all matters whatsoever, is void; but if it had been only from Escapes,
then it had been good. Vide 2. H. 4. 9. If a man be bound to save another
harmless against all the world, the Bond is void, Vide 4. H. 4. 2. Will. Rices
case. And he compared these Covenants against the Law to Perpetuities which
kill themselves. Then he argued, That although some of the Covenants were
lawful, yet the Bond was void in all; and that, he said, is the better opinion
of the book in 14. H. 8. 25. And if A. be bounden to enfeoff J. S. of the Manor
of D. and to disease J. N. of another Manor, the Bond is void for the whole. 3.
He said, That there was not a sufficient breach laid by the plaintiff; for it
is only laid, That such a one in Execution evasit; and it is not said, That
the under Sheriff did suffer him to escape. 4. It is not laid, That the
plaintiff did request the under Sheriff to pay the Money upon the escape, but
he went and paid the Money voluntarily of himself, and request and notice are
needful; 46. E. 3. 27. 22. E. 4. 14. 40. E. 3. 20 Non damnificatus is a good
plea generally; and the other side ought to come and show specially how he is
damnified. 5. It is not laid, That he gave him warning to arrest the party in
Execution for Fifty pounds; and therefore as to that, he was not under Sheriff,
because as Sheriff, without warning, by his former Covenants, he was not to
serve any Executions, but such as were under Twenty pounds; and therefore he
ought to have laid it, That he gave him a Warrant to arrest the party upon
this Execution, otherwise there is no breach. Harris Sergeant contrary, and he
said, The Covenants are sufficient in part, and ought to be performed; and so
the Bond good. And as K^ble said in 13. H. 7. 23. so he said, That there are
three conditions which are not allowable, but the Case at Bar is not within the
compass of any of them; and the words here [Discharge and save harmelesse]
shall be meant from all escapes suffered by the under Sheriff himself; and the
words [from all Amercements whatsoever] shall be intended by reason of his
Office: And he said, That when an Indenture of Covenants is good in part, and
void in part, those Covenants which are good shall stand and ought to be
performed; and the book of 14. H. 8 by four Justices, is, that all legal and
lawful Covenants ought to be performed: and he vouched Lee and Golshills Case
39. Eliz. which Vide c. 5. part 82. to that purpose; and he said, that this
Case is not like the case in 9. Eliz. Dyer, of Rai^ure: Also, he said, that the
Defendant has pleaded, That he has performed all the Covenants; and if these
Covenants be void, and no Covenants, then the Defendants plea is not good. Also
there are diverse Covenants in the Negative, and to those he ought in pleading
to show in certain that he has not broken them. The Court said, nothing at all
to the case; but yet Cook chief Justice seemed to be clear or opinion; That the
Bond was void; and so he said, he conceived it had been adjudged before in this
Court in the same Sir Daniel Nortons case against Chamberlain, (...). 9.
Jacob^. (...). And it was adjourned.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 304
AN Action upon the Case was brought by an Attorney of the Court against
another Man, for speaking these words of him, viz. Thou art an Ambodexter; and
the words were adjudged actionable, because the same slandred him in his
Profession, for it is as much in effect as if he had said, that he was corrupt
in his Office.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 305
IT was Ruled by the whole Court, that a Fieri facias, or Capias ad
satisfaciendum, or other Judicial Process did not run into Wales; But it was
agreed that a Capias utlagatum did run into Wales: And Brownloe, one of the
Pronothories, said, that an Extent has gone into Wales.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 306 HUGHE's Case:
A Man who dwelt in Somersetshire made his Will, and by his said Will did
bequeath to each of his children being Enfants, a Legacy of 20. pound a piece:
the Procurators of the Enfants did Libel in the Court of Arches against the
Executors of the Testator, for the said Legacies, being out of the Diocese, and
a Prohibition was awarded: and in this Case it was said by Justice Warburton,
to have been agreed by all the Justices, that the exception in the Statute of
23. H. 8 cap. 9. does extend only to probate of Wills. It was also holden in
this case, That an Averrment might be, that the parties were sued out of there
proper Deocess, if the same does not appear in the Libel: as it may be in like
case where one sueth in the Court of Admiralty for a thing done upon the land;
and Averrment may be, that the contract was made infra Corpus Comitatus. And in
this case it was also agreed by the Court, that if an Infant brings an action
against his Guardian for money, and recovereth, and he brings the money into
Court, and there deposite it, that the same is a good discharge against the
Enfant, and he shall not answer the Suit again in an account.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 307 Sir THOMAS SEYMORE's Case.
MOuntague Sergeant showed to the Court, that the Wife of Sir Thomas Seymore
did Libel against her Husband in the Spiritual Court, for that he did threaten
her, and beat her; and in the end of the Libel she prayed allowance of
Allimony; and a Prohibition was prayed by him, because the Suit in that Court
was for a force, which was not triable in that Court; and to that purpose he
remembered the case of 11, H. 4. 88. Where a Clark sued in the Spiritual Court
for a battery, and laying of violent hands upon him, and because in such case
an action of Trespass of assault and battery did lie at the Common Law, a
Prohibition was awarded, Vide. 22. E. 4. 29. pl. 9. the Abbot of St. Albans
case, and 12. H. 7. 23. Cook Chief Justice agreed all those Cases: And said,
that if a Clark sueth in the Spiritual Court for damages, a Prohibition shall
be awarded; and no damages are given in the Spiritual Court, if not for
repairing of the Church, as appears by the Statute of Articuli Cleri. Quaere
and Vide. 20. E. 4. 10. professione Fidei, etc. And Linwood says, that if a
Clark walks in his doublet and hose, and non habet habitam Clericalem, but
goes in colors; if another man does beat him, he shall not sue for the same
in the Spiritual Court: But in the principal Case it was agreed by the whole
Court, that no prohibition should be awarded, because the Wife cannot have
remedy against the Husband at the Common Law for the beating of her, because
she is sub virga viri; and also because the Suit there is, but by way of
inducement, to have a Divorce causa metus. And Warburton said, that she should
recover there expensas litis against her Husband. Cook held, that the Husband
could not give correction to his Wife: But Nicols and Warburton Justices, held
the contrary; and that the Wife may have a Writ de securitate Pacis against the
Husband, as appears by F. N. B. 80. f. quod been and honest tractabit and
gubernabit, nec malum aliquod ei aliter quam ad virum suum causa regiminis and
castigationis vxoris suae, licite and rationabiliter pertinet, non faciet etc.
And F. N. B. 238. s. acc. Cook vouched 31. E. 3. Fitz. Tit. Attachment for
Prohibition 8. where the Wife Libelled against her Husband in the Spiritual
Court for beating and imprisoning of her, and no Prohibition was granted, and
the Suit in the Spiritual Court was there as an Inducement to have a Divorce.

Mich 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 308 PAYNE's Case.
IT was moved by Hutton Sergeant, for a Prohibition to the Court of Requests:
The Case was this, A man in consideration, That Alice S. would obtain the good
will of his Master, that he the Defendant might have a shop in his Masters
house, did promise her, that when she was married, that he would give unto her
ten pound; And the Plaintiff showed, That she did get the good will of her
Master, and that the Defendant had a shop in his Masters house, and that she
the said Alice was afterward married to the Plaintiff Pain. And the opinion of
the whole Court was, That a good Action upon the Case would lie upon such
promise. And a Prohibition was awarded unto the Court of Requests; a Suit being
there brought for the same matter; which matter being a thing merely triable at
Law, and not in a Court of Equity, that Court had no Jurisdiction of it.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 309
MOuntague Sergeant, demanded the opinion of the Justices in a Case upon the
Statute of 3. Jacobi, of Recusants, in the behalf of the University of Oxford.
viz. That if a Recusant convict do avoid, the said Statute does grant his
Patronage for years to one of his friends in trust; Whether the same were void,
or not within the said Statute? The Justices did deny to deliver any opinion in
the case, for they said, perhaps it might be that that point and case might
come judicially before them; and such they said was the answer of Hussy in 1.
H. 7. in Humfrey Staffords case, which was, King Henry the seventh came in
Bance, and demanded a queston of the Justices. But yet the Court tacit seemed
to agree, That such a Lease of the Patronage was void by the said Statute of 3.
Jacobi. And they said, That they would not have the University discouraged in
the case, which employed their opinions to be for the Universitie. And 21. H. 7.
was vouched, That the Patronage was only matter of favor, and was not a thing
valuable; And in this case Cook chief Justice said, That Apertus haereticus
melius est quam fictus Catholicus.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 310 BOND and GREEN's Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought against an Administrator, the Defendant showed
how that there were diverse Judgments had against him in (...) And ^^so that
there was another Debt due by the Testator, which was assigned over unto the
Kings Majesty, and so pleaded, That he had fully Administered. Barker Sergeant
took Exception to the pleading, because it was not therein showed that the King
did assent to the Assignment; and also because it was not showed, that the
Assignment was enrolled. The Court said nothing to the Exceptions; But whereas
he Defendant as Administrator, did allege a Retayner in his own hands for a
debt due to himself; The opinion of the whole Court was, that the same was
good, and that an Administrator might retain to satisfy a debt due to
himself. But it was agreed by the Court, That an Excecutor of his own wrong,
should not Retain to satisfy his own debt; See to this purpose, C. 5. part
Coulters Case.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 311 STROWBRIDG and ARCHERS Case.
IN An Action of debt upon a Bond the Defendant was Outlawed. And the Writ of
Exigent was, viz. Ita quod habeas corpus ejus hic etc. whereas it ought to be
coram Justiciariis nostris apud Westminster: And for that defect the utlagary
was reversed, and it was said, that it was as much as if no Exigent had been
awarded at all: And upon the Reversall of the utlagary, a Supersedeas was
awarded; and the party restored to his goods which were taken in Execution upon
the Capias utlagatum. It was also resolved in this Case, That if the Sheriff,
upon a Writ of Execution served, does deliver the money or goods which are taken
in Execution to the Plaintiffs Attorney, it is as well as if he had delivered
the same to the Plaintiff himself; for the Receipt by his Attorney is in Law
his own Receipt. But if the Sheriff takes goods in Execution, if he keep them,
and do not deliver them to the pa^^ at whose suit they are taken in Execution,
the party may have a new Execution, (as it was in the principal Case) because
the other was not an Execution with Satisfaction.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 312 CHAVVNER and BOVVES Case.
Bows sold three Licenses to sell Wine unto Chawner; who Covenanted to give
him ten pounds for them; and Bows Covenanted that the other should enjoy the
Licenses. It was moved in this Case, whether the one might have an Action of
Covenant against the other in such Case: And the opinion of Warburton and
Nichols Justices, was, That if a Man Covenant to pay ten pound at a day
certain, That an action of Debt lies for the money, and not an action of
Covenant. Barker Sergeant, said, he might have the one or the other: But in the
principal Case the said Justices delivered no opinion.

313
Note, That this Day Cook Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, was removed to
the Kings Bench, and made Lord Chief Justice of England. And Sir Henry Hobart,
who was the Kings Aturney general, was the day following made Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas. Sir Francis Bakon Knight, who before was
the Kings Solicitor, was made Attorney General. And Mr Henry Yelverton of
Gray's Inn was made the Kings Solicitor: and this was in October, Term. Mich. 11
Jacobi. 1613.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 314
THis Case was put by Mountague the Kings Sergeant, unto the Lord Chief Justice
Hobart, when he took his place of Lord Chief Justice in the Common Pleas; viz.
Tenant in tail the Remainder in tail, the Remainder in Fee; Tenant in tail is
attainted of Treason, Offense is found: The King by his Letters Patents
grants the lands to A, who bargaineth and sells the land by Deed unto B. B.
suffers a common Recovery, in which the Tenant in tail is vouched, and
afterward the Deed is enrolled. And the question was, Whether it was a good
Bar of the Remainder? And the Lord Chief Justice Hobart was of opinion, That it
was no bar of the Remainder, because before enrollment nothing passed but
only by way of conclusion. And the Bargainee was no Lawful Tenant to the
Precipe.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 315 WHEELER's Case.
IT was moved for a Prohibition upon the Statute of 5. E. 6. for working upon
Holy days; and the Case was, That a man was presented in the spiritual Court
for working, viz. carriage of Hay, upon the feast day of Saint John the
Baptist, when the Minister preached and read divine service; and it was holden
by the whole Court of Common Pleas, That the same was out of the Statute by the
words of the Act it self, because it was for necessity; And the Book of 19 H.
6. was vouched, That the Church has authority to appoint Holy days, and
therefore if such days be broken in not keeping of them Holy, that the Church
may punish the breakers thereof; But yet the Court said, That this day, viz. the
Feast day of Sr John the Baptist was a Holy day by Act of Parliament, and
therefore it does belong unto the Judges of the Law, whether the same be broken
by doing of such work upon that day, or not. And a Prohibition was awarded.

Mich. 11 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 316 REARSBY and CUFFER's Case.
IT was moved for a Prohibition to the Court of Requests, because that a man
sued there by English Bill for money which he had laid out for an Enfant within
age for his Meat, drink and necessary apparel; and set forth by his Bill that
the Enfant being within age, did promise him to pay the same. And a Prohibition
was awarded, because as it was said, he might have an action of Debt at the
common Law, upon the contract for the same, because they were things for his
necessary livelihood and maintenance. And it was agreed by the Court, That if
an Infant be bounden in an Obligation for things necessary within age, the same
is not good, but voidable. Quaere, for a difference is commonly taken, When the
Assumpsit is made within age, and when he comes to full age. For if he make a
promise when he comes of full age, or enters into an Obligation for
necessaries which he had when he was within age, the Law is now taken to be,
that the same shall bind him. But see 44. Eliz. Randals Case, adjudged, That
an Obligation with a penalty for money borrowed within age, is absolutely void.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 317 SMITH's Case.
SMith, one of the Officers of the Court of Admiralty, was committed by the
Court of Common Pleas to the prison of the Fleet, because he had made Return of
a Writ, contrary to what he had said in the same Court the day before: and 11.
H. 6. was vouched by Warburton Justice, That if the Sheriff do return that one
is languidus in prisona, whereas in truth he is not languidus, the Sheriff
shall be sued for his false Return: which was agreed by the whole Court. Quod
nota.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 318
WArburton Justice asked the Pronothories this question, If in Trespass the
plaintiff might discontinue his action within the year? To which the
Pronothories answered, That if it be before any plea be pleaded, that he might:
But the Justices were of a contrary opinion, that he could not* because then
costs which are given by the Statute should be lost.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, In the Common Pleas. 319 LAISTON's Case.
IN Trespass for a W^y, the Defendant pleaded a plea in bar which was
insufficient; and afterward the plaintiff was Nonsuit; yet it was resolved by
the Court, that the defendant should have his costs against the plaintiff. But
if a default be in the original Writ; and afterward the plaintiff is Nonsuit
there, the defendant shall not have costs; because that when the Original is
abated, it is as if no suit had been. And so was the opinion of the whole Court.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 320 HILL and GRUBHAM's Case.
THe Case was this A Lease was made unto Grubham by a deed paroll, Habendum to
him, his wife, and his daughter successive, sicut scribuntur et nominantur in
ordine: Afterward Grubham dyed and then his wife dyed; And if it were a good
estate in Remainder to his daughter, was the Question. Harris Sergeant, The
Remainder is void, and not good by way of Remainder for the incertainty. C. 1.
part in Corbets case. In all Contracts and bargains there ought to be
certainty. And therefore 22. H. 6. is, That if a Feoffment be made to two et
haeredibus, it is void although it be with warranty to them and their heirs.
Vide 9. H. 6* 35. Where renun^iavit totam communiam does not amount unto a
Release, because it is not showed to whom the Release is: and so in 29. Eliz.
in the Kings Bench, in Windsmere and Hulbards case. Where an Indenture was to
one, Habendum to him and to his wife, and to a third person Successive, it was
holden that it was void by way of Remainder to any of them. And there it was
Resolved, 1. That they did not take presently. 2. That they could not take by
way of Remainder: And 3. that They could not take as Occupants, because that
the intent of the Lessor was, that they should take but as one estate. But the
Court was of opinion against Harris; And Resolved, That the daughter had a good
estate in Remainder, and that the same did not differ from the Case in Dyer,
Where a Lease was made by Indenture to one, Habendum to him and to another
successive, sicut nominantur in Charta, for that those words Sicut nominantur
in Charta, makes the estate to be certain enough. And so they said in this
Case, Sicut scribuntur et nominantur in Ordine, is certain enough, and shall be
taken to be Sicut scribuntur et nominantur in eadem charta. But they agreed
according to the Case in Brooks Cases, That a Lease to three, Habendum (...).

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 321. TRAHERNS Case.
AN Assize of Nusans was brought against the Defendant, because that Levavit
quandam domum ad nocumentum, etc. And the Plaintiff showed how that he had a
Windmil, and that the Defendant had built the said house, so as it hindered his
Mill: And the Jury found that the Defendant levavit domum; and that but two
feet of it did hinder the Plaintiffs Mill, and is ad nocumentum. And how
Judgment should be given, was the question. And the Court was of opinion, That
Judgment should be, that but part of the house should be abated, viz. That
which was found to be ad nocumentum. And it was said by some, That the Assise
is such a Writ which extends to the whole house; and therefore that the whole
house should be abated according to the Writ. But a difference was taken
betwixt the words Erexit and Levavit: For, Erexit is but when parcel of a house
is set up ad nocumentum; but Levavit is when an entire house is levied from the
ground. And it was said by Hobart Chief Justice, That if the Defendant had not
levied the house so high by two yards, it had been no Nusans: for the Jury
find, that the two yards only are ad nocumentum. And therefore he conceived
that the Writ was answered well enough; and that but part of the house should
be abated: For the Writ is, Quod levavit quandam domum, etc. And the Verdict
is, Quod levavit domum; But that but two yards of it is ad nocumentum: And
therefore he said, the Writ is answered well enough; and that the Judgment
should be given, That that only should be abated which was ad nocumentum, etc.
Quaere; for the Case was not resolved; And vid. Batten and Sympsons Case, C.
par. 9. to this purpose.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 322. BAGNALL and POTS Case.
IT was resolved by the Court in this Case, That when an Issue is joined upon
Non concessit, that the Issue shall be tried where the Land is: But if a Lease
be in question, and Non concessit be pleaded to it, it shall be tried where the
Lease was made. 2. It was resolved, That if Copyhold land be given to
superstitious uses, and the same comes unto the King by the Statute; That the
Copyhold is destroyed, and the Uses shall be accounted void: But it was
resolved, That in such Case by the Statute which gives this Land so given to
superstitious uses to the King, that the King has not thereby gained the
Freehold of the Copyhold, but that the same remains in the Lord of the Manor.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 324. JUCKS and Sir CHARLES CAVENDISH's
Case.
A Parson sued for the substraction of Predial Tithes, upon the Statute of 2*
E. 6. in the Spiritual Court. The Defendant made his suggestion, That for such
a Farm upon which the Tithes did arise, there was this custom; That when the
Tithes of the Lands were set forth, that the Owners of the said Lands had used
time out of mind to take back thirty sheafs of the Tythe-corn: and showed that
he was the Owner of the said Farm; and that according to the said custom, after
the Tithes were set forth, that he did take back thirty sheafs thereof, and
thereupon prayed a Prohibition. And in this Case it was said by the Court, That
it ought to be averred, that the Farm was a great Farm, for otherwise it should
be the impoverishing of the Church, and would take away a great part of the
profit of the Parson. And it was further said by the Court, That if there were
but thirty Tythe-sheafs in all, that the Owner should not have them, for then
the Custom should be unreasonable: And Day was given to the other side, to show
Cause why the Prohibition should not be awarded.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 325. GANDEN and SYMMON's Case.
NOte, That where a Juror is not challenged by one party, who had sufficient
cause of challenge; and afterward is challenged by the other side, and
afterward the party does release his challenge; in that case, the first party
cannot challenge the same Juror again, because he did foreslow his time of
challenge, and he had admitted the party for to be indifferent at the first.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 326. The Bishop of CHICHESTER and
STRODWICK's Case.
IN an Action of Trespass for taking away of Timber, and the Boughs of Trees
felled: The Defendant, as to the Timber, pleaded Not guilty; And as to the
Boughs, he made a special Justification, That there is a Custom within the
Manor of Ashenhurst in the County of Sussex, That when the Lord fels or sels
Timber Trees, that the Lord is to have only the Timber, and that the poor
Tenants in Coscagio part Manerii, time out of mind have used to have the
Branches of the Trees for necessary Estovers to be burnt in necessario focali
in terris and tenementis. And the Opinion of the Court was, That the Custom was
not well expressed, to have Estovers to burn in terris and tenementis; for that
Estovers cannot be appertaining to Lands, but to Houses only: And therefore
whereas the Defendant in the Case did entitle himself to a house and lands, and
gave in Evidence that the Custom did extend to Lands, it was holden that the
Evidence did not maintain the Issue; And the Custom was alleged to be, That
the Lord should have Quicquid valeret ad maremium, and that the Freeholders
should have ramillos. Which as Hobart Chief Justice said, is to be meant all
the Arms and Boughs; for whatsoever is not maremium, is ramillum. 2. It was
holden in this Case, That the Non-use or Negligence in not taking of the
Boughs, did not extinguish nor take away the Custom, as it has been oftentimes
resolved in the like case. And note that in this Case, to confirm the said
Custom, the Book-case was cited, which is in 14. E. 3. Fitz. to Bar. 277. and
the same was given in and avowed for good Evidence: where the Case was, That
the Bishop of C. (which shall be intended the Bishop of Chichester) brought an
Action of Trespass for felling of Trees, and carrying them away: where the
Defendant pleaded, That he held a Message and a Verge of Land of the Bishop;
and that all the Tenants of the Bishop within the Manor of A. ought to have all
the Windfals of Trees, and all the Boughs and Branches, etc. Which Case, as
Harris Sergeant conceived, was the Case of the very Manor now in question; and
the Tenant there (as in this Case) made a special Justification, and there it
was holden that it was good, and adjudged for the Defendant: Also in that Case
it was adjudged, That the Lord should have Maremium, and that the Tenants
should have Residuum, which shall be intended the Boughs and Branches. And the
Custom in the Case was adjudged good. But because the Defendant alleged the
Custom to be, to have the same as Estovers to be burned in terris, and gave
Evidence only to the Message, it was found against the Defendant, for that the
Evidence did not maintain the Issue.

Mich. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 327. VAUGHAN's Case.
IN a Formedon in the Discender, the Tenant had been essoined upon the Summons,
and also upon the View. And after was pleaded Ne dona pas, the general issue;
and thereupon issue was joined: And if he might be essoined again after issue
joined, was the Question: And the Court was of opinion, That in a real action
the Tenant may be essioned after Issue joined, but not in a personal action, by
the Statute of Marlebridge. And Hobart Chief Justice said That the Statute of
Marlebridge gave not any Essoin, but only did restrain Essoins: and therefore
in real Actions the same is left as it was at the Common Law; and by the Common
Law the Tenant might be Essoined after Issue joined. And note, per totam
Curiam, That if an Essoin be not taken the first day, it shall never after be
taken.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 328. CLAY and BARNETS Case.
IN an Ejectione Firm, the Case was this* Sir Godfrey Foliamb had issue James
his son, who had issue Francis: And Sir Godfrey Foliamb was seized in Fee of
diverse Lands as well by purchase as by descent, in sundry Towns, viz.
Chesterfield, Brampton, etc. in the Tenures of A. B. C. etc. and dyed, James
Foliamb his son, 7* E. 6. made a Conveyance of diverse Lands to Francis Foliamb
being his younger son, in haec verba, viz. Omnia mea Mesuagia, terras, and
tentam in Chesterfield, Brampton, etc. modo in tenuri of the said A. B. C. quae
pater meus Galfrid: Foliamb perquesivit from diverse men, whom he named in
certain: And also convey a House called the Heart to the same Francis, which
came to him by descent, by the same Conveyance which was in the occupation of
one Celie, and not in the Tenures of the said A. B. C. And the great Question
upon the whole Conveyance was, Whether all the Lands which he had by Descent in
the said Towns, and in the Occupations and Tenures of the said A. B. and C. did
pass, or only the purchased Lands. And it was resolved by the whole Court, That
the Conveyance did pass only the Lands which he had by purchase, except only
the said House which was precisely named and conveyed; and did not pass the
Lands which he had by Descent. For if all the Lands which he had by Descent
should pass by the general words, then the special words which passed the House
which he had by Descent should be idle and frivolous; and that was one reason
ex visceribus causae, that only the purchased Lands did pass. 2. It was said by
Justice Warburton, That if a man gives all his Lands in D. in the Tenures of
A. and B. and he has Lands in D. but not in their Tenures, that in that case
all his Lands in D. passes: So if a man give all his Lands in D. which he had
by Descent, from his son, there all his Lands whatsoever shall pass. Hobart
acc' and said, That if a man gives all his Lands in the County of Kent, if he
have Lands within the County, they do pass. And he said, that in a Conveyance
every restriction has his proper operation; and in the Conveyance in the
principal case there were three restrictions: 1. All his ^ands in such Towns,
viz. Chesterfield, Brampton, etc. 2. All his lands in the Tenures of such men,
viz. A. B. C. 3. All his lands which he had by Purchase, etc. And the words
(All my Lands) are to be intended all those my Lands which are within the
restrictions. And he said, that the word (Et) being in the copulative, was not
material; for all was but one sentence, and it did not make several sentences
and the word Et is but the conclusion of the sentence. 3. They resolved, That
general words in a Grant may be overthrown by words restrictive; as is 2* E. 4.
and Plow. Com. Hill. and Granges Case. And therefore if a man gives all his
lands in D. which he has by Descent from his Father; if he have no lands by
Descent from his Father, nothing passes. 4. They agreed, That a Restriction
may be in a special Grant, as in C. 4. par. Ognels Case: but they said, that if
the Restriction does not concur and meet with the Grant, that then the
Restriction is void. Note, the principal Case was adjudged according to these
Resolutions.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 293. COOPER and ANDREWS Case.
TO have a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court, suggestion was made, That the
Lord De la Ware was seized of 140 Acres of lands in the County of Sussex, which
were parcel of a Park. And a Modus Decimandi by Prescription was said to be,
That the Tenants of the said 140 Acres for the time being had used to pay for
the tithes of the said 140 Acres two shillings in money, and a shoulder of every
third Deer which was killed in the same Park, in consideration of all tithes of
the said Park: And it was showed, how that the Lord De la Ware had enfeoffed
one Cumber of the said 140 acres of land; who bargained and sold the said 140
acres of land to the Plaintiff who prayed the Prohibition. The Defendant said,
that the said Park is disparked, and that the same is now converted into arable
lands and pasture-grounds, and so demanded tithes in kind; upon which the
Plaintiff in the Prohibition did demur. Hutton Sergeant. By the disparking of
the Park, the Prescription is not gone nor extinct; because the Prescription is
said to be to 140 acres of lands, and not to the Park: and although the
shoulder of the Deer, being but casual and at the pleasure of the party, be
gone, yet the same shall not make void the Prescription. 2. He said, that the
act of the party shall not destroy the Prescription: and although it be not a
Park now in form and reputation, yet in Law the same still remains a Park. And
he compared the Case unto Lutterels Case, C. 4. par. 48. where a Prescription
was to Fulling-Mils, and afterward the Mils were converted to Corn-Mils, yet
the Prescription remained. 3. He said, Admit it is not now a Park, yet there is
a possibility that it may be a Park again, and that Deer may be killed there
again. For the Disparking in the principal Case is only alleged to be, that
the Pale is thrown down; which may be amended: For although that all the
Park-pale, or parcel of it be cast down, yet the same does still remain in Law
a Park: and a Park is but a Liberty; and the not using of a Liberty does not
determine it, nor any Prescription which goes with it. And if a man have
Estovers in a Wood by Prescription, if the Lord felleth down all the Wood, yet
the right of Estovers does remain; and the Owner shall have an Assise for the
Estovers, or an Action upon the Case. Vid. C. 5. par. 78. in Grayes Case, the
Case vouched by Popham. Further he said, That in the beginning a Modus
Decimandi did commence by Temporal act, and Spiritual; and the money is now the
tithe, for which the Parson may sue in the Spiritual Court: And a Case Mich. 5.
Jacobi was vouched, where a Prescription to pay a Buck or a Do in
consideration of all Tithes, was adjudged to be a good Prescription. And the
Case Mich. 6. Jacobi, of Skipton-Park, was remembered: where the difference was
taken, when the Prescription runs to Land, and when to a Park. In the one case,
although the Park be disparked, the Prescription does remain; in the other not.
And 6* E. 6. Dyer 71. was vouched: That although the Park be disparked, yet the
Fee does remain. And so in the Case at Bar, although the casual profit be gone,
yet the certain profit, which is the two shillings, does remain. Harris
Sergeant contrary. And he said, that the Conveyance was executory, and the
Agreement executory, and not like unto a Conveyance or Agreement executed: And
said, that Tithes are due jure divino; and that the party should not take
advantage of his own wrong, but that now the Parson should have the tithes in
kind. And upon the difference of Executory and Executed, he vouched many
Authorities, viz. 16* Eliz. Dyer 335. Calthrops Case, 15 E. 4. 3. 5 E. 4. 7.
and 32 E. 3. Anuitie 245. And in this case he said, that the Parson has no
remedy for the shoulder of the Deer; and therefore he prayed a Consultation.
Hobart Chief Justice said, That the Pleading was too short, and it was not
sufficiently pleaded: For it is not pleaded, That the Park is so disparked that
all the benefit thereof is lost. But he agreed it, That if a man does pull down
his Park-pale, that the same is a disparking without any seizure of the Liberty
into the Kings hands, by a Quo Warranto. But yet all the Court agreed, That it
does yet remain a Park in habit: And they were all also of opinion That the
disparking the Park of the Deer, was not any disparking of the Park as to take
away the Prescription. The Case was adjourned till another day.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 330. PIGGOT and PIGGOT's Case.
IN a Writ of Right, the Donee in tail did join the Mise upon the mere Right;
and final Judgment was given against the Donee, in which case the Gift in tail
was given in Evidence. Afterward the Donee in tail brought a Formedon in the
Discender: and it was adjudged by the whole Court, that the Writ would not lie:
For when final Judgment is given against the Donee in tail upon issue joined
upon the mere Right, it is as strong against him as a Fine with Proclamations:
and the Court did agree, That after a year and day, where final Judgment is
given, the party is barred; and also that such final Judgment should bar the
Issue in tail.

Mich. 11 Iacobi, in the Exchequer-Chamber. 331*
AN action upon the Case was brought for speaking these words: Thou do lead
a life in manner of a Rogue: I doubt not but to see thee hanged for striking
Mr. Sydenhams man who was murdered. And it was resolved by all the Justices in
the Exchequer-Chamber, That the words were not actionable. At the same day in
the same Court, a Judgment was reversed in the Exchequer-Chamber, because the
words were not actionable: The words were these, viz. Thou usest me now, as thy
Wife did when she stole my goods.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 332. ROES and GLOVE's Case.
AN action of Debt was brought upon a Bond in Mich. Term 9 Jac and in Hillary
Term after the parties were at issue upon the Statute of Usurie, and it was
found against the Defendant. Afterward Ter. Trin. a Writ of Error was brought
retornable Mich. 10. Jacobi. in which Term no Errors were assigned. And
afterward in Hillary Term following two Errors were assigned: the one, That
there was no such Statute as the Statute of 37 H. 8. of Usurie, which was
against what he had before confessed by his Plea; the second Error was, That
whereas J. S. of Exeter was returned of the Jury, it was assigned for Error,
that J. S. of another place was sworn upon the Inquest: and in this Case the
Court advised the Defendant in the Writ of Error to plead In nullo erratum est.
By which the Court did seem to incline, that they were no Errors.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 333. BRADLEY and JONES Case.
IN an action upon the Case, the case was, That the Defendant did exhibit
Articles against the Plaintiff in the Chancery before Dr. Carry, and there swore
the Articles; and afterward he sued in the Kings Bench, and had Process out of
that Court upon the Articles sworn in Chancery: and for this an action upon the
Case was brought, and it was adjudged that the action would lie. The articles
exhibited in the Chancery were, That the Plaintiff being an Attorney at Law,
was a Mainteinor of Juries and Causes, and a Barretor: and the Defendant prayed
the Peace against him in the Kings Bench. And in this Case it was resolved, 1.
That a man might pray the Peace or Good Behavior of any other man in any of
the Kings Courts: but then it must be done in due form of Law: and if he do it
so, no action upon the Case will lie, as it was resolved 27 Eliz. in Cutler and
Dixons case in the Kings Bench. But it was agreed, that if a man sueth in a
Court which has not jurisdiction of the Cause, an action upon the Cause will
lie, but not where the Court has jurisdiction of the Cause. 2. It was
resolved, That the action did lie in the Case at Bar, because he did exhibit
the articles in Chancery, and did not pursue them there; For when he had sworn
the articles in the Chancery, he could not have a Supplicavit out of the Kings
Bench; and the Oath and Affidavit in the Chancery does remain as a Scandal upon
Record. And Hobart Chief Justice said, That every Court ought to intermeddle
with their own proper causes; and that two Courts are not to join in one
punishment, for punishment is not to be by parcels. And he said, That if a man
claims right to the Land of another, he is not punishable for it; but if he
make title unto a Stranger, then he shall be punished: for every one ought to
meddle with his own business. 3. It was resolved, That when a thing does
concern the Commonwealth, the same does concern every one in particular. And so
it is lawful for any man to require the Good behavior of another, for the
public good: Interest etenim reipublicae ut maleficia punientur. 4. It was
resolved, that the action did lie; because the Defendant made the articles in
Chancery but a color of the Good Behavior* and although that the Kings Bench
might grant the Good Behavior without any articles preferred, yet when first
they begin in another Court, they ought to follow the cause there: And Hobart
the Chief Justice, in this case said, that an Attorney may not labor Jurors in
the behalf of his Client, for that is Imbracery.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 334. FIAL and VARIER's Case.
IN an Action upon the Case, upon an Assumpsit, the Case was this. A man did
promise to stand to the Arbitrament of J. S. and J. D. if they made their
Arbitrament and Award within ten days: and if they do not make their Award
within ten days, that if they nominate an Umpier, and he make an Award within
the said ten days, that then, etc. J. S. and J. D. did not make any Award
within ten days: but the fourth day after the Submission they did nominate J.
N. to be Umpier, who made an Award within the said ten days; and the Defendant
would not perform the Award, wherefore the Plaintiff brought the action.
Sherley Sergeant. It is repugnant: For the first Arbitrators had the whole ten
days to make their Award, and then cannot the Umpier make an Award within the
said ten days. But the opinion of the whole Court was, that the action would
lie; and that it should be construed thus, viz. That if an arbitrament and
award be made within ten days by the first Arbitrators or by the Umpier: For
the first Arbitrators may examine the matter for two or three days; and if
they cannot make any award, then the Umpier shall have the rest of the ten
days to make the award: and so it was adjudged.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 335. COLT and GILBERT's Case.
AN action upon the Case brought for these words, He is a Thief, and stole a
Tree: adjudged that the action would lie; for the later words do not extenuate
the former: But, Thou art a Thief, for thou have robbed my Orchard, are not
actionable, v. C. 4 par. Bretridges Case.

Mich. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 336. BROOK's Case.
AN action upon the Case was brought for words. The Plaintiff set forth in his
Declaration, That he was a Mercer by his trade, and did sell wares and
commodities in his shop, and did keep diverse Books of his trade, and
Debt-books: and that the Defendant said unto Mr. Palmer, being the Plaintiffs
Father-in-law, these words of the Plaintiff, viz. Your Son-in-Law Brooks
deceived me in a Reckoning, and he keeps in his shop a false Debt-book, And I
will shame him in his Calling. Nichols Justice, and Hobart Chief Justice were
of opinion, that the action would not lie for those words: 1. Because the words
single of themselves are not any ^lander; and when words will bear an action,
it ought to be out of the force and strength of the words themselves. 2. The
first words, Thou have deceived me in a Reckoning will bear no action, because
it is impossible but that Tradesmen and Merchants which keep Debt-books will
sometimes mistake one Figure for another, and so the same does turn to the
prejudice and damage of another against the will of the party himself. And so
the subsequent words, He keeps a false Debt-book, are not actionable, because
it may be falsified by the Servants of the party, and not by the Defendant
himself; and also it may be false written. Et interest reipublicae ut sit finis
litium: and it should be a cause of many Suits, if such a nice construction
should be made of words as to make them actionable; and words shall be taken in
mitiori sensu, if there be no particular description and declaration that the
words were spoken maliciously. And therefore general words which of themselves
are actionable, by construction shall be taken to bear no action; as C. 4. par.
Stanhops case. And so if a man says of another, that he has the Pox, they
shall be taken in mitiori sensu, because they are not described by any
subsequent words which declares malice in the party. And Nichols vouched a Case
which was in this Court this Term, where an action was brought for these words;
Thou usest me now, as thy Wife did when she stole my Cushions: that the words
were not actionable. Warburton Justice. When words are spoken which scandal a
man in his trade or profession, they are actionable: as if one say of an
Attorney, Thou cosenest Mr. Winsor of his Fees: and so if words are spoken
maliciously. And therefore an action was brought by one who was a Jury-man, for
these words, viz. Thou have deceived me any my children of eight hundred
pounds; they were adjudged actionable. And so Hill. 6. Jacobi. rot. 1159. Thou
art a Jury-man, and have been the death of a hundred men by thy false means:
Being maliciously spoken, (although in themselves they are not actionable) yet
they will bear an action. But it was adjudged in the principal Case, for the
reasons given by the two other Justices, that the words would bear no action;
to which Warburton Justice in the end did seem to agree.

Hill. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 337. AYLIFFE and BROWNS Case.
A Woman who was possessed of a Term for diverse years, had issue two Daughters;
the one married to Ayliffe, and the other to Brown. Ayliffe had issue four
Daughters, and Brown had also issue; and the Woman did demise Legacies to the
children of Ayliffe out of the Rent reserved upon the Lease, and made Brown her
Executor, and dyed. Ayliffe required Brown in the behalf of his children to pay
the money to him, that he might employ the same for the benefit of the
children: which he refused to do, and thereupon he sued him in the Spiritual
Court, and there Sentence was given for the Plaintiff. Brown the Executor
moved for a Prohibition, and alleged for ground of it, that he was Executor,
and chargeable in an account for the money. But because he came after sentence,
and also after he had appealed to the Court of Delegates, and after a sentence
given there also against him, the Court refused to grant a Prohibition in the
Cause; and also because he did refuse to give security for the payment of the
Legacies to the children.

Hill. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 338. WORMLEIGHTON and HUNTERS Case.
TWo men are bounden with J. S. as Sureties in an Obligation. One of the
Sureties, viz. Wormleighton, was sued upon the Bond, and the whole penalty
recovered against him. He exhibited an English Bill into the Court of Requests
against the Defendant, being the other Surety, to have contribution: and it was
moved to the Court for a Prohibition to the Court of Request, and the same was
granted, because by entering into the Obligation it became the debt of each of
them jointly and severally, and the Obligee had his election to sue which of
them he pleased and take forth Execution against him: and the Court said, That
if one Surety should have contribution against the other, it would be a great
cause of suits, and therefore the Prohibition was awarded; and so it was said
it was lately adjudged and granted in the like case, in Sir William Wh^rwoods
case.

Hill. 11. Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 339. LAMBERTS Case.
TWo men were Partners in goods: the one of the Partners sold unto J. S. at
several times goods to the value of 100 l. and for the goods at one time bought
he paid the money according to the time* afterward an action was brought by
one of the Partners for the rest of the money, and the Plaintiff declared upon
one contract for the whole goods whereas in truth they were sold upon several
contracts made, and the Defendant in that case would have waged his Law: But
the Court advised the Plaintiff to be Nonsuit, and to bring a new action,
because that action was not well brought, for it ought to have been a several
action upon the several contract. And in this case it was agreed by the Court,
that the sale of one Partner is the sale of them both; and therefore although
that one of them sells the goods, or merchandizeth with them, yet the action
must be brought in both their names; and in such case the Defendant shall not
be received to wage his Law, that the other Partner did not sell the goods unto
him, as is supposed in the Declaration.

Hill. 11. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 340. WHITE and MOORS Case.
A Man did recover in an action of Debt brought in the Common Pleas, and had
Judgment; and afterward before Execution was taken forth, the Defendant in the
Debt exhibited an English Bill into the Court of Requests to overthrow the
Judgment and to stay Execution, pretending in his Bill that there was a parol
agreement betwixt him and the other, that he should not be charged with that
Judgment nor the payment of the money. It was moved for a Prohibition in this
case, which was granted by the Court, because the Plaintiff there by practice
did endeavor to subvert a Judgment given at the Common Law. And in speaking of
this Case, the Court did very much condemn the course used in the Court of
Requests in taking Bonds of the parties to perform their Decrees made there;
for it was said that such Bonds were against Law, and so it had been oftentimes
adjudged.

Hill. 11 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 341. BALDWYN and GIRRIES Case.
A Parson did Libel in the Spiritual Court for Tithes* and the substraction of
them; and grounded his Libel upon the Statute of 2 E. 6. The Defendant alleged
that he was to be discharged from the payment of tithes, by reason of
privilege within the Statute of 31 H. 8. of Dissolutions: and the Plaintiff
here had a Prohibition. And afterward they were at issue here, Whether he
ought to be discharged hy Privilege or not; and after issue joined, the
Plaintiff in the Prohibition was Nonsuit: And thereupon the Parson had a
Consultation, and proceeded* in the Spiritual Court, and there obtained a
sentence; and the sentence there was, That he should recover the single
damages, and the same was set in certain; and ulterius that recuperet duplicem
valorem, which was also by the said sentence set in certain. And it was
resolved in that Case by the whole Court, That a Prohibition should be granted
grounded upon the sentence* because the Spiritual Court in their sentence did
exceed the damages which was to be given by the Statute in that Court: and it
was said* That although the sentence there given be not expressly that he
recover treble damages, yet because it did amount to so much, if the words of
the sentence be joined together, It was directed that a special Prohibition, in
which the Statute and the whole matter is to be mentioned, be awarded. And in
this case it was agreed by the whole Court, That the Statute of 2 ^. 6. for
substraction of Tithes merely, does not give any damages: but if the Tithe be
first set forth, and then they are subtracted, there because the Parson had
once an interest in them, he shall recover treble damages. And the principal
Case was resembled by Warburton Justice to the case of Waste; that if the Jury
give damages 20l* there the Court shall treble the damages and make the same
60l* and so it was done in the principal case.

Hill 11 Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 342. GIPPE's Case.
A Man Libelled for Tithes in the Spiritual Court: the Defendant alleged a
Modus Decimandi, and thereupon had a Prohibition; and afterward the Plaintiff
in the Prohibition did not prove his suggestion within six months: and
therefore the Court granted a Consultation, because the Law has appointed a
certain time within which time the suggestion is to be proved, Otherwise the
Parson should be delayed and prejudiced in his Tithes; and so it was adjudged
in Parson Bugs case, Mich. 8. Jacobi, in this Court.

Hill. 11 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 343. CROSS and STANHOP's Case.
AN action of false Imprisonment was brought against the Defendant and two
other Justices of Peace of the County of York. The Defendants justified the
Imprisonment, by reason of the Statute of 1 M. cap. That it should not be
lawful for any maliciously and contumeliously to molest or disquiet any person
or persons which are Preachers, or after should be Preachers. And the
Plaintiff demurred upon the Plea in Bar generally; and two Exceptions were
taken to the Pleading: 1. Because the words of the Statute were misrecited; for
the words of the Statute are in the disjunctive, maliciously or contumeliously:
And the opinion of the Court was, that when the precedent and subsequent words
disjunctive are all of one sense, that the word (Or) is all one with the
copulative; but where they are of diverse natures (as by word or deed) it is
otherwise. The second Exception was, That where the words were (by the greater
part of the Justices) the Recital was (by the better part of the Justices.) But
notwithstanding these Exceptions, it was adjudged against the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 344. CARTWRIGHT's Case.
CArtwright prayed a Prohibition; and the Case was this. A. lying sick upon his
bed, made his Will; and afterward said unto his Executors named in the Will, I
will, that B* shall have twenty pounds more, if you can spare it. And the
Executor answered and said, Yes forsooth: but no Codicil was made of the same
Legacy. And a Bill was preferred in the Spiritual Court for the Legacy:
whereupon the Executor prayed a Prohibition. And it was holden by this Court,
that although this Court has not power to hold plea of the thing Libelled for
there in the Spiritual Court, yet it has power to limit the Jurisdictions of
other Courts; and if they abuse their authority, to grant a Prohibition. Vid. 2
H. 4. 10. But it was doubted whether the Spiritual Court, as this case is,
might give remedy to the person for the Legacy: For the same not being annexed
to the Will by a Codicil, it was but fidei commissum: and so the doubt was,
Whether the Spiritual Court might hold plea of it: For if they cannot hold plea
of it, then in this case a Prohibition may be lawfully granted, although that
this Court have not power nor jurisdiction of the thing it self. The Court
would be advised of it, and therefore it was adjourned.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 345. Sir CHRISTOPHER HEYDON's Case.
GOdsall, Shepard and Smith brought an Assise of Novel disseisin against Sir
Christopher Heydon, which was tried at the Assizes in Norfolk before Sir Tho.
Fleming Lord Chief Justice of England, and Justice Dodderidge, which was found
for the Plaintiffs, and Judgment was given for them in the Court of
Common Pleas. And thereupon Sir Christopher Heydon brought a Writ of Error in
the Kings Bench; and assigned for Error, That whereas the Judgment was given
upon his own Confession, the Judgment was entered, That the Plaintiffs did
recover per visum Recognitorum Assise predict. And after argument in the
King's Bench, it was adjudged by the whole Court, that the Judgment given in the
Common Pleas should be affirmed, notwithstanding the Error assigned. And now to
reverse the Judgment given in the Kings Bench, he brought another Writ of Error
in Parliament. Cook Chief Justice said, That the Clarks of the Chancery ought
not to make a Writ of Error to the Parliament, unless they have the Kings
license so to do. And it was agreed by the whole Court, that a Writ of Error
lies in Parliament upon the Transcript of the Record, without bringing of the
Record it self in Parliament: For the Parliament is holden at the Kings
pleasure, and may be dissolved before the Errors be discussed; and so the
Record it self cannot be brought here again, because the Parliament which is a
higher Court was once possessed of it. 8 H. 5. Error 88. The same Law in Error
upon a Judgment given in Ireland, 5 E. 2. Error 89. where only the Transcript
of the Judgment is removed: For if the Record it self should be brought into
England, it might be that before it came hither it shall be drowned in the sea;
and it is dangerous to commit a Record to the mercy of the winds and sea. And
Error lies to reverse a Fine upon the Tenor of the Record: and it is not
necessary to bring the Fine it self, because there is not any Chirographer in
this Court to examine it. At another day the same Term, George Crook and Noy
took five Exceptions to the said Writ of Error: the first was, Because the Writ
does recite the Judgment to be in Assis. capt. coram Tho. Fleming Capital.
Justiciar. ad Placita, and Johannem Dodderidge milit. unum Justic. ad Placit.
coram nobis tent. And the Exception was, because that this latter addition was
not to them both. Dodderidge Justice held, that the same was no good Exception
to abate the Writ of Error, because the omission is only in the addition of
Honor which is surplusage, and the Person is certain, and his power appears to
take the Assise: and that Exception is not in point of jurisdiction, but of
denoting of the person; and therefore is like the Case in 19 Eliz. Dyer, 356.
which is a stronger Case, and 6 E. 6. Dyer 77. Haughton and Cook contr. But
Crook Justice did agree with Dodderidge, that the addition of the same was but
surplusage, and that the Writ had been well enough without it. Cook Chief
Justice held the contrary: For then he varieth from their Commission, which is
their authority; but if it had been left out in their Commission, then the Writ
had been good enough. And he said, that when a man meddles with a thing which
is but surplusage, which he needed not to do, he must recite the same
substantially, otherwise his plea will be vicious. C. 4 par. Palmers case. And
when he makes Tho. Fleming Capit. Justic. ad Placita indefinitely, he varieth
from the truth: for the style is, Tho. Fleming Capit. Justic. ad Placita coram
Rege tent. Haughton Justice acc' and he said, that in every Writ of Error which
is to remove a Record three things ought to be expressed. 1. Mention is to be
made before what person it was taken, as the book is in 28 H. 6. 11. 2. It is
to mention betwixt whom it was, 9 H. 6. 4. 3. The manner of the caption is to
be mentioned, whether by Writ or without Writ, 2 R. 3. 2 and 3. and this Writ
fails in the first of them, therefore he concluded that the Writ should
abate. Cook Chief Justice was of the same opinion, and agreed that Misnosmer
and variance are not to be favored, if they be not substantial and essential,
quae dant esse rebus: and he said that the variance in this case is of such
nature; For in many Records yet extant, and in the time of King H. 3. it is to
be found, that the Chief Justice of England did sit and give Judgment in the
Common Pleas and in the Exchequer; and so then Capital. Justic. ad Placita is
too general, because he might sit and give Judgment in any of the said Courts.
The second Exception was, because that the Writ says, Assisa capta, etc. and
does not say per breve, nor sine breve, nor does say secundum legem and
consuetudinem, etc. For in 43 Eliz. in the Case betwixt Cromwell and Andrews,
it was adjudged not good to say, That such an Action came into the Common Pleas
out of the Country, and does not show that it came by adjournment, or by
Certlorari, or Mittimus. To which it was answered by Damport Councellor for the
Plaintiff, that it is a strong intendment that the Assise was taken per breve,
and therefore it needed not to be expressed, because it is a general, and not a
special Assise. Crook Justice. The Exception is good; for it is so general,
that it cannot be intended which Assise it was: For put case there were two
Assizes betwixt the same parties, it cannot be known which Assise is intended.
And of the same opinion was Haughton Justice. Dodderidge contrary; and he said,
Notwithstanding the Exception the Record ought to be removed by the Writ: For
the Judges Conscience may be well satisfied which Record is to be removed; And
here the Record which is to be removed is so precisely showed, that no body can
doubt of it which ought to be certified: And there are Records removed by Writs
of Error which are more dubious then this is, v. 19 Eliz. Dyer 356. 20 E. 3.
But in this case the Writ is much enforced by the words Sommon. and Capt. For
in every Assise there are four Commands to the Sheriff. 1. Facere tenementum
esse in pace, to quiet the possession. 2. Facere recognitionem, or Recognit.
videre tentam. 3. Summoneas. 4. Ponas eos per vadios, etc. For which cause of
necessity it must be meant an Assise per Breve. The third Exception was,
because in the Writ it was not showed who was Plaintiff, and who Defendant.
Dodderidge. It is generally to be agreed, That the Writ of Error ought to agree
with the Record: which Rule is taken in 3 H. 6. 26. C. 3. par. the Marquess of
Wincbesters Case. But yet every Variance does not abate this Writ: For if the
variance be only in matter of circumstance* as it is in this Case, the Writ
shall not abate. vid. 9 H. 6. 4. 4 and 5 Phil. and Ma. Dyer 164. 2 Eliz. Dyer
173. and 180. 28 H. 6. 11. and 12. The fourth Exception was, because it does
not show the place of the Caption of this Assise, but says general in Com.
Norfolk. Haughton held that rather to be examinable in the Parliament then
here. The last Exception was, because the Writ is directed to Cook Chief
Justice, that he certify the Record sub sigillo suo: whereas it was said the
Record it self was to come in Parliament, and there a Transcript thereof is to
be made, and the Record to be remanded. V. 22 E. 3. 23 Eliz. Dyer 357. 1 H. 7.
29. against the Book of Entries 302. To which it was answered, That it is at
the pleasure of the Parliament to have either the one or the other, 22 E. 3. 3.
8 H. 5. Error 88. To which Cook agreed. And note, that upon this Writ of Error
a Supersedeas was fraudulently procured, and a Writ of Attachment issued forth
against Bacon who procured it; And the Supersedeas was disallowed, because that
another Supersedeas was granted in the first Writ of Error, And a man can have
but one Supersedeas. But the Question in this Case was, Admitting that the
Writ of Error be good and not abateable, If the same be a Supersedeas in it
self? And the Court doubted of that point: For Cook Chief Justice said, That he
had viewed 26 or 27 Writs of Error which were brought in Parliament, where the
first Judgment was disaffirmed, and but one where the Judgment was affirmed;
and that is in 23 Eliz. Dyer 357. the Record of which cannot be found: Et quod
in praxi est inusitatum, in jure est suspectum. The Books where Error was
brought in Parliament are 2 E. 3. 34 and 40 in the old print. 22 E. 3. 3. 42
Ass. pl. 22. 9 H. 5. 23. 1 H. 7. 29. 23 Eliz. Dyer 375. And it should be
mischievous for delay, for a Parliament is only to be summoned at the Kings
pleasure. Haughton, Dodderidge and Crook held clearly, That this Writ of Error
was a Supersedeas in it self, and that upon the Book of 8 E. 2. Error 88. and 1
H. 7. 19. where it is said, That the Justices did proceed to Execution after
the Judgment affirmed in Parliament, and therefore ex consequente sequitur not
before: And therefore the Writ of Error is a Supersedeas that they cannot
proceed. But there is no President of it in the Register, but a Scire facias,
fo. 70. And the Court held, That if a Supersedeas be once granted and
determined in default of the party himself, that he shall never have another
Supersedeas: but otherwise if it fail by not coming of the Justices. Also Cook
Chief Justice held, That by this Writ of Error in Parliament Sir Christopher
Heydon could not have the effect of his suit, because it is to reverse a
Judgment coram Rege, and so the Judgment given in the Common Pleas stands firm,
and Sir Christopher Heydon is put to a new Writ of Error in this Court: for
the Judgment in the Kings Bench is, Judicium affirmetur, and stet in pleno
robore and effectu: And it is not as the Judgment is in 20 E. 4 44. Judicium
stet in aeternum. And so that not being the fundamental Judgment, the Reversal
thereof is but the beginning of another suit, 38 H. 6. 3. And admit that the
Writ of Error be a Supersedeas for the second Judgment, yet it is a Question
whether it shall be for the first which is not touched by the Writ: And
whether they may grant Execution upon it or not. Vide 13 E. 4. 4: 43 E. 3. 3. 8
H. 7. 20. And therefore the Court advised Sir Christopher Heydon to sue unto
the Kings Majesty by Petition to have a new Writ of Error, for without Petition
he cannot have the Writ, 32 E. 3 1. 8 E 2. Error 88. And the Justices gave him
warning to do it in time convenient, otherwise they would award Execution if
they did perceive the same to be merely for delay, according to the Cases in 6
H 7. and 8 ^. 7. And afterward the Parliament being upon a sudden dissolved
without any thing done therein, Execution was awarded.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 346. BLITHMAN and MARTIN's Case.
John Blithman brought an Action upon the Case against Martin upon an
Assumpsit, and recovered. And it was moved, That because the Consideration
which was the Cause of the Action was against Law, that the Judgment might be
stayed. For the Plaintiff did allege the same to be in consideration, That
if the Plaintiff being Jailer of such a Prison in Dev^nshire, would deliver one
who was in Execution for Debt, he promised to give him Twenty pounds: And he
alleged in facto, that he did deliver him, the Debt not being satisfied: And
because the Consideration was to do a thing which was against the Law, the
opinion of the Court was that it was void, and that the Plaintiff should not
have Judgment.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 347. SHERLOE's Case.
SHerloe brought an Action of Assault and Battery, and declared Quod eum the
Defendant verberavit: And did not show certain, nor allege precisely in his
Declaration, That the Defendant did beat him. Exception was taken unto it: For
there is a difference betwixt a Declaration in an Ejectione Firm, Debt, and
this Action; for in those Actions such Declaration is good, but not in this
Action. And to prove the same, one Sheriff and Bridges Case in 39 Eliz. was
cited, where such Declaration was adjudged void. But yet the opinion of the
Justices was, That the Declaration was good enough notwithstanding the said
Judgment in 39 Eliz.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 348. GRUBE's Case.
IT was moved in Arrest of Judgment upon issue joined inter Mathiam Grub, and
in the Venire facias he was called Matheum Grub. And Cook Chief Justice said,
That the Venire facias was vicious: but because that the Jury did appear upon
the Habeas Corpora, the Trial was well enough.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 349. CROOK and AVERIN's Case.
CRook Merchant brought an Action upon the Case against Averine for speaking
these words, viz. Mr. Crook came into Cornwall with a blue Coat: but now he has
gotten much wealth by trading with Pirates, and by cosening by tale of Pilchers,
and by Extortion. And Cook Chief Justice said, That the Law gives no favor to
those verbal Actions, and we see there is not any such Action brought in our
old Law Books. And therefore he said, Words ought to be certain: And he
examined the words in this Case by themselves; and said, That the first words
are not actionable, because they are not material; And the other words (by
trading with Pirates) are too general; for an honest man might trade with a
Pyrate, not knowing him to be a Pyrate, and so no damage might come to him. But
as to the other words he gave no opinion.

Pasch. 12 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 350. CLAYDON and Sir JEROME HORSEY's Case.
CLaydon brought an Action upon the Case against Sir Jerome Horsey for erecting
of a house in a certain place called Risborough Common: and alleged in
certain, That every one who had Common in Risborough pred. etc. and did not
allege, That the Common is in the Manor of Risborough: But he declared, That
there is such a Custom within the Manor of Risborough. And the opinion of the
Court was, That the Declaration was good, because there is but one Risborough
alleged, and therefore of necessity it must be meant de Manerio.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 351. The CLOTHWORKERS of IPSWICH Case.
THe Masters and Wardens of the Clothworkers of Ipswich in the County of
Suffolk, brought an Action of Debt for 3l. 13s. 4d. against D. and declared,
That the King who now is had incorporated them by the same name, etc. And had
granted unto them by Charter, Quod nullus exerceat artem sive occupationem in
aliqua shoppa, domo sive camera infra villam predict. of a Clothworker or
Tailor, nisi ante eos vel duos eorum probationem faceret quod Apprentic. fuit
per spacium 7 annorum, and per eos sive duos eorum sit approbat. sub paena 3l.
13s. 4d. pro qualibet septimana qua exerceat predict. artem contra hanc
constitutionem. And laid in facto, That the Defendant had used the Trade of a
Tailor for the space, etc. against etc. The Defendant pleaded, That he was
retained in service with one Mr. Pennel Gen: of Ipswich, and had been an
Apprentice for the space of seven years in tali loco, etc. And that he made
garments for his said Master and his wife and their children, infra etc. quae
quidem exercitio est eadem exercitio artis which is supposed by the Plaintiffs
in their Declaration. Upon which the Plaintiffs did demur in Law. Goldsmith for
the Plaintiffs, That the Plea in Bar is void: For every Plea in Bar ought to
confess and avoid, traverse or deny that which is alleged in the Plaintiffs
Declaration: But this Plea in Bar had not done any of them, and therefore was
void: For the exercising of the Trade which he has confessed in his Bar,
cannot be intended the same matter with which the Plaintiffs have charged him
in their Declaration, and therefore it is no good bar at all: And to prove the
same, vide 14 H. 6. 2. 35 H. 6. 53. 12 H. 7. 24. 27 H. 8. 2. Sir Robert Hitcham
for the Defendant: And he held that the matter is well confessed and avoided;
because that usage which he has confessed in the Bar is colorable the same
usage with which the Plaintiffs have charged him in their Declaration. As in a
Writ of Maintenance, the Defendant says That he was of Council with the party,
being a Sergeant at Law, etc. which is the same Maintenance which is supposed
by the Plaintiff: vide 28 H. 6. 7. and 12. 19 H. 6. 30. 18 E. 4. 2. 36 H. 6.
7. Also he said, When a Declaration is general, the Defendant need not
traverse, 1 E. 4. 9. 2 E. 4. 28. And further he said, That the Statute of 27
Eliz. cap. 5. of Demurs helped that defect, for that it is but only in matter
of form. But the Justices did not argue that point: But the Question which they
made was, Whether the Constitution or Ordinance were lawful or not: And as to
that it was holden by the whole Court, That the said Ordinance was unlawful:
And it was agreed by the Court, That the King might make Corporations, and
grant to them that they may make Ordinances for the ordering and government of
any Trade; but thereby they cannot make a Monopoly, for that is to take away
Free-trade, which is the birthright of every Subject. And therefore the Case
was in 2 H. 5. 5. in Debt upon a Bond upon Condition, That one should not use
his Trade of a Dyer in the Town where the Plaintiff did inhabit for one year:
And there said, That the Obligation was void, because the Condition was against
the Law; And he swore (by God) if the Plaintiff were present, that he should
go to prison till he had paid a Fine to the King: Yet regularly, Modus and
Conventio vincunt legem. 2. It was resolved, That although such Clause was
contained in the Kings Letters Patents, yet it was void: But where it is either
by Prescription or by Custom confirmed by Parliament, there such an Ordinance
may be good; Quia Consuetudo Legalis plus valet quam Concessio Regalis. The
King granted unto the Abbot of Whitny the Custody of a Port which is as it were
a Key of the Kingdom; and therefore the Grant was void and so adjudged: And
such Grants are expressly against the Statute of 9 E 3. cap. 1. And the Charter
granted by King Henry the 8. to the Physicians of London has the same Clause
in it: But if it had not been confirmed by Act of Parliament made 33 H. 8. it
had been void. The King granted unto B. that none besides himself should make
Ordnances for Battery in the time of war: Such Grant was adjudged void. But if
a man has brought in a new Invention and a new Trade within the Kingdom, in
peril of his life, and consumption of his estate or stock, etc. or if a man
has made a new Discovery of any thing, In such Cases the King of his grace and
favor, in recompense of his costs and travail, may grant by Charter unto him,
That he only shall use such a Trade or Trafique for a certain time, because at
first the people of the Kingdom are ignorant, and have not the knowledge or
skill to use it: But when that Patent is expired, the King cannot make a new
Grant thereof: For when the Trade is become common, and others have been bound
Apprentices in the same Trade, there is no reason that such should be forbidden
to use it. And Cook Chief Justice put this Case: The King granted to B. That he
solely should make and carry Kersies out of the Realm; and the Grant was
adjudged void, which Crook concessit. 3. It was resolved, That this Charter was
void, because of the words, viz. Nisi ante eos vel duos eorum probationem
fecerit, etc. And therefore it was considered what proof should be sufficient
for the party: And as to that it was agreed, That the proof cannot be upon
Oath; for such a Corporation cannot admidister an Oath unto the party: And then
the proof must be by his Indentures and Witnesses; and perhaps the Corporation
will not allow of any of them: For which the party has no remedy against the
said Corporation, but by his Action at the Common Law; and in the mean time he
should be barred of his Trade which is all his living and maintenance, and to
which he had been Apprentice for seven years. Another reason was given, because
that by this way they should be Judges in their own cause, which is against the
Law: And the King cannot grant unto another to do a thing which is against the
Law. And afterward Trin. 12 Jacobi, Judgment was entered, Quod Querentes nihil
capiant per Billam. And Judgment was then given for the Defendant.

Pasch. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 352. LINSEY and ASHTON's Case.
LInsey brought an Action of Debt against Ashton upon a Bond, the Condition of
which was to perform an Award. The Defendant said that the Award was, That the
Defendant should surcease all suits depending betwixt them, which he had done:
The Plaintiff in his Replication said, That the Arbitrators made such Award ut
supra, and also that the Defendant should pay unto the Plaintiff 25l. at the
house of J. S. absque hoc, that they made the other Award only. Upon which the
Defendant did rejoyn and said, That well and true it is that they made those
Awards, etc. But they further awarded that the Plaintiff should release unto
the Defendant, which he had not done. And upon the Rejoinder the Plaintiff did
demur in Law. And the opinion of the Court was without question, That the Plea
was a departure, 19 H. 6. 19. But it was argued by Finch, That the Replication
was insufficient: For the Plaintiff ought not to have traversed, as this Case
is, because that a man ought not to traverse a thing alleged by Implication,
but ought to traverse that which is alleged de facto, upon which there may be
an issue joined. And to prove the Traverse void, the Case in 11 H. 6. 50. was
put: But the Exception was not allowed by the Court. Another Exception was
taken, because the Award it self was void, because it was to do a thing upon
the Land of another man, which he might not lawfully do: And although the
Arbitrators might award him to do the thing which is inconvenient, yet they
cannot award him to do a thing which is impossible and against the Law: as in
17 E. 4, 5. Two were bound to stand to the Arbitrament of J. S. of all
Trespasses; who awarded that the one should pay unto the other 40. and that he
find Sureties to be bounden for the payment of it. And by the opinion of the
Justices the Award was void, because he could not award a man to do that which
did not lie in his power, and he has no means to compel the stranger to be
bound for him. But the opinion of the whole Court was against Finch* For first,
the money is to be paid apud domum J. S. and not in domo; And it might be, for
any thing that appears, that the said House is adjoining to the Highway, so
as every Stranger might lawfully come unto it, although he might not come into
it without being a Trespassor: But admit it be not adjoining to the Highway,
yet he might come as near unto the house as he could, or he might get leave to
come thither. Secondly, It was resolved, That although the Award was void as to
that part, yet for the residue it stood good, and therefore for not performance
of the same the Bond is forfeited. As if J. be bounden to perform the Award of
J. S. for White-Acre, and that he award that I enfeoffe another of White-Acre,
and that he give unto me Ten pounds: If I tender unto him a Feoffment of
White-Acre, and he refuses it, and will not give to me the 10l. I shall have
an Action of Debt upon the Bond, as it is adjudged in Osborn's Case C. 10. par.
131. The same Law, If J. S. and J. N. submit themselves unto the Award of J. D.
who awardeth that J. S. shall surcease all suits, and procure J. N. to be
bounden with a stranger, and make a Feoffment of his Manor of D. which is a
thing out of the Submission: In that case there are three things enforcing the
Arbitrament; the first is only good, the second is against the Law, and the
other is out of the Submission: yet being in part good, it ought to be
performed in that, otherwise the Bond is forfeited. But this Case was put: If
J. be bounden to stand to the Award of A. ita quod it be made de and super
premissis, and afterward. A. makes an Award but of part of the premises,
there it is void in all, because it is not according to the authority given
unto him. And afterward in the principal Case Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Pasch. 12 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 353. DOCKWARY and BEAL's Case.
IN an Essex Jury, The opinion of the Court was, That Wood will pass by the
name of Land, if there be no other Land whereby the words may be otherwise
supplied. Also it was agreed, That the Tenant for Years might fell Underwoods
of 25 years growth, if the same has used to be felled.

Pasch. 12 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 354. WROTESIEY and CANDISH's Case.
ELizabeth Wrotesley did recover Dower 6 Jacobi in the Common Pleas; in which
Writ she demanded tertiam partem Manerii de D. eum pertinaciis, Nec non tertiam
partem quarundam terrarum jacent. in Hovelan. And upon Ne unque seize que Dower
the parties were at issue, and the Venire facias awarded de Hovelan: And it was
found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment was given for her. And Candish the
Defendant brought a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench; and assigned for Error,
That it was a Mis-trial: For that the Venire facias ought to have been de
Manerio, and not of Hovelan, 6 H. 7. 3. 11 H. 7. 20. C. 6 par. ^. 19 H. 6. 19.
19 E. 4. 17. Yet the Council of the Defendant moved, That the Trial was good
for the Land in Hovelan: And it being found that the Husband was seized of the
Manor of D. that now the Trial was good for the whole.

Pasch. 12 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 355. COWLEY and LEGAT's Case.
COwley brought an Audita quaerela against Legate, and the Case was this: Cowley
and Bates bound themselves in a Bond of 200l. jointly and severally to Legate;
And afterward 6 Jacobi, Legate brought an action of Debt upon the Bond against
Bates, and had Judgment; and 7 Jacobi the said Legate brought Debt against
Cowley in the Kings Bench upon the same Bond, and obtained Judgment; and
afterward he sued forth Execution upon the first Judgment by Elegit, and had
the Land of Bates, who was Tenant thereof only for another man's life, in
Execution; and afterward he took forth a Capias ad satisfaciendum against
Cowley upon the Judgment in the Kings Bench: And thereupon Cowley brought an
Audita quaerela, containing in it all the whole matter. And the opinion of all
the Justices was, That the Audita quaerela was well brought. And first it was
holden, That when a man may plead the matter in bar, he shall not have an
Audita quaerela upon the matter, because it was his lachess that he did not
take advantage of it by way of plea. But secondly in this Case it was said,
That he could not have pleaded the special matter; and therefore as to that
point the Audita quaerela was well brought. But the only doubt in the Case
was, Whether Legate the Defendant might have a new Execution by Capias ad
satisfaciendum, after that he had Execution against one of the Obligers by
Elegit: and the doubt was, because the Judgments upon which he grounded his
Executions were given at several times, and in several Courts, and against
several persons: For it was agreed by the whole Court, That a Capias does not
lie after Execution sued by Elegit against the same person; but after a Capias
an Elegit is grantable: And the reason of the difference is, because upon the
prayer to have an Elegit, it is entered in the Roll, Elegit sibi executionem per
medietatem terrae, so as he is estopped by the Record to have another
Execution; but upon a Capias nothing at all is entered upon Record. Yet Cook
Chief Justice said, That it is the common practice of a good Attorney to
defer the entry in the Roll of Execution upon an Elegit, until the Sheriff
has returned it served: And in such case it was agreed, That if the Sheriff
retorn upon the Elegit, That the party has not Lands, etc. then the party may
take forth a Capias. Also the Elegit is in it self a satisfactory Execution;
and by the Common Law a man shall have but one Execution with satisfaction. And
therefore at the Common Law, if after Execution the Land had been evicted, the
party had no remedy: And Cook said, If part of the Land be evicted, the party
shall not have remedy upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 5. to which Crook
Justice agreed. And the Court held it to be no difference, although that the
Judgments were given in several Courts against persons several, and at several
times, and where it is but one Judgment against one person. Vide the Case 43 E.
3. 27. where in Debt the Defendant said, That the Plaintiff had another Action
for the same Debt depending in the Exchequer by Bill, Judgment, etc. And by
Mowbray and Finchden clearly it is a good plea, although it be in another
Court: And Dodderidge Justice said, That in the first case the said Legate might
sue the said Cowley and Bates severally, and after Judgment he might choose his
Execution against which of them he pleased: But he could not have Execution by
Elegit against them both. And therefore he said, That although there be an
Eviction of the Land, or that the Judgment be reversed by Error after that he
has Execution against one by Elegit, yet Legate could not have Execution
against the other: for by the first Execution he had determined his Election,
and he could not sue the other: which Cook agreed.

Mich. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 356. FOX and MEDCALF's Case.
IN a Writ of Account brought in the Court of York, the Plaintiff had Judgment
that the Defendant should account: And upon that Judgment the Defendant in the
Court there brought a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench. And it was adjudged,
That no Writ of Error lay in that case, because the Judgment to Account is but
the Conveyance, and the Plaintiff has not any benefit until he be satisfied
by the Award of the Auditors; for upon their Award the final Judgment shall be
given.

Mich. 12 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 357. The Bishop of SALISBURY's Case.
IT was holden in this Case, That if a Bishop, Parson, or other Ecclesiastical
person do cut down Trees upon the Lands, unless it be for Reparations of their
Ecclesiastical houses; and do or suffer to be done any delapidations: That they
may be punished for the same in the Ecclesiastical Court, and a Prohibition
will not lie in the Case; and that the same is a good cause of deprivation of
them of their Ecclesiastical Livings and Dignities. But yet for such Wastes
done they may be also punished by the Common Law, if the party will sue there,
Vide 2 H. 4. 3.

Trin. 13 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 358. PRAT and the Lord NORTH'S Case.
A Man was distreined by the Bailiffe of the Lord North, for 20s. imposed upon
him in the Court Leet for the erecting and storing of a Dove-Cote: And it was
said, That it cannot properly be called a Nuisance, but for the destroying of
Corn, which cannot be but at certain times of the year: And therefore it was
conceived, That the party who was presented might traverse the Nuisance to be
with his Pigeons; and it was said that a man might keep Pigeons within his
new house all the year, or put them out at such a time as they could not
destroy the corn: And Cook Chief Justice said, That there is not any reason
that the Lord should have a Dove-Cote more then the Tenant; and he asked the
Question, where the Statute of E. 2. says, Inquiratur de Dove-Cotes erected
without License, Who should give the License? Ad quod non fuit responsum. In
Mich. Term following the Case was argued by Damport, who said, That the
erecting of a Dove-Cote by a Freeholder was no Nuisance: For a Writ of Right
lies of a Dove-Cote, and in the Register it is preferred and named before
Land, Garden, etc. But he said that there was a fatal defect in the Plea: which
was, That the Presentment at the Leet was. That Prat had erected a Dove-Cote
unlawfully, and did not say ad commune nocumentum, as it ought to be, otherwise
it is not presentable in the Leet: And therefore although it was otherwise in
the Plea, That it was ad commune nocumentum, the same did not help the
defective Presentment.

Mich. 10 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 359. GREENWAY and BARKER's Case.
BEtwixt Greenway and Barker, It was moved for a Prohibition to the Court of
Admiralty; and the Cause was for taking of a Recognisance in which the
Principal and his Sureties, his heirs, goods and lands were bounden: And it was
in the nature of an Execution at the Common Law* and thereupon they in the
Admiral Court made out a Warrant to arrest the body of the Defendant there.
Dodderidge Sergeant said, That it was not a Recognisance at the Common Law, but
only a Stipulation, in the nature of a Bail at the Common Law; and he said,
That it was the usual course to pledge goods there in Court to answer the party
if sentence were given against him. Nichols Sergeant: They cannot take a
Recognisance; and by the Civil Law, if the party render his body the Sureties
are discharged; and Execution ought to be only of the goods, for the ship is
only arrested; and the Libel ought to be only against the ship and goods and
not against the party, 19 H. 6. acc'. And afterward Dr. Steward and Dr. James
were desired by the Court to deliver their opinions what the Civil Law was in
this Case: and Doctor Steward said, He would not rest upon the Etymology of
the word; for if it be a Recognisance, Bail, or Stipulation, it is all one in
the Civil Law; and in such case he said by their Law Execution might be against
the sureties. And he argued, 1. That ex necessitate it must be agreed that
there is an Admiral Court. 2. That that Court has a Jurisdiction: And by a
Statute made in Henry the 8. time, and by another in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, diverse things as Appeals, etc. were triable by the Civil Law. And he
said, That every Court has his several form of proceedings; and in every Court
that form is to be followed which it has anciently used: And as to the
proceedings he said, That first they do arrest the goods; 2. That afterward
the party ought to enter Caution, which is not a Bond, but only a Surety or
Security, which does bind the parties. And he said, That the word Haeredes was
necessary in the Instrument, For for the most part the Sureties were strangers:
And he said, That Court took no notice of the word (Executors) and therefore
the word Haeredes is used, which extends as well to Executors and
Administrators as to Heirs: And he said, That upon a Judgment given in the
Court of Admiraltie, they may sue forth an Execution of it in foreign parts, as
in France, etc. And he said, That if Contracts be made according to other Laws,
the same must be tried according to the Law of that Country the Contract is
made. Dr. James said, That in the same Court there are two manners of
proceedings; 1 The Manner, 2 the Customs of the Court are to be observed. And
he said, that Stipulation ought to be in the Court by coertion, which word is
derived (a stipite) by which the party is tied (as he said) as a Bear to the
stake, or as Ulysses to the Mast of the ship. And he said, In a Judicial
stipulation four things are considerable: 1 The Judicial Sistem; 2. Reparratum
habere; 3. Judicatum solvere; 4. De expensis solvendis, as appears in
Justinians Institutes cap de Satisdationibus: For Satisdatio and Stipulatio are
all one in the Civil Law. And after Cook Chief Justice said, That it ought to
be confessed that there has been a Court of Admiralty; 2. That their
proceedings there ought to be according to the Civil Law. And he observed four
things, 1. The Necessity of the Court, 2. The Antiquity of it, 3. The Law by
which they proceed, and lastly the Place to which they are confined. And as to
the necessity of the Court he said, That the Jurisdiction of that Court ought
to be maintained by reason of Trade and Traffic betwixt Kingdom and Kingdom;
for Trade and Traffic is as it were the life of every Kingdom. 2. A man's life
is in danger by reason of traffic, and Merchants venture all their estates;
and therefore it is but reasonable that they have a place for the trial of
Contracts made upon the Sea by them or their Factors. And for the Antiquity of
the Court, v. to E. 1. sitz. to Annuity. 7 R. 2. to trespass in Statham. And so
long as there has been any Commerce and Traffic by this Kingdom, so long
there has been a Court of Admiralty. 3. He said, The Court of Admiralty is no
Court of Record in which a Writ of Error lies, 37 H. 6. acc'. 4. He considered
the place: And that he said was of things super altum mare only, as appears
by the Stat. of 13 R. 2. And he said, That all the Ports and Havens within
England are infra corpus Comitatus; and vouched 23 H. 6. and 30 H. 6. Hollands
Case, who was Earl of Exeter and Admiral of England: who because he held plea
in the Court of Admiralty of a thing done infra Portam de Hull, damages were
recovered against him of 2000l. And he said, That if the Court and Civil Law be
allowed, then he said the Customs of that Court ought to be allowed; and he
said, That the Custom of the Civil Law is, That in no case the Surety is
chargeable, when the Principal is sufficient: And he agreed with the Doctors,
That the word Haeredes ought to be in the Stipulation, because those beyond the
Seas did not take any cognizance of the word Executors. Also he said, That they
may take the body in Execution, which are for the most part the Masters of the
ships and Merchants, who are transeuntes, and therefore if they could not
arrest their bodies they might perhaps many times lose the benefit of their
suits. But he said that in no case they might take forth Execution upon Lands.
And he said, That if a Contract be made in Paris in France, it shall be tried
either by the Common Law, or by the Law of France: and if it be tried here,
then those of France shall write to the Justices of England, and shall certify
the same unto them. And he said, That in Sir Robert Dudley's Case it was
allowed for good Law; where a Fine was levied and acknowledged in Orleance in
France, which was certified and allowed for good by the Common Law here in
England: But he said, That the Civil Law could not determine of the Fine. And
to conclude, he said, That no Custom can be good which is against an Act of
Parliament. The principal Case was adjourned.

Mich. 13 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 360. The MAYOR of YORK'S Case.
IN an Action of False Imprisonment brought, It was holden by the whole Court,
1. That no man can claim to hold a Court of Equity, viz of Chancery, by
Prescription; because every Prescription is against Common Right, and a
Chancery-Court is founded upon Common Right, and is by the Common Law. 2. It
was holden per Curiam, That the King by his Charter cannot grant to another any
of the Customs of London: But the like Liberties, Franchises and Customs as
London holds or uses, the King by his Letters Patents may grant. Quaere,
because the Customs in London are confirmed by Act of Parliament.

Mich. 13 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 361. LAMBERT and SLINGBY'S Case.
A Man brought an Action of Debt as Administrator, and took the Defendants body
in Execution. The Sheriff suffered him to escape. And afterward a Will was
found, by which Will the said Administrator is nominated Executor. The Question
now was, Whether he might maintain an Action against the Sheriff for the
Escape as Executor when he was but Administrator at the time: and it was the
opinion of the Court that the action of Debt against the Sheriff upon the
Escape would lie, and that the same Debt should be assets in the Executors
hands. And it was holden clear, That the Executor of an Executor might have
Debt upon the Escape, for that he is Executor to the first Testator; and
therefore a fortiori the Action in the principal Case would lie.

Mich. 13 Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 362.
IT was holden by the Court, That if a man present by Usurpation to my
Advowson, within six months I may have a Quare Impedit: But after the six
months past, if the Church become void, I cannot present, but am put to my
Writ of Right of Advowson. And that if a man usurpeth upon the King, he is put
to his Quare Impedit within the six months. And it was holden, That a double
Usurpation upon the King does put him to his Writ of Right. v. 22 and 24 E. 3
ac^.

Pasch. 13 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 363. OWEN alias COLLIN'S Case.
JOhn Owen alias Collins of Godstow in the County of Oxford, was indicted and
arraigned of High Treason, for speaking these traitorous English words at
Sandwich in the County of Kent, viz. If the King be excommunicate by the Pope,
it is lawful for every man to kill him, and it is no murder: For as it is
lawful to put to death a man that is condemned by a Temporal Judge, so it is
lawful to kill the King if he be excommunicate by the Pope: For that is the
execution of the Law, and this of the Popes supreme sentence; The Pope being
the greater, includes the King being the lesser. To which words he pleaded Not
guilty. And the Evidence to the Jury was, the Major of Sandwich, a Parson of
the same Town, and the Servant of the Town-Clark. And this was the sum of the
Evidence, That the said Owen coming from S. Lucar in Spain, spoke the said
words to diverse persons, who told them to the Major: whereupon the said Major
had conference with Owen, and then he spoke the like words unto the Major; and
thereupon the Major tendered unto him the Oath of Allegiance, which he refused
to take, and he put his hand to awriting containing the said words as his
opinion; and further said, That if he had twenty hands he would put them all to
it. The Exception which Owen took unto the Evidence given against him was, That
he did not speak of the King of England But the same was said to be a simple
Exception: For before he spoke the words to the Major, the Major asked him if
he were an Englishman, or not? To which he answered, that he was; and then
after, he spoke the said words to the Major, which must necessarily have
reference to the speeches which were before betwixt him and the Major. And Cook
Chief Justice said, That if he had not spoken of the King of England, but of
the King generally, yet it had included the King of England. The matter of his
Indictment of Treason was not grounded upon the Statute of Supremacy, but upon
the Common Law, of which the Statute of 25 ^. 3. is but an Expl^nation; which
was, his intent to compass the death of the King. And he said, That
notwithstanding that the words as to this purpose were but conditional, viz. If
he were Excommunicate, yet (he said) it was High Treason. For proof of which
two Cases were cited. The Duke of Buckingham, in the time of King Henry the 8.
said, That if the King should arrest him of High Treason, that he would stab
him with his dagger: and it was adjudged a present Treason. So was it also
adjudged in the Lord Stanley's Case, in the time of King Henry the 7. who
seeing a Young Man, said, That if he knew him to be one of the Sons of E. 4.
that he would aid him against the King. In the like manner a woman in the time
of Hen. 8. said, That if Henry the 8. would not take again his wife Queen
Katherine, that he should not live a year, but should die like a dog. So if
discontented persons with Enclosures say, That they will petition unto the King
about them, and (if) he will not redress the same, that then they will assemble
together in such a place and rebel: In these Cases it is a present Treason:
and he said, That in point of Allegiance none must serve the King with Ifs and
Ands. Further Cook Chief Justice said, That Faux the Gunpowder Traitor being
brought before King James, the King said to him, Wherefore would you have
killed me? Faux answered him, viz. Because you are excommunicated by the Pope.
How? said the King. He answered, Every Maunday-Thursday the Pope does
excommunicate all Her^tiques who are not of the Faith of the Church of Rome;
and you are within the same Excommunication. And afterward Owen was found
guilty, and Judgment of Treason was given against him.

Mich. 13 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 364. SIMPSON'S Case.
RIchard Simpson a Copyholder in Fee, jacens in extremis, made a Surrender of
his Copyhold habendum to an Enfant in ventrefamier and his heirs; and if such
Enfant die before his full age or marriage, then to John Simpson his brother
and his heirs. The Enfant is born, and dies within two months: Upon which
John was admitted, and a Woman as Heir-general to the Devisor and to the Enfant
is also admitted and enters into the Land, against whom John Simpson brought
an Action of Trespass, and it was adjudged against the Plaintiff. And two
points were resolved in this Case. 1. That a Surrender cannot begin at a day to
come, no more then a Livery, as it was adjudged 23 Eliz: in this Court in
Clarks Case. 2. That the Remaindor to John Simpson cannot be good, because it
was to commence upon a Condition precedent, which was never performed: And
therefore the Surrender into the hands of the Lord was void; for the Lord does
not take but as an Instrument to convey the same to another. And it was
therefore said, That if a Copyholder in Fee does surrender unto the use of
himself and his heirs, because that the Limitation of the use is void to him
who had it before, the Surrender to the Lord is void.

Trin. 13 Jacobi, in the Chancery. 365. The Lord GERARD'S Case.
IT was holden in the Chancery in the Lord Gerards Case against his Copyholds
of A^dley in the County of Stafford, That where by ancient Rolls of Court it
appears that the Fines of the Copyholds had been uncertain from the time of
King Hen. the 3 to the 19 of H. the 6. and from thence to this day had been
certain, Except twenty or thirty: That these few ancient Rolls did destroy the
Custom for certainty of Fine. But if from 19 H. 6. all are certain except a
few, and so uncertain Rolls before, the few shall be intended to have escaped,
and should not destroy the Custom for certain Fines.

Hill 13 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 366. BAGNAL and HARVEY'S Case.
IN a Writ of Partition it was found for the Plaintiff: And a Writ was awarded
to the Sheriff, that he should make the partition: And the Sheriff did
thereupon allot part of the Lands in severalty; and for other part of the
Lands, the Jurors would not assist him to make the partition. All which
appeared upon the Retorn of the Sheriff. And an Attachment was prayed against
the Jurors who refused to make the Partition; and a new Writ was prayed unto
the Sheriff. And the Court doubted what to do in the Case, whether to grant an
Attachment or not, and whether a new Writ to the Sheriff might be awarded; And
took time to advise upon it, and to see Presidents in the Case.

Hill. 13 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 367. BLANFORD'S Case.
A Man seized of Lands in Fee devised them unto his Wife for life, and
afterward to his two Sons, if they had not issue males, for their lives; and
if they had issue males, then to their issue males; and if they had not issue
males, then if any of them had issue male, to the said issue male. The wife
died, the sons entered into the lands, and then the eldest son had issue male
who afterward entered, and the younger son entered upon the issue and did
trespass and the issue brought an Action of Trespass: And it was adjudged by
the whole Court, that the Action was maintainable, because by the birth of the
issue male the lands were devised out of the two sons, and vested in the issue
male of the eldest. Crook Justice was against the three other Justices.

Hill 13 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 368. BROOK and GREGORY'S Case.
IN a Replevin the Defendant did avow the taking of the Cattle damage feasants.
And upon issue joined it was found for the Plaintiff in the Court at Winsor,
being a Three-weeks Court. And the Defendant brought a Writ of Error, and
assigned for Error, That the Entry of the Plaint in the said Court was the 7.
day of May, and the Plaintiff afterward did Declare there of a taking of the
Cattle the 25. day of May. And whether the same was Error, being in a
Three-weeks Court, was the Question* and 21 E. 4. 66. was alleged by Harris,
that it was no Error. But the Court held the same to be Error, because no
Plaint can be entered but at a Court; and this Entry of the Plaint was mesne
betwixt the Court days, and so the Declaration is not warranted, no ^ustome
being alleged to maintain such an Entry. 2. It was holden by the Court in
this Case, That (...) est erratum is pleaded, the Defendant cannot allege
Dim^^^tion because there is a perfect issue before. 3. It was holden, That a
(...) cannot allege Diminution of any thing which appears in the R^^^d to
be (...). And because the Defendant ^id allege Diminution (...) Case of the
Record, and by the Record it was certified that the (...) was entered the 25 day
of May, the same was not good after issue joined, and after Judgment is given
upon the ^^^ Record upon the first D^^^aration and Pleading in the said Court
of Winsor. And therefore the Judgment was reversed by the opinion of all the
Justices.

Hill. 13 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 369. BISSE and TYLER'S Case.
IN an Action of Trover and Conversion of goods, the Defendant said, That J. S.
was possessed of the said goods, and sold them unto him in open market. ^uaere
whether it be a good Plea, because it does amount to the general issue of Not
guilty. Curia avisare vult. And v. Tompsons Case, 4 Jac. in the Kings Bench, It
was adjudged that it was no good Plea.

Hill. 6 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 370. PAGINTON and HUET'S Case.
IN an Ejectione Firm the Case was this, That the Custom of a Manor in
Worcestershire was, That if any Copyholder do commit Felony, and the same be
presented by twelve Homagers, That the Tenant should forfeit his ^opyhold: And
it was presented in the Court of the Manor by the Homage, That H^^t the
Defendant had committed Felony. But afterward at the As^ises he was acquitted:
And afterward the Lord seized the Copyhold. And it was adjudged by the Court
that it was no good Custom, because in Judgment of Law before Attaindor it is
not Felony. The second point was, Whether the special Verdict agreeing with the
Presentment of the Homage, That the party had committed Felony, did entitle the
Lord to the Copyhold notwithstanding his Acquital. Quaere, For it was not
resolved.

Mich. 7 Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 371.
THe Custom of a Manor was, That the Heirs which claimed Copyhold by Descent,
ought to come at the first, second, or third Court upon Proclamations made, and
take up their Estates* or else that they should forfeit them. And a Tenant of
the Manor having Issue inheritable beyond the Seas, dyed: The Proclamations
passed, and the Issue did not return in twenty years. But at his coming over he
required the Lord to admit him to the Copyhold, and proffered to pay the Lord
his Fine: And the Lord, who had seized the Copyhold for a Forfeiture, refused
to admit him. And it was adjudged by the whole Court, That it was no
Forfeiture, because that the Heir was beyond the Seas at the time of the
Proclamations, and also because the Lord was at no prejudice because he
received the profits of the Lands in the mean time.

Mich. 14 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 372.
A Copyholder in Fee did surrender his Copyhold unto the use of another and his
heirs, which surrender was into the hands of two Tenants according to the
custom of the Manor to be presented at the next Court. And no Court was
holden for the Manor by the space of thirty years; within which time the
Surrenderor, Surrenderee, and the two Tenants all dyed: The heir of the
Surrenderor entered, and made a Lease for years of the Copyhold according to the
Custom of the Manor; And it was adjudged per Curia^^, That the Lease was good.

Mich. 14 Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 373. FROSWEL and WEICHES Case.
IT was adjudged, That where a Copyholder does surrender into the hands of
Copy-Tenants, That before Presentment the Heir of the Surrenderor may take the
profits of the Lands against the Surrenderee: For no person can have a Copyhold
but by admittance of the Lord. As if a man makes Livery within the view,
although it cannot be countermanded, yet the Feoffee takes nothing before his
entry: But it was agreed, That if the Lord does take knowledge of the
Surrender, and does accept of the customary Rent as Rent due from the Tenant
being admitted, that the same shall amount unto an Admittance, but otherwise if
he accept of it as a duty generally.

Mich. 5 Iacobi, in the Exchequer. 374.
IT was adjudged in the Exchequer, That where the King was Lord of a Manor,
and a Copyholder within the said Manor made a Lease for three lives, and made
Livery; and afterward the Survivor of the three continued in possession forty
years: And in that case because that no Livery did appear to be made upon the
Endorsment of the Deed, (although in truth there was Livery made) that the same
was no forfeiture of which the King should take any advantage. And in that case
it was cited to be adjudged in Londons case, That if a Copy-Tenant does bargain
and sell his Copy-Tenement by Deed indented and enrolled, that the same is no
forfeiture of the Copyhold of which the Lord can take any advantage. And so was
it holden in this Case.

Pasch. 14 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench 375. FRANKLIN'S Case.
LAnds were given unto one and to the heirs of his body, Habendum unto the
Donee, unto the use of him, his heirs and assigns for ever. In this ^ase two
points were resolved. 1. That the Limitation in the Habendum did not increase
or alter the Estate contained in the premises of the Deed. 2. That Tenant in
Tail might stand seized to an use expressed, but such use cannot be averred*

Hill. 13 Iacobi, in the Chancery. 376 WINSCOMB and DUNCHES Case.
VVInscomb having issue two sons, conveyed a Manor unto his eldest son, and to
the daughter of Dunch for life, for the jointure of the wife, the Remainder to
the (...). The son having no issue his Father-in-law Dunch procured him by Deed
indented, to bargain and sell to him the Manner. The Barg^ynor being sick, who
died before enrolment of the Deed within the (...) Deed ^ot being acknowledged:
And (...) the (...) coming to be enrolled, the Clark who enrolled the same, did
pro^^^e. Wa^^^nt from the Master of the Rolls, who under-^^^ upon the De^^,
(...) the Deed be enrolled upon Affidavit made of the delivery of the Deed by
one of the Witnesses to the same. And afterward the Deed was e^^^^d within the
six months. And the opinion of the Court was^ That (...) Conveyance was a good
Conveyance in Law. And therefore the younger brother exhibited his Bill in
Chanchery, pretending the Conveyance to be made by practice, without any
Consideration.

Mich. 15 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 377 LUDLOW and STACI^S Case.
A Man bargained and sold Land by Deed indented, bearing date 11 Junii 1
Jacobi. Afterward 12 Junii. The same year Common was granted unto the
Bargainee for all manner of Cattle commonable upon the Land. 15 Junii the^
Deed of Bargain and Sale was enrolled. And it was adjudged a good grant of the
Common. And the Enrolment shall have Relation as to that, although for
collateral things it shall not have relation.

Hill. 15 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 378.
NOte that it was held by Dodderidge Justice, and Mountagu Chief Justice,
against the opinion of Haughton Justice, That if Lessee for years covenanteth
to repair and sustein the houses in as good plight as they were at the time of
the Lease made; and afterward the Lessee assigns over his Term, and the
Lessor his Reversion: That the Assignee of the Reversion shall maintain an
Action of Covenant for the breach of the Covenants against the first Lessee.

Hill. 15 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 379. SMITH and STAFFORD'S Case.
A Man promised a Woman, That if she would marry with him, that if he dyed, and
she did survive him, that he would leave unto her 100^. They entermarried; and
then the husband dyed, not performing his promise. The wife sued the Executor
of her husband upon the said promise. And whether the duty did survive with the
wife, or were extinguished by the entermarriage, was the Question. And H^bart
Chief Justice and Warburton were against Winch and Hutton Justices, That the
marriage was a Release or discharge of the 100^. Quaere.

Hill. 15 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench 380. PLOT'S Case.
AN En^ant brought an Assise in the Kings Bench for Lands in Mich depending
which, The Tenant in the same Assise brought an Assise for the same Lands in
the Common Pleas; which last Writ bore date and was recornable after the first
Writ. And the Demandant in the second Writ did recover against the Enfant by
default, by the A^^^se who found the Seisin and Disseisin. And upon a Plea in
(...) of the first Assise of that Recovery, the Enfant by way of Replication
set forth all the special matter, And that the De^andant at the time of the
second Writ brought was Tenant of the Land: And prayed that he might (...) the
Recovery. And it was adjudged, That he might falsify the Recovery. For in all
Cases where a man shall not have Error, no^ ^^taint, he may Falsify: But in
this case he could not have Error nor Attaint, because the Judgment in the
Common Pleas was not given only upon the Default, but also upon the Verdict.
And it should be in vain for him to bring an Attaint, because he shall not be
(...) to give other Evidence then what was given at the first Trial. Also he
shall falsify the Recovery, because it was a practice to defeat and take away
the Right of the Enfant, and to leave him without any remedy whatsoever.

Pasch 16 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 381, INGIN and PAYN'S Case.
LEssee for years was bounden in a Bond to deliver the possession of a house
unto the Lessor, his heirs and assigns upon demand at the end of the term. The
Lessor did bargain and sell the Rendition by Deed enrolled to two: One of the
Bargainees at the end of the term demanded the Delivery of the Possession: The
Lessee refused, pretending that he had no notice of the bargain and sale. It
was adjudged that the Bond was forfeited.

Pasch. 16 Iacobi, in the Common Pleas. 382. JERMYN and COOPER'S Case.
A Man by Deed gave Lands to A. and to a Feme sole, and to their heirs and
assigns for ever; Habendum to them and to the heirs of their bodies, the
Remainder to them and the survivor of them for ever. And it was adjudged by the
Court, That they had an Estate in tail, with the Fee-simple Expectant

Pasch. 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 383.
A Man was Indicted De verberationem and vulnerationem of J. S. and the words
(vi and armis) were left out of the Indictment. And the same was adjudged to be
helped by the Statute, and that the Indictment was good.

Mich. 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 384. BARNWEL and PELSIE'S Case.
A Parson did Covenant and grant by Deed with one of his Parishioners, That in
consideration of Six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence per annum be paid
unto him, that the said Parishioner should be discharged of all Tithes upon
condition to be void upon default of payment. Afterward the Parson against his
grant did sue the Parishioner in the Spiritual Court for Tithes in kind; and
it was moved for a Prohibition. But the Court would not grant it, because that
the Original, viz. the Tithes, do belong to spiritual jurisdiction. But it
was said, that the Parishioner might have an Action of Covenant against the
Parson upon the Deed in the Temporal Court.

385. Posch: 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for speaking of these words, viz. J. S. 34
years since had two Bastards, and has paid for the nursing of them. And the
Plaintiff showed, that by reason of these words, contention grew betwixt him
and his wife, almost to a Divorce. And it was adjudged, That an Action would
not lie for the words. And the Chief Justice said, That an Action upon the Case
does not lie for every ill word, but for words by speaking of which the
Plaintiff is damnified, and that cannot be in this Case, the time being so long
past. And the causes wherefore a man shall be punished for saying that a man
has a Bastard, are two^ the one, because by the Statute of 14 Eliz. the
offender is to be punished for the same: And secondly, because the party by
such means is discredited, or hindered in his preferment.

Hill 16 Iacobi in the Kings Bench. 386 HURLSTON and WODROFS Case.
HEnry Hurlston was Plaintiff against Robert Wodroffe in an Action of Debt upon
a Demise of a Message with a Sheep-walk, the Latin word being (Ovile.) And it
was moved in arrest of Judgment after a verdict found for the Plaintiff, That
the sheepwalk was not alleged to be appurtenant nor pleaded to be by Grant by
Deed. But notwithstanding that it was ruled by the whole Court, because it
rested indifferent whether there was a grant by Deed or not: That when the Jury
find that the Sheep-walk did pass, it shall be intended that there was a Deed.
Dodderidge Justice in the Argument of this Case did hold, That by the word
(Ovile) although it be translated in English a Sheep-walk, yet a Sheep-walk did
not pass by it but a Sheep-Cote, and by that the Land it self did pass.

Hill. 16 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 387. HILL and WADE'S Case.
HIll brought an Action upon the Case against Wade, and declared upon an
Assumpsit to pay money upon request; and did not allege the Request certain:
but issue was joined upon another point, and found for the Plaintiff, That the
failing of certain alleging of the Request in the Declaration made the same
insufficient. And so it was adjudged by the Court with this difference, where
it was a duty in the Plaintiff before, and where the Request makes it a duty:
For in the first case the Plaintiff need not allege the Request precisely,
but otherwise in the later. Dodderidge Justice put this Case. If I promise J.
S. in consideration that he will marry my daughter, to give him 20^. upon
request, there the day and place of the request ought to be alleged in the
Declaration. Montagu Chief Justice cited 18 E. 4. and 5 H. 7. to be contrary,
viz. That the finding of the Jury made the Declaration which was vicious to be
good: As if Executors plead, That they have nothing in their hands the day of
the Action brought, it is insufficient; But if the Jury find Assets it is good,
and so by consequence the Verdict shall supply the defect of Pleading. But the
Court held these books to be good Law, and not to be contrary, and well
reconciled with this difference: For there the Plea was naught only in matter
of circumstance; but otherwise it is where it is vicious in substance, as in
this case it is. And a difference also was taken where the Verdict does perfect
all which is material and ought to be expressed, and where not: For in the
principal Case, notwithstanding that the Jury find the Assumpsit yet the same
does not reach to the Request, and without that the Assumpsit is void,
Dodderidge Justice cited 5 E. 4. That if the Declaration be vicious in a point
material, and issue is taken upon another point, there the finding of it by the
Jury does not make the Declaration to be good. And so in the principal Case
Judgment was given for the Defendant. In this Case it was agreed, That if a man
bring an Action of Trover and Conversion, and not allege a place where the
Conversion was Although the issue for the Trover be found for the Plaintiff,
yet he shall not have Judgment.

Hill. 16 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 388. GODFREY and DIXON'S Case.
Cornelius Godfrey brought an Action of Debt upon a Lease against Dixon, and
declared, That Cornelius Godfrey his Father being an Alien, had issue Daniel
Godfrey born in Flanders: the Father is made a Denizen, and has issue the
Plaintiff his second son born in England. The Father dies: Daniel is
Naturalized by Act of Parliament, and made the Lease to Dixon for years
rendering Rent and dyed without issue: And the Plaintiff his brother brought an
Action of Debt for the Arrearages as heir, and upon that it was demurred in
Law. And George Crook in his Argument said, That Inheritance is by the
Common Law, or by Act of Parliament: And that three persons cannot have heirs
in travnsersali linea, but in recta linea, viz. 1. A Bastard, 2. A person
Attainted, 3. An Alien; see for that 39 E. 39. Plow. Dom. 445. 17. E. 4. 1. 22
H. 6. 38. 3 E. 1. sitz. to Cousinage 5. and Dr. and Student. And he said, That
Denization by the Kings Charter does not make the heir inheritable, 36 H. 8.
Br. to Denizen, and C. 7. part. 77. And he said, That he who inheriteth ought
to be, 1. Next of blood, 2. Of the whole blood, and 3. He ought to derive his
Pedigree and descent from the stock and root, Bracton lib. 2. fol. 51. And he
said, That if a man does covenant to stand seized to the use of his brother
being an Alien, that the same is not good and the use will not rise: But that
was denied by the Court. And he said, That an Alien should not have an Appeal
of the death of his brother: And he took a difference betwixt an Alien and a
person Attainted; and said, that the one was of corrupt blood, the other of no
blood, and cited 9 E. 4. 7. and 36 Eliz. Hobby's Case. Dodderidge upon the
argument of this Case said, That if a man claim as Cousin and Heir, he must
show how he is Cousin and Heir; but not when he claims as Brother, or Son and
Heir. The Case was adjourned.

Hill. 16 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench 389 GRAY'S Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon a Bond with Condition to stand to an
Arbitrament, and also that he should not begin proceed in, or prosecute any
suit against the Obliger before such a Feast. The Obliger did continue a Suit
formerly brought. George Crook said, That the Bond was forfeited, because it is
the act of the Obliger to continue or discontinue a suit, and profit accrues to
him, therefore it shall be adjudged his act: But it is otherwise of an Essoin,
because that that may be cast by a stranger. And he cited the books of 36 H. 6.
2. 5 H. 7. 22 14 E. 41. 18 H. 6. 9. And he held, That it was a good Award to
continue, or discontinue a suit, because it is in the power of the party to do
it, or not.

Hill. 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 390 SLYE'S Case:
IN a Scire facias to have Execution, the Sheriff returned, That by virtue of
a Writ of Fieri facias he took the goods in Execution ad valentiam of 11l.
which remained in his custody for want of buyers, and that they were rescued
out of his possession. Mountagu Chief Justice and Dodderidge Justice, The
Plaintiff shall have an Execution against the Sheriff; and relied upon the
book of 9 E. 4. 50. and 16 E. 4. Faulconbridge Case. 7 Eliz. Dyer 241. 5 E. 3.
to Execution, and C. 5. par. Pettifers Case. And Dodderidge said, That by this
Retorn he had concluded himself, and was liable to the value of 11l. And he
took this difference, where the Sheriff by virtue of the Writ Venditioni
exponas sels the thing under the value, there he shall be discharged, but
otherwise where he sels the goods ex officio. Crook. and Haughton Justices, The
Plaintiff shall not have a Scire facias against the Sheriff, but where he
has the money in his purse: And they said, That the Plaintiff must have a
Distringas directed to the new Sheriff, or a Venditioni exponas. Note, the
Court was divided in opinion: But the Law seems to be with Crook and Haughton;
and the books before cited prove their difference, and warrant it.

Hill 16 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 391 Sir JOHN BRET and CUMBERLAND'S Case.
IN an Action of Covenant brought by Sir John Bret against Cumberland Executor
of I. C. the Case was this. Q. Eliz. by her Letters Patents did demise a Mill
unto the Testator for 30 years reserving Rent; and these words were in the
Letters Patent viz. That the Lessee, his Executors and Assigns should repair
the Mill during the Term. The Lessee assigned over all his interest unto Fish,
who attorned Tenant and paid the Rent to the Queen; and afterward the Queen
granted the Reversion to Sir John Bret and Margaret his wife. The Assignee is
accepted Tenant; the Mill came to decay for want of Reparations, and Sir John
Bret brought an Action of Covenant against the Executor of the first Lessee;
And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. And Dodderidge Justice gave the reasons
of the Judgment, 1. Because that by the Statute of 32 H. 8. all the benefit
which the Queen had was transferred to the Grantee of the Reversion. 2. It
might be parcel of the Consideration, to have the Covenant against the Lessee;
For a Mill is a thing which without continual Reparations will be ruinous and
perish and decay: And he said* That the Assignee had his election to bring his
Action against the Lessee or against the Assignee, because it was a Covenant
which did run with the Land. Mountagu Chief Justice said, That the reason of
the three Cases put in Walkers Case is in respect of the Interest: And took a
difference where there is privity of Contract, and where not. It was adjourned.

Hill. 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 392. WEBB and TUCK'S Case.
IN an Action of False Imprisonment it was agreed, That a Fine may be assessed
for Vert and Venison. And it was said in this Case by the Justices, That a
Regarder is an Officer of whom the Law takes knowledge; and so are Justices in
Air. 2. It was agreed, That such things of which the Law takes notice ought to
be pleaded 3. That if a man in his pleading is to set forth the jurisdiction of
the Court of Justices in Air, if he say Curia tent. etc. he need not set forth
all the Formalities of it. And Mountagu Chief Justice in this Case said, That
if a man do justify for diverse causes, and some of the causes are not good,
the same does not make the whole Justification to be void, but it is void for
that only, and good for the residue*

Hill. 16 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 393, CULLIFORDS Case.
CVlliford and his Wife brought an Action upon the Case against Knight for
words: And declared upon these words viz. Thou art Luscombs Hackney, a pockey
Whore, and a theevish Whore, and I will prove thee to be so; which was found
for the Plaintiff; And in arrest of Judgment it was moved that the words were
not Actionable, which was agreed by the whole Court quia verba accipienda sunt
in mitiori sens^^^ And Judgment was stayed accordingly.

Hill. 16. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 371.
IN an Action upon the Case for Words: The Plaintiff did relate that he was
brought up in the Study of a Mathematition, and a Measurer of Land: And that
he was a Surveyor: and that the Defendant spoke these words of him, viz. Thou
art a Cosener and a cheating Knave, and that I can prove. And the opinion of
the Court was, That the words were actionable: And Montague Chief Justice, said
that it was ruled accordingly in 36 Eliz. Rot. 249. betwixt Kirby and Walter.
And a Surveyor is an Officer of whom the Statute of 5. E. 6. takes notice: And
he said, that Verba de persona intelligenda sunt de Condition personae: And he
said that the words are Actionable in regard it is a faculty to be a Measuror
of Lands. But Dodderidg Justice put it with a difference, viz. Betwixt a
Measurer of Land by the Pole, and one who uses the Art of Geometry or any of
the Mathematics; for he said that in the first Case it is no scandal, for that
his Credit is not impeached thereby; but it is contrary in the other Case,
because to be a Geometritian or Mathematitian is an Art or faculty which every
man does not attain unto. And he put this Case: If a man be Bailiffe of my
Manor, there no such words can discredit him; and by consequence he shall not
have an Action for the words, because the words do not found in discredit of
his Office; because the same is not an Office of Skill, but an Office of
Labor, quod nota.

Hill. 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 395. BISHOP and TURNERS Case.
IN a Prohibition it was holden by the whole Court, That for such things as a
Churchwarden does ratione officii no Action will lie by his successor against
him in the Spiritual Court; and a Churchwarden is not an Officer but a Minister
to the Spiritual Court; But it was holden that a Churchwarden by the Common Law
may maintain an Action upon the Case for defacing of a Monument in the Church.

Trin. 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 396. BLACKSTON and HEAP'S Case.
IN an Action of Debt for Rent, the Case was this: A man possessed of a Term
for 20 years in the right of his Wife made a Lease for 10 years, rendering Rent
to him his Executors and assigns and died. The Question was, whether the
Executors or the Wife should have the Rent: Haughton and Crook, Justices
against Montague Chief Justice (Doddridg being absent) that the Rent was gone:
But it was agreed by them all that the Executors of the Husband should not have
it; But Montague held that the Wife should have it. But it was agreed that if
Lessee for 20 years makes a Lease for 10 years, and afterward surrendreth his
Term, that the Rent is gone: And yet the Term for 10 years continues. And in
the principal Case, If the Husband after the Lease made had granted over the
Reversion, his grantee should not have the Rent. But Montague said, that in
that Case the Wife in Chancery might be Releived for the Rent.

Mich. 16 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 397. WAIT and the Inhabitants of STOKE'S
Case.
Wait a Clothier of Nubery was robbed in the Hundred of Stoke of 50l. upon the
Saboth day in the time of Divine Service. The Question was whether the Hundred
were chargeable or not for not making out Hue and Cry. And 3 of the Justices
were against Montague Chief Justice, that they were chargeable, For they said
that the apprehending of Thieves was a good work, and fit for the Saboth day,
and also fit for the Commonwealth. Montague Chief Justice agreed that it was
bonum opus; and that it might be lawfully done: But he said that no man might
be compelled upon any penalty to do it upon that day: For he said, That if he
has a Judgment against I. S. and he comes to the Parish Church where I. S. is
with the Sheriff, and shows unto the Sheriff I. S. upon the Saboth day, and
commands the Sheriff to do his Office, If the Sheriff do arrest I. S. in
Execution upon that day, it is good, but if he does not arrest him it is no
escape in the Sheriff. And he took a difference betwixt Ministerial Acts and
Judicial Acts, for the first might be done upon the Saboth day; but Judicial
Acts might not. But the case was adjudged according to the opinion of the three
other Justices.

Pasch. 17 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 398. SPICER and SPICE'S Case.
UPon a special Verdict the Case was this: A man seized of Gavilkind Land,
devised the same to his Wife for life, paying out of it 3l. per annum to his
eldest son, and also devised the Land to his second Son paying 3l. per annum to
his third Son, and 20s to such a one his Daughter* and whether the second Son
had the Land for his life or in Fee, was the Question. And it was adjudged that
he had a Fee-simple in it by reason of the payment of the Collateral Sums of
3l. and 20s. to his brother and sister: which charge to the brother might
continue afafter the death of the Devisee; and if he should have but an estate
for life, his charge should continue longer then his own estate: And so it was
adjudged.

Mich. 17 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 399.
IN a Habeas Corpora, which was to remove two men who were imprisoned in
Norwich, The Case was this, That within Norwich there was a Custom that two men
of the said place should be chosen yearly to make a Feast for the Bailiffs; and
upon refusal for to do it, that they should be Fined and imprisoned, which two
men brought to the Bar by the Habeas Corpra were imprisoned for the same
cause; It was urged and much stood upon, That the Custom was no good Custom for
the causes and reasons which are delivered in Baggs Case in C. 11. part. But
yet at the last the Court did remand them, and held that the Custom might be
good.

Mich. 17 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 400.
IN an Evidence, in an Ejectione firm for Land in the County of Hartford the
Case was this, A man was married unto a woman and died. The wife after 40 weeks
and 10 days was delivered with child of a daughter; and whether the said
daughter should be heir to her Father, or should be bastard, was the Question;
and Sir William Padde Knight, and Dr Montford Physicians, were commanded by
the, Court to attend and to deliver their opinions in the Case; who being upon
their Oaths, delivered their opinions, That such a child might be a lawful
daughter and heir to her Father; For as wellas an Antenatus might be heir, viz.
a child born at the end of 7 months, so they said might a Postnatus, viz. child
born after the 40 weeks, although that 40 weeks be the ordinary time: And if it
be objected that our Savior Christ was born at 9 months and five days end, who
had the perfection of Nature, To that it may be answered, That that was
miraeulum, and amplias. And they held that by many Authorities and by their own
Experiences a child might be Legitimate, although it be born the last day of
the 10^h Month after the conception of it, accounting the Months, per Menses
solares, and non Lunares.

Hill. 17 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 401. WEBB and PATERNOSTERS Case.
A Man gave License unto another to set a Cock of Hay upon his Meadow, and to
remove the same in reasonable time; and afterward he who gave the License,
made a Lease of the Meadow to the Defendant, who put his Cattle into the Meadow,
which did eat the Hay: And for that the Paintiffe brought his Action of
Trespass. And upon Demurrer joined, the Court was of opinion against the
Plaintiff: For upon the whole matter it appeared, That the said Hay had stood
upon the said ground or Meadow for 2 years: which the Court held to be an
unreasonable time.

Mich. 18 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 402. BROWN and PELL's Case.
IN an Ejectione firm upon a special Verdict found, the Case was this Brown
had issue two Sons, and devised his Lands to his youngest Son and his Heirs;
And if it shall happen his said youngest Son to die without issue living his
eldest Son, That then his eldest Son should have the Lands to him and his Heirs
in as ample manner as the youngest Son had them; The youngest Son suffered a
Common Recovery, and died without issue living the eldest Son; The Question was
whether the eldest Son or the Recoverer should have the ^ands; Montague,
Haughton and Chamberlain Justices; The same is a Fee-simple Conditional, and no
Estate Tail in the youngest Son, Doddridge Justice contrary.

Mich. 18. Jacobi in the Kings Bench. 403. POLLYES Case.
IN an Action of Trespass, It was agreed by the Court: If 2 Tenants in Common
be of Lands upon which Trees are growing, and one of them felleth the Trees and
lays them upon his Freehold, If the other enters into the ^and and carries
them away, an Action of Trespass Quaere clausum fregit lies against him;
because the taking away of the Trees by the first was not wrongful, but that
which he might well do by Law: And yet the other Tenant in Common might have
seized them before they were carried off from the Land; But if a man do
wrongfully take my Goods, as a Horse, etc. and puts the same upon his Land,
I may enter into his Land and seize my Horse again; But if he put the Goods
into his House, in such Case I cannot enter into his House and retake my Goods;
because every man's House is his Castle, into which another man may not enter
without special Li^ence.

Hill. 19 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 404.
THe Case was, That two Tenants in Common of Lands made a Lease thereof for
years rendering Rent, and then one of them died: And the Question was, who
should have the Rent; And if the Executor of him who died and the other might
join in an Action for the Rent; And as this Case was, The opinion of the whole
Court was, That the Executor and the other might join in one Action for the
Rent, or sever in Action at their pleasures. But if the Lease had been made for
life rendering Rent; The Court was clear of opinion that they ought to sever in
Actions.

Trin. 20 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 405.
A Man was bounden in a Bond by the name of Edmond, and his true name was
Edward* And an Action of Debt was brought against the Executors of Edmond upon
the said Bond, who demanded Oyer of the Bond, and then pleaded that it was not
the Deed of their Testator; and issue being thereupon joined, It was found by
Inquest in London to be his Deed, viz. the Deed of Edmond; And it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, Quod querens nihil caperet per Billam and so it was
resolved and adjudged by the Court (Doddridge only being absent) And a Case was
vouched by Henage Finch Recorder of London, to prove this case, That it was so
adjudged in a Case of Writ of ErError brought in the Exchequer-Chamber; in
which Case the party himself upon such a Misnosmer, and after a Verdict and
Judgment given in the same Case, did reverse the Judgment for this Error.

Mich. 14 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 406. VESEY's Case.
William Vesey was indicted for erecting of a Dove-house. And Sergeant Harvey
moved, That the Indictment was insufficient. the words were, That the Defendant
erexit Columbare vi and armis ad commune nocumentum, etc. and that he was not
Dominus Manerii nes Rector Ecclesiae. And the Indictment was quashed, because
it was not contained in the Indictment that there were Doves in the Dove-cote:
For the mere erecting of a Dove-cote, if there be no Doves kept in it, it is no
Nusans, as it was holden by the Justices.

Mich. 15 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 407 Sir WILLIAM BRONKER's Case.
SIR William Bronker brought an Action upon the Case for slanderous words: And
he showed in his Declaration how that he was a Knight, and one of the Gentlemen
of His Majesty's Privy-Chamber; And that the Defendant spoke of him these
scandalous words, viz. Sir William Bronker is a Cosening Knave, and lives by
Cosenage. Which was found for the Plaintiff. In arrest of Judgment it was
moved that the words were not actionable, And so it was adjudged per Curiam.

Pasch. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 408. YATE and ALEXANDER's Case.
YAte brought an action upon the Case against Alexander Attorney of the Kings
Bench; and declared, That the Plaintiff in an action of Debt brought against
Alexander the Defendant who was Executor to his Father, had Judgment to recover
against him as Executor, and that he sued forth a Fieri facias to the Sheriff
to have Execution: and that before the Sheriff could come to levy the debt and
serve the Execution, the Defendant A secret and fraudulenter vendidit, amovit
and disposuit of all the Testators goods, For which cause the Sheriff was
constrained to retorn Nulla bona, etc. Ley Chief Justice said, That the Action
would well lie, because the Sheriff could not retorn a Devastavit, because the
goods were secretly conveyed away, so as the Sheriff could not tell whether he
had sold or otherwise disposed of the said goods, and also because the
Plaintiff is destitute of all remedy by any other Action. To which Dodderidge
Justice did agree* But Haughton Justice was against it: For he said, That if
one be to bring an action of Debt against the Heir, if the Heir sells the
Land which he has by descent from his ancestors before the action brought, an
action upon the Case will not lie against him for so doing. Dodderidge said,
That the Case which was put by Haughton was not like to this Case: For in this
Case if the Sheriff had, or could have returned a Devastavit, the action upon
the Case would not have lien; But here the Sheriff has not returned any
Devastavit: And the sale being secretly made, the Sheriff could not safely
retorn a Devastavit, for so perhaps he might be in danger of an action upon the
Case to be brought against him for making of such a Retorn. The Case was
adjourned till another day.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 409. WILLIAMS and GIBB's Case.
NOte in this Case it was said by Ley Chief Justice, That whatsoever is allowed
for Divine service, or whatsoever comes in lieu of Tithes and Offerings, the
same is now become a thing Ecclesiastical. And Dodderidge Justice also said,
That no Law does appoint that the Vicar or Parson should read Divine Service in
two several Parish-Churches, but only the Ecclesiastical Law.

Pasch. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 410. STEWRY and STEWRY'S Case.
A Bill was exhibited into the Court of Chancery for the traversing of an
Office, who found one to be in Ward to the King: and the parties were at issue
super seperales exitus; And a Venire facias was awarded out of the Chancery
retornable in the Kings Bench, directed to the Sheriff Quod venire faciat 12
homines triare (placita traversiae) super seperales exitus. And it was moved,
That the several Issues ought to be expressed in the Venire facias. Dodderidge
Justice, It ought not to be (Placita traversiae) For it shall never be called
Placitum, but when it is at (...) Kings suit. And the opinion of the Court was,
That the Venire facias should be amended, and that the several Issues should be
expressed therein; and Young's Case 20 Jacobi was cited for a President in the
very point.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 411. ASTLEY and WEBB'S Case.
IN an Ejectione Firm the words (vi and armis) were omitted out of the
Plaintiffs Declaration: And although this was the default of the Clark, yet the
same could not be amended, but it made the Declaration not to be good.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 412. WHITE and EDWARD'S Case.
IN Trespass, Edwards the Defendant being a Clark of the Chancery, after an
Imparlance could not be suffered to plead his Privilege. It was moved in this
Case, That the Declaration was viginti opali vocate Wythies; And it was said it
should have been (anglice) and not vocate: But the opinion of the Court was,
that (vocate) was as good as anglice. Then it was moved, that the Declaration
was, That the Defendant had felled twenty Pearches of Hedging whereas it ought
to have been, that the Defendant had felled a Hedge containing twenty Pearches;
for a man cannot cut a Mathematical Pole. But the Court said, That the
Declaration was good notwithstanding that; and cited 17 E. 4. 1. where a man
sells twenty Acres of Corn, and there Exception was taken to it as it is here,
viz. That it ought to have been twenty Acres sowed with Corn: but it was no
good Exception there, No more was it as the Court said in this Case; for it is
the common speech to say, Twenty perches of hedging, A pint of wine, An acre of
corn, etc. And therefore the Declaration was ruled to be good, notwithstanding
these Exceptions which were taken to it by Sergeant Headley.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 413. BRIDGES and MILL's Case.
AN action upon the Case was brought for speaking of these words, viz. Thou
(inuendo the Plaintiff) have ravished a woman twice, And I will make thee
stand in a white sheet for it. Henden Sergeant moved in arrest of Judgment,
That the action would not lie for the words: For he said, That by the
Common Law Rape was not Felony, but Trespass, v. Stamford 23. 6. But now by the
Statute of West. 2. cap. 34. it is made Felony: And he said, That the later
words, viz. (stand in a white sheet) does mitigate the former words, by reason
that in the former words the word (Felonice) was omitted; as the Case is in C.
4. par. 20. Barhams Case, where the words Thou did burn my Barn, and did not
say, My Barn full of Corn, nor that it was parcel of his Mansion House, and
therefore the action would not lie: For unless the Barn were full with corn,
or part of a dwelling house, it is not Felony. Like unto Humfries Case adjudged
in the Common Pleas, where an action upon the Case was brought for these words,
Thou have picked my Pocket and taken away ten shillings: And it was adjudged
that the action would not lie, For he did not say that he had stolen ten
shillings; But if he had said nothing but Thou have picked my pocket, then the
action would have been maintainable. Ley and Dodderidge Justices, By the
Common Law Rape was Felony, and in the said Statute the word Felony is not,
although it be used in the Indictment. It was adjourned: But the opinion of the
Court seemed to be, That the action would lie for the words.

Pasch. 21 Iacobi, in the Star Chamber. 414. Sir HENRY FINES Case.
IN the Case of Sir Henry Fines in the Star Chamber, Exception was taken to one
of the Witnesses, viz. to Dr. Spicer, because that he stole Plate, and had been
pardoned for it. But notwithstanding the Exception, the Court did allow of the
Testimony of the said Dr. Spicer. And then Hobart Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas cited Cuddingtons Case Hill. 13 Jacobi, to be adjudged. Cuddington
brought an action upon the Case for calling him Thief: The Defendant justified
that such a day and year he stole a Horse: The Plaintiff replied, That the
King had given him a Pardon for all Felonies: And it was adjudged that the
Action did lie. Afterward at another day Jones and Dodderidge Justices put the
Case more largely, viz. Cuddington committed Felony 44 Eliz. and 1 Jacobi by
the General Pardon he was pardoned. And they said, That he who procures a
Pardon, confesses himself to be guilty of the offense: But by the general
Pardon it is not known whether he be guilty or not; and in Cuddingtons Case it
was a general Pardon, and that was the cause that the Action did lie, for that
it is not known whether he committed the Felony or not. But they conceived that
if it had been a particular Pardon, that then in that case the Action would not
have been maintainable: For the procuring of a special Pardon does presuppose,
and it is a strong presumption that the party is guilty of the offense. Note,
it did not appear in the Case of Fines the principal Case, whether the Pardon
by which Dr. Spicer was pardoned were a general Pardon, or whether it were a
particular and special Pardon.

Pasch. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 415. DAVER's Case.
IN Davers Case who was arraigned for the death of William Dutton, Ley Chief
Justice delivered it for Law, That if two men voluntarily fight together, and
the one kills the other, if it be upon a sudden quarrel, that the same is but
Manslaughter. And if two men fight together, and the one flies as far as he
can, and he which flies kills him who does pursue him, the same is Se
defendendo. Also if one man assaulteth another upon the Highway, and he who is
assaulted kills the other, he shall forfeit neither life, nor lands nor
goods, if he that killed the other fled so far as he could. Quod nota.

Pasch: 21 Jacobi, ^n the Court of Wards. 416. Sir EDWARD COKE's Case.
THis Case being of great consequence and concernment, The Master of the Court
of Wards was assisted by four of the Judges in the hearing and debating of it:
and after many Arguments at the Bar, the said four Judges argued the same in
Court, viz. Dodderidge one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Tanfield Lord
chief Baron of the Exchequer, Hobart Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas, and Ley Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench: The
Case in effect was this: Queen Elizabeth by her Letters Patents did grant to
Sir Christopher Hatton the Office of Remembrancer and Collector of the first
Fruits for his life, Habendum to him after the death or surrender of one
Godfrey who held the said Office then in possession; Sir Christopher Hatton
being thus estated in the said Office in Reversion, and being seized in
Fee-simple of diverse Manors, Lands and Tenements, did Covenant to stand
seized of his said lands, etc. unto the use of himself for life, and afterward
to the use of J. Hatton his son in tail, and so to his other sons intail; with
the Remainder to the right heirs, of J. Hatton in Fee, with Proviso of
Revocation at his pleasure during his life. Godfrey the Officer in possession
died, and Sir Christopher Hatton became Officer and was possessed of the
Office, and afterward he became indebted to the Queen by reason of his said
Office; And the Question in this great Case was, Whether the Manors and Lands
which were so conveyed and settled by Sir Christopher Hatton, might be extended
for the said Debt due to the Queen, by reason of the Proviso and Revocation in
the said Conveyance of Assurance of the said Manors and Lands, the debt due to
the Queen was assigned over, and the Lands extended, and the Extent came to Sir
Edward Coke, and the heir of John Hatton sued in the Court of Wards to make
void the Extent: And it was agreed by the said four Justices, and so it was
afterward decreed by Cranfield Master of the Court of Wards, and the whole
Court, That the said Manors and Lands were liable to the said Extent.

And Dodderidge Justice who argued first, said that the Kings Majesty had
sundry prerogatives for the Recovery of Debts and other Duties owing unto him:
First he had this prerogative, ab origin legis, That he might have the Lands,
the Goods, and the Body of the Person his Debtor in Execution for his Debt. But
at the Common Law a common person; a common person could not have taken the
body of his debtor in execution for his debt: but the same privilege was given
unto him by the Statute of 25. E. 3. cap. 17. At the Common Law he said that a
common person Debtee might have had a Levari facias for the Recovery of his
Debt, by which Writ the Sheriff was commanded Quod de terris and Catallis
ipsius, the Debtor, etc. Levari faciat, etc. but in such Case the Debtee did
not meddle with the Land, but the Sheriff did collect the Debt and pay the
same over to the Debtor: But by the Statute of West. 2. cap 20. The Debtee
might have an Elegit, and so have the moyetie of the Lands of his Debtor in
Execution for his Debt, as it appears in C. 3. part. 12. in Sir William
Harberts Case.

Secondly, He said, That the King had another prerogative, and that was, to
have his Debt paid before the Debt of any Subject, as it appears 41. E. 3.
Execution 38. and Pasc. 3. Elizabeth. Dyer. 197. in the Lord Dacres and Lassels
Case, and in M. 3. E. 6. Dyer, 67, Stringfellows Case; For there the Sheriff
was amerced, because the King ought to have his Debt first paid, and ought to
be preferred before a Subject vid. 328 Dyer, There the words of the Writ of
Privilege show that the King is to be preferred before other Creditors: By the
Statute of 33. H. 8. cap. 39. The Execution of the Subject shall be first
served, if his Judgment be before any Process be awarded for the Kings debt.
In the Statute of 25. E. 3. Cap. 19. I find that by the Common Law, the King
might grant a Protection to his Debtor that no other might sue him before that
the King was satisfied his debt. See the Writ of Protection, Register ^. 81. B.
the words of which are, Et quia nolumus solutionem debitorum nostrorum caeteris
omnibus prout ratione Perogativae nostrae totis temporibus retroactis usitatae,
etc. But that grew such a Grievance to the Subject, that the Statute of 25. E.
3. Cap. 19. was made. And now by that Statute a common person may lawfully sue
to Judgment, but he cannot proceed to Execution (and so the Kings Prerogative
is saved) unless the Plaintiff who sueth will give security to pay first the
Kings Debt; For otherwise if the Paty does take forth Execution upon his
Judgment and does levy the money, the same money may be seized upon to satisfy
the Kings Debt, as appears in 45. E. 3. title Decies tantum 13.

The third Prerogative which the King has, is That the King shall have the
Debt of the Debtor to the Kings Debtor paid unto him. v. 21 H. 7. 12. The Abbot
of Ramseys Case. The Prior of Ramsey was indebted. to the King, and another
Prior was indebted to the Prior of Ramsey: and then it was pleaded in Bar,
that he had paid the same Debt to the King, and the Plea holden for a good
Plea. And if Rent be due and payable unto me by my Lessee for years, the same
may be taken for the Kings Debt, and the special matter shall be a good bar in
an Avowry for the Rent, 38. E. 3. 28. A Prior Alien was indebted to the King
for his Farm Rent: And being sued for the same, he showed, That there was a
Parson who held a certain portion of Tithes from him which were part of the
Possessions of the same Priory, which he kept in his hands, so as he could not
pay the King his Farm-Rent unless he might have those Tithes which were in the
Parsons hands Wherefore a Writ was awarded against the Parson to appear in the
Exchequer, and to show cause why he should not pay the same to the King for the
satisfying of the Kings Rent: And there Skipwith Justice said, That for any
thing which touches the King and may turn to his advantage to hasten the Kings
business, that the Exchequer had jurisdiction of it, were it a thing Spiritual
or Temporal. V. 44 E. 3. 43, 44. the like Case, but there it is of a Pension;
And the Case of 38 Ass. 20. was the Case for Tithes: See also 12 E. 3. Swalds
Case to the same purpose. If two Coparceners be in ward to the King, upon a
suggestion that one of them is indebted to the King, the staying of his Livery
shall be for his moytie until the King be satisfied his debt; but the other
sister shall have Livery of the other moytie which belongs unto her, Fitz. N.
5. 263. a. Mich 19 E. 3. and Hill. 20. E. 3. which was one and the same Case.
The Kings Debtor brought a Quo minus in the Exchequer against his Debtor: the
Defendant appeared, And the Plaintiff afterward would have been Nonsuit, but
the Court would not suffer him so to be: And it was there said, That a Release
by the Kings Debtor unto his Debtor would not discharge the Kings Debtor as to
that Debt. In a Quo minus in the Exchequer upon a Debt upon a simple Contract,
the Defendant cannot wage his Law, because the King is to have a benefit by the
suit, although the King be no party to the suit, C. 4. par. 95.

The fourth Prerogative which the King has, is, That the King shall have an
Account against Executors, because the Law there makes a privity; it being
found by matter of Record, that the Testator was indebted to the King, which
Record cannot be denied. But in the Case of a common person an Account will not
lie against Executors for want of privity. The Account which the King brings is
ad computandum ad Dominum Regem, etc. without setting forth how the party came
liable to account: But a common person in his account brought ought to show how
that the party was Receiver, Bailiff, etc. If a man does entermeddle with the
Kings Treasure (the King pretending a title to it) he shall be chargeable for
the same to the King, C. 11. part 89. the Earl of Devonshire's case. The Master
of the Ordnance pretending that the old broken and unserviceable Ordnance
belonged unto him by reason of his Office, procured a Privy Seal, etc. and
afterward disposed of them to his own use, and dyed: And his Executor was
forced to account for them. Sir Walter Mildmay's Case, Mich. 37. and 38 Eliz.
Rot. 312. in the Exchequer. Sir Walter Mildmay was Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and suggested unto the Lord Treasurer of England, That his Office was of great
attendance, and desired the Lord Treasurer that he would be pleased to allow
unto him 100l. for his diet, and 40l. per annum for his attendance; which the
Lord Treasurer did grant unto him, and he enjoyed it accordingly, and
afterward dyed, and his Executors were forced to account for it, and to pay
back the money for all the time that their Testator received it. C. 11. part.
90, 91. there is cited, That Sir William Cavendish was Treasurer of the Chamber
of King H. 8. E. 6. and Queen Mary, and that he was indebted to K. E. 6. and to
Q. Mary; and that being so indebted he purchased diverse lands, and afterward
aliened them, and took back an estate therein to himself and his wife, and
afterward dyed without rendering any Account: the Terre-Tenants of the land
were charged to answer to Q. Elizabeth for the moneys, to which they pleaded
the Queens special Pardon; and it was in conclusion said, That the Pardon was a
matter of grace ex gratia, but in Law the Terre-Tenants were chargeable to the
said Queen for the moneys, v. Com. 321. 5 Eliz. Dyer 244, 245. in the
Exchequer, Mich. 24. E. 3. Rot. 11. ex part Rememb. Regis. Thomas Farel
Collector of the Fifteenths and Tenths, being seized of lands in Fee, and being
possessed of diverse goods and chattels, at the time when he entered into the
said Office (being then indebted to the King) did alien them all, and
afterward dyed without heir or Executor: And a Writ went out unto the Sheriff
to enquire what lands and tenements goods and chattels he had at the time he
entered into the said Office; and Process issued forth against the
Terre-Tenants and the Possessors of his goods and chattels ad computand. pro
collectione predict. and ad respondendum and satisfaciendum inde Domino Regi,
V. Dyer, 160, 50 Ass. 5. A notable Case to this purpose, Mich. 30. E. 3. rot.
6. William Porter Mint-Master did covenant with the King by Indenture enrolled,
That for all the Bullion which should be delivered ad Cambium Regis pro Moneta
faciend. that money should be delivered for it within eight days: which
Covenant he had broken, and therefore the King paid the Subject for the
Bullion: And afterward because John Walweyen and Richard Piccard duxerunt and
praesentaverant dict. William Porter in officium illud tanquam sufficientem,
(and that they offered to be Sureties for him, but were not accepted of) which
they did confess; Ideo consideratum est quod predict. Walweyen and Piccard
onerentur erga Dominum Regem: And they afterward were charged to satisfy the
King for all the moneys which the King had paid for the said Porter: And
although that none of the Kings treasure came to their hands, nor they had not
any benefit as appeared by any matter in the Case, yet because they were the
means and causers that the King sustained damage and loss, they were adjudged
to be chargeable to the King, C. 11. par. 93. this Case is there cited.

Upon these Cases vouched by me, I make diverse Observations. 1. I observe, That
from Age to Age what care the Judges had for the Advancing and the recovering
of the Kings Debts; because Thesaurus Regis est vinculum Pacis and Bellorum
nervus, And it is the slowing fountain of all bounty unto the Subject. 2. I
observe, That the King has a Prerogative for the Recovery of Debts due unto
him. 3. I observe, That although the Debt due to the King be puisne or the
lesser Debt, and although the Debtor be able and sufficient to pay both Debts,
viz. the Kings Debt and the Debt owing to the Subject, yet the Kings Debt is to
be first paid.

Now to apply these cases to the Case in question Here is a Subject who is
indebted to the King; And I say, That the Lands which such a Debtor has in his
power and dispose (although he has not any Estate in the Lands) shall be
liable to pay the Debt to the King: And I say, That Sir Christopher Hatton had
a Fee in the Manors and Lands in this case; And although he did convey them
bona fide, yet until his death by reason of the Proviso of Revocation they
were extendable. Trin. 24. E. 3. Rot. 4. Walter de Chirton Customer, who was
indebted to the King for the Customs, purchased Lands with the Kings moneys;
and caused the Feoffor of the Lands to enfeoffe certain of his friends, with an
intent to defraud and deceive the King; and notwithstanding he himself took the
profits of the Lands to his own use: And those Lands upon an Inquisition were
found, and the values of them, and returned into the Exchequer; and there by
Judgment given by the Court the Lands were seized into the Kings hands, to
remain there until he was satisfied the Debt due unto him; And yet the Estate
of the Lands was never in him: But because he had a power, viz. by Subpena in
Chancery to compel his Friends to settle the Estate of the Lands upon him,
therefore they were chargeable to the Debt. You will say perhaps, there was
Covin in that Case: But I say, that neither Fraud, Covin, nor Collusion is
mentioned in the Report in Dyer 160. C. 11. par. 92. And that Case was a harder
Case then our Case is: For Walter de Chirton in that Case was never seized of
the said lands: But in our Case Sir Christopher Hatton himself had the lands;
And when he had the lands he was assured of the Office, although he had not the
possession of it, For he was sure that no other could have it from him, and no
other could have it but himself. And for another cause, our Case is a stronger
Case then the Case of Walter de Chirton: For Chirton had no remedy in Law to
have the lands; but his remedy was only in a Court of Equity, and a remedy in
Consc' only: But in our Case, Sir Christopher Hatton had a time in which he
might let the land to pass, and yet he had a power to pull it back again at
his pleasure: So as he had the disposition of it; but before the alteration of
the uses he dyed: And if he had been living (being indebted to the King) the
King might have extended the lands, because that then he had the possession of
them. There were two Considerations which moved Sir Christopher Hatton to
Convey the Lands: the first was honorable, viz. For the payment of his Debts;
the second was natural, viz. For the preferment of his Children. Although the
Conveyance of the Lands for payment of his Debts was but for years, yet the
same was too short, like unto a Plaster which is too short for the sore: For
the Covenanters were not his Executors, and so they were not liable to Debts:
And although he be now dead and cannot revoke the former uses, yet he had the
power to revoke the uses during his life; And so he was chargeable for the Debt
due to the King.

Tanfield Chief Baron agreed with Justice Dodderidge in all as before: And he
said, That all powerful and speedy courses are given unto the King for the
getting in of his Revenues; and therefore he said he had the said Prerogatives
as have been recited: And in 25 E. 3. in libro rubro in the Exchequer, there
the Foundations of the said Prerogatives do appear. If a common person arrest
the body in Execution, he shall not resort to the lands, contr. to Blumfields
Case, C. 5. par. The course of the Exchequer makes a Law every where for the
King. If any Officer be indebted unto the King and dies, the course of the
Exchequer is, For to call in his Executors or the Heir, or the Terre-Tenants to
answer the Debt; and if he has no lands, then a Writ issues out of the
Exchequer to know what goods he had, and to whose hands they be come. All
Inquisitions concerning Lands in the like Cases are, Habuit vel seisitus; and
not that he was seized only. The word Habuit is a large word, and in it is
contained a disposing power. But in this Case Sir Christopher Hatton had a
power every day to revoke the uses; And when he had once revoked them, then was
he again as before seisitus. 7 H. 6. in the Exchequer, the Kings Farmor had
Feoffees to his use, and dyed indebted to the King: And upon an Inquisition it
was found that (Habuit) for he had them in his power by compelling his Feoffees
by Equity in Chancery; and therefore it was adjudged that the King should have
the Lands in the Feoffees hands in extent. But in this case Sir Christopher
Hatton might have had the Lands in him again without compulsion by a Court of
Equity, for that he had power to revoke the uses in the Conveyance at his
pleasure. Mich. 30. H. 6. rot. in the Exchequer: A Clark of the Court was
assigned to receive moneys for the King, who had Feoffees of lands to his use:
And the lands were found and seized for the Kings moneys, by force of the word
Habuit. 32 H. 6. Philip Butler's Case, who was Sheriff of a County, being
indebted to the King; his Feoffees were chargeable to the Kings debt by force
of the word Habuit, For habuit the lands in his power. 6 E. 4. Bows Case acc'.
34 H. 6. A widow being indebted to the King, her Feoffees were chargeable to
pay the Kings debt, because she had power of the lands, It being found by
Inquisition that habuit. 1 R. 3. the like Case. And 24 Eliz. in Morgan's Case
it was adjudged, That lands purchased in the names of his Friends for his use,
were extended for a debt due by him to the King.

Hobart Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas argued to the same purpose, and
agreed with the other Justices; and he said in this case it was not material
whether the Inquisition find the Deed to be with power of Revocation; For he
said that the Land is extended, and that the extent remains good until it be
avoided: And he said that a revocable Conveyance is sufficient to bind the
Parties themselves, but not to bind the King; but the Lands are liable into
whose hands soever they come. When a man is said to forfeit his body, it is not
to be intended his life, but the freedom of his body, Imprisonment At the
Common Law a Common person could neither take the body nor the Lands in
Execution; But yet at the Common Law a Capias lay upon a force, although it did
not lie in case of Debt, Agreement, etc. The King is Parens Legum, because the
Laws flowed from him: he is Maritus Legum, For the Law is as it were under
Covert Baron; he is Tutor Legum, For he is to direct the Laws, and they desire
aid of him: And he said that all the Land of the Kings Debtor are liable to his
Debt. The word (Debtor) is nomen equivocum, and he is a Debtor who is any ways
chargeable for Debt, Damages, Duty, Rent behind, etc. The Law amplifies evry
thing which is for the Kings benefit, or made for the King. If the King
releaseth all his Debts, he releases only debts by Recognizance. Judgment,
Obligation, Specialtie or Contract: Every thing for the benefit of the King
shall be taken largely, as every thing against the King shall be taken
strictly; and the reason why they shall be taken for his benefit is because the
King cannot so nearly look to his particular, because he (...), intended to
consider ardua regni pro bono publico. The Prerogative Laws is not the
Exchequer Law, but is the Law of the Realm for the King, as the Common Law is
the Law of the Realm for the Subject: The Kings Bench is a Court for the Pleas
of the Crown, The Common Pleas is for Pleas betwixt Subject and Subject, and
the Exchequer is the proper Court for the Kings Revenues, 13. E. 4. 6. If the
King has a Rentcharge, he by his Prerogative may distrein in any the Lands of
the Tenant, besides in the Lands charged with the Rent, 44. E. 3. 15. although
that the party purchases the Lands after the Grant made to the King, but then
it is not for a Rent, but as for a duty to the King: And the King in such case
may take the Body. Lands and Goods in Execution. See the Lord Norths Case,
Dyer, 161. where a man became Debtor to the King upon a simple Contract. N.
When he was Chancellor of the Augmentation received a Warrant from the Privy
Council, testifying the pleasure of King E. 6. That whereas he had sold to R.
etc. That the said Chancellor should take Order and see the delivery of etc.
and should take Bond and Sureties for the King for the payment of the money; By
force of which Warrant, he sent one T. his Clark to take a Bond of W. for the
payment of the money, and he took Bond for the King accordingly, and brought
the same to the Chancellor his Master, and delivered the same to him to the
Kings use; and presently after he deliverd the same back to T. to deliver over
to the Clark of the Court, who had the charge of the keeping of all the Kings
Bonds and Specialties: And when T. had received the same back, he practiced
with R. and W. to deliver them the Bond to be cancelled, and so it was done,
and cancelled: And it was holden in that Case, because that the said Bond was
once in the power and possession of N. that he was chargeable with the Debt:
But the Queen required the Debt of R. and W. who were able to satisfy the
Queen for the same.

In Mildmay's Case cited before, there it was holden, That the Queen might take
her Remedy either against the Parties who gave the insufficient Warrant, or
against Mildmay himself at her Election. So a man (he said) shall be liable for
damages to the King, for that is taken to be within the word (Debita.) In
Porters Case cited before, there was neither Fraud, Covin, nor Negligence; and
yet the persons who presented Porter to the King to hold the Office were
chargeable for his negligence, whom they preferred to be Master of the Mint.
But in that Case, The Body and goods of Porter were delivered to his Sureties
as in Execution, to repay them the money which the King had levied of them.
These Cases prove that the word (Debtor) is taken in a large sense: That the
King shall have for the Debts due to him, the Body, Goods and Lands in
Execution. The word (Goods) does extend to whatsoever he has, 11. H. 7. 26.
The King shall have the Debt which is due to his Debtor upon a simple Contract,
and therein the Debtor of the Debtor shall not wage his Law: For after you say
that you sue for the King, it is the Kings Debt, and the King if he please may
have Evecution of it. An Ejectione firm was brought in the Exchequer by
Garraway against R. T. upon an Ejectment of Lands in Wales; and it was
maintainable in the Exchequer, as well as a Suit shall be maintainable here for
an Intrusion upon Lands in Wales upon the King himself: and the King shall have
Execution of the thing, and recover Damages, as he shall in a Quo minus, in
satisfaction of a Debt which is due by his Debtor to the King: 8. H. 5. 10.
There the Kings Debtor could not have Quo minus in the Exchequer; The Case
there was, That a man Indebted to the King was made Executor, and by a Quo
minus sued one in the Exchequer who was indebted unto his Testator upon a
simple Contract, as for his proper debt; and the Quo minus would not lie,
because the King in that Case could not sue forth Execution: and every Quo
minus is the Kings Suit, and is in the name of the King, 38. Ass. 20. A Prior
Alien was arrear in Rent to the King, The Prior brought a Quo minus in the
Exchequer against a Parson for detaining of Tithes, (here is a variance of the
Law and the Court; for the Right of Tithes ought to be determined by the
Ecclesiastical Law) and it was found by Verdict for the Prior. A Sergeant
moved, That the Court had not jurisdiction of the Cause; To whom it was
answered, that they had and ought to have Jurisdiction of it: For that when a
thing may turn to the advantage of the King and hasten his business, that Court
had Jurisdiction of it: and diverse times the said Court did hold jurisdiction
in the like Case: and thereupon issue was joined there, and the Reporter made a
mirum of it; But it seems the Reporter did not understand the Kings
Prerogative: For it is true, That such Suit for Tithes does not fall into the
Jurisdiction of the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas; but in the Exchequer it is
otherwise; And if the Suit be by Quo minus, it is the Kings Suit.

At a common persons Suit the Officer cannot break the house and enter, but at
the Kings Suit he may: And a common person cannot enter into a Liberty, but the
King may if it be a common Liberty: But for the most part when the King
grants any Liberty, there is a clause of Exception in the Grant; That when it
shall turn to the prejudice of the King, as it may do in a special Case, there
the King may enter the Liberty; and a house is a Common Liberty, and the
Execution of Justice is no wrong when it is for the King. The King has the
precedence for the payment of his Debts to him, as it appears in
Stringfellows Case cited before by Justice Dodderidge: And when Lands are once
liable to the payment of the Kings debts, let the Lands come to whom you will,
yet the Land is liable ^o his debt, as it appears in Cavendishes Case, Dyer
224, 225. which was entered Pasc. ^. Eliz. Rot. 111. in the Exchequer, 50. Ass.
5. A man binds himself and his heirs and dies, and the heir alieneth the
Land; the Land is discharged of the Debt as to the Debtee; But in the Kings
Case, if at any time the Land and Debt meet together, you cannot sever them
without payment of the Kings debt. Vid. Littleton: Executors, and so
Administrators are chargeable in an Account to the King: and the Saying of Mr
Littleton are adjudged for Law, and are Judgments: A sale in Market over, nor a
Fine and Nonclaim shall not bind the King; and so it is of things bought of the
Kings Villeyn, because Nullum tempus occurrit Regi: A common person in London,
by Custom may attach a Debt in another hands: As he may come into Court and
show that his debtor has not any thing in his hand to satisfy his debt, but
only that debt which is in the hands of another man; and that Custom is
allowable and reasonable: And if it shall be reasonable for a Subject so to
attach a Debt, will you have it unreasonable for the King? Before the Statute
of 25. E. 3. cap. 19. The King might protect his Debtor as it appears by the
Register 281. and Fitz. 28. 6. But the Statute of 25. E. 3. gave the Party a
liberty to proceed to Judgment, but does bar him from taking forth of
Execution upon the Judgment, until the King be satisfied his Debt. In Dyer
296, and 297. a man condemned in the Exchequer for a Debt due to the Queen, was
committed to the Fleet, and being in Execution he was also condemned in the
Kings Bench at the Suit of a Subject upon a Bill of Debt in Custodia Mariscalli
Maris^alciae: Afterward upon prayer of the Party, a Habeas Corpus cum causa
was awarded out of the Kings Bench to the Warden of the Fleet, who returned the
Cause ut supra, and he was remanded to the Fleet in Execution for the Debt:
Afterward a Command was given by the Lord Treasurer upon the Queens behalf, to
suffer the Prisoner to go into the Country to collect and levy money, the
sooner to pay the Queen her Debt: In that Case the Subject brought an Action of
Debt against the Warden of the Fleet upon the Escape, who justified the Escape
by the said Commandment; It was holden in that case, That although the Party
was in Execution for both the Debts, yet before the Queen was satisfied, the
Execution for the Subject did not begin, For the King cannot have equal to
have interest in the Body of the Prisoner Simul cum illo: But if the Case were
as Lassels case, 3. Eliz Dyer, then he might be in Execution for the King, and
for the Subject.

Lassels was taken in Execution at the Suit of a Subject, and before the Writ
was returned, a Writ for the Queen came to the Sheriff, and Lassels was kept
in Execution for the Queen: In that case Lassels was in Execution for them
both, viz. the Queen and the Subject. So there is a difference where the Party
is first taken for the King, and where he is first taken for the Subject.

Now I will consider of the Case at Bar; Whether the Land might be extended
notwithstanding the Conveyance made. The Kings Debt is to be taken largely, and
so Goods in such case are to be taken largely, and so is it likewise of Lands,
viz. any Land, be it Land in Use, upon Trust, by Revocation. By the Law, Debts
are first to be paid, then Legacies, then childrens preferments; There is a
difference where the Land was never in the man, and where it was once in him,
C. 8. Part. 163. Mights Case: Might Purchased lands to him and to his heir; It
was resolved that this original Purchase could not be averred to be by
Collusion, to take away the Wardship, which might accrue after the death of
Might, for they were Joints, and the survivor shall have the whole: Note, that
there was no fraud, for that it was never in him; but if it had once been the
Lands only of Might, and then Might had made the conveyance to him and his
heir, then it would have been fraud to have deceived the King of the Wardship.
In the Case at Bar, Hatton has not aliened the land, For an Alienation is,
alienum facere, and here he has not made it the land of another, having a
power of Revocation. Sir John Packington Mortgaged his lands for 100l. The
Mortgagee enfeoffed W. and within the time of Redemtion, Packington and he to
whom the money was to be paid, agreed that Packington should pay him 30l. of
the said 100l. and no more; and yet in appearance for the better performance of
the Condition, it was agreed that the whole 100l. should be paid; and that the
residue above 30l. should be repaid back to Packington, which was done
accordingly. It was resolved in that Case, that the same was no performance of
the Condition, because it was not a payment animo solvendi: And so in this Case
there was not any allienation animo (...); For Sir Christopher Hatton gave the
Lands, but yet he kept the possession. and received the profits of them; And if
Sir Christopher Hatton had given the land with power of Revocation, or
reserving as in this Case he did an Estate for his own life, it had been all
one. If a man devises the profits of such lands, the lands themselves do pass.
And a Conveyance of lands upon Condition not to take the profits, is a void
condition in Law, Lit. 462, 463. A Feoffment is made upon confidence, and the
Feoffor does occupy the land at the will of the Feoffees, and the Feoffees do
release unto the Feoffor all their right, Litt. 464. there it was said that
such a Feoffor shall be sworn upon an Inquest, if the lands be of the value of
40s. per annum, and that by the Common Law; Therefore it seems that the Law
does intend, That when a man has Feoffees in Trust, that the lands are his
own; and then if in such case the Commonwealth shall be served, shall not the
King who is Pater reipublicae be served, so as he may be satisfied his debts?
If the Case of Walter de Chirton had never been, yet I should now have the same
opinion of the Law in such Case as the Judges then had. The King is not bound
by Estopels, nor Recoveris had betwixt strangers, nor by the fundamental
Jurisdiction of Courts, as appears 38. Ass. 20. where a Suit was for Tithes
in the Exchequer, being a mere spiritual thing; and shall he be bound by a
Conveyance? Anno. 16. H. 6. then in the time of Civil War Uses began; and of
Lands in use the Lord Chief Baron Tanfield in his Argument has cited diverse
cases where the lands in use were subject and liable to the debt of Cestuy que
use in the Kings Case, and so was it until the Statute of 27. H. 8. of Uses
was made. Babbington, an Officer in the Exchequer, had lands in the hands of
Feoffees upon Trust, and a Writ issued out, and the lands were extended for the
Debt of Babbington in the hands of his Feoffees Sir Robert Dudley having lands
in other men's hands upon Trusts, the lands were seized into the Kings hands for
a contempt (and not for debt or damages to the King;) And in this Case although
that the ^nquisition do find the Conveyance, but have not found it to be with
power of Revocation,; yet the Land being extended, it is well extended until
the contrary does appear, and until the extent be avoided by matter of Record,
viz. by Plea, as the Lord Chief Baron has said before.

Ley Chief Justice of the Kings Bench argued the same day, and his Argument in
effect did agree with the other Justices in all things, and therefore I have
forborne to report the same at length. And it was adjudged, That the Extent was
good, and the Land well decreed accordingly.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Exchequer Chamber. 417. The Lord SHEFFIELD and
RATCLIFF'S Case.
IN a Writ of Error brought to reverse a Judgment given in a Monstrans de Droit
in the Court of Pleas, The Case was put by Glanvile who argued for Ratcliffe
the Defendant, to be this. 2 E. 2. Malew being seized of the Manor of Mulgrave
in Fee, gave the same to A. Bigot in tail, which by diverse discents came to Sir
Ralph Bigot in tail, Who 10 Jannarii 6 H. 8. made a Feoffment unto the use of
^is last Will, and thereby after his Debts paid declared the use unto his right
heirs in Fee, and 9. H. 8. dyed. The Will was performed: Francis Bigot entered
being Tenant in tail, and 21 H. 8. made a Feoffment unto the use of himself and
Katherine his wife, and to the use of the heirs of their two bodies. Then came
the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. by which Tenant in tail for Treason is to
forfeit the Land which he has in tail. Then the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses is
made. Then 28 H. 8. Francis Bigot did commit Treason, And 29 H. 8. he was
attainted and executed for the same. Anno 31 H. 8. a private Act of Parliament
was made, which did confirm the Attaindor of Francis Bigot, and that he should
forfeit unto the King (word for word as the Statute of 26 H. 8. is) saving to
all strangers except the Offender and his heirs, etc. 3 E. 6. The heir of
Francis Bigot is restored in blood, Katherine entered into the Manor and dyed
seized. 8 Eliz. their Issue entered, and married with Francis Ratcliffe, and had
Issue Roger Ratcliffe, who is heri in tail unto Ralph Bigot, And they continue
possession until 33. Eliz. And then all is found by Office and the Land seized
upon for the Queen, who granted the same unto the Lord Sheffield. Francis Bigot
and Dorothy die, And Roger Ratcliffe sued a Monstrans de Droit to remove the
Kings hands from off the lands, and a Scire facias issued forth against the
Lord Sheffield as one of the Terre-Tenants, who pleaded all this special
matter; and Judgment was thereupon given in the Court of Pleas for Roger
Ratcliffe; And then the Lord Sheffield brought a Writ of Error in the
Exchequer-Chamber to reverse the said Judgment: And Finch Sergeant argued for
the Lord Sheffield that the Judgment ought to be reversed; And now this Term
Glanvile argued for Roger Ratcliffe, that the Judgment given in the Court of
Pleas ought to be affirmed.

There are two points: The first, If there were a Right remaining in Francis
Bigot, and if the same were given unto the King by the Attaindor and the
Statute of 31 H. 8. Second. If a Monstrans de Droit be a proper Action upon
this matter, which depends upon a Remitter; for if it be a Remitter, then is
the Action a proper Action. The Feoffment by Ralph Bigot 6 H. 8. was a
Discontinuance, and he had a new use in himself, to the use of his Will, and
then to the use of his Heirs: Then 9 H. 8. Ralph Bigot dyed, And then Francis
Bigot had a right to bring a Formedon in the Discendor to recover his estate
tail. 21 H* 8. (then the point arises) Francis Bigot having a right of
Formedon, and an use by force of the Statute of 1 R. 3. cap. 1. before the
Statute of 27 H. 8. by the Feoffment he had so settled it, that he could not
commit a forfeiture of the estate tail. When a man makes a Feoffment, every
Right, Action, etc. is given away in the Livery and Seisin, because every one
who gives Livery gives all Circumstances which belongs to it: For a Livery is
of that force, that it excludes the Feoffor not only of all present Rights, but
of all future Rights and Tytles, v. C. 1. par. 111. and there good Cases put to
this purpose. 9 H. 7. 1. By Livery, the Husband who was in hope to be Tenant by
Courtesy, is as if he were never sised. 39 H. 6. 43. The Son disseiseth his
Father, and makes a Feoffment of the lands; the Father dies, the hope of the
heir is given away by the Livery.

It was objected by Sergeant Finch, 1. Where a man has a right of action to
recover land in Fee or an estate for life which may be conveyed to another,
there a Livery does give away such a Right, and shall there bind him: But an
estate in tail cannot be transferred to another by any manner of Conveyance,
and therefore cannot be bound by such a Livery given. I answer, It is no good
Rule, That that which does not pass by Livery, does remain in the person which
gives the Livery. 19 H. 6. Tenant in tail is attainted, Office is found; The
estate tail is not in the King, is not in the person attainted, but is in
abeyance: So it is no good Rule which has been put. When Tenant in tail makes
a Feoffment, Non habet jus in re, neque ad rem: If he have a Right, then it is
a Right of Enter, or Action* but he cannot enter nor have any action against
his own Feoffment, 19 H. 8. 7. Dyer. If Discontinuee of Tenant in tail levieth
a Fine with proclamations, and the five years pass, and afterward Tenant in
tail dies, his issue shall have other five years, and shall be helped by the
Statute, for he is the first to whom the right does accrue after the Fine
levied; for Tenant in tail himself after his Fine with Proclamations has not
any right: But if Tenant in tail be disseised, and the Disseisor levieth a Fine
with proclamations, and five years pass, and afterward Tenant in tail dies*
there the issue in tail is barred; for there after the Fine levied the Tenant
in tail himself had right, so as the issue in tail was not the first to whom
the Right did accrue after the Fine levied, C. 3. part 87. Com. 374. a. When
Ralph Bigot made the Feoffment 6 H. 8. Francis Bigot had a Right; by his own
Feoffment 21 H. 8. his Right was extinguished.

The second Objection was upon the Form of pleading in a Formedon, viz. Post
cujus mortem discendere debet to him, viz. the issue. Then the Ancestor had
such a Right, which after his death might have descended to his issue; Then
that proves that the Ancestor by his Feoffment has not given away all the
Right. I answer, The form is not Post cujus mortem, but Per cujus mortem; and
the Post cujus mortem discendere debet is not traversable; and therefore it is
but matterof form, and not of substance. Old Entres 240. One dum non fuit
compos mentis makes a Feoffment, he shall not avoid the Feoffment, because
that the Law does not allow a man to stultifie himself, C. 4. part 123. But his
heir after his death may avoid the Feoffment of his Ancestor; for de ipso
discendit jus, although the Father had not a Right in his life.

It was thirdly objected out of C. 4. part 166. b. where it is said, That if an
Idiot makes a Feoffment, the King shall avoid the same after Office found. I
answer, That the Book it self does clear the objection: For it is in regard of
the Statute of Prerogativa Regis, cap. 9. Ita quod nullatenus per eosdem fatuos
alienentur, etc. and not in respect of any Right which the party has who
makes the Feoffment. By the Common Law, Tenant in tail, viz. He who had a
Fee-simple conditional, had not any right after his Feoffment: Then the Act of
West 2 cap. 1. makes such a Fee an Estate in tail, and provides for the issue
in tail, for him in the Remaindor or in Reversion, but not for the party who
made the Feoffment or Grant; for a Grant of Tenant in tail is not void as to
himself. Magdalen-Colledge Case; A Lease by a Parson is good against himself,
but voidable against his Successor: And so the same is no Exception, Discendit
jus post mortem, etc.

The fourth Objection was, That although Tenant in tail had made a Feoffment,
yet he remained Tenant to the Avowry of the Donor, and therefore some right of
the old estate tail did remain in him. I answer, 5 E. 4. 3 a. 48 E. 3. 8. b. 20
H. 6. 9. 14 H. 4. 38. b. C. 2. part 30. a. The matter of the Avowry does not
arise out of the Right or Interest which a man has in the Land, but out of the
Privity: As when the Tenant makes a Feoffment, he has neither right nor
interest in the Land, yet the Lord is not compellable to avow upon the Alienee
before notice. In a Precipe quod reddat the Tenant alieneth, yet he remains
Tenant as to the Plaintiff, and yet he has not either a Right or any Estate
as to the Alienee.

The fifth Objection was upon the Statute of 1 R. 3. cap. 1. All Feoffments
etc. by Cestuy que use shall be effectual to him to whom it was made against
the Feoffor and his heirs. I answer, The words of the Statute are to be
considered, All Feoffments, etc: I desire to know how this affirmative Law does
take away the power of the Feoffees: And the Feoffees are bound by the
Feoffment of Cestuy que use, and are seized to the use of such Alienees. 27 H.
8. 23. b. by Fitzherbert: If Cestuy que use enter and makes a Feoffment with
warrantie, etc. but there are not words that the old rights are given away. The
Feoffees to use before the Statute of 1 R. 3. c. 1. might only make Feoffments;
but after that Statute Cestuy que use might also make Feoffments of the Lands:
And so the Statute of 1 R. 3. did not take away the power of the Feoffees, for
they yet may make Feoffments; but it did enlarge the power of Cestuy que use,
Com. 351, ^52. Then the Question further rises: If Francis Bigot had any Right
in the Tail which might be forfeited by the Statutes, by 26 H. 8. and 31 H. 8.
A particular Act made for the Attaindor of the said Francis Bigot. From the
time of West. 2. cap. 1^ until the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. there were
many Bills preferred in Parliament to make Lands which were entailed to be
forfeited for high Treason; but as long as such Bills were unmasked, they were
still rejected: But Anno 26 H. 8. then at a Parliament a Bill was preferred,
That all Inheritances might be forfeited for Treason; (so that as under a vail)
lands in tail were forfeited for Treason) which was accepted of. The Statutes
of 26 H. 8. and 31 H. 8. are not to be taken or extended beyond the words of
the Statute, which are, That every Offender hereafter lawfully convict of any
manner of high Treason, by Presentment, confession, Verdict or Process of
Outlawry, shall forfeit, etc. It does not appear that Francis Bigot was
attainted in any of these ways; For the Inquisition is, That he was Indicted
and convicted, but Non sequitur that he was convict by any of those ways, viz.
Verdict, Confession, or Outlawry; And one may be attainted by other means: 4 E.
4. in Placito Parliamenti, Mortimer was attainted by Parliament; 1 R. 2. Alice
Percy was attainted by Judgment of the Lords and Peers of the House of Lords in
Parliament.

It was objected, That after an Indictment Verdict ought to follow: I answer,
Non sequitur: for it may be without Verdict, viz. by standing mute; And then
the Statute of 26 H. 8. does not extend unto it, C. 3. part 10, 11. Admit it
were an Attaindor within the Statute of 2^ H. 8. yet Francis Bigot had not such
lands which might be forfeited, C. 3. part 10. For this Statute does not extend
to Conditions or Rights, And C. 7. part 34. this Act of 26 H. 8. does not
extend to Rights and Titles: And it is clear that Francis Bigot had not any
Estate within the letter of the Act.

It was objected, That if we have not set forth the full Title of the King in
the Monstrans de Droit, then is the Monstrans de Droit naught, and void. I
answer* 9 E. 4. 51. 16 E. 4. 6. I find no book that in a Monstrans de Droit we
should be put to observe that Rule: For a Petition were a going about; The
Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 6. gives the Monstrans de Droit: 16 E. 4. 7. If a
Petition be void for want of instructing the King, and if all his Title be not
set forth in it, then the Court is to abate the Petition; but after Judgment to
find such a fault, he must have a Scire facias, and not a new Petition; and in
our Case there was none who gave in such matter for the King.

Now I come to the Statute of 31. H. 8. The particular Act for the Attainder of
Francis Bigot, and that he should forfeit all such Lands, etc. Conditions,
Rights, etc. in Fee, and Fee tail saving, etc. and as the lands of Francis
Bigott stood stated at the time of the making of this Act of 3. H. 8. the
Statute did not extend to him to make him forfeit any thing In the Statute of
33. H. 8. Cap. 20. there were as many words as in this Statute of 31. H. 8. and
many Cases upon the Statute of 33. H. 8. are adjudged upon the words, shall
lose and forfeit. There is a difference betwixt an Act of Assurance, and an Act
of Forfeiture: If the words be, That the King shall enjoy and have, it is then
an Act of Assurance, and the lands are given to the King without Office; but by
an Act of Forfeiture the Lands are not in the King without Office found.
Exceptio firmat regulam, but our Case is out of the Rule. Savings in Acts of
Parliaments were but of late days: 1. E. 4. there was a private Act: A Petition
was preferred against diverse in Parliament for sundry misdemeanors, and it was
Enacted that they should forfeit unto the King and his heirs, etc. in that Act
there was no exception of saving for it was but a forfeiture of their Rights,
and Savings were but of late times, Trin. 8. H. 8. Rot. 4. A Petition of Right
in the Chancery, upon that was a plea which was after the Attainder of the Duke
of Suffolk) That the Duke did disseise him; it was showed that the Attainder
was by Parliament, and he showed no saving to be in the Statute in the
Petition; and yet it was well enough, Com. 552. Wyat Tenant in tail of the Gift
of the King, made a Feoffment, and by Act of Parliament 2 Mariae was attainted
of Treason, by which he was to forfeit, etc. as in our Case.

I answer, That within two years after that Judgment, upon solemn argument it
was adjudged contrary, Com. 562. It was objected that in that Case a Writ of
Error was brought, Com. 562. and that the Judgment was affirmed in the Case of
Walsingham. I answer, that the same was by reason of the Plea in Bar: And Com
565. there Plowden confesses that the Judges were not agreed of the matter in
Law, and the Lands in question in Walsingams Case do remain with Moulton, and
at this day are enjoyed contrary to the Judgment given in Walsinghams Case: It
was objected, That although this Act of 31. H. 8. was made after the Attainder,
yet that it should relate to all the Lands which Francis Bigot had at the time
of the Treason committed. I answer, That this Act of 31. H. 8: is but a
description what Lands he shall forfeit, viz. all the Lands which he had at the
time of the Treason committed.

The second Point is upon the Remitter of Roger Ratcliff before the
Inquisition, for there was a descent to Roger Ratcliff. When Tenant in Tail is
attainted of Treason, his blood is not corrupted, C. 9. part. 10. Lumleys Case.
And the Statute of 33. H. 8. is the first Statute which vests Lands forfeit for
Treason in the King without Office found: So as according to the Lord Lumley's
Case, C. 3. part. 10. before this Statute of 33 H. 8. the Land did descend to
the issue in tail. The Rule of Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, is to be meant for
the preserving of the Kings Right, but not to make the King to do wrong. Com.
488. there the Remitter is preferred before the King. 49. E. 3. 16. there the
Devise of a Common person was preferred before the Right of the King. 3. H. 7.
2. the Lord Greistock's Case: The Dean of York did recover against him, and
before Execution the Lord died, his heir within age; the Dean shall have his
Execution, notwithstanding that the King has right to have the Ward: A
fortiori a Remitter shall be preferred before the Kings Title. C. 7. part. 28.
The Rule Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, is to be intended when the King has an
Estate or Interest certain and permanent, and not when his Interest is
specially limited, when and how he shall take it, and not otherwise.

The third Point was, Whether Ratcliff has brought his proper Action. The
words of the Act of 2 E. 6. cap. 8. which gives the Monstrans de Droit, are to
be considered: A Remitter is within the words of the Act. Diverse Errors were
assigned by the other side for matter of Form. 1. Because the Venire facias
want these words (tam milites quam alios.) Sheffield being a Noble man, and a
Peer of the Realm, It appears by the Register 7. that the same was the
ancient Form in every common persons Case; but of late that Form was left. 2.
Admit that it were a good Exception, then it ought to have been taken by way of
Challenge, as it appears 13. E. 3. Challenge 115. Dyer 107. 208. 3. The
Statute of 35. H. 8. Cap. 6. makes a new Law, and prescribes a Form.
Precipimus, etc. quod Venire facias coram, etc. 12 Liberos and Legales homines,
etc. and then if it ought to be by the Register (tam milites quam alios) yet
here is a new Statute against it: And by the Statute of 2. E. 6. Cap. 32. this
Statute of 35 H. 8. is made perpetual. And by the Statute of 27. Eliz. Cap. 6.
the Statute of 35. H. 8. is altered in parvo, and augmented in the worth of the
Jurors: and by the Statute of 18. Eliz. Cap. 14. It is Enacted, That after
Verdict, etc. the Judgment thereupon shall not be stayed or reversed by reason
of any default in Form, or lack of Form, or variance from the Register. The
second Error assigned was, because that there are two Venire facias, and two
Distringas, after that Issue was joined. The Lord Sheffield sueth unto the King
to have the first Venire facias, and first Distringas quashed, and it was
quashed with Ratcliff's consent. Secondly, admit there were two Venire facias,
yet it ought to be intended that the proceedings was but upon one of them, and
that the best: M. 17. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas, Bowen and Jones's Case: In
Error upon a Recovery in Debt, there were two Originals certified, and there
the one was good, and the other naught; the Judges did take it that the
Judgment and proceedings were upon the good Original, and the Judgment was
affirmed in the Kings Bench: M. 15 H. 8. Rott. 20. the same Case. Two
Originals, one bearing date after the Judgment, the other before the Judgment:
and upon a Writ of Error brought, the Judgment was affirmed, for by intendment
the Judgment was given upon the first Original, which bore date before the
Judgment. Another Error was assigned, because the Plea was, That such a one was
seized of the Castle and Manor of Mulgrave predictis in the plural number: I
answer, that there is not any color for that Error, for the word (predictis)
does show that the Manor and Castle are not one and the same thing: So upon
the whole matter, I pray that the Judgment given in the Court of Pleas may be
affirmed. Sir Henry Yelverton argued for the Lord Sheffield, that the Judgment
might be reversed. There are three things considerable in the Case: First, If
any right of the ancient estate tail was in Francis Bigot who was attainted, at
the time of his Attainder: Secondly, admit that there was an ancient right, if
it might be forfeited being a right coupled with a Possession, and not a right
in gross: Thirdly, Whether such a Possession descend to Francis Bigot, that he
shall be remitted, and if this Remitter be not overreached by the Office.
First, If by the Feoffment of Francis Bigot, 21. H. 8. when he was Cestuy que
use, and by the Livery the right of the ancient entail be destroyed; And I
conceive it is not, but that the same continues, and is not gone by the Livery
and Seisin made: There is a difference, when Cestuy que use makes a Feoffment
before the Statute of 1 R: 3. and when Cestuy que use makes a Feoffment after
the said statute of 1 R: 3* For, before the statute he gives away all, Com
352. but after the statute of R. 3. Cestuy que use by his Feoffment gives away
no Right. In 3 H. 7, 13. is our very case almost; For, there the Tenant in Tail
made a Feoffment unto the use of his Will (so in our Case,) and thereby did
declare that it should be for the payment of his debts, and afterward to the
use of himself and the heirs of his body, and died; the heir entered before the
debts paid (but in our Case he entered after the debts paid) there it is said
that the Feoffment is made as by Cestuy que use at the Common Law, for his
entry was not lawful before the debts paid. But when Francis Bigot made a
Feoffment 21 H. 8. he was Cestuy que use in Fee, and then is the Right of the
Estate tail saved by the Statute of 1. R. 3. And by the Statute of 1. R. 3. he
gives the Land as Servant, and not as Owner of the Land, and so gives nothing
but a possession, and no Right. 5 H. 7. 5. Cestuy que use since the Statute of
1 R. 3. is but as a Servant, or as an Executor to make a Feoffment. And if an
Executor makes a Feoffment by force of the Will of the Testator, he passes
nothing of his own Right, but only as an Executor or Servant: 9 H. 7. 26.
proves that Cestuy que use since the Statute of 1 R. 3 has but only an
Authority to make a Feoffment, For Cestuy que use cannot make a Letter of
Attorney to make Livery for him, for he has but a bare Authority, which cannot
be transferred to another: Cestuy que use has a Rent out of Land, and by force
of the Statute of 1 R. 3. he makes a Feoffment of the Land, yet the Rent does
remain to him, for he gives but a bare possession: So in our Case, the right
of the Estate Tail does remain in Francis Bigot, notwithstanding his Feoffment
as Cestuy que use by the Statute of 1 R. 3. If Cestuy que use by force of the
Statute of 1 R. 3. makes a Feoffment without Warranty, the Vouchee shall not
Vouch by force of that Warranty; For as Fitzherbert says, Cestuy que use had
no possession before the Statute of 27. H. 8. Cap. 10. 27 H. 8. 23. If Feoffees
to Use make a Letter of Attorney to Cestuy que use to make a Feoffment, he
gives nothing but as a Servant. The Consequent of this Point is, That the
right of the old Estate Tail was in Francis Bigot at the time of his Attainder,
and was not gone by the Feoffment made 21 H. 8.

The second Point is, Whether a right mixed with a possession of Francis Bigot
might be forfeited by the Statutes of 26. H. 8. and the private Act of 31. H.
8. The Statute of 31. H. 8. does not save this Right no more then the Statute
of 26. H. 8. For they are all one in words. I say that he has such a right as
may be lost and forfeited by the words of the Statute of 26. H. 8. Cap. 13. For
that Statute gives three things. First, It gives the Forfeiture of Lands, and
not of Estates. Secondly, How long does that Statute give the lands to the
King? For ever, viz. to the King his Heirs and Successors. Thirdly, It gives
the lands of any Estate of Inheritance, in Use or Possession, by any Right,
Title or means. This Estate Tail is an Estate of Inheritance, which he has by
the Right, by the Title, and by the means of coming to the Right it is
forfeited. These two Statutes were made for the punishment of the Child, For
the Common Law was strict enough against the Father, viz. he who committed the
Treason; And shall the same Law which was made to punish the Child, be
undermined to help the Child? The ancient Right shall be displaced from the
Land, rather then it shall be taken from the Crown, which is to remain to the
Crown for ever. And this Statute of 26 H. 8. was made pro bono^ publico, and it
was the best Law that ever was to preserve the King and his Successors from
Treason, for it is as it were a hedge about the King; For before this Statute,
Tenant in Tail had no regard to commit Treason, For he forfeited his Lands but
during his own life, and then the Lands went to the issue in Tail: But this
Statute does punish the Child for the Fathers offense, and so makes men more
careful not to offend, least their posterity may beg. I take two grounds which
are frequent in our Law: First, That the King is favored in the Exposition of
any Statute. Com. 239, 240. The second, That upon the construction of any
Statute, nothing shall be taken by equity against the King. Com. 233, 234. Here
in this Case although the Right were not in possession, yet it was mixed with
the possession, from Anno 13. E. 1. until 26. H. 8. Tenant in Tail feared not
to commit Treason, For the Statute of West. 2. did preserve the Estate Tail, so
as the Father could not prejudice his issue per factum suum: And therefore the
Commonwealth considering that a wicked man did not care what became of himself,
so as his issue might be safe, provided this Statute of 26. H. 8. Cap. 13.
although the Statute of 16. R. 2. Cap. 5. which gives the Praemunire, does
Enact that all Lands and Tenements of one attainted in a Praemunire shall be
forfeited to the King: Yet Tenant in Tail in such Case did not forfeit his
Lands: C. 11. part. 63. b. as the Statute of West. 2. Cap. 1. says in
particular words, That Tenant in Tail shall not prejudice his issue; Therefore
the Statute of 26. H. 8. in particular words says, That Tenant in Tail shall
forfeit his Lands for Treason. The Right of Francis Bigot is not a right in
gross, but a Right mixed with a possession. The Statute of West. 2. Cap. 1.
brought with it many mischiefs; For by that Statute, the Ancestor being Tenant
in Tail, could not redeem himself out of prison, nor help his wife, nor his
younger children; and that mischief continued until 12. E. 4. Taltaram's Case,
and then the Judges found a means to avoid those mischiefs by a common
Recovery; and this Invention of a common Recovery was a great help to the
Subject. Then came the Statute of 32. H. 8. Cap. 36. which Enacted, That Fines
levied by Tenant in Tail, should be a good bar to the issue of any Estate, any
way entailed. If the Son, issue in tail, levieth a Fine in the life of his
Father who is Tenant in tail, it shall be a bar to him who levieth the Fine,
and to his issues* And both these, viz. the Common Recovery, and the said
Statute did help the Purchaser; And shall not this Statute of 26. H. 8. help
the King? The Statute of 26. H. 8. Cap. 13. has not any strength against the
Ancestor, but against the Child. For the Construction of Statutes I take three
Rules; First, When a Case happens which is not within the Letter, then it is
within the intent and equity of the Statute, Com. 366. 464. Secondly, All
things which may be taken within the mischief of the Statute, shall be taken
within the Equity of the Statute 4. H. 6. 26. per Martin. Thirdly, When any
thing is provided for by a Statute, every thing within the same mischief is
within the same Statute, 14. H. 7. 13. The Estate tail of Francis^ Bigot and
Katharine his wife is forfeited by the Statute of 26 H. 8. There is a
difference when the Statute does fix the forfeiture upon the person, As where
it is enacted that J. S. shall forfeit his lands which he had at the time of
his Attaindor; The Judges ought expound that Statute only to J. S. But the
Statute of 26 H. 8. does not fix the forfeiture upon the person, but upon the
land it self: And Exposition of Statutes ought to extend to all the mischiefs.
8 Eliz. Sir Ralph Sadler's Case in B. R. where an Act of Parliament did enact,
That all the lands of Sadler should be forfeited to the King, of whomsoever
they were holden: Sadler held some lands of the King; in that case the King had
that land by Escheat by the Common Law, and not by the said Statute. Com. 563,
The Law shall say, that all the rights of the tail are joined together to
strengthen the estate of the King. Tenant in tail, before the Statute of 1 E.
6. cap. 14. of Chauntries, gave lands to superstitious uses, which were enjoyed
five years before the said Statute of 1 E. 6. made; Yet it was adjudged that
the right of the issue was not saved, but that the land was given to the Crown;
for the issue is excluded by the saving in the said Statute. If Tenant in tail
give the lands to charitable uses; the issue is barred, For the saving of the
Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 5. excludes him, And he is bound by the Statute of
Donis. So the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. and the private Act of 31 H. 8. do
save to all but the heirs of the Offenders.

The third Objection was, That Ratcliffe was not excluded by the saving; for it
was said, That the same does not extend but to that which is forfeited by his
Ancestors body: And here Ratcliffe had but a Right, and that was saved; And the
Statute does not give Rights. I answer, first, The Statute of 26 H. 8. is not
to be expounded by the letter, for then nothing should be forfeited but that
only which he had in possession and use. Tenant in tail is disseised and
attainted for treason: By the words of the said Statute of 26 H. 8. he forfeits
nothing, yet the issue in tail shall forfeit the lands; for the issue in tail
has a right of Entry which may be forfeited, 6 H. 7. 9. A right of Entry may
escheat, and then it may be forfeited. Secondly, The Statute is not to be
construed to the possession; but if he has a mixed right with the possession,
it is forfeited, but a right in gross is not forfeited. Tenant in tail of a
Rent or Seignorie purchases the Tenancie or the Land out of which the Rent is
issuing, and is attainted; He shall forfeit the Seignorie and Rent, or the
Land, for the King shall have the Land for ever, And then the Seignorie or Rent
shall be discharged, for otherwise the King should not have the Land for ever;
For the King cannot hold of any Lord a Seignorie, 11 H. 7. 12. The heir of
Tenant in tail shall be in Ward for a Meanaltie descended unto him, the
Meanaltie not being in esse; and yet it shall be said to be in esse, because of
the King, C. 3 part 30. Cars Case: Although the Rent was extinguished, yet as
to the King it shall be in esse. The difference is betwixt a Right clothed with
a possession, and a right in gross, viz. where the Right is severed from the
possession, there it is in gross, For there the Right lies only in Action;
and therefore neither by the Statute of 26 H. 8. nor by the private Act of 31
H. 8. such a Right is not forfeited, C. 3. part 2. C. 10. part 47, 48. Right of
Action by the Common Law nor by Statute Law shall escheat, and therefore it is
not forfeited: For no Right of Action is forfeitable, because the right is in
one, and the possession in another. Perkins 19. A Right per se cannot be
charged. 27 H. 8. 20. by Mountague, A man cannot give a Right by a Fine, unless
it be to him who has the possession; C. 10. part Lampits Case; Sever the
possibility from the right, and it does not lie in grant or forfeiture; but
unite them (as they are in our Case) and then the Right may be granted or
forfeited, for that Right clothed with a possession may be forfeited. A Right
clothed with the possession, 1. It tastes of the possession, 2. It waits upon
the possession, 3. It changes the possession. The Bishop of Durham has all
Forfeitures for Treason by the Common Law within his Diocese, viz. the
Bishopric of Durham: And if Tenant in tail within the Bishopric commits
Treason and dies, the Issue in tail shall enjoy the land against the Bishop,
Dyer 289 a. pl. 57. For the Bishop has not the land for ever, but the Issue in
tail may have a Formedon against the Bishop: But in our Case it is otherwise:
Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment, and takes back an estate unto himself in
tail, the remainder in Fee to his right heirs; The Bishop in such case shall
not have the land forfeited for Treason, because that the Bishop cannot have
the estate tail; but in such case the King shall have the Land by the Statute
of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. And the Bishop in such case shall not have the Fee,
because it is one estate, and the King shall not wait upon the Subject, viz the
Bishop. The Right waits upon the possession: For 11 H. 7. 12. If the son and a
stranger disseiseth the father, and the father dies, this right infuseth it
self into the possession, and changes the possession, And it is a Release in
fact by the father to the son, 9 H. 7. 25. Br' Droit 57. A Disseisor dies
seized, and his heir enters and is disseised by A. The first Disseisee does
release unto A. all his right; All the right is now in the second Disseisor,
viz. A. because the right and the possession meet together in A. 40 E. 3. 18.
b. Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life with warranty: If Tenant for life be
impleaded by the heir to whom the warranty does descend, he shall rebut the
right in tail being annexed with the possession, for that is in case of a
saving of the land by that right: But where one demands land, there all the
Right ought to be showed. 11 H. 4 37. If a man be to bring an Action to
recover, then he ought to make a good title by his best right, if he has many
rights: But if a man be in possession, and an Action be brought against him,
then he may defend himself by any of his rights, or by all his rights. 11 H. 7.
21. Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment to his use upon Condition, and afterward
upon his Recognisance the land is extended, and afterward the Condition is
performed, yet the interest of the Conusee shall not be avoided; For although
the Extent come upon the Fee, and not upon the Tail, yet when the Extent was,
it was extracted out of all the rights. C. 7. part 41. A Tenant in tail makes a
Lease for life, now he has gained a new Fee by wrong; and afterward he makes
a Lease for years, and Tenant for life dies; He shall not avoid his Lease for
years, although he be in of another estate, because he had a defeicible title
and an ancient right, the which if they were in several hands shall be good, as
the Lease of the one, and the Confirmation of the other; And being in one hand,
it shall be as much in Law as a saving of the Right.

In our Case, the Right and Possession both were in Francis Bigot; And
Ratcliffe is entitled to the old estate tail, and to the new also. There is a
difference betwixt him who claims the land so forfeited to the King; and the
heir of the body of the person attainted: Litt^719. Land is given to A and the
issue males of his body, the remainder to the heirs females of his body: If the
Father commit Treason, both heir male and female are barred, for they both
claim by the Father; but if the heir male after the death of his Father be
attainted of Treason, the King shall have the lands as long as he has issue
male of his body, and then the heir female shall have the lands, for she shall
not forfeit them, because she claims not by the brother, but by the father.
Com. in Manxels case, A man has three several rights of estate tails, and
comes in as Vouchee; If the Recovery pass, it shall bar all his Rights for one
Recompense, and they shall be all bound by one possession. There is a
difference where the Kings title is by Conveyance of the party, and where for
forfeiture for Treason by this Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. v. the Abbot of
Colchesters Case: The Abbot seized in the right of his house, did commit
Treason, and made a Lease for years, and then surrendered his house to the King
after the Statute of 26 H. 8. The question was whether the King should avoid
the Lease: It was adjudged, That the King was in by the surrender, and should
not avoid the Lease, and not by the Statute of 26 H. 8. But if the King had had
it by force of the Statute, then the King should have avoided the Lease. Com.
560. Tenant in tail, the reversion to the King: Tenant in tail makes a Lease
for years, and is attainted of Treason; The King shall avoid the Lease upon the
construction of the Statute of 26 H. 8. which gives the lands unto the King for
ever.

The third point is upon the Remitter. This point had been argued by way of
Admittance: For as I have argued* The ancient right is given away unto the
King; and then there is no ancient right, and so no Remitter. There is a
difference where the issue in tail is forced to make a Title, and where not: In
point of defense he is not so precisely forced to make his Title, as he is in
case of demand. Whereas the Defendant demands the lands from the King, the
Descent will not help him, because the Attaindor of the Ancestor of Ratcliffe
hinders him in point of title to make a demand, Dyer 332 b. In this case he
ought to make himself heir of the body of Francis Bigot and Katharine. C. 8.
part 72. C. 9. part 139, 140. There Cook couples the Case of Fine levied, and
the Case of Attaindor together. C. 8. part 72. Land is given to husband and
wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies: The husband alone levies a Fine
with proclamations, Or is attainted of Treason and dies: The wife before Entry
dies: The issue is barred; and the Conusee, or King has right unto the land,
because the issue cannot claim as heir to them both, viz. father and mother,
for by the father he is barred. 5 H. 7. 32, 33. C. 9. part 140. Husband and
wife Tenants in tail; If one of them be attainted of Treason (as it was in our
Case) the lands shall not descend to the issue, because he cannot make title.
And there Cook puts the Case, That if lands be given to an Alien and his wife,
they have a good estate tail, and yet it is not discendable to the issue. The
Consequence then of all this is, That if Ratcliffe cannot take advantage of the
descent by reason of the disability by Attaindor, a fortiori he shall not be
remitted: And yet I confess that in some Cases one may be remitted against the
King, Com. 488, 489, 553. But that is where the King is in by matter of Law by
Conveyance; but in this Case the King is in by an Act of Parliament, and there
shall be no Remitter against a matter of Record. Another reason is, because
that the possession is bound by the Judgment of Attaindor and the Act of
Parliament. 5 H. 7. 31. 7 H. 7. 15. 16 H. 7. 8. A descent of land shall not
make a title against the King or any other who has the land by an Act of
Parliament.

But then in our Case, If there should be a Remitter, yet the same is
overreached by the Office. (...)-part 10. before the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap.
20. there ought to have been an Office found in the Case of Attaindor of
Treason, Br. Cases 103. Brook Office Devant, etc. 17. I do not mean an Office
of intitling, but an Office declaratory of a conspicuous title. C. 5. part 52.
There are two manner of Offices; One which vesteth the estate and possession of
the land etc. in the King; Another which is an Office of Instruction; and that
is when the estate of the land is lawfully in the King, but the particularity
thereof does not appear upon record: And the Office of Instruction shall relate
to the time of the Attaindor, not to make Queen Elizabeth in our Case in by
descent, but to avoid all me^ne Incombrances; And is not this Remitter an
Incombrance? And for that purpose the Office shall relate: For in things of
Continuance Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, C. 7. part 28. For so the rule of
Nullum tempus etc. is to be understood of a thing of Continuance, and not a
thing unica vice, v. Fitz. Enter Congeable, 53. Trav. 40. where it is said,
Where the King has cause to seize for the forfeiture of Tenant for life, if
the Tenant for life dies, the Reversion may enter; for in that case Tempus
occurrit Regi, and the King cannot seize after the death of the Tenant for
life. 35 H. 6. 57. There is no descent against the King* and if there be no
descent, then there is no Remitter. The consequence of all this is, That the
Office does relate to the Right, And that the Monstrans de Droit does not lie:
And the want of Office found for all this time, was the fault of the Kings
Officers, and shall not prejudice the King. But if the Office should not
relate, then the Monstrans de Droit would lie, because then the King was in but
by one single matter of Record. We show in the Office, 33 Eliz. That there
issued forth a Commission directed to certain of the Privy-Councel to enquire
of the Treason; and if Francis Bigot upon the Treason were Indicted. And in our
Case we show immediately another Commission was directed to the Lord Chancellor
and the two Chief Justices etc. to arraign Francis Bigot. And all that is
confessed by Ratcliffe himself, viz. modo and forma. And therefore the
Objection which Glanvile made was frivolous, viz. That it did not appear that
Francis Bigot was attainted by Verdict, by Confession, or by Outlawry. And so
he concluded, That for these causes the Judgment given in the Court of
Common Pleas ought to be reversed.

George Crook argued for Ratcliffe, and he prayed that the Judgment might be
affirmed. I will argue only these points following. 1. That Francis Bigot had
not so much as a right of Action at the time of his Attaindor, for he had not
any right at all. 2. Admit that he had a right of Action, If this right of
Action be given to the King by the said Statutes of 26 and 31 H. 8. It was
objected, That the right being clothed with a possession, that the same is
given to the King: But I will prove the contrary. 3. When Francis Bigot being
Tenant in tail, and being attainted and executed for Treason, and then
Katherine his wife dies being one of the Donees in tail, 21 H. 8. and the
lands descend to Ratcliff, If the Office afterward found shall relate to take
away the Remitter. I say it does not, but that his Remitter does remain to
maintain his Monstrans de Droit, and he is not put to his Petition. The chief
point is, What right Francis Bigot had at the time of his Attaindor. 1. When
Ralph Bigot being Tenant in tail, 6 H. 8. made a Feoffment in Fee, what right
remained in Francis his Son? The right is in abeyance, viz. in nubibus, that is
in custodia Legis: And then Francis Bigot had no right of that entail 21 H. 8.
when he made the Feoffment. Com. 487. There Jus is divided, viz. Jus
recuperandi, Jus in randi, Jus habendi, Jus retinendi, Jus percipiendi, Jus
possedendi; but here Francis Bigot had not any of these rights. Com. 374. if
the Discontinuee of Tenant in tail levieth a Fine with proclamations, and five
years pass, and Tenant in tail dies, the issue in* tail shall have other five
years, because he is the first to the right. 19 H. 8. 7. C. 7. part 81. If
Donee in tail makes a Feoffment in Fee, in rei veritate the Donee has not jus
in re, neque ad rem. C. 3. part 29. Litt. 649. There it appears that the
right to an estate tail may be in abeyance. Com. 552. Walsinghams Case: There
the King gave land in tail to Wyat, who made a Feoffment unto Walsingham;
Afterward Wyat was attainted of Treason, and there the estate tail of Wyat was
forfeited; but the cause there was, because that the reversion was in the
Crown, and so no discontinuance by his Feoffment, because that the reversion
was in the Crown. In our Case, no right of the estate tail was in Francis Bigot
after the Feoffment unto his own use, but the right is in abeyance. It was
objected, That the Writ of Formedon is Discendit jus, and the Monstrans de
Droit was so: I answer* It is so in point of form in the Writ, but not in
substance. C. 7. part 14. Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life, and Tenant for
life dies: Now he has an ancient right, and the Donor may avow upon the
Tenant in tail notwithstanding his Feoffment, but that is by reason of privity,
and not by reason of any right he has. Jus recuperandi did descend to the
issue in tail, viz. Francis Bigot, 21 H. 8. He who has a right of Action
gives the same away by his Livery and Feoffment, as appears by the Cases put
in C. 1. part 111. It was objected, That Cestuy que use was an Attorney or
Servant, therefore he does not pass his own right, for he cannot make an
Attorney to make Livery; and 9 H. 7. 26. was cited to be adjudged so: But it is
adjudged to the contrary, M. 25 H. 8. in the Kings Bench, rot. 71. betwixt the
Bishop of London and Kellet, as it appears in Dyer 283. and Bendloe's
Reports, and C. 9. part 75. For there it is express, that Cestuy que use may
make a Letter of Attorney to make Livery; which proves that he makes not the
Feoffment as a Servant, but as Owner of the Land. It was objected, That Cuesty
que use was as an Executor: but that I deny. 49 E. 3 17 a. Persay: Executors
cannot make a Feoffment, but they ought to make a Sale; and the Vendee, viz.
the Bargainee is in without Livery and Seisin: But if they do make a Feoffment
by the Livery, all their right is given away: But if an Attorney gives Livery
in the name of his Master, nothing of his own right to the same Land is given
away by the Livery and Seisin; but if he makes Livery in his own name, then he
gives away his own right; and the Statute of 1 R. 3. cap. 1. makes the
Feoffment good which is made by Cestuy que use against him and his heirs. C. 1.
pt. 111. By Livery and Seisin his whole right is given away. Com. 352. The
Feoffees of Cestuy que use are disseised; the Disseisor enfeoffeth Cestuy que
use, who enfeoffs a stranger. And the Question was, If by this Feoffment made
by Cestuy que use the right of the first Feoffees were determined and extinct.
Fitzherbert held that the right was gone; and in that case the Uses were raised
after 1 R. 3. and before 27 H. 8. cap. 10. Although Yelverton held that it was
meant of a Feoffment before the Statute of 1 R. 3. Jus recuperandi was in
Francis Bigot. Then the question is, Whether this Right were given away by the
Statutes of 26 and 31 H. 8. The Statute of 26 H. 8. and 31 H. 8. are several
and distinct Statutes: The words of the Statute of 26 H. 8. are, That the party
offending shall forfeit all his Possession and Use; but there is no word of
Right in the Statute; and that Statute does not extend to give any land but
that which was in possession or use: And the cause was, because before that
Statute of 26 H. 8. Uses were not given unto the King for Attaindor for
Treason, they being but a Trust and Confidence. C. 11. part 36 b. The Statute
says, By any ways, title, or means: But observe when this Statute was made;
It is a penal Statute, and therefore shall be taken strictly, Stamford 129 b.
C. 11. part 36 b. The Statute of 5 and 6 E. 6. takes away Clergy; but if a
stranger be in the house by license of the Owner, the party shall have his
Clergy, because out of the words, and being a penal Law, it shall be taken
strictly. The Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 20. forfeits for Treason Right to the
Land, viz. right of Entry; but the Statute of 26 H 8. gives not any Right.
Before the Statute of 33 H. 8. a right of Entry was not given to the King for
Treason; a fortiori a right of Action was not forfeited to the King. It is the
Statute of 31 H. 8. the private Act which hurts us, which expressly gave
Rights: But this Right in our Case is not forfeited by this Statute, which
gives Rights which a man has; But in our Case Francis Bigot had not the
Right, but the Right was in abeyance. Statutes in points of Forfeiture forfeit
no more then a man has: But yet a Statute may give to the King that which a
man has not. C. 11. part 13. The statute of Monasteries gave that to the King
which was not, viz. Monasteries in reputation, saving to none but strangers, no
not to the Donors. Hussies Case: Tenant in tail does bargain and sell to the
King; and a statute gave it to the King, saving to strangers; but neither the
Donor nor his issue were within the saving. Old Entries, 423. b, c, d. It was
enacted, That the Duke of Suffolk should forfeit for Treason all his Lands,
Rights, and Tenements, and all such Rights and Titles of Entry which he had:
But thereby rights of Action were not given to the King, but only rights of
Entries. The statutes of 31 and 33 H. 8. are alike in words: If Tenant in tail,
the Remainder over, forfeit etc. the Remainder is saved without words of
saving: But if the statute gives the land by name unto the King, then the
Remainder is not saved, but is destroyed. If a Right of Action be given unto
the King, the statutes of Limitation and Fines are destroyed, for he is not
bound by them. C. 485, 486. in point of forfeiture, Stamf. 187, 188. There is a
difference betwixt real and personal Rights given to the King. C. 3. part 3. A
right of Action concerning Inheritances are not forfeited by Attaindor, etc.
But Obligations, Statutes etc. are forfeited by Attaindor. C. 7. part 9. A
right of Action is not given to the King by general words of an Act, because it
lies in privity, And it would be a vexation to the subject if they should be
given. C. 4. pt. 124. Although that a Non compos mentis cannot commit Felony;
yet he may commit Treason; for the King is Caput and salus reipublicae. If Non
compos mentis makes a Feoffment, and then commits Treason, the King shall
not have an Action to recover the Land of the Non compos mentis, as the party
himself may have: But if Non compos mentis be disseised, and then be attainted
of Treason, then the King may enter into the Lands, because the party himself
had a right of Entry which is given to the King.

It was objected, That a right of Action clothed with a possession might be
given to the King. Tenant in tail discontinues, and takes back an estate, and
is attainted of Treason: This right of Action shall not be forfeited to the
King, for his right of Action was to the estate tail. In our Case the right of
Action was to Katherine, for she was Tenant for life. The Attaindor was 29 H 8.
and the Act which forfeited the Right was made 31 H. 8. and then the right and
possession were divided. 30 H. 6. Grants 91. The King may grant the
Temporalties of a Bishop before they happen to be void, And so he may grant a
Ward: But the King cannot grant the Lands of J. S. when he shall be attainted
of Treason; for the Law does not presume that J. S. will commit Treason. The
Devise of a Term, the Remainder over is good: But if the Devise be of a Term to
one in tail, the Remainder over, the Remainder is void, because the Law does
presume that an estate in tail may continue for ever. C. 8. part 165, 166. The
Law did not presume that Digby at the time of the Conveyance intended to commit
Treason.

It was objected, That whatsoever may be granted, may be forfeited: I deny
that, C. 3. part 10. by Lumley's Case: If the issue in tail in the life of his
Father be attainted of high Treason and dies, it is no forfeiture of the
estate tail: But if the issue in tail levieth a Fine in the life of his Father,
it is a bar to his issues. C. 3. part 50. Sir George Brown's Case, 10 E. 4. 1.
there Executors may give away the goods of the Testator, but they cannot
forfeit the goods of their Testator. Com. 293. Osborns Case, Guardian in
Soccage may grant the Ward, but he cannot forfeit him. C. 3. part 3. Right of
Actions reals, because they are in privity by general words of a Statute, are
not given to the King, v. Dyer 67. String fellow's Case: That which is in
custodia Legis cannot be taken as a Distress in a Pound overt, cannot be taken
out of the Pound upon another Distress.

The third Point is, If he were remitted; And I conceive that he was remitted:
When Tenant in tail is attainted of Treason, the issue at the Common Law should
inherit as if he had not been attainted, Lit. 747. C. 1. part 103. for as to
the Estate tail, there was no corruption of blood. C. 10. part. 10. If Tenant
in tail before the Statute of 26. H. 8. commit Treason, the land shall descend
to his issue, for the issue does not claim by the Father, but per formam doni^
C. 8. part 166. such a descent shall take away entry; But in our Case Ratcliff
had both possession and right, and therefore is remitted; the special Verdict
finds that he was remitted, and the Judgment given in the Court of Pleas in the
Exchequer was, that he was remitted. It was objected, that the Remitter was
destroyed by the relation of the Office; but the same is not so, for the Office
relates only to avoid Incombrances, viz. acts done by himself: but to divest
the Freehold, and to settle the same in the King, the Office shall not relate:
And if it should relate, then the King should lose many Lands which he now
has: Com. Nichols Case. Tenant for life upon condition to have Fee etc. If the
Office shall relate, then the same takes away the Freehold out of the person
attainted, a principio. and then the Fee cannot accrue; and so by that means
the King should lose the lands. A Remitter is no incombrance, for it is an
ancient right, and the Act of the King cannot do wrong. C. 1. part 44. b. 27
Ass. 30. There Tenant for life with clause of re-entrie is attainted the
reversioner enters, the Office shall not relate to take the Freehold out of
the reversioner, C. 3. part 38. Relatio est fictio juris, and shall never
prejudice a third person; and the Office found in the life of Katherine shall
not prejudice him, C. 9. part, Beamounts Case; the husband and wife are Tenants
in tail, the husband is attainted of Treason and dies, yet the wife is tenant
in tail, when it is not to the damage or prejudice of the King, there tempus
occurrit Regi: C. 7. part 28. Baskervile's Case. From 29 H. 8. until 33 H. 8.
Katherine; and afterward Ratcliff had the possession; and then the Law was
taken to be, that Ratcliff had a lawful possession. For these reasons he
concluded, that the Judgment ought to be affirmed.

In Trinity Term following, viz. Trin. 21. Jacobi Regis, the Case was argued
again: and then Coventry the Kings Attorney general, argued for the Lord
Sheffield, That the Judgment given in the Court of Pleas in the Exchequer,
ought to be reversed. He said, I will insist only upon the right of the Case,
Whether upon the right of the Case Ratcliff may maintain a Monstrans de Droit.
First, If by the Attainder, the right of the old Estate tail, as well as of the
new Estate tail be forfeited: Secondly, Admitting that the old right of entail
be not forfeited, then if the Office do overreach the Remitter, for then a
Monstrans de Droit does not lie, but a Petition for the reason of the
discontinuance: First it is evident, that when Ralph Bigot Tenant in tail in
possession 6 H. 8. made* a Feoffment, that that was a discontinuance, and it is
as clear that the right of the old Estate tail vested in Francis Bigot. The
Feoffment made by Francis Bigot, 21 H. 8. did not divest the right of the old
tail: First for the weakness of the Feoffment; Secondly for the
inseparableness of the Estate tail, which is incommunicable, and not to be
displaced by weak assurance. That Feoffment was made according to the Statute
of 1 R. 3. and not by the Common Law, but only by force of the said Statute.
The Feoffment is without Deed, and so nothing passes but only by way of
Livery, or else nothing at all. Also at the time of the Feoffment in 21 H. 8.
the Feoffees were in seisin of the Lands; and Ratcliff shows in his Monstrans
de Droit, that Francis Bigot did disseise the Feoffees, and so the Feoffment
had no force as a Feoffment at the Common Law, but only by the Statute of 1 R.
3. For at the Common Law, if Cestuy que use had entered upon the Feoffees, and
made a Feoffment, nothing had passed. There is a difference betwixt a Feoffment
at the Common Law, and a Feoffment according to the Statute of 1 R. 3. which
operates sub modo Feoffments are the ancient Conveyances of Lands, but
Feoffments according to the Statute of 1 R. 3. are upstarts and have not had
continuance above 150 years. In case of Feoffments at the Common Law, the
Feoffor ought to be seized of the lands at the time of the Feoffment; but if a
Feoffment be according to the Statute of 1 R. 3. in such Case the Feoffor
needs not be in possession: Feoffments at the Common Law give away both
Estates and Rights; but Feoffments by the Statute of R. 3, give the Estates,
but not the Rights. In case of Feoffment at the Common Law, the Feoffee is in
the Per, viz. by the Feoffor; but in case of Feoffments by the Statute of R. 3.
the Feoffees are in in the Post, viz by the first Feoffees, 14 H. 8 10. Brudnel
says, that a Feoffment by Cestuy que use by the Statute of 1 R. 3, is like to
fire out of a flint, so as all the fire which comes out of the flint will not
fasten upon any thing but tinder or gunpowder: So a Feoffment by Cestuy que use
by force of the Statute of 1 R. 3, will not fasten upon any thing but what the
Statute requires, 5 H. 7. 5. 21 H. 7. 25. 8 H. 7, 8. 27 H. 8. 13. 23. by these
books it appears, that if Cestuy que use makes a Leaf for life, during the
Lease he gains nothing, and after the Lease he gains no reversion; for the
Lessee shall hold of the Feoffees, and of them he shall have aid, and unless it
be by deed Indented, in such a Case a Reservation of Rent is void, and the
Lessor in such a Case cannot punish the Lessee for waste; for he makes the
Lease merely by the power which the Statute gives him. 8. H. 7. 9. Cestuy que
use makes the Feoffment as servant to the Feoffees, and if not as servant to
the Feoffees, yet at least as servant to the Statute of 1 R. 3. If a man
enters upon another, and makes a Lease for life, he gains a reversion to
himself, and shall maintain an Action of Waste; but Cestuy que use, when he
enters and makes a Lease, he has no reversion, nor shall punish waste. And
as it is in the Creation, so is it in the Continuance, 4 H. 7. 18. If Cestuy
que use for life or in tail makes a Lease for life, it is warranted during his
own life, by the Statute of 1 R. 3. but if Tenant for life at the Common Law,
makes a Feoffment, or a lease for life: there the first Lessor ought to avoid
this forfeiture by entry, and it is not void by the death of the second
Lessor, viz. the Tenant for life, 27 H. 8. 23. A Feme Covers is Cestuy que use,
the husband makes a Feoffment and dies, the Feoffment is void by his death:
Br. Feoffments to Uses 48. If Cestuy que use for life levieth a fine, it is no
forfeiture, but good by the Statute of 1 R. 3. during his own life. And if in
such case Proclamations pass, there needs no claim nor entry within five
years; but the Law is contrary of Tenant for life by the Common Law: for if
Tenant for life at the Common Law levieth a fine, it is a forfeiture. Dyer 57.
Cestuy que use for life or in tail, makes a Lease for life, the Lease is
determined by the death of Cestuy que use, and the Lessee is become Tenant at
sufferance; but a Lease for life by Tenant for life at the Common Law, is not
determined by the death of Lessee for life who was Lessor, and his Tenant is
tenant for life, and not at sufferance, as in the Case before, and the first
Lessor ought to avoid it by entry. Br. Feoffments to Uses 48. A Recovery by
Cestuy que use in tail or in fee, is ended by his death.

By these Cases appears a main difference betwixt the validity of a Feoffment
by Cestuy que use, and the Feoffment at the Common Law: The Statute of 27 H. 8.
of Uses, does not execute Uses which are in abeyance, C. 1. part, Chudleigh's
Case 9 H. 6. by the Common Law, the Devise to an Enfant in ventre samier is
good but by the Statutes of 32, and 34 H. 8. of Wills such a Devise is not
good, for the Statute Law does not provide for the putting of lands in
abeyance. By the Statute of 1 R. 3. All Feoffments and Releases, etc. shall be
good and effectual to those to whom they are made to their uses. And this
Feoffment in our Case, was not made to a man in Nubibus. Cestuy que use by this
Statute of 1 R. 3. makes a lease for years, the remainder over to the right
heirs of I. S. the remainder is not good, for the Statute does not put it in
abeyance, for the remainder ought to be limited to one in esse. 21 H. 8. cap.
4. gives power to Executors to sell: that Executor who proves the Will, shall
sell, and when he sells, if he have any right to the land, the right of the
said Executor is not gone by that Statute.

So if Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts, sell the Lands of the
Bankrupt, and one of the Commissioners has right to the land so sold, his
right is not extinct: And so in this Case the Statute limits what shall pass.
Upon the Statute of ^3 Eliz. cap. 4. which makes the lands of Receivers liable
for their debts, if the King sells, the right of the Accomptant passes, but
not the Kings right 17 E. 3. 60. An Abbot having occasion to go beyond the
Seas, made another Abbot his Procurator, to present to such Benefices which
became void in his absence. That Abbot presents in the name of him who made him
Procurator, to one of his own Advowsons, the right of his own Advowson does not
pass; but yet it is an usurpation of the Abbot which went beyond sea, to that
Church. What is the nature of this right? All rights are not gi^en away by
Feoffments at the Common Law, Lit. 672. Land is given unto husband and wife in
tail, the husband makes a Feoffment, and takes back an Estate to him and his
wife, both of them are remitted. Which Case proves that the husband has left
in himself a right notwithstanding the Feoffment. 41 E. 3. 17. 41 Ass. 1. John
at Lee's Case. So at the Common Law a Feoffment does not give away all the
right; This right does stick so fast in the issue, as the Statute of West. 2.
cap. 1. can back it unto him. 2 E. 3. 23. 22 E. 3. 18. At the Common Law, if
Tenant in tail had offered to levy a fine, the Judges ought not to receive it,
but ought to have refused it, if it had appeared unto them that the Conusor was
Tenant in tail: the same was before the Statute of 4 H. 7. which gave power to
Tenant in tail to levy a fine; for the Statute of West. 2. Cap. 1. says, Quod
finis sit nullus. 2. E. 2. age 77. 2 E. 3. 33. 3 E. 3. 1. 24 E 3. 25. If Donee
in tail levie^h a Fine, yet there is no remedy against his Tenant, for he
shall not be compelled to attorn, for that the right is in the Donor. ^ E. 2.
Avowry 181. 48 E. 3. 8. Avowry was made upon the Donee in tail, notwithstanding
that he made a Feoffment: and Avowry is in the realtie and right. 4 E. 3. 4. 4
H. 6. 28. 10 H. 7. 14. In a Replevin, ancient Demesne is a good plea, because
the Avowry is in the realtie: The Donor shall know for homage upon the Donee,
after that the Donee has made a Feoffment. 7 E. 4. 28. the Donee shall do
homage. And Litt. 90. says, That none shall do homage, but such as is seized
in his own right, or in the right of another. 2 E. 2. Avowry 85. 7 E 54. 28. 15
E. 4. 15 Guard. 116. the issue shall be in Ward notwithstanding a Feoffment by
Tenant in tail, Com. 561. Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment, yet the right of
the tail does remain in the Tenant in tail. 21 H. 7. 40. Tenant in tail of a
Rent, grants the same in Fee; if an Ancestor collateral releaseth with
Warranty, the same binds the Tenant in tail.

There is a common Rule, That a Warranty does not bind when a man has not a
right: The Cases cited in C. 1. part, Albonies Case, where Feoffments give
Rights, I agree. Barton and Ewers Case, A man made a Feoffment of Land, of
which he had cause to have a Writ of Error, he gave away his Writ of Error by
the Feoffment; I agree all those Cases, for that is in Cases of Feoffments at
the Common Law; but in our Case the Feoffment is by the Statute of 1 R. 3. In
our Case there is Jus habendi, possedendi, and recuperandi: It is like unto a
plant in Winter, which seems to be dead, yet there is in it anima vegitativa,
which in due time brings forth fruit: So the right in our Case is not given
away, nor is it in abeyance, but in Francis Bigot, which may be regained in due
time. Dyer 340. there was Scintilla juris, as here in our Case. 19 H. 8. 7.
Where Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment, and the Feoffee levieth a fine, and
five years pass, there it is said that the Issue in tail shall have five years
after the death of Tenant in tail who made the Feoffment; and the reason is,
because he is the first to whom the right does descend. This Case was objected
against me: yet I answer, that Tenant in tail in that Case has right, but he
cannot claim it by reason of his own Feoffment; he cannot say he has right,
but another may say he has right.

In our Case Francis Bigot cannot say he has a Right in him, but another may
say he has a Right. It is like where Tenant in Fee takes a Lease for years by
Deed Indented of his own Lands; He, during the years cannot say that he has
Fee, yet all other may say that he has the Fee. C. 4. part 127. The King shall
avoid the Feoffment for the benefit of a Lunatique, which Feoffment the
Lunatique had made; and shall not the King avoid a Feoffment which a Lunatique
has made, for his own benefit, viz for the benefit of the King himself? I
conceive that he shall. Secondly, Admit the right be in the person, viz. in
Francis Bigot; yet they object that it is a right of Action, and so not
forfeited. If this right be in the person at the time of the Attainder, it
shall be forfeited; if it be not in his person, but in Nubibus, yet it shall be
forfeited. Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment unto the use of himself and his
wife in tail* if the old right of entail rest, or not, in his person, it is
forfeited to the King. 34 Eliz. this very Point was then adjudged, Where Tenant
in tail before the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses, made a Feoffment unto the use
of himself and his wife in tail. It was resolved upon mature deliberation by
all the Judges of England, that the old Estate tail was in such case forfeited
for Treason. Set this Judgment aside, yet it rests upon the Statute of 26 H. 8.
A general Act for forfeiture for Treason, and the particular Act of 31 H. 8.
which was made for the particular Attaindor of Francis Bigot.

I will argue argue only upon the Statute 26 H. 8. which has three clauses.
First, to take away Sanctuary; Secondly, to provide that no Treason be
committed, and the Offender punished; The third, which clause I am to deal
with, which gives the forfeiture of Lands of Inheritance, etc These three
clauses do depend upon the Preamble. It was high time to make this Statute: For
when H. 8. excluded the Pope, he was to stand upon his guard: And that year of
26 H. 8. there were five several Insurrections against the King, therefore it
was great wisdom to bridle such persons: King Ed. 6. and Queen Mary repealed
diverse Statutes for Treason and Felony, yet left this Statute of 26 H. 8. to
stand in force. Anno 5 E. 6. cap. 5. this Statute of 26 H. 8. somewhat too
strict was in part repealed, viz. That the Church lands should not be forfeited
for the Treason of the Parson. This third branch does insist upon a Purview,
and a Saving, and both agree with the Preamble: The Purview is ample; Every
Offender, and Offenders of any manner of High Treason, shall forfeit and lose,
etc. I observe these two words in the Statute, shall (Forfeit) those things
which are forfeitable, and (Lose) those things which are not forfeitable. But
it shall be lost, that the heir of the Offender shall not find it, shall
Forfeit and l^se to the King his heirs and successors for ever, so it is a
perpetual forfeiture; shall forfeit all his Lands, which includes, Use, Estate
and Right, by any right, title or means: So you have Estate, Right, Title and
Use. Here Francis Bigot shall forfeit the Castle and Manor of Mulgrave unto the
King, his heirs and Successors, and he must forfeit the Land, Right* Title and
Use, otherwise it cannot be to the King for ever; and what is saved to
strangers, all shall be saved; and what will you not save to the Offender and
his heirs, all his Lands, Right, etc. as was saved to strangers.

It was objected, that it was not an Act of Assurance, but an Act of
Forfeiture, which is not so strong as an Act of Assurance. I do not doubt of
the difference; but how much will that difference make to this Case? does the
Statute go by way of Escheat? it does not; but in case of Petty Treason Land
shall Escheat; but when the Statute of 25 E. 3. speaks of High Treason, the
words of the said Statute are, Shall forfeit the Escheat to the King: But is
the Right divided from the King? Truly no; the word (Forfeit) take it in
nomine, or in natura, is as strong a word, as any word of Assurance. Alienare
in the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. Non habeant illi potestatem alienandi; so
non habent illi potestatem forisfaciendi, is in the nature of a Gift. Com. 260.
Forfeiture is a gift in Law, Et fortior est dispositio legis quam hominis, and
so as strong as any assurance of the party., If a Statute give the Land to the
King, then there needs not any Office, 27 H. 8. Br. Office. Com. 486. The
Right vests before Office. It was objected that the statute of 26 H* 8. does
not extend to a right of Action, but to a right of Entry. The purpose of this
Act of 26 H. 8. is not to attaint any particular person, as the Statute of 31
H. 8. was made for the particular Attaindor of Francis Bigot. 5 E. 4. 7. Cestuy
que use at the Common Law, did not forfeit for Felony or Treason; but by this
Act of 26. H. 8. Cestuy que use shall forfeit both Use and Lands, out of the
hands of the Feoffees. 4 E. 3. 47. 4 Ass. 4. The husband seized in the right of
his wife at the Common Law for Treason shall not forfeit but the profits of the
lands of his wife during his life, and not the Freehold it self; but by this
Act of 26 H. 8. the Freehold it self is forfeited. 18 Eliz. in the Common
Pleas, Wyats Case, C. 10. Lib. Entries 300. And if the Statute of 26 H. 8. had
had no saving, all had been forfeited from the wife. 7 H. 4. 32. there it is no
forfeiture, yet by this Statute it is a forfeiture. A right of Action shall not
Escheat, 44 E, 3. 44 Enter Cong. 38 C. 3 part the Marquess of Winchesters Case,
and Bowti^s Case, and C 7. part. Inglefield^s Case* A right of Action per se
shall not be forfeited by the Rules of the Common Law, nor by any Statute can a
right of Action be transferred to another, but by the Common Law a right of
Action may be quashed, and exonerated, and discharged in the possession of the
King. For it is out of the Rule which is in C. 10, part 48, for the cause of
quieting and repose of the Terre-Tenants, otherwise it would be a cause of
Suits; But all Rights, Tithes, Actions, etc. might for the same reasons, viz.
for the quiet of the Terre-Tenants, and the avoidance of Suits and
Controversies, be released to the Terre-Tennants. By the same reason here the
right of Action of Francis Bigot shall be discharged and exonerated by this
forfeiture, viz. for the quiet and repose of the Terre-Tenants; for the Law
delights in the quiet and repose of the Terre-Tenants. If Francis Bigot had
granted a Rent, the ancient right of the tail had been charged. C. 7. part 14.
Where Tenant in tail makes a lease for life, and grants a Rent charge, and
Tenant for life dies, he shall not avoid his charge, although he be in of
another Estate, because he had a defeisible possession, and an ancient right,
the which, etc. so as they could not be severed by way of conveyance and
charge, and no lawful act; Then I admire how he will sever this from himself
by his unlawful act, viz. the Feoffment, the discontinuance: Lit. 169. If a
man commit Treason, he shall forfeit the Dower of his wife, yet he does not
give the dower of his wife, but it goes by way of discharge in those Lands. 13
H. 7. 17. Tenant by the Courtesy in the life of his wife, cannot grant his
Estate of Tenant by the Courtesy to another, but yet he for Felony or Treason
may forfeit it, viz. by way of discharge. A Keeper of a Park commits Treason,
there the King shall not have the Office of Keeper for a forfeiture, because it
is an Office of trust; but if he had been Keeper of the Kings Park, and had
been attainted, there he should forfeit his Office by way of discharge and
exoneration. This Statute of 26 H. 8. has been adjudged to make Land to
revert, and not strictly to forfeit.

Austin's Case cited in Walsingham's Case. Tenant in tail, the reversion in the
King, the Tenant makes a Lease for years and dies, the issue accepts of the
Rent, and commits Treason, the Lease is avoided, for the King is not in by
forfeiture by the Statute of 26 H. 8. but by way of Reveter by the Statute of
26 H. 8. It was objected, that if Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment, and takes
back an Estate for life, and is attainted of Treason, that he shall not forfeit
his old right, I agree that Case: For indeed it is out of the Statute of 26 H.
8. which speaks of Inheritance, and in that Case the Tenant has but a
Freehold. The Statute of 26 H* 8. says, that it shall be forfeited to the
King, his heirs and Successors; And if in our Case the old right should remain,
then it should be a forfeiture but during the life of the Testator. When the
Common Law, or Statute Law gives Lands, it gives the means to keep them, as
the Evidences; So here the King is to have by force of this Statute of 26 H. 8.
the Evidences. The forfeiture of right is expressly within the Statute of 26 H.
8. as the forfeiture of Estate, as by any right, title or means, for the old
Estate tail is the means of Estates since 6 H. 8. And if you will take away the
Foundation, the Building will fall: For all the Estates are drawn out of the
old Estate tail. The Statute of 26 H. 8. is not an Act of Attaindor, for none
in particular is attainted by the Act; but the Act of 31 H. 8. does attaint
Francis Bigo^ in particular. It was objected, that here in this case there
needed not to be any express Saving. I answer, that there are diverse Statutes
of Forfeitures: yet the Statutes have Savings in them, so as it seems a saving
in such Acts were not superfluous, but necessary. The Act of 33 H. 8. for the
attainder of Queen Katharine, there is a saving in the Act, and yet an Act of
Forfeiture. Dyer 100. there the land vested in him in the Remainder by force of
a saving in the Act, so the saving is not void, but operative. C. 3. part
Dowlies Case, vid. the Earl of Arundels Case, there the saving did help the
wife, so it appears savings are in Acts of Parliaments of Forfeiture, and Acts
of Attaindor. Dyer 288, 289. The Bishop of Durham had Jura Regalia within his
Diocese, and then the Statute of 26 H. 8. came: now whether the Forfeiture for
Treason should be taken away from the Bishop, by reason of that Statute, and
given to the King, was the doubt? It was holden, that of new Treasons the
Bishop should not have the Forfeitures, for those were not at the Common Law,
as the Forfeitures of Tenant in tail; but that he should have the Forfeitures
of Lands in Fee within his Diocese; and that he had by force of the saving in
the Statute; so that a Saving is necessary and operative. Com. Nichols's Case,
there Harpers opinion, that there needs no saving to strangers; but yet a
saving is necessary for the Party and the Issue, if they have any thing, as
well as strangers. vid. C. 3. part Lincoln College Case. It is the Office of a
good Interpreter, to make all the parts of a Statute to stand together. Com.
559. By these general words (Lose and Forfeit) and by excluding of the heir in
the saving, the heir is bound; So the Judges have made use of a Saving, for it
is operative.

2 Ma. Austin's Case cited in Walsinghams Case. Tenant in tail the Reversion in
the Crown: Tenant in tail made a Lease for years, and levied a Fine to the
King, the King shall not avoid the Lease, for the King came in in the Reverter;
but in such Case, if he be attainted of Treason, then the King shall avoid the
Lease. So a Statute of Forfeiture is stronger then a Statute of Conveyance. By
this Statute of 26 H. 8. Church Land was forfeited, for so I find in the
Statute of Monasteries which excepts such Church Lands to be forfeited for
Treason, Dyer. Cardinal Poole being attained, did forfeit his Deanary, and yet
he was not seized thereof in jure suo proprio, for it was jus Ecclesiae. 27 E.
3. 89. A writ of Right of Advowson by a Dean, and he counts that it is Jus
Ecclesiae, and exception that it is not Jus suae Ecclesiae; But the Exception
was disallowed, for the Jus is not in his natural capacity, but in his
politic capacity; and yet by this Statute of 26 H. 8. such Church Land was
forfeited for Treason: this is a stronger Case then our Case.

Vide C. 9. part. Beaumont's Case: Land is given to husband and wife in tail,
and the husband is attainted of Treason; the wife is then Tenant in tail, yet
the Land is forfeited against the issue, although it be but a possibility for
the whole estate is in the wife; but the cause thereof is, because it was once
coupled with a possession. C. 7. part, Nevils Case, There was a question
whether an Earldom might be entailed and forfeited for Treason, which is a
thing which he has not in possession nor use, but is inherent in the blood:
And there resolved that the same cannot be forfeited as to be transferred to
the King, but it is forfeited by way of discharge and exoneration. 12 Eliz.
Dyer, the Bishop of Durhams Case: There, if it had not been for the saving, the
Regal Jurisdiction of the Bishop had been given to the King by the Statute of
26 H. 8. This Statute of 26 H. 8. was made for the dread of the Traitor: For
the times past saw how dangerous Traitors were, who did not regard their lives,
so as their lands might descend to their issue; It was then desperate for the
King, Prince, and Subject; For the time to come it was worse. The Law does not
presume that a man would commit so horrid an act as Treason: so it was cited by
Mr. Crook, who cited the case, That the King cannot grant the goods and lands
of one when he shall be attainted of Treason, because the Law does not presume
that he will commit Treason: If the Law will not presume it, wherefore then
were the Statutes made against it? If the Land be forfeited by the Statute of
26 H. 8. much stronger is it by the Statute of 31 H. 8. But then admit there
were a Remitter in the Case, yet by the Office found the same is defeated:
Without Office the Right is in the King, Com. 486. c. 5. part 52 where it is
said, There are two manner of Offices, the one which vests the estate and
possession of the Land etc. in the King, where he had but a Right, as in the
case of Attaindor the Right is in the King by the Act of Parliament, and
relates by the Office. Com. 488. That an Office does relate. 38 E. 3. 31. The
King shall have the mean profits. The Office found was found in 33 Eliz. and
the same is to put the King in by the force of the Attaindor which was 29 H. 8.
and so the same devests the Remitter. Tenant in tail levieth a Fine, and
disseiseth the Conusee and dies, the issue is remitted, then proclamations
pass; now the Fine does divest the Remitter. C. 1. part 47 Tenant in tail
suffers a common Recovery, and dies before Execution; the issue enters, and
then Execution is sued; the Estate tail is divested by the Execution; and so
here in our Case it is by the Office. C. 7. part 8. Tenant in tail makes a
Lease and dies (his wife priviment ensient) without issue; the Donor enters,
the Lease is avoided, afterward a Son is born, the Lease is revived. Com. 488.
Tenant in capite makes a Lease for life rendering rent, and for non-payment a
re-entry, and dies: the rent is behind, the heir enters for non-payment of
the rent, and afterward Office is found of the dying seized, and that the land
is ho^den in capite, and that the heir was within age: In the case the Entry
for the Condition broken was revived, and the Estate for life revived* 3 E. 4.
25. A Disseisor is attainted of Felony, the Land is holden of the Crown; the
Disseisee enters into the Land, and afterward Office is found that the
Disseisor was seized, the Remitter is taken out of the Disseisee: which is a
stronger case then our Case; for there was a right of Entire, and in our Case
it is but a right of Action, which is not so strong against the King. And for
these Causes he concluded, That the Judgment given in the Court of Pleas ought
to be reversed, And so prayed Judgment for the Lord of Sheffield Plaintiff in
the Writ of Error.

This great Case came afterward to be argued by all the Judges of England: And
upon the Argument of the Case the Court was divided in opinions, as many having
argued for the Defendant Ratcliffe as for the Plaintiff: But then one new
Judge being made, viz. Sir Henry Yelverton, who was before the Kings
Solicitor, his opinion and argument swayed the even balance before, and made
the opinion the greater for his side which he argued for, which was for the
Plaintiff the Lord Sheffield; And thereupon Judgment was afterward given,
That the Judgment given in the Court of Pleas should be reversed and was
reversed accordingly: And the Earl Lord Sheffield, now Earl of Mulgrave,
holds the said Castle and Manor of Mulgrave at this day according to the
said Judgment. Note, I have not set here the Arguments of the Judges, because
they contained nothing almost but what was before in this Case said, by the
Council who argued the Case at the Bar.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 418.
IT was the opinion of Ley Chief Justice, Chamberlain and Dodderidge Justices,
That a Defendants Answer in an English Court is a good Evidence to be given to
a Jury against the defendant himself; but it is no good Evidence against other
parties. If an Action be brought against two, and at the Assizes the Plaintiff
proceeds only against one of them, in that case he against whom the Plaintiff
did surcease his suit may be allowed a Witness in the Cause. And the Judges
said, That if the Defendants Answer be read to the Jury, it is not binding to
the Jury; and it may be read to them by assent of the parties. And it was
further said by the Court, That if the party cannot find a Witness, then he is
as it were dead unto him; And his Deposition in an English Court in a Cause
betwixt the same parties Plaintiff and Defendant may be allowed to be read to
the Jury, so as the party make oath that he did his endeavor to find his
Witness, but that he could not see him nor hear of him.

Pasch. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 419.
THe Husband, a wife seized of Lands, in the right of the wife levied a Fine
unto the use of themselves for their lives, and afterward to the use of the
heirs of the wife; Proviso that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
husband and wife at any time during their lives to make Leases for 21 years or
3 lives. The wife being Covert made a Lease for 21 years; And it was adjudged a
good Lease against the husband, although it was made when she was a Feme
Covert, and although it was made by her alone, by reason of the Proviso.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas. 420.
NOte that Hobart Chief Justice said, That it was adjudged Mich. 15 Jacobi in
the Common Pleas, That in an Action of Debt brought upon a Contract, the
Defendant cannot wage his Law for part, and confess the Action for the other
part. And it was also said, That so it was adjudged in Tart's Case upon a
Shop-book. And vide 24 H. 8. Br. Contract 35. A Contract cannot be divided. 38
H. 6. 14. If the Law does not lie for parcel, then it is suspended for the
whole where the debt is an entire debt. And so it was adjudged in this Case.

Pasch. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. 421.
NOte it was cited by Chamberlain Justice, 15 Jacobi, to be adjudged, That
where a man brought an Action upon the Case against another man for calling of
him Bastard, that the Action was maintainable. The Defendant brought a Writ of
Error, and showed for Error, That the Plaintiff did not claim any Inheritance*
or to be heir to any person certain: But notwithstanding that Error assigned,
the Judgment was affirmed. And he said, That if one says of J. S. that his
Father is an Alien, that an Action upon the Case will lie, because it is a
disability to the Son. Quaere.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
422. YOUNG and ENGLEFIELD'S Case. Intratur, Pasch. 21 Jac. Rot. 102.
YOung brought an Action of Trespass for entering his Close, etc. abutted upon
one side with Pancras, and butted on the other side with Grayes-Inne-Lane. Upon
Not guilty pleaded, the parties were at issue: And the Record of Nisi prius was
Graves-Inne-Lane; And thereupon the party was Nonsuit. And now it was moved to
have a Venire facias de novo. And a Case was cited express in the point,
betwixt Farthing and Dupper, 9 Jacobi Rot. 1349. Where in an Action upon the
Case upon Assumpsit, the Plea-Roll was Six weeks, and the Record of Nisi prius
Six months: And the Jury being sworn, the Plaintiff was Nonsuit; and a Venire
facias de novo was awarded, and the Nonsuit was recorded. Ley Chief Justice,
You cannot have a new Venire facias if the Nonsuit be recorded: And if the
Record of Nisi prius varieth from the Record, then it can be no Nonsuit,
because there is no Record upon which the Nonsuit can be, and the Nisi prius
was prosecuted without warrant. Judicial Procss are of Record, because they are
by the Award of the Court: But if the Transcript of a Record be mistaken by a
Clark, it issues out by the Award of the Court; and if it vary, then it is no
Record. The president cited is direct in the point: There was a Venire facias
de novo; But I conceive there is a difference where the Jury is sworn, as it is
in the President, and then the Plaintiff is Nonsuit; but in our Case the
Plaintiff was Nonsuit before the Jury was sworn. But per Curiam the Case is
the stronger to have a new trial.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
423. PRITCHARD and WILLIAMS Case.
IN an Ejectione Firm, the Jury found for the Defendant. Now it was moved for
the Plaintiff, That the Defendant might not have Costs, because the Venire
facias is mistaken. And the Defendants Council cited a President in the Case,
viz. Mich: 18 Jacobi, betwixt Done and Knot; where the Defendant had Judgment
for his Costs, notwithstanding that the Plaintiff mistook his Venire facias
in an Ejectione Firm, where the Jury found for the Defendant.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
424. WISEMAN and DENHAM'S Case.
Wiseman brought an Action upon the Case against Denham Parson, and declared
that there is a Custom within the Town and Parish of Landone, of which the
Defendant is the Parson. That every Parishoner who keeps so many Kyne within
the said Parish, should give and pay to the Parson, for his Tythe-Milk, so many
Cheeses at Michaelmas: and showed how that he kept so many Kyne, viz. 20, etc.
within the said Parish, and that he did tender apud Landone so many Cheeses at
Michaelmas to Denham the Defendant, being Parson, who refused them, and to take
them away, but suffered them to be and continue in the Plaintiffs house, for
which cause he brought the Action: The Defendant did demur upon the
Declaration. George Crook, the Action will lie; for the Plaintiff has a
damage, by reason that the Parson does not take away his Tythe-Cheese. And it
is like unto the Case in 13 H. 4. Action sur le Case 48. Where a man sold unto
another Hay, and because that the Vendee took not away his Hay, an Action upon
the Case did lie, for it was a damage to the Plaintiff to let it stand upon
his ground, for he durst not put his Cattle into his ground to feed, lest they
should eat the Hay and spoil it, and so he should be liable to an Action to be
brought by the Vendee: So if Tithe be lawfully se^forth, and the Parson
refuses the Tithe, but will sue in the Spiritual Court for the Tithe, an
Action upon the Case will lie: a fortiori in this Case, for the Cheeses may be
cumbersome and troublesome to the Party, so as he cannot make the best use or
benefit of his house. Paul Crook* contrary: and he took exception because the
tender is alleged to be apud Landone, and it is not showed that it was at his
house at Landone, or in any place certain; and he said that the Action will not
lie, because here is no damage to the Plaintiff: and it is like the Case when
a man makes a Lease rendering Rent, Cheese, or Corn, and the Tenant tendreth it,
and the Lessor refuses it; the Lessee cannot have an Action upon the Case
against his Lessor, but he may plead the matter in bar, in an Action brought
by the Lessor. And the Case of 13 H. 4. before put, is not to the purpose, for
there it was part of the Bargain to take it away by such a time: And in our
Case the Plaintiff may plead the matter in bar to the Plaint'. 43 Eliz.
betwixt Crispe and Jackson, an Action upon the Case was brought for suing in
the Ecclesiatical Court for Tithes which were due, and he recovered damages.

Secondly, Admit that the Action does lie, then it is because it is a damage
unto him that they remain in his house; but it does not appear that the tender
was made at his house, but apud Landone, which might be a mile from the house;
and so because it was his own fault, the Action will not lie as this Case is,
by reason of the tender. George Crook, It was adjudged in a Cornish Case, that
an Action upon the Case lies against a Parson which does not take away his
Tithe corn, or hay, because it spoils the ground upon which it stands, and
because the party cannot have the free use of his Land: So in our Case, he
cannot have the free a^e of his house, the cheeses cumbring his house, and
offending him with their smell. Haughton Justice, If the Action were well laid,
it would lie for the Cause, but in this Case it is not well laid: If any thing
makes the Action to lie, it is the damage which the Plaintiff does sustain by
the cheeses being in his house; but here it is laid to be tendered apud Landone,
and it is not said at his house, and non constat how the cheeses came to his
house; for if they were brought back by the Plaintiff, or by his commandment,
then the Action will not lie; but if he had laid his Action, that he gave
notice to the Parson that he had so many cheeses ready for him for his Tithe,
and had required him to send for them, then if the Parson had not carried them
away, the Action would have lien; but for the reason before the Action as it is
laid is not maintainable. Dodderidge Justice, There are two matters in this
case: First, If the Action will lie for the matter. Secondly, If the Action
will lie by reason of the Tender: as to the first, I put this difference, That
in some case it will lie, and in some case it will not lie; in this case the
Action is not maintainable.

Where a tender is of a thing which the Party ought to have, by the tender the
property is changed; and there a damage may arise by reason that he will not
take it away, as in the case of 13 H. 4. put before; there the Plaintiff had
damage by the standing of the hay upon the ground, for he could not put in his
cattle, for then he might be in danger of an Action, because the cattle might
eat the hay.

If one sets forth his Tithe, and the Parson having notice thereof will not
take it away, an Action lies, because it as a damage to the Land: But in our
Case, admit the tender were at his house, yet this tender does not alter the
Property in the person, and they being his own cheeses, he has no loss; so the
difference is, where the party has damage and loss, and where he has none,
as here in our Case he has no damage; the tender of the Rent saves from the
penalty, but does not discharge the duty; but admit that the Action will lie,
yet in this Case the Declaration is insufficient, For the tender is not
alleged to be at any place certain in the Village, for it may be that he
tendered them to the Parson in the Churchyard of Landone, and then by the
carrying of them home to his house again, he has lost the Action which he
might have had if he had tendered them at his house. Ley Chief Justice, There is
a difference in the case of Tenders: If I tender such a thing which is due, and
the other refuses it, and I must pay the same thing in kind, if by the
keeping of it I be endamaged, I may have an Action upon the Case: and that is
our Case.

If a man sets out his Tithe hay, or Corn (the tender in our Case is a
setting forth of the Tithe Cheese) and the Parson refuses to take it away, and
it perish in keeping, I am excused for the perishing of it; but I may have an
Action against the Parson, for letting it stay upon my Land to my anoyance. So
if A. commit goods to me to keep in my house, and I require him to take them
away and he refuses to do it, I may have an Action upon the Case against him,
for it is a trouble to me to remove them for him: and so in our Case; but it is
otherwise where I pay Rent-Corn, and the Lessor does refuse it, I may pay him
in other corn. If one be to pay so much corn, and the other will not receive it
being tendered unto him, until it be dearer, an ^ction upon the Case will lie,
for he is thereby endamaged. In our Case the party is damnified, for his house
is anoyed by the smell, and also encombred therewith, and the rooms of his
house are valuable, and he cannot make use of them at his pleasure: the Tender
ought to be, where by the ordinary course the thing has its being: As at the
place of the shearing of the Sheep, the Parson is to demand his Tithe wool, and
there it is to be paid, if there be be a person who has power to deliver it;
the things which are ordinarily in the house, as butter, cheese, etc. are to be
tendered there, and there they are to be demanded, and thereof notice is to be
given to the Parson; and the party is not bound to carry them to the Parsons
house. The cheeses which are to be paid by this Custom, are to be paid of
cheeses made upon that Land, and not of cheeses which the Parishoner shall buy
elsewhere: The tender is alleged to be in the Town of Landone, and the Law
intends the cheeses to be in the Parishoners house and this general tender is
to be understood at the place where the cheeses by intendment of Law are to be;
and on the other side it ought to be alleged, that the tender was not at the
house: so as I conceive that the tender is good. Dodderidge, The intendment is
not good in this case; for in every Declaration there ought to be certainty and
verity; but in a plea in bar, there if it be a common intendment, it is
sufficient. If a man speak generally of a Town, it is to be meant at the Hamlet
where the Church stands. Ley, when a tender is pleaded, it is supposed to be at
the place where the tender ought to be by the Law. As a man is bound to pay
money, if he plead that he tendered it at D. it shall be intended that D. is the
place where it ought to be paid. If the party goes to the Parsons house, and
tells the Parson that he has at his house such Tithe cheeses for him, and
requires the Parson to send for them; here the notification is at the Parsons
house, but the real tender is at the parties own house: And the party
plaintiff in our Case cannot plead it otherwise then at Landone. Haughton, In
this case the Law requires a special place of tender expressed, or else he
shows no cause of Action: For if it were at any place out of his house, the
Action will not lie, and the cheeses ought to be personally tendered. Ley Chief
Justice; That would be inconvenient, for then he must carry them to him, and so
he should be forced to wait upon the Parson. Dodderidge, 40 E. 3. If I tender
to one a marriage, or a Ward, the woman, or Ward ought to be present at the
time of the tender. Tender of money in a bag, as to say, I have money for you,
is no good tender: and so it is of cheeses; to say, I have cheeses for you, is
but a verbal tender, and it is not good; but it ought to be tendered personally
and in kind. You will intend that the Parson was at the plaintiffs house at
the time of this tender, and here is nothing in the case to direct you so to
think. Ley, The place is but circumstance, for the Parson is tied to demand
them at the house, being the proper place of tender, by reason of their being
there. Dodderidge, The cheese must be showed the Parson, and that proves that
he must be present: Ley, If he were present, then the tender is good: But if he
be not there, but at another place, the notice is sufficient Dodderidge, The
Law requires certainty in a Declaration, and the matter cannot be taken by
intendment; so we ought to have a certainty set forth, otherwise no certain
Judgment can be given. It was adjourned, for Dodderidge and Haughton Justices
were against Ley Chief Justice: But as I have heard, the Case was afterward
adjudged for the Plaintiff. There quaere the Record of the Judgment.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 425.
A Man made a Lease for life, and covenanted for him and his heirs, That he
would save the Lessee harmless from any claiming by, from or under him. The
Lessor dyed, and his wife brought a Writ of Dower against the Lessee, and
recovered; and the Lessee brought an Action of Covenant against the heir. And
it was adjudged against the heir, because the wife claimed under her husband,
who was the Lessor: But if the woman had been mother of the Lessor who demanded
Dower, the Action would not have layen against the heir, because she did not
claim by, from, or under the Lessor. And so it was adjudged, v. 11. H. 7. 7. b.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
426. SNELL And BENNET'S Case.
A Parson did contract with A. his Executors and Assigns, That for ten
shillings paid to him every year by A. his Executors and Assigns, that he, his
Executors or Assigns should be quit from the payment of Tithes for such Lands
during his life, viz. the life of the Parson. A. paid unto the Parson ten
shillings, which the Parson accepted of; And made B. an Enfant his Executor,
and dyed. The mother of the Enfant took Letters of Administration durante
minori aetate of the Enfant, and made a Lease at Will of the Lands. The Parson
libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of the same Lands against the
Tenant at Will; who thereupon moved for a Prohibition. Dodderidge, During the
life of the Parson the Contract is a foot; but the Assignee cannot sue the
Parson upon this Contract, yet he may have a Prohibition to stay the suit in
the Ecclesiastical Court, and put the Parson to his right remedy, and that is
to sue here. This agreement is not by Deed, and so no Lease of the Tithes. The
Parson shall have his remedy against the Executor for the ten shillings, but
not against the Tenant at Will: and the Executor has his remedy against the
Tenant at Will. Crook, 21 H. 6. A Lease of Tithes without Deed is good for one,
but not for more years, v. 16 H. 7. And afterward a Prohibition was granted.

Trin. 16 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
427. PHILPOT and FEILDER'S Case.
THe Parties are at issue in the Chancery, and a Venire facias is awarded out
of the Chancery to try the issue; and the Venire facias was, Quod venire facias
coram etc. duodecim liberos and legales homines de vicineto de etc. quorum
quilibet habeat quatuor lib. terrae, tenementorum, vel reddituum per annum ad
minus, per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit etc. And it was moved in
arrest of Judgment, That the Venire facias is not well awarded; for it ought to
be Quorum quilibet habeat quadraginta solidos terrae, tentorum vel reddit. per
an. ad minus, according to the Statute of 35 H. 8. cap. 6. which appoints that
every one of the Jurors ought by Law to expend forty shillings per annum of
Freehold, and it ought not to be quatuor libras terrae etc. according to the
Statute of 27 Eliz cap. 6. which Statute of Elizabeth does not speak of the
Chancery, but only of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and the Exchequer, or
before Justices of Assise. Before the Statute of 35 H. 8. no certain Land of
Jurors was named in the Venire facias; but since the Statute of 35 H. 8. it was
quadragint. solidos, until the said Statute of 27 Eliz. and now it is quatuor
libras in the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer. It was adjourned.

At another day the Case was moved again, That the Venire facias ought to be 40
solidos etc. according to the Statute of 35 H. 8. cap. 6. And 10 H. 7. 9. and
15 were vouched, That if a Statute appoint that the King shall do an act in
this form, the King ought to do it in the same form and manner: So if a Letter
of Attorney be to make a Bill in English, and the same is made in Latin, it is
not good, although it be the same in form and matter. Cook lib Entries 578.
Waldrons Case is, That in the Chancery the Venire facias was but 40* but that
Case was between 35 H. 8. and 27 Eliz. cap: 6. Dodderidge and Haughton
Justices, It is a plain case, For the Venire facias ought to be according to 35
H. 8. cap. 6. because the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 6. speaks nothing of the
Chancery, Quod nota.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
428. HEWET and BYE'S Case.
IN an Ejectione Firm of a house in Winchester, the Ejectment was laid to be
of a house which was in australi part vici, Anglice the High Street. Ley Chief
Justice, If it had been ex australi part vici, then the South part had been
but a Boundary: but here it is well laid. Then it was moved, That the Venire
facias is Duodecim liberos and legales homines de Winton, and does not say of
any Parish in Winton. But notwithstanding it was holden good: For Dodderidge
Justice said, That it is not like unto Arundels Case, C. 6. part 14. For there
the Offense was laid to be done in paroechiae Sanctae Margaret de Westminster,
therefore the visne ought to be of the Parish; but in this case it being laid
generally in Winton it is sufficient that the visne come out of Winton.
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
429 WATERER and MOUNTAGUE'S Case.
A Man made a Lease for six years; and the Lessor covenanted, That if he were
disposed to lease the said lands after the expiration of the said term of six
years, that the Lessee should have the refusal of it. The Lessee within the six
years made a Lease thereof to J. S. for 21 years. Dodderidge, Haughton, and Ley
Chief Justice, The Covenant is not broken, because it is out of the words of
the Covenant. But Dodderidge said, Temp. E. 1. Covenant 29. The Lessee
covenanted to leave the houses, trees and woods at the end of the term in as
good plight as he found them; and afterward the Lessee cut down a tree, that
in that case the Covenant was broken, and the Lessor shall not stay until the
end of the term to bring his action of Covenant, because it is apparent that
the tree cannot grow again and be in as good plight as it was when he took the
Lease.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
430. OWFIELD against SHIERT.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in an Action of Debt;
The Action of Debt was upon a Concessit solvere, etc. pro diversis summis
pecuniae; and the opinion of the Court was, That Debt does not lie upon
Concessit solvere pro diversis summis, etc. because it is incertainty: But the
same Term in another Case, viz. Stacies Case, That by Custom of London, it was
holden that Debt does lie upon a Concessit solvere pro diversis summis: And it
was then said, That in an Action upon the Case, it was good to say, That in
consideration de diversis summis Concessit solvere: and so it has been
adjudged.

Trin: 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
HAWKSWITH and DAVIES Case. Intratur.
431. Pasch. 19. Jur. Rot. 83.
LEssee for years of diverse parcels of Lands, reservant Rent, and for not
payment a reentrie: The Lessee assigns part of the Land to A. and other part
to B. and keeps a part to himself: afterward the Lessee levies a Fine of all
the Lands unto the use of the Conusee and his heirs; afterward the Lessee
paies the Rent for the whole unto the Conusee, and afterward the Rent becomes
behind; and the Conusee enters for the Condition broken, and made a Lease to
the Plaintiff, who thereupon brought an Ejectione firm; and all this matter
was found by special Verdict: and it was moved, that by the assigning of the
Lessee of part of the lands to one, and part to another, that the Condition was
gone and destroyed; but notwithstanding, it was agreed by all the Justices,
that the Condition did remain, and was not gone nor destroyed. And they said
that this Case was not like unto Winters Case, in Dyer 308, and 309. where the
Lessor did assign over part of the Reversion to one, and part unto another;
for that in that Case the Lessor by his own Act had destroyed the Condition,
but in this Case it is the Act of the Lessee, and therefore no color that the
Condition be gone and destroyed. And so it was resolved for the Plaintiff, and
Judgment given accordingly.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
432. KILLIGREW and HARPER'S Case.
HArper in consideration of 100l. does assume and promise to Killigrew, That
the Lady Weston and her Son shall sell to Killigrew such Lands, Proviso that
Killigrew such a day certain pay to the said Lady and her Son 2000l. At which
time the Lady and her Son shall be ready to assure and convey to Killigrew the
said lands; And for want of payment of the said 2000l. at the said day, that
Killigrew shall lose the said 100l. and that the Contract for the Land shall be
void. Killigrew brought an Action upon the Case sur Assumpsit against Harper,
and all this matter was found by special Verdict. Athow Sergeant argued that
the Action would lie, because the Lady and her Son were to do the first act,
viz. to make the Assurance. 22 H. 6. 57. Rent is reserved upon a Lease for
years in which are diverse Covenants, and a Bond is given for the performance of
all the Covenants within such Indenture of Lease: the Rent is behind, the Bond
is not forfeited unless the Lessor does make a demand of the Rent, because the
Lessor is to do the first act, viz. to demand the Rent. Yelverton contr' That
the Action will not lie. The question is, Of whose part is the breach? The
Assumpsit is grounded upon the Consideration, and not upon the Promise: The
Jury find that Killigrew was not ready to pay the 2000l. and that the Lady and
her Son were not ready to assure the land. The Agreement was (for which not
time is expressed) That the Lady and her Son should convey such lands: Then the
Agreement was, That Killigrew should pay at such a day certain, at which day
the Lady should be ready, etc. and if Killigrew made default of the payment of
the 2000l. then he was to lose the said 100l. which he gave to Harper to
procure the Bargain, and also that the Bargain should be void. Ley Chief
Justice, If Killigrew had paid or tendered the 2000l. at the said day, and the
Lady and her Son had not been ready at that time to have assured the lands,
Killigrew should have had an Action upon the Case for the 100l. and recovered
damages: If the Lady had been to have done the first action, then the Action
would have been maintainable; but in this Case Killigrew is to do the first
act, and therefore the Action will not lie. Dodderidge, If it had been
indefinite, then the Assurance and Conveyance is to be before the Payment; but
here the bargain is to pay the money first. Harper promises to Killigrew in
consideration of 100l. that Killigrew shall buy such lands; then comes the time
of payment, and assurance of the land at that time shall be made; Proviso, that
if he do not pay the 2000l. then Killigrew to lose the 100l. and the Contract
to be void: so there are two penalties; so as of necessity the 2000l. must
first be paid, for otherwise how can the Contract be void for not payment? For
if the Conveyance shall be first made, then it was present before the money
paid, and so the clause (viz.) Then the Contract to be void, should be of no
effect. Haughton Justice agreed. Chamberlain Justice, You have bound your self
with a penalty, and the bargain ought to be performed as it was made. And so
being made, that the money should be first paid, at which time the conveyance
shall be made; and for want of payment, that Killigrew should lose the 100l.
and also the Contract to be void: The opinion of the whole Court was against
the Plaintiff, that the Action would not lie; and so Judgment was given Quod
nihil capint per Billam.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
433. Sir ARTHUR GORGE and Sir ROBERT LANE'S Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon a Bond for not performance of Covenants.
The Case was: Lane did marry with the daughter of Gorge; and in consideration
of marriage, and also of 3000l. portion given in marriage by Gorge, Lane did
covenant, That he within one year would make a Jointure of lands within England
then of the value of 500l. per annum over and above all Reprises, to his said
wife, so as Sir Henry Yelverton and Sir John Walter Counselors at Law should
devise and advise. In Debt for the breach of these Covenants, Lane pleaded,
That he did inform Gorge of lands which he was determined should be for her
Jointure, but neither Yelverton nor Walter did devise the Assurance. Paul Crook
did demur upon the Plea; and first showed, That Lane did not give notice to
Yelverton and Walter, as he ought to have done by law: For in this case it is
not sufficient to give notice to Gorge, but the notice ought to be to the
Counselors, otherwise how could they devise the assurance for her jointure? 2.
Here is no place named where the Notice was, for it is issuable whether he gave
Notice or not; and then there being no certain place named, no visne can be
upon it. 3. He does not show where the Lands are; for it might be (as in truth
it was) the Lands were out of England, and by the Covenant they ought to be
within England. 4. He does not show that the Lands were of the value of 500l.
per annum over and above all Reprises, as they ought to be by the Articles* 5.
He shows that they were his Freehold, but does not show that the lands were
his lands of Inheritance of which a Jointure might be made. The opinion of the
whole Court was, that the Exceptions were good, and that the Plea in bar was no
good plea. Dodderidge, If the word had been (Such as his Council shall devise)
then the Notice ought to have been given to the party himself, and he is to
inform his Council of it, 6 H. 7. 8. But here two Counselors were named in
certain, and therefore the Notice ought to be given to them, for he has
appointed Counselors. The whole Plea in bar is naught; For if he has an
estate in tail, then there ought to be a Fine in making of the Jointure; and if
there be a Remainder upon it, then there ought to be a Recovery: So because
that Lane has not informed the party what estate he had in the lands, they
could not make the Assurance. Ley Chief Justice. Where a man is bound to make
such Assurance of lands as J. S. shall advise, here he need not show his
Evidences, but he ought to show to the party what the land is, and where it
lies, and the Obligee is to seek out the estate at his peril: And then J. S.
may advise the Assurance conditionally, viz. That if he has Fee, then to have
such an assurance; and if an Estate in tail, then such an assurance; and if
there be a Remainder over, then to devise a Recovery. Curia, All the Errors are
material.

The Bail for Lane, before any Judgment given against him, brought Lane into
Court, and prayed that they might be discharged, and Lane taken into custody*
Dodderidge Justice said, There is a difference betwixt Manucaptors, which are
that the party shall appear at the day, for there the Court will not excuse
them to bring the party in Court before the day: But in case of Bail, there
they may discharge themselves if they bring the body of the Defendant into
Court at any time before the Retorn of the 2. Scire facias: against the
Defendant. For when one goes upon Bail, it is intended that he notwithstanding
that is in ^^stodia Mariscalli; For the Declarations are in custodia Mariscalli
Marschalsiae. Quod hota, so is the difference.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
434. WHEELER and APPLETON'S Case
AN Action upon the Case was brought for these scandalous words, viz. Thou have
stolen my Piece, and I will charge thee with suspicion of Felony: Which were
found for the Plaintiff. It was moved for the staying of Judgment, That the
Action was not maintainable: For the Declaration is A Piece, innuendo a Gun:
And here the innuendo does not do its part; for it might be a piece of an Oak,
or a 225. piece of Gold, which is commonly called a Piece; and in this Case the
words may be intended such a Piece. 17. Jacobi in the Kings Bench, betwixt
Palmer and R^ve: Thou have the Pox, and one may turn his finger in the holes of
his legs: Adjudged that for these words the Action would lie, because it cannot
be meant otherwise then of the French pox. 41 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, the
Defendant said of the Plaintiff, Thou art forsworn, and thou have hanged an
honester man then thy self: the Action did lie. For the first words, Thou art
forsworn, no Action will lie, C. 4. part 15. but the later words prove that it
was in course of Justice, and that he was perjured. So in this Case, admitting
that the first words will not bear an action, yet the later words make them
actionable; For the first words ought to be meant of a thing which is Felony.
Heck's Case, C. 4. part 15. there it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, although
the first words would not bear action, yet the later words make them
actionable. I will charge thee with suspicion, or flat Felony, an Action does
not lie, Hecks Case proves it. Another Councellor argued that the Action would
not lie: The first words are not actionable; For so many things as there are in
the world, so many pieces there may be, and here it might be a piece of a thing
which could not be Felony. Betwixt Roberts and Hill, 3 Jacobi in the Kings
Bench it was adjudged, Roberts has stolen my wood, the words were not
actionable; for it might be wood standing, and then to cut and take it away it
is not Felony, but Trespass. Ley Chief Justice, I charge thee with flat Felony,
If the words be spoken privately to a man no Action lies for them; but if they
be spoken before an Officer, as a Constable, or in a Court which has conusance
of such Pleas, then the Action will lie, for the party by reason of such words
may come into trouble: But if a man charge one with flat Felony, and charge
the Constable with him, then an Action will not lie, because it is in the
ordinary course of Justice. C. 4. part 14. If a man makes a Bargain with
another to pay him twenty Pieces for such a thing, it shall be taken by common
intendment twenty 22s. pieces of gold, which vulgarly are called Pieces* But to
endite a man for 20 Pieces is not certain, and therefore such Indictment is not
good; and the Action in our Case will not lie, for (my Piece) is an uncertain
word. Dodderidge. Thou have stolen my Piece, What is that? For we call 22s. in
gold a Piece. You ought to tell it in certain: And here the innuendo will not
make the scandal, but the words of scandal ought to proceed out of the parties
own mouth; and an Innuendo cannot make that certain, which was uncertain in the
words of the speaker: And therefore the Action here will not lie. Haughton
Justice, If the whole matter had been set forth in the Declaration, as to have
showed that the parties before this speech had had speeches of a Gun, then the
Action in this case would have been maintainable; but here, the word (Piece) is
uncertain, and the Action will not lie. Chamberlain Justice, If the speeches
had been concerning a Gun lost, then upon these words spoken the Action would
have lien, but not as they are here spoken; For the two words there, ought to
have been matter subsequent, as upon the charging with Felony, to have
delivered him to an Officer. And so by the whole Court it was adjudged, Quod
querens nihil capiat per Billam.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
435. SHOETER against EMET and his WIFE.
THe plaintiff being a midwife, the Defendants wife said to the plaintiff, Thou
art a Witch, and were the death of such a man's child, at whose birth thou were
Midwife. In an Action upon the Case in Arrest of Judgment it was moved, that
the words were not actionable. Hill 15 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas: Stone and
Roberts Case adjudged, That an Action upon the Case does not lie for saying
thou art a Sorcerer, 9 Jac. Godbolds Case in the Kings Bench, Thou art a
Sorcerer or an Inchanter. 30 Eliz. betwixt Morris and Clark, for saying, Thou
art a Witch, no Action will lie; for of the words Witch, or Sorcerer, the
Common Law takes no notice; but a Witch is punishable by the Statute of 1
Jacobi, cap. 12. Pasch. 44 Eliz Lowes Case, Thou have bewitched my cattle, or
my child; there because an Act is supposed to be done, an Action upon the Case
will lie for the words. 1. Jacobi, Sir Miles Fleetwoods Case, He was Receiver
for the King in the Court of Wards; and Auditor Curle said of him, Thou have
deceived the King: and it was adjudged, that an Action upon the Case would lie
for the words, because it was in his calling by which he got his living.
Chamberlain Justice, Since the Statute 1 Jacobi, for calling one Witch
generally an Action will lie; For, for the hurting of any thing, a Witch is
punishable by shame, viz. Pillory in an open place. Dodderidge Justice, Thief
or Witch will bear Action; and the reason of the Case before cited by the
Council is, because that the common Law does not take notice of a Witch: But
punishment is inflicted upon a Witch by the Statute of 1 Jacobi, and by that
Statute a Witch is punishable. Trin. 21 Jacobi, Betwixt Mellon and Her^,
Judgment was stayed where the words were, Thou art a witch, and have bewitched
my child, because that the words shall be taken in mitiori sensu, as thou have
bewitched him with pleasure. And in that sense Saint Paul said, Who has
bewitched you, O Galatians! That case was adjudged in the Common Pleas.

Trin. 21 Iacobi in the Kings Bench.
436. KNOLLIS and DOBBINE'S Case.
KNollis did assume and promise apud London, within such a Parish that he would
cast so much Lead and cover a Church in Ipswich in Suffolk, and one Scrivener
promised him to give him 10l. for his costs and pains: Scrivener died, Knollis
brought an Action upon the Case against Dobbins who was Administrator of
Scrivener, and declared that he such a day did cast the Lead and cover the said
Church, apud London. The Defendant pretended that the Intestator made no such
promise, and it was found for the Plaintiff: and in arrest of Judgment it was
moved, That the Declaration was not good, by reason that the Agreement was to
cover a Church in Ipswich, and he declared he had covered such a Church apud
London, which is impossible, being 60 miles asunder; and so the Declaration is
not pursuing the promise. Dyer 7 Eliz. 233. In Avowry for Rent upon a Lease for
life, etc. That the Prior and Covent of etc. at Bathe, demiserunt Lands which
was out of Bathe, it was void; for they being at Bathe, could not make Livery
of Land which was out of Bathe. Vi. Dyer 270. The second Exception to the
Declaration was, That the Commissary of the Bishop of Norwich apud London, did
commit Administration of the Goods and Chattels of Scrivener to Dobbins apud
London, which was said not to be good, because he had not power in London to
execute any power which appertained unto him at Norwich. Dodderidge Justice,
The plaintiff declares that apud London he did cover the said Church, that is
not good, and makes the Declaration to be insufficient, because it is not
according to the promise. The place where the Commissary of the Bishop of
Norwich did grant the Administration is not material; For if the Bishop of
Norwich be in London, yet his power as to granting of Letters of
Administration, and making of Deacons and Clarks in his own Diocese, does
follow the person of the Bishop, although his other Jurisdiction be Local, to
which the Court agree. And it was adjudged that the Declaration was not good,
and therefore Judgment was given Quod querens nihil capiat per Billam.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
437. BULLEN and SHEENE'S Case.
SHeene brought a Writ of Error upon a Judgment given in the Common Pleas. The
Case was, Bullen being a Commoner, intituling himself by those whose Estate he
had in the Land, brought an Action upon the Case against Sheene, because he had
dug clay in the land where the Plaintiff had Common, and had carried away
the same over the Common, per quod he lost his Common, and by that could not
use his Common in as ample manner as he did before. Sheene entitled himself to
be a Commoner, and have common in the said land also, and so justified the
Entry, and set forth a prescription, That every Commoner had used to dig clay
there, and the first issue was found for the Defendant Sheene, viz. that he was
a Commoner; but the other issue was found for the Plaintiff Bullen, viz. that
there was no such prescription, That a Commoner might dig clay: And the Jury
did assesse damages to the Plaintiff generally; and the same was moved to be
Error, because that the Plaintiff had not damage by carrying away of the clay,
because the same did not belong to him, for that he was but a Commoner; and so
the Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas was Erroneous. Ley Chief
Justice, By the digging of a pit the Commoner is prejudiced, by the laying of
the clay upon the Common the Commoner is prejudiced, and so the damages are
given for the digging and carrying away of the clay, per quod Commoniam suam
amisit, and the damages are not given for the clay. Chamberlain Justice, If he
had suffered the clay to lie by the pit, it had been damage to the Commoner. If
the Owner of the soil plough up or makes conyburies in the Land, an Action
upon the case lies against him by the Commoner, for thereby the Common is much
the worse, and the Commoner prejudicedS If the pit be deep, it is dangerous to
the Commoner, and so a damage unto him, for it is dangerous lest his cattle
should fall into it, and it will not suddenly be filled up again, and so no
grass there for a long time, and the longer, because that which should fill up
the pit is carried away. Haughton Justice, The proceedings are Erroneous, both
Plaintiff and Defendant are Commoners, The wrong is in two points. First, That
the Defendant had with his cattle fed the Common: Secondly, That the Defendant
had dug clay there, and carried the same away; The Defendant makes Title to
both: First he prescribes to have Common there; Secondly, That the Commoners by
prescription have used to have and dig clay there. The first point is found for
the Defendant, and the last issue is found against the Defendant, and damages
are given generally: All the question is upon the Declaration Coepit and
asportavit the clay, which implies a property and interest in the clay to be
to the Plaintiff. It is not said that the clay was carried over the land; I
conceive that the property of the clay is in issue, and the Commoner has
nothing to do with that: So damages being given to him for that which does not
belong unto him, I hold the Judgment to be Erroneous, and that it ought to be
reversed. Dodderidge, The Declaration is well enough, and of necessity it
cannot be otherwise: Here the Plaintiff challenges nothing but Common; In an
Action upon the Case there ought to be injury and damage, which is the
consequent upon injury; For an Action upon the Case will not lie for an
injury without damage. Here Bullen does not complain for any thing but the
loss of his Common, which is the first wrong: The second wrong is the digging
of the pit, in the which his cattle may fall and perish: The third wrong is,
for carrying away of six loads of clay over the Common, which is a great
detriment to the Common, to carry it either by Carts or otherwise: and for
these three wrongs he concludes his damages, ratione cujus he could not have
his Common in as ample manner as before he was used to have it, and he does not
conclude any damage for the clay: Every one of these injuries does increase the
damages, and so it would have been if he had left the clay to lie upon the land
by the pit, for thereby so much Common would have been lost. Here he makes
himself title only to the Common, and these Acts do increase the damages only.
2. E. 4. and 7 E. 4. Where one was unlawfully and falsely imprisoned, and being
imprisoned, compelled to levy a Fine or make a Feoffment, or other Deed. In an
Action of false Imprisonment the Jurie gave damages, by reason of his restraint
of his Liberty, and increased them by reason of the levying of the Fine, or
making the Feoffment or other Deed, which he then made. The Jurie found that he
is not to have any clay, and coepit and asportavit does not alter the Case; for
that is a special Action of trespass. And by three of the Justices against
Haughton, the Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas was affirmed.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 438.
CAlthrope Councellor, cited this Case to have been adjudged, 25 Eliz. The
husband seized in the right of his wife of Copyhold Land, made a Lease for
years; and it was holden by the Court then, That by the death of the husband
the forfeiture of the Copyhold was purged, and that the wife should have the
land again, notwithstanding this forfeiture by the husband, by making a Lease
for years, without License: And the Court seemed to allow of the said Case to
be Law. And afterward, this very Term the like Case came in question in this
Court, betwixt Severn and Smith, where in an Ejectione firm, a special Verdict
found, That a Copyholder seized in the right of his wife, made a Lease for
years; and it was a question whether it were a forfeiture of the inheritance of
the wife. Hitcham Sergeant said it was no forfeiture: Dodderidg Justice took
this difference, Where a Feme Sole is a Copyholder, and she takes a husband,
who makes a lease for years without license, the same is a forfeiture, because
it is her folly to take such a husband as will forfeit her Land: But where a
Copyhold is granted to a Feme Covert, and the husband makes a Lease without
License, in such case it is no forfeiture; and so in the Case of a Feme Lessee
for life at the Common Law, against Whitinghams Case, C. 8. part 44. It was
adjourned.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 439.
NOte, It was the opinion of all the Justices, and so declared, That if the
Plaintiff in an Ejectione firm does mistake his Declaration, That the
Defendant in such Case shall have his Costs of the Plaintiff, by reason of his
unjust vexation.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 440.
FOur several men were jointly Indicted for erecting and keeping of four
several Inns in Bathe; It was moved that the Indictment was insufficient,
because the offense of the one is not the offense of the other, like unto the
Case in Dyer 19. Where two join in an Action upon the Case for words, it is not
good, but they ought for to sever in their Actions, because the wrong to the
one, is no wrong to the other. Dodderidge Justice, One Indictment may
comprehend several offenses, if they be particularly laid, and then it is in
Law several Indictments: It may be intended that the Inns were lawful Inns;
for it is not laid to be ad nocumentum, and therefore not punishable; but if
they be an anoyance and inconvenient for the Inhabitants, then the same ought
particularly to appear, otherwise it is a thing lawful to erect an Inn. An
Action upon the Case lies against an Innkeeper who denies lodging to a
Travailer for his money, if he has spare lodging, because he has subjected
himself to keep a common Inn. And in an Action upon the Case against an
Innkeeper, he needs not to show that he has a License to keep the Inn.

If an Innkeeper takes down his Sign, and yet keeps an Hosterie, an Action
upon the Case will lie against him, if he do deny lodging unto a Travailer for
his money; but if he takes down his Sign, and gives over the keeping of an
Inn, then he is discharged from giving lodging. The Indictment in the principal
case is not good, for want of the words (ad Nocumentum.) Haughton and Ley
Justices argreed. Ley, If an Indictment be for an Offense which the Court ex
Officio, ought to take notice to be ad Nocumentum, there the Indictment being
general, ad Nocumentum and contra Coronam and dignitatem, is sufficient*
without showing in what it is ad Nocumentum. But for Inns, it is lawful for to
erect them, if it be not ad Nocumentum, etc. and therefore in such Indictments,
it ought to be expressed that the erecting of them is ad Nocumentum, etc. and
because in this Case there wants the words ad Nocumentum, the Indictment was
quashed. Vi. The Lord North and Prat's Case before to this purpose.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
441. BRIDGES and NICHOLS's Case.
THey were Indicted for the not repairing of such a Bridge, and the Indictment
was, debent and solent reparare pontem, etc. It was moved that the Indictment
was insufficient, because it is not alleged in the Indictment, that the the
Bridge was over a Water, and no needful that it be amended, Secondly, It did
not appear in the Indictment, that at the time of the Indictment the said Bridge
was ruinous and decayed. Thirdly, The Indictment is, that Bridges and Nichols,
debent and solent reparare po^tem, and it is not showed that their charge of
repairing of the same is ratione tenare. 21 E. 4. 38. Where it is said, That a
prescription cannot be, that a common person ought to repair a Bridge, unless it
be said to be by reason of his Tenure; but it is otherwise in case of a
Corporation. For these Errors the Indictment was quashed by Judgment of the
Court.

Trin: 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
Intratur, Trin. 20. Rot. 1609.
442. Sir THOMAS LEE and GRISSEL's Case.
GRissel brought an Action upon the Case against Lee in the Common Pleas, and
showed that diu fuit, and adhuc seisitus existens of a house etc. and he did
prescribe that he and all those whose Estate he has in the said house, etc.
had used to have Common in the waste of L. and that Lee in Jacobi, made
Coniburies in the waste, quorum quidem premissorum he lost his Common. The
Action was brought 18 Jacobi, and Judgment given in the Common Pleas for the
Plaintiff there: and thereupon a Writ of Error was brought in the Kings Bench,
and it was assigned for Error,

First, That (diu seisitus) is not good, because it has not any limitation of
time, for it may contain as well forty years as one year: He laid the wrong to
be 15 Jacobi, and does not show that at that time he was seized, for (diu) does
not express any certain time; and then it is like unto the case of Waste, where
the Grantee of a Reversion brings an Action of waste, and does not show that he
committed waste to his dis^heresin, but does not show when the waste was done;
for it might be that it was done betwixt the Grant and the Attornment, and then
he had no cause to have waste; or otherwise it might be that the waste was done
in the time of the Grantor, and then the Grantee had no cause of Action; But in
such case he ought to have showed that he was seized of the Reversion at the
time of the waste done. 4 E. 4. 18. There Trespass was brought upon the Statute
of R. 2. and the Writ was, That he did enter in diversa terras and tenementa,
There it was holden that the Writ being insufficient, the Court should not make
it good, because it is too general. In our Case it ought to have been, that he
was (diu) and adhuc est seisitus Et, seisitus, that the Defendant did do the
wrong.

Another Error was assigned because he does not conclude, quorum quidem
premissorum praetextu, he lost his Common; But he says quorum quidem
premissorum he lost his Common; and leaves out the word (pr^textu) which word
ought to have been in the Declaration. The Action is brought three years after
the wrong done, and he ought to have showed, that he 15 Jacobi (which was the
time of the wrong done) fuit seisitus, and diu ante fuit seisitus in dominico
ut de feodo.

All before the clause, quorum quidem, etc. is but collection; and he ought to
have concluded with a cause of grievance, viz. quorum quidem premissorum
praetextu, he lost his Common. 7 H. 7. 3. There it is said that this word
(praetextu) is a conclusion that the particular wrong does contain, and does
affirm that which went before; but in this case the word (praetextu) is
wanting, and a Seisin first ought to be laid, and then praetextu quorum is
good. Vi. Bullen and Sheenes case before, where the Plaintiff first made him
title to the Common, viz. that he was such a time seized in Fee, and adhuc
seisitus existens, that the Defendant did dig clay: Vi. Brown and Greens Case
in the Common Pleas. 40 Eliz. Where a man pleaded a Feoffment and Livery,
Virtute cujus he was seized in fee, and did not show that he entered, and yet
the same was good, because the Virtute cujus was a good conclusion. Ley Chief
Justice, (diu) does not denote any time certain; If in a Case it had been
postea, or sic inde seisitus, the Defendant did the wrong, then the Declaration
had been good; but here is nothing to which diu, may have reference: If he had
said, that he being (diu seisitus) that the Defendant had such a day done the
wrong, it had been good.

Secondly, Here ought to have been either quorum quidem premissorum ratione, or
praetextu, he lost his Common: here the Latin is good, viz. quorum quidem
premissorum Commoniam perdidit, but it is not good in Law. Dodderidge Justice,
You ought to have coupled the damage and the wrong; and in this case there
wants the coupling, for want of the word (praetextu) for the word (praetextu)
is the application of the precedent matter: The matter of wrong is the making
of the conyburies, by reason of which he lost his Common: and the quorum quidem
here has not any sense: The Declaration wants matter of form also; diu fuit
seisitus and adhuc seisitus existens. Might you not have purchased this Common
after the wrong done by the making of the conyburies? for it does not appear
otherwise by the Declaration; for as well as (diu) may comprehend forty years,
so it may but one month. If it had been diu seisitus and sic seisitus) that he
made the conyburies, then the Declaration had been well; but as this case is,
it is not good. Haughton Justice, Your Action ought to have contained your
matter of time, as well as your matter of wrong. (Diu) includes no certainty of
time; and quorum quidem premissorum, etc. is a speech without sense. If a man
makes title to have Common pro omnibus averiis, and the word (suis) is
omitted, it is not good.

Ley Chief Justice, here the wrong and damage are not knit together by these
words; and it might be that in this case he had lost his Common by some other
means: For he does allege that he lost his Common; but how he lost it, that
does not appear to us. If he had said, Virtute cujus, or per quod, or ratione
cujus he had lost his Common, then the Declaration had been certain, and had
been well enough: But here it being uncertain, both in the seisitus, and also
in the alleging the damage, The Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas
for these Errors was reversed.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench.
443. PIE and BONNER's Case.
AN Information was in the Common Pleas by Pie against Bonner, for buying of
Cattle and selling of them again in the same Market, against the Satute. Which
was found against the Defendant; and the Judgment was entered Quod sit in
misericordia, whereas it ought to have been Capiatur, being upon an
Information; For it is a Contempt, and punishable by Imprisonment. And in this
Case upon a Writ of Error brought in the Kings Bench, by the opinion of the
whole Court the Judgment was reversed.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, Intratur Hill. 20 Jac.
Rot. 137. in the Kings Bench.
444. KITE and SMITH's Case.
ONe Recovered by Erroneous Judgment; and the Defendant did promise unto the
Plaintiff, That if he would forbear to take forth Execution, that at such a
day certain he would pay him the debt and damages And Action upon the Case was
brought upon that Promise. And now it was moved by the Defendants Council, That
there was not any Consideration upon which the Promise could be made, because
the Judgment was an Erroneous Judgment. It was adjourned. But I conceive, that
because it does not appear to the Court but that the Judgment is a good
Judgment, that it is a good Consideration: Otherwise, if the Judgment had been
reversed by a Writ of Error before the Action upon the Case brought upon the
Promise; for there it does appear judicially to the Court, that the Judgment
was Erroneous.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
445. TOTNAM and HOPKIN's Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought upon an Assumpsit: And the Plaintiff did
declare, That in Consideration of etc. the Defendant 1 Martii did promise to
pay and deliver to the Plaintiff 20 Quarters of Barley the next Seed-time.
Upon Non Assumpsit pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff. It was moved for
the Defendant, That the Plaintiff ought to have showed in his Declaration when
the Seed-time was, which he has not done. But it was answered, That he needs
not so to do, because he brings his Action half a year after the Promise, for
not payment of the same at Seed-time, which was betwixt the Promise and the
Assumpsit. Dodderidge Justice, If I promise to pay you so much Corn at Harvest
next, If it appears that the Harvest is ended before the Action brought, it
is good without showing the time of the Harvest, for it is apparent to the
Court that the Harvest is past: And here the Action being brought at
Michaelmas, it sufficiently appears that the Harvest is past. And Judgment was
given for the ^laintiffe.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, Iatratur Hill 1^ Iacobi, Rot. 652. inter Hard and Foy, in the
Kings Bench.
446. KELLAWAY's Case.
IN an Ejectione Firm brought for the Manor of Lillington upon a Lease made
by Kellaway to Fey, It was found by a special Verdict, That M. Kellaway seized
of the Manor of Lillington in Fee, holden in Soccage, did devise the same by
his Will in writing in these words, viz. For the good will I bear unto the name
of the Kellawayes, I give all my Lands to John Kellaway in tail, the Remainder
to my right Heirs, so long as they keep the true intent and meaning of this my
Will. To have to the said John Kellaway and the heirs of his body, until John
Kellaway or any of his issues go about to alter and change the intent and
meaning of this my Will. Then, and in such case it shall be lawful to and for
H. Kellaway to enter and have the Land in tail with the like limitation. And so
the Lands was put in Remainder to five several persons, the Remainder to the
right heirs of the Devisor. M. Kellaway dyed without issue, John Kellaway is
heir, and entered and demised the same to R. K. for 500 years, and afterward
granted all his estate to Hard. Afterward John Kellaway did agree by Deed
indented with W. K. to levy a Fine of the Reversion to W. and his heirs. H.
Kellaway entered according to the words of the Proviso in the Will, and made the
Lease to Foy, who brought an Ejectione Firm against Hard. And whether H.
Kellaway might lawfully enter or no was the Question. It was objected, That in
the Case there is not any Forfeiture, because the Fine was without
proclamations, and so it was a Discontinuance only. The first Question is, If
the Remainder does continue: The second is, If it be a Perpetuity, or a
Limitation. John Kellaway is Tenant in tail by Devise, until such time as John
Kellaway or any of his issues agree or go about to alter or change the estate
tail mentioned in the Will; with Proviso to make Leases for 21 years, 3 lives,
or to make Jointures: Then his Will is, That it shall be lawful for H. K. to
enter and to have the Land with the same limitations. If it be a Perpetuity,
then it is for the Plaintiff; but if it be but a Limitation, then it is for
the Defendant. The Fine was levied without proclamations, and H. K. enters for
the Forfeiture.

Damport, It is no Perpetuity, but a Limitation, which is not restrained by the
Law as Perpetuities are, Until such time as etc. shall discontinue etc. The
Jury find an Agreement by Indenture: The act which is alleged to be the
breach, is, Conclusivit and agreavit, not to levy a Fine with proclamations,
but to levy a Fine without proclamations, which is but a Discontinuance.
Yelverton, If the Fine had been with proclamations, then without doubt he in
the Remainder during the life of him who levied it had been barred. The Devise
was, To have to them and to the heirs of their bodies, so long as they and
every of their issues do observe, perform, fulfill and keep the true meaning of
this my Will touching the entailed Lands in form following, and no otherwise.
And therefore I M. Kellaway do devise unto John Kellaway and the issue of his
body the Remainder etc. ^o have to the said John Kellaway and the issue of his
body, until he or any of his issue shall go about to conclude, do, or make any
act or acts to alien, discontinue, or change the true meaning of this my Will.
That then my Will is, and I do give and bequeath to H* K* in tail, And that it
shall be lawful for him the said H. K. or his issue to enter immediately upon
such assent, conclusion, or going about to conclude etc. And that H. K. and his
issue shall leave it until he or any of them go about etc. C. 9 part, Sundays
Case, 128. where it was resolved, That no Condition or Limitation, be it by act
executed, or by limitation of an Use, or by a Devise, can bar Tenant in tail to
alien by a common Recovery, v. C. 3. part acc. The Case was not resolved, but
it was adjourned to another day to be argued, and then the Court to deliver
their opinions in it.

Trin. 21. Intratur Trin. 20 Jacobi, Rot. 811. in the Kings Bench.
447. KNIGHT's Case.
IN this Case George Crook said, That Land could not belong to Land: yet in a
Will, such Land which had been enjoyed with other, might pass by the words cum
pertinaciis. As where A. has two houses adjoining, viz. the Swan and the
Red-Lyon; and A. has the Swan in his own possession, and occupies a Parlour
or Hall (which belongs in truth to the Red-Lyon) with the Swan-house, and then
leaseth the Red-lyon house, and then by his Will devises his houses called the
Swan: The rooms of the Lion which A. occupied with the Swan shall pass by the
Devise, although of right those rooms do belong to the Lyon-house. Pasc. 36
Eliz. Ewer and Heydon's Case. A man has a house and diverse lands in W. and
also a house and lands in D. And by his Will he devises his house and all his
lands in W. and D. there the house which is in D. does not pass, for his intent
and meaning plainly appears that his house in D. does not pass: But if he had
devised all his lands in W. and had not spoken of the house, the house had
passed. A Case was in the Common Pleas betwixt Hyam and Baker: The Devisor had
two Farms, and occupied parcel of one of the Farms with the other Farm, and
devised the Farm which he had in his possession; The part of the other Farm
which he occupied with it, did pass with the Farm devised.

Dodderidge Justice, The Devise is in the Case at Bar: All his Farm called
Locks to his eldest Son, and all his Farm called Brocks to his younger Son; And
the Land in question was purchased long after that the Devisor purchased
Brocks; but that Land newly purchased was not expressly named in the Will, and
therefore it shall descend to the heir, viz. the eldest Son. Land is not parcel
of a house, and in strictness of Law cannot appertain to a house: Yet Land is
appertaining to the Office of the Fleet and the Rolls; but that is to the
Office, which is in another nature then the Land is. For the Land newly
purchased, (the Jury did not find the same to be usually occupied with Brocks)
it shall not pass with Brocks, although it be occupied together with Brocks. I
do occupy several Farms together, and then I devise one of the Farms called D.
and all the lands to the same belonging; the other Farms shall not pass with
it, although they be occupied all together. Haughton Justice, What time will
make lands to belong unto a house? All the profits of the lands used with the
house for a small time will serve the turn. Ley Chief Justice, There are two
manner of belongings; One belonging in course of Right, and another belonging
in case of Occupation. To the first belonging there ought to be Prescription,
viz. time out of mind: But in our Case, Belonging does borrow some sense from
occupying for a year, or a time; And then another year to occupy it will not
make it belonging in the later sense. In strictness of Law, Land cannot be said
to belong to a house, or land; but in vulgar reputation it may be said
belonging: And in such case, in case of grant, the Land will not pass as
appertaining to Land, C. 4. part. Terringham's Case. But in our Case, it is in
case of a Will. Usually occupied, is not to be meant time out of mind. Here
other lands were belonging to Brocks; and so the words of the Will are
satisfied. But it might have been a Question, if there had been no other lands
belonging to it. Dodderidge Justice, If the Devisor had turned all the profits
thereof to Brocks, then it had passed by the Will. Ley Chief Justice, This
occupying of it promiscuously does make it belong to neither.

At another day, Ley Chief Justice said, Here is nothing which makes it appear
to us that this Land does belong to Brocks: For the Jury find not that it was
occupied either with Brocks or Locks; and so this Land belongs to neither of
them. Dodderidge, There is not any Question in the Case: It is not found that
it does belong; And then we must not judge it belonging. The ground of this
question arises out of the matter of fact; and it ought to be found at the
least, that it is appertaining in Reputation. Haughton, The Jury find that
Knight was seized of Brocks and of lands belonging to it, And that he was
seized of Locks and of lands belonging to that, And lastly they find that he
was seized of this Land in question, but they do not find that it was any ways
belonging to Brocks or Locks. It was adjudged for the Plaintiff, and that the
Land did not pass by the Devise, but that it did descend to the heir.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
448. SELY against FLAYLE and FARTHING.
IN an Ejection Firm the Verdict was found for the Defendant. Three of the
Jurors had Sweetmeats in their pockets; and those three were for the
Plaintiff, until they were searched and the Sweetmeats found with them, and
then they did agree with the other nine, and gave their Verdict for the
Defendant. Haughton Justice, It does not appear that these Sweetmeats were
provided for them by the Plaintiff or Defendant; and it does not appear that
the said three Jurors did eat of the Sweetmeats before the Verdict given: And
so I conceive there is not any cause to make void the Verdict given; but the
said three Jurors are fineable. Dodderidge Justice, Whether they eat or not,
they are fineable for the having of the Sweetmeats with them, for it is a very
great misdemeanour. And now we cannot tell which of the Jurors the three were;
and because it was not moved before the Jurors departed from the Bar, it is now
too late to examine the Jurors, for we do not know for which three to send for.
The nine drew the three which had the Sweetmeats to their opinions* and
therefore there is no cause to stay Judgment: But if the three Jurors had drawn
the nine other to them, then there had been sufficient cause to have stayed the
Judgment; but as this case is there is no cause. And therefore per Curiam
Judgment was given for the Defendant according to the Verdict.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench 449.
NOte, It was vouched by George Crook, and so was also the opinion of the whole
Court, That by way of Agreement Tithes may pass for years without Deed, but not
by way of Lease without a Deed. But a Lease for one year may be of Tithes
without Deed.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. 450.
THe Plaintiff recovered in Debt in the Kings Bench, and a Capias ad
Satisfaciendum was awarded; and immediately upon the awarding of the Capias the
Defendant dyed. Quaere if in such case an Action of Debt lies against the
special Bail. (The Executors having nothing, a Scire-facias does not lie
against the Bail.) And in the Common Pleas in that case the Court was divided,
two Judges being against the other two Judges. Ideo quare.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
451. LEONARD's Case.
IN a Scire facias to have Execution of a Recognizance, the Case was, That a
special Supplicavit for the Peace was directed out of the Chancery to A. and B.
Justices of the Peace, and to the Sheriff of the County of etc. to take a
Recognizance of L. M. and N. for the Peace and good behavior; and the
Commission was to A. B. and the Sheriff, and cuilibet eorum. The Supplicavit
was delivered to the two Justices, who took a Recognizance from L. but M. and
N. could not be found: The Sheriff was afterward out of his Office, because
his year of Sheriffwick expired. The new Sheriff made a Retorn, That M. and N.
non sunt inventi in balliva mea; And also Returned, That A. and B. had taken a
Recognizance of L. as appears per quandam schedulam huic annex. in haec verba
etc. This Case was argued, and 21 H. 7. 20. and 21. vouched, That if the Writ
be first delivered to the Sheriff, then he only is for to execute the Writ,
and retorn the Supplicavit: But if it be first delivered to the Justices, then
they ought to execute it and retorn it. 9 E. 4. 31. A Supplicavit is a Judicial
Writ, and cannot be executed by a Deputy; but a Ministerial Writ may be
executed by a Deputy. In this case the succeeding Sheriff did retorn the Writ,
and it was not directed unto him: And the same being delivered to the
Chancellor, whether the same should be a Record or not was the Question. 4 H.
7. 17. Debt was brought upon an Obligation; The Kings Sergeant prayed the Bond
for the King, because that the Plaintiff was a person Outlawed.

Bryan Justice, You ought to bring a Writ of Detinue to recover the Bond, which
is a legal course for the King: And so in this case here is no Record for the
King, because the Recognizance comes not in by a legal course, viz. a lawful
Retorn; for it was returned by the new Sheriff, and also by him who did not
execute the Commission. Heath said clearly, There was no Record for the King*
and vouched 21 H. 7. 20, 21. Note the whole Case there. 1. Where it is said, In
casu superiori ipse Justiciarius qui primo illud breve de Supplicavit recepit,
tota executione ejusdem Brevis tantummodo tenetur, and reliqui sociorum suorum
tangent. dictum Breve exonerentur, and Justiciarius hanc recipiens nomine suo
proprio illud retornabit. And in our Case it was directed to the Sheriff and
Justices; and being delivered to the Justices, the Sheriff had not to do to
make Certificate of it, and in this case he is but as a private man. This suit
is a Scire facias to have Execution upon the said Recognizance. A Dedimus
potestatem is directed to two, and one of them does execute it; the other
cannot certify it, for the Execution of it ought to be upon his own knowledge.
A Record taken by one cannot be certified by another; for if it be, it is not
any Record upon which a Scirefacias can be awarded. In our Case, the Justices
made the Record, and the Sheriff did certify it.

Ley Chief Justice, When the Recognizance is put to writing, or Notes of
Remembrance taken of the Recognizance before the Commissioners, it is
immediately a Record. One takes Notes of a Recognizance, and dies. He to whose
hands the Notes come may certify the same, for it is a perfect Record by the
taking of the Notes of Remembrance: But that is to be understood when no Writ
is directed to Commissioners, but when a Justice takes is. In our Case the
Sheriff may retorn the Writ ex officio, and also retorn, That executio istius
brevis patet in quadam schedula annexa. And it does not appear but that the now
Sheriff was at the Execution of this Commission: But admit that he was not,
yet now the Writ being returned into the Chancery, your pleading and taking
issue upon another matter has made it a good Record: And therefore I hold that
the Judgment ought to be given for the King according to the Verdict. Haughton
Justice, Judgment cannot be for King: If the Record does not come duly into the
Chancery according to course of Law, it is not any Record upon which there can
be any Procution. If a Judge take a Fine and dies before it be certified, a
Certiorari ought to be directed to the Executors of the Judge, v. 2 H. 7. 10.
but the Certiorari ought not to be to a stranger. If two Justices of Peace have
Commission to take a Recognizance, and one of them takes it and dies, the
Certiorari must be to his Executors, and not to the other Justice. In this Case
the Record came into the Chancery by undue course: The Commission was several,
Cuilibet eorum; and those who took upon them the Execution thereof are now made
Officers by the express words of the Writ; and it is not so here returned, and
therefore Judgment ought to be against the King. A Dedimus potestatem is
directed to four to take a Fine of Lands in several Counties: Two of them take
it in one County, and they certify it and the two other take it in another
County, and they certify it: None of the Certificates are good.

Dodderidge Justice, Judgment ought to be against the King. There are two
Questions in the Case. 1. Whether the Sheriff, as this Case is, may only make
the Retorn. 2. Admitting that he cannot, but the same being returned, and the
Chancery accepting of it, and sending it to this Court, whether we can damn the
Record. 1. This is a special Recognizance upon the grievance of the party; and
by the Kings Commission they are made especial Judges in this case: And when
the party who sues delivers the same to the two Justices, the Sheriff cannot
entermeddle therewith; for then the Justices ought to retorn the Recognizance
by virtue of that Commission. 21 H. 7. 20, 21. there the Case is direct in the
point, That they to whom the Writ is first delivered, they only are to execute
it, and retorn it; for they only have power by virtue of the special
Commission. The Writ was against three, and two of them are not to be found,
The Sheriff cannot retorn Non sunt inventi, for the two by force of this
Commission: and he is not to make his Retorn as a Minister or Officer to the
other, because the Writ is Judicial. If a Challenge be to the Sheriff and
Coroners, and process is directed to Esliors; they are to execute the process
as particular Officers, by virtue of the Writ, and they are to retorn the same,
and not the Sheriff, because their authority is by virtue of a special Writ. To
the 2. point it has been said, That the Record is in the Chancery* and the
party has pleaded to it to issue, and it is now sent into this Court, and now
fault is found with it but not before.

Though all this be so, yet we cannot accept of it here, if it have not due
proceedings: If process be directed to the Coronors for Challenge to the
Sheriff, and then a new Sheriff is made, against whom there is no cause of
challenge, yet the Coronors must execute and finish the process, and not the
new Sheriff; for the Law will not endure that Offficers do make a mingling of
their Offices, Vi. 13 E. 4 and 10 E. 3. By Hill and Herle. For Trials out of
the Chancery: the Chancery and Kings Bench are but as one Court, and if the
Record come not in duly as it should, the Court was never well seized of the
Record. Ley Chief Justice, The coming of the Writ to the hands of one or two of
the Commissioners, shall not stay the Commission, but the receipt of the one of
them, is the receipt of them all having notice of it; and the others may join
with him to whom the Commission is delivered: So it is in all cases, every one
of the Commissioners are interessed therein upon notice, and not he only to
whom the Commission is delivered. If one Justice of peace takes a
Recognizance, and dies before it be certified, the Certiorari shall be
directed to the other Justice to certify it, if it come to his hands, and he
may retorn the Recognizance, and it shall not be directed to the Executors of
the Justice, who have not the Recognizance; for the Certiorari is but the hand
for the Court to receive it, for otherwise the King might lose the benefit of
the Recognizance: And in our Case the Sheriff by a special Commission has
Authority to take the Recognizance, and to retorn it upon Record. One may do
part of the Office, as to make and take the Recognizance, and the other may
retorn it; but one cannot execute a thing in part, and another in another part;
the taking of the Recognizance by the two Justices, does exclude the Sheriff
from meddling with the taking or making of it, but it does not hinder him but
that he may retorn it well enough; and the Writ or Commission is general,
Vicecomiti, which may extend as well to the new Sheriff as to the old Sheriff.
The Case was adjourned: for by two Judges, the Supplicavit and Recognizance
were not well returned by the new Sheriff; but Ley Chief Justice was against
them. Quaere.

Trin. 21 Iacobi in the Kings Bench.
452. RANDAL and HARVEY's Case.
THe Case was, Harvey, in consideration that Brown might go at large, who was
arrested at the suit of Randal, gave his word that Brown should pay the money
at such a day certain; and for non-payment of the money, Randal brought his
Action against Harvey, and being at issue upon the promise, it was found for
the Plaintiff.

Yelverton moved in arrest of Judgment, that the arrest of Brown was not
warrantable by Law; and that being the consideration, the Promise was void: and
he said, A man cannot make another his Attorney to arrest another man without
Deed, neither can the Sheriff give Warrant to his Baylie to arrest another
without a Deed sealed. And in the principal case, Randal gave one a VVarrant to
T. being an Attorney, to demand, receive, and recover money from Brown; but it
did not appear by the Declaration, that the VVarrant was by Deed in writing.
George Crook, said that it was no Exception; For, be the Arrest lawful or
unlawful, yet he said the consideration was good.

Randal gave to his Attornie Authority to receive, demand, and recover, thereby
he gave him Authority to arrest Brown, because the arrest is incident to the
Recoverie. 2 R. 2. Grants, One grants to another, all the Fish in his Pond, he
may fish with Nets: For when he gives the principal, the incidents do follow.
When Brown had yieldded himself to be lawfully arrested; and then Harvey, in
consideration that Brown might go at liberty, made the promise, the same was
good: The Declaration was, That Randal gave Authority to T. being an Attorney,
to receive, deliver, and recover the Debt, by force of which Letter of Attorney
T. did arrest Brown; and so in the Declaration it is showed that the Warrant
was a Letter of Attorney, Yelverton, 34 H. 6. In Debt upon a Recoverie in the 5
Ports: If a man will declare and set forth a thing in particular, if he fails
in any thing, it overthrows his Action; But if a man allege generally a
Recoverie in the 5 Ports, then the same is good enough. I agree the Case of 9
E. 4. Where a man gives leave to another to lay Pipes of Lead through his
Lands, that he may dig the ground to lay them there, because it is incident to
it. And I agree the Case of 2 R. 2. for there the one thing cannot be done
without the other, viz. the Fish cannot be taken without Nets; but in this
Case, the party might have come by his money by Outlawrie, and so there needed
no arresting of the party.

Ley Chief Justice, If he had declared debito modo arrestatus, it had been
generally good, and it must be intended that the Arrest was by virtue of a
Letter of Attorney: For he alleges that he gave him Authority to recover; and
then he shall have and use the means to recover, as to arrest the party, or to
outlaw him. Haughton Justice, Things incident and accessory may be comprehended
in the principal, as to dig for to mend the Pipe 9 E. 4. Because he grants him
leave to lay them in the ground; and so he may dig, and justify the same for
the amending of the pipes. If A. License B. to hunt in his Park, and to kill a
Deer, yet B. cannot carry away the Deer, for that is not incident to the thing
granted. In this case the Declaration is not good, for he ought to set forth
that the VVarrant was by Deed in writing; and yet one may plead a Judgment
generally, quod debito modo he recovered, and the same is good; but here in
this case he ought to set forth and show the VVarrant and Authority by which he
was arrested; but not so in the case of pleading of a Judgment, because there
it does refer to matter of Record. Dodderidge Justice, The promise was to free
him from the arrest, and if the arrest was unlawful, then there was no
consideration, and so by consequent the promise was void: It ought to be showed
that Brown was lawfully arrest; and if the arrest had been only matter of
inducement, and no cause of the Action, then it had been sufficient to have
said debito modo arrestatus, but in this case the arrest it self is material;
and the Plaintiff has showed that the arrest was (per debitum legis Cursum) by
virtue of a VVarrant of Attorney, and it does not appear but that it was a
Letter of Attorney to deliver Seisin: and so because the Plaintiff has not
showed the arrest to be lawful, there was no good consideration whereupon to
ground the promise, and so no cause of Action.

Yelverton took another Exception, viz. That the Plaintiff does not show that
the arrest was per breve Regis, or how it was. Chamberlain Justice, If the
party had brought an Action of false Imprisonment, this Plea had not been
good, and in this case there appears to be no good consideration, for it does
not appear that it was a lawful arrest, for no time is showed, nor no place,
nor how it was done. Ley, The Jury have found it to be debito modo, and in this
case the arrest is not in question by matter of Plea, but by Declaration, and
the finding of the Jury has made the same to be good. Dodderidge Justice, If
A. be indebted to B. B may have either an Action upon the Case, or an Action of
Debt for the money; but in an Action of Debt, unless it be in London by the
Custom, Concessit solvere is no good Plea: But in an Action upon the Case, the
Plaintiff may declare, That whereas A. was indebted to him in a certain sum of
money, that Concessit solvere, and there he needs not to show how he became
indebted unto him, as he ought to do in an Action of Debt.

Chamberlain Justice, If a man be arrested upon a void arrest, and another in
consideration of setting him at liberty does promise to pay the Debt, there it
is a thing Collateral, and an Action will lie: But if the arrest comes in
question, then in that Case the Action will not lie, but he may avoid it by
special pleading; for the arrest being unlawful, there is no consideration
whereupon to ground the promise. Yelverton, If the Plaintiff had said in the
Declaration, That in consideration that he would forbear his Debt, that he
would pay, etc. there for not payment, the Action would have been maintainable:
but in this case, the consideration is the setting him at Liberty, and so it is
Collateral. At another day, Ley Chief Justice, If I arrest a man generally, and
the party promise for the discharge of the arrest, to give 20l. it is no good
consideration, if I do not show that he had cause to arrest him; For if the
arrest be upon an ill ground, the consideration is not good. Haughton Justice,
To make it a lawful arrest, the party ought to show the Process, the Letter
of Attorney, and the proceedings; and an agreement afterward made, will not
make the arrest good. Legitimo and debito modo arrestatus is too general; for
he ought to show how he became indebted to him: For if I be bounden to make
unto I. S. a lawful assurance or conveyance of such Lands, it is too general
for me to say that I have made him a lawful assurance; but I ought to show
what manner of assurance it is, that the Court may judge whether it be a
lawful and good assurance or not. In Mich. Term followinging 21 Jacobi, It was
adjudged, That Judgment should be arrested.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
Intratur, Mich. 19. Rot. 5^.
453 SEIGNIOR and WOLMER's Case.
IN an Action upon the Case upon an Assumpsit, the Declaration was general,
that the Defendant Assumpsit to the Plaintiff; and the Jury found that the
promise was made to I. N. who Seignior the Plaintiff sent and appointed ad
componendum and agreandum the Debt of Wolmer the Defendant. It was argued, That
the promise made to the Servant, was a promise to the Master. Vi. ^ E. 4. Where
the sale of the Servant is the sale of the Master. 8 H. 5. in trespass, The
Defendant said that the Prior of etc. was seized, etc. and that such a one his
Steward made a Demise unto him; there it was ruled that he ought to have
pleaded that the Prior did demise, V. 27 H. 8. Jorden and Tatams Case, which is
express in the point: Jorden brought an Action upon the Case against Tatam, and
declared that he did assume to him (as the words of the book are.) The Evidence
was, That Tatam came in the absence of Jorden the husband, and assumed to the
wife of Jorden, (and our Case is a stronger Case then that, for there the
husband gave no authority to the wife to take such Assumpsit; but in our Case
he did authorize I. N.) and it was adjudged that the agreement of the husband
afterward, made the Assumpsit to be good to the husband: But in our Case, I.
N. had authority to take the Assumpsit, viz. Seignior sent I. N. ad componendum
and agreandum the Debt: and Wolmer assumed to pay the money, etc. and I. N gave
notice thereof to Seignior, and he agreed unto.

Dodderidge Justice, An Assumpsit to the Servant for the Master, is good to the
Master: and an Assumpsit by the appointment of the Master of the Servant, shall
bind the Master, and is his Assumpsit. 27 Ass. If my Baily of my Manor buy
cattle to stock my grounds, I shall be chargeable in an Action of Debt: and if
my Baily sell corn or cattle, I shall have an Action of Debt for the money; For
whatsoever comes within the compass of the servants service, I shall be
chargeable with, and likewise shall have advantage of the same. If a Servant
sells a horse with Warranty, it is the sale and contract of the Master, but
it is the Warranty of the Servant unless the Master gives him authority to
warrant it, for a Warranty is void which is not made and annexed to the
contract; but there it is the Warranty of the Servant, and the Contract of the
Master: But if the Master do agree unto it after, it shall be said that he did
agree to it ab initio. As where a Servant does a disseisin to the use of his
Master, the Master not knowing of it, and then the Servant makes a Lease for
years, and then the Master agrees, the Master shall not avoid the Lease for
years; for now he is in by reason of his agreement ab initio. When the Servant
promises for the Master, that the Master shall forbear to sue. etc. and shall
by such a day deliver to the Defendant the Obligation, etc. and the Defendant
promises to pay the money at such a day; and the Master having notice thereof
agrees to it, it is now the promise of the Master ab initio, for it is
included in his authority that he should agree, compound, etc. and he has
power to make a promise. Judgment in the principal Case was given for the
Plaintiff.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench. Intratur, Pasch. 18. Rot. 139.
454. GLEEDE and WALLIS Case.
A Writ of Error was brought to Reverse a Judgment given in the Court of
Northampton in an Action upon the Case, upon a Promise: The Error which was
assigned was, because that it appears that the Action was brought before the
Plaintiff had made request. The Case was, a Contract was made betwixt Gleede
and Wallis, and Wallis was to pay to Gleede 10l. when Gleede should require
him. Gleede brought an Action in the said Court 1 Martii, 16 Jacobi; and the
Request is laid to be 7 Martii 16 Jacobi following. Where a Contract is made,
and no time is expressed for payment of the money, If the party bring his
Action before he make his request, he shall not have damages; but if he makes
an actual request, and the Defendant does not pay the money, there he shall
recover damages besides the duty: Here the Action was brought before the
request made, and so no damage to the Plaintiff; and the Judgment was, that the
Plaintiff recuperet damna predict, viz. the damages laid in the Declaration.
Dodderidge Justice, The Judgment ought to be Consideratum est quod Gleede
recuperet damna quae sustinuit, and not damna predict, which are mentioned in
the Declaration, and then a Writ is awarded to enquire of the damages quae
sustinuit. The Judgment was reversed per Curiam.

Mich. 1 Caroli, in the Kings Bench. Rot. 189.
455. TAILOR and HODSKIN's Case.
IN an Ejectione firm upon a special Verdict it was found, That one Moyle was
seized of diverse Lands in Fee, holden in Socage; and having issue four
daughters, viz. A, B, C, and D. A. had issue N. and died: And afterward Moyle
devised the said Lands unto his wife for life, and after her decease, then the
same equally to be divided amongst his daughters or their heirs: Moyle died,
and afterward his wife died; and Hodskins in the right of B, C, and D. three
of the daughters, did enter upon the Lands; N. the daughter of A. married F.
who entered and leased the Lands to the Plaintiff Tailor. Whitfield for the
Plaintiff, The only point is, Whether N. the daughter of A. one of the sisters
shall have the fourth part of the lands or not, by reason of the word (Or) in
the Will.

It is apparent in our books, C. 10. part 76, the Chancellor of Oxfords Case.
C. 3. part, Butler and Bakers Case, That Wills shall be construed and taken to
be according to the intent of the Devisor: And therefore Br. Devise 39. A
devise to one to sell, to give, or do with at his will and pleasure, is a
Fee-simple. And in our Case if N. shall not take a fourth part, the word
(heirs) should be of no effect. C. 1. part in Shellies Case, All the words in a
Deed shall take effect, without rejecting any of them; and if it be so in a
Deed, a fortiori in a Will, which is most commonly made by a sick man who has
not Council with him to inform or direct him. In this Case the three sisters
who were living at the time of the Devise, took presently by way of remainder;
and the word (heirs) was added only to show the intent of the Devisor, That if
any of the three sisters had died before his wife, that then her heir should
take by descent, because her mother had taken by purchase. And by reason of the
word (heirs) the heir of A. shall take by purchase; and the disjunctive word
(or) shall be taken for (and) as in Mallories Case, C. 5. part. A reservation
of a Rent to an Abbot or his Successors; there the word (or) shall be taken for
(and) reddendo singula singulis. Trin. 7. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas, Arnold
was bound in a Bond upon Condition, that he suffer his wife to devise Lands of
the value of 400l. to her son or her daughter; and she devised the Lands to her
son and her daughter: And it was resolved that it was a good performance of the
Condition. And there the word (or) was taken for (and): And there Justice
Warburton put this Case* If I do devise all my goods in Dale or Sale, it shall
be a Devise of all my goods in both places; and (or) shall be taken for (and.)
In this Case the word (heirs) was not added of necessity for the heir of any of
the sisters to take by purchase; but only to make the heir of A. to take part
of the Lands. The Court was of opinion that it was stronger for the Plaintiff
to have it (or) in the disjunctive; For they said that if it were (and) then it
would give the three sisters the Fee, and not give the heir of A. a fourth
part; but being (or) there is more color that she shall take a fourth part by
force of the Devise. It was adjourned.

Trin: 2 Caroli, Rot* 913. in the Kings Bench.
456. ASHFIELD and ASHFIELD's Case.
THe Case was, An Enfant Copyholder made a Lease for years by word, not
warranted by the Custom* rendering Rent; The Enfant at his full age was
admitted to the Copyhold, and afterward accepted of the Rent: The question
was, Whether this Lease, and the acception of the Rent should bind, or conclude
the Enfant. Crawley Sergeant argued, That it was a void Lease, and that the
acception should not bar him. It is a ground in Law, That an Enfant can do no
Act by bare contract by word, or by writing can do any Act which is a wrong
either to himself or unto another person, or to his prejudice. In this Case, if
the Lease should be effectual, it were a wrong unto a stranger, viz. the Lord,
and a prejudice unto himself, to make a forfeiture of the Inheritance. If an
Enfant commands A. to enter into the land of I. S. and afterward the Enfant
enters upon A. A is the Disseisor and Tenant, and the Enfant gains nothing.
So if A* enters to the use of the Enfant, and the Enfant afterward agrees to
it, in this Case here is but a bare contract; and an agreement will not make an
Enfant a Disseisor: No more shall he be bound by a bare Deed, or matter in
writing without Livery. 26 H. 8. 2. An Enfant grants an Advowson, and at full
age confirms it, all is void. Br. Releases 49. Two Joynt-Tenants, one being
an Enfant releaseth to his Companion, it is a void Release. 18 E. 4. 7. An
Enfant makes a Lease without reserving Rent, or makes a Deed of grant of goods,
yet he shall maintain Trespass; nay though he deliver the goods, or Lease with
his own hand, the same will not excuse the Trespass, nor will it perfect the
Lease, or make the grant of the goods good. If the Contract have but a mixture
of prejudice to the Enfant, it shall be void. ^ Jacobi in the Kings Bench,
Bendloes and Holydaies Case. An Obligation made by an Enfant with a Condition
to pay so much for his apparel; because the Bond was with a penalty, it was
adjudged void. If Tenant at Will make a Lease for years, he was a Disseisor at
the Common Law, before the Statute of West. 2. cap. 25. 12 E. 4* 12. Tenant at
Will makes a Lease for years* 10 E. 4. 18. 3 E. 4. 17. But if an Enfant be
Tenant at will, and he makes a Lease, he is no Disseisor. In our Case, if he
had made Livery, then I confess it had been a defeisible forfeiture, and he
mignt have been remitted by his entry upon the Lord. Farrer for the Plaintiff,
The Lease is not void, but voidable 7 E. 4. 6. Brian. 18 E. 4. 2. 9 H. 6. 5. An
Enfant makes a Lease for years, and at full age accepts of the Rent, the Lease
is good, because the Law says that he has a recompense. Com. 54. A Lease for
years, the remainder for years rendering Rent by an Enfant, and afterward at
his full age he accepts the Rent of the particular Tenant, it is a good
comfirmation of the estate of him in the remainder. Litt. 547. If he at full
age confirm, it is good; which could not be if the Lease were void: and yet in
that Case it does not appear that there was any Rent reserved: The Enfant being
a Copyholder makes no difference in the Case. And in Murrels Case, C. 4. part,
It is said, That if a Copyholder make a Lease not warrantable by the Custom,
it is a forfeiture, which proves it is a good Lease, otherwise it could not be
a forfeiture. Hill. 37 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Rot. 99. East and Hardings
Case. A Copyholder makes a Lease for three years by word, to begin at
Michaelmas next ensuing; it is a forfeiture of the Copyhold, and a good lease
betwixt the parties.

Hill 18 Jacobi, Haddon and Arrowsmiths Case One licensed his Copyholder for
life, to make a Lease for 20. if he should so long live; and he made a lease
for 20 years, and left out the words (if he should so long live) yet because he
was a Copyholder for life, and so the lease did determine by his death, and so
he did no more then by Law he might do, it was adjudged a good Lease, and no
forfeiture; otherwise if he had been a Copyholder in Fee. All Conditions in
Fact shall bind an Enfant, but not Conditions in Law. C. 8. part 44.
Whittinghams Case, An Enfant, Tenant for life or years, makes a Feoffment in
Fee, it is no forfeture; For if the Lessor enters, the Enfant may enter upon
him again; yet it is a good Feoffment, but he shall avoid it by Enfancy; but if
it be by matter of Record, then it is otherwise: For if an Enfant be Lessee for
life, and levieth a Fine, it is a forfeiture; and in that case if the Lessor
enter for the forfeiture, the Enfant shall not enter again. The same Law if an
Enfant commits Waste which is against a Statute, it is a forfeiture; and if
the Lessor recovereth the place wasted, the Enfant shall not enter again. 9 H.
7* 24. A woman an Enfant, who has right to enter into lands, takes a husband,
and a descent is cast, yet she shall avoid the descent after the death of her
husband.

The Court said, That if in the Case at Bar the Enfant had been Tenant in Fee
at the Common Law, and made a lease without Deed, and had accepted the Rent at
his full age, that the same had been good, for that there he had a recompense;
but being a Copyholder it is a question. Jones Justice, It was adjudged in the
Common Pleas in Peter's Case, That if a Copyholder without license makes a
Lease not warranted by the Custom, That such Lessee should maintain an
Ejectione firm. The Council against the Enfant in the Case at Bar said, That
the Enfant made the Lease as Tenant by the Common Law, for that he made it by
Conveyance of the Common Law: And so the Lease was voidable, and not void; and
then the acceptance of the Rent had made the Lease to be good. It was adjourned
to another day.

Hill. 2. Caroli, Rot. 389* in the Kings Bench.
457. GEORGE BUSHER against MURRAY Earl TILLIBARN.
A Scire facias was brought dated 28 Junii retornable in Mich. Term 2 Car.
Regis, why Execution should not be awarded against the Defendant upon a
Judgment had against him in this Court. The Defendant pleaded, That King
Charles, 7 October. in the second year of his Reign, did take him into his
protection for a year, and did grant unto him that during that time he should
be free from all manner of Plaints but Dower, Quare Impedit, and Placit. coram
Justiciariis Itinerantibus. It was said that this Protection was not
warrantable by Law for three causes. 1. Because it is after the purchase of the
Scire facias, and before the Retorn. 10 H. 6. 3. 11 H. 4. 7. A Protection
depending the Suit is not allowable, although it make mention that the party is
to go a voyage with the Kings Son. 2. Because he does not specify any
particular cause why the Protection was granted unto him. All our books do
express a cause, viz. Quia moratur etc. quia profecturus etc. Register 22, 23.
there three Protections are Quia incarceratus. 39 H. 6. 38, 39, 40. per Curiam,
The Protection ought to express a special cause, otherwise it is not good.
Fitz. 28. a. b. the cause is expressed. 1. R. 2. cap. 16. The particular cause
ought to be in the Protection. A Protection being general, the party has no
remedy against him to traverse it, or to procure it to be repealed. 3. This
Court is greater then a Justice in Air, and he is excepted in placitis
itinerantibus. That Court was of opinion that there was no color for allowing
of the Protection. A Safe Conduct will only keep the party safe from harm, but
will not protect him from Actions.

Mich. 2 Caroli, Intratur Pasch. 18. Jur. Rot. 298. in the Common Pleas.
458. ROYDEN and MOULSTER's Case.
IN Trespass for entering into his Close called Dipson in Suffolk, upon Not
guilty pleaded, the Jury gave a special verdict, That the said Close was parcel
of the Manor of Movedon, and demisable by Copy of Court-Roll; and that the
same was granted to G. Starling in Fee by Copy of Court-Roll, who had issue two
sons, John and Henry: And that 35 Eliz. George Starling did surrender the same
to the use of his Will, and thereby demised the same to John and the heirs
males of his body, with diverse Remainders over, and dyed seized: And that the
Surrender was presented according to the Custom; and that John was admitted to
have to him and his heirs; And that the said John had issue 3 sons, Harry,
George and Nicholas; And that the said John 43 Eliz. did surrender to the use
of his Will and thereby devised the same to Katherine his wife and dyed, and
that the said Surrender 9 Martii 4t Eliz. was presented, and the said Katherine
was admitted: Harry, George and Nicholas dyed without issue. They further
found, That the Custom of the Manor is, That the youngest brother is to have
the Copyhold by descent. And also That no Copyholder by the Custom could make
any Estate in feodo, and that the said Katherine took to her husband Francis
Robinson, who 1 Sept, 17 Iacobi leased the same to Royden the Plaintiff for
one year, who entered and was thereof possessed, until Moulster the Defendant
by the commandment of etc. did out him etc. In which case, the only Question
was, Whether a Copyhold be within the Statute of West. 2. so as an estate
thereof so limited should be a Fee tail, or a Fee conditional And by the
opinion of the Justices of the Common Pleas it was adjudged, That a Copyhold
could not be entitled within the Statute of West. 2.

First they said, That Copyholds are not within the letter of the Statute,
which speaks only de tenementis per chartam datis, etc. Secondly, they are not
within the meaning of it: 1. Because they were not until 7 E. 4. 19. of any
account in Law, because they were but Estates at will. 2. The Statute of West.
2. provides against those who might make^ a dissen heresin by Fine or
Feoffment, which Copyholders could not do. 3. Because if Copyholders might give
lands in tail by the Statute, then the Reversion should be left in themselves,
which cannot be, 4. The Makers of the Statute did not intend any thing to be
within the Statute of Donis whereof a Fine could not be levied; For the Statute
provides Quod sinis ipso jure sit nullus. 5. Great mischiefs would follow, if
Copyholds should be within the Statute of West. 2. because there is no means to
dock the estate, and no customary conveyance can extend to a Copyhold created
at this day. 37 Eliz* Lane and Hills case adjudged in the Common Pleas was
cited by Justice Harvey, where a Surrender was unto the use of one in tail,
with diverse remainders over in tail: The first Surrenderee dyed without issue;
And first it was agreed and adjudged, That it was no discontinuance. 2. If it
were a discontinuance, yet a Formedon in the Remainder did not lie, because
there ought to be a Custom to warrant the Remainder as well as the first Estate
tail: For when a Copyholder in Fee makes such a gift, no Reversion is left in
him, but only a possibility; And the Lord ought to avow upon the Donee, and not
upon the Donor. And there is a difference when he makes or gives an estate of
inheritance, and when he makes a Lease for life or years; for in the one case
he has a Reversion, in the other not. 2. A Recovery shall not be without a
special custom, as it was agreed in the Case of the Manor of Stepney, because
the Warrantie cannot be knit to such an Estate without a Custom. And for
express authority in the principal Case he cited Pits and Hockle^'s ase, which
was Ter: Pasc. 35 Eliz. rot. 334. in the Common Pleas; where it was resolved,
That Copyholds were not within the Statute of Donis for the weakness and
meanness of their estates: For if they were within the Statute of West. 2. the
Lord could not enter for Felony, but the Donor; and the Services should be done
to the Donor, and not to the Lord of the Manor. And so, and for these
mischiefs he conceived, That neither the meaning nor the words of the said
Statute did extend to Copyholds. Hill. 34 Eliz. Rot. 292. in the Kings Bench,
Stanton and Barney's Case. A Surrender was made of a Copyhold within the Manor
of Stiversden unto one and the heirs of his body; and after issue he surrendered
unto another: And it was agreed by all the Justices, That the issue was barred.
And Popham did not deny that Case, but that it was a Fee conditional at the
Common Law and that post prolem suscitatam he might alien. And so it was agreed
in Decrew and Higdens case, Trin. 36. Eliz. rot. 54^. in the Kings Bench; and
in Erish and Ives case 41 and 42 Eliz. in the Common Pleas, in an Evidence for
the Manor of Istleworth That no Estate tail might be of* Copyhold without a
Custom to warrant it. Mich. 36 and 37 Eliz. in the Kings Bench it was adjudged,
That a Copyholder could not suffer a common Recovery; and the reason was,
because that the Recovery in value is by reason of the Warrantie annexed to the
Estate at the Common Law, which could not be annexed to a Customary estate: And
another reason was given, because that he who recovers in value, shall be in by
the Recovery, and the Copy of the Court-Roll only should not be his Evidence,
as Littleton and other books say it ought to be. And Crook said, That the
Statute of Donis was made in restraint of the Common Law. And it should be very
disadvantagious to the Lord, if Copyhold should be construed to be within that
Statute. And therefore he conceived that the said Statute did not extend to
Copyholds by any equitable construction.

And such difference was taken by Popham Chief Justice, 42 Eliz. in the Kings
Bench, rot. 299. in Baspool and Long's Case: For he said, That a Custom which
did conduce to maintain Copyholds, did extend to them; But a Statute or a
Custom which did deprave or destroy them, did not. As if one surrender to the
use of one for life, the Remainder in Fee, where the Custom is to surrender in
Fee, the Custom does not extend thereunto, because a Custom which goes in
destruction of a Copyhold shall be taken strictly. But if a man be Copyholder
in Fee, he may grant a Fee conditional.

Harvey Justice put some Cases to prove the small account the Law had of
Copyholds at the time of the making of that Statute, as 40 E. 3. 28. 32 H. 6.
br. Copyhold 24. And he said, That there is not any book in the Law but only
Mancels case in Plow. Comment. That the Statute of West. 2. does extend to
Copyholds.

Hill. 2 Caroli, rot. 235 in the Kings Bench.
459. LITFIELD and his Wife against MELHERSE.
A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given in an Action upon the Case
brought by Husband and Wife in the Common Pleas for words spoken of the
Plaintiffs wife: And the Judgment in the Common Pleas was, That the husband and
wife should recover. And that was assigned for Error in this Court, because the
Husband only is to have the damages; and the Judgment ought to be, That the
Husband alone should recover. But notwithstanding this Error assigned, the
Judgment was affirmed by the opinion of the whole Court.

Pasch. 2 Caroli, rot. 362. in the Kings Bench.
460 HOLMES and WINGREEVE's Case.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in the Court at
Lincoln, in an Action of Trespass there brought for taking away a Box with
Writings. And four Errors were assigned. 1. Because the Plaintiff did not
appear by Attorney or in person at the retorn of the Attachment against the
Defendant; so as there was a discontinuance, for the Plaintiff ought to appear
de die in diem. 2. Because in his Declaration there he says, That the
Defendant took a Box with Writings, and does not make any title to the Box, nor
shows that the same was locked, nailed, or sealed. 2 H. 7. 6. a. The certainty
of the writings ought to be showed, that a certain issue may be taken
thereupon. Com. 85. 22 H. 6. 16. 14 H. 6. 4. 21 E. 3. He ought to show the
certainty of the writings. 18 H. 1. Charters in a Box sealed. C. 9. part,
Bedingfields case. C. 5. part, Playters case; The Declaration was insufficient,
because the Plaintiff therein did not name the certain number of the Fishes.
3. He pleaded, That he made a Bill Obligatory, and does not show that it was
delivered. Dyer 156. Per scriptum suum gerens datum, and does not say Primo
deliberatum, is not good. The fourth Error was, That in the Replication the
Plaintiff says (dixit) whereas it ought to be dicit in present tense. 10 H.
7. 12. The title to the Assise took Exception to the Plaintiffs title, because
that he said (fuit seitus) of a Message, whereas he ought to have said (est
seitus) But yet it was there holden good, because he says, that all those
whose title he has, etc. by which words the possession shall be intented to
continue. 35 H. 6. 11. 85. vi. 268. A Writ a False Judgment directed to the
Sheriff, Recordare loquelam (que est) and the form, and the presidents are
(quae fuit) 9 H. 6. 12. The Sheriff retorns Non est (inveni) whereas it ought
to be (Nom est inventus) and adjudged Error. And he said, That Detinue is only
to be brought when it self is to be recovered in as good plight, and no other
Action. It does appear by the Record, that in this Case at Trial 18 were only
returned upon the Panel, whereas there ought to have been 24 returned. By the
Statute of West. 2. cap. 38. 24 ought to be returned on the Panel. 8 H. 4. 20.
More then 24. shall not be returned. 2 H. 7. 8. The Sheriff returned but 12.
and it was ruled to be an insufficient retorn, because 24 ought to have been
returned. 36 H. 6. 27. Trespass is brought for a Box and Charters which
concerned the Plaintiffs lands, and damages were given entirely; and there it
was adjudged not to be good, because the Plaintiff did not make any title to
the Box, nor did show that the same was locked or sealed: For the Box may
belong to one, and the Charters to another, as the Evidences to the heir, and
the Box to the Executors, unless the Box be first locked.

Note, The opinion of the whole Court was, because that the issue was
particular, That he was not guilty of the Trespass and detaining until the
Plaintiff had entered into a Bond. And the Jury found him guilty of the Trespass
generally, That the Verdict was not good to make the Defendant guilty by
implication. And Justice Dodderidge said, That the Plaintiff has brought his
Action of Trespass, and does not lay any possession of the Box; And Trespass is
a possessory Action. Also he said, That the Plaintiff did not set forth the
Quality of the Evidences, viz. Whether they were Releases, Deeds of Feoffments,
or other particular Evidences. And for these causes, and for the causes before
alleged, the Judgment given in the Court at Lincoln was reversed.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
461. Sir WILLIAM FISH and WISEMAN's Case.
JUdgment was given in the Common Pleas against Sir William Fish; and after the
year and day Execution was awarded by Capias, where it ought to have been by a
Scire facias first: And the Plaintiff was taken in Execution, and brought a
Writ of Error in this Court, where the Judgment was affirmed; but the Execution
was reversed, because the Execution was not warrantable, the Process being
erroneous. And out of the Kings Bench another Execution was awarded by Capias
sicut alias, within the year of the affirmance of the Judgment in the Kings
Bench. And it was moved by Banks, That the Execution was erroneous, because he
ought to have a Scire facias, because the year is past after the Judgment in
the Common Pleas; and although that the Court be changed, yet the Plaintiff
ought to have the same Process for Execution as he ought to have in the first
Court. 14 H. 7. 15. The first Process was reversed for Error; and then he
cannot have a Sicut alias, but ought to have a new Original. We pray a
Supersedeas of the Execution for Sir William Fish the Plaintiff, and that he
may be delivered out of Execution. Sir William Fish had a Release, and that was
the cause that Wiseman would not take a Scirefacias. Sir William Fish upon the
Judgment in the Common Pleas was taken in Execution; and upon a Writ of Error
brought, Bail was put in to proceed with effect, and then he was delivered out
of Execution; And then he cannot now be taken in Execution again upon the same
Judgment. 16 H. 7* 2. per Curiam, If one be in Execution upon Condemnation in
the Common Pleas, and the Record and the body is removed into the Kings Bench
by Error; then the party shall find collateral Securities by their Recognisance
to pay the Condemnation in case the Judgment be affirmed, and further to
proceed with effect. In this case the body is discharged of Execution as to any
Process to take the body, unless he render himself to prison of his own accord
to discharge his Sureties: And if he will not do it, he who recovereth has no
remedy but to make the Sureties to pay the Condemnation by reason of their
Recognisance. 2 E. 4. 8. A man is condemned in London tempore Vacationis, and
has Execution in the Term; and the Defendant sueth a Corpus cum causa, and had
his privilege in the Common Pleas.

Danby, The Plantiffe shall not have Debt, for at the beginning when the
Defendant was in Execution, the Action of Debt was gone; and then he being
discharged, here the Action of Debt does not lie. To which Needham agreed. And
Choke said, He did not know any remedy that the party had, and conceived that
he could not have a new Execution. 14 H. 7. 1. If one escape out of Execution,
the Plaintiff cannot take him again in Execution, but his remedy is against
the Jailer. The Court may supersedeat this Execution, because it is erroneous:
34 H. 6. 45. b. An Action of Debt was brought against an Executor, who pleaded
that he had fully administered; And it was found that he had Assets, and
Judgment was given against the Defendant, and a Capias was awarded against him,
and after that an Exigent: And the Court granted a Supersedeas, to supersede
that Erroneous process; For a Capias does not lie against an Executor where he
pleads, etc. but a Fieri facias. And therefore in the principal Case Banks
prayed a Supersedeas.

Jones Justice, If Error be brought within the year of the Judgment in the
Common Pleas, and the Judgment be affirmed here, the party shall have a Capias
although the Judgment be affirmed two years after the bringing of the Writ of
Error: For he shall take the same Execution in the Kings Bench, as in the
Common Pleas; and the altering of the Court makes no difference in it. And so
was Garnon's case: The Writ of Error was brought within the year of the
Judgment in the Common Pleas, but it was not affirmed in two years after, and
yet there he had the same Process in the King's Bench as he was to have had in
the Common Pleas. Dodderidge Justice* If the Execution be lawful and upon
lawful Process, and the party be delivered out of Execution, then he shall not
be taken again in Execution: But if he be taken in Execution upon an erroneous
Process, if he be delivered out, he may be taken again in Execution; for the
first Execution was erroneous, and is no Record being reversed.

Hyde Chief Justice, If a man recover in Debt upon an Obligation, and the
Judgment be reversed by Error, he is restored to his first Action, and may
plead Null tiel record. Dyer 59, 60. Triwingards Case, A man in Execution had a
Writ of Privilege out of the Parliament; upon which the Sheriff sets him at
liberty by Law for a time, yet he shall be in Execution again, and the Law
saves the others right. Broom Secondarie of the Kings Bench, If Error be
brought after the year of the Judgment in the Common Pleas, and the Judgment be
affirmed here, the party may take forth a Capias within the year of the
Judgment affirmed; although in the Common Pleas he cannot have a Capias,
because the year is past: For we are not to respect what process he ought to
have in the Common Pleas; but after the year of the Judgment affirmed here, the
party is to have a Scire facias. Jones Justice said, That when he was a
Reporter, the Judges delivered their opinions in Garnons Case, C. 5. part 88.
That if after the year and day he bring Error, and the Judgment be affirmed,
that he ought to have the like process here as in the Common Pleas: And that
was a Scire facias, because that the year was past in the Common Pleas,
although it were within the year of the Judgment affirmed here. Dodderidge
Justice, The Cases which Banks cited are Law, but are not well applied. The
whole Court was of opinion, That if the Common Pleas award erroneous process,
the Court cannot award a Supersedeas; but the party is put to his Writ of
Error here: and upon that erroneous Process we cannot grant a Supersedeas, but
the party is put to his new Writ of Error. And according to the opinion of
the Court, Sir William Fish brought a new Writ of Error.

Mich. 2 Caroli, Rot. 179* in the Kings Bench.
462. BELLAMY and BALTHORP's Case.
IN an Action of Trover and Conversion, The Plaintiff did lay it, that he was
possessed of twenty Loads of Wheat, and that he lost them, and that they came
to the Defendants hands, who converted the same to his own use. The Defendant
did justify and said, That the Parish of O. is an ancient Parish, in which
there is a Rectorie impropriate, etc. and the Earl of Clare was seized of the
Rectorie, and made a Lease unto him of the Tithes of that Parish for one year,
by force of which he was possessed; and that the Corn was set forth by the
Parishoners, and that one T. gathered the Tithe, and delivered the same to the
Plaintiff, and that the Defendant his Servant took away the Tithe as it was
lawful for him to do: Upon which the Plaintiff did demurr; First because the
Plea did amount to no more then the general issue, viz. Not guilty: and if the
Plea do amount to no more then the general issue, then it is no good plea; but
he ought to have taken the general issue. 5 H. 7. 11. Ass. For if in an Assise
the Tenant says that the Plaintiff did disseise him, and that he entered upon
him, the plea is not good, because it amounts but to the general issue, viz.
Null lort null disseisin, and the other party may demurr upon it. 22 E. 4. 40. In
Trespass for Battery, it is no plea to say that he did not beat him, because
it is but Not guilty by Argument. 34 H. 6* 28. b. If I bring Trespass for
breaking of my Close, It is no good plea to say that I have no Close; or if it
be for carrying away my Goods, to say that I had not any Goods; but the Party
ought to have pleaded Not guilty.

It may be objected, That in this Case the Defendant makes Title to the Corn.
To that we say, He derives a Title to Tithes without a Deed, which gives no
title to them; For Tithes do not pass by Demise alone without Deed; but by the
demise of the Rectorie without Deed they will pass: So by a Feoffment of a
Manor without Deed the Services will pass; but the Services alone will not
pass without a Deed. 21 H. 7. 21. 19 H. 8. 12. A Warren may be demised without
Deed. 9 E. 4. 47. But the profits of Courts will not pass without Deed. 22 H.
6. 34. b. By way of Contract a Demise may be of Tithes without Deed, but in
pleading it ought to be set forth that there was a Deed. C. 10. part 92. Where
the Deed ought to be showed; which proves that there ought to be a Deed. In the
Common Pleas in an Action of Trover and Conversion of certain Goods, the
Defendant said, That A. was possessed of them, and made him Executor, etc. And
the Plaintiff did demurre, and had Judgment, because it amounted but to the
general Issue. Dodderidge Justice; The Parson may demise his Tithe to the
Owner of the Land without Deed; but he cannot grant them to a stranger without
Deed. If the Defendant make Title from a stranger, then it does amount to the
general Issue; but if both Plaintiff and Defendant make Title from one Person
or Donor, then the plea is a good plea. Otherwise, per Curiam, it does amount
to the general Issue. But the Opinion of the Court was, because that the
Defendant did make a title of Tithes without a Deed; therefore Judgment in the
principal Case was given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
436. The Dean and Chapter of Carlisle's Case.
A Writ of Error was directed unto the City of Carlisle, to remove the Record
of a Judgment given there in Curia nostra, whereas the Judgment was given
tempore Jacobi: And the Opinion of the Court was, That it was not good, nor the
Record thereby well removed. Dy^r 4. Eliz: 206 b. There was a Certiorari to
remove a Record cujusdam inquisitionis capt. etc. in Curia nostra; Whereas in
truth it was taken in the time of the predecessor of the King, and so thereby
the Record was not well removed. Dodderidge Justice, If a Writ of Error does
abate upon the Plea to the Writ, and the Record be well removed, the party may
have a new Writ of Error, coram vobis residet, etc. but if the Record be not
well removed, as in this Case at Bar it is not, then the party shall not have
a new Writ of Error here. We do many times grant a Scire facias to sue forth
Execution in the inferior Court, which proves that the Record by an ill and
insufficient Writ of Error is not removed, but does remain there still. If
there be variance betwixt the Record and the Writ of Error, the Record is not
well removed; but if the Writ of Error want only form, but is sufficient for
the matter in substance, the Writ shall not abate, but the party may have a
new Writ of Error coram vobis residet, etc.

Trin. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
464. MILL's Case.
ACtion upon the Case for these words, Thou have Coined Gold, and art a Coyner
of Gold; Adjudged the Action will not lie, for it may be he had Authority to
Coin; and words shall be taken in mitiori sensu*

Pasch. 3 Car* in the Kings Bench.
465. BROOKER's Case.
THe question was, Whether the Feoffee of the Land might maintain a Writ of
Error to reverse an Attaindor by Vtglary: and the Case was this, William Isley
seized in Fee of the Manor of Sundridge in Kent, had issue Henry Isley, who
was Indicted of Felony 18 Eliz. and 19. Eliz. the Record of the Indictment was
brought into this Court; and thereupon 20 Eliz. Henry Isley was outlawed,
William Isley died seized, Henry Isley entered into the Manor and Land as son
and heir, and being seized of the same, devised the Manor and Lands to C. in
Fee, who conveyed the same to Brooker, and Brooker brought a Writ of Error to
reverse the Outlawry against Henry Isley. Holborn argued for the King, and said
that Brooker was no way privy to the attaindor of Henry Isley, but a mere
stranger, and therefore could not maintain a Writ of Error; And first he said,
and took exception, that he had not set himself down Terre-Tenant in
possession. Secondly, he says in his Writ of Error, That the Manor and Lands
descended to Henry Isley as son and heir, when as he was attainted. The third
exception was, That he says that Henry Isley did devise the Lands, and that he
could not do because he was a person Attainted. Fourthly, he said that Brooker
was not Tenant so much as in posse. 4 H. 7. 11. If it were not for the words of
Restitution, the party could not have the mean profits after the Judgment
reversed. 16 Ass. 16. Lessee for years pleaded to a Precipe, and reversed it;
the question was, whether he should be in statu quo? vi. Librum, for it is
obscure. If this Attaindor of Henry Isley were reversed, yet it cannot make the
devise good; For there is a difference betwixt Relations by Parliament which
nullify Acts, and other Relations. Vi. 3 H. 7. Sentlegers Case, Petition 18.
The violent Relation of Acts of Parliament. If a Bargain and Sale be, the
Inrollment after will make Acts before good; but a Relation by Common Law, will
not make an Act good, which was before void. C. 3. part, Butler and Bakers
Case, A gift is made to the King by Deed enrolled, and before the enrollment
the King grants away the Land, the Grant is void; yet the enrollment by
Relation makes the Lands to pass to the King from the beginning. Admit in this
Case that Brooker were Terre-Tenant, yet he is not a party privy to bring a
Writ of Error to reverse the Attaindor of him who was Tenant of the Land; and I
have proved, That although the Attaindor were reversed, yet he has nothing,
because the Devise was void, and is not made good by Relation. It is a rule in
our Books, that no man can bring a Writ of Error but a party or privy. 9 E.
4. 13. 22 E. 4. 31, 32. 9 H. 6. 46. b. Ass. 6: C. 3. part, in the Marquess of
Winchesters Case, The heir of the part of the mother cannot have the Writ of
Error, but the heir of the part of the father may. So if erroneous Judgment be
given in the time of profession of the eldest son, and afterward he is
dereigned, he shall have the Writ of Error. In 22 H. 6. 28. The heir in special
tail, or by Custom, cannot have Error: But yet M. 18 Eliz. in Sir Arthur
Henninghams Case it was adjudged, That the special heir in tail might have a
Writ of Error: The Bail cannot maintain a Writ of Error upon a Judgment given
against the Principal, because he was not privy unto the Judgment, therefore it
shall be allowed him by way of plea in a Scire facias. I never find that an
Executor can have Error to reverse an Attaindor; but for the misawarding of the
Exigent, Marshes Case was cited, C. 5. part 111. Fitz: 104. Feoffee at the
Common Law could not have an Audita Quaerela, in regard he was not privy. 12
Ass. 8. 41. Ke^laway 193. There the Terre-Tenant brought a Writ of Error in the
name of the heir, and not in his own name. 24 H. 8. Dyer 1. There it is said,
That he who is a stranger to the Record shall have Error. To that I answer,
That he in the Reversion, and the particular Tenant, are but one Tenant; for
the Fee is demanded and drawn out of him: But in the principal Case at Bar, no
Land is demanded, but a personal Attaindor is to be reversed. Also there it is
put, That if the Conusee extend before the day, there it is said that the
Feoffee may have Error. 17 Ass. 24. 18 E. 3. 25. Fitz. 22. To that I answer,
That the Feoffee is privy to that which charge him, for the Land is extended
in his hands; and if the Feoffee there should not have a Writ of Error, the Law
should give him no manner of remedy; for there the Conusor himself cannot have
Error, because the Lands are not extended in his hands. Also it is there said,
that the Feoffee brought a Scirefacias against him who had execution of the
Land. To that I answer, That that is by special Act of Parliament. Also there
it is said, That if the Parson of a Church has an Annuity and recovereth, and
afterward the Benefice is appropriated to a Religious house, the Sovereign of
the house shall have a Scirefacias. I answer, That in that Case he is no
stranger, for that he is perpetual Parson, and so the Successor of the Parson
who recovered. 12 H. 8. 8. There a Recovery was against a Parson, and there
Pollard said that the Patron might have Error. I answer, That Pollard was
deceived there; for it is said before that the Parson has but an Estate for
life, and then he, viz. the Patron is as a Recoverer who shall have a Writ of
Error. Dyer 1. But the Parson has the Fee, and therefore Pollard was mistaken
as it appears by Brook Fauxi fire de Recovery 51. 19 H. 6. 57* Newton, A
false verdict is had against a Parson, the Patron cannot have an Attaint: There
is a difference if one be party to the Writ, although not party to the
Judgment. Error 72. A Quare Impedit was brought by the King against the Patron
and the Incumbent, and Judgment only was had against the Patron and the
Incumbent Parson brought a Writ of Error; but if he had not been party to the
Writ, he could not have maintained Error. So in Attaint, the party to the
Writ, though not to the Judgment, shall have Attaint. 44 E. 3. b. 7. But if he
be not party to the Writ, he shall not maintain. Attaint; as if he pretend
Joynt-Tenancy with a stranger who is not named, and the verdict pass against
him, he shall not have attaint. But Jones Justice said that he might have
Attaint.

Admit the first Feoffee, viz. C. might have a Writ of Error, yet Brooker in
this case cannot because he is the second Feoffee; and a Writ of Error is a
thing in Action, and not transferable over. C. 3. part, The Marquess of
Winchesters Case. C. 1. part, Albanies Case. One recovers against A. who makes
a Feoffment to B. neither the Feoffee nor Feoffor shall have Error, for he,
viz. B. comes in after the title of Error, and the Feoffor shall not have the
Writ of Error, because he is not a party grieved. 34 Eliz. in the Common
Pleas. Sherrington and Worsleys Case, Sherrington had Judgment against Worsley,
and afterward acknowledged a Statute to B. Sherrington sued forth Execution,
B. brought Error upon the Judgment, and it was adjudged that it would not lie;
First because he was a stranger, Secondly because he came in under and after
the title of Error. See the reason C. 3. part, the Marquess of Winchesters
Case, where it is said that a Writ of Error is not transferrable. This
Attaindor does not work upon the Land; and so it does not make the Terre-Tenant
privy, but it works upon the person and blood of Henry Isley, the Land is not
touched: For Henry Isley was attainted in the life of his Father, and so it did
not touch the Land. For if Henry Isley had died without issue in the life of
his father, the youngest son should have had the Land by descent; which proves
that it works not upon the Land, but upon the person. Banks for the Plaintiff,
and he desired that the Outlawrie might be reversed: As this Case is, there is
no other person who can maintain Error. Henry Isley had his pardon before the
Outlawrie, but he came not in to plead it; and now having enjoyed it so long a
time, we hope a Purchasor shall be favored before him who beggs a concealed
title. The first Exception was taken: To the Devise by a person attainted. I
answer, That that is but the conveyance to the Writ of Error. Secondly it was
said, that none but privies or parties could maintain Error; and the adverse
party would disable the heir on the part of the Mother, and by Custom.
Thirdly, he would disable the Feoffees and make them as strangers. First the
Outlawrie was 20 Eliz. against Henry Isley, which was after the seisin of the
Land; and Brooker is a party able to bring a Writ of Error, being the heir of
the purchasor: Error and Attaint go with the Land, 13 H. 4 19. Dyer 90. Br.
Cases 337. But Estopels and Conditions go to the heir, Fitz. 21. Error brought
by a special heir. It is not necessary that always the heir and party to the
Record have the Writ of Error, but sometimes he who is grieved by the Record. A
Scirefacias is a Judicial Writ founded upon a Record, and has as much in
privity is Error; and yet a stranger to the Record shall have it. 16 H. 7. 9.
The heir of the purchasor brought a Scirefacias to execute a Fine; It was
objected that he was not a party to the Record; but it was resolved in respect
he was to have the benefit, that he was a sufficient person to maintain the
Writ. 17 Ass. 24. 18 E. 3. 25. Execution was upon a Statute before the time
that it ought to have been, and a Feoffee brought Error; It was objected that
he was not party, nor privy to the Record; yet because he was was grieved by
the Execution, he did maintain the Writ of Error. Trin. 34 Eliz. in the Kings
Bench, Sherrington and Worsleys Case, (not rightly remembered) Sherrington did
recover in debt against Worsley, who aliened the Land to Charnock; afterward
an Elegit is awarded upon the Roll; and Charnock brought Error, and it was
admitted good, and Sherrington forced to plead to it: Now in the principal Case
we are the party grieved by the Outlawrie, and therefore may maintain the
Writ. 21 H. 6. 29. A Reversioner, or he in the Remainder without aid, prayer,
or Resc'. shall have a Writ of Error, because they are damnified, although they
be not parties to the Record. I agree, that where one is not grieved by the
Judgment, there a stranger shall not have Error. 21 E. 4. 23. A Recovery is in
Debt, and the Defendant is taken and escapes, the Sheriff shall not have a Writ
of Error, for he is not grieved by the Record, but by the escape. 2 R. 3. 21.
The Principal is Outlawed in Felony, afterward the Accessory is condemned, he
shall not have a Writ of Error to reverse the Outlawrie of the Principal; for
he is not grieved by that Outlawrie, but by his own Condemnation. Another
Objection was, because here was an Outlawrie against him, and therefore he
shall be disabled to sue: I answer, Our Writ of Error is brought to reverse
that Outlawrie; and we shall not be rebutted by that Outlawrie, when we are to
reverse it. 7 H. 49, 40. Error brought to reverse an Outlawrie, the Defendant
would have disabled the Plainfiff by another Outlawrie, and it was not allowed
because he seeks to avoid it. 10 H. 7. 18. For the Mastership of an Hospital,
Exception was taken to the Writ, because the Assise is brought to undo the
name of Master; and therefore he ought not to name him Master. 22 H. 6. 26.
Abbot and Covent, the Abbot is preferred, and the Covent elected another Abbot;
And the Patron brought a Quare Impedit to defeat the Election: It was ruled,
because he goes about to overthrow the Election, he need not name him Abbot.
Garranty 29. and 18 E. 3. 8. ^o the same purpose. The matter of devise is but
conveyance to the Writ of Error, and the Writ shall not be abated for
surplusage. 9 E. 4. 24. 7 E. 4. 19. Surplusage is no bar nor Estopel. The
Outlawri^ was against Henry Isley and Peckham, and wants these words. Nec eorum
alter comparuit. Dodderidge Justice, To say where a Feoffee shall have a Writ
of Error, is a large field: If this Feoffee bring Error and reverse the
Judgment, he must restore the heir in blood, and who can have a Writ of Error
to restore blood; but he who is privy in blood, and that is the heir. Jones
Justice, Marshes Case, C. 8. part 111. was never adjudged; There an Executor
could not reverse an Attaindor by Outlawrie, because it does restore the blood.
The Case of Sherrington and Charnock was to reverse the Execution and not the
Judgment: An Executor shall have a general Writ of Error to reverse an
Outlawrie. It was adjourned.

Pasch. 3. Car. in the Kings Bench.
466. GUNTER and GUNTER's Case.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment in the Court of Ely, and
diverse Errors were assigned: First that he did not show in the style of the
Court, how Ely has power to hold plea, either by Charter or by prescription:
Secondly because he said, That at such a place in Ely he did promise; but did
not show that it was within the Jurisdiction of Ely: Thirdly, that it was upon
a Consideration to ^ur^ease a Suit in the Chancery that the Defendant did
promise; but did not show that at the time of the promise there was a Suit
depending: Fourthly it was said, That the Defendant did promise to surrender
certain Customary Lands, and it is not shown what the Lands were; and so no
certainty for the Jurie to give damages. Jermyn argued for the Defendant in
Writ of Error, and said, The Declaration is good in substance, Diversas terras
Customarias proxim. adjacend. lib. tenem' of the Defendant; and the Defendant
pleaded that he had offered predict. tenem' Customaria, and so no difference is
betwixt them; for that Tenement is sufficiently known, and although it be not
so certainly laid as it ought to be in a real Action, yet it is certain enough
in an Action upon the Case. Dyer 355, 356. Only who was Solicitor to the
Council of D. did spend 1500l. circa diversa secta and negotia, there the
Declaration was sufficient by two Judges, there the Lands are certain, viz.
proxim' lib. tenem' Secondly, Ely is in the Margent, which is as much as the
County in the Margent; and then when no County is named in the Declaration
wherein the land does lie, it shall be intended to lie in the County which is
in the Margent.

Hetley, Our Case differs from Onlyes Case in Dyer 355. for there 1500l. was
received. But if I bring an Action upon the Case pro diversis merchandisis, the
same is not good; but if I bring the Action for 10^. pro diversis merchandisis,
then it is good. Jones Justice, Chester and Durham are generally known, and
therefore it is good to say Placita tent, apud Chester, etc. and the party need
not show how Chester has Jurisdiction: but it is not so of Ely. Whitlock
Justice, Ely has Jura regalia; and we read in our books, that they have had
Conusans of Pleas. Hyde Chief Justice. In all particular and private
Jurisdictions, if they come to be certified here in a Writ of Error, you must
set out their power: But if they have their power by a Statute, as Wales, then
it need not be set forth. A Writ of Error does not lie upon a Judgment in
London but when the Plea is before Commissioners. Curia, We cannot grant a new
Certiorare to an inferior Court, but only to the Common Pleas, or Wales. The
writ of Error to remove the Record out of the Court of Ely is directed
Justiciario nostro, which proves that this Court takes notice of him as the
Kings Justice: And in other Courts it is Senescallo Curiae, and not Senescallo
nostro. Whitlock Justice, It is since the Statute of 27 H. 8. that it is
directed Justiciario nostro de Ely; for before it was Justiciario Episc. Hyde
Chief Justice, It is a Book-Case: If Midd. be in the margent, and you say apud
D. and name no County, D. shall be intended to be in Midd. The Judgment was
reversed.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench
467. WATERMAN and CROPP's Case. Intratur M. 2 Car. Rot. 419.
AN Action of Trespass for Battery and Imprisonment. The Defendant did justify
the Imprisonment, etc. If it be not a Court of Record, they cannot fine and
imprison; but if it be a Court of Record, then they may, for it is Curia Domini
Regis.

468.
IN a Writ of Error, Error was assigned, That an Action was laid in Lanceston,
and the Venire facias was awarded de vicineto de Lanceston. And it was said,
That the neighborhood might be of those of which the Mayor and Bailiffs had no
power over, viz. those out of their juridiction? And therefore Error was
assigned in the mis-awarding of the Venire facias. 10 Jacobi in the
Common Pleas, Buckley's case, There the Venire facias was de vicineto civitatis
Eborum, and well enough, for (vicineto) shall imply those within the
jurisdiction, and not the neighbors. 10 Jacobi, Procter and Cliffords case
adjudged contrary, where it was, That the Venire facias was de vicineto
civitatis Coventry, and adjudged not good, for it ought to have been de
civitate Coventry.

Dodderidge (Vicineto) goes about the Precinct. When I was a Councellor, then
I moved for Bristol, and to maintain it good de vicinet^ de Bristol: but it was
ruled not good, but ought to be de civitate Bristol.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
469. TOLLYN and TAYLOR's Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought in the Common Pleas by an Enfant who
declared by Attorney. The Defendant brought a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench,
and assigned the same for Error, For he ought to have declared per Prochyn amy,
and not by Attorney. If an Action be brought, and the Defendant plead that he
is an Enfant, the Enfancie is to be tried where the Writ is brought. Here he
assigns the Error in fact that he was an Enfant, and showed no place where he
was an Enfant, and so no place set where to prove it. To this Error the
Plaintiff pleaded, That he was at full age. And upon that they are at issue
upon this matter in fact. And it was tried at Halsworth in Suffolk, whereas it
ought to have been in this Court where the Enfancie is pleaded, because he
names no place where he was of full age. And notwithstanding that it was found
that he was of full age, yet the Trial was not good. The first Action was
brought before the Statute of 21 Jacobi, cap. 13.

Hitcham Sergeant, Age or not age is not local; and a place must be set down
for formalitie sake, and so it is no matter of substance. And the Venire facias
might be awarded from the place where the first Action was, viz. at Halsworth
in Suffolk: For that is a matter dependant and pursuant the first Action, and
now since the Statute is helped. Denny contrary, It has no dependence upon the
first Action, but is a new thing sprung up. If any place had been set down, and
the Venire facias had been mistaken, that is helped by the Statute, and not
where no place is set down at all. Whitlock Justice, Every Venire facias
properly is to be from the place where the Writ is brought, unless it be drawn
away by Plea. He ought to have alleged a place; For this is a new matter in
this Court, and not helped by the Statute of 21 Jacobi, nor any other, for the
Venire facias is totally mistaken. Dodderidge Justice, The Statute of Jeofaites
have ever been taken strictly according to the letter: For if they had been
taken by equity, what need had there been of more Statutes to have been made?
The want of a letter out of a word, is out of the Statutes C. 8. part. You
should have alleged some place. The Statute of 21 Jacobi is not of any Venire
facias which is misawarded generally: but the Statute helps when there are
two places, and the visne ought to come from both places, and the visne comes
but from one place; and when there is but one place, and the visne comes from
two places. If Enfancie be to be tried (sc.) If he were at such a time within
age, it ought to be tried by the Country. This matter is collateral to the
first Record, and it is a new Record (sc.) upon Error.

The whole Court was of opinion that it was out of the Statute, and a Repleader
was granted. Whitlock Justice, There is no Trial at all, for there is no Venire
facias at all. Dodderidge Justice, If the Defendant in Error plead an ill plea,
he shall replead: But if in this Action he had alleged a place of his
Enfancie (sc.) at Dale, and the Venire facias had been of Sale, there it had
been good trial; and there he should not replead, for that he has pleaded
well; but there he shall have a Venire facias de novo.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
470. DAY's Case.
DAY was Indicted for erecting of a Cottage. It was moved, that the Indictment
was insufficient, for that the words of the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 7, are,
(Shall willingly uphold, maintain, and continue) And the Indictment is only,
That he continued, and so wants the words (voluntarily upheld) according to the
Statute. 2. It did not appear in the Indictment that it was newly erected; for
it is only that he continued, but not that he erected. The Indictment was
quashed, because being a penal Law, it was not pursued.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
471. MAN's Case.
MAN was Indicted, That he fuit and adh^^c est a common Barrettor, and no place
is expressed where he was a Barrettor, so as no trial can be. Dodderidge
Justice, If he be a Barrettor in one place, he is a Barrettor in all places.
The Indictment was, Per quod he did stir up contentions, Jurgia; And no place
alleged where he did stir up Jurgia, contentions. And it was said that in
that case the place was very material: And so the Indictment was quashed for
want of setting forth the place where he did stir up many Contentions, Jurgia
etc.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
472. GREEN and MOODY'S Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought for Rent; and it was found for the Plaintiff.
Thyn Sergeant moved in arrest of Judgment, and set forth the Case to be, That a
Lease was made for years to begin at Micha^lma^ after; And the Plaintiff in the
Action of Debt for the Rent did declare, Virtu^e cujus the Lessee did enter,
and did not show what day, according to Cliffords Case 7 E. 6. Dyer 89. But the
Court said, It is said in this Case, Virtute cujus dimissionis he did enter and
was possessed; and that must be intended at Michaelmas. Alexander and Dyer's
Case, 33 Eliz. was resolved accordingly. And Cliffords Case, Dyer 89. is not
virtute cujus dimissionis. And the Court held a difference betwixt Debt and
Ejectione firm: Cliffords case was an Ejectione firm, but here it is Debt.
Jones Justice, If he did enter before Michaelmas, yet Debt will lie for the
Rent upon the privity of contract; for the Lessee cannot destroy the contract,
unless he make a Feoffment. It was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Quaere, If when the Lessor in the case which Jones put has brought his action
and recovered when the Lessee has entered before the day, If the Lessor shall
put him out as a Disseisor by reason of the Recovery in the action of Debt, in
which he has admitted him to be Lessee for years: Or if the Lessor after he
has recovered in Debt dies, whether his heir shall be estopped by the Record
to say otherwise then that he is in by the Lease; Or whether the Recovery in
Debt has purged the wrong. Like unto the Case 14 H. 8. 12. by Carret. If one
enters into my lands, and claims 20 years therein, and I suffer him to
continue there and accept of the Rent, and afterward he commits Waste, I
shall maintain an action of Waste, and declare upon the special matter. If one
enters into my Land claiming a Lease for years, per Curiam he is a Disseisor,
and he cannot qualify his own wrong, Dyer 134. Traps case. But Sir Henry
Yelverton said, That I may admit him to be Tenant for years, if I accept of the
Rent, or bring Waste, as Carret said 14 H. 4. But he has not but for years, in
respect of his claim: But I am concluded by acceptance of the Rent, or by
bringing of the action of Waste. So here by the bringing of the action of Debt,
the Lessor is concluded. But Quaere if it shall bind his heir. It was conceived
it shall, because it is by Record, the strongest conclusion that is.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
473. SMITH's Case.
A Lease for years was made of Lands in Middlesex, and the Lessor brought Debt
in London against the Assignee. The opinion of the whole Court was, that it was
not well brought, but the Action ought to have been brought in Midd. Jones
Justice, Debt for Rent upon the privity of Contract may be brought in another
County; but if it be brought upon the privity of Estate, as by the Grantee of
the Reversion, or against the Assignee of the Lessee, then it ought to be
brought in the County where the Land is. Quod nota.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
474. CREMER and TOOKLEY's Case.
AN action of Debt was brought for suing in the Court of Admiralty against the
Statutes of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. and 15 R. 2. cap. 3. whereby it is enacted, That
of manner of Contracts, Pleas and Complaints arising within the body of the
Counties as well by land as by water, the Admiral shall in no wise have
conusans: And the Statute gives damages, part to the party, and part to the
King. And the Plaintiff in the action of Debt did declare. That the Defendant
Tookley did implead Cremer the Plaintiff in the Court of Admiralty; And in his
Declaration set forth, That one Mull^beck was Master of a Ship, etc. and that
the Contract was made in London* And that Tookley the Defendant did force the
Plaintiff to appear, and prosecuted the suit upon the Contract in the Admiral
Court. And by special Verdict it was found, That a Charter-party was made
betwixt Mullibeck and Cremer at Dunkirk, And that Tookley did prosecute Cremer
in the Admiral Court by virtue of a Letter of Attorney; and so that he as
Attorney to Mullibeck did prosecute the suit there. The Case was argued by
Andrews for the Plaintiff. There are two points: The first upon the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, the Contract being made at Dunkirk, but to be
performed in England: The second, If Tookley being the Attorney, be such a
party prosecutor as is within the Statutes. The ancient Law of the Admirals
Jurisdiction appears in our Books. 8 E. 2. Corone 399. Staunton Justice, It
shall not be accounted the Sea, where a man may see the land over the water:
And the Coroners were to do their office in such case, and the County was to
take notice thereof, 40 Ass. 25. Stamford 11. This Commission was at the
Common Law before the Statutes of Pyracie. 46 E. 3. tras. 38. Statham It is
pleaded that the Defendant took the goods as Pyracie, etc. I infer thereupon
that it was a good Justification. 7 R. 2. tras 54. Stat^am, Trespass was
brought for a Ship and Merchandises taken upon the Sea, and holden good; which
proves that the Common Law had jurisdiction upon the Sea, and not the Admiral.
6 R. 2. Protection 46. Protection quia profecturus super altum mare. Belknap,
The Sea is within the Kings jurisdiction; and the Sea is as well in the Kings
protection as is the Land.

It may be objected, That the Contract was made at Dunkirk, and so out of the
body of the County, and so our Law cannot take notice of it; and if the Admiral
shall not have jurisdiction in such case, it should remain undetermined. To
that I answer, If all the matter were to be done at Dunkirk, then all were a
Marine case, and the Admiral should have jurisdiction; but if any part were to
be done in England, then it is otherwise. M. 30, 31 Eliz. C. 6: part 47. in
Dowdalos case. In an Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, the Plaintiff did
declare, That the Defendant at London did assume that such a ship should sail
from Melcomb Regis in Suffolk to Abvile in France: The issue was tried in
London, because the Contract was made in England. Pasch. 28 Eliz. Gynne and
Constantines Case: there because it was part upon the Sea, and part upon the
Land, the trial was at the Common Law, and not in the Admiral Court. 48 E. 3.
2. One did retein three Esquires to serve in France; there because the Reteiner
was here, the trial was here. If a Mariner contract with me for wages to sail
in such a ship, he shall demand his wages at the Common Law, and not in the
Admiral Court. vi. 39 H. 6. 39. There a Protection super vetilationem Calisiae,
etc. cannot be moraturus, because that the Sea is ever ebbing and flowing, and
does not stand still. So that if any part of the Contract be to be done upon
the Land, then Common Law shall have the jurisdiction. Wreck of the Sea shall
be tried at the Common Law, because it is cast upon the Land. Dyer 326. to E.
1. Avowry 192. A Replevin was brought of a ship taken upon the coast of
Scarborough, and carried into Norfolk; and it was alleged to be within the
Statute of Malebridge for taking a Distress in one County, and carrying of it
into another County. Bereford, The King wills that the Peace be kept as well
upon the Sea as upon the Land. And our Case differs from Lacy's case, C. 2.
part: For in that case of Felony it is mere local; but Contracts are not so
local. The second point, Whether this be a prosecution within the Statutes,
because it was done by virtue of a Letter of Attorney from Mullibeck. 32 E. 3.
bar. 264. Annuity 51. Qui per alium facit, per seipsum facere videtur. The
Statute of Merton cap. 10. gave power to make Attorneys in any Court, Com. 236.
but the Attorney must look at his peril that that which he does be a lawful
act. Here Mullibeck himself could not have justified this prosecution, nor
shall his Attorney, ^ H. 7. 24. 28 H. 8. 2. Quod per me non possum, per alium
non possum. If an Enfant make a Letter of Attorney to make Livery and Seisin,
and the Attorney makes Livery accordingly, he is a Disseisor. C. 10. part 76.
If the Court have not jurisdiction of the Cause, the Minister must look to it
at his peril, otherwise he is punishable. Tras. 253. One may do that himself,
which he cannot do by Attorney: The Lord may beat his villein, but a stranger
cannot do it for the Lord: the Lord may distrein for Rent when it is not
behind, and the Tenant shall not have trespass; but if the Bailiff distrein
when no Rent is arrear, trespass lies against him. 2 H. 4. 4. 9 H. 7. 14. In
Trespass all are Principals. Then the Attorney here and Mullibeck are both
Trespassors against the Statutes: And the doing of the Attorney at the command
of the Master shall not avail him. vi. Dyer 159. does conduce to the reason,
that the Attorney shall be punished. It seems this suing in the Court of
Admiralty is a Contempt, for it is malum prohibitum; and so either Mullibeck or
the Attorney are punishable. And in this case the Plaintiff has his Election
to sue Mullibeck or the Attorney; and therefore having sued the Attorney, the
Action brought against him will well lie.

Calthrop for the Defendant. It was objected, That the Court of Admiralty did
begin but in the time of King Edw. 3. But Dyer 152. proves the contrary: For
there in an Assise brought of the Office of Admiralty, the Plaintiff does
declare the same to be an Office time out of mind etc. which proves it to be a
more ancient Office: And in the Statute of 2 H. 5. cap. 6. There the words are
to enquire of all offenses etc. as the Admirals after the old custom; which
proves that it is an ancient Office. It Is true, Avowry 192. makes against me;
but the Notes of that Case in writing proves that the book is misprinted. I
confess, if part of the thing be to be done here upon the Land, that it is
triable at the Common Law. The Defendant in this our Case is not liable to the
penalty, because at the time of the making of these Statutes it was not known
that any Charter-partie was made beyond the Seas. 2 E. 3. Oblig. 15. Debt was
brought upon an Obligation made at Barwick; where because this Court had not
jurisdiction, It was adjudged, That the Plaintiff nihil capiat per breve.
Testament 16. A Testament bore date at Cane in Normandy, which was proved in
England: Pole, Upon an Obligation which bears date in Normandy, a man shall not
have an Action here; but it is good in case of a Will proved here. 6 E. 3. 17,
18. The Abbot of Crowband granted an Annuity, and the Deed was made in
Scotland: If the Deed had been the ground of the Action, then the Action would
not have lien; but because the Deed bore date before time of memory, the
Annuity did lie; for the Action was not brought upon the Deed, but upon the
Prescription. 1 E. 3. 1. 18. 8 E. 3. 51. It is ruled, where the title is made
by a Deed which bears date beyond Sea, that the Action will not lie. 13 H. 4. 5
and 6. An Obligation bore date in France, and was made according to the Law of
France. 6 R. 2 cap. 2. Where the Specialtie bears date, there the Action shall
be brought. The first book that speaks of Deeds bearing date out of England, 20
H. 6. 28, 29. 20 E. 4. 1. 21 E 4. 72. You must suppose then, That it was at a
place in England; and that is but a fiction of Law, and you shall never make a
man subject to the penalty of a Statute upon a fiction of Law. C. 11. part 51.
A Disseisor makes a Lease for life or years; the Disseisee shall not not have
an Action of Trespass vi and armis against him, because he comes in by title:
For this fiction of Law, That the Frank-tenement has always been in the
Disseisee, shall not have Relation to make him who comes in by title to be a
Trespassor vi and armis. 18 H. 6. 23. A Reversion is expectant upon an estate
for life; and in the mean time betwixt the Grant and the Attornment the Lessee
commits Waste: yet although the Attornment relate to make the Grant good ab
initio, yet the Relation being a fiction of Law will not make the Lessee
punishable for Waste. Then in this our Case, the Deed bears date beyond the
Sea; and then to make Dunkirk to be in England by a fiction in Law, shall not
be prejudicial to the Defendant. Com. 369. The preamble of a Statute is the
best Interpreter of the Statute. In the Statute of 13 R. 2. the preamble says,
Because the Admirals and their Deputies do hold their Sessions etc. in
prejudice of the King and of the Common Law, and in destruction of the common
people, etc. But this Deed bearing date beyond the Sea, is no prejudice to the
King, nor to his Franchises, nor to his people to be sued in the Admiralty. 32
H. 8. cap. 14. The suit within the Admiralty ought to concern Charter-partie,
and Fraighting of a Ship. For by that Statute it was enacted, That if any
Merchant-stranger (as Mullibeck was) by long delaying and protracting of time
(As in our Case) otherwise then was agreed between the said Merchants in or by
the said Charter-partie, etc. shall have his remedy before the Admiral* which
Lord Admiral shall take such Order, etc. In our Case at Bar, It was a
Charter-partie made beyond Sea. 2. It was for the freighting of a Ship. 3. For
the breach of it was the the suit in the Court of Admiralty. But admit that
this point be against me, then for the second point I do conceive* that he who
is punishable by the Statutes must be Prosecutor, which the Defendant is not;
for what he has done, he did by virtue of a Letter of Attorney, and he did it
in the name of another, and it is the Act of the other. C. 9. part 76. Combs
Case, If a man have power to do an Act by force of a Letter of Attorney, it
ought to be done in the name of him who gives the power. 3 Ma. Dyer 132. If
Surveyors have power to make Leases, if they make the Leases in their own
names, it is not good; but they ought to be made in his name who gives the
power. 11 Eliz. Dyer 283 The Statute of R. 3. gives power to Cestuy que use to
make Leases, and he makes a Letter of Attorney, the Attorney must make the
Leases in the name of Cestuy que use, who has the power by the Statute. C 9.
part 75. A Copyholder may surrender by Attorney, because it is his own
surrender. Vi Perkins 196. 199. A Feoffment with a Letter of Attorney to the
wife to make Livery, is good; but then the wife must make the Livery in the
name of her husband. Secondly, in this Case at Bar, the beginning and the
prosecution of the Suit was altogether for the benefit of Mullibeck, and so it
appears by the Records of the Court, and no notice is there taken of the
Attorney but of the Master. L. 5. E. 45. A Writ is directed to the Sheriff, and
the Undersheriff makes a false retorn, the Sheriff shall be amerced; and not
the Undersheriff, for the Law does not take notice of him. 7 Eliz. Dyer 239.
The Customer himself and not his Deputy, shall be charged. And so in our Case
Mullibeck being party to the whole, ought to be accounted the party
prosecuting within the words of the Statutes. The Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 27.
is so as they pursue their claims within five years; such prosecuting or
pursuing ought to be by the party himself. C. 9. part 106. If one of his own
head make claim, it is not good claim for to avoid the Fine, etc. The Statute
of 16^ R. ^. cap. 5. of Praemunire makes against me; for there the Procurours,
Counselors, Sollicitors, Abettors and Attorneys are named by the express words
of the Statute, and there is an express provision against them: But in our Case
it is not so; for if our Statute had intended to extend to Counselors,
Attorneys, etc. it would have expressly named them. There are diverse exceptions
which I take to the Verdict First, There is variance in the place, betwixt the
Declaration and the special Verdict; for the Declaration lays the Contract to
be made at Dunkirk in England, and the special Verdict finds it to be made at
Dunkirk extra parts transmarinas. Secondly, The Declaration is to take in
Mariners, and the special Verdict is to take in Men. Thirdly the Declaration
is, A Ship to be prepared, and the Verdict is to be in readiness. Fourthly, The
Statute of 15 R. 2. and 2 H. 4. gives the Action by way of Writ; and here it
is by Bill. 42 Ass. 11. There one was taken in Execution and escaped, and there
a Bill was exhibited for the escape: and it was holden because the Statute of
West. 2. gave a Writ of Debt, it shall not be extended by equity to a Bill of
Debt. Com. 38. a. and Com. 36, 37. Plats Case, There the Judgment is given upon
a Bill for an escape; but Mr Plowden said that it seemed to diverse a hard Case.
The Statute of ^8 Eliz. cap. 5. of Informers is in the negative, viz. That none
shall be admitted or received to pursue any person upon any penal Law, but by
way of Information, or original Action, and not otherwise. Mich. 29 Eliz. in
Clarks Case it was resolved, that the Statute of 18 Eliz. was a penal Law, and
the party must not be sued by Bill, but as the Statute has prescribed. 27 H.
6. 5. There upon Praemunire facias, it was adjudged good by Bill; but there the
Action was not directed so precisely by the Statute, viz. in what manner the
party should proceed. There are no presidents that an Action of Debt has been
brought for pursuing in the Court of Admiralty, but in such Case a Prohibition
granted only: and for these causes he prayed Judgment for the Defendant.
Observe Reader, the Argument of Calthrope; he does not speak to the point,
where part of the thing or Contract is upon the Sea, and part upon the Land, as
it was urged by Andrews who argued on the other side. The Case was adjourned.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, rot. 362. in the Kings Bench. 475.
IT was cited to be adjudged, That if a man purchase the next Avoidance of a
Church, with an intent to present his son, and afterward he present him, that
it is Symony within the Statute.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
476. SUTTON the Chancellor of Gloucester's Case.
IN the Case of Sutton who was Chancellor of Gloucester, and put out of his
place for insufficiency in the Ecclesiastical court, Trotman moved for a
Prohibition to the Spiritual Court, and said that the Bishop had power to make
his Chancellor, and he only has the Examination of him, and the allowance of
him, as it is in the Case of a Parson who is presented to the Bishop, and said,
that if his sufficiency should be afterward reexamined, it would be very
perilous. Doddridg Justice, If an Office of Skill be granted to one for life
who has no skill to execute the Office, the grant is void, and he has no
Frank-tenement in it. A Prohibition is for two causes: First to give to us
Jurisdiction of that which does belong unto us: And secondly, when a thing is
done against the Law, and in breach of the Law, then we use to grant a
Prohibition. Jones Justice, Brook had a grant of the Office of a Herald at Arms
for life; and the Earl Marshal did suspend him from the execution of his
Office, because he was ignorant in his profession, and full of Error contrary
to the Records: and it was the opinion of the Justices, that because he was
ignorant in such his Office of Skill, that he had no Freehold in the Office. In
the Principal Case, the Prohibition was denied: And afterward Sutton was put
out of his Office by Sentence in the Spiritual Court, for his insufficiency.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
477. SYMM'S Case.
TWo men having speech together of John Symms and William Symms, one of them
said The Symmses make Half-crown pieces, and John Symms did carry a Cloak-bag
full of clippings. And whether the Action would lie was the Question, because
it was uncertain in the person; For he did not say these Symmses, but The
Symmses: Like unto the Case where one Farrer being slain, and certain persons
being Defendants in the Star-Chumber, one having speech of them, said, These
Defendants did murder Farrer; and it was adjudged that the Action would not
lie, for two causes: First because the words (These) was uncertain in the
person: And secondly it was uncertain in the thing; For it might be that they
had Authority to do it, as in Mills Case 13 Jac. in the Kings Bench, Thou have
Coined Gold, and art a Coyner of Gold Thirdly, a Cloakbag of clippings, that is
also uncertain; for it might be clippings of Wool, or other things, or it
might be clippings of Silver from the Goldsmith; For the Goldsmith that makes
Plate, makes clippings. And fourthly, It is not showed any certain time when
the words were spoken: And for these causes it was adjudged that the Action
would not lie.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
478. WHITTIE and WESTON'S Case.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon the Statute of 2 E. 6. and the Plaintiff
declared, That at the time of the Action brought, he was Parson of Merrel, and
that Weston the Defendant did occupy such Lands, and sowed them with corn.
Anno 21 Jac. and that he did not fet forth his Tythe-corn, etc. The Defendant
pleaded in bar of the Action, That W. W. Prior of the Hospital of St John of
Jerusalem, was of the Order of Hospitalers, etc. and that he held the said
Lands free from the payment of Tithes, and that the Priory came by the Statute
of 32. H. 8. to the King: By virtue of which Statute the King was seized
thereof, and that the same descended to Queen Elizabeth, who granted the Lands
unto Weston to hold as amply as the late Prior held, and that he was seized of
the Lands by virtue of that grant, Et propriis manibus suis excolebat. Upon
this Plea the Plaintiff did demurr in Law. Noy argued for the Plantiff, There
are three points in the Case. First, If these Lands the possessions of the
Hospitalers of St John, which they held in their own hands were discharged of
Tithes. Secondly, If there be any thing in the Statute of 32 H. 8. by which the
Purchasor of the King should be discharged. Thirdly, Admitting that it shall be
a discharge, if the Defendant has well entitled himself to such discharge or
Privilege. First it is not within the Statute of 31 H. 8: cap. 13. for that
Statute did not extend to the Order of St John. Secondly, the Statute of 31 H.
8. cap. 13. does not discharge any but what was then dissolved. Thirdly, The
Statute of 32 H. 8 cap. 24. gives the possessions of the Hospitalers of St
John's to the King, and not the Statute of 31 H. 8. Note that the Defendant did
recite the branch of the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap 13. That as well the King, his
heirs and successors, as all and every such person and persons their heirs and
assigns, which have or hereafter shall have any Monastery, etc. or other
Religious or Ecclesiastical houses or places shall hold, etc* according to
their Estates and Titles discharged and acquitted of the payment of Tithes, as
freely and in as large and ample manner as the said Abbots, etc. had or used:
Also he recited the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 7 which Enacts that none shall pay
Tithes, who by Law, Statute, or Privilege ought to be discharged. The Statute
of 31 H. 8. recites that diverse Abbeys, etc. and other Religious and
Ecclesiastical houses and places have been granted and given up to the King:
The Statute ena^ts that the King shall have in possession for ever all such
late Monasteries, etc. and other Religious houses and places, etc. And also
enacts that the King shall have not only the said Monasteries, etc. but also all
other Monasteries, etc. and all other Religious and Ecclesiastical houses which
hereafter shall happen to be dissolved, suppressed, renounced, relinquished,
forfeited, given up, or by any other means come to the King; and shall be
deemed, adjudged, vested by Authority of this present Parliament, in the very
actual possession and seisin of the King for ever, in the state and condition
they now be. Vi. The Statute. And shall have all privileges, etc. in as ample
manner and form as the late Abbots, etc. had, held or occupied, etc. The
Question then is. Whether the men of the Hospital of St John at Jerusalem, are
intended to be within the said Statute of 31 H. 8. And I conceive that they are
not: It does not appear in the pleading, that the Priory of St John was an
Ecclesiastical House, therefore it ought to have been averred. It is true, to
plead that such a man has entered into Religion, is intended that he is a
person dead in Law. They were never Ecclesiastical, nor so accounted; they must
be both Religious and Ecclesiastical, who are within the Statute of 31 H. 8.
For the said Statute does not extend to Religious houses unless they be
Ecclesiastical. Trial 99. proves that they were Religious, 21 H. 7. 7. And the
Statute of Templers, 17 E. 2. do show that they were Canonized (which is)
admitted unto a Rule of their own Law, and not that they were made Saints, or
that they were Ecclesiastical, 1 E. 3. 7. Nonability 4. They were dead persons
in Law. Feoffments 68. proves that they were religious; but whether they were
Lay or Ecclesiastical, I have not read. In the difference of Summons to
Parliaments unto the Templers, the Summons is, Vobis mandamus in fide and
legeanti^s; but the Summons to a Spiritual Lord is, in fide and electione; and
so was the Summons to the Prior of St John's of Jerusalem, but that was because
he held in Frankalmoign, but that does not prove him to be Ecclesiastical; for
first they exercised themselves in Arms, It was part of their Order, armis se
exercere; and that is against the Rule of the Common Law, to meddle with blood.
Secondly, They used no Imposition of hands, but only a Robe, nor had they so
much Ceremony as a Knight of the Bath; and yet the Knights of the Bath are not
Ecclesiastical. So there is nothing in their Creation or Order, that makes
them Ecclesiastical; For they were Lay-Monks of the Order of St Anthony. The
Jesuits have Lay-Brethren, and not Ecclesiastical. 44. Ass. 9. There the
Defendant pleaded in bar, That the Prior was a Layman, and so not under any
Rule; and it is there admitted that he was a Layman, and yet that he might be
Prior, and bring the Action in his own name, and not as Prior with his
brethren, which proves that the residue were dead persons in Law. If there be
professions alleged in one of the Hospitals of St John of Jerusalem, how shall
it be tried? By the Country. Trial 99. Profession was alleged in the
Plaintiff, who was a Knight of the Order of the Templers, and it was commanded
to certify it: And the Bishop could not enquire of it, because the Order of a
Knight Templer was exempted by the Pope: But Trial 98. there it was certified
by the Bishop; yet all our books are contrary to it. 2. R. 3. 4. Si profissio
allegata sit in quodam militi Sancti Johannis Jerusalem, quia immediate sub
Papa sunt, non habere cuiscribere possunt, etc. 21 H. 7. 7. Seldom 1 21. in his
History of Tithes, that they were accounted no part of the Clergy, but merely
Lay. With us they were accounted Lay, and therefore it is not material what
they were accounted of in other places. A College is a Lay Corporation: If they
be disseised, an Assise must be brought. The Statute of 1. and 2. Philip and
Mary is, That men might devise to spiritual Corporations, notwithstanding the
Statute de terris ad manum mortuum nonpo^^nd* (...) or any other Statute to the
contrary. Dyer 254. There a Devise was unto a College and Grammar School, and
holden a good Devise, because the Statute of Philip and Mary ought to be
favorably expounded, being for the benefit of the Corporation. I take another
reason from the manner of payment of Tithes: Ecclesiastical persons paid
Tithes; but no Tithes were paid by the Hospitalers of St John's of Jerusalem The
Statute of 27 H. 8. dissolves Abbeys, etc. but does not relate to any formerly
given up, etc. and the reason was, because they were but petty Abbeys. The
Statute of 31 H. 8. dissolves none; but recites that whereas diverse have given
up, etc. or were to be given up, but shows no reason; for diverse inquisitions
issued forth to enquire of their Lands; but the Statute of 32 H. 8. does not
show any such reasons, but other reasons; because that Rodes was taken away,
and that they held of the Pope. And if they were dissolved by the Statute of 31
H. 8. then what need a Statute the next year after, viz 32 H. 8. to dissolve
the Corporation? By the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 3. the King has the first
Fruits and Tenths of all that shall be promoted to any Benefice or promotion
spiritual. This does not extend to St John of Jerusalem; and therefore
afterward in the same Statute it is Enacted, That every one which shall be
elected, or by other means appointed to the Dignity of the Prior of St John's of
Jerusalem, shall before their real and actual entry into the Dignity or
meddling with the profits, satisfy the King, etc. Now if they were intended in
the words Spiritual promotion, it was in vain a new to enact for them. The Act
of 32. H. 8. extends to Ireland, and so does not the Statute of 31 H. 8. the
Statute of 31 H. 8. extends only to Eccelesiastical and Religious; so they were
not intended within the Statute of 31 H. 8. Next, If they were intended within
the Statute of 31 H. ^. then the Statute of 32 H. 8. gives them absolutely by
name to the King: The Statute of 31 H. 8. gives nothing to the King, but those
that are or were to be given up, forfeited, surrendered, or otherwise given up;
but gives nothing to the King but by the help of some other Act, viz.
forfeiture, surrender, or otherwise given up. The word (Otherwise) never
intended Dissolution by Act of Parliament; for that is paramount the
particulars recited. The Statute of Malebridg cap. 30. n. Provisum est quod si
depredationes vel rapini aliqui fi^nt Abbatibus, etc. vel aliis Prelatis
Ecclesiasticis, etc. That Statute never intended, to extend to Bishops, who are
paramount and superior to Abbots: The word (aliis) will bear no such sense, to
make the superior to be intended, when as the inferior is recited. The Statute
of 13 Eliz. recites, That no College, Dean and Chapter, Parsons, Vicars, etc.
may make a new Lease, unless within a year of the end of the Lease in being.
Now a Bishop is superior and above these particularly named, and may make
concurrant Leases: so here the word (Otherwise) does not intend that Otherwise)
to be by Act of Parliament, and to extend to greater then the particulars
recited. The Statute of 32 H. 8. says that the Corporation shall be dissolved
and void; but the Statute of 31 H. 8. does not say that the Corporation shall
be dissolved and void. The Statute of 32 H. 8. says that the Corporation and
possessions shall be in the King by virtue of that Act; then not in the King by
virtue of the Act of 31 H. 8. A Feoffment in Fee is made unto the use of A. in
Tail, he has the Use by the Statute of West. ^. cap. 1. Now when the Statute
of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. came, he has the possession by force of that Act, viz. of
27 H. 8. and not by force of the Statute of West. 2. If the King be not in by
the Statute of 3* H. 8. then he shall not have every of the Privileges which
the Act of 31 H. 8. gives. C. 2. part, The Bishop of Canterburies Case. The
College of Maidstone was Religious, but not Ecclesiastical; and it was adjudged
that the Purchasors of the Lands of the said College were not discharged from
the payment of Tithes, because the College was not Ecclesiastical, but
Religious only; and Religious and not Ecclesiastical, came not to the King by
the Statute of 31 H. 8. 18 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas, Wrights Case; The
Priory of Hatfield being of small value, viz. not having Lands of the value of
200l. per annum was dissolved by the Statute of 27 H. 8. and the Lands were not
Tythe-free in the hands of the Purchasors, because the Priory came not to the
King by the Statute of 31 H. 8. and yet they were Tythe-free in the hands of
the Prior himself.

The second point upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. The words are, That the King
shall have all Rights, Interests and Privilege, as it was in the hands of the
Abbots, Priors, etc. It is objected, To be free from payment of Tithes is a
Privilege: I answer, That neither Right, Interest, nor Privilege do free him
from the payment of Tithes: First, there is no discharge of Tithes by the word
(Interest) in the Statute, for that is plain; Then the question is, if the word
Priveledg will discharge the Lands from the payment of Tithes; and if that word
would have sufficed to have discharged the Tithe* what need was there of the
special Clause to discharge Tithes? The Statute of 27 H. 8. dissolves
Chaunteries, and there it is said, That the King shall have and enjoy, etc. and
there also all Privileges are given; then the Statute of 1 E. 6. came, and
gave all Chauntries to the King, and there the word (Privilege) was not in the
Act; yet by those words the Lands were not discharged from the payment of
Tithes: The Statute of 31 H. 8. is, Conditions and Rights of Entry; yet there
was another Act made to give Conditions to the King. But admit that the King
himself be discharged, yet his Patentees are not discharged. The Privilege was
personal, and personal Privileges are not transferrable. 35 H. 6. 56. A
Statute dissolve^ the Templers, and gives the Lands to the Hospitalers to hold
by the same service as the Templers did, which was Frankalmoign; yet the
Grantee held by Fealty, for that Frankalmoign is a personal privilege, and
cannot be transferred by general words. The King (it is true) shall have the
privilege, for he is a privileged person: for of his goods he shall not pay
Tithes, if he do not grant them over: and the Grants prove, That unless he had
granted them, he should have paid no Tithes. The Statute of 31 H. 8. says, All
Conditions which the Abbots, etc. have; yet until the Statute of 32 H* 8. no
Purchasor could take advantage of a Condition. Hill. 44. Eliz. in the Common
Pleas, Rot. 1994. Spurlings Case. The Purchasors of Lands of the Hospital of St
John's of Jerusalem, were not privileged from the payment of Tithes. Pasch. 8.
Jacobi in the Common Pleas, Vrry and Bowyers Case, In a Prohibition it was
holden by Cook and Nichols, That the Purchasor of St John's of Jerusalem should
pay Tithes; but Winch and Warburton cont. 18 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas, All
the Judges but Warburton, held that the Purchasor should pay Tithes. 10 Eliz.
Dyer, There it does not appear whether they were of the Order of Templers or
Cistertians.

The third point in this Case, The Defendant does make no title to the
Discharge, for he has not averred that the Priory were Ecclesiastical persons.
If a man plead that A. is professed, the Court cannot take notice of it that he
is a dead person in Law; But if he says that he was of such an Order, he ought
to set forth of what Rule the Order is. Secondly* The manner of their discharge
was, when they did Till and sow* their Lands, propriis sumptibus and manibus.
If they grub up Roots, and make the Lands fit for Tillage; but if their Tenants
sow the Lands, they shall pay Tithes, for they had the privilege in respect
they should not be idle; unless all these do concur, they shall pay Tithes,
viz. plough, sow, reap, and carry the Corn. These Privileges are to be taken
stritly, because they are to defeat the Church of her endowment; and therefore
in this Case the Defendant does not well entitle himself to the Discharge,
unless he do show that he did occupy the Land for one whole year before, and
that he did plow, sow, and ^eap the corn; But he ought for to have showed, that
such time he pl^^ed the Land, such a time he sowed it, and such a time he
reaped the (...) Otherwise the Court will intend that another man did plow and
sow the land, and that he only reaped it: For if Lessee of the Hospital does
plow the Land, and sow it, and afterward does surrender to the Prior of the
Hospital who reaps the same, he shall pay Tithe of the same, for the Privilege
was granted unto them who were Laborers. And the Defendant perhaps might have
the Lands to halfs: that is to say, to have half the Corn growing upon the
Lands. The pleading is not good. When you plead two Bars, each Bar must stand
of it self, and the surplusage of the one Bar shall not help the defect of the
other Bar. The word (Privilege) in the Act of 32 H. 8. does not extend to
Tithes: If it does, yet the Purchasor shall not have the Privilege. Dodderidge
Justice, The Statute of 32 H. 8. was made, because that those of S. John's of
Jerusalem said, that they could not surrender their Hospital, because they had
a Supreme Head over them, viz. their great Master the Pope.

Crawley Sergeant argued for Weston the Defendant. The pleading was overruled
to be good, the last day the Case was argued. We have well entitled our selves
to the Discharge: For we have pleaded that we had the occupation of the Lands
for one whole year; and that Weston the Defendant plowed, sowed, and reaped the
Corn upon the lands at his own costs and charges; And the Plaintiff has not
showed that any other plowed, sowed, or reaped the same. Our title is by
prescription, which is confessed. This Society was erected in the time of King
Henry the 1. and it continued until 32 H. 8. 44 Eliz. in Spurlings case, there
were two reasons of the Judgment. 1. There the Statute of 31 H. 8. was not
found, and so the King was not entitled to rights and privileges, and by
consequence so was not his Pattentee. 2. It did not appear that the Council of
Lateran (15 Johannis) did extend to these Orders, which was said to have been
created 17 E. 3. whereas indeed it was created in the time of Henry the 1.
Regularly this privilege is not transferrable, for it is ratione Ordinis: As
when the King makes a Duke, and gives to him possessions, those possessions
annexed to the Dukedom are not transferrable over but by special Act of
Parliament. 35 H. 6. 36. Moile, There if there had been special words in the
Act of Parliament, it had been Frankalmoigne. This Privilege is transferred to
the King by the Act of 32 H. 8. and that Statute requires no aid of Regular or
Ecclesiastical persons. Secondly, the words are special, And all other things
of theirs. This Case opposes not the Bishop of Canterbury's Case, C. 3 part;
For that refers to the Statute of 1 E. 6. which had not so large words. The
intent of an Act shall be taken largely and beneficially to enlarge the Kings
possessions; as the grants of the King shall be taken largely and beneficially
for the King. There is a difference betwixt this Statute of 32 H. 8. and the
Statute of 27 H. 8. The copulative words of the Statute of 27 H. 8. are, To
have all Rights and Interests, and Hereditaments. C. 11. part 13. pro omnibus
demandis, etc. there the demand shall extend to Temporal demand; so, All rights
and Interest, and Inheritance, shall be construed, All temporal rights, etc.
But the Statute of 32 H. 8. is larger, viz. Of what name and nature soever.

If by the words of the Statute of 31 H. 8. (Privileges) Tithes had been given
to the King without especial provision after made, then what needed the special
Clause after? was the Objection which has been made. I answer, The special
Clause was necessary: For in pleading otherwise he ought to have showed what
Privilege and Discharge it was in particular; and so the Clause was added for
the case of pleading* C. 9. part, The Abbot of Strata Mercellos case; there it
is said, That if a man plead to have such privileges as such a one had, he
ought to show in particular what those privileges were: But this provision in
the Statute of 31 H. 8. was made for the benefit of pleading. The Statute of 17
E. 2. which gave the Tithes to the Hospitalers, give them by the word of
Privileges, for they had their possessions as it were by a new purchase. Cook
Entries 450. there the Case much differs from this: so then the general word
(Privileges) does extend to Tithes. 14 H. 8. 2. By a grant of All trees,
Apple Trees will not pass; yet if it be of all trees cujuscunque generis,
naturae, nominis aut qualitatis, then they will pass. C. 3. part 81. By grant
of all goods, Apparel will not pass. Here are special words in the Statute,
cujuscunque naturae, nominis, etc. Nominla sunt symboa rerum: And then call
them what you will they are given to the King, and intended to be transferred
to the King; and so there needs no special provision for the discharge of the
Tithes; For to say, that the Priory was of the Order of the Cistertians, is
sufficient.

Admit then that the King shall have the Tithes, as I have argued he shall;
then his Pattentee shall have them. It is a real discharge in the King, and not
a discharge in respect of his person only. Privileges of discharge may be
transferred as well as Privileges of profit. Then the question further is,
Whether they of S. John's of Jerusalem were Ecclesiastical? They were Regular,
as appears by the Statute of 32 H. 8. for that says that they shall be free
from Obedience. Trin. 8. Jacobi in the Common Pleas, Bowyers case: Whore Cook,
Nichols, Warburton and Winch did agree that they were Ecclesiastical Priests.
The Prior had Parsonages; and none could have Parsonages but Ecclesiastical
persons* 3 E. 3. 11. They had Appropriations, which could not be unto Laymen.
22 E. 4. 42. There a Writ of Annuity was brought against the Prior of S. John's
of Jerusalem; and it was ruled there that he ought to be named Parson, which
proves that he was Ecclesiastical. 26 H. 8. cap. 2. there it is said, That he
shall pay First Fruits as other Parsons; which proves that he was Parson. 42 E.
3. 22. there they are called Ecclesiastical. 35 H. 6. 56. they were seized in
the right of the Church. Linwood lib. cap. 47. de Judiciis. That they were
Ecclesiastical. It was objected, that Knighthood cannot be given to
Ecclesiastical persons; and they were Knights. Popham once Chief Justice of
this Court said, That he had seen a Commission directed unto a Bishop to Knight
all the Parsons within his Diocese; and that was the cause that they were
called Sir John, Sir Thomas; and so they continued to be called until the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Jones and Dodderidge Justices, They were
Ecclesiastical persons, although they were divided from the jurisdiction of the
Bishop. The Case was adjourned to be further argued.

Pasch* 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
479. LANGLEY and STOTE's Case.
IN an Ejectione firm, the Plaintiff declared of an Ejectment 26 Martii 23
Jacobi, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc: which could not be, because King
James dyed the 27 of March, and so it was not contra pacem Caroli Regis. 8 H.
4. 21. An Appeal of Maheim was brought; and the Plaintiff declared, That he
meyhemed in the time of the King that now is; and the Writ did suppose the same
to be in the time of King R. 2. And for that cause it was adjudged, Quod nihil
capiat per Breve.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
480. MUTLE and Does Case.
DEbt was brought upon a Bond; and the Plaintiff in his Declaration does not
say, hic in Curio prolat. It was holden by the Court, That although it be in
the election of the Defendant to demand Oyer of it, yet the Plaintiff ought to
show it. The Judgment also was entered, Concessum est; whereas it ought to have
been, Ideo consideratum est. And for these causes the Judgment was reversed: So
was it adjudged also the same Term in this Court, in Barret and Wheeler's Case.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
481. Sergeant HOSKIN's Case.
HE was Indicted for nor paving of the Kings highway in the County of
Middlesex in S. John's street, ante tenementa^ sua: And in the Indictment it was
not showed, How he came chargeable to pay the same; Nor was it showed that he
was seized of any house there, nor that he dwelt there, nor was it averred that
he had any Tenement there. The opinion of the Court was, that the Indictment
was uncertain; for it might be that his Lessee dwelt in the house, and so the
Lessee ought to have repaired it, and also mended the highway. And for these
Incertainties the Indictment was quashed.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
482. SAMSON and GATEFIELD's Case.
ERror was brought to reverse a Judgment given in the Court of Virge in an
Action upon the Case; where the original Process fuit a Sommons, whereas it
ought to have been an Attachment.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
483. HERN and STUB's Case.
IN an Action of Detinue, the Plaintiff did declare upon the Bailment of a
Cloak of the value of 10l. to the Defendant to be safely kept, and to be
redelivered unto him upon request; And showed, That he did request the
Defendant to redeliver it, and that yet he does detain it to his damage, etc.
The Defendant justified the Detainer by reason of a Forain Attachment in
London: And said, That London is an ancient City; and that there is a Custom in
London etc. That if any one be indebted unto another, that if he will enter his
suit or plaint into the Counter of the Sheriff of London, that a Precept shall
be awarded unto a Sergeant at Mace to summon the Defendant; and if he retorn
Nihil^ viz. that he has nothing within the City by which he may be summoned,
and Non est inventus; And if he be solemnly called at the next Court, and makes
default, that then if he can show that the Defendant has goods in the hands of
one within the Liberty of the City, that the said goods shall be attached: And
if the Defendant make default at four Court-dayes, being solemnly called, that
then if the Plaintiff will swear his Debt, and put in Bail for the goods, viz.
That if the Debt be disproved within one year and a day, or the Judgment be
reversed, That he he shall have Judgment for the said goods. And he showed,
That he entered his plaint against the now Plaintiff in the Counter of
Woodstreet for the Debt of 20l. and that a Precept was awarded to a Sergeant at
Mace to summon him; And because he had not any thing by which he could be
summoned, he showed that the now Plaintiff had goods in his the Defendants
hands, which were attached in his hands: And that he swear his Debt, and put in
bail for the goods, and had Judgment thereupon. Upon which Plea the Plaintiff
did demur in Law.

Ward argued for the Plaintiff. There are four Reasons of the Demurrer. 1. He
sets forth, That J. S. did levy a plaint against the now Plaintiff for the Debt
of 20l. but does not set forth expressly that he did owe him 20l. And he ought
to have set down how the Debt grew due; for that is traversable by the
Plaintiff, and now he cannot traverse it. C. 10. part 77. The general Count
in an Action upon the Case, Quod cum indebitatus fuit in such a sum, Super se
Assumpsit, without showing the Cause of the Debt is insufficient. 5 H. 7. 1.
Trespass was brought for taking of a Chain of Gold; The Defendant said, That
the Plaintiff before the trespass supposed did License him to take the same
Chain, and to retain it until he paid him 200 Marks, which he ought to pay
him. Keble took Exception, because the Defendant did not allege for what cause
the 200 Marks was due, which Cause the Plaintiff might traverse: to which Brian
acc'. 9 E. 4. 41. Trespass for taking a Bagg with Money; the Defendant said,
That the Plaintiff was indebted unto him in a certain Sum, and delivered unto
him the Bagg of Money in satisfaction. Littleton, The plea is not good, for he
ought to show how he was indebted unto him. Old Entries 155, 156. there in a
Foreign Attachment the certainty of the Debt was expressed and averred. 2. He
pleads a Custom, and does not prosecute his Case according to Custom. The
Custom is, That if the Sergeant retorn, that he has nothing within the City
whereby he may be summoned; And Non est inventus. And at the next Court day he
be solemnly demanded, and make default, etc. And he says, That because he had
nothing by which he could be summoned; but does not say, That the Officer did
return that he had not any thing whereby to be summoned, nor that he was not to
be found, nor does he plead or say, That at the next Court day he was solemnly
demanded. Dyer. 196. b. where this Case of Foreign Attachment was; there the
Custom is set forth, viz. That the Debt ought to be affirmed by the Oath of the
party in Curia Guildhall; and this was pleaded to be in Curia Vicecomit in
Computatorio. Also he does not averr, That he had found pledges according to
the Custom, and therefore the plea is insufficient, because he has not
purchased the Custom. 3. He shows that the goods were attached in the
Defendants hands, but he does not show that it was within the Liberty of the
City and it might be out of the liberty of the City, and all the Presidents are
infra Jurisdictionem etc. And the Plea of every person shall be taken strongest
against the Pleader. And he ought to have showed that it was within the Liberty
of the City, because it is a peculiar Jurisdiction. 34 E. 3. breve 789. Debt
was brought in the Common Pleas; the Defendant said, That the Plaintiff had a
Bill for the same Debt depending in the Exchequer; and demanded Judgment of the
Writ, and non allocatur: for it does not appear by the Plea that the Plaintiff
or Defendant were privileged in the Exchequer* and then by the Statute of
Articuli super Chart* as, cap. 4. it is provided, That no Common plea shall be
holden in the Exchequer. 4 E. 4 36. a, In trespass for Imprisonment, the
Defendant does justify, etc. there he ought to show that the Tower of London
has privileges etc. For where a man will take advantage of a particular
Privilege and Liberty, he ought to show that he was within the Privilege of
Liberty. Mi^. 2. Car-Willis was Indicted before the Justices of Northampton for
frequenting of a Bawdy House in Northampton; and the Indictment was quashed,
for it might be within Northampton, and yet out of the Liberties and
Jurisdiction of Northampton. 4. He does not show in his Plea that his Debt was
a due Debt: and it was pleaded Dyer 196. that it was a due Debt, vi Entries
155, 156. It is not enough to swear his Debt, but he must sweat his Debt to be
a due Debt.

Stone for the Defendant. 1. I agree, that if the Action had been brought in
that Court to recover a Debt, then he ought to set forth how it became due: but
here he pleads to bar him, and not to recover, and so the Debt is not
traversable. 5 H. 7 1. there Brian took the Exception; but two Judges are
against him, because he brought not Debt, but another Action for the Chain. 9
E. 4. 41. It is good by Moile, without showing the Debt, because it is by way
of excuse. 39 H. 6. 9. is ruled in the point: there the Attachment is in his
own hands; there the other pleaded there was no debt: It is there ruled, that
the debt is not traversable; for if there be no debt, then he shall have
restitution in London upon the pledges. It was objected, That he is to swear
his debt to be a true debt. I answer, It ought to be so intended: and then if
he lay a Custom to swear the Debt, and we say we have sworn our Debt, then we
have pursued the Custom. 3. It was objected, that it is not showed where the
goods were, whether within the jurisdiction of the City. 4 E. 4. 36. there the
place came not in question: But in our Case we lay, That the Custom is, that
the goods must be in London. Old Entries, 155, 156. there it is not alleged
that the goods were within the City of London at the time of the Attachment* If
a Precept be awarded to the Officer, who retorns that he has not any thing
within the City; and upon the allegation of the Plaintiff that such a one has
goods of the Defendant in his hands, was the Objection. I answer, If we have
not proceeded well, yet the Process is well enough; for here is a Judgment
against him in London: then so long as the Judgment is in force against him, he
cannot have the goods: 21 E. 4 23. b. It is a Rule, That a stranger unto a
plaint shall not be received to allege discontinuance in the process: So the
Sheriff shall not excuse himself upon an Escape, that there was Error in the
Judgment nor a privy shall not take advantage of it. Ognels Case Trim. 31 Eliz.
there lies no process of Capias by the Law upon a Recognisance, but Extent, or
Levari facias: Yet there a Capias was awarded; and if the party taken escape,
the Sheriff shall not take advantage of the Erroneous process. So I desire
Judgment for the Defendant. And he took an Exception to the Declaration: In
Detinue, if the Declaration be general, it is good, (sc.) Licet sepius
requisitu, etc. But here he shows that he delivered the Cloak to be redelivered
upon Request, and he does not show any particular Request, but says generally
Licet sepius requisitus. Ward, There is a difference betwixt Detinue, and
Action upon the Case: For in an Action upon the Case he ought to show a
particular Request. 26 H. 6. If I bail goods to redeliver upon request, yet I
may seize them without request. Dodderidge Justice, The reseisure of the goods
is a Request in Law, a Request with a witness, a Request with effect; and
until Request, he has just cause to keep them. Jones Justice, In Debt and
Detinue the very bringing of the Action and demand of the Writ is a demand and
request: And if he appear at the first Summons, then he excuses himself,
otherwise he shall be subject to damages: but the Request ought not to be so
precisely alleged. But if a collateral thing be to be done upon Request,
there to say sepius requisitus, is not sufficient. So if I sell a horse for
10^. to be paid upon Request, there the Request must be precisely laid, for it
is parcel of the Contract: And in Action upon the Case, and upon Debt, you must
lay a Request, Dodderidge Justice, The Request is no part of the Debt: for the
Debt is presently due; but if I make the Request to be part of the Contract,
there it is otherwise: As if I deliver goods to redeliver to me, there needs
no precise Request: but if it be to redeliver upon Request there the Request
ought to be alleged, for there the Request is part of the Contract. The Case
was adjourned till the next Term.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
484. MOLE and CARTER'S Case.
IN an Action upon the Case upon an Assumpsit, it was moved in arrest of
Judgment, That the Plaintiff declares that he was possessed of certain Goods
(viz. such, etc.) at London, And that in consideration of two shillings, That
the Defendant at London did promise to carry the said Goods aboard such a
Ship, if the Plaintiff would deliver the Goods to him; And he showed that he
did deliver the Goods to him, and that he had not carried them aboard. He
showed that he was possessed of the Goods, but did not show when or where he
delivered the said Goods to the Defendant; but said only deliberavit, etc. And
then the Law says that they were not delivered. Jones Justice, The same is but
matter of Inducement to the promise, and ought not to be showed so precisely.

Pasch. 3 Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
485. FRIAR and DEW'S Case.
DEW being sued, prayed his Privilege, because he is a Commoner in Exeter
College in Oxford, and brought Letters under the Seal of the Chancellor of
Oxford, certifying their Privilege: and he certifies that Dew is a Commoner, as
appears by the Certificate of Doctor Prideaux, Rector of the said College,
Whereas he ought to certify that he is a Commoner upon his own knowledge, and
not upon the Certificate of another. But afterward Certificate was made of his
own knowledge, and then it was allowed as good. The Declaration came in Hill. 2
Caroli. The Certificate bore date in the Vacation, and he prayed his Privilege
this Easter Term. After Imparlance he comes too late to pray his Privilege: The
Certificate is not, that at the time of the Action brought he was a Commoner in
Exeter College, but that now he is a Commoner. And the Certificate bears date
after the Action brought; He ought to have said that at the time of the Action
brought, and now he is a Commoner in Exeter College. The Privilege was allowed
per Curiam.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
486. TANFIELD and HIRON'S Case.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action upon the Case against the Defendant, for
delivering of a scandalous Writing to the Prince, and in his Declaration he set
forth what place he held in the Commonwealth, and that the Defendant seeking to
extenuate and draw the love and favor of the King, Prince, and Subjects from
him, did complain that the Plaintiff did much oppress the Inhabitants of Michel
Tue in the County of Oxford, and that he did cause Meerstones to be dug up
which might be a cause of great contention amongst the Inhabitants of Tue. The
Plaintiff denied the oppression alleged against him; and the Defendant did
justify, and said that I. S. being seized of the Manor of Tue, did demise
certain Lands, parcel thereof unto I. F. for eighty years; who made a Lease of
the same at Will; and afterward I. S. did Enfeoff Tanfield the Plaintiff of
the said Manor, to whom the Tenants did attorn Tenants: And the Defendant
showed, That time out of mind, the Inhabitants of the Town of Tue had Common in
the Waste of the said Manor, and that a great part of the said Manor was
enclosed, and the Meerstones removed (but does not show by whom:) And showed
that the Lands enclosed, out of which the Inhabitants had their Common. And
said, That there were diverse other Grievances to the Inhabitants of Tue, (but
did not show by whom they were, nor what they were) and showed, that at a
Parliament the Defendant did deliver such a Writing to the Prince, as one of
the Peers of Parliament, supposing that the grievances were set upon the
Inhabitants by the Plaintiff, by reason the Plaintiff occupied the Lands so
enclosed; and for Reformation thereof, that he delivered the Writing to the
Prince Absque hoc, that he did deliver it in any other manner. And upon this
Plea in Bar, Tanfield the Plaintiff did demurr in Law.

Noy for the Plaintiff said, That the Defendant complains of wrong, and does
not show any wrong to be done by Tanfield the Plaintiff; It is a grievous
scandal to deliver this Writing; for it is a scandalous Writing, and no
Petition: for therein he does not desire any Reformation, but complains
generally. Betwixt John Frisel and the Bishop of Norwich, The Case touched in
21 E. 3. was, That Frisel brought a Prohibition to The Bishop, and the Bishop
excommunicated him for the delivering of it unto him; The Bishop was fined: And
there it is said, As Reverence is due to the King, so it is due to his
Ministers. Our Action is brought at the Common Law, and not upon the Statute of
R. 2. de scandalis magnatum. M. 18 E. 3. Rot. 162. Thomas Badbrook sent a
Letter to Ferris, one of the Kings Council, the effect of which was, That Scot
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and his Companions of the same Bench, would
not do a vain thing at the Command of the King; yet because he sent such a
Letter to the Kings Council, although he spoke no ill, yet because it might
incense the King against the Judges, he was punished, for it might be a means
to make the King against his Judges. We are to see here, if the Defendant has
made any good Justification; If there were no wrong, then there was no cause to
complain. Secondly, If he had demeaned himself as he ought, he ought to have
had the wrong (if there were any) reformed, and that he did not do. 11 H. 4. 5
H. 7. A voice of Fame is a good cause for to Arrest a man of Felony; but then
some Felony ought to be committed. 7 H. 4. 35. A certain person came and said
to one, that there were certain Oxen stolen, and that he did suspect such a one
who he arrested upon the suspicion: It is a good cause of Justification if any
Oxen were stolen; but if no Felony was committed, if one be arrested upon
suspicion that he has committed Felony, it is not good: If Felony be done,
then a good cause to suspect him; but if no Felony be done, nor he knows nor
hears of any Felony committed, there is no cause for to suspect that the
party has committed Felony; but there ought to be suspicion that the party
has committed such a particular Felony: Where Felony is committed certainly,
one may be arrested upon suspicion, but unless a Felony be committed he cannot
be arrested: For where no Felony is committed at all, he shall not be drawn to
a Trial to clear himself of the suspicion; but if a Felony be certainly
committed, and he be arrested upon the suspicion, there he being forced to
answer to the Felony, he may clear and purge himself of the infamy upon his
trial, and so the infamy is not permanent, as in case when no Felony is
committed; for there he may bring his Action upon the Case. Here he says that
parcel of the Waste is enclosed, and does not show what parcel, so as no
certain issue can be taken upon it. Moor and Hawkins Case in an Ejectione
firm, It was alleged that he entered into parcel of the Land, and the Land was
alleged to lie in two several Towns; and it was not good, because no certain
issue could be thereupon: He says the same was enclosed, but does not show by
whom it was enclosed, viz. whether by the Feoffor, or Tanfield the Feoffee: he
complains of many grievances, but does not show what they are, and he ought not
to be his own Judge.

Secondly, He has not demeaned himself as he ought; for he has not desired in
the Letter any Reformation, but only he complains of the oppression of
Tanfield: He ought to have directed the Writing unto the Parliament, and he
directed the same unto the Prince by name; In the Letter he does not show that
Tanfield the Plaintiff did oppress, but that the Plaintiff was an oppressor,
but he does not show in what thing. The Case was adjourned.

Trin. 21 Iacobi in the Kings Bench.
487. SCOT'S Case.
PRoborum and legalium hominum is omitted in the Certificate of an Indictment
by the Clark of the Sessions: Curia, If it had been in Trespass, the omission
of the said words had vitiated the Indictment; but not in Case of Felony.
Quaere the reason.

Trin. 21 Iacobi, in the Kings Bench. Intratur, M. 19 Jac. Rot. 322.
488. CROUCH and HAYNE'S Case.
IN a Writ of Error the Record is removed out of the Common Pleas: The
Defendant pleads in nullo est Erratum, and a Demurrer is joined; and the
Defendant afterward alleges Diminution of the Original. 7 E. 4. 25. The
Assignement of Errors is in lieu of the Declaration. 4 E. 4. Error 44. After
that in nullo est erratum is pleaded, the Defendant shall not alledg
Diminution; for they are agreed before, that that is the Record. The Writ of
Error was general, and did not show when the Judgment was, when the Ejectment
was, what the Lands were; and nothing is certain in the Writ of Error, but the
persons and the Action: He shall not be concluded by the general retorn of the
Record by the Chief Judge of the Common Pleas. Fitz. 25. a. C. 6. Entr. 231. The
Record was removed, and a Scire facias awarded ex record; and Diminution was
alleged for omitting of certain words; yet the Retorn there was of the Record,
and omnia ea tangentia. Dyer 330. The Court certify that the party was not
essoigned; there then cannot be any Certificate of the Chief Justice to the
contrary. The Principal Case was, An Original bore date in June 18 Jacobi, and
another Original in September 18 Jacobi, and both were retornable S. Mich. And
the Trespass was done after the first Original sued forth, and before the
later, and both the Writs are in Court: The question was, upon which of the
Originals the Judges should judge. 4 E. 4. 26, 27, 28. There it is holden that
the Judges ought not to suppose any Error. 22 E. 4. 45: Error was brought to
reverse a Judgment in a Writ of Dower, And the Error assigned was, That there
was not any Issue joined; but because there was sufficient matter upon which
the Judges might give their verdict, therefore the Judgment was affirmed: for
the Judgment was not given upon the verdict. Pasch. 25 H. 8. Rot. 25. Plot and
his wife against Treventry in a Writ of Error, after the Record removed,
Diminution of the Original was alleged; and there it was pretended that the
Judgment was given upon another Original, and one of the Originals was before,
and the other after the Judgment; and there the Judgment was reversed, because
it cannot appear to the contrary but that the Judgment was given upon the later
Original. Trin. 18 Jacobi, Rot. 1613. Bowen and Jones's Case, In an Action upon
the Case brought upon Assumpsit, Error assigned was, because that no place was
limited where the payment should be made: The Original was, That the promise
was in consideration that the Plaintiff did lend to the Defendant so much, he
at London did promise to pay the same to him again; There were two Originals
which bore date the same day, Judgment was in that Case for the Plaintiff: And
the Defendant brought a Writ of Error, and alleged Diminution of the Original,
then the other Original was certified; The Defendant in the Writ of Error said,
That the Original upon which the Recoverie was grounded, was an Original which
had a place certain; The Judges did affirm the same to be the true Original
which did maintain the Judgment, and agree with the proceedings, otherwise
great mischief would ^ollow. George Crook contrary, and recited the Case, viz.
Hayns brought a Writ of Error against Crouch, and the Writ of Error is to
reverse a Record upon a Judgment which was given in the Common Pleas; The
Original which is certified, bears date Trin. 18 Jacobi; and the Ejectione
firm is brought Trin. 18 Jacobi, for an Ejectment which is made in September
following; and now upon this Error assigned, the party had a Certiorari to
remove the Record upon which you allege Diminution: For you say, That the
Original upon which the Judgment was given, bore date in September 18. Jacobi,
which was after the Ejectment. The body of the Record is Trin. 18. Contrary to
this Record, you say that there was an Original Mich. 18 Jacobi, and so that
is contrary to the Record. Error 2. upon the Record, The Original is not part
of the Record; but you ought to assign Error in that which is alleged in
Diminution. 6 H. 7. 4 Fitz. 21 a. To allege any thing against a Record, is
void: The Ejectment was after the Original which warrants the Record, and it
was after the Action brought. They allege that the Original was not truly
certified, and that then after an Imparlance, an Original Writ is made to
Warrant the Action* Jones and Bow^ns Case before cited, There a vicious
Original was certified, and then upon the Complaint of the Defendant, the true
Original was certified; both were retornable at the same day.

And in the Case before cited of Plott and Treventris, The Original which was
first certified did not bear date according to the Record which was certified:
But in our Case the last Original does not agree with the Record, but the
first: But in the Case of Plott the Judgment was reversed for another Error.
The Diminution when it stands with the Record shall be allowed, but when it
differs from the Record, then it shall not be allowed.

The Ejectment was laid after the first Original purchased, which agrees with
the Record, and after the Action brought. Quod nota. It was adjuorned till
another Term, viz. Mich. 21. Jacobi.

Trin. 21. Jacobi in the Kings Bench.
489. SUMMERS Case.
THe Case was between Summers and Mary his Wife Plaintiffs; who Traversed an
Office found after the death of one Roberts: The parties were at Issue upon one
point in the Traverse; and it was found against the King. Henden Sergeant
moved: The Office finds, That Roberts dyed seized of two Acres in Soccage, and
four foot of Lands holden in Capite: (which was alleged Roberts had by
Encroachment.) Summers and his Wife pleaded, That Roberts in his life time did
enfeoffe them of one of the Acres, Absque hoc that that Acre did descend. And
for the other Acre they pleaded and entitled themselves by the Will of Roberts,
Absque hoc, that Roberts was seized thereof. That I take to be an insufficient
Traverse.

First, it is found by the Office, That Roberts dyed seized* and that the same
descended to four Daughters, and One of the Daughters is the Wife of Summers:
And he and his Wife traverse the Office, and confess that the Ancestor died
seized, Absque hoc that the same descended. The Traverse is repugnant in it
self, for if he did Devise it, then until Entry by the Devisee it does
descend* but if they had pleaded the Devise only, and Entry by force thereof,
it might have been a good Traverse. The Office finds that it did descend to
four Daughters, and the Wife of Summers is one of the four Daughters, and he
and his Wife Traverse the descent, and that is not good, for one cannot
Traverse that which makes a Title to himself. 37 Ass. 1. The Rule there put is;
That a Man cannot Traverse the Office by which he is entitled; but in point of
Tenure he may Traverse it: wherewith agrees Stamford Prerogat. 61. and 62. 42
Ass. 23. One came and Traversed an Office, and thereby it appeared that Two
there had occasion to Traverse it, and it was holden that, they all ought to
join in the Traverse. Finch Recorder of London, contr'. The Office found
generally, That Roberts had four Daughters, and had two Acres and four Foot of
Lands, and that the same descended to four Daughters: Summers and his Wife
Traverse the Office, and plead, That as to one Acre; Roberts made a Feoffment
thereof unto them, Absque hoc that he died seized thereof. 2. That Roberts
devised the other Acre to them Absque hoc that the same did descend. 5 Eliz.
Dyer 221: Bishops Case, There it is resolved, That a Devise does prevent a
Remitter; and then by consequent, it shall prevent a Descent. 49 E. 3, 16.
There a Devise did prevent an Escheat to the King.

As to the four Foot (gained by Encroachment) which is holden of the King in
Capite, They traverse Absque hoc that Roberts was seized thereof; I agree that
where their Title is joint, there all must Traverse; but in our Case we
Traverse for our selves, and deny any thing to be due to the three other
Sisters.

The four Foot of Waste, was part of the Manor of Bayhall; and the Venire
facias was out of that Manor, and the Towns where the other lands lay. 9 E. 4.
A. disseises B. of a Manor and A. severs the Demeasnes from the Services. Now
B. shall demand the Manor as in Truth it now is: Henden contr'. It is no part
of the Manor of Bayhall, for it is encroached out of it; therefore the Venire
facias ought not to be of the Manor of Bayhall. The Jury find that he had
encroached four Foot Ex vasto Manerii, etc. Dodderige Justice, the encroachment
does not make it to be no parcel of the Manor. Ley chief Justice, it is not
laid to be a Disseisin, but an Encroachment, and therefore it is not so strong
as a Disseisin with a Descent, but in Right it belongs to the Manor: Tenant in
Tail makes a Feoffment to the use of himself, and devises the Lands to A. the
Devise does prevent the Remitter.

Haughton Justice the Descent is Traversed: The Father dies seized, and has
issue two Sons; and that the Lands descended to him; the other may say, That
the Land is borough English, and that the Lands descend unto him Absque hoc
that they descended to the Eldest.

Dodderidge Justice, Regularly, you shall not Traverse the Descent but by the
dying seized; but in this Case it ought to be of necessity (sc. ^ in case of a
Devise, the Traverse must be of the Descent; for here they cannot traverse the
dying seized, for if they traverse the dying seized, then they overthrow their
own Title, sc. the Devise; but here in Case of a Will, the party shall
traverse the Descent, for he cannot say that it is true that the Lands did
descend, and that he Devised it, etc. The heir cannot traverse that which
entitles him by Descent; but here his Title is by the Devise, and not as heir.
Finch Recorder, the Devise is not of the four Foot, for if we confess the dying
seized of the four Foot which was holden in Capite, then we should overthrow
our own Devise. The Office finds that he died seized of the whole, and
therefore of the four foot. He being never seized, we traverse the dying seized
thereof, and we deny that he ever had it; so the Traverse is good without
making of us any Title unto it, for we desire not to have it. Dodderidge
Justice, If a man devises to his heir, it is a void Devise; for the descent
shall be preferred: But if one has Issue four daughters, and he devises to
one of them, it is good for the whole Land so devised to her; and no part of
the Land so devised shall descend to the other, the Lands being holden in
Socage. Ley Chief Justice and the whole Court did agree, That they might deny
and traverse the four Foot, if the Ancestor had no Title unto it: and Judgment
was given accordingly against the King, quod nota.

Trin. 21 Jac. in the Kings Bench.
490. PAIN and COLLEGES Case.
AN Agreement was made between Pain and College, That if Pain (being
Surgeon) did Cure College of a great Disease, viz. A Noli me tangere, That
then he should have 10l. and that if he did not cure him, That then for his
pains and endeavors, College would give him 5l. In an Action upon the Case
brought by Pain, he does not show in his Declaration in what place he used his
endeavor and Industry: And there is a difference where the Plaintiff is to do
any thing of Skill and Industry, for there he may do the same at several times,
and in several places; and so this Case differs from the Cases in our books, 15
H. 6. Accord: 1. is expressly in the point, There the Defendant pleaded an
Accord, That if the Defendant by his Industry, etc. And exception was taken
because that he did not show a place. 3 E. 4. 1. Debt brought by a Servant, and
declares that he was retained by the predecessor of the Defendant, etc. and
that he had performed his Service, etc. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, and
Exception taken as in our Case, because he did not show where he did the
Service, for that is issuable: and Denly there said, That he need not show the
place, because he might do it in several places. Bridgeman Sergeant contrary,
If the issue had been upon a Collateral matter, it had been good enough; but
here the issue is taken upon an endeavor, and you ought to alleadg a place for
the trial of it. Dodderidge Justice, The Jury was from the place where the
Agreement was made, the verdict will not make good the Declaration, although
the Jury have found the whole matter of fact; for it does not appear to us,
That that was the Jury which could try his endeavor. The Case of 3 E. 4. of
the Servant was to serve him seven years, and there he need not show any place
where he did his Service, but only that he obeyed his Master in his Service for
the seven years: If the Plaintiff in this Case had showed but any one place of
doing, his endeavor in it, had been sufficient; but here he shows no place
at all: And therefore Judgment was given, That Querens nihil Capiat per Billam.

Trin. 21 Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
491. The Lord ZOUCH and MOORS Case.
IN an Action of Trespass for cutting down of Trees in Odiham Park in
Hampshire, It was found by special Verdict, That King Henry the eighth was
seized of the Manor and Park of Odiham, And by his Letters Patents 33 of his
Reign, did grant unto Genny the Office of Stewardship of the said Manor, and
the Office of Parkership of the said Park, with reasonable Herbage; and by the
same Letters Patents did grant unto him the Manor of Odiham cum pertinaciis,
and 100. Loads of Wood, excepting the Park, the Deer, and the Wood, for fifty
years, if he should so long live. Then they found, That after that Genny did
surrender and restore the Letters Patents in the Chancery to be cancelled, and
that in truth they were cancelled, and that the said Surrender was made to the
intent to make a new Lease thereof unto Pawlet; and that this Lease of 33 H. 8.
being surrendered, That King Henry the 8. Anno 36. of his Reign, reciting the
Letters Patents made to Genny to be dated anno 32 H. 8. (whereas in truth they
were dated 33 H. 8.) and that they were surrendered, and that the intent of the
Surrender was to make a new Lease to Pawlet; Did grant the same to Pawlet, as
before they were granted to Genny, excepting as before.

They further found, That King Philip and Queen Mary, 5 and 6 of their Reigns,
being seized of the said Manor and Park in jnro Coronae, reciting that Henry
the 8. anno 36 of his Reign had granted unto Paulet as before, omitting the
Proviso which was for 50 years if he should so long live) and the Exceptions
before; And reciting that those Letters Patent were surrendered ea intention
to make a new Lease in forma sequente They in consideration of good service and
200l. paid did grant the Office as before, and by those Letters Patent did
grant Herbage generally (whereas the first Patent was reasonable Herbage) And
by these Letters Patent did grant to him the Manor cum pertinaciis (except
the grand trees and woods in the Park) and Felons goods which were granted by
the first Letters Patents for 50 years: And here was a Rent reserved; and a
Proviso that for doing of Waste that the Letters Patent should be be void: And
there was no such Proviso in the first Letters Patent.

27 Eliz. Queen Elizabeth reciting the Letters Patent of 5 and 6 Phil. and
Mary verbatim and truly, did grant the Parkership unto Secretary Walsingham,
and Leased the Manor unto him with the Appurtenances, with power to take 100
loads of wood, Excepting the Deer, Habendum from the end of the Lease to Pawlet
either by surrender or forfeiture for 21 years rendering rent, and for not
payment a Re-entry. Walsingham granted the same to H. who granted to the same
to Moor and others Defendants. King James anno 1. of his Reign granted the said
Manor, and the Offices of Stewardship and Parkership all by one
Letters Patent to the Lord Zouch, who thereupon entered. Moore entered upon him
and cut down the Trees; and the Lord Zouch brought the Action of Trespass.

Sir Henry Yelverton argued for the Plaintiff, and said, 1. The Lease made unto
Pawlet 36 H. 8. is a void Lease in Law. 2. The second Lease unto Pawlet made by
King Philip and Queen Mary 5 and 6. is also void in Law. 3. The Lease made by
Queen Elizabeth to Walsingham, anno 27 of her Reign, is also void in Law. And
that the Lease made by King James is good in Law; and the Action of Trespass
brought by him will well lie. The first Lease is void; For it is granted upon a
false suggestion made by Genny, scil. a supposed Surrender: For the Lease which
he did surrender did not bear date 32. but 33 H. 8. and the Surrender to the
King was false; for the Lease supposed to be surrendered by Genny bears date
32 H. 8. whereas there was no such Lease made to Genny: And therefore both
being the suggestions of the party, the King was deceived; For what Lease Genny
had, the King could not know but by the suggestion of Genny; and upon his
information the King was contented to accept of a Surrender, which was but a
show of a Surrender. The King could not know with what Genny treated him, but
by his Information; and in both the King was deceived: For it was not the Kings
intent to charge the lands but with one Lease.

C. 6. part, The Lord Shandoe's Case; The reason of the Judgment there proves
our Case: For there all which grew by the Information of the party was true,
and then the King made a wrong Collection thereupon; but that which he
collected was not upon the Information of the party. And there it was agreed,
That if in any part the party had misinformed the King, that the whole had
been void. Dyer 35^. Lessee for 6^ years of the Queen made Lease for 80 years;
The 60 years expire; the Assignee does surrender unto the Queen his Lease for
80 years, ea intention that the Queen shall make unto him a new Lease for 20
years. The Queen reciting that the said Lessee did surrender a Lease for 80
years, did grant to him a Lease for 20 years: The Lease for 20 years was
adjudged void; For he did surrender no Lease unto the Queen. And there Dyer
said, That it is all one where the Consideration is false, and where the
Information is false; there, and here is but a show of a surrender, And it was
not the Queens intent to pass more then she took by the Surrender. Henry the 8.
recites, That Genny has surrendered up the Patent which bore date 32 H 8. And
there was not any such Patent. Genny suggested that he had given up the Patent,
dated 32 H. 8. when he had not any such Patent. So the King was deceived in the
suggestion.

A difference has been taken betwixt Consideration and Information: Here the
Consideration was Service, and Two hundred pounds paid; And it was objected,
That he took here by the Consideration, and not by force of the Information.
But I say that the Information was the ground upon which the Patent was made.
For it was not the Kings intent to charge the lands with two leases, C. 2. part
17. there it is cited, That in a Patent of King Henry the 7. four Letters, viz.
H R. F. H. of the first words were left out, intending afterward propter
honorem to be set out with gold: but the great Seal was put to the Patent,
leaving out the said four letters; and yet the Patent was adjudged good being
referred to the Inrollment, Privy Seal etc. For thereby it appears that it
was the grant of the King.

If Queen Elizabeth recite, That whereas her Father made such a Lease, and does
not recite it by the name of Henry the 8. her Father, it is good enough, if
Henry the 8. made such a Lease: But in such case, if Henry the 7. made the
Lease, then the Lease of the Queen had not been good, for that she mistook her
Ancestor, for Henry the 7. was her Grandfather. 10 H. 7. 20. 20 H. 7. 7, 8. The
Kings Patent may be without Date; for he may resort to the Inrolment and
Privy Seal, and so help it: But in such case if he does surmise a false Date,
the same makes the Patent void. 21 E. 4. 45. Misrecital of the year of the
Reign of the King will make void a Patent: And in our Case, by the misrecital
of the year of the King there is a year gained.

It was objected, That it shall be helped by the Statute of 34 H. 8. which
helps Mis-recital, and Non-recital: But in our case it is not a Mis-recital:
For Mis-recital is when part of that which is recited is true, and part false;
but Non-recital is, when nothing at all is recited. But in our Case, it is a
false Recital of the subject in the thing which is surrendered; Genny surrendered
nothing, and the King took nothing*

Trin. 9 Jacobi, Roper and Roden's Cases. Henry the 8. reciting by his Grant,
That where he had a Reversion expectant upon a Demise made unto M. whereas in
truth it was made unto N: He granted the Reversion unto Roden. It was adjudged,
That that recital was not helped by the Statute of 34 H. 8. for that the King
had not any such Reversion. 19 Jacobi, Tucker and Carr's Case was adjudged upon
the same point, Doddington's Case, C. 2. part, There a general Grant is not
helped by the Statute of 34 H. 8. In our Case here is a mistaking of the thing
it self: If he had recited the same to be 33 H. 8. and then had mistaken any
thing in it, it had been helped by the Statute of 34 H. 8.

Dyer 195. Kemp was Nonsuit, (there 32 H. 8. was mistaken for 33 H. 8.) There
the Surrender was of a Patent bearing date 32 H. 8. whereas in truth it bore
date 33 H. 8. And there it is adjudged, That the Patent of 32 H. 8. cannot be
the Patent of 33 H. 8. by which the Office was granted to him: And therefore it
was adjudged void, notwithstanding the Act of 34 H. 8. and other Statutes of
Misrecital. So in our Case 33 H. 8. is mistaken, and it is 32. whereas in truth
it was 33 H. 8.

The second Point then is, If the Lease of 36. H. 8. be void, then of necessity
the Lease of 5. and 6. Philip and Mary is void, for therein is falsity of three
things. 1. The thing recited is the custody of the Park, with reasonable
Herbage and the Patentee would have nothing but pramissa, and he trusts the
King to give that; and he takes from the Queen Herbage (leaving out reasonable)
and so he takes more then was intended him, and therefore he has deceived
the Queen; and if you are to have reasonable Herbage; the King may put one to
be Overseer, that you have that which is fitting and reasonable, and the Queen
may agister Cattle there; but in our Case the Queen can neither set any
Overseer, nor can she agist Cattle there. Dyer 285. 2. H. 8. Killaway 159. He
who has reasonable Herbage cannot enclose, but he which has Herbage may
enclose. Then forasmuch as here the Patent is larger then it was before, scil.
that which was surrendered, the Patent is void; for the Queen Grants more then
she took by the surrender: For he did surrender ea intention, that the Queen
should regrant him praemissa; and by this new Grant he has more. 2. He
recites, That he had a Lease for fifty years absolutely, whereas it was
determinable upon death; and the Queen grants the same for fifty years
absolutely, and that was by reason of his false Suggestion. It may be objected,
That the Queen is not deceived, for the limitation for life is not annexed to
the Habendum. 20. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Hunts Case; The Queen made a Lease
to begin at a day to come, and afterward the Queen by the suggestion of the
party, and for the surrender of the present Lease, did make a new Lease unto
the party; it was adjudged, That the new Lease was void. So here, the Queen was
deceived in the quality of the Lease. 9. E. 4. 12. Baggots Case; The King
reciting that Baggot was born in Normandy (whereas in truth he was born in
France) made him a Denizen; and the Patent, notwithstanding this false recital
of the party, was adjudged good, for the intent was to make him a Denizen: That
Case was objected against me. But put the Case a little further, and it is
otherwise; for if at that time Edward the fourth had had Wars with France, then
the Patent had been void, for it was not the Kings intent to protect a man who
was an Enemy, and to nourish him in his own bosom. If the Queen had made the
new Lease to begin after the first fifty years, then it had been void. C. 1.
part the Rector of Chedington's Case; It is not the years, but the death of the
Patentee which determins the Lease. C. 2. part 72. In a Deed there is not any
proper place where the Proviso shall be inserted, then if it come in any place,
so as it does not lean upon a Covenant, it is a good condition. 35. Eliz.
betwixt Throgmorton and Sir Moile Finch. Queen Mary made a Lease unto
Throgmorton for 21 years, and in the end of the Lease there is a Proviso, That
the Lease shall cease if the Rent be behind. Popham Chief Justice said, That
Throgmorton has such a Lease which is absolute, but shortened by limitation in
the end of the Lease; and he might plead it generally and absolutely, That
those who will take advantage of the Proviso, ought to show where the Proviso
comes in another clause. So here Pawlet should have informed the Queen of the
Proviso, for he trusts the Queen, and the Queen trusts him. The third Falsity
is, It is pretended, That the Park of Odiham does pass with the Manor; for the
Manor is granted by King Philip and Queen Mary, cum pertinentiis; and it is
found by the Jury that the Park is parcel of the Manor. He has deceived and
misinformed the Queen; for in the Lease which he surrendered, the Park is
excepted, and now he would steal it in by the general words, cum pertinentiis.
If the Park does not pass, then the Defendants are Trespassors to the
Plaintiff; and if the Manor does not pass, then they are Trespassors; so as
they are in a Dilemma. This Park (admit the Manor passes) does not pass: for
Queen Mary, shortly after, made Pawlet a Marquess, and then she granted unto
him by Letters Patents. The custody of the Park, and the Interest of the Park
cannot stand together in one person; and he cannot be the Queens Parker, when
as it is his own Park. C. 8 part 117. The best Expositor of Letters Patents,
are the Letters Patents themselves, joining one part of the Letters Patents
with the other. And here in one clause the custody of the Park is granted by
express name; and the general words, viz. Grant of the Manor cum pertinentiis
does not convey it. There is a difference betwixt the Custody of a Park, and
the Interest of the Park. In Com. 399. If a Parker be attainted and pardoned,
he loses not his Park, but he may be a Parker notwithstanding such
Attainder; but if the Owner of a Park be attainted and pardoned, he loses his
Park; a Parker is a matter of service, and cannot be forfeited; but an Interest
may. 10. H. 7. 6. The Keeper shall render account for the Hawks, for it is
parcel of the profits of the Park; but Lessee for years of a Park shall not
render account for them: So there is a difference betwixt the Interest in a
Park, and a Parkership. 12. H. 8. 1. Lessee for years of a Park suffers the
Pale to fall down or decay, Waste lies; but if a Parker suffers the Pale to
decay, he can only lose his Office. Dyer 71. The Owner of a Park may dispark
it, but he who has only the Herbage of it, cannot. A man has the custody of a
house, and afterward he becomes the Owner of the house; his custody therein
cease. There are four Mischiefs in our Case: 1. By expressing himself to be
Parker, he excludes himself from being Owner. 2. The Keeper is Accountable,
but Lessee for years is not. 3. If he be only Keeper of it, then the Queen
might dispark: but if he were Lessee, the Queen could not. 4. Where he is
Keeper, all will rest upon account, as well the Deer which he finds there
when he became Keeper, as those which came after. But that makes the Queen in
doubt, whether the Exception should extend to the Deer; then whether to those
Deer which came after:

The third Point was concerning WALSINGHAM'S Lease; It is of the Manor, and
Custodiam Parci. First, This Lease has one of the wounds of the former Leases:
for the Parkership is granted expressly. Secondly, The leases before being void,
then this Lease must needs be void also. Thirdly, This Lease is to take effect
upon the end, Surrender, or Forfeiture of the Lease to Pawlet, which was made
5. and 6. Philip and Mary, and that lease had not any beginning, and therefore
was void; and so the three limitations, End, Surrender or Forfeiture cannot
happen. Dyer 197, 198. From the death of the Father the lease which is made to
the Son shall begin the Father being dead, it is a void lease to the Son. C. 6
part 35. Enumeration of particular times, if it do not happen within the
particular, then it shall never begin: And so it is of this lease to Walsingham
in our Case. Note, it was said by Sir Henry Yelvertor, That it was the opinion
of the Judges in this Case, That he had but the custody of the Park, and not
the interest of the Park; for by the acceptance of the custody of a Park, when
he has a lease of the Park it self before, it is a surrender of his lease.
Davenport argued for the Defendant More. The question which is made of the
lease of 27. Eliz. rests upon the lease made to Genny 33. H. 8. which was
determined upon the surrender of the lessee. 2. It rests upon the lease made to
Pawlet. 36. H. 8. which was for fifty years, determinable by two Provisoes; the
one for not payment of a sum in gross. 3. It rests upon the lease made to
Pawlet. 5 and 6. Ph. and M. for 50 years from Mich* last past, upon the death
of Pawlet, or committing of Waste. The lease of 27. Eliz. is a lease in
reversion for 31 years, to begin after the surrender, forfeiture or expiration
of the lease made 4 and 5 Ph. and M. to Pawlet. Exception is taken to the lease
36. H 8. because it has two falsities; the first, Because it mis-recites the
lease of 33 H. 8. reciting the same to be dated 32 H. 8. whereas in truth it
was dated 33 H. 8. and that varies the term of years, and that lease is not
good at the common law, nor as they objected, is it helped by the Statute of
34. H. 8. of Mis-recitalls. Secondly, Because it is upon a false suggesstion of
the Patentee, and therefore it is void. It was also obejected, That the lease
of 5 and 6 Philip and Mary was void for two causes; first, Because that that
recites the lease of 36. H. 8. to be for fifty years, without the Proviso of
determination by the death of Pawlet. 2. The King is deceived in his Grant; for
they objected, That it was recited to be surrendered (...) intention to regrant
eadem praemissa; and there are other things granted which were not surrendered;
They say, That the Lease is said to be of the Parkership, and not of the Park;
for that does not pass by the general words cum pertinentiis; for by express
words the Parkership is granted, and then not the Park it self. The Lease of
33. H. 8. was truly surrendered; But the King reciting that the Patent bearing
date 32. H. 8. was surrendered in consideration of service, did grant the office
of Parkership, etc. And insuper the Manor for fifty years, etc. The question
is, If this misrecitall be helped by the Common Law: if it be not, then if the
Statute of 34. H. 8. does help it? The Lease which was mis-recited was not in
esse; and there is a difference when the Lease which is recited, is not in
esse, but determined; and when former Leasus are recited, as Leases in esse.
There are three things in which misrecitall is material, and does vitiate the
Patent, 1. Misrecitall of the Tenant to whom the Lease was made or of the
Tenant which was last possessed 2. Misrecitall of the thing demised. 3. Of the
Estate in esse, and the Limitation. If in such case of misrecitall, there be
not a Non obstante, then the Patent is void at the Common Law, C. 4. part 35.
The King by the Law ought to be truly informed of estates in esse, and also of
his Rents and Revenue; But by the Common Law, if the former Leases be recited
to be determined, (and in truth, they are,) and the new grant is upon another
consideration, then it is not material, if they be misrecited; for that it is
not any part of the consideration. Vide 38. H. 6. 37. Darby. If the misrecitall
be in any thing not material, which need not to be recited: and no part of the
consideration of the new Lease, then it shall not make void the Patent; for
that the misrecitall was not of any thing material. If the misrecitall be of a
thing determined, and the second Patent depend thereupon, then the second
Patent is void; for if the King recite a Lease made to I. S. which is
determined, and demise tenementa praedict' sic ut praefertur; and in truth the
Lease recited was made to I. D. the second Lease is void: 38. H. 8. Br. Patents
10l. The King Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life, the successor King may
make a new Lease without recital, and if he do misrecite the lease which is
determined, it is not material. If our Lease should be void at the Common Law,
yet it is helped by the Statute of 34. H. 8. cap. 21. by express words, the
same extends to all Leases, with, or without consideration, notwithstanding
misrecitall, or non-recitall; yet all misrecitals are not helped by that
Statute: if the misrecitall be of Leases, which are not the guide of the second
Patent, and need not to be recited, such misrecitall is helped by the Statute.
But if the former Patent begets the later, then the Statute does not extend
unto it, for then the last is void, for that the King is deceived, and not by
reason of the misrecitall. Dyer 194. 195. The Case there is direct to prove our
Case; for there the recital was of the grant of an Office, 33. H. 8. whereas
it was dated, 32. H. 8. Et quia omnia, etc. And there was not any surrender,
for in truth it was not surrendered to the Master of the Rolls, who died before
it was entered: There it is resolved, That it is not helped by the Statute of
Queen Mary: for in that Act there is an express clause, that it extend not to
the grant of an Office, (as in the Case of Dier it was) and then it was left at
the Common Law, and the Queen was deceived, because the surrender was not good.
The defect of the second Patent was, That it was not in the Crown by the
surrender, but if it had been well surrendered, the misrecitall had been helped
by the Statute of 34. H. 8. for it was the misrecitall of the year, that the
Patent bore date. ^. 2. part, Doddingtons Case, Dyer 129. upon the Statute of
34. H. 8. The misrecitall of the Town is not helped; for it does not appear
unto the Court what Land was intended to be granted: But if the thing had been
certainly and particularly named, so as it might appear to the Court what Land
was intended to pass; then the mis-recitall of the Town had been helped by the
Statute of 34. H. 8. A thing granted generally with reference to a misrecited
Patent, is not helped by the Act of 34. H. 8. But when the thing granted is
particularized with reference to a thing which is determined in a misrecited
Patent, then the Statute of 34. H. 8. will help it; but in our Case, the
misrecitall is of a thing which needed not to be recited. The second Objection
which has been made, is, That the King is deceived, by reason of the false
suggestion: And then the Letters Patents made by reason thereof are void. I
answer, That if the false Suggestion tends to the detriment of the Crown,
and to the apparent prejudice of the King, then the Letters Patents may be
avoided: But where the Suggestion is of a thing not material, and does not
tend either to the deceit of the Crown, or to the Kings prejudice, neither in
his profit, nor his Inheritance, there it shall not make void the Letters
Patents. Dyer 352. Where an Abbot Lessee for sixty years of the Queen, made a
Lease for eighty years; the sixty years expired, the Lessee for eighty years
surrendered to the Crown, and in consideration of that Surrender, to have a new
Lease; there the second Patent was void, for the King was deceived in the real
consideration. And Dyer there said, That it was but the Suggestion of the
party, and the Collection of the Queen. C. 5. part 93. 94. Where Lessee for
years of the King did assign part of his Term and Land to another, and then
surrendered, the surrender there was the consideration; and that was not good.
If the recital be made of a thing which needs not to be recited, and the
Patent is made upon another consideration, there the misrecital shall not hurt
it, C. 1. part 41. where Henry the seventh, reciting cum p^st etc. virtute
cuj^s, etc. the estate is recited, as determined; the Reversion shall pass;
for the King was certified of the estate: And in our Case it is determined.
Where the falsitie of the suggestion is not in deceit, nor to the prejudice of
the King; If the thing misrecited be not material, it shall not make void the
Patent. C. 10 part 110. Legates Case. Quae quidem etc. the false suggestion
shall make void the Patent; for the King did not intend to abate his Revenue.
Fitz. Not. Brev. Grants 58. Falsitie of Tenure of the King shall make void the
Kings License: For the falsitie of suggestion which came from the party, did
tend to the prejudice of the King in his Tenure. C. 10. part 110 Quod quidem
manibus etc. ratione Escheatae etc. It shall make void the grant by this
suggestion of the party which does prejudice the King in his title. But where
the Suggestion is not to the prejudice of the King in his revenue, tenure, nor
title, it shall not make the Letters Patents void. C. 10. part 113. MARKHAM's
case. The King grants the office of Parker, quod quidem Officium the Earl of
RUTLAN'D late had; And the said Earl never had it; the Suggestion was of a
thing not material to the second Patentee, nor to the Kings prejudice,
therefore it was good. 10. H. 6. 2. Quod quidem Manerium seisitus fuit in manus
nostras; the false suggestion there shall not make void the Patent, because it
was not of a thing material. If the King grant a Manor, quod quidem Manerium
nuper fuit in tenura I. S. and in truth it was not in the Tenure of I. S. yet
it was adjudged good: For Nuper is a Recital of the thing that was* and not of
a thing that is. For if it had not been in the possession of I. S. whereas in
truth he was not seized or possessed thereof, there it had not been good. It is
found in our Case, That the Lease is actually surrendered, and so the
misrecitall is of a thing that was, scil. nuper; and not of a thing that is, or
in esse.

The next Exception is to the Letters Patents of Philip and Mary. First,
because thereby the Lease of 36. H. 8. is not fully recited; For there was a
Proviso, That if he did not pay a sum, in gross, that it should be void; And
that it should determine by the Death of Pawlet the Patentee. The misrecitall
of that Collateral matter by the Common Law, shall not make void the Grant.
There are three things necessary in Recitalls: First, The Certainty of the
particular estate in esse, with the Limitations. Secondly, The Tenant to whom
the particular estate was made, or the Tenant which then is in possession.
Thirdly, The thing granted, by the same name as it is granted in the first
Patent. But Covenants, Reservations, Provisions, Conditions, and the like, need
not to be recited. The Recital ought to be of a thing in esse: Avowry 112. A
Town was granted by the King. And afterward he granted unto another a Leet in
the same Town; the King in this case needed not to recite the grant of the
said Town. Secondly, The Recital ought to be in the same name as it was
granted in the first Patent. And cannot be helped by averment, if it be
misrecited. Thirdly, the Tenant of the Land, or the Tenant which was before the
grant, ought to be recited, scil. that such a man habuit, to whom the first
Patent was granted; Or, that he now has the Lands, or lately had the thing
granted in possession. Brook Pat. 96. Such things ought to be recited as ought
to be pleaded against the King in an Information of Instruction. In our Case,
the misrecitall being of a thing determined and not material, and not to be
the guide of the second Patent, does not make void the Grant to Pawlet.

It was objected, That Queen MARY was deceived: for the Grant was de ^isdem
praemissis: And in the former Patent the Park was excepted; but so it was not
in the Letters Patents to Pawlet: In the first Patent reasonable Herbage was
granted; but in the second to Pawlet, the Grant was of Herbage generally. If
the King except the Deer, as he does in this case, then he ought to have
sufficient herbage for his Deer: The Jury find, That the Letters Patents of
36. H. 8. were absolutely surrendered ea intention, that the King might make a
new Lease in forma s^quente, which is not de praemissis, sed de
praementionatis. Now the King for two hundred pounds Fine, is pleased to grant,
tam in consideration of the Surrender, quam for the Fine of two hundred pounds:
And here the King took knowledge, that it ought to be in forma sequente: and
then by reason of the Fine and Surrender, he is pleased to vary from the
former Patent, and it is to the prejudice of the Patentee: The first was
reasonable Herbage; and here it is Herbage, and in the Kings Case it amounts to
as much, as if he had said, Reasonable Herbage: for because the King excepts
the Deer, it is employed, That the Patentee is but to have reasonable Herbage.
Here the Grant is not De omnibus grossis arboribus, bonis and catellis Felonum;
and of the Goods of Felons themselves: and in the former Patent these were
granted, and so the Grant is for the Kings benefit, and to the prejudice of the
Patentee. Also this Patent is ad proficuum Domini Regis: For here is a Rent
reserved, and here is a Proviso for the committing of Waste in the premises,
which were not in the first Letters Patents; and in these Letters Patents there
are diverse Covenants which were not in the former Patents: and so it is in
forma sequente: And so the Lease of Philip and Mary is good. The King seized of
a Manor to which he has a Park, does grant the Stewardship of the Manor, and
the Custody of the said Park, with reasonable Herbage: Afterward in the same
Letters Patents he grants the said Manor of O. and all the Lands in O.
excepting gross trees in the Park. If this Grant be not good for the Manor, it
is not good for the Park that was the Objection: It is good for the Manor, and
also for the Park. It was objected, That the King grants the custody of the
Park, and so not the Park it self; for how can the King grant the custody of
the Park, if he grant the Park it self; it is dangerous, that upon an
implication in one part of a Patent, the express words which follow should be
made void; the subsequent words in this Case, are, The King grants the Manor,
and all the Lands to the same belonging; now the Park does belong to it, and
the King excepts only the Deer, C. 10 part 64. The King at this day grants a
Manor unto a man, as entirely as such a one held the same before it came into
his hands, etc. the Advowson does pass without words of grant of the Advowson;
for the Kings meaning is, That the Advowson shall pass: The meaning of the
King is manifest in our Case; C. 3. Part 31, 32. Carr's Case, There the Rent
was extinct betwixt the Parties* yet for the benefit of the King for his
tenure, it has continuance; for a thing may be extinct, as to one purpose, and
in esse as to another purpose. 38. Ass. 16. a Rent extinct, yet Mortmain. Dyer
58, 59. The Exception ought to be of the thing demised. In our Case the Park
does pass, but the King shall have the liberties in it; and so here the Park
shall pass, and the Exception is of the liberties; Com. 370. the Exception
ought to be of that which is contained in the former words, in the former
Patents; the Offices were first granted; and in the same Letters Patents the
Manor was afterward granted. But now King James grants the Manor first, and
then the Offices. Construction of Statutes ought to be secuncundum intentionem
of the makers of them; and construction of Patents secundum intentionem Domini
Regis, C. 8. part 58. You ought to make such a construction, as to uphold the
Letters Patents, C. 8. part. 56. Auditor Kings Case; There the Letters Patents
were construed secundum intentionem Domini Regis, and adjudged good: But to
make void the Patent, they shall not be construed secundum intentionem, but to
make a Patent good, they shall be construed secundum intentionem Domini Regis.
The Case was adjourned till Michaelmas Term next. Note, I have heard Sir Henry
Yelverton say, That it was the opinion of the Judges in this Case, That he had
but the custody of the Park, and not the interest of the Park; for that by the
acceptance of the custody of the Park, when he had a Lease of the Park before,
it was a surrender of his Lease.

Trinit. 21. Jacobi, in the Kings Bench.
492 SHORTRIDGE and HILL's Case.
SHortridge brought an Action upon the Case against Hill for ravishing of his
Ward; and the Writ was contra pacem, without the words Vi and armis, Lib. Dent.
366. where three Presidents are of Actions upon the Case, without Vi and armis:
An Action upon the case for doing of any thing against a Statute, must be
contra pacem. Ley Chief Justice, Recovery in this Action may be pleaded in
Bar in a Writ of Ravishment of Ward brought. Dodderidge Justice, The Action
of Trespass at the common Law, is only for the taking away of the Ward; and
here he has elected his Action at the common Law, and then he shall not have
an Action upon the Statute, viz. a Ravishment of Ward; but here the Action upon
the Case is brought for the taking and detaining of the Ward, so as he cannot
prefer him in marriage; and upon this special matter the Action upon the Case
lies without the words Vi and armis. A Writ of Ravishment of Ward ought to be
brought in the Common Pleas; but yet you may bring a Writ of Ravishment of Ward
in this Court, if the Defendant be in the custody of the Marshal of the
Marshalsey, for in such special Case it shall be brought in this Court: if
there be an extraordinary matter besides the Trespass, then an Action upon the
Case lies; as when A. contracts with B. to make an estate unto B. of Bl. Acre
at Michaelmas, if C. enter into Bl. Acre, A. may have an Action upon the Case
against C. for the special damage which may happen to him, by reason that he
is not able to perform that contract by reason of the entry of C. and he shall
declare contra pacem, but not Vi and armis.

Trinit. 21. Jacobi, in the King's Bench.
493 BAKER and BLAKAMORE's Case.
IN Trespass, the Defendant pleaded, That J. S. being seized in Fee, gave the
Lands unto Baker and the Heirs of his body, and conveyed the Lands, by descent,
to four Daughters; and Blakamore the Defendant, as servant to one of the
Daughters, did justify. The Plaintiff did reply, That the said J. S. was
seized in Fee, and gave the same to Baker and the Heirs Males of his Body, and
conveyed the Land by descent to himself, as Heir Male, absque hoc, that J. S.
was seized in Fee. Henden Sergeant did demur in Law upon the Replication; and
took Exception to the Traverse, for that here he traverseth the Seisin of J. S.
whereas he ought to have traversed the gift in tail made by J. S. for the being
seized is but an inducement not traverseable, and therefore he ought to have
traversed the gift in tail, for then he had traversed the seisin; for he could
not give the Lands in tail, if that he were not seized thereof in Fee, L. 5. E.
4 9. there in Formedon, the Tenant would have traversed the Seisin of the
Donor, but the book is ruled, that the Traverse ought to be of the gift in
tail, and that includes the Seisin. Bridgment for the Plaintiff, and said,
That the Sergeant is of opinion contrary to the Books, when he says
positively, that you ought to traverse the gift in tail, and not the seisin of
the Donor. The Case shortly is, A. being seized in Fee, makes a gift in tail to
B. and that descends to four daughters, etc. And the Plaintiff replies, That A.
was seized in Fee, and gave the Lands to B. and to his Heirs Males; and the
Plaintiff claims the entail as Heir Male: and the Defendants under the
general tail, absque hoc that A. was seized in Fee, 27. H. 8. 4. by
Englefield, If in Trespass the Defendant plead the Feoffment of a stranger, and
the Plaintiff says, That he was seized in Fee, and made a Lease for years to
the said stranger, who enfeoffed the Defendant, he need not to traverse, absque
hoc, that he was seized in Fee, C. 6. part 24. The seisin in Fee is
traversable, Br. Travers. 372. acc. Dodderidge Justice, The seisin in this Case
is traverseable. Ley Chief Justice, Take away the Seisin and then no gift, and
therefore the Seisin here is Traverseable. Haughton and Chamberlain Justices
agreed. The Court resolved, That either the Seisin in Fee, or the gift in tail,
is traverseable. Dodderidge Justice, If you both convey from one and the same
person, then you must traverse the conveyance. It is a rule C. 6. part 24.
there the Books are cited, which warrants the traverse of either. Quod nota. It
was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Trinit. 21. Jacobi, In the Kings Bench.
494 Sir EDWARD FISHER and WARNER's Case.
THE Testator being indebted unto Fisher, made Warner his Executor: and Warner
in consideration that Fisher would forbear suing of him upon the Assumpsit of
the Testator, did promise to pay him Fifty Pounds; and in an Action upon the
Case upon this promise, Warner pleaded Non Assumpsit in the Common Pleas, and
it was found for the Plaintiff. And a Writ of Error was brought in this Court,
because it was not showed for what consideration the Testator did promise. 2.
Because it was not showed, That Warner the Executor had Assets in his hands. It
was said by the Council of Sir Edward Fisher, That they need not show that he
has Assets, because the Defendant Warner was sued upon his own promise. C. 9.
part 94. The Testator made a promise to pay to Fisher fifty pound, and died;
The Executor in consideration of the forbearance of a Suit upon that promise of
the Testator, does assume to pay, etc. The Jury find for the Plaintiff. The
Error is, that no time is limited, nor no place where the promise was made; and
also it is not showed when the Testator died, and so it is not showed whether
the promise were made in the life time of the Testator, or not? for if it were
in the life time of the Testator, then the promise was void. Nor is the time of
the forbearance showed: and so no good consideration. Hill. 5. Jacobi, a
consideration to forbear paululum tempus, is no good consideration by Cook. And
the like case was adjudged, 36. Eliz. Rot. 448. Sackbdos case. We do allege de
facto, that we have forborne our Suit, and that the Defendant has not paid us
the money: Dodderidge Justice, It is alleged, that the Plaintiff paid money to
the Testator, upon which he promised; And the Action now brought, is upon the
promise of the Executor: Part of the promise, is, That he paid the fifty pound
to the Testator, and that ought to be proved in evidence to the Jury: C. 6.
part Gregory's case, if it be not specially named how he shall prove it.
Haughton, to forbear to sue him, is for all his life time, and not paululum
tempus. Dodderidge Justice, Exception was taken, that he does not show that the
Testator was dead at the time of the promise by the Executor: It was showed,
That after the death of the Testator, that he took upon him the Execution of
the Will, and then promised; and that of necessity must be after the death of
the Testator.

Trinit. 21. Jacobi, in the King's Bench.
495 WILLIAM's and FLOYD's Case.
IN an Ejectione firm, The Array was challenged, because it was made at the
Nomination of the Plaintiff: And by consent of the parties, two Atturneys of
the Court did try the Array: The question was, Whether the Trial of the Array
was good? It was said by the Council which argued for the Defendant, That it
was not good. If one of the four Knights be challenged, the three other Knights
shall try that challenge; and if he be found favorable, he shall be drawn; and
if another of the Knights be challenged, he shall be tried by the other two;
and if one of the two be challenged, then a new Writ shall issue forth to cause
three Knights to appear. 9. E. 4. 46. The two which quash the Array ought to
try the Array of the Tales; for that they are strangers to them. The assent of
the parties in this case is to no purpose; for the consent of the parties
cannot alter the Law, neither can the King alter the Law, but an Act of
Parliament may alter the Law. 29. Ass. 4 19. H. 6. 9. by Newton. 27. H. 8. 13.
Where a trial cannot be out of the County by the assent of the parties; and if
it be, it is error. By the Council of the other side, contrary* This trial of
the Array is much in the discretion of the Judges; for sometimes it is tried by
the Coroners, and they are strangers to the Array. 21. Ass. 26. 20. Ass. 10.
there the Judges at their discretion appointed one of the Array, and the
Coroners to try it; 27. Ass. 28. there, upon such a challenge it was tried by
the Coroners: and Shard said, That the trial by any of them was sufficient,
and by Forriners de Circumstantibus, 31. Ass. 10. so as it rests much in the
discretion of the Judges. 29. Ass. 3. there it was denied: But note, That that
was in Oyer and Terminer; and there it did not appear that the Array was made
at the Nomination of one of the parties: but in other challenges it may be
tried by one of the Panell. But in our case, they were all challenged, was the
objection. 9. E. 4. 20. Billing. For if one of the parties will nominate all of
the Jurours to the Sheriff, it is presumed that they are all partial: and
(...) ^his case, the whole Array is challenged: but in other cases he may
challenge one or two of the Array, and yet the others may be indifferent. But
admit it had been error, yet being by the assent of the parties, it is no
error. Baynams case in Dyer. A Venire facias by assent of the parties was
awarded to one of the Coroners, and good: Dyer 367. 43. E. 3. Office of Court,
12. One of the twelve does depart; If the Justices do appoint one of the panell
to supply his place, it is erroneus; but yet if it be with the assent of the
parties, it is good; So in our case, 21. E. 4. 59. Brian says, That he has
not seen more then two to try the Array, yet by assent of the parties more may
try it, 30. E. 3. 2. or 39. E. 3. 2. In a Writ of Right, process issued to the
Sheriff to return four Knights; he returns two Knights, and two Esquires,
without making any mention that there were no more Knights in the County, the
same is error; yet if two Knights and two Esquires had been returned by the
assent of the parties, it had been good. 6. E. 6. Dyer. A man cannot enter for
Non-payment of Rent without a demand, yet by assent of the parties it may be
good. 22. H. 6. 59. the trial in favor of Liberty ought to be in the same
County where the Action is brought, and not where the Manor is: But 44. E. 3.
6. by the assent of the parties it is sufficient. In the Abridgement of the
Book of Assizes 48. the books are cited to the contrary; there it is said to be
no Law, where the Coroners ^ry the panell: I agree, that where it is not
against a fundamental point of the common Law, that the consent of the parties
tollit errores: Dodderidg Justice, Two questions are in this case, 1. If this
trial be good. 2. Admitting it be not good, whether the assent of the parties
does make it good. First it is a mere matter in the discretion of the Justices,
which is not tied to any strict rule in Law: In the Book of the Assizes it was
tried by the Coroners, because it was in the discretion of the Justices: And
the Coroners are Ministers to the Court, and ought to attend at the Assizes.
The Book of the Assizes is the Report of the Cases which happened at the
Assizes in the Circuits of the Justices; and they are not Term cases. For the
Exception which is taken by him who made the Abridgment of the Book of Assizes,
is of no moment; for the Author thereof was but a Student, and no Councellor
at Law. In these Courts the Coroners do not attend; therefore sometimes two,
four, or six of the Panell are chosen to try those who are challenged, as the
Court shall think fit; and if the Triers cannot agree, we put them together
into a room, and swear one to keep them, (as a Jury is kept:) so as you see it
rests much in the discretion of the Justices, and Court: And if there were a
certain rule to try it, then it ought to be strictly observed. 31. Ass. 10.
there the trial was de Circumstantibus. 2. The assent of the parties does make
it good. It is not a trial in point of the right of the cause, but only of the
indifferency of the Ministers: The Array was challenged, because the Sheriff
made it at the request of one of the parties; and the Sheriff has confessed
it upon his Examination. The principal Array shall be first tried; and if that
be quashed, then the Tales shall not be tried; but if it be affirmed, then two
of the Panell shall try the Panell, and two of the Tales shall try the Tales.
This is a trial only of indifference, and not of the fundamental point of the
Cause. If the Plaintiff require the Venire facias to the Coroners, because
that the Sheriff is chosen; the Defendant shall be examined if he will agree
to it: if he will not agree, but the Sheriff returns the Jury, the Defendant
in that case shall not challenge the Jury, or any of the Array: The four
Knights in the Writ of Right shall choose the other twenty of the Grand Assize,
who shall be joined with them, and they shall be the Judges of the twenty, when
they are named by them, 39. E. 3. 2. Haughton Justice, The appearance by
Attorney by assent of the parties, is not error, although by the Law the
Plaintiff ought for to appear in proper person. Chamberlain Justice would be
advised, because he had not seen the Books. Ley chief Justice, When the whole
Panel, as in this case, comes to be challenged, then it is in the discretion of
the Justices to choose triers; and chiefly in this case, because all the Array
is partial. If the Coroners be absent, (...) is good to take two Atturneys of
the Court, who the Court know to be honest by their honest carriage, and fair
practice. The assent of the parties strengthens this case. It is a rule, That
the assent of the parties cannot make that good which is against any
fundamental point of the Law: therefore it is best to view the Presidents, and
to draw a Jurour; but that we cannot do of our selves by the Law, yet with the
assent of parties we may do it. It is a contempt and a deceit to the Court, if
his assent be entered upon record, and notwithstanding that the Defendant will
question the matter by a Writ of Error, or otherwise relinquish his consent;
and for such contempt the Court may commit him, and fine him also: But if the
matter be not a matter of Record, but be only by a Rule of the Court, then we
may award an Attachment only against the party. In this case, the trial of
the Panell was good, and so was it afterward adjudged by the whole Court. Quod
nota.

Pasch. 3. Caroli, in the King's Bench.
496 EVERS and OWEN's Case.
SAmson Evers the Guardian of Compton Evers, did sue Owen the Executor of the
Lady Anne Evers for a Legacy, before the Council of the Marches of Wales.
Henden Sergeant moved for a Prohibition, and said, That by Law, no intent of a
Will ought to be averred contrary to the words of the Will, C. 5. part 68.
Cheyneys case: And so no equity shall be taken upon a foreign intent, contrary
to that which is in the Will. 2. He said, That the party might not sue in the
Marches of Wales for a Legacy; for that the party ought to sue for the same in
the Ecclesiastical Court. Banks* contrary, They may proceed there in an
Ecclesiastical Cause, wherein there is cause of equity: The Statute of 34. H.
8. cap. 26. gives power unto them to proceed as they proceeded heretofore by
Commission. And before that Statute they proceeded there in case of a Legacy;
and so are diverse Presidents; therefore no Prohibition is to issue. Samson
Evers is the Kings Attorney for the Marches of Wales, and his personal
attendance is requisite there: And this Court cannot grant a Prohibition to
stay a Suit, when he cannot sue in this Court for the same thing. Finch
Recorder contrary. If you show Presidents, yet they will not bind this Court,
and give power unto them to hold plea of that which they ought not to hold plea
of. It is usual to grant a Prohibition, if the Court of Requests holds plea of
a Legacy, if it be not by reason of some special circumstance; and it is
usual to dismiss Legacies out of the Chancery: And no Privileges shall be
granted unto an Executor, Administrator, or Guardian. Hyde Chief Justice: Two
have an Obligation as Executors, and the one releaseth; it is good, and a good
cause of equity against him who releaseth: A Will is made, and A. is made
Executor, and no trust is declared in the Will; and at his death the Testator
declares, That his Will is for the benefit of his children: May not this intent
be averred? there is nothing more common. Dodderidg Justice, For the making of
an Estate, you cannot aver otherwise then the Will is; but as to the
disposition of the estate, you may aver. Jones Justice, There are two
Executors; one commits wast, or releaseth, etc. the other has no remedy at the
common Law, for that breach of Trust. The reason of Chenyes case, C. 5. part
is, Whosoever will devise Lands, ought to do it by writing; and if it be
without the writing, it is out of the Will, although his intent appears to be
otherwise. Before the Statute of 34. H. 8. cap. 26. The Marches of Wales held
plea of all things, for things were not then settled. But the said Statute gave
them power and authority to hear and determine such causes and matters as are,
or afterward shall be assigned to them by the King, as heretofore had been
used, and accustomed: Now if it be assigned by the King, yet if it be not a
thing accustomed and used to be pleaded there, it is not there pleadable. So if
it be within the Instructions made by the King, yet if it be not used and
accustomed, it is not pleadable there; but it ought to be within the
Instructions, and also accustomed and usual; Adultery, Symony, and
Incontinency, are within their Instructions, and are accustomed. The things
being accustomed to be pleaded there, have the strength of an Act of
Parliament; but by the Instructions they have no power to proceed in case of
Legacy. Then let us see if the same be included within the general words
(things of Equity) within the Instructions: And then I will be tender in
delivering of my opinion, If a Legacy be pleadable there or not? Whitlock
Justice: The Clergy desired that they might forbear to intermeddle with
Legacies: Five Bishops one after the other, were Presidents of the Marshes
there: and they draw into the Marches spiritual business: but originally it
was not so; their power was larger then now it is, for they had power in
criminal causes, but now they are restrained in that power. There is a common
Law Ecclesiastical, as well as of our common Law. Jus Commune Ecclesiasticum,
as well as Jus Commune La^cum. The whole Court was of opinion, That the Kings
Attorney in the Marches being out, we ought to have privilege there. In the
Chancery, there is a Latin Court for the Officers of the Court, and the Clarks
of the Court for to sue in. But in the principal Case, a Prohibition was not
granted, because there was much matter of Equity concerning the Legacy. It was
adjourned.

Pasch. 3. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
497 HARLEY and REYNOLD's Case.
HArvey brought an Action of Debt upon an Escape against Reynolds (Hill. 1.
Car.) Reynolds pleaded, That before the day of Escape, scil. the twentieth day
of January 1. Car. That the Prisoner brake Prison and escaped; and that he
afterward, viz. before the bringing of this Action; viz. 8. die Maii 2. Car.
took the Prisoner again upon fresh Suit. Anderws for the Plaintiff, Reynolds is
bound to the last day. viz. 8. Maii, and not the day before the bringing of the
Action; for the Bill bears date, Hill. 1. Car. and the term is but one day in
Law, c. 4* part 71. and so no certain day is set for the Jury to find. The day
which Reynolds sets that he retook the Prisoner is the eighth day of May, and
he shall be bound by that, Com. 24. a. 33. H. 6. 44. Where a day is uncertain,
a day ought to be set down, for a day is material for to draw things in issue,
C. 4. part 70. the Plaintiff showed, That 7. Maii 30. Eliz. by Deed indented
and enrolled in the Common Pleas Ter. Pasc. in the said thirtieth year (within
six months according to the Statute) for the consideration of One hundred
Pounds, did bargain and sell: But he further said, That after the said seventh
day of May, in the said thirtieth year, he levied a Fine of the Lands to the
now Plaintiff; after which Fine, viz. 29. Aprilis, in the said thirtieth year,
the said Deed indented was enrolled in the Common Pleas. Note, That another day
more certain was expressed, therefore the mistaking of the day shall not hurt:
And there it was helped by Averment, 8. H. 6. 10. Repleader 7. In Waste, the
Defendant said, That such a day, before the Writ brought, the Plaintiff entered
upon him, before which entry no Waste was done, etc. Strange, It might be that
he entered again; wherefore the Court awarded that he should recover. Co.
Entries 178. In Dower the Tenant vouched a stranger in another County, who
appeared; and there the Replication is, viz. die Lunae, etc. so the day ought
to be certain. 19. H. 6. 15. In a Formedon, If the Defendant plead a thing
which by the Law he is not compelled to do; and the Plaintiff reply, That she
is a Feme sole and not Covert, it is good; but if he plead, That such a day,
year and place, there the Trial shall be at the particular place, otherwise the
Trial shall be at the place where the Writ bears date. C. 4 part, Palmers Case;
If the Sheriff sell a Term upon an Extent, and puts a Date to it, scil. recites
the Date, and mistakes it, the sale is not good, for there is no such Lease,
Dyer 111. Then it is said 31. Octobris, and there by the computation of time it
was impossible; and so here the time is impossible, scil. that 8. Maii 2. Car.
should be before Hill. 1. Caroli; for the taking is after the Action brought,
and so naught to bar the Plaintiff: it is the substanre of his bar upon which
he relieth, and so no matter of form: 20. H. 6. there upon an Escape, the
Defendant said, That such a day, ante impetrationem billae in this Court; scil.
such a day, he retook him; and the day after the scilicet, is after the
purchase of the Writ: there the scilicet and the day expressed shall be void,
and it shall be taken according to the first day expressed: if the Sheriff had
retaken him before the filing of the Writ, it had been a good plea in Bar,
otherwise not* Calthrope contrary, H. brought debt, Hill. 16. Jacobi against
Cropley; and 9. Junii 19. Jacobi, Cropley was taken in Execution, and delivered
in Execution to R. by Habeas Corpus; afterward 1. Caroli, Cropley escaped, and
H. brought debt against R. who pleaded a special Plea, and showed, That 20.
Januarii 1. Caroli. Cropley brake prison and escaped, and that he made fresh
Suit until he took him; and that before the purchase of the Bill; scil. 8 Maii
2. Caroli, he was retaken, 16. E. 4. If he retake him before the Action
brought, it is a good bar; so if the taking be before the Action brought, R. is
excused. We say, That postea, and ante the purchasing of the Bill; and I
suppose we need not lay down any day, but the postea, and ante makes it certain
enough. If the viz. be repugnant to our allegation, it is surplusage. 41. Eliz.
in Communi Banco, Bishops Case, Trespass is brought for a Trespass supposed to
be done 4. Maii 39. El. It is ruled in that Case, That the videlicet does not
vitiate the premises; because it is surplusage* Trinit. 34. El. in the Kings
Bench, Garford and Gray's Case, In an Avowry: it was showed, That such an Abbot
surrendered, 32. H. 8. and that the King was seized of the possessions of the
said Abbey; and that postea, scilicit 28. H. 8. the King did demise, and that
the same descended to King Ed. 6. there it was ruled that postea had been
sufficient, though he had not showed the year of the demise of the King; so
here, postea, and ante do express that he was taken before the Bill brought.
Dodderidge Justice, If the day had been certain at the first, and then he
comes and sueth, that postea, videlicet such a day, and alleges another day
which is wrong, there the videlicet is not material; but if the first day be
uncertain, then the videlicet ought to be at a certain day, otherwise it is not
good. Curia, If you had left out your time, (your videlicet) it had been good,
for you must express a certain time; for when the time is material, it ought
to be certain. If you had laid down a certain day of the purchase of his Bill,
then the ante would have been well enough. Dodderidge Justice, If a thing is
alleged to be done in the beginning of the Term, quaere if that shall be
intended the first day of the Term; if you can make it appear that it must be
intended of necessity of the first day of the Term, then you say somewhat, and
then the videlicet is void and surplusage* Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Pasch. 3. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
498 DEAN and STEELE's Case.
AN Action upon the Case for words, was brought for words spoken in the Court
of Sudbury; and it was laid, That he did speak the words at Sudbury, but did
not say Infra jurisdictionem curiae. 2. The Judgment in the Action upon the
Case was, capiatur: And for these two Errors the Judgment was reversed.

Pasch. 3. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
499 GOD and WINCHE's.
THIS Case was put by Sergeant Astley: A Lease is made for life by Husband and
Wife; and the Covenants were, That he should make such reasonable assurance as
the Counsel of the Lessee should advise; and the Counsel advised a Fine with
warranty by the Husband and Wife, with warranty against the Husband and his
Heirs; and the Defendant did refuse to make the assurance; in an Action of
Covenant brought, it was moved, That it was not a reasonable assurance to have
a Fine with Warranty, because the Warranty did trench to other Land. But the
Court did overruled it, and said, That it is the ordinary course in every Fine
to have a Warranty, and the party may rebut the Warranty.

Pasch. 3. Caroli, in the Kings Bench. 500
IT was cited to be adjudged, That if a man purchase the next avoidance of a
Church with an intent to present his son, and afterward he does present his
son, that it is Symony within the Statute of 31. Eliz.

Ter. Mich. 4. Caroli, in the King's Bench.
501 HILL and FARLEY's Case.
IN Debt brought upon a Bond, the Case was, A man was bound in a Bond, That he
should perform, observe, and keep the Rule, Order, and final end of the
Council of the Marches of Wales. And in Debt brought upon the Bond, the
Defendant pleaded, That the Council of the Marches of Wales nullum fecerunt
ordinem. The Plaintiff replied, That Concilium fecerunt ordinem, that the
Defendant should pay unto the Plaintiff an hundred pound. The Defendant did
demurre in Law upon the Replication: And the only Question was, If the
Plaintiff in his Replication ought to name those of the Council of Wales, who
made the Award by their particular names. Jermyn, who argued for the
Plaintiff, said, That he ought not to name the Counselors by their proper
names; and therefore he said, That if a man be bounden to perform the Order
that the Privy Council shall make, or the Order which the Council should make,
That in Debt upon the same Bond, If the Defendant says that he has performed
Consilium generally of the Council, without showing the particular names of the
Counselors, it is good. And he vouched 10. H. 7. 6. 10. E. 4. 15. and Com.
126. Sir Richard Buckleys case, That the number of the Esliors ought not to be
particularly showed: But in an Action brought upon the Statute of 23. H. 6. he
may declare generally, that he was chosen per majorem numerum, and that is
good. And 10. E. 4. 15. In debt upon a Bond, That the Defendant shall serve the
Plaintiff for a year, in omnibus mandatis suis licitis: The Defendant said,
That he did truly serve the Plaintiff until such a day as he was discharged;
And it is there holden, that he is not compellable to show the certainty of the
services. Banks contrary, and said, That he ought to name the Council by their
particular names: And therefore in this case he ought to have pleaded
specially, as in 9. E. 4. 24. If a man will plead a Divorce, Deprivation, or a
Deraignment, he ought to show before what Judge the Divorce, Deprivation, or
Deraignment was: So 1. H. 7. 10. If a man will plead a Fine, he must show
before what Judges the Fine was levied, although they be Judges of Record. And
he took this difference, That the Judges ought to take notice of the
Jurisdiction of general Courts, which are Courts of Record, and of the
Customs of those Courts: but of particular Courts which have but particular
Jurisdictions, and particular Customs, the Judges are not to take notice of
them, nor of the Laws and Customs of such Courts, if they be not specially
showed unto them. And therefore although it was alleged, That it was the
general usage to plead Awards, or Orders made before the Council of the
Marches of Wales, as in the principal Case, yet he held that the Judges were
not to take notice thereof. And therefore the Counselors who made the Order,
ought to be particularly named. 2. He said that the Replication was not good,
because the Plaintiff in his Replication does not show that the Order was made
by the President, and the Council; for by the Statute of 34. H. 8. it ought to
be made by the President, and the Council. 3. He said, That the Replication was
not good, because the Plaintiff does not show within the Record, that the
matter of which the Order was made, was a matter which was within their
Jurisdiction. It was adjourned.

Mich. 4. Caroli, in the King's Bench.
502 SHUTFORD and BOROUGH's Case.
IN an Action upon the Case upon a Promise, the Case was this, The Defendant
had a dog which did kill five of the Plaintiff's sheep, and the Defendant in
consideration the Plaintiff would not sue him for the said sheep; and also in
consideration that the Plaintiff would suffer the Defendant to do away the
sheep, promised to give him recompense for the said sheep upon request: and the
Plaintiff alleged the promise to be made, 18. Jacobi, and that afterward 2.
Caroli, he did request so much of the Defendant for the said sheep: The
Defendant pleaded in Bar the Statute of 21. Jacobi, cap 16. of Limitation of
Actions, and alleged, That the Action was not brought within six years after
the cause of action accrued: which was the promise. And it was adjudged that
the plea in Bar was not good; for it was resolved, That where a thing is to be
done upon request, that there, until request, there is no cause of Action; and
the time and place of the request is issuable. And so was resolved, 1. Caroli,
in the Kings Bench in Peck's Case: and Hill. 16. Jacobi, in the same Court in
Hill and Wades Case; and in the principal Case the request was, 2. Caroli, and
that was within the time limited by the Statute of 21. Jacobi. And the meaning
of the Statute was, but to bar the Plaintiff but from the time that he had
complete cause of Action, and that was not until the request made. And when
diverse things are to be done and performed before a man can have an Action,
there all these things ought to be completed before the Action can be brought.
And therefore, If a man promise to pay I. S. ten pound when he is married, or
when he is returned from Rome, and ten years after the promise, I. S. marries,
or returns from Rome, because the marriage, or the Return from Rome are the
causes of the Action, that the party shall have six years after his marriage,
or return to bring his Action, although that the promise was made ten years
before. And in the principal Case, the cause of Action is the breach, and that
cannot be until after the Request made; and where a Request is material, it
ought to be showed in pleading* And so it was resolved by the whole Court,
(nemine contradicente) that the Action was well brought, and within the time
limited by the Statute. And Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 4. Caroli, in the Star Chamber.
583 FLOYD and Sr THO. CANNON's Case.
IT was agreed by the Lord Keeper Coventry, and the whole Court in this Case,
That if a man did exhibit a Bill against another for oppression; and lays in
this Bill, That the Defendant did oppress A. B. and C. particularly, and an
hundred men generally; That the Plaintiff by his witnesses must prove that the
Defendant has oppressed A. B. and C. particularly, and shall not be allowed to
proceed against the Defendant upon the oppression of the others laid
generally, before his particular oppression of A. B. and C. be proved. But if
the charge laid be general, and not particular, as if the Plaintiff in his
Bill says, That the Defendant has oppressed an hundred men generally, there
he may proceed and examine the oppression of any of them. And Richardson Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas said, That if a man exhibiteth a Bill against
another for extortion, there the Sum certain which he did extort, must be laid
particularly in the Bill. And he cannot say, that the Defendant did extort
diverse sums from diverse men generally. And so was it adjudged in Reignolds Case
in this Court. Also in every oppression there ought to be a threatening of the
party, for the voluntary payment of a greater sum where a lesser is due, cannot
be said extortion. And afterward the Bill of Sir Thomas Cannon was dismissed
for want of proofs ex part Querentis.

Mich. 4. Caroli, in the Star Chamber.
504 HUET and OVERIE's Case.
IN a Riot for cutting of corn, It was agreed by the whole Court, That if a man
has title to corn, although that he comes with a great number to cut it with
Sickles, it is no Riot; but if he has not any title, although that he does not
come with other Weapons then with Sickles, and cutteth down the Corn, it is a
Riot. And it was agreed by the whole Court in this Case, That Witnesses which
were Defendants, and which are suppressed by order of the Court, although that
afterward there he no proceedings against them, yet they shall not be allowed
of at the hearing of the Cause in that Court. And this was declared to be the
constant rule of that Court.

Trinit. 5. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
505 The Earl of PEMBROKE and BOSTOCK's Case.
IN a Quare Impedit Judgment was given; and the same Term a Writ of Error is
delivered to the same Court, before a Writ to the Bishop is awarded to admit
the Clark. It was holden by the whole Court, That the Writ of Error ought to
have been allowed, without any other Supersedeas, because a Writ of Error is a
Supersedeas in it self* Whitlock Justice, If in this Writ of Error the
Judgment be affirmed, the Defendant in the Writ of Error shall have damage.

506 The Bailiffs, Aldermen, Burgesses, and Commonalty of Yarmouth and COWPER's
Case.
IN a quo Warranto brought against the Bailiffs, Aldermen, etc. they did appear
by Warrant of Attorney; and one of the Bailiffs named in the Warrant did not
appear nor agree to it. It was holden by the whole Court, That the appearance
of the major or greater part, being recorded, was sufficient. And it was also
holden, per curiam, that although the Warrant of Attorney was under another
Seal, then their common Seal, yet being under Seal, and recorded, it cannot be
annulled; Vide 14. H. 4. If two Coroners be, and one makes a return, the same
is good; but if the other does deny it, then it is void.

Mich. 8. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
507 LANCASTER's Case against KIGHTLEY and SINEWS.
Judgment was given in a Scire facias against the Bail. A Writ of Error was
brought by the Defendant in the principal Action and the Bail. And the opinion
of the Court was, That a Writ of Error would not lie, hecause the Judgments
against them were several, but they ought to have several Writs of Error. And
the books of 3. H. 7. 14. 3. E. 4. 10. and 2. Eliz. Dyer 180. were vouched. And
so was it adjudged, Hill. 11. Jacobi, Rot. 1377. in the Exchequer Chamber, in
Doctor Tennants Case. Where a Writ of Error was brought by the Defendant and
the Bail; and it was adjudged, that they could not join in an Writ of Error,
but ought to have several Writs.

Mich. 8. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
508 EVELEY and ESTON'S Case.
IN Trespass; It was found, That a man was Tenant in tail of certain Farm
Lands called Estons; and that a Fine was levied of Lands in Eslington, Eston
and Chilford, whereas Eston lay in another Parish, appell D. Calthrope argued,
That the Land in Eston did pass by the Fine, although the Parish was not
named, for that the Writ of Covenant is a personal Action, and will lie of
Lands in a Hamlet or lieu conus, 8. E. 4: 6. Vide 4. E. 3. 15. 17. Ass. 30. 18.
E. 3. 36. 47. E. 3. 6. 19. E. 3. Brev. 767. 2. He said, That it was good, for
that the Plea went only to the Writ in abatement; but when a Concord is upon
it, which admits it good, it shall not be avoided afterward. 3. He said, That
a Fine being a common assurance, and made by assent of the parties, will pass
the Lands well enough, 7 E. 4. 25. 38. E. 3. 19. And he vouched Pasch. 17.
Jacobi, in the Kings Bench, Rot. 140. Monk and Butlers Case. Where it was
adjudged that a Fine being but an arbitrary assurance, would pass Lands in a
Lieu conus; and so he said it would do in a common recovery. And Richardson
said, That if a Scire facias be brought to execute such a recovery, Null tiel
ville ou Hamlet, is no plea, and the Fine or recovery stands good, Vide 44. E.
3. 21. 21 E. 3. 14 Stone. And the opinion of the Court was, That the Lands did
well pass by the Fine.

Mich. 8. Caroli, in the Kings Bench*
509 CAWDRY and TETLEY's Case.
CAwdry being a Doctor of Physic, the Defendant Praemissorum non ignorans, to
discredit the plaintiff with his Patients, as appeared by the Evidence, spoke
these words to the plaintiff, viz. Thou art a drunken Fool, and an Ass; Thou
were never a Scholar, nor ever able to speak like a Scholar. The opinions of
Jones and Crook Justices, were, that the words were actionable, because they
did discredit him in his Profession; and he has particular loss, when by
reason of those words, others do not come to him. And Palmers Case was vouched:
Where one said of a Lawyer, Thou have no more Law then a Jackanapes; that an
Action did lie for the words: Contrary, if he had said, No more Wit. And
William Waldrons Case was also vouched; where one said, I am a true Subject,
thy Master is none; that the words were actionable.

Mich. 4. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
510 The King, and BAXTER and SIMMON's Case.
THE Case was this, Tenant in tail the Remainder in tail, the Remainder in Fee
to Tenant in tail in possession: Tenant in tail in Remainder by Deed enrolled,
reciting that he had an estate tail in Remainder, Granted his Remainder and all
his estate and right unto the King and his Heirs, Proviso, that if he pay ten
shillings at the Receipt of the Exchequer, that then the Grant shall be void.
Tenant in tail in possession suffers a common Recovery, and afterward devises
the Lands to I. S. and dies without Issue 18. Jacobi. Afterward 21. Jac. he
in the Remainder in tail dies without issue; but no seizure is made, nor
Offense found, that the lands were in the Kings hands.

Noy, who argued for the King: The first Point is, When Tenant in tail recites
his estate, and grants all his estate and right to the King and his Heirs, what
estate the King has? And if by the death of Tenant in tail without issue, the
estate of the King be so absolutely determined, that the Kings possession needs
not to be removed by Amoveas manum: And he argued, That when the Lands are once
in the King, that they cannot be out of him again, but by matter of Record. 8.
E. 3. 12. Com. 558. And a bare entry upon the King, does not put the King out
of possession of that which was once in him: And so was it adjudged 34. Eliz.
in the Lord Paget's Case* as Walter chief Baron said. And Noy took this
difference, 8. H. 5. Traverse 47. and 8. E. 2. Traverse 48. If a particular
estate does determine before that the King seize, there the King cannot
afterward seize the Lands. But if the King has once the Lands in his hands or
possession, there they cannot be divested out of him but by matter of Record.
So F. Not. Br. 254. If a man be seized of Lands in the right of his Wife, and
be outlawed for Felony, for which the Lands come into the Kings hands, and
afterward he who is outlawed dies; there a Writ of Diem clausit extremum
shall issue forth: which proves, That by the death of the Husband the Lands
are not immediately out of the King, and settled in the Wife again. 22. E. 4.
Fitz. Petition 9. Tenant in tail is attainted of Treason, and the Lands seized
into the Kings hands; and afterward Tenant in tail dies without Issue, he in
the Remainder is put to his Petition: which proves, that the Lands are not
presently after the death of Tenant in tail without issue, out of the King.
But he agreed the Cases: If Tenant in tail acknowledges a Statute, or
grants a Rent charge, and dies, that the Rent is gone and determined by his
death, as it is agreed in 14. Assisarum. The second point argued by Noy, was;
That although that there was not any seizure or Offense found which entitled
the King, Yet the Deed enrolled in the Chancery which is returned in this
Court, did make sufficient title for the King: and as 8. E. 3. p. 3. is, The
Judges of Courts ought to Judge upon the Records of the same Courts. In 8. H.
7. 11. a Bailiff showed, That a Lease was made to T. his Master for life, the
Remainder to the King in Fee, and prayed in Aid of the King: And the Plaintiff
in Chancery prayed a Procedendo: And it was ruled That a Procedendo should not
be granted without examination of the Kings title. Thirdly, he said, That in
this case he who will have the Lands out of the possession of the King, ought
to show forth his title; and in the principal case it does not appear that the
Defendant had any title. Vide 10. H. 7. 13. Athowe Sergeant argued for the
Defendant, and he said, That in this case the King had an estate but for the
life of Tenant in tail. And therefore he said, That If Tenant in tail grant
totum statum suum, that an estate but for his own life passes, as Litt. is,
145. and 13. H. 7. 10. acc. So If Tenant for life the remainder in tail be,
and he in the Remainder releaseth to Tenant for life in possession, nothing
passes but for the life of Tenant in tail. 19. H. 6. 60. If Tenant in tail be
attainted of Treason or Felony, and Offense is found, and the King seiseth the
lands, he has an estate but for the life of Tenant in tail. And he cited 35.
Eliz. C. 2 part 52. Blithmans case. Where Tenant in tail Covenanted to stand
seized to the use of himself for his own life, and after his death to the use
of his eldest son in tail, and afterward he married a wife and died; that the
wife should not be endowed: for when he had limited the use to himself for his
life, he could not limit ar^ Remainder over. And Edwards Case, adjudged in the
Court of Wards, which was, That there was Tenant for life the Remainder in
tail, he in the Remainder granted his Remainder to I. S. and his heirs; and
afterward Tenant for life dyed, and then the grantee dyed, his heirs within
age, and it was adjudged that the heir of the garntee should not be in ward,
because the Tenant in tail could not by his Grant grant a greater estate then
for his own life. But he said, That in the principal Case it appears, That
the Tenant in tail in Remainder has particularly recited his estate. And where
it appears in the Conveyance it self, that he has but an estate in tail, a
greater estate shall not pass. As if Tenant for life grants a Rent to one
and his heirs, the same at the first sight seems to be a good Rent in Fee; but
when it appears in the Conveyance that the grantor was but Tenant for life,
there, upon the Construction of the Deed it self, it cannot be intended that he
granted a Fee, but that an estate for life passed only in the Rent. Secondly,
he argued, That although the estate in tail in the principal case was an
abeyance; Yet a Common Recovery would bar such estate tail in abeyance. And
therewith agrees C. 2. part Sr Hugh Cholmleys Case. 3. He said, That the
estate was out of the King, and vested in the party without any Offense found,
as 49. E. 3. Isabell Goodcheaps case. A man devised houses in London holden of
the King in tail, and if the Donee dyed without Issue, that the Lands should be
sold by his Executors. The devisee died without Issue, The bargain and sale of
the Lands by the Executor does divert the estate out of the King without
Petition, or Monstrans de Droit. So, If there be Tenant in tail the Remainder
in tail, and Tenant in tail ^n Remainder levieth a fine of his Remainder to the
King, and afterward dies without Issue, the Kings estate is determined, and
there needs no Petition or Monstrans de Droit. 4. He said, That in the
principal case, nothing was in the King, because it does not appear that
there was any seizure, or Offense found to entitle the King. And the Tenant in
tail in the Remainder died in the life of King James; and then if the Kings
estate were then determined as before by the death of the Tenant in tail, the
King which now is never had any title. And he said, that he needed not to show
a greater title then he had. And he took a difference when Tenant in tail
does only defend or make defense, and when he makes title to Lands; in the one
Case he ought for to show, That the Tenant in tail died without issue, and in
the other Case not: And therefore in the principal case he demanded Judgment
for the Defendant. The Case was adjourned to another day.

Mich. 4. Caroli, in the Star Chamber.
511 TAILOR and TOWLIN's Case.
A Bill was preferred against the Defendant, for a Conspiracy to Indict the
plaintiff of a Rape. And the Plaintiff aleadged in his Bill, That an Indictment
was preferred by the Defendant against the Plaintiff before the Justices of
Assise and Nisi prius in the County of Suffolk; And did not lay it in his Bill,
that the Indictment was preferred before the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail delivery: and the same was holden by the Court to be a good Exception to
the Bill, for that the Justices of Assise and Nisi prius, have not power to
take Indictments. But afterward upon veiw of the Bill, because the Conspiracy
was the principal thing tryable and examinable in this Court, and that was
well laid in the Bill, the Bill was retained, and the Court proceeded to
Sentence. And in this Case Richardson Justice said, That in Conspiracy the
matter must be laid to be false et malitiose: and if it be laid for a Rape,
It must be laid, that there was recens persecutio of it, otherwise it will
argue a Consent. And therefore, because the Defendant did not prefer an
Indictment of Rape, in convenient time after the Rape supposed to be done, but
concealed the same for half a years time, and then would have preferred a Bill
of Indictment against the plaintiff for the same Rape, he held that the
Indictment was false and malicious. And Hyde Chief Justice said, That upon
probable proof a man might accuse another before any Justice of Peace, of an
Offense; and although his accusation be false, yet the Accuser shall not be
punished for it. But where the Accusation is malicious and false, it is
otherwise; and for such Accusation he shall be punished in this Court.

Trinit. 8. Caroli, in the King Bench.
513 JONES and BALLARD's Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for these words, viz These Jones are
proper Witnesses, they will swear any thing; They care not what they say; They
have already forsworn themselves in the Chancery, and the Lord keeper Committed
them for it. Jermyn. took Exceptions, because it was not said to be in the
Court of Chancery; nor that it was in any Deposition there taken upon Oath. But
it was adjudged per Curiam, That the Action would lie; and Jones Justice said,
that the Addition [in the Chauncery] was as much as if he had said, he was
perjured there. And H^msies case was vou^hed by him: Where one said of a
Witness, presently after a Trial at the Guild Hall in London, You have now
forsworn your self, That it was adjudged that the words were actionable.

Trinit. 8. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
513. SYMME's and SMITH's Case.
A Woman being entitled to copyhold Lands of the Manor of D, did covenant,
upon reasonable request to be made unto her, to surrender the Copyhold Land
according to the Custom of the Manor. And it was found That the Custom of the
Manor is, That a surrender may be made either in person, or by Letter of
Attorney: and that the plaintiff did request the woman to make the surrender by
a Letter of Attorney; which she refused to do. And whether she ought to
surrender presently, or might first advise with her Council, was the Question.
It was argued for the plaintiff, that she ought to do it presently: And
Munser's Case, C. 2. part, and 16. Eliz. Dyer. 337. Sir Anthony Cooks Case
were vouched, that she was to do it at her peril: And the Election in this
Case was given to the Covenantee; and he might require it to be done either in
Court in person, or by Letter of Attorney: And C. 2. part, Sir Rowland Heywards
Case: and C. 5. part, Hallings Case was vouched to that purpose. Rolls
contrary, for the Defendant: And he said, That the woman was to have convenient
time to do it: and the words are upon reasonable request, which implies a
reasonable time to consider of it: And there might be many occasions, both in
respect of her self and of the Common wealth, that she could not at that ^ime
do it. And Hill. 37. Eliz. in the Common Pleas, PERPOYNT and THIMBELBYES Case:
A man Covenants to make Assurances; It was adjudged he shall have reasonable
time to do it: In 27. Eliz. the opinion of Popham was* That if a man be bounden
to make such an Assurance as Council shall advise: there, if Council advise
an Assurance, he is bound to make it. But if it were such [Reasonable
Assurance] as Council shall advise; There, If the Council do advise, That he
shall enter into, seal and deliver a Bond of a thousand pound for the payment
of an hundred pound at a day; he is not bound to do it, because it is not
reasonable. Vide 9. Ed 4. 3. cap. 6. part Bookers Case. Doct. and Stud. 56. 14.
H. 8. 23. Secondly, He said, That the request in the principal Case was not
according to the Covenant: for the election in this case was on the woman's
part, and not on the Covenantees part, and she was to do the act, viz. to
surrender: And where election is given of two things, the same cannot be taken
from the party: and if it should be so in the principal Case, the Covenantee
should take away the election of the Covenanter. And where the manner of
Assurance is set down by the parties, there they cannot vary from it; and in
this case the manner is set down, in which the Covenanter has the election,
because she is to do the act. And he said, That the woman was not bounden
afterward to surrender in Court upon this request, because the request was as
it were a void request: And it is employed by the words, That she in person
ought to make the Surrender: and so he prayed Judgment for the Defendant. It
was adjourned.

Trinit. 8. Caroli, in the King's Bench.
514. HYE and Dr. WELLS Case.
DOctor William Wells sued Hye in the Ecclesiastical Court for Defamation, for
saying to him, that he lied: And the Plaintiff prayed a Prohibition: It was
argued for the Defendant, that in this Case no Prohibition should go; For it
was said, that by the Statute of 21. Edw. 1. of Consultation; When there is no
Writ given in the Chancery for the party grieved in the Temporal Court, there
the Spiritual Court shall have the Jurisdiction: and in this Case there is no
Writ given by Law. And Fitzherbert Natura Brevium 53. h. a Consultation does
not lie properly, but in case where a man cannot have his Recovery by the
Common Law in the Kings Courts: for the words of the Writ of Consultation are,
viz. Proviso quod quicquid in juris nostri regii derogationem cedere valcat
aliqualiter per vos nullatenus attemptetur: And Vide Register 149. Falsarius is
to be punished in the Spiritual Court. And Fitzherb. Not. Brev. 51. I. A man
may sue in the Spiritual Court, where a man defames him, and publishes him
for false. Vide Linwood in cap. de foro comp^tenti. acc.

Trin. 6. Jacobi, in the Common Pleas, Boles Case, Rot. 2733. A man called a
poor Vicar, poor rascally Knave; for which the Vicar sued him in the spiritual
Court: And by the opinion of the whole Court, after a Prohibition had been
granted, upon further advice a Consultation was granted. 1. It was objected,
That the party might be punished by the Temporal Judges and Justices for the
words. To which it was answered, That although it might be so, (which in truth
was denied,) yet the party might sue for the same in the spiritual Court. And
many Cases put, That where the party might be punished by either Laws, that
the party had his election in what Court he would sue. And therefore it was
said, That if a man were a drunkard, he might be sued in the Ecclesiastical
Court for his drunkenness; and yet he might be bounden to his good behavior
for the same by the Justices: so the imputed father of a Bastard child, may be
sued for the offense either in the spiritual Court, or at the Common Law by
the Statute of 18. Eliz. and 7. Jacobi. So F. N. B. 52. k. If a man sue in the
spiritual Court for taking and detaining his wife from him to whom he was
lawfully married; if the other party sue a Prohibition for the same, yet he
shall have a Consultation quatenus, pro restitutione uxoris suae duntaxat
prosequitur; and yet he may have an Action at the Common Law De uxore abducta
cum bonis viri; or an Action of Trespass. Maynard, contrary. By the Statute of
Articuli Cl^ri, although that the words be general, yet they do not extend to
all defamations. And by Register 49. where the Suit is for defamation, there
the Cause ought to be expressed and ought to be wholly spiritual, as the Book
is in 29. E. 3. and C. 7. part in Kenn's Case: And in the principal Case, It is
not a matter affirmative which is directly spiritual: And therefore 22.
Jacobi, where a Suit was in the Ecclesiastical Court for these words; Thou art
a base and paultery Rogue, a Prohibition was awarded. And so Vinor and Vinors
Case, Trinit. 7. Jacobi, in the King's Bench, Thou art a drunken woman, Thou
art drunk over night, and mad in the morning. 2. He said, That Crimen falsi in
the spiritual Court, is meant of counterfeiting of the Seal, or of Forgery:
and Crimen falsi cannot be intended a lie. If in ordinary speech one says,
That Is a lie; If the other reply, You lie; that is no defamation: for Qui
primum peccat ille facit rixam. Trinit. 42. Eliz. Lovegrove and Br^wens Case. A
man said to a Clark, a spiritual person, Thou art a Woodcock, and a Fool: for
which words he sued him in the spiritual Court; and in that Case, a
Prohibition was awarded. It was adjourned.

Trinit. 8. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
515 GWYN and GWYN's Case.
A Quod ei deforceat was brought against two, they appeared and pleaded
several Pleas, and the issues were found against both of them, and a joint
Judgment was given against them both; and they brought a Writ of Error
thereupon in the Kings Bench. And the opinion was, That the Judgment was
Erroneous, and that the Writ of Error would well lie. So in a Writ of Dower
brought against two Tenants in common, who plead several Pleas, the Judgment
must be according to the Writ. But Barkley said, That if in a Writ of right by
two, the Mise is joined but in one Issue, where several Issues are, the
Judgment ought to be several. Quaere, quia obscure.

Trinit. 8. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
516 BLAND's Case.
THE Case was this, Thomas, Spence was a Lessee of Lands for one hundred years;
and he and Jane his Wife, by Indenture, for valuable consideration, did assign
over to Tisdale, yiedling and paying to Thomas Spence and his Wife and the
Survivor, the Rent of seventeen Pounds yearly, and every year during the term;
Proviso, that if the Rent be arrere by forty days, that Thomas and his Wife,
or the Survivor of them should enter. Thomas Spence died, his Administrator did
demand the Rent, and being denied, entered for the Condition broken. Calthrope
argued, That the reservation to the Wife was void because she had not any
interest in the Land, and also never sealed the Indenture of Assignment, but
was as a stranger to the Deed, and so he said that the Wife could not enter for
the condition broken, nor make any demand of the Rent. The 2l Point was,
Admitting that the wife could not enter, nor demand the Rent; Whether the
Administrator of the Husband might demand it and enter for the condition
broken; because the words are, Yiedling and paying to Thomas Spence and Jane
his Wife, and the Survivor of them during the term, and no words of Executors
or Assigns are in the Case: and he conceived the Administrator could not; and
so he said it had been resolved in one Butcher and Richmonds Case, about 6.
Jacobi. Banks contrary, and he said, It was a good Rent and well demanded, and
the reservation is good during the Term, to the Husband and Wife; and although
the word Reddendo does not create a rent to the Wife, because the Husband
cannot give to the Wife; yet the Solvendo shall gain a good rent to the Wife,
during the life of the Wife; and the reservation shall be a good reservation to
him and his Administrators during the Survivor. Vide C. 5. part Goodales Case
38. E. 3. 33. 46. E. 3. 18. and admitting that the rent shall be paid to the
Wife, yet the condition shall go to the Administrator. 2. The word Solvendo
makes the Rent good to the Wife, and amounts to an agreement of the Lessee to
pay the Rent to them, and the Survivor of them; and that which cannot be good
by way of reservation, yet is good by way of grant and agreement; and many
times words of reservation or preception, shall enure by way of grant. Vide 10
E. 3 500. 10. Ass 40. 8. H. 4. 19. Richard Colingbrooks Case. 41. E. 3. 15. 13.
E. 2, Feasts and Fasts 108. Richardson Justice, The Reservation being during
the term, is good, and shall go to the Administrator. Jones Justice contrary,
It is good only during the life of the Lessor; and so was it adjudged in Edwyn
and Wottons Case, 5. Jacobi. Crook Justice accorded, The Administrator has no
title, and the Wife is no party to the Deed, and therefore the Rent is gone by
the death of the Husband. If it had been durante termino generally, perhaps it
had been good; but durante termino praedicto to him and his Wife, it cease by
his death. And the words durante termino, couple it to him and his Wife, and
the Survivor; and it cannot be good to the Wife who is no party, nor sealed the
Deed; neither can it inure to the Wife by way of Grant. And the words Reddendo
and Solvendo are Synonima; and the Administrator is no Assignee of the
Survivor, for she cannot assign because she has no right in the Rent. Barkley
Justice, The intention of the parties was, That it should be a continuing Rent,
and Judges are to make such Exposition of Deeds, as that the meaning of the
parties may take effect. I do agree, That the Wife could not have the Rent,
neither by way of Reservation, nor by way of Grant, if she were not a party to
the Indenture: but here she is a party to the Deed; for it is by Deed indented
made by the husband and wife, and the husband has set his Seal to it. And 2.
The Solvendo does work by way of Grant by the intent of the parties: The
Reddendo shall go and relate as to the husband, and the Solvendo to the wife;
and he agreed the Case 33. H. 8. Br. Cases: because there expressum facit
cessare tacitum; but in case of a Lease for years, the words, [Reserving Rent
to him] shall go to the Executor, who represents the person of the Testator;
and 27. El. it was adjudged in Constables Case; and Littleton agrees with it,
That the Executor shall be possessed and is possessed in the right of his
Testator. And therefore if an alien be made an Executor, in an Action brought
by him the Trial shall not be per med^^tatem l^nguae. And this Case is the
stronger, because the Reservation is during the Term. And C. 3. part in
Malleries Case, That the Law shall make such a construction Upon reservation of
Rent upon a Lease as may stand with the intent and meaning of the parties; and
therefore in that, where an Abbot and Covent made a Lease for years, rendering
Rent yearly during the Term, to the Abbot and Covent or to his Successors, it
is all one as if it had been to him and his Successors; and although the words
be joint or in the Copulative, yet by construction of Law, the Rent shall be
well reserved during the term; for if the reservation had been only Annually
during the term, it had been sufficient, and his Successors should have had
the Rent. Quaere the principal Case, for the Judges differed much in their
opinions.

Hill. 8. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
517 The KING against HILL.
AN Information was by the Kings Attorney against Hill and others, upon the
Statute of 32. H. 8. of Maintenance. Where the Point was, A man was out of
Possession, and recovered in an Ejectione firm in May 2. Car. and Habere
Possessionem was awarded; and 29. Sept. 4. Car. he sold the Land: And whether
he might sell presently, or not? was the Question. And it was determined, That
he being put in possession by a Writ of Habere facias possessionem, that he
might sell presently. Vide Com. Crookers Case; and C. Littl. acc. and so was it
holden in Sir John Offley's Case 7. Car. in this Court. Barkley Justice, If a
Disseisor does recover in an Ejectione firm, if he afterward sell the Land,
it is a pretended Title. Jones Justice, It was adjudged 36. El. in the Common
Pleas, in Pages Case, in the Case of a Formedon, That if a man be out of
Possession for seven years, and afterward he recover, that he may sell the
Lands presently. Crook Justice, There is a difference where the recovery is in
a real Action, and where it is in an Ejectione firm. It was Master Browneloes
Case in the Star Chamber, resolved by all the Judges of England, That a Suit in
Chancery cannot make a Title pretended nor Maintenance. Barkley Justice put
this Case, If Husband and Wife bargaineth and sells, whereas the Wife has
nothing in the Land, and afterward a Fine is levied of the same Lands by the
Husband and Wife, it shall have a relation to conclude the Wife, and to make
the Wife to have a Title ab initio. It was adjourned.

Pasch. 10. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
518 BARKER and TAYLOR's Case.
IN an Ejectione firm, the Case upon the Evidence was this, Two Coparceners,
Copyholders in Possession; the one did surrender his reversion in the moity
after his death. Charles Jones moved, That nothing did pass, because he had
nothing in Reversion. Vide C. 5. part Saffyns Case, If a man surrendreth a
Reversion, the Possession shall not pass. 2. It is not good after his death;
so was it adjudged in C. 2. part Buckler and Harvey's Case. Curia, The
Surrender is void, and the same is all one, as well in the Case of Copyhold as
of Freehold: and so was it adjudged 26. El. in Plats Case; and so also was it
adjudged in this Court, 3. Caroli in Simpsons Case.

Pasch. 13. Caroli, in the Kings Bench.
519 HUMFREYS and STUDFIELD's Case.
IN an Action upon the Case for words, the Plaintiff did declare, That he was
Heir apparent to his Father, and also to his younger Brother, who had purchased
Lands, but had no Issue, either Male or Female; and that the Defendant, with an
intent to bring him in disgrace with his Father, and also with his younger
brother; and thereby to make the Father and younger Brother to give away their
lands from the Plaintiff, did maliciously speak these words to the Plaintiff,
Thou art a Bastard, which words were spoken in the presence of the Father and
younger Brother; by reason of speaking which words, the Father and younger
Brother did intend, and afterward did give their Lands from the Plaintiff. And
by the opinion of the whole Court it was adjudged, That the words were
Actionable, and Judgment entered accordingly.

FINIS.
I have perused this Collection of Reports, and think them fit to be printed.

Per me JOHANNEM GODBOLT, Unum Justiciar' de Banco
18. Jun. 1648.
An Alphabetical TABLE.
A
ABatement of Writs 9 34 64 By Death 66 68 For Surplusage 380 Abeyance 313 314
319 443 Acc^ptance 47 39 384 385 425 When a man is bound to accept, etc. 39
Accessory 65 Accusation before a Justice 444 Acts which purge the wrong before
384 Act subsequent, where lawful 28 29 First Act 337 Action 337 Another Action
hanging 258 In what County 42 See County, there where it bears date 388
Possessory 34 Before Seisin, etc. Special 186 Accord see Arbitrament. Account
30 43 56 90 291 155 122 123 210 As Bai^y ad Merchandizandum 58 Against
Executors 291 292 Acquittal 19 Acquittance 104 Addition, de Parochia 203
Administrator is found to be an Executor 26 Surety in debt is Administrator,
etc. 149 Administrator counts of his own Possession before he be possessed 34
see 40 Retains for his own debt 217 Administration 33 34 2 Durante minori, etc.
30 Sues to Execution, the Executor comes of age. 104 Admiralty upon a
stipulation or bill, there the body of the stipulators, who are, for the most
part, Masters of ships and Merchants transeuntes, may be taken, no execution
can be upon lands. Its jurisdiction 260 261 Admiralty Court its jurisdiction,
things partly done on land 386 387 388 389 390 Adv^wson 17 38 128 129 passes in
Grants 425 Equity in Statutes 308 Agreement, disagreement 180 After an ar^est
360 After Assumpsit 361 Alien 275 Amendment 57 286 103 Amercement 49 135
Distress for it without Presentment 190 Annuity 4 144 Ancient Demesne pleaded 64
320 Appeal 275 Appendant Appurtenant 40 352 353 Apportionment of rent 95 118
139 Apprentices bound by Covenants though Infants 122 Appropriation 1^4
Approvement of common 116 Arbitrament 13 241 25 276 165 185 in part good 256
Arreers 12 Array, triers of it 429 430 Arrests 125 358 lawful 360 Assault and
battery 251 Assent of parties 429 430 Assets 29 30 31 averred 176 Assignment 18
of Debts 81 etc. Assignee 3 16 70 271 277 120 162 Assize 4 for erecting houses
189 Assurance -- as counsel shall advise 435 bound to assure 445 446 Assumpsit
13 31 274 72 73 94 159 the arrest is void 360 337 338 350 138 144 358 to the
servant 361 Attachment of Debts by custom 297 196 401 402 403 404 Attainder
267 275 303 325 376 Attaint 271 378 279 Atturnment 19 25 320 142 Attorney for
livery 39 Attorney must not do acts unlawful 387 what he may do 389 Receipt by
him 217 Audita querela 257 104 155 377 Averment of uses 269 214 in a devise 131
432 that Cestuy que vie is alive 195 Avowry 24 302 320 upon whom 368 Authority
must be persued 39 84 195 389 naked 307 to recover a debt without more 358 359
Aid 318
B
BAil 148 339 Debt against them 354 Bailment of Goods 160 403 Bankrupts -- one
Commissioner has right to the land 319 division where but one bond 195 196
Bargain and sale 270 156 Bar: Pleas in Bar 253 434 Insufficient 138 two bars
397 Barretor 384 Bastard 275 281 Battery: a base fellow strikes a man of
dignity 207 Benches 246 247 Bill: Suits by bill 389 Bill for oppression or
extortion 438 By-Lawes 50 Bishops, their Acts 342 Borough English 3
C
CApias 39 257 83 372 373 Case Action of, etc. 13 40 54 55 58 64 240 241 73 285
98 155 160 381 412 li^s 329 330 338 344 346 137 176 200 362 426 against an
Innkeeper 42 See Slander. Vi and armis, etc. 426 Trover, etc. 267 274
Challenge 234 110 193 428 429 to the Sheriff and Coronets 357 Chancery 262
Chaplains 41 Charge 3 Charters 370 Things in point of Charter 93 Churchwardens
279 Cessavit 84 Certainty, incertainty 14 93 336 220 once in a deed 198
Certiorari, Certificate 14 356 404 Citation out of the Diocese 190 Claim 333
389 of the Lessee 105 Clark of a Parish 163 Colleges are Corporations 394
Collusion, Covin 78 298 Color 159 Commission, Commissioners* 105 193 High
Commissioners 58 Common 4 21 96 97 185 168 169 170 171 Surcharged 182 Digging
in the Common, etc 343 344 making Coney Boroughs 327 Where woods are enclosed
267 What the Commoner may do upon the ground 123 12^ Conclusion by the word
praetextu, 344 Condition assignee 162 etc. 3 9 29 38 39 75 99 101 against Law
250 void 293 Lessee assigns Rent 336 broken, acceptance by rent after 47
performance 299 that neither A. B. or C. shall disturb etc. 60 61 not to
implead A. 72 to assure lands as Council shall advise 338 339 360 Confession 80
to save harmless, etc. 134 Confirmation 25 Consideration 13 31 32 94 134 159
437 against Law 251 to forbear a debt 303 306 See assumpsit 428 Conspiracy 76
206 447 Consultation 446 447 Contract 31 98 176 entire 154 Continuance to some
intents 309 in Courts 195 Contribution for one surety against another 243
Conviction; before it, lands not to be begged 206 nor seized, there 365 366
Copyhold 2 11 47 233 268 129 130 140 Admittance 269 143 extinguished 101
Statutes extend to it 15 369 tailed 20 21 367 Fines 265 Leases 171 365 368 369
forfeiture 269 142 365 felling trees 173 174 trespass brought 174 Corporation
347 dissolved: the donor shall have his land again 211 sues 393 Costs 329 345
220 Covenant 38 assignee 162 Executors ibid. and 11 and 12 48 69 70 to build a
mill etc. there 271 273 175 99 120 333 335 217 to surrender 445 performed 95
The Indenture is void in part 213 Covenant 87 121 cause of things must appear
in the Court, 401 Countermand 133 County, where actions shall be brought, 335
of trials 429 Courts-Baron 68 69 Leet 71 Tower Court 145 of Requests 208 216
243 244 Kings Bench and Chancery 357 Acts done in spiritual Courts 33 163 164
181 215 Curia claudenda 127 Custom 5* 49 234 140 143 235 267 261 135 of
descents 166 127 That the wife may devise to the husband 14 Particular Customs
163
D
Day in Court 68 Day material to be set down 433 434 Damages recowping in them
53 135 362 jonyt, severed 57 assessed 98 343 344 not assessed: writ of enquiry
207 not recoverable in account 57 treble 245 to be severed 210 Damage feasan.
124 185 Date of a Patent 416 Declaration 251 86 186 in an action upon 1 and 2.
P. and M. of distresses 11 upon an Assumpsit 32 Custom 252 particularly 358
insufficient 76 106 343 370 mistakes 345 287 119 160 125 Deed: things pass by
one deed 129 by deed 354 128 Debt 253 91 336 372 217 210 who liable 294 The
Kings debt 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 Default 280 Defamation 440 Delivery
of deeds 130 of money to another use 210 Demand 23 39 67 96 154 337 where to
be 331 by writ 74 335 310 the word 398 Demurrer 10 Denizen made 417 Departure
255 122 Depositions 193 Deprivation 259 163 Detaining 8 Detinue 370 Declaration
in it 403 Devastation by Executors 30 Devastavit 285 Devise 7 14 15 16 26 40 46
208 266 280 95 99 130 131 299 319 146 351 352 363 to a College etc. 394
prevents a remitter, etc. 411 to a man's heir 412 to one daughter, heir of land
held by Knights service, etc. 17 to sell 78 to the Son and heir* 94
Dilapidation 259 Diminution 267 alleged 407 Disability, the plaintiff cause of
it 75 76 Discharge 11 105 ought to show what 61 Descent 3^5 312 365 Disclam 25
Discontinuance, one issue only found 5 370 within a year 219 Discontinuance by
tenant in tail 317 Disseisin 522 of a particular estate 139 Acts of disseisor,
disseisor sues etc. 388 Distress justified 109 110 187 190 driven out of the
Country 11 sufficient upon the Land 67 110 Divorce 19 145 Dove-coat, a Writ of
Right lies of it 259 erected 284 Dower 21 135 145 A Lease is for years 266
Forfeitable by the Husband 323 Averment of seisin of the husband for damage 212
E
Ejectione firmae 6 15 18 53 71 72 33^ extra tenet unnecessary 60. lies 157
Plea 149 Election 258 159 127 140 446 To sue. 196 determined ibid. Elegit 257
82 84 Ely: jurisdiction there 380 381 Emblements 159 Enclosure in Forests 167
168 169 170 171 Entry into one house 72 To defeat an estate 9 To fortify it 25
for forfeiture 175 No trespass 283 Error 26 258 248 73 80 84 87 372 373 lies
not 261 247. brought 376 377 378 379 439. directed 44. things uncertain 408.
several 440 Escape 22 27 262 280 125 126 372 403 Fresh suite 177 433 Escheat
78 For Miscreancy 34 Right of action 322 Essoine 235 236 Estates 19 42 51 52
272 A Lease for time 102 103 determined 9 the less drowned 52 voidable 9
Estoppel 257 48 147 321 177 384 385 Estranger to a plaint erroneous, etc. 403
Estovers custom pleaded 235. see 238 97 173 Estrepment, 112 164 Estrey 150 151
Eviction 258 Evidence maintains not the issue 235 see 326 Execution 26 257 258
80 82 83 84 290 295 147 125 126 181 371 372 373 217 Assignment after judgment
161 Taking* 372. several 208 Executors 21 192 See Right Of his own wrong, 104
Reteines 217 Order in payment 298 Pleads fully administered, 178 Exception in a
grant 116 117 118 Time past to take it 100 One releases 431 Ex^hange 99 100
Exigent 83 217 Excommunication 191. unjust 406 Exposition 16 17 18 36 37 67 71
236 246 198 of Laws 39 of Statutes 309. and Patents 425 Extent 82 289 311
Extinguishment 24 11 101 314 128 137 211 Lands given by Statute to the King,
Annuity not extinguished 170
F
Fals^fying a Rec^very 271 Falsely imprisoned 124 Fee executed ^^2 one cannot
depend of another ^^7 Fee-simple 155 Felony, not before attainder, 267 Cause of
arrest for it, 406 Feoffments, 318, 319, 320 Fieri facias, 276, 147, 83 Fine
for vert, etc. 277. What Courts may fine, etc. 381 Fine levied by tenor of it,
246 Parish not named, 440 Record of it, 103, 129, 307, 148, 351, 179 First
fruits, 393 Forceable entry 45 Forfeiture of Lessor, 105, 141. Of a Right, 321,
See Treason. Forgery, 62, 63, 175 Form commanded by Statute, must be observed,
334, 188, 189 Formedon, 239, 302, 163 Forests, chases, etc. 169 Frankalmoigne,
396 Franchises, 17, 262 Usurped, 91 Frankmarriage, 18, 19, 20 Franktenement,
rule of it, 9 In an upper chamber, 44 Forfeiture, 6, 318 In case of Treason 34,
307, 308, 310, 315, 316 Fraudulent conveyances and acts, 6, 7, 285, 161, 191,
192
G.
Guardian in soccage, 316 Gardens, 6 Gavel-kind Plea, 55 Grants, Words apt, 7 Of
a common person, 8, 18, 24, 25, 236, 237, 270, 273 Restriction, rule, 237 To
dig in his waste, 18 General words, 183 One thing passes with another, 352
Things pass in gross, 127. By one Deed, 129. Of the King, 8, 35 Where a
mistake shall not abridge the fullness of words precedent, 36 Favored, 37, 38,
262, 136, 425. See 414, 415, 416, 417, 421, 422, 423, 425 Of a possibility, 316
H.
HAbeas corpus directed, 44. See 198 199 Habendum, 51, 269, 272 Habendum
successive, 220 Holidayes, 218 Heire-speciall, 3. Force of the word, ib. 4,
275, 102, 312 Homage, 320 Husband and Wife, acts of both, or either, 2, 5, 14,
15, 312, 141, 180 Wifes lease good, 327 Gives land to her husband, 143
Execution of the Wives Lease, 26 See Reservation. Husband may forfeit the Wives
Copyhold, 345 May correct his Wife, 215
I.
Idiot, 302 Jeofailes, 56, 57, 194 Imbracery, 240 Imprisonment, 158, 344, 199.
See Fine. Improvement of common, 97 Incidents, 359 Ingrossers of corn, 144
Innkeepers, 345, 346 Incroachment, 24, 411 Inquisitions, 294, 299 Indictment,
45, 46, 65, 67, 272, 84, 157, 400, 346 For erecting a Cottage, 383 For omitting
the Cross in Baptism, 119, Joint 349 Contra pacem, when 59 Infant, 60, 104 In
his mothers belly, 319, 364, 365, 366. May grant, etc. 14 Brings Error to
reverse a Fine, 20 May release, 30, 31 Acknowledges a Statute, etc. 149
Appears, etc. 382 Promises to pay for his meat, etc. 219. Sues his Guardian,
discharges, 214 Information, 91, 131, 158 Inrollment, 7, 270, 142 Intent,
Intendment: 130, 121, 381 Common, 332 Interest not dividable, 18, 77, 78
Interesse termini, 2, 3, 175 Interruption, 22, 48 Joining in action, 43, 283,
90, 116, 160, 345. Husband and Wife, 10 Joint-charge, 56. 57. Joint-tenants,
129. Join^ture forfeited by 11 H. 7. 6. 339. Issue l^gi^tim are born after ten
months etc. 281. Issue not proved by the special matter, 10. Of Issues see 23.
286. 92. 100. 108. 154. A thing in Issue not in the verdict, 57. M^^ joined no
issue, 56. Several issues, 57. Repugnant, 62. Negative and affirmative, 194.
tried, 233. Jury 334. their finding things, 33. 34. 65. 274. 88. 171. 359.
Examined, sworn, 209. Foreign matter, ibid. Strongly imply a thing, 36. Three
with Sweetmeats in their pocke^s, 364. Returned, 370. Judges sworn to procure
the Kings profit, 201. Judgment in a Writ of Error, 27, 66. in Account, 258.
Husband and wife 369 80. False, 176. depending on another, 176. staid, 177.
joint, 448. voidable, 96. entered Concessum est, 399. Justification, 277. 137.
Jurisdiction of Courts, 45. 240. 427. 163. 196. 197. showing how, 380, 381.
K.
KIng usurped upon, 7. 8. adhering to his enemies in France, 34. To direct the
laws, 237. his Prerogatives, 290. 291. 292. 293. 294. 295. 296. 297. 298. 299.
Prerogative-law Common Law, 295. Lands once in the King, 441. 442. divest
without Office, 443. Intrusion upon the King, 133. Knights of S. John's of
Jerusalem, 393. Lay, 394. their possessions Ecclesiastic, 393. 395. 396. 397.
398. 399. Templars, 394.
L.
LAches in not entering the Kings silver, 139. Laps, 129. L^w, against the rule
of the Common Law to meddle with blood, 393. The Law preserves things in its
custody, 316. Not alterable by grant, 201. Leases, Term extinguished, 2. 3. 5.
268. 129. on Continge ^ie, rule, 419. 420. Exception of timber-woods and
underwoods, 98, 99. In certain beginning, 24. 25. 166. may be avoided, 323.
324. and revive, 325. within 32 H. 8. 102. Joining to Lease, 211. Lease for
life by Copyholder, 171. of an infant Copyholder, 364. of a stock of sheep,
113. windfals* 117, 118. by a Parson, 302. by Tenant in tail, 9. wants a
beginning, 419. Legacies for children, security to be given, 243. A verbal
Legacy after the will made, 246. 247. To be paid at full age, 182. Suit for
them, 41. Liberty to cleanse a Watercourse, 98, License to erect Dove-cotes,
259. 82. 93 93. Limitation, by Law and statute 5. Limitation of an Estate, 19.
103. Of time for actions according to 21. Jac. 437. Livery, 9. 25. 84. 93. 301.
158. Right extinguished by it, 314. London, insolency of the Common Counsel:
106, 107. Custom there: 127. Lunatic.
M
MA^hem, 67 Maintenance, 81, 159. 450. hem Manor 3. 135 Market, 131.
Marsha^sey, Judgment there, 184. Marriage, 2 Is a Release, 271. Master and
Servants acts, of and to the Servant 361 Mines, 5. 28. Misnaming, 35. 38. 283.
Mir^cital, 36. 170. in the Kings Grant: 416, 417. 420, 421, 422. of a Statute,
178. Mistake of the day: 125, 126. of the date 433. Monasteries: 1. 392, 393.
what houses within the Stat. 31 H. 8. there 394* Monstrance of Deeds, etc. 85.
111, 112, 114, 115. How things are done: 61. 126. Of the Place: 187, 188. 359.
412, 413. time: 391. Of Letters of Administration: 34. Of a Bond must be, 39.
In what Ward, etc. 160. Of more then needs, and that false: 189. That the place
is within the Jurisdiction, etc. that he ought to be privileged, etc. 402.
Inducement to a matter need not be shown precisely 404. Number and names to be
shown: 436. before whom, etc. 437. Monstrance of right: 301. 304. Mortmain:
192. Murder, Manslaughter, se defendendo. 288 289. within the Stat. of King
James. 154.
N
NAme, 17. in a Writ 40. 379. 398. Nihil dicit 135 Nisi prius: 10. 328. Nomine
poenae: 12. 154. Non compos: 302. 316. 321. Non obstante in the Kings Grants:
37. Nonsuit: 328. 220. Non use: 235. No such Record: See Record. Notice: 23.
162. 339, Nuisance: 4. 259. 58, 59. 183. then when an Action upon the Case, when
an Assise of Nuisance, part of an house in Assise abated: 233
O
OAth, putting to a man's Oath, 151. Obligation, the Condition against Law, 13.
see 152. 177. see 192. to save harmless 212. not within 13 Eliz. 29. by the
High Commissioners, 148. Bond to deliver Possession, the Assignee of Reversion
demands it, 272. taken by the Sheriff, 136. 212, 213. to pay when out of his
apprenticeship, etc. 153. Occupant, occupancy, 52* 172. 220. Offices, Officers,
21. 47, 48. Insufficient 390, 391. Coroners, 64, 89. 105. Regarder, 277.
Steward of the Leet, 71. Office found, 312, 313. 322. Rights vest without
Office, 325. void if in deceit of the King 192, Omission of word in a
Certificate, 407. Ordinary, 30. 191. Ordinances, 253. 106, 107. Over-sea, 268
Outlawry, 83. 119. Oyer of a Record not to be denied, 186.
P
PAyment before the day, 10 Parceners, 3. 129, 130. Parceney, 3. Park-keeper,
for what things accountable, 419 Forfeits, 419. Parker forfeits not his Office
by Attainder, 418. Parks, 237. 425. Chasing, 169. beasts of it there, 171.
Pardon, 378. Parliament Summoned at the Kings pleasure only, 250. held at the
Kings pleasure, Writ of Error there must be the Kings License, 247 by Petition
250 Parsons heretofore Knights 399 Parsonage, 34 Partition, 3, 4. 265. 14, 84,
85, 86. by word, 94 Partners in Trade 244. 90. Patents, 21. 37. Exposition of
them, 418. void, 254 Perjury, 88, 89. 179. Perpetuity by devise, 102. 350, 351.
Perquisite, 27. Petition of Right, 304. Place to be alleged, 48. 187, 188,
189. 382 384. Plaint entered, 266. Pleas, 6. 43. 91. 95, 96. 145. 121.
Certainty, 93. in debt, 359, 360. Amount to a general issue 374. General where
they should be specially 10. taken strictly, 70. mistaken, 121 not entered new
Plea, 176. Plwalit^es, 23. 153. Porti^n of Tithes, 35. P^ss^ssion, unity, 4
Possibility, 20. 25. may pass by a grant, 26 146 325. Praemunire, 308, 389.
Praecipe, 6, 16. 87. 152. Pre^ogative, see King, Presentation, 265 179. as
Precurator, 319. P^^se^^ments ^n Courts, etc. 59. (...), 14, 15, 16. 262. 54
Rules of it there, and 237. ^7 184. in a Court, 48. one against another 183.
Principal and accessory, Pr^vily, 19. to sue, 377. 379. Prviledg, 10. 81. 286.
90 372. Privileges not transferrable, 396 397. of discharge, 398. Pleaded,
398. time to pray it, 404. Probate of Wills. Exception of the 23 H 8. 214.
Proceedings of Law, the form must be kept, 201. Procedendo, 442. Proclamation,
107. Process, 73. Erroneous, 371. Judicial 328. A Summons for an Attachment,
400. Proof, 254. Profession, trial of it, 393. Prohibition, 260. 259. 45. 51.
63. 216. 234. 243. 246. 273. 163. 164. 196. 200. 301. 446. 447. Promise, 13.
32, 271. 94. 134. 349. 350. 216. Property, 26, 27, 117. 118. 193. Changed by
tender, 330. 331. in things (...) naturae, 123. Protection, 299. 366. Proviso,
18. gives power to lease, 195. No proper place for it, 418. Purchase by Tenant
for life, and the administrator of Lessee for years, where the term was to
begin after death of Tenant for life, 1, 2. Two named as Joint-purchasers, 180.
Taking by purchase, 363.
Q.
QVare impedit, 263. Quae plura, 191. Que estate, 172. Quod ei deforceat, 2.
448. Quo minus, 291, 296, 297 Quo warranto. 91, 92, 93.
R.
RApe, the Indictment must be preferred in convenient time, 444. Ra^^shment of
Ward, 14. 34. 426. Rebutter, 310. by that which is sued to be reversed. 379.
Recognisance. 142. Notes only taken, 356. for good behavior. 22. 311. Recital
of a Statute, 86. of the particular estate etc. 423. Rec^rd, 103. 356. No such
record pleaded there. 178. 373. Removed well or not. 375. Brought from one
Court to another 14. 249. Transcript in Parliament, 247. see 328. Recovery
common, an invention of the Judges found out in Ed. 4 his time, 308. All the
rights barred 311. before inrolment of the bargain, 218. Estoppes, 147. by an
Infant, 161 Recovery in actions, 6. Ba^s; 19. 134. Erroneous, 27. Rectory,
Glebe etc. 35 Recusancie, 148. Recusant convict his advowson, 216. Relation,
270. 313. 317 325. 140. 388. To avoid mean acts, 312 Makes acts good before.
376. Release of all actions. 11. 12. of all his right. ibid. where a Covenant
is not broken. ibid. 29. 30. 310. 220. with Warranty. 158. Relief. Remainder.
19. 51. 52. 265 319. 220. Acts by him in remainder. 9. good, yet uncertain.
139. of a term. 26. 316. Remitter. 69. 312. 320. 326. Rent. 3. 279. 146. 156.
to cease during minority, etc. paid to one who has but a right for a time. 156.
to A. and his heirs for life of B. 172. the word (...) 449. Replevin 96. 124.
187. Replication 96 insufficient 138. Reputation 17. 353. Request 49. 274. 144.
40^ 438. in an action of the case upon promise 362. Resceit Rescuous 276. 126.
Plea in it 91. Reservation 19. 283. 101. Husband leases his wifes Lease
reserving rent* 279. reservation to the wife, 448, 449. Restitution upon a
Judgment reversed, 27. 376. Retraxit Retorn, 217 265. 276. 82. 355. 357. 389.
by Coroners one denies, 439. general retorn of a Record, 408. Reviving 4. of
estates and rights, 326. Revocation, 133, 289. Riot 146 438. Rights 301. 313.
314. forfeited, 310. 322. 323. given away by conveyance, 319. 320. see Livery.
Executor sels the land, has right etc. 31. Robbery on Sunday, no Hue and cry.
280.
S
SAle 244. by Executors 77. in a market 160. 349. of goods taken by Pirates 193.
Satisfaction acknowledged 79. 80 Scire fac. 79. 83. 155. 371. 379. Seats in a
Church 200. sin to be shown 347. 121. Seigni^ry, services, 4^ 28. 38. Sheriff
collects Fines etc. after a pardon, 178. Simony 390. 202. 435. Slander 40. 43.
239. 241. 242. maliciously spoken there, 152. 273. 278. 88. 284. 287. 88. 89.
90. 106. 147. 151. 157. 167. 327. 328. 304. 341. 181. 375. 391. 202. 214. Of a
Physician, Lawyer etc. 441. For^sworn your self, 444. 445. Calling one Bistard,
451 Statute-Merch etc. General Statutes, particular Interests: 168. a third
person there. Statutes: 11 H 7. of Jointures forfei^ed: 6. 1, 2. P, and M. of
Distresses: 11. the Statute of Wi^^es 38 H. ex^ends not to Copyholds: 15 34 H.
8. of Mistakes: 416. 32 of H. 8 17. 32 H. 8. of Leases 102. 13 Eliz. of
Covenants, etc. for enjoying spiritual Livings: 29 2 M. concerning Preachers:
245 4 H 7. Heir of Cestuy que use: 79 2 West. 1. of Feoffments there 5 Eliz. of
Per jury: 89 26. H. 8. of Estates tail forfeited for Treason: 307, 308, 309. 27
H. 8. Statu^e of Fermors 145 22 E. 4 35 H. 8 of enclosure of Woods 167 Statutes
extend not to Superiors unnamed 395 General Statutes bind insants 80 Some
particular in 160 Some points 169 Construction where the King is concerned 308
Such Statutes are general 171 of Penal Statutes 315 Savings in Statutes 304.
324 Steward of a Mannor-Court 142 Surety in Debt 149 to pay the Condemnation,
etc. 372 Suit for part 196. in Temporal and Spiritual Courts 447 Sum^o^s and
Severance Sunday 280 Supersed^^s 249, 250 Supplicavit for the Peace 355
Surp^us^ge 248. 73. 434. Surrender 14, 15, 16. 52. 265. 268. 153. 425 Surrender
to the use of A. for ever, the Lord admits him in Fee 137 Surrender, etc. after
his death 451 Suspension 4^9*
T
TAil-Tenant his Acts, Leases 9. 301, 302. 308. 323. could not levy a Fine at
the Common Law 300 Estate-Tail without the word Heirs 19 Tenant grants Rent,
acknowledges a Statute 442 Tenant in Tail, the remainder in Tail to another who
grants his Estate to the King, etc. 441. 543. tot Stat. suum 442 Forfeited for
Treason 307, 308, 309 321 showing that the Tenant died without issue 443 the
Tenant cannot be barred to alien by common Recovery 351 Tales de circumstantib.
204. tried 430 Tenant in common 2. 16. 282, 283. 129. Two Lords Tenants in
Common of a Waste 156 Tenant by Courtesy 15. 25 cannot grant his Right living
his wife 323 In Dower. see Dower. In Tail after possibility, etc. at Will,
Leases. etc. 15, 319. 364. Tender 39. 330, 331, 332 Tenure 20. 101 Things in
action 12 in grols 38 Trade 25, 254 Travers 24. 43 56, 57 of a Debt 402. to an
Office 410. of Discents 411. Rule 253. 111. of Seisin in Fee, or the gift in
Tail 427 Treason, a Papist who after refussing to take the Oath of Allegiance,
spoke these words, It is lawful for any man to kill the King, etc. 263, 264.
in the point of Allegiance none must serve the King with ifs and ands, ibid.
Forfeitures for Treason 322, 323 324 a mad man may commit Treason 316 presumed
in Law no man will commit Treason 325 Trespass 6. 16. 33. 133. 200. 270, 271.
bar 134 by one who has special property 173 for taking Conies 174 meddling with
the Soil 52, 53 Pleas 55 Rule 53 Tro^er 210 Trust not conveyed 64. joint 77, 78
Feoffment in trust 299 broken 432 Trial 33. 257. 50, 51. 196, 197. 433 things
done in a foreign Port 193 of things done beyond sea 76. 204. see Admiralty
Tithes, Lands discharged by the Statute 31 H. 8. L. 392. 211. 395, 396
discharged by grant 273. 35. 44, 45 50, 51. 329, 330, 331. 333 Modus 63. the
Parson to have all, where 64 Prescription 60. 237, 238. 120 after Tithes set
out, that the owner may carry away 30 sheafs 234 Substraction 245 Leased 333 by
Deed 354 not 374 Modus after endowment 180. s. 194 of lopping 175 The King to
pay no Tithes, privileges of discharge to be taken strictly 396, 397, 398
V
VA^iance 248. 88. 362 Valor maritagii 189 Writ of Error 249. 375 Venditioni
expon^s 276 Venire facias 257. 251. 305. 328. 334, 335. 381, 382, 203. 411 none
194 Verdict 126. 354 Imperfect 27 uncertain 36 special favored 37 Villein
presented to a Benefice by the Lord 179 Vis^e 48. 54 335. 381, 382, 383 Void
Acts and voidable 311. 318, 319 161 Vou 307 Usage 5 Use 7. 265 Acts of Cestu
que use 303. 306, 307. 318, 319 makes attorney to make livery 314 Tenant in
tail cannot stand seized to an use expressed 269 Superstitious 233 Usurpation
7, 8. 263
W
WAger of law 244, 79, 296 not for part 327 Waife Waining estates 79, 100
Wales, what Process runs into Wales 214 the Marches 243 President and Council
437 Ward 79, 320 Warre^ 124, 184 Warrant of Attorney 73, 74 appearance by it 439
Warrant to receive money etc. 358 Warranting an horse sold 31 a Lease 48
Warranty 5, 130, 320, 368 entering into it 152 Warrantia chartae 152. lies
there. Waste 5, 28, 52, 70, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 132, 164, 209. When done
must be shown 347 Way drowned 52 Wills 15 construed 363 Witnesses 16, 288, 326,
327, 439 Woods, underwoods 5, 256 enclosed in Forests according to Statutes
167, 168, 1^9, 190, 171 Words for a grant 7, 17 the word portio 35, 36.
successive 51 Ovile 274, 89. omitted in a Writ 286 or 363 Writs not formal,
divertit for coarctavit 58 the true words not used 64 admitted good 87 demands
in them 6 insufficient 347 Two originals 306, 408, 409, Trespass after the first
purchased 407 409. of Right etc. 239 Writ mistakes the time of one King for
another 399 Of right of advowson 6, 263 Writ untrue, yet good 115 Writing
scandalous words, under pretense of a Petition delivered to the King 405.
FINIS.

