PLATO's Demon: Or, the STATE-PHYSICIAN Unmaskt; Being a Discourse in Answer to
a Book called Plato Redivivus.

By Thomas Goddard, Esquire

Si unum Id spectamu^, quam nefaria voce Lutorius Priscus mentem suam and aures
hominum polluerit, neque carcer, neque laque^^, ne serviles quidem cruciatus in
eum suffecerint.

Tacit. Ann. lib. 3. LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for Walter Kettilby, at
the Bishop's Head in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

To His ROYAL HIGHNESS, JAMES Duke of YORK, etc.
Royal Sir,
THe sense which all sober Men, and good Subjects, ever will retain of that
Safety and Protection, which the Nation owes to your Princely Wisdom, and true
born Courage, obliges us to look upon your Royal Person (next to His most
Sacred Majesty) as Our Sword, Our Shield, and Our securest Hopes.

You are Our Head in Council, and Our Arm in Battle: and as we all ought to
fight under your Royal Banner against the force and injuries of a Foreign Foe;
so is it Our Duty to oppose no less, the Seditious Conspiracies, and Traitorous
Associations, of Our little, malicious scribbling Enemies at home.

Amongst many of that deceiving, or deceived Crew, none seems more impudently
extravagant than the Author of a Libel called Plato Redivivus. The Book it
self, with the encouragement which I had to answer it, I received about May
last at Paris, from that most Loyal and most Worthy Minister, my Lord Preston.
What I have been able to do in this little time, I most humbly offer at your
Highness's Feet, being fully assured, that your Royal Highness will never
refuse your Princely Protection to what Person so ever shall sincerely
endeavor to defend (according to his strength) Our Regal Government with its
just Rights, and Prerogatives. May Heaven continue your Royal Person a Blessing
to these Kingdoms, to the utmost extent of Providence and Mercy: And may these
Nations endeavor to deserve so great a Blessing, by an unfeigned Respect,
Duty, and Gratitude without limit.

Your Royal Highness's T. G.

TO THE READER.
THe inquity and licentiousness of the times are such, that those wicked
Principles which the most perverse of men in former days would hardly trust to
their private thoughts, In these men impudently dare to publish.

Amongst many Seditious Libels, which of late have come abroad, none is more
insolently bold than that which bears the Name of Plato Redivivus. The Author
seems so hardened and confirmed in his Villainous Errors, that he makes no
scruple to offer Treason and Sedition, for Reason and Loyalty: He would make us
believe that he is supporting Our Government, whilst he endeavors utterly to
destroy it: Propounds ruin and slavery in a quiet and peaceable way: And
disapproves a Civil Page 219.
War only because he doubts the success: He beseeches the King therefore that
he would be graciously pleased to lay down his Imperial Crown: Tells Page 220.
him it will make himself Glorious, and his People happy: Advises him to Page
249.
quit his lawful Power, that he may be great: Divest himself of his
Prerogatives and Liberties that he may be free; and become a ward to a Popular
Juncto, that he may live at ease. And that this their Pupil King may not doubt
the kind intentions of his Indulgent Governors, they promise to take
immediately Page 258.
the Administration of the Regal Authority into their own hands, and make him
as idle, as he would prove an insignificant Prince: Ease him of the trouble of
making Peace and War abroad, and Page 237.
Officers and Ministers Page 239.
at home; Take away from him the disposal of the Militia, by Sea and Land, as
also of his own Revenue, as affairs too mean and below the consideration of
such an absolute Monarch: Disingage him from the Obligation of bestowing
Honors, and Titles, upon Persons deserving well; That Barons, Earls, and Dukes
shall be henceforward created Page 252.
by the Authority and Favor of Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights. And last of
all, that the Dignity of this their Glorious King might lose nothing of its
luster, from the Communication of laborious business, and the concerns of
Government, it is proposed, that the King shall have no more Authority to Page
249.
Call, Adjourn, Prorogue, or Dissolve Parliaments: That their Annual Session
shall be perpetuated to all Eternity.

And least an Honest, Sober and Loyal Parliament, should (in process of time)
undo what a Knavish, Hotbrain'd and Traitorous Assembly had imposed upon us,
Page 249.
Elections are to be regulated according to their own fancies, and Honesty and
Loyalty are to be perpetual marks of Incapacity. And in a word, when they are
once elected, It is concluded, that they shall be Judge and Party in their own
Cause, Page 254.
and govern themselves World without end, according to their own Independent
and most Sovereign Right of Power.

Now least these, and many other Propositions, (howsoever illegal and
extravagant) should not be embraced as cheerfully as they are loyally and
honestly intended, Our Author assures us, That he has proposed nothing in Page
258.
his Discourse which intrencheth upon the Kings Hereditary Right.

These, Worthy Reader, are the just Principles and sound Foundation upon which
Our Author pretends to build his newfound Government. And that the Effect may
answer so good and so great a Project; He assures us, that such a blessed
Reformation will not fail to work Miracles. The King shall be more absolute
when he has no Power at all, than ever Page 249.
he was, or could be before: The Lords more honorable when they receive their
Honors from the People, Page 256. 7.
than when they were given by the King. The People shall enjoy their Liberties
and Properties more Secure, now they are become their own Slaves, than when
they were the Kings Subjects: No Fires in London but of their own making, no
Want in the Country, no Wars abroad, nor Troubles at home but of their own
raising: Presbyterians Page 186.
and Papists like Peace and Righteousness shall kiss each other: The Lion shall
lie down with the Lamb, and there shall be no more enmity between the Serpent
and the Seed of the Woman.

Nay, such is the force of our wonderworking politic Apostle, that provided
his Tyrannical, Popular Usurpation may take place against a Lawful, Natural,
and the most Easy Monarchy upon Earth, all Interests will be reconciled, all
Persons, of whatsoever different Principles or Professions they be, whether Jew
or Greek, a Samaritan, or of the dwellers of Mesopotamia; They shall all
understand his charming and irresistible reasoning in their own Languages, that
is, according to each man's design, and the desires of his own heart.

Now although the extravagances and fallacies of our vain Magisterial Author,
are obvious enough to all sober, considering men, yet since Error is more
communicative than Truth, and some men (especially such as may be already
prejudiced are more apt to embrace Shadows, than retain Substances, I have
endeavored to distinguish Both, unmask our Republican Demon, and show no less
his horrid Claws, than his Cloven-feet.

I should now make some excuse that this Answer comes so late into the World,
but I have a sufficient Witness, that I had never seen the Book called Plato
Redivivus, before I received it at Paris, about May last, from My Lord Preston,
His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary in the French Court: To his Lordship, I owe
the first motion, and encouragement of answering it, you the advantage (if any
be) and satisfaction of the Answer.

Next I must inform you, that I meddle little with the Law-part, which is now
and then to be met withal in Our Author; not only because it has been
sufficiently answered already, but besides, if there be any breach of the Law
or Government by any Person whatsoever, the Courts of Justice are open, which
are the proper places for Law matters; and when Plato shall think fit to show
himself and legally accuse, both himself, and such other of the Kings Subjects,
who may have been deceived by him, will receive a more full and ample
satisfaction, than I durst pretend to give them.

The historical and rational part I endeavor to answer as plainly, as my
judgment and little time would permit, which I have done also by way of
Dialogue, that I might in all things comply with Our Authors method, as far as
is reasonable. Many impertinencies I have passed by to avoid tediousness. Those
faults in this Discourse which shall not be found malicious, I hope the Reader
will excuse; small mistakes may be easily rectified. And as to the whole, if
the Reader shall please to examine it as impartially, as it is writ sincerely,
I persuade my self, that he will find nothing misbecoming an Honest Man and a
Loyal Subject. Farewell.

PLATO'S Demon: OR, The State-Physician unmaskt; BEING A Discourse in Answer
to a Book called Plato Redivivus.
The Argument.
An English Gentleman lately returned from France, and Italy, where he had
spent several years, is invited by a very considerable Merchant, and his near
Kinsman, to his Country House, where discoursing of many things with great
liberty, the Merchant accidentally opens a Book, called Plato Redivivus, which
the Traveller had brought down with him into the Country; This becomes a new
subject of Discourse, and both deliver their opinions concerning it with great
freedom, as follows.

First Discourse.
Merchant. GOod morrow, Cousin, What, up and ready too so early? How do you
like our Old English Country Air?


Traveller. Very well Sir, and indeed the pleasantness of this situation, with
those many delights which appear round about it, are sufficient to raise any
Man from his Bed, especially one who has been so long a stranger to the
happinesses of a Country retirement, and who loves them so much as I do.


Mer. I rather feared that notwithstanding our best endeavors here, your time
would pass tediously away, for having seen all France and Italy (which they
call the Garden of Europe) I apprehended that the best part of England, would
have appeared no better to you, then an uncultivated Desert.


Trav. No, nor yet shall Lumbardy, nor Capua which is the Garden of Italy, be
ever preferred by me before our own blessed, happy soil.


Mer. I am glad to find you so good an Englishman, the rather because we may
now hope to keep you henceforward in a place which, it seems, you like so well.


Trav. Believe me, Tutto il mondo e pa^se. All Countries are in this alike,
that they have their conveniences, and inconveniences, their particular
delights, and their particular wants. And when we shall have made a just
estimate of all the Kingdoms in Europe, I know none, which for pleasure and
profit, ought to be preferred justly before our own.


Mer. Sir, I was always satisfied with my own Country, and the little
encouragement you give me to exchange it for any other confirms me now so much
in my Opinion, that I am resolved never to cross the Seas, except some greater
Business, than I can foresee, should necessitate me.


Trav. I have now spent somewhat more than Eight years, (as you know Cousin)
out of England. The first time I went abroad, I only learnt my Exercises, and
made those Tours of France and Italy, which generally other Gentlemen use to
do. I could then have told you who was the best Dancing Master of Paris, where
lived the most fashionable Tailor, the airiest Perriwigmaker, and such like. In
Italy, where the best Wines, and what Curiosities were particular to every City.

But having almost lost the bon goust, as they say, or relish for those
youthful pleasures, since I went last abroad, I have made other remarks, and
grown more sullen possibly than I ought to be; can tell you now of the pride
and libertinage of the French Noblesse, the impertinence, coquetry and
debauchery of the Gentry, the misery of the Commonalty, the extreme poverty of
most, and slavery of all. In Italy the restraint of their Wives and Women, the
jealousy of Husbands and their general vindicative humor: At Venice the
insupportable insolence of their Nobili Venetiani, and triumphant Vice. At
Genoua the scandalous Mechanic Traffic and notorious Avarice o^ their
Grandees, insomuch that they starve even a Jew in his own Trade: Their frequent
assassinations, pride and ill manners. The dull Bigotry of Florence, and hard
impositions upon Subjects. The formalities of Rome, the lost Virtue and
Courage, and natural Cowardice and Poltronery of the degenerated Romans; the
insolence of the Commonalty del regna, as they call it, or Kingdom of Naples,
the Robberies of their Banditti, the great Titles, and small Estates of the
Nobility; the hereditary risses or quarrels of the Piedmontesi, and those of
Monferat, and (from their ill administration of Justice) their eternal
Processes. And to conclude, add to this, the arbitrary Government exercised
generally all over Italy, and the heavy impositions upon their Subjects,
greater than they ought to bear.

Now, Cousin, with all I have said, compare the extreme happiness of the
English Nation. The Riches of the Commonalty, insomuch that some have thought
it to be the greatest part of our disease; The vast trade and prosperous
condition of our Merchants; The Hospitality, Wealth and Modesty of our Gentry;
The high quality and true worth of our Nobility, their uncorrupted Loyalty to
their Prince, and unaffected kindness for the People.

But above all let us reflect seriously upon the most happy security and
liberty of our Persons and Estates, which all strangers are forced both to
admire and envy: Our freedom and exemption from all manner of Taxes and
Impositions, but such as we our selves shall consent to.

And not to be too tedious upon a subject which is so large, let us truly
consider, and at the same time bless God Almighty for our just Laws, and
impartial execution of them, for the admirable and equal Constitution of our
Government; where the Prince has so great a power, and the People such ample
privileges, that as our form of Government is Monarchy, and that as perfect
and free as the Sun ever saw, so it is eternally secured from the corruption of
Tyranny.

Over all this, our present Age enjoys a Prince so moderate and so just, that
his mercy and goodness have been his greatest faults, and his Government over
us has been so modest, that his greatest Enemies are forced to consess, That
his present Majesty never did any Act of arbitrary Power, nor to^k from any
particular Person the benefit of the Law; Plato Red. p. 18, 19.

These considerations have obliged all Persons of all Nations whom I have
happened to meet abroad, o^ who have heard or read any thing concerning us, to
congratulate with me the incomparable Constitution and easiness of the
Government under which we live, and applying the happiness of Virgil's
Husbandman to our own People, have often repeated:

O fortunatos nimium, bona si sua norint,
Anglicolas.
Now, Cousin, if you have an inclination to leave all those general blessings,
besides your particular ones of a noble House, a healthful and pleasant
situation, delightful Garden, plenty of water and fresh springs, and many other
great conveniences belonging to them, then Cousin, go abroad, and there learn
to be wiser.


Mer. No, good Cousin, I intend to remain a fool and stay at home, and to speak
plainly, if I had as good an Opinion of the present Constitution of our own
Government, as I have an ill one of those which you have mentioned, all those
foreign pleasures, which the most Frenchefi'd Traveller would make us believe
were to be found amongst them, should not persuade me to leave Old England, not
so much as for one single Month.


Trav. How, dear Cousin? Is it possible that there should be any thing in the
Constitution of our own Government which can displease a man of your sense, and
solid Judgment, and one whom hitherto I have ever thought very well affected to
it?


Mer. Truly Sir, few men love their King and Country better than my self. I
have never forwarded any irregular address to his Majesty, nor given my Vote
for any notorious Phanatick, nor am I looked upon as such amongst them. But I
must confess, when I reflect upon the differences and animosities between the
King and the House of Commons, the discontents of a great number of People, the
Danger of Popery, and many other such considerations, which I have not at
present in my mind, I cannot but think there is a fault somewhere, and where to
lay it more modestly, and more reasonably than upon the Constitution of the
Government itself, is what I cannot find out.

But we shall not want opportunity to discourse as much as you please of these
matters, ere we return to London: And in the mean time, I think it a good hour
to break your fast. What Drink do you choose for your Mornings draught?


Trav. Good faith Cousin, a mouthful or two of good Air is to me the most
acceptable Breakfast in the World.


Mer. Pray use no ceremonies. You know and believe, I hope, that our
friendship, as well as near relation gives, you the same freedom in my House,
as you have in your own. If therefore you will eat or drink any thing, speak
what you like best, and the Butler shall bring it you immediately But if you be
resolved to stay till Dinner, I will in the mean time carry you to a very
pleasant walk, and show you a little Arbor at the end, agreeable enough.


Trav. Most willingly. I Will only put on my Cravat and Perriwig and wait upon
you.


Mer. And I, until you are ready, will (with your leave) examine what curious
Books you have brought down from beyond Sea.


Trav. Very few besides such as I carried over; for I find London the best
Library, and England the best University for learned men in Europe.


Mer. I am glad you think it so. Let Us see, what have we here? Hugonis Grotii
de Jure Belli ac Pacis? This we have translated into English since you left us.


Trav. I heard so in Italy, but never saw the Book, I should have thought it a
very difficult undertaking by reason of many expressions so particular to the
Civil Law and Latin, that they are hard to be rendered into our Language.


Mer. It is very well done, and of good use, I can show it you when ever you
please. For in my vacant hours I love a little reading, especially when I meet
with an Author, who is universally allowed to be of a solid Judgment and great
Learning.


Trav. You could not have met with one in my opinion who more truly possesses
those two qualifications then Grotius did. Joseph Scaliger tells us, that he
was prudens Politicus, optimus Groecus, Juris-consultus, modestus,
proestantissimus in Epigrammatibus, and certainly he deserved all or more than
he has said of him.


Mer. What have you got next? The holy Bible in English? Nay then, Cousin, we
may hope, that besides your English inclinations, you have brought over with
you also your English Religion. For I think the Papists seldom make use of the
Bible.


Trav. Sir, I assure you, I profess the same Religion which I ever did, and
hope I ever shall. I mean the true Orthodox Protestant Religion of the Church
of England, as it is by Law established, and in my Heart do believe it, not
only a safe Religion, but the most sound and the most pure in its Doctrine as
well as in its discipline, that is professed this day in any part of the whole
World.


Mer. I shall ever agree with you in the Doctrine, and not much differ from you
in the Discipline. But let us proceed. What fine gilt Book is this? Plato
Redivivus. It Is a strong piece, Cousin.


Trav. As strong as Mustard, Cousin; Children are afraid of it, because it
bites them by the Nose, as they fancy. But those of riper years, easily
discover the fallacy, for when examined, it leaves no impression behind it.


Mer. Have you read it Sir?


Trav. Please to open it, and you will find whether I have or no.


Mer. I perceive indeed that your red Lead Pen has examined it very strictly;
every leaf looks almost as dismal as a Martyr.


Trav. Not a Martyr, I beseech you; but if you will say a Sacrifice, I will
admit of the Comparison.


Mer. Why Cousin? What distinction do you make between these two?


Trav. Martyr, Sir, is generally taken in a good sense, and in a good cause,
but a Sacrifice may be said to be offered either to God or to the Devil.


Mer. Which is as much as to say, That you believe the Author has undertaken
an ill cause.


Trav. Yes, Sir, and under any good Government besides our own, especially in
that Republic, which he so much admires, both himself and his works would have
been made public Sacrifices to Justice, and to the quiet of the established
Government, long before now.


Mer. But is it not hard, that a Man of great Learning, should not have liberty
to give his Judgment in a case of so great consequence, as the Peace and
Security of our Government, under which our lives and fortunes, and our all,
are to be preserved or shipwrack'd; especially when his design is so apparently
good and commendable?


Trav. First, Cousin, as to our present Author, to deal plainly with you, I
cannot possibly remark, either his great Learning* or his good design. But
supposing he had both (which I shall hardly grant you) yet I must maintain,
that any private person, who unauthoriz'd by our lawful Government, shall
publish either by words or writings, any arguments or discourse, against the
Constitution of the Government by Law established, is a pestilent, pragmatical
Deceiver, a seditious Calumniator, and Perturbator of our Peace: His words and
writings become scandalous Libels, and both deserve the extremest punishments,
which the rigor of the Law or Reason in that case provides.


Mer. Hold, hold, dear Cousin, be not so angry.


Trav. Sir, I ask your pardon; for whilst you entertain me with so much
kindness, it were indeed unreasonable that I should offend you in the Person of
any Man, for whom you may bear the least respect.


Mer. No, no, Sir, you mistake me; for in the first place I have no
acquaintance with the author, supposing it, whom common fame speaks him:
Besides, want of freedom in discourse, abates so much of the profit, as well as
the pleasure of it, that I must conjure you to use all the liberty henceforward
imaginable, and so with your good leave I intend to do my self. But I confess I
wondered a little to see you so warm and vigorous in the Defense of a
Government, under which we must needs agree, that even to our own knowledge, and
possibly amongst our own friends, there have happened* cases very severe (not
to say more) which sure must be faults, either in the Governors, or the
Government.


Trav. Perhaps in neither, for though as you say, we may have remembered many
particular cases, which to us have seemed hard, yet it may be, if we had fully
examined the circumstances of each case, we should have found, either some
mismanagment in the Person, or some very unlucky contingency, which neglects or
misfortunes we presently throw upon the Government, that we may the easier
discharge our selves.

Indeed such particular cases, how hard soever they may seem to those
concerned, yet ought they not to overbias or prejudice a Man's Reason or
Justice, much less make him undermine, and endeavor to shake the very
Constitution of our present Government; which having subsisted so long, been
constituted, approved, confirmed, by so many wise, just, and valiant Princes;
and consented to, established, and courageously asserted by such a long Series
of our grave, and learned Ancestors, remains the same at this day in the
substantial part, which it ever has been in the best of times, and under the
administration of much greater Politicians than our quack Statesman, (who ever
he was) seems to have been.


Mer. I know not what our former Constitution has been. It is sufficient to
mind you, that now the incertainty of grants, and Court favors has been such,
that many men have never enjoyed, what with great pains and expense they
thought they had obtained; and I still think that a fault.


Trav. I guess possibly what you mean, and I confess Machiavel above all things
advises his Prince to avoid the imputation of easiness, or unsteadiness. He
would not have him be, Varius, or Levis, as he calls it. But on the contrary,
to be so firm and constant in all that he says, or resolves, as not to leave in
any Man, so much as the hopes of moving or deceiving him. Ita sententiam suam
quam semel pronuntiavit, ratam ac firmam haberi velit, ut ab ea nunquam deduci,
aut dimoveri posse procerto teneant, ac talem de se opinionem sustineri ac
retineri studeat, ut illorum nemo veniat, ut illum aut decipi aut flecti posse
cogitet. This certainly is good advice, and possibly very proper in our
circumstances; and this exact care of a Prince in keeping his word, and not
passing one grant over the head of another, might be more practicable in the
little Government, under which Machiavel wrote, than in ours, which has such
numerous Offices depending upon his Majesty's grace and favor. But still if
this Fermete, be wanting, and hard cases do sometimes happen, yet nothing can
be more ridiculous and unjust, than presently to accuse the Government: For
such things have happened under the best forms of Government that ever have
been, or ever will be, whether Monarchical or Democratical, and will ever
happen, whilst we are governed by men, who are all more or less naturally
subject to inevitable frailties. We must therefore distinguish between the
Supreme Governors, and the subordinate ones, and both from the Constitution of
the Government. The first, as I said, are subject to weaknesses and
infirmities, and when they are too frequent, I mean in the subordinate
Officers, they may be easily removed or changed, without destroying or altering
the Government.

For as a man would be justly thought mad, or highly imprudent, who finding
that by the negligence of Servants, a Door-post, or Window, a Joyst, Beam or
Rafter of his House had been decayed, should immediately pull down the whole
building, with a design to repair only those little breaches; so that
Politician is certainly most unfit for a Prince's Cabinet, or House of
Parliament, who finding, it may be, some mismanagement in State Affairs, should
presently resolve to pull down the Fabric it self, I mean Monarchy, and in its
place build up a fantastical Commonwealth, then transform that into an
Optimacy, then an Oligarchy, till having past through all the misfortunes,
which innovation and change have generally produced, we fall necessarily into
confusion and Anarchy, and in that most miserable state, become either Slaves
to some mechanical Tyrant, sprung up from the Lees of the people, and raised by
the foul breath of vulgar applause, or made eternally a pitiful Province
laden with afflictions, and groaning under the heavy Taxes of a foreign
Conqueror.

By this time, Cousin, I hope you understand the difference between Governors
and Governments; the solid Foundation, or the whole House it self, from its
Ornaments, or some necessary or convenient parts of it, and the dangers which
attend the change of the one, more than of the other. I shall endeavor to show
you next, if you command me, what unjust pretenses our old neglected Politician
has found out, to endeavor an alteration in either, and what false arguments
he produces to favor his pretense.


Mer. Nothing can oblige me more; And that we may not lose the advantage of
this fine morning, since you are now ready, let us be walking. I Will lead you
through my Garden, which brings us into the walk I spoke of, and in the Arbor,
if you please, we may discourse farther of these matters.


Trav. Most willingly. And to help the unfaithfulness of my memory; I Will take
my constant companion Grotius in my Pocket.


Mer. And I, that I may be able now and then to make some opposition, or at
least ask some pertinent Questions, will take with me our friend Plato
Redivivus.


Trav. Best of all: You will find, whatever is well or ill said by him already
scor'd to your hand.


Mer. Come then, let us walk. You see, Cousin, that my Garden is but small, but
the Soil is very proper for Fruit, and lies well enough to the South Sun, which
is a great advantage to us.


Trav. Yes: And I see you have plasht your Vines upon Treilles; which sure
ripens the Fruit better than when they touch the Walls. Then your Gravel walks
are particular to our Country, and finer than any thing I have seen of that
kind, either in France or Italy.


Mer. You may take notice also that I want not Water, for I have an excellent
Spring, which lies close by the Arbor to which we are going, that serves all
the offices of my House. Here Sir, is the walk I told you of.


Trav. It is indeed very pleasant and I suppose we see at the end of it the
Arbor you mean.


Mer. The same. There we shall have a very fine prospect over a great part of
our Country. But what will please me much better, I hope to have there the
advantage of your Discourse, upon a subject, which will be no less delightful
than profitable, to a man who has had neither time nor learning enough to
examine those high points, which do not much belong to a man of my profession.


Trav. Sir, I am very well satisfied concerning your judgment and your learning
also: For I remember you were reputed the best Scholar in Paul's School, when I
was at Westminster. And if the death of your Father had not happened in the
nick of time, you were designed for Oxford, when I went to Cambridg. However
having lately had occasion to read somewhat more of these matters, than it may
be you have done, I shall be very willing to give you my opinion, as far as my
reading goes, provided you will excuse my ignorance, and presumption, in
seeming to inform you of what possibly you are better instructed than my self.


Mer. Pray, dear Cousin, let us lose no time in complements, we are now in the
Arbor, and here are seats convenient enough.


Trav. Sir, I am ready to obey your commands. And that we may proceed in some
method, at least as good as your Author there has taken; and because I suppose
it is thought by some, that he has treated as fully and clearly upon that
subject, as is necessary to satisfy a reasonable man, let us examine him from
the beginning to the end.


Mer. That I fear will be too tedious for you.


Trav. No Sir, you have only to read those places, which are marked with the
red lead Pen; And if you please to add any arguments of your own (which I am
confident will have more weight, than many which he has produced) I will
endeavor to give you the most plain and satisfactory Answers I can.


Mer. Agreed; And in the first place I find, you have wounded even Plato
himself in the very Title of the Book.


Trav. No Sir, it is only his Ghost or Doemon, Plato Redivivus; For to tell you
the truth, I never was a friend to such troublesome spirits. But in earnest, do
you not think it a little arrogance in our Polypragmatick (notwithstanding the
gentle excuse of the Publisher) to assume the Title even of Plato himself. I am
confident, could Plato look into the world again* he would be much ashamed to
see how ill a figure his Ghost makes among all sober men, and it would prove a
second death more cruel than the first, to see himself so ill Travestie.


Mar. But Cousin, he that maintains Plato's opinions, may surely without
offense call himself Plato's Friend and Disciple, and Honoris gratia, as our
Author says, take upon himself the name of him, whom he admires and follows;
that is common enough at this day among our selves.


Trav. It Is true, but in that case he ought rather to have styled himself Plato
Britannicus: That would have made distinction enough between the Master and the
Scholar, agreed better with the instances which you have brought on his behalf,
and have been more modest than Redivivus.

However you must consider that Plato and others living then under
Commonwealths, wrote in favor of that Form of Government, under which their
lives and fortunes were protected. And besides, many of them, being but the
late corruptions of Monarchy or Aristocracy, wanted the learned Philosopher's
defense. But to alter, nay totally destroy the ancient established Government,
under which we enjoy all the blessings and liberties, which our Ancestors ever
did, or we can reasonably desire, would have been so much contrary to the
Wisdom and Judgment of Plato, that he would no more-have wrote in our days, for
a Democracy in London, than for Monarchy at Athens.

Add to this the vast difference between the State of Greece in those days, and
that of Great Britain in these: The first was divided into several different
Governments, all aemulous of one another greatness, and were oftentimes forced
to make great alterations in their Polities, according to the misfortunes, or
success of their Neighbors, who besides were all upon the same Continent, and
had no other bounds or separation between them, than a hedge or brook, or at
most a little River.

But England having subsisted gloriously and happily, more than 1700 years, as
authentic History can witness, under a Monarchical Government, and divided
from the world by a Ditch which nature has made, not easily passable, Toto
divisos orb Britannos, fears no interruption whatsoever, in our Tranquillity
or Government, but such as may proceed from seditious men, whom false
mischievous and calumniating persons (such as our Author may, if tolerated,
decoy into some Rebellion as unnatural, as to themselves destructive.

To conclude, I appeal to all wise men, whether the Government of Athens in
those days, be more applicable and necessary for us and ours in these, than to
affirm, that the Government of France could not possibly subsist, except they
introduce the Discipline of Geneva, or Polity of the little Commonwealth of
Luca or Genoua.


Mer. I am much pleased with this way of reasoning, and am well satisfied, that
times, and places, and circumstances, may alter our reason exceedingly, and
that no one Polity, or Form of Governments or laws whatsoever, are universally
proper for all places.

Plato, I think, introduced in his Commonwealth, a commonalty or common use of
Wives or Women, as well as of all other Goods and Chattels. Lycurgus forbad the
use of Gold and Silver, divided all the Lands equally amongst all, and
permitted the noble exercise of stealing. Sure could these two learned men
preach the same Doctrine in our days at London, as they did then in Sparta and
Athens, they would be looked upon rather as madmen, than great Lawgivers and
Philosophers.


Trav. (...), or rapto vivere, was indeed commendable among the Egyptians, and
generally all the Grecians, as well as Spartans. But it was not, ad sumptum
libidini proebendum, as Gellius observes, but only pro exercitio disciplinaque
reipublicoe factitatum. To accustom their youth to vigilance and agility, that
thereby they might be initiated in some measure in military affairs, and learn
the practical part of laying, as well as avoiding the snares and ambushes of
their enemies.

This practice in Peace prepared them for War abroad, and the impossibility of
gaining any thing at home, together with the small reward of Industry, so
inclined them to it, that they fancied, they could be no where more miserable,
than in their own Houses, nor ever lead a more unfortunate than a peaceable
life, Ils estoient si malheureux en leurs maisons (says my Author) qu' ils ne
demandoient que la guerre pour en sontir, and trouver dans la fatique des arms
du soulagement a leurs maux. And I am confident, whosoever shall consider
impartially the Laws and Constitutions of those older Democratical Governments,
I mean of Rome, as well as Sparta and Athens, will find, that they were
adapted, and contrived rather for the e^largement and conquest of other
Countries, than the peace and security of their own, and in effect they were
all three in contitinual Wars; sometimes Conquerors, sometimes reduced to the
utmost extremities of Conquest, until at last, having past through all the
miseries which Change and Wars produce, they were united all, and consolidated
under a Monarchy, from which only true solid Form of Government, they at first
proceeded.

Now how improper such Laws and Constitutions would prove for us, who are in no
measure in their circumstances, and to whom all foreign acquisitions, have been
justly thought rather chargeable, and prejudicial, than advantageous, I leave
to you and all sober men to determine.

As for Plato, it is true, that he permitted the promiscuous use of Women, as
may be seen in his 4 Repub. for which amongst other things Aristotle reprehends
him in his 2 Polit. c. 5.

But that might proceed from the little respect which he had for that Sex, and
great love for the other, which made him so great a Paederastist, or to speak
plainer, a Sodomite that he wished himself as many eyes, as there were Stars in
the Heavens, the better to admire his dear Alexis, his Phedius, or his Agathon;
witness (amongst other tender expressions) that celebrated Distich to his
beloved Agathon.

(...)
(...).
I cannot pass by a memorable passage to this purpose of Philo, a great
favourer of Plato, who tells us in his Book De vita Contemplatrice, that
Plato's Convivia's were all spent in the affairs of love, not of Men toward
Women, or Women toward Men, which the Law of nature does very well approve,
but of Men toward one another, or youths no way differing but in their Ages,
(...), etc.

Now whether our Climate be warm enough to entertain such Philosophical and
Amorous notions, will be an experiment amongst his Politics, worthy the name
of Plato Redivivus.

But to return to his Government, and that you may not be carried away with the
fame only, or great reputation of any man, whether ancient or modern; give me
leave to mind you, that Plato, as great a Philosopher as he was, had
nevertheless an Antagonist, as eminent in all manner of learning as himself; I
mean the admirable Xenophon, who, whilst Plato instituted his Commonwealth,
defended worthily the most excellent Government of Monarchy, as may be seen at
large in his Cyropaidia. And so jealous were these two famous men of their name
and honor, that as Plato in all his writings never named Xenophon, though
contemporaries, so Xenophon also never made any mention of Plato.


Mer. This, Cousin, is thus far very plain and satisfactory, that is to say,
that the ancient Customs, Laws, and Governments of Greece, or any other part of
the World, though contrived and modeled by men extremely learned, and most
proper for those times and Countries, where they were in force, are not for
that single reason practicable in our days, and in our Kingdom, any farther
than our case and circumstances agree with theirs.

And that the Authority of Plato, Lycurgus, or Solon, or any other, are to be
admitted no farther than their laws are proper or convenient for us.


Trav. Right, for though Galen, Hypocrates or Aesculapius himself, should have
delivered as an Oracle that Phlebotomy is good in Fevers, yet if a modern
Physician shall from thence affirm that we may as safely bleed an ancient
Phlegmatic person, languishing under a malignant Fever, as a vigorous, young,
Sanguine man, who is sick of a burning Fever, I think in reason, we ought not
to admit of his inference.

Besides, you must again remark, that as Democracy, so Monarchy had equally its
learned Champions, as Homer, Callimachus, Aristotle, Seneca and others.


Mer. I apprehend you, and from thence you would insinuate, that the
Republiques of Holland, Venice, or Geneva, may as well follow the Maxims of
Xenophon, and imitate the Governments of Persia, and generally all the Eastern
Monarchies upon the bare credit of that Great Man, and example of those
Flourishing Empires as England, France, or Spain, the discipline of Plato, upon
his sole Authority, and Fortune of his little Grecian Commonwealth. Your
inference is most reasonable, and your design most just, which is to disengage
our judgments from the dependence upon any Man's great Reputation, I have only
one question or two to ask you, before we leave Greece, the rather because I
would be well informed, concerning a Country whose prosperity under their good
Laws, and Democratical form of Government, our Author has produced as great
arguments, and rules for our imitation.


Trav. By all means Sir, for as nothing can oblige me more, than to use all
possible freedom in asking whatsoever you doubt, or seems difficult to you, so
you can never make this Discourse without that liberty, either pleasurable or
profitable.


Mer. Pray then Sir, give me leave to mind you, that you were just now saying,
that some of those Grecian Republics, were but the corruptions of Monarchy, or
Aristocracy: and that notwithstanding their excellent Laws, they were not only
engaged in many most desperate Wars, but that their very Laws themselves,
seemed to induce them: If your memory can serve to make this out, or bring any
few examples, I shall be extremely satisfied, especially since the true
knowledge of the ancient state of Greece, will be a great help to me in your
following discourse.


Trav. I shall endeavor to give you as plain and as short an answer, as the
case, and my memory will permit. And to your first Question, I must tell you,
that all Greece was originally Governed under most absolute Monarchies. And
that they descended for many ages successively from Father to Son, as generally
amongst us at this day.

I will pitch chiefly upon Athens and Sparta, which I suppose will be
sufficient at present: I need not begin so high as the very original of Greece
it self, and tell you they were peopled by Fathers of Families. I mean Jon,
Javon, or Javan the Son of Japhet. Whence durum Japeti genus, and thence their
name* (...) and (...), as is observed by Suidas.

Of these you may read farther in Josephus and other Authors. I shall only mind
you, that before Deucalion's Flood, Cecrops was said to have brought Learning,
and with it Idolatry out of Egypt into Greece, and was King in that Country,
which we call Attica or Athens. Ante Deucalionis tempora Regem habuere
Cecropem. Cran^us succeeded Cecrops, to whose Daughter Athis that Country owes
its name. After him Amphiction, who dedicated the Town to Minerva, and from her
name called it Athenae. In his days happened the Flood of Deucalion: After that
per ordinem successionis, the Kingdom descended to Erichthe^s or Erichthonius,
then passing through many others, unto Theseus, and from him to Demophoon, who
was an associate in the Trojan War. There you have a long Catalogue of the
Grecian Kings, without the least mention either of an Aristocracy or a
Democracy amongst them. And from thence the Kingdom fell by succession to
Codrus, the Son of Melanthus, who was the last King of Athens. Eusebius in his
Chronology gives us the names of Sixteen Kings of Athens to Codrus inclusively,
which space of time makes up near Five hundred years. And in his time it was,
that a War broke out between the Athenians and the Dorians. Which last when
they consulted the Oracle of Apollo, which should have the better, it was
answered, that they should certainly overcome their enemies, except the King of
the Athenians were slain: Upon this, strict charge was given to their Army,
that none should presume ^^ hurt the Athenian King; but Codrus being informed,
as well of the Answer ^f the Oracle, as the order which the Dorians had given,
unknown to any, clad himself in a miserable habit, and geting in that condition
into the Enemies Camp, raised on purpose an impertinent quarrel, and was there
according to his intent, slain by his enemies. This being soon discovered, the
Dorians of themselves retreated home, and the War ended: Quis eum non miretur,
^aith Paterculus, qui iis artibus mortem quoesierit, quibus ab ignavis vita
quoeri solet?

Much such an action did Leonidas King of Sparta for the safety of his Country
in the Persian War, at the streights of Thermopiloe. Who being admonished by
the Oracle, that either himself must fall, or Sparta, died desperately fighting
in the midst of the Persian Army.

I believe, Cousin, you will hardly remark two more generous actions of public
spirited men in any Commonwealth, than those of these two M^narchs. But to
return to Athens, M^don Son to Codrus, was first Archon ^ Athens, in whose
Family that Kingdom continued, having changed nothing by the name of (...),
into Archon, until the death of Alcmoeon.

After him Charops was first created Archon for Ten years only, which
constitution lasted Seventy years. The last of those was Erixias -- Tum annu^s
commissa est magistratibus Respublica. Then Monarchy lay bleeding, and their
Archon became but an annual Magistrate.

The first of these was Creon, to whom Nine other Princes were chosen, ex
nobilibus urbis. And under this Form it was, which we may truly call an
Aristocracy, That Solon was appointed to make them laws, which it seems were
contrived so equal, between the Senate and the People, that he was we^^
esteemed, and thanked on both sides: This was the first considerable change in
the Athenian Government, for wh^^ was before a Monarchy, and Governed
absolutely according to the will of the Monarch, became now an Optimacy, or if
you will, according to Isocrates, a mixed Democracy, (...), and had now, by the
diligence of Solon, certain public written Laws, which (as I said) seemed so
reasonable, that both the Prince and the People obliged themselves to observe
them.


Mer. Pray Cousin, by your leave, had the Athenians no Law before Solon? And
did their Kings rule after their own Wills, which we may call, Fancies or
Inclinations?


Trav. First, Sir, the Athenians had, as I said, no certain public Laws, by
which they might constantly know their Duty, and which might regulate the
Princes Commands, as well as their Obedience, except a few which Draco made for
them about sixty Years before Solon; which being now mostly antiquated,
signified little. Solon therefore is truly said to have found Laws proper for
the Government and Times, which were both much out of order and distracted.
Administratio Reipublicoe annuis magistratibus commissa, sed Civitati nulloe
tunc leges erant, quia ^^bido Regu^^ pro legibus habebatur. Legitur itaque
Solon, vir justitia insignis, qui velut novam Civitatem legibus conder^t, etc.

And for their Kings, I must tell you, that anciently, not only in Greece, in
which there were several Kingdoms, but generally all the World over, the People
were governed, purely and simply, according to the good Will and Pleasure of
their Prince. This you will easily believe was very inconvenient for the
People. For, since there are more bad than good amongst all sor^s of Men and
Professions, it happened by consequence, that there were generally in the World
more evil than just and virtuous Princes.

The last therefore were adored as Gods. The first, from the very ill use of
their right of Power, were deservedly called Tyrants, and sometimes removed by
violence, when their Yoke grew insupportable.


Mer. I do not wonder at it; for humane Nature has its Bounds, beyond which it
cannot suffer; and both Respect and Obedience too, will break, when bent with
too much Rigor and beyond their Trempe.


Trav. This has happened, and may do so again, especially amongst People whose
Understandings having been never opened by the more glorious Rays and Light of
the Gospel, follow, at best, the Dictates of Nature only; amongst which, that
of Self-Preservation is none of the least. But you will observe, that these
Accidents are still no Arguments against a Monarchical Form of Government, no
more than the happy Reign of a good King, and the entire Obedience of most
dutiful Subjects, are certain Reasons for it, these being Contingences, and may
vary often, in Prince, or People, or in both together.


Mer. What solid Foundation then do you establish for perpetuating a
Government, and judging of its Goodness?


Trav. The same which God and Moses did, I mean, good Laws, of which we have as
many, as prudently penned, and as proper for us, as any People upon Earth; not
only in the point of Meum and Tuum, but the more necessary parts of Obedience
and Command, the Right of Power and Honor in the Governor, and Right of
Privilege and Protection in the Governed; that the one may be secured against
Oppression, and the other from Violation. And in this it was, that Solon,
(having probably in his Travels* perused Part, it not all the Law of Moses, and
nicking the Circumstances of the troublesome Affairs in Attica) succeeded so
well that, as has been said, he had the Fortune to make such Laws, and
contrive such a Form of Government, as for a time pleased both Parties.


Mer. Pray, How did Athens prosper under these new Laws, and this Innovation in
the Government?


Trav. As for the Laws, they continued in Force for many Years: but for the
Form of Government, it succeeded as generally all Innovations do, especially
such as are popular; for, his mingled Democracy became, even in his own Days, a
perfect Monarchy, under the Reign of Pisistratus, to whom, even Solon himself
was a constant Privy Councillor.


Mer. It surprises me extremely, that so wise a Man as Solon* should fail so
grossly in so material a Point as the Establishment of his new Government.


Trav. Sir, you will cease to wonder, when I shall tell you how the Case and
his Circumstances stood. Attica was divided into three principal Factions,
according to the three different Situations of the Country. The Mountaineers
were all for a Popular Government; those of the plain or low Country affected
an Aristocracy; the Coasters, and those who lived near the Seaside, desired
rather a mixed Government; but all the People and poorer sort were so generally
indebted to the Rich, that they paid annually no less than the sixth part of
all they had, to their Creditors: whence they were called Hectemor^i; and many
were so desperately engaged that they were forced to sell their Children.

In these Distractions and Afflictions, the more sober part did believe, That
nothing could so truly heal their Grievances as returning again under the
Government of a Monarch; whose Power being despotical, might, according as
himself should think most just, end all their Differences, by easing the Poor,
without exasperating the Rich.

In this Conjuncture, Solon (being a rich Merchant, and a wise Man, and living
splendidly enough) grew so popular, that the common People invited him to take
the Government wholly upon himself. Two of the Parties were very zealous in it,
and the third seemed well enough satisfied that the Management of all should be
in the Hands of so prudent a Man, as he was thought to be.

But Solon very unadvisedly refusing what was offered him, suffered himself to
be chosen after Philombrotus their Archon; and then, to gratify the People,
who had been so respective to him, he abolisheth their Debts, and gave them a
greater share in the Government than in good reason and Policy they ought to
have had. All their Lawgivers and Politicians, after Draco, (as Josephus cont.
App. observes) aut Civitatem laudantes, aut Reges, that is, affected, according
to their Circumstances or Inclinations, a Popular or a Monarchical Government.


Mer. But this sure should rather have strengthened their popular Government,
than introduced another so contrary to it.


Trav. No Sir, that is a Mistake; for when Men are unduely raised to the Helm
who are born to obey, or as Agrippa observes, Qui hoereditariam obedientiam
susceperunt, their new Power, like Strong Liquors, intoxicates them, their
Heads grow giddy, and they become more insolent and unsupportable, even to
their Fellows, for whose sakes they received their Honors, than the most
absolute Monarchs generally have been. This makes them easily shake off the
servile Yoke, and return to the Obedience of their natural Prince, or else some
aspiring Man amongst them usurps all. So the popular Sedition of the Gracchi,
and some others of the Tribunes, confirmed the Authority of the Consuls, and
introduced at last (even by the Consent of the People) a Monarchical Government.


Mer. This Observation is most just, and common enough amongst us, nothing
being more ridiculously proud and insolent, than a Clown in Office. But what
became afterward of Athens?


Trav. Pisistratus having governed very well, about thirty five Years, left the
Kingdom to his Son Diocles; who being murdered by one of his Subjects, the
other Son, Hippias, was banished by the Rebellious Multitude, and the
Government fell again into the Hands of the People. Then it became an
Aristocracy, and was governed wholly by the Senate, Permittente populo imperium
ad Senatum transfertur. Then a Tyranny under thirty Governors, each of which
was more cruel than any of their former Kings had been. Then they reduced the
thirty to ten Tyrants; then the Government came to the People again; and, in a
Word, passing through all the Changes and Forms which they could invent, they
had nothing certain and established but continual Wars, which lasted until
they became Slaves to the Macedonian Conqueror, and at last remained Subjects
to the Roman and Grecian, as at present to the Turkish Emperors.


Mer. And was this the Condition of the celebrated Athenian Governments? are
their Wars and Changes the admirable Blessings which we are encouraged to seek
after?


Trav. Sir, I relate only matter of Fact, as you will find at large in
Thucydides, Justin, Plutarch, and several other Authors; make what use of it
you think fitting.


Mer. The Use is plain; which is, To seek after Peace while I live, and, by the
Grace of God, endeavor, as far as belongs to a Man of my Profession, to
support the present Government by Law established, that we may avoid the Plague
of Innovation, and the Slavery of some Macedonian Conqueror. One Word more,
dear Cousin: How came Athens to produce such excellent Wits as it seems it did,
in those troublesome Days?


Trav. As our Miseries under the Tyranny of the rebellious House of Commons,
and Usurpation of a Plebeian, produced several most learned Works; or as the
Persecution of the Primitive Church procured the excellent Volumes of many Holy
Fathers and Martyrs.

Besides, you must believe ^^at Athens had some Intervals of Prosperity: but
that is still little to our purpose; for, I cannot think it reasonable that we
in this Age should be obliged ^^ in^ur all the Misfortunes, which Innovation
generally produces, in hopes that the next Age may be (if possible) more happy
and flourishing t^^n we are at present.


Mer. Sir, I am hitherto perfectly well satisfied, and ^eg your Pardon for the
Trouble which I have given you; but it will shorten our way very much in our
Discourse hereafter. One word concerning the famous Spar^^^ Commonwealth, and
then I have done.


Trav. That will not cost us much time. You must know then, that Sparta was
governed originally by Kings, as Athens was. They reckon nine successively to
Lycurgus, whose Power was also most arbitrary. But then the Kingdom falling, by
Right of Succession, to Charyllus, Posthumate Son to Polybita, Lycurgus his
Uncle taking the Advantage of his Nephew's Minority, gave the People Laws, and
made some Alteration in the Government, which consisted principally in the
Institution of a Senate composed of twenty eight of his own chiefest Friends.
The Kingdom he delivered to his Nephew as soon as he came of Age.


Mer. What kind of Government do you call that?


Trav. Monarchy, without doubt. It is true, their Senate had given to them a
greater Right of Power than ours have, who enjoy only a Right of Counsel and
Consent, or a subordinate Power for the Dispensation of Justice; and the People
had Liberty to choose their Senators. But the Right of making Peace and War,
with several other Prerogatives, together with the Right of Succession,
continued always in the Prince.


Mer. I have heard much talk of the Ephori. Were not they created on purpose to
abate the Authority of their Kings?


Trav. Sir, they were not created, until about an Hundred and thirty years
after the death of Lycurgus: And then if we may believe their Kings Agis and
Cleomenes whom our Author has mentioned) their Authority was only to do
justice, whilst their Kings were absent in the Wars, and were properly the
Kings Ministers, they usurped indeed afterward a Sovereign Authority and dared
to depose the Kings themselves; for which Usurpation, Cleomenes, who divided
again the Land among the People, slew them publicly as enemies to the ancient
Government, and present prosperity and peace of Sparta.


Mer. Pray Cousin, what new Laws did Lycurgus institute with his new Government.


Trav. Many Sir, but sure not much to our purpose, or fit for our imitation;
for at first they had none, Non habentibus Spartanis leges instituit, etc.
Their Prince's will, being (as I have already observed) the only rule. But
Lycurgus considering, I imagine, the greatness of the Spartan name, framed Laws
most proper for the encouraging War, and educating the People from their
infancy in a military kind of Discipline; Amongst other Laws he totally forbad
the use of Gold and Silver, Auri argentique usum, velut omnium scelerum
materiam sustulit, he forbad traffic, but encouraged idleness and stealing.

He commended parsimony and hardship, and ordered that all the People of
Sparta, should always eat together, that none should eat at his own house,
except upon great occasion. That the young Women should dance, and exercise
publicly without any manner of covering upon them, and many such, too long to
repeat at present.

Judge then how ridiculous and unpracticable, and unnecessary these Laws would
appear in our age, and in our climate and circumstances; To conclude let me
refer you to two sufficient Authors, concerning the Spartan Laws. The first is
Aristotle, in his 7. Pol. cap. 14. who tells us, that the chief admirers of the
Spartan Commonwealth, have placed its sole excellency, in having Laws adapted
most Particularly for War and Victory. (...). etc. The other is Euripides in
his Andromache. His Words are these;

(...)
(...)
(...).
Si vis Martia
Vobis lacones absit, et ferri decus,
Spectatur ultra quid sit eximium, nihil.
What can ye boast, ye Spartans, if ye cease
To fight like Dogs, and live like Men in Peace.
Add to all, this single Consideration, That Lacedemonia was but as a small
Province, in Comparison of the Kingdom of Great Britany; and Sparta, no more
than a Corporation Town. And when you have done this, let their Law, or Form of
Government, be what it will, I dare undertake to make it appear, that they are
so far from being made an Example for our Imitation, that our own Government,
as distempered as our Author would have it, even at this time, while we are
discoursing, is a more excellent Form, and the Laws more just and reasonable*
and conducing more to the Safety and Perpetuity of the Government, and Peace
and happy Subsistence of the People, than either Sparta or Athens ever enjoyed,
or any other part of Greece, or Government in the World, except that Monarchy,
which God himself was pleased to institute, and which, above any* other, ours
does most particularly imitate. And this, I hope, is a sufficient Answer to
whatsoever our Author has offered concerning Greece.


Mer. Dear Cousin, You have more than performed your Promise; and that my
Pleasure as well as Profit may be complete, pray let us proceed with our Author.


Trav. As Soon as you please.


Mer. What say you then to the first Day?


Trav. Very little, save only that I never knew a Day worse spent in my Life,
nothing being more nauseous than to read the impertinent Complements of three
Fools, extolling one another great Parts and Learning; when, if we may believe
the Publisher, who comes in like Sapientum octavus, the eighth wise Man, the
whole Triumvirate, or if you will, Quatrumvirate are included in the politic
individuum of the English Gentleman.


Mer. Really, I was almost deceived at first, and did begin to fancy that I
knew the Physician.


Trav. It was without doubt his Design to deceive all Men.


Mer. To what Purpose?


Trav. That he might make the credulous Reader believe, that there were more
learned Men of his Opinion besides himself. But truly, I think that neither the
State of Venice, nor College of Physicians, are much obliged to him, for
picking out two of their Societies, to make up so ridiculous a Comedy.


Mer. Is that way of writing Ancient or Modern?


Trav. Dialogue was oftentimes very properly used among the Ancients; but they
seldom introduced more than two, if the Subject of their Discourse were grave
and serious.


Mer. Why then has our Author made choice of three?


Trav. I suppose the noble Venetian wanted Learning enough, to comprehend so
profound a Discourse, and the Physician, we must imagine, had not anatomized or
studied the Body Politic, so thoroughly as he had done the Body Natural, and so
could not see so far into a Millstone as a Venetian Statesman can, who, as our
Nobleman tells us, will sometimes discover a State Marasmus breaking out, two
hundred Years after the passing an indigested Law; and this without the help of
any Telescope: both therefore possessing separately these eminent
Qualifications, became jointly an Auditory worthy of Sir Politic Wouldbee's
Doctrine. Besides, you know the number Three is most perfect. But had I been
advised withal, I could have shown our Author this Number of Three so
ingeniously and politically placed, that our Medicopolitico-Venetian Publisher
might have born a better part than he does, in his Book, without either
altering the Number or spoiling the Figure.

But, to be serious, I must confess, Cousin, that I have sometimes heard two or
three Fools cog^^onaring one another, as our Author calls it; and it has been
pleasant enough: But that one Coglione should presume to coglionare three
Kingdoms, impose upon His Majesty, despise the Wisdom of the Lords and Commons,
His Majesty's Privy Council, and Learned Judges of the Land; and last of all,
to give the Fool to all our Worthy Ancestors, who have lived within the Compass
of four hundred years, according to his Account, is so ridiculous a piece of
Insolence, that I know not whether I should be more angry at his Arrogance,
than laugh at his Impertinence. But, let us proceed, and see whether the second
Day will afford us any thing better.


Mer. Nothing, Sir, can be more acceptable to me. But, I think, the ringing of
that Bell tells us, that Dinner is ready. In the Evening my Coach shall carry
us into a pleasant Ai^ a little farther from home; where, if I shall not too
much tire you, I should be extremely pleased to hear your Opinion of the Second
Part.


Trav. Most willingly, Sir; and by that time I shall have rubbed over some few
of my old Notes, whereby I may be able to give you a little better Satisfaction
than hitherto I have done.


Mer. Dear Cousin, I shall own my self much obliged to you; and in the mean
time, let us go drink a Health or two to our Good Friends at London.


Trav. Sir, I wait upon you.


Second Discourse.
Mer. COme Sir, we are now in the open Air, and, I think, in a pleasant
Country. And, to tell you the Truth, I am so much pleased with our Morning
Discourse, that I cannot any longer forbear importuning and persecuting you,
until we shall have got through our politic Author, and examined whether we
be really so sick as he would make us believe we are; and if we be, whether he
has ghessed right at our Distemper, and our Cure.


Trav. In good faith, Cousin, I am persuaded he plays the Knave with us, as
those idle People did, when they took in the Gentleman's Doublet, making him
believe he was in a Dropsy, and only let it out again when they thought fit to
tell him he was cured. But however, pray Sir proceed.


Mer. The first Remark which you have made lies, I perceive, upon the high
Commendation which the Noble Venetian has bestowed upon our Country, in Page
16.


Trav. Pray read it.


Mer. He says then, That since he arrived in England, he finds it one of the
most flourishing Kingdoms in Europe, full of splendid Nobility and Gentry, the
comeliest Persons alive, valiant, courteous, knowing and bountiful; well stored
with Commons, honest, industrious, fitted for Business, Merchandise, Arts, or
Arms, prodigious for Learning, and succeeding to Admiration, in the Perfection
of all Sciences.


Trav. Add to this, the good Character which our Author himself gives of us,
That there is not a more Loyal or Faithful People to their Prince in the whole
World, than ours are: that we have as gracious and good a Prince as is any
where to be found, having never yet heard that he did, or attempted to do, any
the least Act of Arbitrary Power, in any public Concern, or endeavored to
take from any particular Person, the benefit of the Law: that his only Brother,
and Heir to the Crown, is a most glorious and honorable Prince, one who has
exposed his Life, several times, for the Safety and Glory of this Nation, who
pays justly and punctually his Debts, manages his own Fortune discreetly, and
yet keeps the best Court and Equipage of any Subject in Christendom: is
courteous and affable to all: and in fine, has nothing in his whole Conduct to
be excepted against, much less dreaded. These are our Author's own Words. Now,
dear Cousin, if all these extraordinary Happinesses be the Symptoms of a
distempered Government, then the Lord keep me and my Friends out of a healthful
one.


Mer. But yet you see, that both the Venetian and himself concur in this, That
the Posture of our Affairs is turbulent, the Government and the People
disunited, the Gentry discontented; and to cure all this, he tells us, That the
present Constitution of the Government it self lies agonizing, must be altered
and changed from what it is, or all will come to Destruction.


Trav. Indeed I am apt enough to believe, that somewhat is ami^s amongst us.
But to lay the fault upon the Government rightly understood, that I think is
unreasonable.


Mer. Pray Sir, please to inform me what you mean by Government rightly
understood.


Trav. Most willingly, since it is extreme necessary to avoid Equivocations, of
which, our Author, and most such malicious Writers as he is, are very full.

Government then, is divided into the Material part, and the Formal part. The
material part, or Subjectum materiale, is the People. The Subjectum Formale, or
Proprium, est persona ^na pluresve pro cujusque gentis legibus ac moribus, is
one or more Persons, according to the Customs of different Countries, in whom
the right of Power resides.

Now, by this distinction, when a Man shall tell you that our Government is
distempered, you will certainly ask him, whether he means in the material or
formal Part, because Government, by use, is become an equivocal Word.


Mer. I understand you and suppose that our Author means the formal part.


Trav. Without doubt he does; but therein, I think he is mistaken. For, when
the whole Crasis of a Body is decayed, and Infection is gotten into the very
Marrow, and Soul of Life, the Body consumes all over, and in every part, and
never produces such lively and beauteous Marks of Health and Vigor, as those
which the Noble Venetian and English Gentleman have numbered up. But on the
other side, when a little Choler only, or Heat, or some sharp Humors, abound,
they generally show themselves in some little Tettars or Pimples, on the Face,
without infecting the whole Mass of Blood* And though I be no Physician, am yet
persuaded, that they may be easily cu^'d by some slight Purge; or, if you
please, breathing a Vein with some proper Juleps, and keeping a little Diet for
a time.

Now these Tettars and Pimples in our Body Politic, are some of those few
discontented Gentlemen, whose number, our worthy Author has himself augmented,
or some of the ignorant and turbulent Commonalty. But, had I been called into
Consultation with our State-Physician, (whom, between you and I, Cousin, I
believe to be only a Quack) I should never have agreed, that the whole Economy
and Systeme of the Body, should be so much discomposed to purge it of Humors
so easily removed.


Mer. But what if this Choler run on until it come to the Disease which they
call Atra bilis?


Trav. It would be ill advised, to neglect the Cure so long: but if they
should, a few stronger Medicines applied, by a skil^ul hand, would remedy all
at last.

But of these matters, we shall discourse more fully, in a more proper place.
And in the mean time, pray go on.


Mer. In Page the twentieth, you note these Words; The evil Counselors, the
pen^ioner Parliament, the throughpac'd Judges, the flattering Divines, the
^^sie and designing Papists, the French Councils, are not the cause of our
Misfortunes. What have you to say to this?


Trav. Little, Sir, save only, I would have you remark the Malice of the Man.
But he and his Party are known s^ well, that their Tongues are become no
Slanders. For first, as to evil Counselors, we must believe, that there ever
has been such, and ever will, whilst Men have different Judgments: that is to
say, if we mean those, as in all Charity we ought to do, who following their
Opinions, give sometimes Counsel, which in truth, may be prejudicial rather
than advantageous for us; witness* our Author himself, whom supposing to be (as
in great Charity we may) an honest Man, has yet given Counsel, even undesir'd
and unauthoriz'd, more pernicious to our Government and Happiness, than the
worst of our evil Counselors could ever have invented.

As to the Pensioner Parliament, I must confess, till of late days, I never
knew it was a Crime for a Parliament Man to hold an Employment from the King,
nor a fault in the King, to endeavor to ^o^^en the Rancor of a virulent
Member, any more than in an indulgent Father, to hire, by fair Words and
Promises, a froward and perverse natured Child, to live peaceably and decently
in the Family amongst the rest of his Brethren, since the Design both of the
Pater Patrioe, and Pater Familias, is no other than to procure to himself and
Family, a quiet and happy Life.

For the Judges and Divines, if their great Worth and Learning, and most
exemplary Lives, did not speak plainly, and loud enough in their Behalf, they
would not want better Pens than min^ to defend their Cause.

But I think their Sphere is much above the noise, much more the danger of this
barking Mongrel. When ^e named the busy and designing Papist, I was in great
hopes, that he would have added the Presbyterians too, and then we might have
come betimes to the Cause of our Misfortunes. But, since he has thought fit to
leave them out, I shall also let them alone till occasion requires. For his
French Councels, I know them no more than himself does; and, in my Opinion, had
our Author had any Wit in his Anger, he might have forborne in this place, to
have reviled the Divines and Judges of our Land, the King's Council, and
Parliament it self; that is to say, all that we hold under the King, sacred and
religious amongst us: especially since he tells us immediately, that these are
not the Causes of our Misfortunes; the finding which out, is, I think, one main
Design of his Politic Search.


Mer. Very well, Sir. The next thing is, We have played handy dandy with
Parliaments, and especially the House of Commons, (the only Part which is now
left entire of the old Constitution) by adjourning, proroguing, and dissolving
them, contrary to the true meaning of the Law.


Trav. That Is enough. I have only to remark his two Parenthesises. In the first
he tells us, That the House of Commons is the only part that is now left entire
of the old Constitution. Pray, Cousin, Have you heard what is become of the
House of Peers? or, Do you know how it comes to be less entire than ever it
was? I am persuaded you cannot tell me.


Mer. I imagine his Meaning may be, that their Estates are not so great as
formerly they have been; or that the House of Commons depended more upon them
formerly than now they do.


Trav. For the first, it is false, there being as great Estates now in the
House of Lords, as, generally, ever there were. And for the dependence of the
Commons upon the Lords, that is to say, wearing their blew Coats, making up
their Lords-train, waiting upon them to the House of Lords, and making a La^e
for them to enter, and such like, as he tells us, page 135. Let him endeavor
to reduce the House of Commons to this old Constitution if he can, and he will
soon see, how far the Commoners will think themselves obliged to him for it. If
not, why does he talk of an old Constitution?

But Sir, with his good leave, and the Commoners too I take the House of
Commons to be the latest Addition to that Assembly, which altogether we call a
Parliament. I do not remember to have heard any News of a House of Commons, as
it is now understood, until several Years after the Norman Conquest, that is,
until the end of the Reign of Henry the Third, at soonest. But though some
contend for the eighteenth of Henry the First; But the House of Lords has
subsisted, and been a Court of Judicature, even before the Roman Conquest, 1700
Years ago. Witness, amongst many other Passages, the Dispute between King
Cassibelaunus and Androgeus Duke of the Trinovantes. Whose Son, or Nephew,
having slain the Son of the King, Cassibelaunus commanded the Duke to surrender
him, in order to his Trial, that he might suffer such Punishment as the
Noblemen or Lords of the Kingdom should judge most ^it. Commotus Rex Androgeo
mandavit, ^t nepole^ suum sibi redderet paratum ^alem sententiam subire, qualem
Proceres regni judicarent. So we read of Vortegern, the British King,
Vortegernus excitatus perstrepentium vocibus super statu publico in medium
consulit Sententias Magnatum. So of the Malm. l. 1.
Saxon Ethelwulphus, Cum concilio Episcoporum ac Principum concilium salubre ac
remedium uniforme f. 22.
affirmavi, etc. So Edmundus Rex Anglorum ^^m concilio and consensu Optimatum
meorum, etc. Besides many hundred of such Instances (proving the Existence of a
Court of Lords from the Conquest of Will* the First, until the end of Hen. the
Third) are to be found in Eadmerus and other good Authors.

But, it being none of my business to defend, in this place, the Prerogatives
of the House o^ Lords, I shall not offer any thing further concerning them. But
since our Author troubles himself so much about the old Constitution of the
House of Commons, and (detracting from the House of Lords) calls the Lower
House the only entire part of the old Parliaments. I shall beg leave to mind
you what was the Cause and Design of their first Institution; as I find it in
the best Histories of those Ages; and by that you will easily perceive their
Antiquity, as also, which was the eldest Constitution.

William the Conqueror, P. 57. 154. 211.
(called by Eadmerus, and others, William the Great,) having mastered the Power
and the Fortune of the English Nation, what he retained not, in Providence, as
the Demesnes of the Crown, or reserved not, in Piety, for the Maintenance of
the Church, the rest of his Kingdom he divided amongst such of his principal
Lords as sailed hither with him in the Barque of* his Adventures, giving to
some, whole Countries, to others, considerable parts of it; so as in the County
of Norfolk, for instance, there were not above threescore Chief Lords or
Owners, and half of them not very considerable, as appears by Doomsday.

And as the Estate, so the Council of the Kingdom was entrusted into few Hands,
none being employed in the public Councils, but only these great Lords and
Peers who were Conciliarii nati, born to that privilege, and came thither
without Leave and without Summons.

And although at first this great Power and Trust in so few hands, was looked
upon as a great Obligation to those Lords, and a great Security to that King,
so long as their Interests stood united in their new Conquest; yet, in the next
Age, when the heat of that Action was over, their Interests divided, and the
Obligation forgotten, it proved to the succeeding Kings so great a Curb and
Restraint to Sovereignty, that nothing fell more intimately into their Care,
than how to retrench (as much as they durst) the Power of that Nobility which
they began to suspect, and was like, in time, to mate even Monarchy it self.

Though others foresaw the mischief in time, yet none attempted the Remedy
until King John; who no sooner began to reign (in his own Right, for, by the
way, he practiced a little in his Brother's time, and by that Experience found
Mat. Paris his Words true of the Barons, viz. Quot Domini tot Tyranni.) But he
bethought himself to frame his Counsel of such a Constitution as he might have
Credit and Influence upon it.

To be short, he was the first that durst restrain the tumultuary access of the
Barons to Council; he was the first that would admit of none but such as he
should summon, and would summon none but such as he thought fitting: and
besides, he would send out Summons to several of the Commons (or lesser
Tenants) mixing them with the Nobles, and engaging them thereby to his
Interest: and whereas, before, the Council consisted of the Nobility and
Clergy, he erected a third Estate, a Body of the Commons, or lesser Tenants,
which might, in some measure, equal the rest, and be faithful to him. All which
appears in the Clause Rolls and Patent Rolls of the sixth Year of this King;
and in vain, before that time, shall any Man seek either for Summons or Advice
of the Commons in any of these great Councils.

King John having put this Cheque upon the Councils, considers next, how to
balance the unequal power of the unruly Barons; and first he tampers with the
Bishops and Clergy: sain he would have drawn them into his Party, at least, to
his Dependency; but that Trial cost him dear. In the next place therefore, that
he might create new Dependances and new Strength to himself, he becomes a great
Patron and Founder, or at least, Benefactor to many considerable Corporations,
as Newcastle, Yarmouth, Lynn, and others; insomuch, that he is taken notice of
by Speed, and other of our Chroniclers, and styled particularly, the Patron of
Corporations: Thus you see not only when, but for what Reason, the Institution
of the House of Commons was first thought upon; and indeed, according to their
old or first Constitution, their Attendance in Parliament, or (as we say) their
serving in Parliament, was looked upon rather as an easier Service due to the
King, than otherwise, as a Privilege granted to the People; as may be seen,
not only in the Case of the Burgesses of St. Albans in temp. Ed. 2. recited by
the Worthy Dr. Brady against Petit, but also by many other good Authorities,
too long for this place.

But, begging your Pardon for this long Story, I now proceed to the second
Parenthesis; in which, he makes no Scruple, to accuse his present Majejesty,
and his late Sacred Father, of breaking the Law, in adjourning, proroguing, and
dissolving Parliaments.

Indeed, Cousin, I know nothing that reflects more truly upon the Constitution
of our Government, than that it suffers such pestilent seditious Men, as our
Author seems to be, to live under it. For nothing sure is more evident, in the
whole or any part of the Law, whether Statute, common or customary, than that
the Kings of England, ever since the first Parliament that ever was called,
have had, and exercised the same Power, in adjourning, proroguing, and
dissolving them, as his present Majesty or his Father of Blessed Memory, ever
did.

And, that you may have Plato's own Authority against himself, I must
anticipate so much of his Discourse, as to inform you, That in p. 105. you will
find these very Words; That which is undoubtedly the King's Right, or
Prerogative, is, to Call and Dissolve Parliaments.

Nay more, so great was the Authority and Prerogative of our Kings over the
House of Commons, according to their old Constitution, That they have in their
Writs of Summons named and appointed the particular Persons all over England,
who were to be returned to their Parliaments: sometimes have ordered, that only
one Knight for the Shire and one Burgess for a Corporation, should be sent to
their Parliaments, and those also named to the Sheriffs, and sometimes more; as
may be seen, by the very Writs of Edw. 2. and Edw. 3. fully recited by the
aforesaid Dr. Brady, from p. 243. to p. 252.

Besides, Sir, what is more reasonable and equitable, than that our Kings
should enjoy the Power of Adjourning, Proroguing, and Dissolving, that their
Council or Parliament, when, and as often as they please, since our Kings
alone, in Exclusion to all other mortal Power in England whatsoever, enjoy
^olely the Prerogative of Calling or Assembling these their Parliaments, when,
and where, they alone shall think convenient.


Mer. I confess, we generally say, That it is a great Weakness in a cunning
Man, to raise a Spirit which afterward he cannot lay; and that in such case
the Spirit tears him in pieces first who raised him. And, I think, we have had
the Misfortune to see somewhat very tragical, of this kind, in the beginning of
our late Troubles, if it were not possibly the great Cause of his late
Majesty's fatal Catastrophe. But truly, excepting that case, I never heard the
King's Authority, in proroguing or dissolving Parliaments, questioned before.


Trav. Well, Sir, go forward to the twenty fifth Page; for all between, is
nothing but quacking, and ridiculous Complements, or Matter as little worth our
notice.


Mer. He tells us there, that it remains undiscovered, how the first Regulation
of Mankind began; that Necessity made the first Government; that every Man, by
the Law of Nature, had, like Beasts in a Pasture, Right to every thing. That
every Individual, if he were stronger, might seize whatever any other had
possessed himself of before.


Trav. Hold a little, Sir, that we may not have too much Work upon our Hands at
once. I think he said before, at Page 22. That he would not take upon him, so
much as to conjecture how and when Government began in the World, etc.

This, Cousin, I cannot pass by, because it seems to be the only piece of
Modesty, which I observe, in his whole Treatise. And I should commend him for
it much, but that I have great reason to suspect, that he pretends Ignorance,
only to cover his Knavery, and thereby leave room to introduce several other
most false and pernicious Principles, which we shall endeavor to refute.

First therefore, I shall take the Liberty, not only to conjecture, but to tell
him plainly, when and where Covernment began, and how also it continued.

Government then, began with the World, and God, who had the Sovereign Right of
Power over the whole Universe, invested Adam with so much as was necessary for
the Government of this World, and that in such express Words, that there can
remain no doubt, but such as is malicious and willful. And God said, be
fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have
Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the Air, and over every
living thing that moves upon the Earth.

And, least those Words, every living thing, should not yet be general enough
to comprehend Mankind, God gives Adam the rule over his Wife Eve, the only
humane Subject that was then upon Earth, and from whom, all the Race of Mankind
was to proceed.

And surely Adam had naturally a Right of Power over those whom himself begot.
Unto Cain God gave the rule over his Brother Abel, and after God had banished
him from the Protection of his Father, he builds a City, and secures it by
Walls. Can any body be so blind as not to see that Cain was absolutely
Governor of the Place, and had an undoubted Right of Power over those Subjects
which proceeded out of his own Loins?

I confess, the Affairs of that Age before the Flood, are a little obscure; and
since Moses thought fit to pass them over with so great Silence, it is
reasonable we should do so too. But, we may most probably conjecture, as well
from that short History in the Bible, as from the Authority of Josephus, and
after him Grotius, That the neglect of Government, and of the exercise of Power
in those days, produced the Deluge: for formerly Government was but a trouble;
and as the best of Men cared for no more than was necessary for the
Preservation of their particular Families, so some were unnatural enough to
abandon their Children to the Licentiqusness of their own corrupt Inclinations.
Whence proceeded Violence, as the Text says, The Earth was corrupt, and filled
with Violence. And, as Grotius tells us, Ante Dil^vium Gigantum oetate
promiso^a invaluit coedium Licentia. And from thence followed the Punishment of
their Violence, by that universal Cataclis^*

But howsoever it was before the Flood, I suppose it will be sufficient for our
purpose, if we deduce the History of Government, and the Right of Power, from
the Restoration of Mankind to the first Grecian Kingdoms; which, I hope, may
be done so plainly, and that by the Authority of approved Authors, that not
only Europe, Asia, and Africa, but even America it self, according to the
imperfect Accounts of Solon, Plato, and Pliny, and of later Authors, Josephus
Acosta, and Herrera, will appear to have been repeopled and governed absolutely
by Fathers of Families.

But, not to embarque into so wide an Ocean as that is, we shall keep our
selves within the Streights, where Affairs being more certainly known, they
will prove more pertinent to our purpose. Which is, to show, when, and how
Governments, and the first Regulation of Man began in the World after the Flood.

I think, there are very few who doubt the Truth of the Flood it self. Common
Experience, even in our days, in several Countries attesteth it; besides, most
Authors, both Greek and Latin, agree to it, even as it was delivered by Moses.

I confess, the Greeks, from the Assyrians, talk of a Deluge happening under
Sythithrus, or Xi^uthrus, as also Ogyges and Deuc^lion. But we are assured by
Grotius, de verit. Rel. Christ. That they signify the same in Greek as Noe in
the Hebrew Language. Philo de proemiis and poenis tells us plainly, that whom
the Chaldaeans call Noe, the Greeks call Deucalion. (...). And many other good
Authorities there are, it being most usual among the Greeks to contrive
expressive Names. So Plato observes of Solon, That he, searching into the Force
and Signification of the Hebrew Words, turned them into the Greek Idiom, vim
ipsam significationemque nominum personatus ea ipsa nostr^ vestivit Sermon.

This being granted, I suppose all Men must agree, that Noe had a Right of as
absolute Power in him, as any Man upon Earth ever had. Not only as he inherited
it from Adam and the rest of Mankind, but even from his own Father Otyartes, if
we will believe Abyd^us the Assyrian, and Alexander Polyhistor, who say, that
Otyartes, being dead, (...), his Son Sisythrus reigned in his stead eighteen
Years; in which time the Deluge happened. However, a Monarch he was, and I do
not hear, and am confident you will not believe, that he received any
Investiture or Right of Power from his Children, but that as his Authority was
successive, so it was divided among his Children, according to their
Generations, by whom the World was progressively re-peopled.


Mer. But, Sir, if the World was repeopled progressively, as you speak, that is
to say, from Father to Son, sure Fathers were more humane than to suffer their
Children to live together like Beasts in a Pasture, as our Author says; Men
having not, certainly, debased their Natures so soon, to be equal with the
Beasts which perish, and turn their young ones out a grazing, without any
farther Care what became of them.


Trav. No surely, Cousin, for besides natural Instinct, which we have common
with other Creatures, and by which we are desirous to preserve our Young, God
has bestowed upon us all a rational Soul, more than the rest of other Creatures
have, by which we may find out the best and easiest way to obtain artificially
what naturally we thus desire.


Mer. Methinks then, Sir, we should easily contrive a way to live happily
together, and peaceably, Peace being, undoubtedly, more rational and natural
than War. Nor can I easily believe, That naturally we should covet what another
has possessed himself of before; but rather leave that to every Man which he
had appropriated to himself and Family. Pray, Sir, is Nature a God or a Devil?


Trav. Nature is certainly a God, or else, rather, the Opifex Dei, whom we call
Natura naturata, that is, the Causa Causata, or second general Cause of all
sublunary Beings whatsoever. God is the first Cause, who out of nothing has
made Matter. Whether that nothing be a Nothing, which to us is
incomprehensible, Nullam rem e nihilo gigni divinitus unquam, or whether it be
that Materia prima, which some Philosophers have believed antecedent to the
Elements themselves, and which others agreeing with the Rabbis, have called
Hyle, Ench. phys. Rest. Can. 18. by which they seem to mean a kind of Shadow,
or Darkness, incomprehensible, the fancy of a thing rather than a thing indeed;
a Matter without Form, yet most desirous and capable of all Form; without a
Body, and yet the Foundation of all Bodies; in short, a vast abyss of Cold and
Night, which we cannot comprehend. I say, whether God created all things out of
Nothing, which we cannot conceive, or out of this materia prima, which we can
as hardly explain, I Will not determine. It is sufficient, for my purpose, to
declare, that God is the first Cause, and made matter, and that what I here
call Nature is the second Cause. Who, working upon the second Matter, or
materia Elementata, produces several Effects, according to its several
Dispositions.

In the next place, Nature* can neither create nor yet destroy; her Power
extends no farther than Generation and Preservation, or changing old Matter
into new Form. The God of Nature only has the power of Annihilation; and as he
made all things out of nothing, so he alone can again reduce all things into
nothing.

To conclude, Nature is most just and good in all her Actions. And as she has
received the Command of Preservation from him who has given her the Power of
Generation, so she has transmitted that inviolable Precept unto all things,
which she has made, according to their different Kinds and Species. And this
is the Ground and Foundation of that universal Law of Nature, which is so
immutable, that it cannot be changed. Jus natural adeo immutabile est, ut ne a
Deo quidem mutari queat, says Grot. l. 1.

And this is sufficient for the Explanation of Nature, what she is; that is to
say, a Spirit, infinitely good and just, and abhorring, above all things,
Violence and Destruction.


Mer. Dear Cousin, this is extremely satisfactory, to show what Nature is, and
by consequence, what her Laws must needs be. And indeed, we see it most plainly
by the Effects: for, amongst the various kinds of Beasts and Fowl, there is
scarce a Creature found which is not solicitous to preserve its Young. And by
this Law of preserving what we have produced, the World was governed, from Adam
to Moses. And had we as exactly observed this Law of Nature as she has obeyed
that of the first Creator, the World sure would have needed no other Law, nor
known any other Government.


Trav. This, Sir, is that Law, which to our shame, continues uncorrupted
amongst Birds and Beasts. An Eagle stoops not upon an Eagle, a Lion preys not
upon a Lion; Man only devours Man, and from being made a little beneath the
Angels, degenerates below the worst of Beasts.


Mer. This sure proceeds from some accidental Corruption; to recompense which,
God Almighty has given us Reason, which, methinks, joined with the natural Law
of Preservation, should produce Government, and by consequence, Peace and
Happiness.


Trav. Your Observation is most just: for, the World being peopled, as well
before the Flood as since, successively, Succession begets Inequality, the
Father being greater than the Child. And inequality necessarily produces
Superiority, which eternally includes a natural Right o^ Power.


Mer. By this Rule then, Noah, as well as Adam, being our first Parent, should
have been an Universal Monarch; the whole right of Power being lodged
originally in himself, pray what became of this Power?


Trav. First you must observe; that Power never dies, but descends to him who
best represents the last Possessor, and that is naturally the eldest Son: for
his Title being before those who are posteriour to him, it cannot pass to them
but through him. So you see Noah settles the Power only upon his eldest Son
Shem. Canaan, he says, shall be a Servant to him, and Japhet shall dwell in
the Tents of Shem; which, according to the Interpretation of the best
Expositors, is, under the Government and Protection of Shem.


Mer. How came this Power then so soon divided, as we hear in the Histories of
those elder times.


Trav. By the express Will of God himself, who whilst the People were building
Babel, confounded their Language, and dispersed them abroad, that the Earth
might be the better repeopled*


Mer. Did then the People of different Languages choose to themselves
particular Governors who were to conduct them, or did every Man go according
to his own Fancy?


Trav. Neither, but were all governed according to their different Languages,
by the Head of the Family, that happened to be in that Language, whose Right of
Power proceeded from their Father Noah, and from them the first Kingdoms of the
World were begun and continued.


Mer. Can you name me any of those Kingdoms so begun?


Trav. I think I can. And first, Japhet is said to be Father of the Europoeans.
Japetus Europoeorum genitor, says Grot. Gomer, his Son, of the Galatians, or
(...). Magog founded the vast Empire of the Scythians, where his Name is to
this Day remembered; Madian the Medes, Javan the Greeks, as has been already
observed: these are the Sons of Japheth. The Sons of Javan were, Elishath,
Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. By these, says the Text, were the Isles of the
Gentiles divided in their Lands, every one after his Tongue, after their
Families in their Nations, Genesis 10. From Ham proceeded the Africans; from Cush,
his Son, the Cusei or Ethiopians. From Seba, the Son of Cush, the Sabeans. From
Ashur, the Son of Shem, the Assyrians. From Lud the Lydians. The Caldoeans from
Arphaxad; and from his Grandson Eber, the Hebrews.

But it would be too tedious to relate in this place, all the Kingdoms,
Countries, and Cities, that had their Beginnings and Names from the Sons of
Noah. If therefore you be not yet satisfied, I shall only recommend you, beside
the Bible, to Eusebius, Nicholaus Damascenus, Pliny, Strabo, Josephus, and of
our Modern Authors, to Grotius, and the Learned Doctor Stillingfleet.


Mer. Sir, I am very in^linable to believe all that you have here observed,
having heard and read much to this purpose. But then, Sir, People must always
have lived under some Government, and have been obedient to some Superior,
which will surely destroy our Authors perpetual State of War, as also his
universal Right, which every one had to all things; and, in a Word, will so
totally divest the People of that original Liberty, which he pretends they had,
and Right of Power which they were able to bestow, and upon which Foundation he
seems to build the greatest part of his Discourse, that according to your
Principles, we shall not meet with any People who had any right of Power or
Liberty, but such as was granted them and derived from their Governors.


Trav. Sir, This Liberty is no where to be found, but in the shallow Brains of
such conceited Men as our Author seems to be. And I am persuaded, that he will
never be able to produce one single Instance of any People whatsoever, even to
this day, that were so free, or enjoyed such an original or virgin Liberty,
that they could of themselves give a Right of Power, which never had been
possessed but by themselves. From whence it will follow, That all popular
Governments have been Usurpations, except such People alone, who having leave
from their Mother City, have planted Colonies in Foreign Countries. Such were
most of those Grecian Governments, which we find in Asia, and in Italy, and in
some parts of Greece it self. And they all bore generally this Mark, That they
followed the form of Government of those from whom they proceeded, and ^ver
paid them a dutiful Respect: which when neglected or denied, generally produced
War; witness the long Peloponesian War, largely described by Thucydides. These
things considered, let us draw this Conclusion, to which all Politicians must
agree, and even our Author himself, whether he will or no, That all
Commonwealths have been founded upon Usurpation or Rebellion, or the Grant or
Permission of some superior and antecedent Power.


Mer. How comes it then to pass, that so many Philosophers, and all our
Antimonarchical Authors, pretend, That the People were before the Prince, that
they are above him, that they made him, and by consequence, may depose him.
That their Liberty and Freedom was independent upon any, until, for their own
Interest and Advantage, they parted from it; and much to this purpose?


Trav. From the Ignorance of some ancient Philosophers, and the impious
Complaisance of some of our modern Wits.


Mer. What do you mean by the impious Complaisance of our modern Wits?


Trav. I mean, Sir, that neglecting the History of Moses; which being the most
ancient, and most authentic of any extant, is penned besides by the Assistance
of the holy and infallible Spirit of God himself; neglecting, I say, what our
very Faith obliges us to believe most sacred; we run foolishly after the blind
Conjectures of Men, who were as much inferior to Moses in Learning and Wisdom,
as they are posteriour to him in Time.


Mer. What is it these Philosophers teach us contrary to Moses, and wherein
lies their Error?


Trav. It consists chiefly (as it relates to our Case) in their Ignorance of
the History of the Creation, and want of a true Notion of the Deity. Hence they
teach, That the World was made, or rather, made it self, by chance, and that
Mankind was, at first, but the natural Production of the Earth, as Plants, and
some few Animals at present are produced. So the Epicurean Lucretius tells us
in his second Book.

Jamque adeo affecta est oetas, effoetaque tellus,
Vix animalia parva creat, quoe cuncta creavit
Secla, deditque ferarum ingentia corpora partu.
Haud, ut opinor enim, mortalia secla superne
Aurea de Coelo demisit funis in arva.
Nec Mare, nec fluctus plangentes saxa crearunt
Sed genuit tellus eadem, quoe nunc alit ex se.
The Earth's grown now so barren, so decayed,
She scarce brings forth a Mouse, who all things made.
In her once pregnant Womb all Creatures lay.
Thence monstrous Beasts and Giants broke their way.
For I cannot think the golden Chain of Jove
E're let them down from their bright Heavens above;
Or that the Billows of the working Main,
Made those vast Rocks which do themselves contain:
But that the Earth, as other Mothers use,
Whatever she feeds, did first her self produce.
Diodorus Siculus gives us a long account of the Creation; where, amongst other
things, he tells us, That when the great Separation was made of the Waters from
the Earth, the Earth remained, nevertheless, very moist, over which a
Pellicule, or kind of Skin, in most places was spread. This preserved the Seeds
of all things whatsoever, which after due Fermentation, and the nourishing heat
of the Sun, the Pellicule broke, and all sorts of living Creatures appeared.
Those which participated most of Heat, became Birds and Fowl. Those which were
of a more gross and earthly Composition, were made Men and Beasts; and the more
moist became Fish.

After this, the Moisture and Surface of the Earth being hardened, and dried,
by the continual heat of the Sun and drying Winds, the Earth could no more
produce any considerable Creatures, but that they were henceforward propagated
by Generation, according to their several Kinds and Species.

Now, Sir, notwithstanding this fine Fancy, you may easily see its great Error,
if you consider, that the Earth produced those living Creatures either by
Chance or Accident, or by the positive Will of God.

If the last, then we shall easily agree with you, it being indifferent to us
which way God was pleased to take for the making of Man, supposing he was made
and propagated successively by Gods Order: but this the Philosophers generally
deny.

If the first, Then how comes it to pass, that Accident and Chance should form
Male and Female, so fitting for the work of Generation, that few things do more
manifestly declare the Wisdom of our Maker, than the Composure of those Organs,
which serve for the Nutrition of the Infant in the Womb, and whatever else
belongs to our Conservation and Propagation.

And indeed, when we come to consider seriously of what many of the Ancients
have delivered concerning the Creation of the World, we shall not find them so
different from the Doctrine of Moses as some imagine.

The Phoenicians and Egyptians, and some later Philosophers, as Aristotle,
Anaxagoras, and amongst the Poets, Hesiod, Orpheus, Ovid, Virgil, and others,
supposing that Mankind proceeded originally from the Earth, have ascribed the
Production to some particular Cause, as the brooding of a Pigeon upon the
Chaos, incubitum columbae, Anaxagoras to a Mind, (...), Aristotle to Nature,
most of the Poets to Amor, or Love: but all as they have fetched these Notions
from the Phoenicians, and they from Moses, so they mean the same thing which
Moses did, that is to say, God; which for want of that Illumination which Moses
had, they could not better express.

Now some Men, not well understanding what the Philosophers meant, and others
refining upon Notions which the Philosophers themselves had too grossly
interpreted, have delivered Opinions most ridiculous.

Hence Mr. Hobbs will have Men produced like Mushrooms, fungorum more. But sure
it were most reasonable, that those Mushroom Men should be kept in some sharp
and sour Pickle, until they had disclaimed a foolish Fancy, which is so
contrary to the Word of God; which is the public Rule of our moral Actions and
Obedience.


Mer. Sir, I believe most assuredly the History of the Creation, as Moses has
wrote it, and think, that in Reason, as well as Conscience, we ought so to do.
But, setting aside the Divine Inspiration, Are there any other Reasons why we
ought rather to believe Moses in that Particular, than any other of the Learned
Grecian Philosophers?


Trav. Yes, Sir, there are three principal Reasons, which ought to engage our
Belief for Moses rather than for any other Historian whatsoever. And they are,
first, The Antiquity of his History; secondly, The Reason in his History; and
thirdly, the Testimony of others concerning both.

For the first, It is agreed by the Greeks themselves, That they have no
History ancienter than that of Homer. Constat apud Groecos nulla invenitur
conscriptio poemate Homeri vetustior, says Josephus contra Appion. And yet
Homer lived above six hundred Years after Moses.

But, not to trouble you with what you may find elsewhere, I shall refer you to
the same Josephus, and to Grotius de Verit. Rel. Christ. and last of all, to
the Origines Sacroe of Dr. Stillingfleet, or Mr. Gale's Court of the Gentiles.

For the Reason of his History, especially as it relates to the Creation of
Man, nothing seems more just, than that God Almighty, who is the Fountain of
all Wisdom and Goodness, should have rather chosen to propagate the World at
first, as he did at last after the Flood by Succession, than by such a
promiscuous Production of the Earth as is before mentioned; that even thereby
he might prevent (as he did) that State of War supposed by our Author, and
those many Mischiefs and Inconveniences which would attend an Equality
intolerable, and never yet known upon the Earth. And notwithstanding the
ridiculous Arguments of Mr. Hobbs, and some others, they could never yet
produce any good Authorities or Examples, where this Equality was ever to be
found, except in their own Understandings. The Learned Pompenatius, in his
Treatise de immort. Animoe, tells us, That if the Inequality which is amongst
Men were taken away, the Race of Mankind would be destroyed, or at best,
subsist with great Inconvenience; and that it is not the occasion of Discord,
but rather of the most perfect Harmony. Hoecque inoequalitas, si toleretur, aut
genus h^manum periret, aut non commode constaret. Neque inoequalitas inter
homines, commensurata tamen, debet discordiam parare, imo sicut in symphonia
vocum commensurata diversitas concentum delectabilem facit, si^ commensurata
diversitas inter homines perfectum, pulchrum, decorum and delectabilem generat.

On the other side, by this successive Propagation God has secured Man's
Preservation, and that by introducing a natural form of Government and
Obedience, so certain, and so reasonable, that it might have continued even to
this day, had not the Negligence of the Governors in the first Age permitted a
Confusion. And the Ambition and Avarice both of the Governors and Governed in
the latter Age, so entangled the Reins, that they have made it sometimes as
hard to drive as to be driven.

In the next place, the compiling of the Law of Moses shows so demonstrably the
Wisdom and Reason of the Lawgiver, that his Laws have been the Ground and
Patterns for the best and most ancient both of the Attick or Greek, as well as
Roman Institutions.

And lastly, for Testimony concerning the Veracity of his History, we find even
the very Particulars confirmed by the most ancient Authors. Hesiod, Homer, and
Euripides, declare, That Man was made out of Clay. Callimachus calls Man (...),
lutum Prometheum. The History of Adam and Eve, of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, and the Serpent, are attested by Sanchuniathon.

In the most ancient of the Grecian Ceremonies and Mysteries, they used to show
a Serpent crying out (...) or Eva; Hesychius, Clemens in protreptico and
Chalcidius ad Timoeum tell us, that according to the account of Moses, God
forbad our Forefathers the eating of the Fruit of certain Trees, left thereby
they should come to the Knowledge of good and Evil, ex quibus notitia boni
malique animis eorum obreperet.

The Story of the Giants is attested by Pausanias, Philostratus, and Pliny.
Berosus, and Abydenus the Assyrian, with many others, give a perfect Account of
the Deluge. Trogus Pompeius, Polemones, Manetho, Lysimachus, and others, of the
flight of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, under the Conduct of Moses
himself. All which, and a great deal more to this purpose, abundantly confirm
the Authority of Moses his History, and oblige our Approbation and Belief, even
without the express and indisputable Command both of God and Man.


Mer. I am perfectly satisfied, and shall reap this advantage from the long
Trouble I have given you, that I shall henceforward apply our Authors
Propositions to the History of Moses; and according as they are conformable to
it, approve them, or otherwise, if contrary, totally reject them; and for the
present, am sufficiently convinced that the first Regulation of Mankind began
from paternal Governments. For his Necessity, universal Right to all things,
the regulating of Ownership and Property, and the Mediation of some wise men,
for the consenting to the establishing a Government, I shall look upon them
hereafter as canting Terms, contrived by some Commonwealths Men, and not at all
consonant to Reason or Truth, especially since he has not produced one
Instance of any Government originally so begun, against twenty which you have,
and I believe can produce, for the deducing many great Governments from Fathers
of Families.


Trav. You will find, that the force of all his reasoning, quite through his
Book depends chiefly upon such canting Propositions as you have here repeated.
But pray proceed.


Mer. He tells us then, p. 31. That could we trace all Foundations of Polities
that now are, or ever came to our Knowledge since the World began, we shall
find none of them to have descended from Paternal Power.


Trav. Did you ever meet with a more impudent or more ignorant Author? You
remember, I suppose, those Instances which I have already produced to
demonstrate the repeopling the World by Fathers of Families, which are
confirmed to us by approved and irreproachable Authors. Besides, what is more
notoriously known, than the History of the Edomites, or the Posterity of Esau
or Edom, and the Hatred which continued in his Family against the Sons of
Jacob, when they denied the Israelites Passage through their Country. Nay so
certain is it, that that great Nation descended from Edom, who was the eldest
Son of Isaac, and Father of his Family, and that they spread as far as the Red
Sea, that the Greeks themselves, from his Name Edom, which they interpret
(...), have left the Name of Mare Erythroeum, even to this day.

Nor less known is the Genealogy of Ismael the Son of Abraham, from whence the
Ismaelites or Arabians, whom Epiphanius calls the Saracens, are lineally
descended.

And, as a constant Mark of their unquestionable Descent from Ismael, they
have, to our Age, retained the Custom of being circumcised after the thirteenth
Year, according to what we find written of their Father Ismael himself.

There are besides, as I told you, many more undoubted Instances in those
Authors, which I have already named to you. And if our Politician has any
respect for the Holy Bible and History of Moses, let me recommend him to the
twenty fifth Chap. of Genesis, where Moses numbering the Children of Ismael,
concludes, These are the Sons of Ismael, and these are their Names, by their
Towns and by their Castles, twelve Princes according to their Nations. And they
dwelt from Havila unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou go toward
Assyria. And whilst he has the Book in his hand, let him turn forward to the
thirty sixth Chapter of Genesis, where, after a long Catalogue of the Dukes and
Kings which descended lineally from Esau, it is said, ver. 31. And these are
the Kings that reigned in the Land of Edom before there reigned any King over
the Children of Israel. And these are the Names of the Dukes that came of Esau,
according to their Families, after their Places, by their Names. And Verse the
last, These be the Dukes of Edom according to their Habitations, in the Land of
their Possessions, he is Esau the Father of the Edomites.

Now what can be more particular or express, than what I have here produced? Or
what can he mean by tracing the Foundation of Polities, which are, or ever came
to our Knowledge since the World began, if these will not pass for such?

He cannot pretend that we should bring a long Roll of Parchment, like a Welsh
Pedigree, ap Shinkin, ap Morgan, and so from the Son to the Father, until we
arrive at ap Ismael, ap Esau, ap Magog, ap Javan, and so forth: that would be
too childish to imagine of him; for we know very well, that all the Kingdoms
upon the Earth have oftentimes changed their Masters and Families.

But if he means, as surely he must, if he mean any thing, that we cannot name
any such Kingdom or Government that has been so begun, then he is grossly
mistaken: for, the Assyrians, the Medes, the Ethiopians, or Cusoei, the
Lydians, the Jones, or Greeks, and very many others, are sufficiently known,
and preserve to this day the very names of their first Founders; who (as is
made appear) were all Fathers of Families.


Mer. Cousin, I begin to be very weary of this rambling Author. Pray, therefore
let us go on as fast as we can.


Trav. Read then what follows.


Mer. As for Abraham, whilst he lived, as also his Son Isaac, they were but
ordinary Fathers of Families, and, no question, governed their Households as all
others do. What have you to say to this Holy Patriarch and most excellent Man?


Trav. I say we are beholden to our Author, that he did not call him a Country
Farmer, some such a one, it may be, as in his new Model of the Government, is
to share the Royal Authority. Indeed it is hard, that whom the declared Enemies
to the Hebrew People have thought fit to call a King, we who adore the Son of
Abraham, will not allow to be better than a common Householder?


Mer. I confess, my Reading is not great; but as far as the Bible goes I may
adventure to give my Opinion: And if I mistake not, the Children of Heth owned
him to be a mighty Prince among them.


Trav. Yes* Sir; and the Prophet David, in the hundred and fifth Psalm, calls
him the Lords Anointed. But, because I perceive the Word of God is too vulgar a
Study for our Learned Statesman, I have found out a Profane Author who concurs
with the History of the Bible.

And first, Justin makes no Scruple to call him in plain Words a King. Post
Damascum Azillus, Mox Adores, and Abraham and Israel, Reges fuere. lib. 36.
Josephus also, and Grotius, who are Men of no small Repute even amongst the
most Learned, have quoted Nicolaus Damascenus to vindicate the Regal Authority
of Abraham.

His Words are very intelligible, (...). And tells us moreover, that in his
Days (which was in the Reign of Augustus) the Fame of Abraham was much
celebrated in that Country: and that there was yet a little Town remaining,
which was called by his Name.


Mer. I perceive, when Men grow fond of their own Imaginations they run over
all, and neither Reason nor Religion have any Power to stop them.


Trav. Then he introduces Samuel upon the Stage, chiefly I suppose, to
insinuate, that the People had a Power, and did choose themselves a King: which
is so notoriously false, that they never had the least share, or pretended any
in the election of Saul. It is true they chose rather to be governed by a
temporal King, who was to live amongst them, and rule as other Kings did, than
continue under the Government of the King of Heaven and Earth; and so the Word
chose relates wholly to the Government, but not to the Person of the Governor.
For which, Samuel also reproves them, and accordingly they acted no farther,
leaving the Election of their new King wholly to God, and their Prophet, and
God did particularly choose him from the rest of their People, and Samuel
actually anointed him before the People knew any thing of the matter.

Afterward, lest some might have accused Samuel of Partiality in the Choice,
he ordered Lots to be cast, which in the Interpretation of all men, is, leaving
the Election to God; and Saul was again taken. What Junius Brutus, another old
antimonarchical seditious Brother, objects concerning renewing the Kingdom at
Gilgal, where it is said, And all the People went to Gilgal, and there they
made Saul King before the Lord, will serve very little to prove any Right of
Power in the People, no not so much as of Election: for confirming and renewing
the Kingdom, and such like Expressions, signify no more, than the taking by us
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which I think were never thought to give
the King any Right to the Crown, but only a just Right to punish us for our
Perjury as well as Disobedience, in Case of Rebellion. So renewing the Covenant
with God, as particularly a little before the Death of Joshuah, cannot be
supposed to give a greater right of Power to God Almighty, than what he had
before, but is only a stricter Obligation for the Peoples Obedience, that they
might be condemned out of their own Mouths. And Joshuah said unto the People,
See ye are Witnesses against your selves.

So Samuel makes the People bind themselves to God, to their King, and to their
Prophet, that they would faithfully obey him whom the Lord had set over them.
And behold, says Samuel, the Lord has set a King over you. But having spoke
more to this purpose elsewhere, and the Case being most clear, as well by the
History it self, as by the Authority of Grotius, and other learned Men, that
Saul and the rest of the Hebrew Kings, did not in the least depend upon their
People, but received all their Right of Power wholly from God, we will proceed
with our Author. Only I must note by the way, that with the learned Gentleman's
leave neither the Sanhedrim, the Congregation of the People, nor the Princes of
the Tribes, had any manner of Power, but what was subordinate, and that only to
judge the People, according to the Laws and Institutions of Moses. And so they
continued to the Babylonish Captivity, Grotius only observing, in favor of the
Sanhedrim, that they had a particular Right of judging concerning a whole
Tribe, the High Priest and a Prophet.


Mer. Well, Sir, we are now come to our modern despotical Power. What say you
to Mahomet and Cingis Can.


Trav. Prithee, Cousin, let us not trouble our selves with those Turks and
Tartars, they are yet ^ar enough off, and not like to trouble us, nor does
their Government much concern us; we have Laws of our own sufficient, which as
they secure us from the danger of any Despotical Power or arbitrary Government
which can rise up amongst our selves, so they do no less protect the Person of
our Supreme Magistrate or King, from all manner of Violence or Jurisdiction of
the People.


Mer. In the next place then we come to an Aphorism, which is, That Empire is
founded in Property. Upon which, he tells us, he must build the most of his
subsequent Reasoning.


Trav. Ay marry, here is Work indeed. And no doubt but the Foundation being so
solid, the Building will last eternally. But let us see, in page 40. he gives
us this Aphorism in Latin; and then it runs thus, Imperium fundatur in
Dominio: which, lest we might not understand, he tells us his meaning of
Dominium, is, the Possession of Lands. And that what Kings soever in former
times had no Companion in the Sovereign Power, they had no share likewise in
the Possession of the Ground or Land.

Truly, Cousin, I do not remember to have met with such grave and serious
Fooling in any Author besides himself. But we will examine his Reasoning, and
his Aphorism, as fully and impartially as we can. And in the first place it is
most necessary that we should define the Word Imperium, which surely we cannot
do more plainly, than when we say, That Imperium est jus Imperandi, Empire is a
Right of Command. Now that this Right of Command should be fixed or founded
upon what in it self is incapable of receiving any Command, or paying any
Obedience, I mean Land, is so absurd a Proposition, that it makes Empire an
empty Name only, and Sound: for when you thunder your Imperial Laws through
your hollow Rocks, your shady Groves, and Woods, those stiff and stately
Subjects of your new found Empire, will pay no other Homage or Obedience, than
a Return of your Commands upon your own Royal Head, by the Repetition of a
foolish Echo, the only Subject which can entertain you with Discourse.

You, in the mean time, must remain like Midas, amidst his Gold, without
Service or Sustenance, except being wholly transformed into an Ass, or grazing,
like Nebuchadnezar, amidst your fertile Pastures, you might indeed in such case
become a fat and lusty, though a beastly, Emperor.

But, Cousin, to be serious, the great Folly of our Authors Aphorism will
appear more demonstrable by putting a familiar Case or two, and such as may
show us plainly, upon what Empire is truly founded, and upon what it is not.

Let us suppose then, that the King should make some Nobleman or Gentleman,
Duke or Prince, or (if you will) Emperor of some vast tract of Land, in the
Western Part of Terra Australis incognita; which we will also imagine totally
uninhabited. What kind of Emperor do you think this Nobleman would be?


Mer. Truly, Sir, if he had no Subjects, I think he would appear much such
another kind of Prince as Duke Trinkolo, in the Comedy.


Trav. You have hit upon a very proper Instance.


Mer. But pray, Cousin, why may not our Emperor have Subjects having Land to
bestow?


Trav. Undoubtedly so he may; but they must be procured one of these three
ways: either from his own Loins, as in the old World, that is, from his Wife
and Children; or from Slaves, such as may possibly be bought in some other Part
of the World; or from Free People, whom he may probably carry over with him.


Mer. Very well; and why may not the Land be peopled, in time, by his own
Family, especially if Polygamy be permitted, as formerly it was, and both
himself and Sons take to themselves several Wives.


Trav. So it may, Sir, but this will not do our Business; for, his Empire, in
that case, will not be founded upon the Possession of his Land, but the Persons
of his Children, who become naturally his Subjects, even when he did not
possess one Acre of Land. For God and Nature have so invested a Sovereign Right
of Command in Fathers over their Children, that no Power upon Earth can take
that Right away.

It Is true, the Civil Law, for the Good of all, has reduced even Fathers
themselves under the Civil Government, who is still Pater Patrioe. But,
naturally, every Father is Emperor in his own Family.


Mer. I understand you, Sir; for, Fathers having naturally a Sovereign Right of
Command over their own Children, if then he peoples a Country by his own
Posterity, the Possession of his Land gives him no more Power than what he had
originally, and from a higher Title too, before. It is plain; but why may he
not then stock his Land with Slaves, from Guiney, or other Parts of Africa?


Trav. O Cousin, but properly speaking there is no Empire of Slaves. (...).

For Aristotle, lib. 8. de Rep. and from thence Grotius assure us, That such a
Government is not properly an Empire, but an overgrown Family. Qui ergo tali
tenetur imperio populus, in posterum non civitas erit, sed magna Familia.
Besides, Reason it self convinces us of this Truth: for no Man is a Slave
willingly, and what we hold by force is not truly an Empire, which, as I said,
is Jus Imperandi, but a Tyranny, which always includes Injustice.


Mer. But, by your leave, may not a Man justly command his Slave.


Trav. Yes Sir, as he may use his Ox or his Horse, and they are always looked
upon as part of our Personal Estate, and pass accordingly. But naturally, or
according to the Law of Nature, which is Justice, no Man is born a Slave, Servi
natura, id est, citra factum humanum, hominum nulli sunt, says Grotius, lib.
3. Whence the Civilians tell us, Contra naturam esse hanc servitutem*

Lawfully indeed, which is humane Institution, Men become, and are sometimes
born Slaves, but Subjects we are both by Law and Nature too.

All Politicians therefore, and Civilians, have made a Distinction between
Subjects and Slaves: the last are so by Accident and Misfortune, and against
their Will, for the sole Benefit of their Lord and Master; the others are
Subjects by Nature, and willingly continue so, not only for the Honor of their
Emperor, King, or Supreme Governor, but for the peaceable and happy
Subsistence of themselves. So Tacitus distinguishes them in these Words, Non
Dominationem and servos, se^ rectorem and cives cogitatet. And Xenophon of
Agesilaus, whatsoever Cities he reduced under his Government he exempted from
those servile Offices which Slaves pay their Lords, and only commanded such
things as were fit for Freemen to pay their Supreme Governor. (...). Nor are
there, or ever were there, any such Kingdoms of Slaves.

For, though the Turk and Tartars at present, the Persians, and generally all
other Eastern Kings, anciently governed despotically; yet their Subjects always
had a Civil as well as a Personal Liberty, and were generally so far from being
governed against their Wills, that, as Apollonius observes, the Assyrians and
Medes ad^r'd their Monarchy, (...). The Cappa^ocians would not accept of the
Liberty which the Romans offered them, Negantes vivere se posse sine Rege.

The same Philostratus tells us of the Thracians, Scythians, and those Mysians
which inhabited about the Hellespont, that they had no manner of Satisfaction
in the Proposition of a Liberty, which they cared not for. And the Tarks, at
this day, being so taught by their Prophet and their Alcoran, think it an
Honor to dye by the Command of their Emperor.


Mer. This I comprehend well: but why may not those Slaves be made free?


Trav. That indeed they may. But then they come under the third Consideration;
which is, That our Emperor may People his Country with Freemen, whom he is
supposed to carry over with him. But then I must ask you, Whether you imagine,
That Men who are Free at home will become Subjects in a Foreign uncultivated
Country, unhealthful it may be, and dangerous, and very remote from all their
Friends and Relations, and whatever else they once esteemed, without the Hopes
of some Recompense and considerable Advantage?


Mer. Without doubt, they will not: But, why may not the Proprietor of the Land
grant such Proportions of it, to these Freemen, as may encourage them to
transplant themselves and Families, as they do at present, to Carolina, and
other Colonies.


Trav. This is, and may be done: but then, Sir, you must observe, that,
according to our Authors Aphorism, part of his Empire must go for it; whence
will arise the most ridiculous Soloecism that ever was heard of, which is, That
by how much he increases in Subjects, by so much he decreaseth in Empire.
Which is as much as to say, That by how much he becomes powerful, and rich, and
strong, by so much he becomes less an Emperor.

Nay, and in process of time, when his Lands shall happen to be all peopled, he
shall be no Emperor at all.


Mer. But, Sir, Why may he not retain, suppose, half the Lands to his own use?


Trav. He may, Sir: Yet still the Empire being founded upon the Possession of
the Land, he is but half so great an Emperor, now his Empire is half peopled,
and begins to be supplied with all Necessaries, as he was when no humane
Creature besides himself, did inhabit it. Which is so absurd, that nothing can
be invented more unreasonable.


Mer. I know not what to say against this; but must only ask you one Question
more. Whether you pretend to make an Emperor without Land?


Trav. I do not say I would, nor was there, it may be, any such Emperor ever
known. Yet I must tell you, that it is more rational to affirm, That a Man may
be an Emperor without Land, than without People. So many of the Roman Generals
were called Emperors, when they had little to fix their Empire on, besides
their Army.

But this also we shall illustrate by this following Case. Suppose then* That
after the Death of this present Emperor of Germany, the Princes Electors
should think fit to choose this present King of France in his stead. I do not
know that he has any Lands in Germany; yet, nevertheless, what kind of
Emperor do you suppose he might prove?


Mer. Without doubt, as great as his Predecessor.


Trav. Truly, I believe as great, and as perfect an Emperor, to all Intents
and Purposes, as ever enjoyed that August Title, since Charlemaigne. Which,
sure, is an Argument most demonstrable, that Empire is not founded according to
our Authors erroneous Aphorism, in the Possession of Lands.

The wise Queen Eliz. understood this Truth well enough, when she used to say,
That she cared not to rule in her Subjects Purses, but in their Hearts. And the
truly politic Church of Rome knew most assuredly, that they should raise their
temporal Empire to the utmost height that their Ambition could suggest, not
when they invaded some few Territories, belonging to some of their neighbor
Counts and Princes, but when they could fix their Empire in Men's Minds,
persuading them that they had a Right of Power over their Souls and Bodies, the
Lands followed then of Course; and you find them presently deposing Emperors,
and disposing of Kingdoms, and other temporal Possessions, with no less Freedom
than they did their spiritual Benefices.

And, to comply with our Author's Country Comparison of a Carter and his Teem,
let him command his Wagon, or his Cart, with all the Rhetoric and Artifice he
can, see whether all his Endeavors would not prove ineffectual to obtain the
least Motion; and whether himself would not look ridiculous. Besides, could the
Cart obey, and drag the Teem after it; where could we see a more irregular and
preposterous Sight?

But by governing well and commanding his Horses, the Cart will certainly
follow with ease, and both arrive safely and happily at their Journeys end.

Whence it is easy to infer, That Empire is always founded upon Living Bodies,
and not upon Lands or Things insensible.


Mer. Pray, give me leave to ask you, Whether you think this Aphorism of our
Authors false in it self, or by him ill understood?


Trav. Sir, I am not obliged to defend another Man's Proposition. It is
sufficient for me, if I prove that it is false, according to his own
Interpretation.

But however, that I may give you all the Satisfaction which you can reasonably
desire, I will so far comply with you, as to tell you, That Empire may be well
enough said to be founded in Property, but by no means when he constrains
Property to signify the Possession of Lands.


Mer. Dear Cousin, I must entreat you, that you will give me your own
Interpretation, especially since the true understanding where Empire ought to
be fixed, will be a ^arther Light to me.


Trav. Sir, If you can have Patience, I shall endeavor to satisfy you, as
briefly as the Subject will permit. And first, I must again remind you, that
the formal part of all Empire is Power, or a Sovereign Right of Government;
whether residing in one or more is not material*

Power thus fixed in some Person, has for his Objects, first, the Persons to
be governed; secondly, the Territory containing them.

The first is sometimes alone sufficient to create an Empire; the second may be
divided or changed, the Empire remaining still entire. Imperium, says Grotius,
D^ Jure B, and P. l. 2. c. 3.
duas solet habere materias sibi subjacentes; Primariam personas, quoe materia
sola interdum sufficit: Secundariam locum, qui territorium dicitur.

This second Matter Grotius calls Dominium, as it is distinguished from
Imperium. Ideoque, says he, Dominium non in cives tantum, sed and in extraneos
transit, manente penes quem suit imperio.

These rightly understood, it will be no difficult Matter to affirm, That
Empire is founded in a Sovereign Right of Command, or Government, or Power over
Persons and Men; which that we may bring under the Term of Property, we will
say, That Empire consists in holding this Government or Power, as Grotius
expresses it, In pleno Jure proprietatis, or, In patrimonio imperantis, that is
properly, or in Property, or in chief, or how else you please to render these
Words in English. Which Grotius, in the same Chapter, explains, by a Jus
regendi, non aliunde pendens. A Right of Government not depending upon any
other humane Authority whatsoever.


Mer. But, Sir, since you have founded Empire upon a Supreme Right of
Government or Power over Men, how comes it to pass that we find a Right of
Power, and Privileges, and Government too, so founded in the Possession of
several Lands, that the Possession of those Lands alone gives a Man several
Rights and Prerogatives.

For example, amongst us it is said, That whosoever has the Right and
Possession of the Barony of Burgaveny, besides some others, becomes thereby a
Baron of England, and enjoys those Privileges which belong to it.

In France I have heard say, That nothing is more common than for Men to
receive their Titles according to their Lands, whether Count, Baron, Marquess,
and so forth.

Is it not plain then, That the Right of Command or Power, which is Empire, may
be founded upon Property, according to our Author's Interpretation, that is,
the Possession of Lands?


Trav. I agree to what you have urged; that is to say, That several
Privileges, and Right of Power, are annexed to several Lordships or Terres
Nobles, that they have thereby haute and basse Justice; and their Jurisdiction
extends to Life and Death. Nay more, in several parts of Italy, and
particularly in Lombardy, there are several Imperial Feuds, which Grotius seems
to call Regna Feudalia, which have almost as great Prerogatives as some other
Kingdoms have. They make Laws, raise Taxes, and mint Money, as other greater
Kingdoms do. And yet all this makes little for our Author's Aphorism, as by him
interpreted.


Mer. The Reason, if you please.


Trav. Because all those little Lordships, or Principalities, whether they were
instituted at first by the Goths and Vandals, or Lombards, or granted
afterward by several later Emperors and Kings, or both, as is most probable,
yet they did, and still do, at this day, depend upon a Superior Power, and pay
Homage and Fealty for those Privileges which they enjoy; which is much
different from Empire, or a Sovereign Right of Power. And yet, even in this
Case, this subordinate Power is so far from being founded upon the Possession
of all the Land belonging to the Feud, which is our Author's Proposition, that
very often their Liberties depend only upon the old Walls of a ruinated Castie,
and a very inconsiderable Number of Acres, which represent the whole Feud, or
Manor, the rest of the Land having been sold away, and become the Property of
others, some small Rent only, or Acknowledgment, being reserved. And after this
manner, the Supreme Power may as well tie Privileges to a Post, and grant the
Possessor of that Post such Royalties as the Proprietor of such a Castle or
Land. Which is very far from proving, that the Possession of Lands does thereby
originally create a Sovereign Right of Power.


Mer. Cousin, I have heard, and read too, I think, that the Sea has formerly
eaten up a considerable part of your ancient Patrimony, and from thence, it may
be, you are no Friend to Lands. But, for my part, I will stand up for Land as
long as I can; and must therefore ask you, Why those Rents or Acknowledgments
were reserved, if not to testify, that they came originally from the Lord, and
that thereby he still keeps up a kind of Sovereign Right to the Lands
themselves; knowing well enough, that his Power, according to our Author, is
founded upon them.


Trav. This yet signifies nothing: for although the Reservation of these Rents
or Services do preserve the Memory of the Benefactor, and continue the Respect
due from the Tenant, yet this is personal only, and has no Relation to the
public Right of Power or Government.

For, when this Rent was not reserved, yet whosoever lives within the
Jurisdiction of such a Fewd or Manor, is always subject to him, who enjoys the
Lordship.

So in England, Services and Quit-Rents have been generally received and paid,
until the late King, and his present Majesty, were pleased to dispose of them.

But to believe that this has lessened his Sovereign Right of Government, is a
Fancy that sure cannot enter into the Head of any sober Man. But let us put a
plain Case.

Suppose the Kingdom of England were at any time obtained by absolute Conquest,
as I conceive it was more than once, and that such Conquest gives the
Conqueror a Sovereign Right, not only to our real and personal Estates, which
we find to have been wholly in the hands of some of our Kings, but also over
our Liberties and Lives, as may be fully seen in Grotius, de Jur. B. and P.

Now, Sir, supposing a People in this Condition, and having nothing of their
own, submit themselves, and all they have, to the Mercy of the Conqueror, as
the Carthaginians did to the Romans, you will grant, I imagine, that this
Conqueror is an Emperor to all Intents, having an absolute Right of Power
over the People and their Land also.


Mer. Yes certainly, as long as he keeps himself and People in that Condition
there cannot want any thing to make him an absolute Monarch.


Trav. But we will farther suppose, That our Conqueror (being of a more noble,
and more humane Temper, than, it may be, our Author would have been) orders
diligent Inquisition to be made into the Value of his conquered Lands. Which
being done, and entered into a Register, such as we call Doomsday Book, the
Conqueror divides most of these Lands between the Conquerours and the
Conquered; some he returns to their former Owners, upon certain Conditions or
Services; others he changes. To his Noblemen and Favorites he grants great
Titles and Privileges, to the Gentry less, and to the vulgar or common sort,
some small Possessions, which with a little Labor and Diligence, will enable
them to live easily and peaceably the rest of their days.

All these become an Inheritance to themselves and their Heirs, according to
their several Tenures, (which the Conquerours have generally created) and which
we call Property. These, Sir, being thus established, and the Lands of the
Kingdom settled after this manner, the Conqueror or King himself reserves, it
may be, a small part, which we call Crown Lands; and in Consideration of his
Right of Conquest, and those Benefits which he has bestowed upon his People,
in granting them their Liberties, Lives, and Lands, he continues to himself
the Power of making and abolishing Laws, according as he shall think most fit,
and proper for the Peace, Honor, and Safety of his Government. He creates
Magistrates for the due Execution of these Laws; who, in his stead, and by his
Authority, have a Power to judge between his Subjects, and in some Cases
between his Subjects and himself, or his Attorney.

Besides these, he retains the sole Power of making Peace and War, of disposing
of the Treasury, whether it be his own particular Revenue, or such as may be
granted for the Defense and Security of the Kingdom, and such other
Prerogatives as Sovereign Princes generally pretend to.

And after all, he obliges all his Subjects, generally and in particular, to
pay him Homage and Fealty for the Land and Privileges which they hold or have
received from him, and to bind themselves and their Heirs for ever to become
true and faithful Subjects unto him their Liege Lord, his Heirs and Successors
for ever; as may be seen at large in the Form of our general Oath of
Allegiance: and this under no less Penalty than the loss of our Lives, Honor,
and Estates, whatever they be.

Now, Cousin, after the Disposition of the Lands, as has been here supposed,
and this Establishment of the Government, according to the good Will and
Pleasure of him who is Master of all, and the Consent and Confirmation of the
People, who have received those Lands and Privileges, can you believe that our
Conqueror is less an Emperor than he was, when he kept all the Lands in his
own Hands, and undistributed?


Mer. Methinks, in good Reason, in Justice, and in Gratitude, he should lose
nothing of the Power which he has reserved, by reason of the Graces and
Privileges which he has granted.


Trav. No sure, Sir, he rather acquires another Right, and becomes doubly their
Sovereign, that is to say, both King and Father of his Country; for since
Government is agreed even by our Author, to have been instituted for the Good
of Man, certainly, that Governor who does the greatest Good, is by consequence
the greatest Emperor. So Josephus (in the Speech which Judah makes in the
Behalf of his Brother Benjamin, to his unknown Brother Joseph, chief Minister
of the Egyptian Kingdom) observes, That Power was given Men to do Good. And by
how much we extend our Bounty, by so much we enlarge our Empire, Ad servandos
homines potentiam datam existimare, and quo pluribus salutem dederis, hoc te
ipsum illustriorem fore.


Mer. Cousin, all this is very fine, and seems indeed most reasonable and most
just. But I perceive we are not yet come to a right Understanding of the Case.

For, if a Prince or Sovereign Monarch shall, out of a Principle of Goodness,
or what you please, entrust Part of his Power in the hands of the People, let
the Conditions be what they will, when they are once possessed of that Power,
most likely they will think it reasonable, to share the Government also; or, to
use our Author's Expression, p. 45. if the People have the greatest Interest in
the Property, they will, and must, have it in the Empire. So if a Master of a
Family shall think fit to arm his Servants, to the Intent only, and upon the
express Condition, that they shall never use them but in Defense of their
Master and Family, and that only according to his own Commands; yet,
nevertheless, if in process of Time the Servants shall believe that the Master
does not govern his Family for their mutual Advantage and Security, it is ten
to one, but that having the Power in their Hands, they will pretend to govern
the Family as well as the Master: nay, and if the Master prove too obstinate,
turn even himself out of the Government and Family too.


Trav. Very well. I did indeed expect, that at last we should come to Club Law,
and that your convincing Arguments would end in the invincible Force of Powder,
Ball, and Musket.

Pardon me, Sir, I do not speak this of your self; for I know, that according
to our Agreement, and for the Support of our Discourse, you only personate our
Author, whose Words are, They will and must have it in the Empire.

Now, though will and must are not proper Terms amongst civilized and
reasonable Men, yet nevertheless, since we know that Deformity in some
Countries, and when in Vogue, passes for Beauty; and a Disease grown
Epidemical assumes the Name of Health, according to that of Seneca, Recti locum
tenet error, ubi fit publicus.

I shall endeavor to pull off the ugly Vizard, and unmask our ignorant
State-Physician, and demonstrate first, That it is not reasonable, that those
who have the greatest Interest in the Property, or the Possession of the Lands,
according to our Author's Interpretation, should have any Right of Power in the
Government, otherwise than what is subordinate, and derived from the Supreme
Magistrate.

Secondly, That by having this Interest in the Property, they have not thereby
more Right, no nor more Power, than if they had it not.

Thirdly, That all Sovereign Princes have a Right of Power over the Lands
themselves, notwithstanding the Property be divided amongst the People.

Fourthly, That most Kings who have had the Sovereign Power, have yet had many
Companions and Sharers in the Possession of the Land.

And lastly, I shall give an Answer to your Instance which you have produced
concerning a Master and his Servant.


Mer. Dear Cousin, Excuse the Liberty I take, since you know, we at first
granted it to each other. Besides, the deciding these main Points will be in a
great measure ending the Trouble which I give you. And being confident that you
will be able to make good what you have promised, I shall reap the Advantage of
your Pains, and you the Honor and Satisfaction of confirming me, and it may be
many others in an Opinion, which we were rather willing to believe than able to
justify.


Trav. Sir, not to lose Time, I shall begin with the first, That it is not
reasonable, that those who have the greatest Interest in the Property, should
have any Right of Power in the Government, except what is subordinate and
derived from the supreme Magistrate.

To prove this, we must make these two general Distinctions, which are, and
ever were in all Governments whatever: That is to say, between the Governor
and the Governed, which must of necessity be two different Persons: for, as
Plutarch observes in his Introduction to the Lives of Agis and Cleomenes, one
Man cannot be Master and Servant, nor can he who commands be able at the same
Time to obey. So Grotius tells us, Quod cogens and coactum requirunt distinctas
personas, neque sufficient distincti respectus. I never heard but that the
People were always taken for the Governed. To moderate and regulate whose
unruly Passions and inclinations, Government it self has been hitherto
continued in the World, and they are generally called the Body of the Kingdom.
The Governor has been ever understood to be a single Person, or Counsel, or
more, who are likewise properly called the Head. Both form the Body Politic.
Right of Power is like the Soul, and is seated in the Head; whence dispersing
itsvital Heat, through proper Arteries and Veins, it nourishes and gives
Motion to all the Body, and every part of it. The Body thereby is enabled to
preserve the Head from Violence. The Head alone commands, and the Body
performs. The Body cannot command, nor has the Head any Action, nor can it
possibly obey. The Head separated from the Body destroys both.

Mark, that Right of Power, which is Empire, has no other Object or Subject
than the Body, and in its Exercise, is properly and solely founded thereupon.
The Body parted from the Head, is no more a Body, but a Carcass. And the
People, without a Supreme Governor, is no more a People, but a confused
deformed, and unactive Multitude. Mark, that the People have no Life, nor
Power, nor Motion, but what they receive from the Head. This is the constant
Doctrine of the most Learned Authors who have ever treated of Government.


Mer. Sir, I have often heard this Comparison made: but, if you allow that a
Head may be composed of several Members, as you seem to suppose, when you say,
a Council, or more, we shall then easily agree. For all we desire is, That a
Head may be chosen or made up out of the rest of the Members.


Trav. Necessity sometimes, and Violence, have composed such a monstrous Head,
over which also they have been forced to raise another Phantasm; such as the
Stateholders in Holland, the Doge of Venice, or Duke of Genoua. So I have
observed in many places, and particularly in the Prince's Gallery at Monaco,
two famous Heads, which were so artificially contrived, that at first Sight, or
at a Distance, they have represented a humane Shape. But upon a stricter
Examination, we have found them patched together of several sorts of Fishes,
Fowls, Beasts, or Insects.

Now, besides that all unnatural and monstrous Productions have been observed
by Naturalists, to be generally of short Continuance, so they do not at all
destroy my Proposition, which is, That there must be a perfect Distinction
between the Governor and the Governed: and that howsoever the Head be
composed, whether of one Monarch, or thirty Tyrants, as in Athens, or of five
Hundred, yet there the sole and total Right of Arbitrary Power, does and must
reside.


Mer. I cannot approve of Arbitrary Power; and I should think, that in this
Case there can be no Danger of it: for, the Body having by much the greater
Force and Strength, may not only refuse to obey what they do not approve of,
but if the Head should impose too obstinately, by virtue of their Strength,
they may resist, and easily reduce their Head to their own terms; nay, even to
obey the Body.


Trav. They may so, Sir, and ever might since the Beginning of Bodies, and ever
may whilst Bodies continue in the World; no matter whether they be fat or lean.
But the Consequence also ever was, and ever will be, Confusion, Dissolution,
and the Destruction of both.

This puts me in mind of a Fable which Plutarch relates in the Life of Agis,
King of Sparta; which if our Author would have impartially considered, it might
have stopped the furious Current of his Popular Pen. The Story is this:

The Serpent's Tail, who had been ever used to follow its imperious Head, grew
weary, at length, of this servile Complaisance, disputes the Precedence; and
having brought the Body into its pernicious Faction, the triumphant Tail begins
to take the place, and marches first. But being no ways qualified for that
Government which it had usurped, it trained the Head through Thorns and Briars,
through Waters, and down Precipices; till having totally blinded and disabled
the Head, and the Tail no ways able to support its Life, both became a Prey,
and were swallowed up by a Vultur, who had watched the fatal Consequence of
this unnatural and irregular Motion.

You see here the Effect of Force against a Right of Power; which, since it
comes in my way, it is most necessary we should distinguish: for Power, by
Abuse, is become, I perceive, another of our Authors equivocal Words.

All Power came originally from God Almighty; for, There is no Power but of
God, the Powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13. 1. which must be always
understood a Right of Power; for God does neither Violence nor Wrong. Namque
odit ipse vim Deus. And if sometimes we have seen Violence and Force prevail
against Power, which is a just Authority, it is only a mark of Permission in
the Divine Providence, as a Punishment for Sin, not of Approbation. Narratur in
testimonium divinae Providentioe id permittentis, non in facti humani
approbationem. These are the Words of Grotius.

The Body Politic is composed of Men, that is to say, Dust and Clay, without
Form or Action, until God breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Power, and
it became a living Soul.

Power then is a Ray of the Divinity it self. And notwithstanding the insolent
Mockery of our Atheistical, conceited Author, where there is a Sovereign Right
of Power there is Jus ^um.

So when God, at the Request of Moses who was unable to govern so great a
People without subordinate Officers, instituted the Court of the Sanhedrim. God
took of the Spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it to the seventy Elders,
which was this Right of Power, and they began to prophecy; a constant mark of
this Right of Power, which they derived from Moses, and was subordinate as
generally the Constitutum is to the Constituens.

So when Saul was anointed King as a Mark of his undoubted Right of Power, he
prophesied amongst the Prophets. So again, when Moses growing old, desired that
God would set a Man over the Congregation, that they might not be as Sheep
without a Shepherd, the Lord said unto Moses, Take Joshuah the Son of Nun, and
lay thy Hands upon him, and thou shall put some of thine Honor upon him, that
all the Congregation of the Children of Israel may be obedient.

What should all the Congregation of the Children of Israel be obedient to, but
to the Commands of Joshuah, who had received this Right of Command, which is
Power and Government, immediately from the Hands of Moses.

Power then is the Soul of Government, received from God himself. It is a
Spirit which gives Life to the Body, but not the Body it self.

Power is like that nourishing Heat and Light of the Sun, which we are sensible
of by its Effects, that is, its Influence upon all sublunary Bodies, by its
Attraction, Reverberation, or Transmission through proper Vehicles. Not by
contact of the Body.

Nay, we are assured, that the Ether, which is nearer the Sun, is dark.

Power shows it self by its Effects, that is, Government, which it produces by
Transmission also of its Influence through proper Vehicles, which are
subordinate Officers, whom it animates and inspires.

Power is invisible, incomprehensible, eternal: Power never dies, and in its
original it is Omnipotency, which is God. And when God himself had invested
Moses with this Power, he was pleased to tell him, That he should be unto his
Brother Aaron instead of a God.


Mer. Sir, I am much pleased with this Description which you have given of
Power. And indeed, since Government is one of the greatest and most necessary
Blessings which Mankind enjoys, that Government cannot subsist without Power,
and that Power is originally in God, who is the Fountain of all Power, nothing
seems more reasonable, than that we should deduce all humane Authority from
that inexhaustible Source, and respect it accordingly.

I have only one Argument against what you have proposed; which, however it may
seem strange, yet I must beg leave to offer it to you. And it is this, That I
have heard some Learned Men, both Ancient and Modern, seem to maintain, That
although God may possibly be the universal Governor of the World, or governs
the Universe in general, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and so forth, yet that he
does not, (as being beneath so great a Majesty) inspect or mind the little
particular Governments of our small Globe of Earth.


Trav. This is, indeed, the pernicious Doctrine of the Epicureans; which, with
its Disciples, ought to be banished all good Governments, Qui ex been moratis
urbibus ejecti sunt, as Grotius tells us, cap. de poenis. Ita and coerceri
posse arbitror, nomine humanae Societatis, quam sine ratione probabili violant.

Gassendus, I confess, in his Treatise de Vita and Moribus Epicuri, seems too
much to favor this Opinion. But Grotius, whose Judgment I prefer before the
Philosophy of both; and St. Paul, whom we Christians ought to respect before
all three, tells us, Heb. 11. v. 6. That he who comes to God, must believe
that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of those who diligently search him.
Grotius also, in the same Chapter, says farther, That that Religion which in
all Ages has been accounted true, is chiefly grounded upon four Principles; the
third of which he says is this, That God takes Care of humane Affairs, and
determines them according to his most just Decrees, a Deo curari res humanas
and aequissimis Judiciis dijudicari. And after he has quoted, to the same
purpose, Cicero, Epictetus, Lactantius, and others, he concludes, That Revera
negare Deum esse, aut negare a Deo curari actiones humanas, si moralem effectum
respicimus, tantundem valet. That to deny there is a God, or to deny that he
regulates humane Affairs, is in Effect the same thing. And particularly in the
same Chapter, Sect. 44. he tells us farther, that Epicurus, when he took away
the Providence of God, in the Government of the World, he left nothing of
Justice, but the empty Name. That Justice is no farther necessary than
profitable, and that we ought to abstain from hurting one another, out of no
other Consideration, than the Fear that those, whom we offend, should revenge
themselves. Epicurus cum Divinam providentiam sustulisset, Justitiae quoque
nihil reliquit nisi nomen inane, etc. But these, and many other of the
Epicurean Principles, are rather plausible than solid, witty than judicious,
and striking the Senses, are rejected by a sober Understanding.

Besides, Cousin, we Christians are obliged by a truer, and much more Divine,
Philosophy; to which, we have all subserib'd, and which is become a public Law
and Rule amongst us: and with good Reason, for nothing is more dangerous in all
Governments, than to regulate Public Actions according to Private Opinions.

Public Actions must have Public Rules, and public Obedience must have
Public Laws, under which we must acquiesce, until they be altered by Public
Authority; otherwise we may eternally wander after the false Lights of foolish
Men, who from their Extravagancies would be accounted witty.


Mer. Sir, I shall not dispute any farther, either your Reasons or your
Authorities; both which I allow as most authentic: pray, therefore, proceed.


Trav. Having told you then, what Power is, I come now to Force; and as the
first is the spiritual part of Government, so the latter is the material part.
Force is the Arm and Nerve, which being animated by lawful Authority, produces
Power in the general Acceptance, which is properly, and in a good Sense, the
Union of both. Force, without this Right, is, Vis injusta, or Violence. With
it, it becomes the just Defense, which Nature has given all Creatures, as well
as Man, to preserve to themselves their Lives, Liberties, and Possessions.
Without it, that is, when we invade the Possessions of another, it becomes
Robbery and Rapine, and is no more excusable in Alexander than the Pyrate.
Tully de Officiis 3. and Grotius, who cites him, besides many others, tell us
the same Truths in plain Words, Vt quisque malit sibi, quod ad vitae usum
pertineat, quam alteri acquiri, concessum est, non repugnante natura. Illud
natura non patitur, ut aliorum spoliis nostras facultates, opes, copias
augeamus. And Grotius adds this Consequence, Non est ergo contra Societatis
naturam, sibi prospicere atque consulere, dum jus alienum non tollatur. Ac
proinde, nec vis, quae jus alterius non violat, injusta est. It is Right of
Power therefore, which makes Force justifiable, both according to the Laws of
Nature, and the Laws of Man.

To conclude, Power or Authority, and Force, are generally so united, that they
oftentimes are mistaken, and pass for one another. But they are also sometimes
separated, as a Right may be from the Possession, and by this Instance we may
easily distinguish them. A lawful Prince has first Power and Authority, to
which Force is added. A Rebel first procures a Force, or Strength, and
afterward usurps a Power.


Mer. This is plain enough; and I have nothing to reply.


Trav. Having then made these necessary Distinctions, I affirm, That the
People, (which is the Force and Strength of all Kingdoms) by how much their
Strength is great, (whether in Land, or Personal Estate) by so much their
Power, which is Authority, or Right of Government, ought to be the less. And
this not only because it is incongruous and unnatural, that the Governed should
become their own Governors, or that the several destructive Appetites of the
Members should train after them, the Reason which ought to regulate all; but it
is also very imprudent, and against all the Rules of true Polity and
Government. For it has been ever the Rule and Endeavor of wise Men, so to
balance Power and Force, that neither may offend the other, but that by the
harmonious Accord of just Commands, and faithful Obedience, a State may become
most happy, invincible, and eternal.

Hence Power never ought to assume an adventitious Force, such as Mercenary
Soldiers, which have generally proved destructive both to Prince and People;
nor the People usurp a Power, which belongs not to them; such as the Seditious
Tribunes of Rome often pretended to, which lost them both that Power and
Liberty which they had. Government consists in Command and Obedience; whence
Empire is defined by some to be certus ordo in jubendo and parendo. Command is
the Effect of Power, Obedience the Result of both, and Peace, Happiness, and
Security, the end of all. The general Interruption proceeds from want of due
Obedience; the sole Consideration of their Force makes Men dare to disobey.

What then can be more irrational and absurd, than that the Governor should,
by granting a Right of Power, countenance their Violence; and by giving a
pretense to Disobedience, make it more difficult, if not impossible, for
himself to govern. It is like uncurbing, or laying the Reins upon the Necks of
headstrong Horses; which is against the Reason and Practice of all good
Governments upon Earth.

Were the Beasts well tempered, it were yet more practicable; but by how much
their Strength is dangerous, by so much a stricter Hand ought to be kept over
them.

What wise Pilot would ever trust the Helm into the Hands of an insolent Crew
of Mariners? Or, What prudent Prince would submit his Scepter to the Will of
arrogant Subjects, whose Wills they themselves declare to be, to govern
equally, if not superior to the King.

If our Author had meant a subordinate Power we would easily have agreed; and I
think there are few People, under Heaven, who enjoy a larger Proportion of
profitable and honorable Employments, than our English Subjects do. But, an
independent Right of Power is destructive to the Prince as well as People, and
would only serve the turn of a few pragmatical, ambitious, antiquated
Politicians.


Mer. But, Sir, if the People have the Force, as they have by enjoying so great
a share in the Land, and shall think it reasonable to have the Government also,
how will you help your self? This is the main Point, which you have not yet
answered.


Trav. Have a little Patience, for my Clock cannot strike Twelve all at once:
and this is the second point, viz. That by having this Interest in the
Property, as our Author calls it, they have not thereby a greater Power, or
Force, or Strength, than if they had it not.

And first, you must admit, that the Possession of Lands, giving thereby no
Right of Power, as has been sufficiently proved: If then the People by Force
only, endeavor to procure to themselves this Right, it is a formal Rebellion;
and what they shall obtain thereby is absolute Usurpation.

But in the next place, by having the Possession of these Lands supposed, they
are not more enabled to usurp this Power than if they had them not: for, the
Strength of all Governments being eternally in the Persons of the Governed,
whether they be rich, or whether they be poor, it must follow, that when they
please to rebel, no Governor or Governors whatever under Heaven, can of
themselves possibly reduce them: for the Number is even in the most popular
Government, ten thousand of the Governed to one that governs. And this is a
natural, irresistible Inequality of Strength, which even in their natural,
naked Estate, without other Arms than such as Nature has given all Creatures,
according to their different Kinds, puts them always in a Condition to destroy
the Government when they please.

You must not urge, that a great Number may probably preserve their Obedience,
and follow the Party of the Governors. For it is already supposed in our Case,
that the greater Number, having the Possession of the Lands, must and will
share the Government.

Might, indeed, if put in Execution, will ever be too hard for Right, and May
and Ought can never stand against the Torrent of Will and Must.

This needs no farther Demonstration: Ten Servants in a Family will easily turn
their Master out of Doors, though they have not the Propriety of one foot of
Land upon the Earth.

Examples we need not. However, since our Author has furnished us with one, as
he has done many others against himself, I shall mind you of it.

The Turk, he tells us, who is absolute Proprietor of all the Lands in his vast
Empire, is not yet thereby so secure, but that the Palace and Seraglio have
often become the Shambles of those Princes.


Mer. But, Sir, that, he tells you, has been done by his Janissaries, which he
calls a Mercenary Army, and not his natural Subjects. But could he introduce
his Timariots into the places of those Janissaries, this horrid Flaw, and
Inconvenience in the Government, had been wholly avoided.


Trav. But why does he entertain these Janissaries, if not to preserve him from
the Violence of his discontented and numerous Subjects? And why dare the
Janissaries act these horrid Murders, if not because they know themselves too
strong? And what Security can he give, that his Spahis would not do the same
thing if their Prince should endeavor to keep them in too severe Subjection.
Never, sure, did any sober Author maintain Propositions so irrational; nay,
insomuch that their contrary is true. What People are more happy and quiet than
those, who possessing a reasonable Proportion of Lands, live in Plenty, and
enjoy, in Security, the Fruit of their own Labors? In this our Nation is
blessed particularly, above all others: for, setting, aside Ambition, what do
we want to make us happy? And what hinders our Happiness from being secure? who
can offend us and remain unpunished.

Our Cattle, our Houses, our Lands, are inviolable; our Persons as free as the
Air, which is it self restrained within certain Bounds; and we (as all Men
ought to be) within the Compass of just and reasonable Laws. What People, who
are at ease, would of themselves disturb their own Happiness? And what oftener
occasions Rebellion than the Pretense of Misery and Oppression?

What made the People of Athens, according to our Author, endeavor a Change in
the Government, but their great Encumbrances and Debts to the Nobility?

What made the People of Rome mutiny against the Senate, but the want of their
Lands? And what occasioned the Barons Wars in King John and Henry the Third's
Time, but the Severity of their Tenures, and want of their Rights and
Privileges, as they pretended?

What, indeed, begins all Wars on the Peoples side, but Oppression; and what
establishes Peace, but Ease and Plenty? Our Author's divine Machiavel is
wholly of our Opinion, and tells us amongst other things, That if a Prince will
preserve to his Subjects their Possessions, their Privileges, and their Women,
he runs no manner of Danger, but such as may proceed from the Ambition of a
few, which yet he assures us we may easily, and by many ways, prevent. In odium
omnium maxim adducunt bonorum direptio, and suarum raptus mulierum.
Quotiescunque bonis parcitur multitudinis and honori, praeclare secum agi
ducunt homines. Id duntaxat fit reliquum oppugnandum, ambitio nimirum paucorum,
quoe multis modis, nulloque negotio reprimi potest. Prin. cap. 19.


Mer. Sir, I can very hardly grant you this Point, it being one of our
strongest Holds, which we must defend to the last Drop of Blood. I must tell
you therefore, that though the greatest Number, such as I must own is ever
composed of the People, be always capable of usurping the Government, over the
Governor, who is indeed no more than a single Man against a whole Nation in
point of Strength; yet whilst the Tenures are preserved, such as were formerly
in England, the Prince had a stricter Tie upon the People, than when having
relinquished them, he has no other Obligation upon them than his Parchment
Right of Power, and, if you please, their Oaths of Allegiance; both which are
cancelled in a Moment, while the Lands remain eternally in the People.


Trav. I have already told you, That public Right of Government, or if you
will, the Right of public Government, does not in the least depend upon
Tenures: for they are only particular Services and Royalties, which Princes
have sometimes thought good to reserve to themselves, more or less, according
as they alone have thought fit, and may be altered or relinquished, without
diminishing their Public Right of Government over the Nation, they being such
as regard rather the private Person of the King, as Lord of a Manor, than his
Politic Capacity, as Supreme Magistrate, or Governor of the State. And
indeed, many of these Services and Tenures were rather very inconvenient and
burdensome to the People than beneficial to the Government.

Many such were anciently known in England and Scotland, as well as France.
Amongst others, what was more inhumane, than that the Lord should have a Right
to lie with his Tenants Wife the first Night they married: which in France they
call Droit de Jambage. Some Services were very ridiculous, and some
extravagant. So I have heard of a Tenure in France, by which the Tenant is
obliged, at certain Times, to drive a Cart with twelve Oxen round the Court of
the Manor House. In which time, if any of the Oxen happen to dung in the
Court, the Cart, with the twelve Oxen, was forfeited to the Lord of the Manor:
but if none of the Oxen should dung, until they were driven out of the Court,
then the Lord was to receive only one Egg. Now how do these and many other such
Services, relate to a Right of Government? So many Manors were held of the
King, to accompany him in his Wars in England, or in France, or elsewhere; some
were obliged to carry his Spear, some his Sword, others his Helmet, and such
like, which are all merely private Obligations, and which any private Man might
reserve, upon consideration of Lands given.

It is true, the King had then a stronger Tie upon particular Persons, than
since he has released them. But this, I say, has no influence upon his
Public Right of Power; for the Supreme Magistrate is always (notwithstanding
any such Release) Master both of our Estates and Persons, as far as they are
necessary, for the Preservation of the Government.

So you see Care is taken that all Lands shall pay their Quotas toward Horses
and Footmen, which is in use at this day; which Forces so paid, we call the
Militia. His Majesty may press Soldiers, and by the Consent of his great
Council, the Parliament, charge our Estates and Persons with such Sums as shall
be thought expedient for the Occasion. And this brings me to the third Point,
which is, That all Sovereign Princes have a Right of Power over the Lands,
notwithstanding the Property be divided amongst the People. And this proceeds
from the Dominium Supereminens, which is eternally in all Supreme Magistrates
or Magistrate whatsoever; whose Duty it is to look after, and by all means
secure, the Preservation of the Whole, in which every particular is involved.
Nor is it a sufficient Objection, to say, That Laws or Impositions may lie very
heavy upon particular Men, if such an Arbitrary Power should rest in any
Government: for Laws cannot be always made so easy, but that Occasions may
happen, which may make them seem very hard to some, Id modo quoeritur, si
majori parti, and in summo prosint.

Hence Grotius, from Thucydides, remarks an excellent Passage of Pericles to
this purpose: Sic existimo, says he, etiam singulis hominibus plus eam
prodesse civitatem, quoe tota recte se habeat, quam si privatis floreat
utilitatibus, ipsa autem universim laboret. Qui enim domesticas fortunas been
collocatas habet, patria tamen eversa, pereat and ipse necesse est, etc. All
which, Livy thus briefly expresses; Respublica incolumis, and privatas res
salvas facile proestat. Publica prodendo, tua nequicquam serves. That whilst
the Commonwealth is safe in general, our particular Concerns may be also easily
secured. But by deserting the public Interest of the Nation, we do thereby no
ways preserve our own. Nothing, therefore, seems more reasonable, and indeed
necessary, than that the Government should have always a Power, to compel
every particular Subject, who standing upon their private Rights and
Properties, would thereby suffer the Whole to be destroyed.

For, though naturally every Man has a Right to maintain what is his own, and
by consequence might oppose whosoever would endeavor to take his Property from
him; yet Grotius tells us, That Government, which is instituted for the public
Tranquillity of the Whole, or, Tranquillitas publica in qua and singulorum
continetur, acquires thereby a more Sovereign Right, even ^ver our Persons as
well as Possessions, than we our selves can pretend to; that is, as far as
shall be necessary for obtaining that great end of public Preservation. Civili
societate ad tuendam Tranquillitatem instituta, statim civitati jus quoddam
majus, in nos and nostra nascitur, quatenus ad finem illum id necessarium est.
Whence Seneca observes, That the Power of all is ever in the Supreme
Magistrate, but the Property remains, nevertheless, in the Hands of particular
Subjects. Ad Reges Potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos Proprietas. And so, as
has been said, the King in Parliament has a Right to dispose of our Estates
and Persons as shall be thought necessary for our public Security. And where
Sovereign Princes act without Parliaments, they have in themselves the same
Authority.

I have spoke already of the Power which the Government has over our Estates;
and for our Persons, Grotius has furnished us with a Case, very strong to show
the great Extent of Sovereign Authority. He puts a Question, Whether an
innocent Citizen may be abandoned, ad Exitium, even to Destruction, for the
Common Good. Without doubt, says he, such an innocent Citizen may be so
abandoned. Dubium non est quin deseri potest. And going still on, how far such
a Citizen is obliged to deliver himself, he concludes, That he may be forced to
it, and sacrificed too, to prevent an imminent Mischief, both against his Will,
and entirely innocent. Quare and in nostra controversia, verius videtur cogi
posse civem; for, says he, Though one Citizen cannot compel another to any
thing more than what is strictly just according to Law, yet the Superior has
a lawful Authority, as Superior, to force an innocent Man to suffer for the
Common Good. Par parem cogere non potest, nisi ad id quod jure debetur stricte
dicto. At superior cogere potest, etiam ad illa, quae quaelibet virtus
praecipit quia in jure proprio Superioris, qua superior est, hoc est
comprehensum.

We find, even in the Commonwealth of Holland, so much envied and applauded by
Men, who are given to change, that in the late Wars with England and France,
they taxed Men's Purses with such heavy Contributions, that they were almost as
much dissatisfied with their Governors at home, as afraid of their Enemies
abroad: and all this was done much against the Wills of almost every particular
Subject. Nay more, I have heard say, That their Fond, or Principal, (the
greatest part of their Estates, for want of Land, consisting in Money) is so
involved in the great Bank, that they can never retrieve their Principal again.
But their Estates being wholly at the Dispose of the Government, when that
falls, they perish.

I confess, I do not know of any Christian Kingdom where a more arbitrary power
is exercised. But it is, it seems, necessary for their affairs, that it should
be so. Yet nevertheless it is no rule for our imitation, their circumstances
being extremely different from ours.


Mer. I perceive you will not be persuaded, to let us enjoy our properties, and
our share in the government together, notwithstanding our author assures us,
that we will and must have it. But pray, Sir, setting aside your reasons, why
you have taken from us our shares, (which indeed at present, (I know not how to
confute) let me prevail with you to be ruled, in this matter, by examples of
other great Kingdoms. And you know, Plato Redivivus tells us for certain, that
those Kings who had no companions in the Sovereign power, had no sharers
likewise in the Dominion or possession of the land. But if the Senate or
people, or both did share the land, they shared also in the Administration of
the Sovereignty. And pray why should we, (who enjoy no small possessions) be
excluded?


Trav. Cousin, under-favour, your Plato redivivus is a most impudent Ghost. For
provided it serves his turn, he makes no Conscience of advancing downright
falsehood for undeniable matter of fact, which will appear more fully hereafter.
We will begin with the Scythians, who contending with the Egyptians for
antiquity, have been thought the first people, which inhabited the earth after
the sloud. The people were not known in History before their Kings, whose power
also was arbitrary. So sure it is, that the first known Governments upon earth
were Monarchical. Principio, rerum, gentium, nationumque Imperium penes Reges
erat, says Justin. And immediately after, Populus nullis legibus tenebatur,
arbitria Principum pro legibus erant. And yet we find the ground so common to
all, that every man was as much Proprietor as the King himself. Hominibus inter
se nulli sines, neque enim agrum exercent, nec domus illis ulla, armenta and
pecora semper pascentibus, and per incultas solitudines errare solitis. Every
man had a propriety to as much ground as was necessary for himself and his
cattle, which also he chose, as he thought most convenient. Yet so far were the
people from pretending any share in the Government, that no Kings were more
absolute than the Scythians, nor did any enjoy their Government longer. And if
we follow them into the upper Asia, which they totally conquered, we do not
find their Kings pretending to one foot of the land.


Mer. What good then did their conquest do them, if they did not enjoy the
possessions of the conquered?


Trav. They made the same use of it, as all Conquerors generally have done,
that is to say, leaving the lands to their proper owners, they only exacted a
Tribute, which was gathered amongst themselves. Yet nevertheless, contrary to
our Author's Proposition, they always retained the Empire, or Government over
them, and that for no less time than 1500 years. Asiam perdomitam vectigalem
fecere, modico tributo magis in titulum imperii, quam victoriae praemium
imposito. His igitur Asia, per mill quingentos annos vectigalis fuit. Pendendi
tributi finem, Ninus Rex Assyriorum imposuit. Ninus then was the first, who
freed the Assyrians from their Tribute, and the Scythian Empire. Nor do we
read, that he enslaved them more under his own. But leaving them their
possessions entire, yet preserving always the Supreme right of Government,
required only such Contributions, as himself thought necessary.

After the Assyrian Empire, that of the Medes began. But no alteration can I
find in the Property of the lands. On the contrary we read, that the Persians
became only Tributary to the Medes. Sed civitates, quae Medorum tributariae
fuerant, mutato imperio, conditionem suam mutatam arbitrantes, a Cyro
defecerunt. That Those Persian Cities, which were tributary to the Medes, under
Astyages, revolted from Cyrus. But to leave no dispute in the case, Xenophon in
his Cyri Inst. l. 4. tells us in plain words, that Cyrus bid the Assyrians be
of good heart, that their condition should be no ways altered, but in the
change of their King. That they should enjoy their houses and their lands as
formerly they did, and have the same right over their wives and children. Cyrus
victos Assyrios jubebat bono esse animo, eandem ipsorum sortem fore, quae
fuerat, mutato tantum Rege. Mansuras ipsis domos, agros, jus in uxores in
liberos, ut fuisset hactenus.

This, I think, shows most clearly, that the people enjoyed the Property in
their lands, not only under the Medes but the Persians also. And yet they were
so far from sharing any part of the Government, that all men agree, no Princes
to have been more absolute than the Medes and Persians.

Now if this be true, as sure it is, for Xenophon was a very good Judge, who
wrote particularly the History of Cyrus, what an ignorant, or what an impudent
Author is Plato Redivivus, who boldly affirms, p. 52. that Cyrus by name, and
other conquering Monarchs before him, took all for themselves.

From Asia, let us travel into Egypt, and by the way we will take notice of the
Government of Sodom and Gomorrha, and those five Kingdoms which we read in
Scripture, to have been subject to Senacherib King of Assyria for twelve years.
But we do not find, that either before or after their defection, the King of
Assyria had any right to their lands, but only a tribute, which they at length
refused to pay.

With the History of the Bible Josephus agrees, who tells us, chap. 10. Eodem
tempore, cum Imperium Asiae penes Assyrios esset, Sodomitarum res, tam opibus,
quam numerosa juventute florebat, ut a quinque Regibus administrarentur, donec
victi ab Assyriis, Tributum eis solvebant.

The Egyptian Kings, notwithstanding the conceit of our Author, and it may be
of some other his Antimonarchical Accomplices, were as absolute as any Kings of
the East. Egyptiorum Reges, says Grotius, ut alios Reges Orientis summo
imperio usos, non est dubium.

From the first Egyptian King to Chencres Pharaoh, who was overwhelmed in the
Red Sea (for Pharaoh like Augustus is only a title of honor) Authors have
reckoned a Succession of Ten Kings, a time long enough to have established a
firm Government. And yet we see in the days of Joseph's Administration, his
Subjects had an undoubted property in their lands, which at last they sold,
with their freedom also, to purchase bread. Quibus agri fuere, says Josephus,
partem aliquam in praetium alimentorum, Regi decidebant -- And again, Non solum
corpora sed animos gentis in servitutem redegit necessitas. Which servitude we
must interpret slavery, and was now distinguished from subjection: for there is
no question, but that Subjects in those days, were free both in their persons
and estates, which they enjoyed in property, and only liable to such
Impositions and Services, as concerned the public happiness and security of
the Government.

We can by no means agree with our Author, that the Egyptian Kings held a kind
of precarious Kingdom, such as the Heraclides in Sparta. But being absolute,
according to Grotius, or summa potestate praediti, were not yet so barbarous,
as to appropriate to themselves, all the possessions belonging to their
Territories, or otherwise enslave their Subjects, than according as misfortunes
or necessity forced them to sell their Liberty. Yet even in this case we find,
that Pharaoh returned the Lands to most of them, upon payment of the Sixth part
only of the usufrute which he retained, as Josephus tells us, Jure Dominii,
which conditions they most gladly accepted, Laeti insperata restitutione
agrorum. And to conclude, let me inform you (from good Authorities) that the
Egyptian Kings were so far from retaining or reserving all the lands to
themselves, that after the general division of their Territories, their Lands
were distributed into Three Equal parts; One part was appropriated to the Kings
use, and was Demesne or Crown Lands; the Second part was assigned to their
Priests, for their Subsistence, and the support of the necessary charges of
their Sacrifices, and other Offices belonging to the Worship and Service of
their Gods. And the Third part was allotted to their Calasiri or Milites, which
were those who professed arms for the defense of their Country.

In the next place, The Romans who held the Sovereign Empire of so great a part
of the world, had it so little in their thoughts to make themselves Proprietors
of all the land belonging to their Empire, that as well in their first as
latter Monarchy, they seldom took away more from the Conquered, than was almost
necessary for preserving their Dominion over them, by the maintaining of
Garrisons, or planting such Colonies, and Praeda militaria amongst them, as
might, at their own expense, and charges, preserve their fidelity to the
Romans, and secure the public peace: Hence Petilius Cerealis reproaching the
French (after his victory over them) for their folly, and defection from the
Roman protection, he tells them, That although the Romans had been often
provoked, yet they added nothing more to what they might claim from their right
of Conquest, than such conditions as might secure their public peace. For
(says he) there can be no peace without arms, nor can armies be maintained
without pay, nor can pay be procured but by Tribute and Taxes. Nos quanquam
toties lacessiti, Jure victoriae id solum vobis addidimus, quo pacem tueremur,
nam neque quies gentium sine armis -- Tac. Hist. 4. Salluste tells us, That the
ancient Pious Romans took nothing from the Conquered but the liberty of doing
injury or wrong: Majores nostri religiosissimi mortales nihil victis
eripiebant, praeter injuriae licntiam. And that they encreasd their Empire by
their goodness and mercy. Ignoscendo auxisse Pop. Romans magnitudinem.

Certain it is, that Romulus and some others of those first Roman Monarchs,
used their victories with so much moderation, that the Conquered were scarce
sensible, or sorry they were overcome; whence Claudius (blaming, in his Speech
to the Senate, the severity of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians) At conditor
noster Romulus, (says he) tantum sapientia Tac. Ann. xi.
valuit, ut plerosque populos eodem die hosts, dein Cives habuerit: But our
Founder Romulus was so prudent a Prince, that he caused many to become Citizens
of Rome, who the same day had been the Roman enemies. And Grotius takes notice
particularly out of Appian, that the Romans when they subdued Italy, took but a
part even of those Italian lands Grot. de I. B. and p. l. 3.
from the Conquered. Romani cum Italiam armis subegissent, victos part agri
mulctarent: and again, etiam victis hostibus, terram non omnem adimebant, sed
partiebantur. And this has been done (as is already observed) for their
support and security. And it has been universally a Custom amongst all
Nations, that (howsoever the Conquerors might differ concerning the Persons or
Personal estate of those whom they overcame or what might fall to them nomine
praedae) they generally left the Lands in the possession of their ancient
Proprietors and Inhabitants of the Country (except sometimes in the case of
Colonies) upon the payment only of certain Tributes or Taxes. Very many
examples occur in all Histories, I shall only therefore take notice of what
Tacitus observes of our ancient Britains, They paid (says he) their Tribute
readily enough, and performed such other Duties as were commanded them,
provided they had no affronts or injuries put upon them, for those they could
not bear; being brought only to obey, but not to serve. Ipsi Britanni dilectum
ac Tributa, etc. in vita Agrip.

These then were the Customs of the Romans, and Greeks too, concerning Lands
between themselves and the Conquered; let us now see how they disposed of their
Lands between themselves and their Natural Subjects, and we find that Romulus
made the first general distribution of his Free men into Tribes, and that Those
again he distinguished into Patres and Plebes, who were afterward called
Patricians and Plebeians, or Lords and Commons; the Patricians were composed of
such as were eminent either in Birth, Courage, Wealth, or any other remarkable
Virtue, and to these many great Privileges and Possessions were granted; out
of these alone were chosen their Priests, as well as Senators, and other
inferior Magistrates.

The Plebeians minded only Tillage and Husbandry, and other mechanical
employments, and were called Commoners, or Roman Citizens, which title became
afterward an honor of no small esteem, and was much affected by their
neighbors, and purchased by particular Admission or Denization; many such were
chosen out of the Sabins, Volscians, Samnites and others: but lest this
distinction between Patricians and Plebeians might beget on the one side,
Insolence, and on the other, Envy, those prudent Monarchs thought fit to unite
them by a more endearing Relation, whence the Patricii were called Patroni, or
Patrons of the People, and were to protect them, not only in all Law Suits, but
in what other occurrences might happen to them. The Plebeians also were styled
Clientes or their Clients, who besides the Protection of their Patrons,
received also Lands from them, under certain conditions, which remained many
years inviolable: for example, in case the Patron should be taken by the Enemy,
the Client was to contribute toward his Ransom, as also toward the
advancement of their Daughters in their Marriages; they were not to inform or
give testimony against their Patrons; or if they did, they were accursed and
condemned as Traitors, Diis inferis devovebantur, and proditionis erant rei,
besides many other obsequious duties and respects: so we read that Appiu^
Claudius gave Lands to his Clients even in the very Infancy of the Roman
Government.

Nor was this jus tutelare, personal only, but it was also Gentilitium, that
is, it extended it self into whole families, as for instance, some of them
(with their whole Generation) were Clients under the protection of the
Aemilian, some under the Julian, and others under the Claudian Families. This
constitution was of great use to the Commonwealth, for the credit which the
Patricii had with their Clients, was sufficient oftentimes to appease their
popular disturbances, who yielding either to the Authority or Entreaties of
their Patrons, were brought to acquiesce, though with some little prejudice to
their own right, and this continued many Ages, until the ambition of the
Tribunes interrupted this good correspondence between the Princes and the
People: and so honorable did the name of Client grow, that many States and
Governments, who have voluntarily committed themselves to the fidelity or
protection of the Romans, did not disdain that Title.

Thus we see the Lands, even within the narrow compass of the first Roman
Monarchy, divided amongst the Princes and the People, which Lands so given to
the latter, were called Clientela's; and accordingly we may observe under
Servius Tullius their sixth King, a Register of their particular Estates: Regis
solertia, ita est ordinata respublica, ut omnia Patrimonii, dignitatis,
aetatis, artium, officiorumque discrimina, in tabulas referrentur. Flor. c. 6.
So we read of the Confiscation of the particular lands of Tarquinius superbus;
and yet Romulus and his successors were as absolute Monarchs, as any of the
Caesar's have been; and Julius Caesar himself by Will devises part of his own
private estate to the Romans.

Thus was property, or the possession of Lands, divided amongst the people,
during the first Roman Monarchy, thus it continued under the Roman as well as
Grecian Empire, thus it remains at present in the German Empire, and thus it
is established in all the most Christian Monarchies upon earth: and not to
forget our own Country, I must observe out of a learned Author, that our
ancient British Kings who were as absolute as any, made distribution also of
their Land amongst their Subjects after this manner; one part they gave to the
Archflamens to pray for the Kings, and their posterity, a second part to the
Nobility to do them Knights service, a third to the Husbandmen to hold of them
in S^^^age, and a fourth to the Mechanics to hold in B^rgage. l. MS. H^st.
Brit. And yet Plato Red. dares obtrude this proposition upon us p. 40. That in
all states, if the King had no Companions in the Sovereign Power, he had no
sharers likewise in the Dominion or possession of the Lands.

But for further satisfaction let us consider the Government of Gods people, or
the Kingdom of the Jews. I think all will agree, that the Hebrews were
proprietors of their Lands, and held them upon as good a Title, as the people
of England do theirs, even at this day. We find in that History a particular
account of the distribution of the Lands according to their Tribes, who were at
that time under a Monarchical Government, whether we look upon God Almighty as
their King, who according to Grotius, Hobbs, Junius Brutus, and all good
Authors, was Rex peculiaris Israelitarum, or as Brutus tells us De jure Mag. p.
226. Ab initio Deus ipse aternus ejus Monarcha fuit, non eo tantum nomine quod
ipse rerum omnium supremum dominium obtinuit, sed singulari quodam modo, nempe,
etc. Or whether under their High Priest, who was Gods vicegerent, except when
he raised them up a Judge. We hear of no Tenures or services amongst them,
other than such as all Subjects upon earth, are obliged to perform for the
honor of the King and public safety.

It is plain from the story of Ahab in the case of Naboth's vineyard, that
Naboth had a clear right and property in the possession of his lands, and that
their Kings had no authority, in their private capacities, to force any
Subject, so much as to sell his land upon reasonable conditions. Yet
nevertheless, neither the Kings of Persia, nor of Egypt, nor of any part of the
East, were more absolute than the Kings of Israel were, and yet none had a less
proportion in the possession of the lands.


Mer. Sir, I shall grant you all except this, That the Kings of Israel were
absolute, which I can hardly believe, especially since our Author tells us the
contrary, and instances in the Sanhedrim, the Assembly of the Tribes, and
Congregation of the Lord, who all had a share in the Government, as they had in
the property.


Trav. I confess several zealous Commonwealths men have asserted this false
doctrine, and amongst others, their old Coryphaeus, Junius Brutus. But I find
no color of pretense for this their assertion, but we will examine the case,
as fully as this occasion will permit, and refer you afterward to what I have
writ more at large concerning this point elsewhere.

And first, it is necessary that we should agree, what we mean by an absolute
Monarch, which is indeed a point rather controverted, than clearly decided by
any Author, that I have yet met withal.

Sallust thinks it consists in an exemption from all humane jurisdiction,
Impune quidvis facere, hoc est Regem esse. Others, that to be absolute, a
Prince ought to govern peremptorily, according to his will. So Juvenal, Sic
volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.

A third sort have declared that King truly absolute, who giving Laws to
others, is subject to none himself. (...). -- to command without being obliged
to give a reason why or wherefore (...), as Aeschylus says, and again, Rex est
suo utens jure, nulli obnoxious. Hobbs will have it consist in the subjection of
our wills to that of the Prince, Homo ille, vel concilium illud, cujus
voluntati singuli suam voluntatem subjecerunt, summam potestatem sive summum
imperium sive dominium habere dicitur.

Grotius, whose opinion I must always esteem very much, tells us, that the most
absolute or highest power, is of that Prince, whose actions are not accountable
or subject, to any other man's right or authority, so as that they may be made
void, according to the will or pleasure, or decrees of any other mortal man,
Potestas summa illa dicitur, cujus actus alterius juri non substunt, ita ut
alterius humanae voluntatis arbitrio, irriti reddi possunt. De jure B. and P.
p. 47.

But with submission to so great authorities, These do not reach the definition
of an absolute Monarch, in a good sense as it ever ought to be taken. For
though they have given their Prince exemption from all Laws, and power enough
to command, yet they have not excluded Tyranny, which indeed is oftentimes
mistaken for absolute power.

I confess it seems hard to destroy the Tyrant, and yet preserve the absolute
Monarch. However I shall presume to give such a definition, as may do both,
which I refer to the impartial judgment of those who shall consider it.

An absolute Monarch then is he, who having received a just authority, executes
the Laws of God and Nature without control. By receiving a just authority, I
exclude one principal mark of a Tyrant, which is intrusion, or usurpation. In
the next place, I oblige the absolute Monarch to execute the Laws of God and
Nature, and nothing contrary to them. By this also Government is freed from
Tyranny, in the use or exercise of authority.

For he who governs according to the Laws of God and Nature (I speak of a
Natural Monarch, or a Monarch in the state of Nature) does no unjust thing, and
is by consequence no Tyrant.

And lastly, as I have secured the absolute Prince from Tyranny, so I have
placed him above all conditional limited Governments, by these words, [ without
control.] For he who commands or governs as far as the Laws of God and Nature
permit, has certainly as ample, and as absolute a Jurisdiction, as any mortal
man can justly possess. This is so large a power, that he who acts beyond it,
that is, contrary to it, is deservedly esteemed a Tyrant, and in such case the
people are not obliged to obey. And the reason is, because the Prince, having
never received an authority to command that which is unjust, that is to say,
contrary to the Laws of God and Nature, the people are acquitted from their
obediences as to that particular command.

All that we have now to do, is but to apply this definition to the Hebrew
Kings, and from thence we shall be able to judge of their absolute power.

And first it is certain, that they received their right of power from God
himself, and no other, which continued by Succession, especially after David,
unto the Babylonish captivity.

I have not time at present to enlarge upon this point, and answer those
frivolous objections which some men have brought against it. You will find this
done more fully in another place, and confirmed by the authority of Josephus,
Grotius, and the History of the Bible.

I know some have pretended that David received his authority from the people,
and would prove it by a passage in 1 Chronicles. 11. where it is said, that the
Elders anointed David King over Israel. But we must observe, that David was
Anointed first by Samuel, and that by the express command of God himself, and
next, this second Anointing by the people signified nothing more, than to
exclude by this public act, the pretensions of Isbosheth eldest Son to Saul,
Who without the special revealed will of God, would have succeeded his father.
And this was ever practiced, where there was any interruption or dispute in the
Succession. So Solomon was anointed, because of the difference between him and
Adonijah, otherwise that Ceremony was not absolutely necessary, and was many
times totally neglected. Besides, in the case of David, it is plain, that he
received no right of power from the people, but from God, and that by their own
confession both before and after their anointing. And the Lord thy God said
unto thee, thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be ruler over my
people Israel. And again, They anointed David King over Israel, according to
the word of the Lord by Samuel, 1 Chronicles. 11. 2, 3. Hence Grotius observes, that
David gave God thanks, for that God had subjected his people unto him. David
Deo gratias agit, quod populum suum sibi subjecerit.

Taking it therefore for granted, that David received no right of power from
the people, by consequence he depended upon none but God, as all the most
Sovereign Princes do, and this is one great mark of an absolute Monarch.

In the next place, he executed the laws of God and nature without control. I
never heard any question made of this, except in the case of judgment
concerning a Tribe, the High Priest, and a Prophet. Which judgments Grotius
supposed, were taken from the Hebrew Kings, Aliqua judicia arbitror regibus
adempta. But I rather think, under favor, that they were more properly,
Principibus concessa, which makes a considerable difference. For I find no
mention of any time or power, who could take those judgments from the King.

On the contrary we read of several Kings, erecting Courts of Judicature, and
making Judges both in Gods cause and in the Kings. And these three points being
of the highest consequence, the judgment of them might most probably be granted
by the King, to the determination of the highest Court of Justice.

In the first of Chron. chap. 26. v. 5. We find David making Rulers over the
Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, for every matter
pertaining to God and the affairs of the King; but more particularly in the
second of Chron. chap. 19. Jehoshaphat does the same thing, but in terms more
plain, And he set Judges in the Land through all the fenced Cities of Judah,
City by City. And said to the Judges, take heed what you do, etc. Moreover in
Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the
Chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the judgments of the Lord, and for
controversies when they returned to Jerusalem. And behold Amariel the Chief
Priest is over you, in all matters of the Lord, and Zedekiah the son of
Ishmael, the Ruler of the house of Judah, for all the Kings matters.

Indeed I should think that this is plain enough to prove, that their Kings had
in them the Supreme right, of administering justice through their territories,
and made their Subordinate officers, who wholly depended upon them; and I am
the more confirmed in this opinion, because I find both the High Priests and
Prophets too judged, condemned and pardoned, even against the judgment of the
Sanhedrim, by the Kings single authority.

So Solomon banished the High Priest Abiathar. Solomon Abiatharem Ponti^icem in
exilium misit, says Josephus lib. 8. so Jehoiakim slew the Prophet Vriah. And
they sent forth Vriah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the King,
who slew him with the Sword, Jer. 26. 23. The same did Joash King of Judah to
Zachariah the Prophet, And they Conspired against him, and stoned him with
stones at the command of the King, 2 Chronicles. 24. 21. and several other instances
there are.

On the other side, when the Sanhedrim entreated Zedekiah, that they might put
Jeremiah to death, by his own single authority he preserved him against them.


Merch. Under favor, Sir, I have heard this very case of Jeremiah, urged
against the Sovereign power of the Hebrew Kings, and produced as an instance to
show the independent right of the Sanhedrim. For when they solicited the King,
that they might put him to death, Zedekiah answered, Lo he is in your power,
the King is not he that can do any thing against you.


Trav. I confess I have read this example in Junius Brutus, and know not which
most to wonder at, his impudence or his impious knavery. The words in the
Vulgar Translation, which Scaliger esteems the best, run thus, Ecce in
potestate vestra est, nam contra vos Rex nihil potest. In hoc negotiorum genere
scilicet, says Grotius.

But our brute Author, by an unparalleled wickedness, perverts both the sense
and words of the Holy Scripture, and translates it, Ipsis contradicere nulla in
re posse. And so would make the Sanhedrim so absolute, that the King could not
contradict them in any thing, but we shall discover his imposture by the
History it self, and practice of Zedekiah even in this very case.

And it is first certain, that the King meant nothing more by this answer, than
that he left Jeremiah to be Tried by his Judges according to Law. And indeed as
his affairs stood, he was unwilling to displease the Princes, in a case which
they thought so nearly concerned the good of the people and safety of the King,
which they believed was endangered by the discouraging Prophecies of Jeremiah.
Rex Zedechias, says Josephus, ne in Principum invidiam tali tempore incurreret,
voluntati eorum resistens, permisit eis, ut de Propheta Jeremia quicquid libent
facerent, lib. 10. c. 10. Yet our Villainous Presbyter is so shameless an Author
as to affirm from hence, that the Sanhedrim was superior to the King- Rege
superiorem, q. 3. p. 73. Nay and could judge the King himself, Illi Regem
judicare possunt, which I am confident was never found in the whole History of
the Bible.

But to return to this case. We find first, that Zedekiah had by his own
authority imprisoned Jeremiah, chapter 30. v. 3. And Jeremiah the Prophet was shut
up in the Court of the prison, which was in the King of Judah's house. For
Zedekiah King of Judah, had shut him up.

Next we may observe, that the Princes applied themselves to the King, that
they might have leave to put the Prophet to death, and that in terms respectful
enough, Jer. 38. 4. Therefore said the Princes unto the King; We beseech thee,
let this man be put to death. Now what needed this impertinent, and indeed
abusive complement to the King, if the whole authority was in the Sanhedrim, or
Princes themselves. But to take away all manner of dispute, we find not only
application made to the King, to release Jeremiah and his own order thereupon,
Ebedmelech went forth out of the Kings house, and spoke unto the King, saying,
My Lord the King, these men have done evil in all that they have done to
Jeremiah the Prophet, whom thou have cast into the dungeon, etc. Then the King
commanded Ebedmelech the Egyptian, saying, Take from hence thirty men with
thee, and take up Jeremiah the Prophet out of the dungeon before he dies, cap.
38. I say, besides this, we read also in the same chap. That Jeremiah made his
address to the King, that he might not dye, which most assuredly, being a
Prophet of the Lord, he would never have done, had it not been in the Kings
power to have granted his request, or had it been an infringement of the lawful
power of the Sanhedrim. And thereupon Zedekiah, without asking leave of the
Elders, promised him that he should not dye, and in terms which sufficiently
express his Sovereign authority. Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare
it to thee, will thou not surely put me to death. So Zedekiah the King swore
secretly to Jeremiah, saying, As the Lord lives that made us this soul, I will
not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hands of these men,
that seek thy life, v. 15, 16. I think these words need no explanation, I shall
only add this remark to show the fourberie of our Author, which is, That in
case this story could have passed according to his own sense of it, yet it
would not have proved what he designed it should have done. For Zedekiah at
that time was not absolute as the former Kings of Judah had been, but was
tributary to the King of Babylon. And when the year was ended, etc. King
Nebuchadnezzar made Zedekiah King over Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36. 10.
Which is confirmed by Josephus in these words. Nebuchadnezzarus exprobat
ingratitudinem Zedechiae, quod cum a se accepisset regnum, accepta potestate
abusus esset, in authorem beneficii. It being then most clear, that the Hebrew
Kings were absolute, or enjoyed a Sovereign right of power, and yet
notwithstanding this, the property was divided amongst the people, who had yet
no share in the right of Government, but what was subordinate; I must conclude
that Plato Redivivus is no less impudent and false, than his master Junius
Brutus was; when he affirms universally, that if the people had a share in the
property, they had a share in the Government, or where the King had no
companions in the Sovereign power, he had no sharers likewise in the Dominion
or possession of lands.


Mer. Sir, So many men amongst us have asserted an Independent right of power
in the Sanhedrim, that I cannot yet get off from that opinion, unless you can
show me somewhat more particular, than yet you have done, concerning their
institution, and that they received not their power from God, but from man,
which in such case will make them subordinate and subjects.


Trav. I have already told you, that at the request of Moses, God was pleased
to admit of such a Council or Court of Judicature, and that then they received
their power, not only from the hand of Moses, but even from that power which
Moses himself had, and no new power immediately from God. But if this be not
plain enough, I will offer you another passage, by which we shall determine the
two main points. First, whence the Court of Seventy Elders received their
authority. And secondly, How large it was.

In the first of Deuteronomy. v. 13. you shall find Moses thus speaking to the people,
Take ye wise men and understanding, and known amongst the Tribes, and I will
make them rulers over you. So I took the chief of the Tribes, wise men, etc.
and I charged the Judges at that time, saying, etc.

Here you see the authority proceeding wholly from himself, and for its extent
you read immediately after, that Moses reserves all appeals to himself, which
is the undoubted mark of Supreme Authority, And the cause which is too hard for
you, bring it unto me, and I will hear it. And so you see, in the forementioned
cases of David, Jehosaphat, Zedekiah and others, that the practice was
conformable to the institution, where the Kings of Judah exercised their
Sovereign power, even in those cases which belonged most particularly to the
knowledge of the Sanhedrim. This Brutus confesses in express words, who
contradicts himself, as such false men do, in most that he says. Propterea boni
Reges, quales David, Jehosaphat and caeteri, quia omnibus jus dicere ipsi non
potuissent, etsi in gravioribus causis, ut e Samuele apparet, supremum sibi
judicium recipiebant, nil prius vel antiquius habuerunt, quam ut Judices bonos
and peritos, ubique locorum constituerent, q. 3. p. 89.

Of these Judges the greater Court was called Sanhedrim Gedola, the Supreme
Senate, the lesser Sanhedrim Ketanna, the lesser, and inferior Court.

The lesser was again subdivided, and out of these, were Judges distributed
into most of the Cities, for the ease of the people.

From them appeal might be made to the Court or Sanhedrim Gedola* which always
was at Jerusalem, and who had many privileges above the others, possibly not
much unlike our House of Lords, at this day. Now, Cousin, if I understand Latin
and English, I think the case is plain, that the Hebrew Kings, (notwithstanding
the Sanhedrim) had the sole Sovereign right of power. But I refer all to your
better Judgment.


Mer. I have nothing to reply against Scripture arguments, especially when they
are so clear, as these seem to be. I am only afraid, that this great trouble
which I have given you, has taken away the pleasure you might have had in
viewing our Country, and talking of some other more diverting subject. But
presuming still upon your goodness, I must desire that you would complete the
Reformation, which you have more than begun in me, and by giving me some
account of the Gothic Government, which it seems has prevailed in a great
part of Europe, you may make me capable of defending the doctrine, and the good
constitution of our Government, against all hotbrain'd and ambitious innovators.


Trav. Sir, I have no greater pleasure than in obeying your commands, nor have
I lost thereby the advantage of this fine evening.

The Goths therefore, if we may believe Jordanes, who was himself of that race,
and whom Procopius (writing only of the latter Goths) no where contradicts,
broke out of the Island Scanzia, or Scandinavia, and with all their substance,
men women and children, advanc*d south-east. And after several Skirmishes and
Victories by the way, they at last sat down about the palus Moeotis.

Here they inhabited many years, and following the warmth of the Sun, spread
Eastwards toward the South of Scythia, and the lower Asia. Their Government
all this while, which lasted many hundred of years, was an absolute Monarchy,
and the Tenth part of the lands were generally appropriated to the support of
their Prince, who descended from father to son, as at this day amongst us, and
in Ottofrising: you have a long catalogue of their names, and an account of
their memorable actions.

But in process of time, (those Northern people, propagating very much under a
warmer climate than their own*) a great detachment past over into Europe,
whence came the distinction of the Visigoths and Ostrogoths, which is as much
as to say, the Southern, and the Western Goths.

The latter spread themselves over Germany and France, and erected several
Kingdoms. Their Government was Arbitrary enough, and somewhat more than that of
the Germans. Paulo jam addictius regnantur quam caeterae Germanorum gentes,
says Tacitus de moribus Germ. Yet we find the Germans themselves under a
Kingly Government, the lands divided, and yet neither their Noblemen nor
people, had any other share in the Government than by way of Council, or a
subordinate authority for the Administration of Justice, whch is much different
from a right of Power or Command. Agri pro numero cultorum ab universis per
vices occupantur, quos mox inter se secundum dignitatem partiuntur.

These were like great Farms, which they chose according as the situation
pleased them. Colunt discreti ac diversi, ut fons, ut nemus, ut campus placuit.
Their Councils were composed of the Commoners, and of the Nobility, but were
distinct, and the Noblemen had the greatest interest. De minoribus rebus
Principes consultant, de majoribus omnes. Ita tamen ut ea quoque quorum penes
plebem arbitrium est, apud Principes pertractentur.

But in all these elder Governments we must consider their circumstances, which
were confused, and much different from those, which are at this day established
generally all the world over. The people were more barbarous than now they are,
unsettled, and much addicted to wars. -- Whence they appeared more like the
children of Israel in the Wilderness, than the people of God in Jerusalem. And
I cannot think that their polities, (though they make little against us) ought
to be proposed by any sober man, as examples for our imitation.

We come now to the Ostrogoths, as nearer to our time, and purpose.

A great body then of these, passing the Danube, possessed themselves of
Hungary or Pannonia, and some of Thrace, where they inhabited sorty eight
years. In Hungary they had their Kings, and paid them too such an awful
obedience, that they esteemed it the greatest impiety, so much as to whisper
any thing that detracted from their honor. Solummodo susurris lacerare nefas
ducunt.

And if by chance any of the Noblemen should have offended their King, though
in never so small a matter, and even unjustly accused, yet the poorest Scullion
belonging to, and sent by the King, had a power, though alone, to seize that
Nobleman, encompassed and guarded by all his friends and adherents: And thus
without Messenger or Sergeant, both imprisoneth or otherwise punishes the
unhappy offender, according to the Order of the Prince, whose Will passes
amongst all for an unquestionable Law. Quod si aliquis ex comitum ordine,
regem, vel in modico, offenderit, quando etiam unjust infamatus fuerit,
quilibet infimae conditionis lixa, a Rege missus, Comitem licet satelli^ibus
suis stipatum, solus comprehendit, etc. Sola Principis voluntas apud omnes pro
ratione habetur. Ottofris. de reb. gest. Fred. primi, lib. 1. ca. 31.

Now if Plato Redivivus will needs produce ancient customs among the Goths, and
impose them, without any farther consideration upon us, I hope he will give me
leave also to offer the example of these Loyal Ostrogoths, which I am sure, if
duly followed, would prove a better cure for us, whatever our disease be, than
our Doting Mountebank impudently proposed.

From these Ostrogoths, and Gepidae -- sprang the Lombards, whom Narses, the
Roman Patrician, inviting into Italy, and showing them the goodness of the
Soil, and warmth of the climate, by the richness of the Wines, and pleasantness
of the Fruit, which he sent them as a Present to encourage their remove, at
last they undertook the journey, and finding the Country fully answer their
expectation; from guests, as they were intended, they became masters. And
having introduced several of their own Laws and Customs, have left many of them
remaining even to this day, with the name of Lombardy to one of the most
fertile Provinces of Italy.


Merch. Pray what kind of Government did they settle amongst themselves?


Trav. The most popular that could be contrived. For hating the Roman Emperors,
from whom they had usurped those Lands, which they did possess, (as the
offender is oftentimes the last reconciled) they set up a Government as
contrary to Monarchy as they could invent. For, obtaining leave to use their
own form under certain conditions, and restrictions, they chose to be governed
under Consuls, which they elected annually, for the most part, out of three
orders, which they distinguished into Captains, Vaivods, and the Commonalty.
And that they might secure themselves from the ambition of the great ones, they
made no scruple to choose into the most honorable employments, the most
mercenary Tradesmen and Artificers. Inferioris conditionis juvenes, vel
quoslibet contemptibilium, etiam mechanicarum artium opifices, quos caeterae
gentes ab honestioribus, and liberioribus studiis tanquam pestem propellunt, ad
militis cingulum, vel dignitatum gradus, assumere non dedignentur.


Merch. What was the effect of this their Popular Government?


Trav. The same which generally happens in all such low irregular
constitutions, that is to say, defection from their Sovereign, and division
amongst themselves; so that every Town became a different Commonwealth, and
were never united or friends, but when they were to oppose the Emperor, and
that they seldom failed to do, as often as occasion happened.

For instance, the Emperors always reserved a certain tribute, which they
called Fodrum, to be paid them as often as they should pass out of Germany
into Italy. The denial of this Fodrum, produced most desperate Wars, insomuch
that the Emperors were generally forced to fight their passage to Rome, through
their own Dominions.

At last under Frederick the first, most of those Corporation Towns were
utterly destroyed.

Amongst these, Milan was the chief seat of Rebellion; then Brescia, Bergamo,
and several others shared in the same fate, as they had done in the same fault.


Merch. I thought there had been several Imperial feuds in Lombardy, as you
lately observed, and Counties -- what became of them, did they follow the
Government of those great Towns?


Trav. Sir, there were several Marquisses and Counts, who had great privileges
and possessions. But in the absence of the Emperor they were in a manner
necessitated -- to acquiesce under the irresistible force of an insolent
people. Vixque aliquis nobilis, vel vir magnus tam magno ambitu inveniri queat,
qui civitatis suae non sequatur imperium. -- But many times upon the return of
the Emperor into those parts, they have been established in their Dominions,
and the Rebels severely punished, as in the case of William Marquess of
Monferat, and the Bishop of Aste; to whom when the Citizens of Aste, and
Quiere, (the chief Towns belonging to them) had refused to do justice
concerning their rights and privileges, the Emperor, Frederick the first,
punished those Citizens most severely, as Revells and his declared enemies.

Now, Sir, if you have observed any thing in the Government of those Lombards,
which either makes for our Authors proposition, or pleases your self, let me
know it, and I shall show you all the farther satisfaction I can.


Merch. I have nothing more to offer concerning them. I hate their Government,
which I think makes little for us. But I would gladly hear somewhat more of the
Goths and Vandals, because it is said, they lived under a Monarchy, though
limited.


Trav. The later Goths, which were of the race of the Visigoths, being much
weakened and harrassed by the Romans, at last, under their King Alaric, obtained
permission from the Emperor Honorius, to retire into Spain. But being
treacherously pursued by Stilico, whom they overcame, were so incensed against
the Romans, that they immediately returned, and sacking Rome again, set down in
that part of France, which they call Provincia, or Gallia Narbonensis. There
being again beaten, they entered into Spain, and possessed it, which happened
about the year of our Lord 412. Here they settled a Monarchical Government, but
not so absolute as formerly it had been, before their separation, a great part,
both of the power, as well as the possessions, being in the people.

Much such was the case of the Vandals, (who after they had run over almost all
Italy, taken Rome and Naples, and had spread themselves all over Campania,)
followed the Goths into Spain, whence (being invited by Bonifacius General to
the Emperor Valentinian) they passed the Streights at Cadiz into Africa, which
they possessed near 100 years, according to Procopius his account, until
Belisarius General to the Emperor Justinian, routed them, and restored the
Province to the Roman Empire. This happened about the year Five hundred and
thirty.

Now, Cousin, you must observe* that though both these Goths and Vandals
instituted a kind of Kingly Government, yet their Prince was rather a General
than a Monarch, and their affairs were for the most part so turbulent, that
they were in a continual state of war. Sometimes their success was good, but
generally bad. And, as the honor of Victory is given to the chief Commander,
so the ill fortune falls heaviest upon his head, who governs. Hence those
insolent people might possibly, as our Author says, beat the Kings brains out,
or commit many outrages upon his person, who was indeed in some things
accountable to his people, and held a Kingdom so precarious, that Grotius
thinks them not worthy of the name or title of Kings.

But no man sure that had not his hands in some measure, already died with the
blood of one of the best Kings, could have commended a people for beating out
the brains of their Sovereign, nor imagined, that some excellent person, as he
says, contrived a Government, in which the people have ever been called and
accounted most barbarous, by all the most civilized Monarchies, and learned men
in Europe, and even by Procopius himself.

He tells us, that nothing remains, that may give us any great light, in what
their excellencies consisted. Truly our Author seems to have grop'd in the dark
for all the arguments and authorities which he has produced to favor his
innovation. But no wonder, men avoid the light, when their deeds and principles
are evil.


Mer. But what say you to the possession of lands, and share in the Government,
which are the points that chiefly concern us.


Trav. Sir, you may easily believe, that if the people were Masters of the
Government, they would not fail to give themselves large proportions of the
lands. But this made their Government so irregular, and subject to so many
inconveniences, that instead of being settled according to the exact rules of
the Polities, as our Author thinks, it was most insupportable, and not capable
of any long subsistence. And in effect, we see both their name and government
so totally extinct, that those people who possessed almost all Europe, are not
now to be found in any part of it.

Such was the case of the once flourishing Kingdom of the Jews; which (when the
Seditious people, as Menahemus, Eliazarus, and others, endeavored to set up a
popular Government,) was utterly destroyed, and of two such mighty Nations,
nothing is left, but some few wandering remains or old rustic monuments, which
serve only to testify that they once have been.

I confess, had the authority of the Gothic Kings been Absolute and
Independent, I know no great inconvenience, that their distribution of the
lands, could have produced. Yet that too ought to be done, with discretion and
good consideration, or many mischiefs, and ruin in the end may ensue.

To this purpose, our Author, I thank him, has put us in mind of a memorable
example. For Plutarch tells us, that Cleomenes King of Sparta, endeavoring to
make himself Absolute, slew the Ephori. And the better to ingratiate himself
with the people, divided the lands amongst them. But being desperately attacked
by Antigonus King of Macedon, before he had well established his Sovereign
Authority, he could not raise money, to pay either his Mercenary soldiers, or
his own Citizens. Whence for want of that power, he was totally routed,
Lacedemon sacked, and the whole Kingdom became a Province to the Macedonians.


Mer. Without doubt many Contingencies may happen, in which an Absolute Power
in the Prince, may prove the greatest security to a Kingdom against a Foreign
Invasion. For whilst the people are consulted withal, or entreated to
contribute toward the necessary expenses of war, by an untimely frugality, and
indiscreet husbandry the whole may be lost.

I remember a story very apposite to this purpose, in the wars between the
Greeks and Turks under Constantine the Fifteenth, and last Christian Emperor
of Greece. The numerous Army of the Turks, had so wasted the besieged in
Constantinople, that Constantine had no hopes of preserving the City, but by a
supply of Mercenary Soldiers. To procure these, a considerable sum of money was
requisite. But the brutal and covetous Greeks would not be prevailed upon to
part with any thing at present, though they had no other hopes, to preserve all
for the future. So the unfortunate Emperor was slain, and the City taken, and
sacked from top to bottom, with all the insolences that might be expected from
a Pagan Conqueror. Among the Greeks, the Admiral Notaras was accounted the
most rich, and had been the most solicited by the Emperor to prevent, by a
cheerful contribution, and his good example, the fatal hour of the Grecian
Empire. But cursed avarice does often blind our reason so much, that we are
forced to yield That to our enemies, which might have once preserved our
friends. And so it happened. For Notaras burying all his Treasure, whilst the
Siege endured, at last to preserve his life, and complement the New Emperor
Mahomet the second, he raised his dead money from the grave, and presenting i^
with himself at the Emperor's feet, offered the one to secure the other. But
the generous Turk looking sternly upon him, Thou dog, said he, I take thy
Treasure, not as thy gift, but as my due, by right of conquest. Which had
thou in time given to thy poor Prince, whom thou have perfidiously betrayed,
thou might have preserved both thy Country, and thy King. Go then with a
mischief, and receive the just reward due to thy Treachery. So he commanded him
to be executed with no less severity, than if he had been a Traitor, even to
Mahomet himself.

But, Sir, Begging your pardon for this Digression, let us return to the Goths,
of whom I think you were saying, That they have left little behind them, which
retains the memory that they once have been. Pray, what say you to those
Tenures, which are yet extant in many parts of Europe. Were they not of the
Gothic institution, and do they not sufficiently testify, not only that they
were, but that they were also a wise people, since their Government has
remained so long after them.


Trav. Sir, I perceive you use the word Government promiscuously, as indeed our
Author himself does. Sometimes he makes it signify the Supreme right of power,
sometimes the Subordinate, and sometimes neither, but only the effects of
Government as in this case.

Now though these Tenures have remained in some Kingdoms, yet they prove little
of the wisdom, and nothing of the excellent Government of those Goths. For the
last, it is either totally lost, or else so changed, that it is not any more to
be known. For I do not hear or read of any such precarious Kingdom as theirs
was, extant at this day in Europe. Nor is it probable there should, for as has
been already observed, such a constitution is so irregular, and contrary to the
nature of Government, that it cannot continue long in that neutrality. For
either the people will take all the power into their hands, whence some little
Commonwealths have sometimes sprung up, or else the King will by degrees become
absolute and independent, such as most of the Monarchs are at present
throughout the whole world. And for their Tenures, you will easily find how
they were continued, if you consider that many little Kingdoms have been built
upon the ruins of the declining Roman Empire, which had been overrun by the
Goths and Vandalls, Roman paulatim coepit minui jam gentes quae Romanorum
provincias non regna habitabant, R^ges creare jam ex illorum potestate subduci
-- and in proprii arbitrii authoritate stare discunt.

These new Princes thought nothing more conducible to the establishment of
their new Governments, than to make as little innovation as they could, but
rather leave the conquered, who were afterward to become their Subjects, in
the same condition as they found them. And those Tenures having no great matter
of ill in them, provided their Lords had no right in the Sovereign Authority as
they had not; many of them have continued, with little alteration to this day.

This, Cousin, is I think sufficient to prove, that contrary to our Author's
proposition, most Kings which have been in the world, though they had an
absolute and an independent right of power, yet they have permitted the Lands
to be divided, and in the possession of the people. And that though in the mixed
Monarchy of the barbarous Goths and Vandalls, some part of the power as well as
possessions, were in the Commonalty, yet that is no reason to us, why,
neglecting all the other more civilized and flourishing Empires of Egypt and
Asia, as well as Europe, we must alone bring those Northern instances, in
contradiction to all the Southern, and the Eastern learning, as the only true
politic examples, for our present imitation. And to conclude, The instance
which you have brought of a master, who entrusts the sword into the hands of
his servants, with conditions, nevertheless, oaths and obligations to use it
only in defense of their master, and according to his command, and no
otherwise, yet you say, these servants, having the power in their hands, may
when they please govern the Master himself, and turn him out of doors too, if
they think it convenient so to do. This indeed cannot be denied, but it proves
nothing still of our Authors proposition. For although they have the sword in
their hands, yet it being delivered upon the forementioned conditions, and
under such obligations, they receive thereby no right of power, but are rather
under stricter vows of obedience. And truly Cousin, when law and conscience,
vows and protestations, and all that is binding upon Earth, or sacred in
Heaven, prove but slender bonds and ties too weak to keep us within the compass
of a sworn Allegiance to our Lawful and Natural Princes and Governors, all
Government in such case must break in pieces, and the Governors can by no
other way be secured from the insolences and unjust force of the governed. And
seriously, Sir, Plato Redivivus speaks of the Church with such malicious
disrespect, and in such seditious terms of the State and Government by Law
established, that it is shrewdly to be suspected, he has neither fear for God,
nor honor for the King. What kind of cure then might be expected, supposing we
were distempered, from such a loose, irreverent and Atheistical quacking Fop, I
leave to your self and all sober men to determine.


Mer. Dear Cousin, I am most entirely satisfied with all that you have said,
from the very beginning of our first discourse. And though some of my
impertinent questions, may have made the subject more tedious to you, than
otherwise it might have been, yet you have thereby totally removed all
scruples, which might have remained concerning the good and reasonable
constitution of our Government. Being most assured, that no people upon earth,
can live more happy and secure under theirs, than we under our own, provided
the strictness of our obedience, correspond with the justness of our Laws.
Besides, we have also gained this advantage, from the assurance of our health,
that we need not trouble our selves to look after a fantastical cure for an
imaginary disease, which is no where more truly to be found, than in the
shallow brains of Plato Redivivus. Being therefore fully convinced, that the
Constitution of our Government, is, thanks be to Heaven, very healthful and
vigorous, you have in your discourse this evening, sufficiently answered our
Author's whole Libel, so that I shall not give you any farther trouble
concerning it, b^t shall sacrifice the whole to the flames, or to some other,
not very respectful end or office.


Trav. I shall esteem my self very happy, if I have contributed any thing
toward your satisfaction or divertisement. However if you please, tomorrow
morning we will run over what is worth the observing, in the rest of his second
and third Discourse. And I am apt to believe, that it will prove less tedious,
and more pleasant, than what we have done this afternoon.


Mer. Most gladly, Sir, For if it be not troublesome to you, nothing can be
more acceptable to me. In the mean time, we will bid the Coachman drive us
home, where we will remember all honest and Loyal good Subjects in a glass of
the best Wine in the Cellar.


Trav. I approve very well of your motion, and if you please, we will conclude
all with our hearty wishes and prayers, for the good health, safety and
prosperity of his most Sacred Majesty, whose unparalled goodness is so great,
that as none of our Virtues can ever equal it, so neither can our vices reach
it, except it be the most barbarous transcendent malice of his merciless and
blood-thirsty enemies.


Discourse the Third.
Mer. GOod morrow to you, Cousin.


Trav. The same to you, Sir, or a better. How have you rested after our long
discourse yesterday?


Mer. I perceive by the time of the day, that I have slept long enough, but
really my head has been so full of Politics and Proclamations, that I am sure
I have done more work in six hours sleep than our Plato redivivus can ever
effect, all the days of his life. I have Reformed Monarchies, Regulated
Republics, Transformed Aristocracies, pulled down, and then set up and new
modell*d vast Empires. In a word, I have settled the whole world under such
excellent forms and polities, that we shall never hear more disputes betwixt
Privilege and Prerogative, Property and Power, People and Prince. No more
Sedition nor Civil wars at home, no more Invasions from abroad, but having
regulated the Universe according to the Polity of private States, we may begin
when we please to turn our Swords into Plough-shares, and our Spears into
Pruning Hooks, for we are to enjoy an uninterrupted peace and security even
unto the end of time, and all things.


Trav. Nothing is more common, than for the discourse of the day, (especially
when it is out of the common road) to furnish matter sufficient for dreams at
night. But pray what kind of Government had you set up.


Mer. ' It Was a Perfect free Monarchy, which so incensed Plato Redivivus, who
methoughts was of the Company, that in the height of our debate we had like to
have fallen to Cuffs. At last I told him plainly, that I did not take him for a
Conjurer. With which opprobrious word, being more offended than with all that
had been said before, rather than not pass for a cunning man, he was not
ashamed to confess, that he had studied the Black art, dealt by the Devil, and
understood Cornelius Agrippa, better than he did his Creed, and that to
convince me of my mistake, he would show me such an infallible proof both of
his skill and parts, that I should be ashamed for ever after to have treated a
person of his talent and qualifications with so little respect. And immediately
(whilst I was expecting the event) our old Commit man, had transformed
himself into a little Cubb Fox. But to that small body there was fixed a pair of
Asses Ears, so large and disproportionate to the Head, that this most
ridiculous object occasioned so hearty, and so loud a laughter among the
Company, that I awakened with the noise, and my Politics ended.


Trav. The Conclusion was pleasant enough, but indeed I should have thought,
our Author had had no part about him, of so modest and well tempered a beast.
But let us proceed in his examination, which hence forward shall be done with
as much brevity as the case will admit.

He tells us, p. 40. that for personal estate, the subjects may enjoy it in the
largest proportion, without being able to invade the Empire, and that the
subjects with their Money cannot invade the Crown. This is the first time, that
I remember to have observed where lay the weak side of invincible Gold. Indeed
till now I should have laid the odds for money against land, and I am the more
confirmed in that opinion, because I remember very well, that in an election of
a Knight for the Shire, a certain moneyed Merchant, not having three hundred
pound per Annum lands in the world, was able nevertheless, to carry the
Election against a worthy Gentleman, of an ancient Family, who had at that
time, above four thousand pounds per Annum lands of inheritance. And it was
thought, that the force of money, procured the advantage. Many such cases I
suppose have happened in other Counties, which argument sure will hold in a
Kingdom, as well as in a County, since the former is composed of the latter.

But our Author, who has the legislative power in his head, makes there, what
card trump he thinks sit. And from his unerring judgment, there is no appeal.


Merch. I think Plato is mistaken. But Sir, you have slipped a remark a little
before this; and it is, that Modern writers are of opinion that Egypt, till of
late, was not a Monarchy; and the only conjecture, which he produces, is, that
originally all Arts and Sciences, had their rise in Egypt, which they think
very improbable to have been under a Monarchy.


Trav. O silly, truly for our Authors reputations sake, I thought to have
passed by so childish a conjecture. I will not go about to prove, that really
all Arts and Sciences had their rise in that Country, because our Author has
confessed it. Nor tell you that Egypt, was an absolute Monarchy many hundred
years before, because I have already given you good authorities for it. Neither
will I trouble you with a long Catalogue of most excellent men, for all manner
of learning, who lived as well under the elder Monarchies, as later ones of
Rome, Germany, Spain, France, England and many others. Let our Authors own
profound Learning, rise up in judgment in this case against himself, since it
is plain, that his vast politic knowledge, sprang up, bloomed, brought forth
fruit, withered and decayed, and all under a Monarchical Government. For
whether we consider him in the days of King Charles the Is It. or under Oliver,
or at Rome, or since his present Majesty's happy Restoration, he has still
sucked in a Monarchical Air. I do not hear that all was effected at Geneva,
though most probably the first sour Grapes came from thence, which have set
his teeth on edge ever since.


Merch. Indeed I think so sober a politician might have spared such a little
malicious remark. But to go on, he tells us, p. 45. That Rome was the best and
most glorious Government, that the Sun ever saw.


Trav. Our Statesman has coupled best and glorious together, as Poulterers use
to do a lean and a fat Rabbit, that one may help off with the other. But his
vulgar cheat must not pass. For glorious, we will admit of that Epithete, and
good Authors give us the reason how it came to be so, which is not much to our
purpose. But for best, we must examine that a little farther.

I could cite many Authorities to prove that the Roman Commonwealth was one of
the worst Governments, that ever subsisted so long. But because I would speak
somewhat to our noble Venetian, who ought to have read his own Authors,
concerning Government at home, before he came to judge of another abroad, I
will refer him for full satisfaction in this point, to the Discorsi politici of
Paulus Paruta, a Nobleman and Senator of Venice, and Procurator of Saint Marco.
Who in his first discourse, comparing several Ancient Commonwealths, with that
of Venice, when he comes to Rome, he tells us plainly, That the Sun never saw a
more confused State. That it was really no regular government at all, and that
its chief default proceeded from the exorbitant power of the people. Whence
Tacitus calls it, lib. 3. Corruptissima Respublica.

Now, Sir, if this noble Senator, who also had been Ambassador abroad,
understood any thing of Government, as I believe he did, even more than the
English Gent. Young Venetian and learned Doctor, put all together, then we must
conclude, that our Author is mistaken. But since it is not the first time, we
will put it to account.


Mer. Well, Sir, he says next, p. 52. That Moses, Theseus, and Romulus were
founders of Democracies. What say you to that?


Trav. If I mistake not, he tells us the same thing in p. 28. 32, and 69. In
some of which he calls their Democracy, in plain English, a Commonwealth. For
Moses, I have already proved his authority to have been Independent, even in
the highest measure, upon any but God, and that in the exercise none ever used
it more arbitrarily, witness the severe punishments against the Idolaters, when
he came down from Mount Sinai. Where without any farther Ceremonies, or legal
trial, he called the Sons of Levi to him, and said: Put every man his sword by
his side, and go in from gate to gate throughout the Camp, and slay every man
his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. And the
children of Levi did according to the word of Moses, and there fell of the
people that day about 3000. men.

Many other instances there are of his Despotical power; besides, the Text
says in plain words, that Moses was King in Jeshurun. -- For the calling
together the Congregation of the Lord by sound of Trumpet, all men, who ever
read the Bible know, that it was generally to tell them some message from God,
reproach them for their misdeeds, exhort them to amendment, and such like. But
I am confident they never did any one act, which proceeded from a right of
power while Moses lived. Nay, on the contrary, when the Seditious Princes,
Corah, Datban and Abiram, as also Aaron and Miriam, murmured against Moses's
Sovereign authority, being desirous to have shared with him in the Government,
we find that God punished their Sedition most severely, and the two last
escaped the Justice of Gods sentence, only through the great intercession of
Moses. Who knows not that his Praesecti Jethroniani, were only subordinate
Judges appointed by his own order, and for his own ease. All which, besides the
common consent of learned men, makes it clear that Moses held the Supreme Civil
power, wholly in himself, call him King, or Captain, or what you please.

Next Theseus being owned after his long Travels, by his father Aegeus, found
Attica Tributary to Minos, King of Candia, and the Kingdom divided in it self,
into several little Burgs, which set up for so many particular several
Governments. Theseus therefore being a discreet Prince, endeavored to reduce
them to their former obedience by peaceable means. To that purpose he persuades
them to unite under one Government, knowing that they would become thereby,
(like a bundle of Arrows) much the stronger.

And that the name of Tyrant might not affright them, or the loss of their fond
power and freedom discourage them, he promised to abate so much, of his own
Sovereign right of Government, as to consult with them, and take their opinions
in weighty affairs, as he did in a common Hall or meeting place called Asty. In
this method things went prosperously on until one Mnesteus, a factious and an
ambitious Prince of the house of Ericthonius, insinuating to the people, that
Theseus intended at last to enslave them, he caused the Athenians to rebel.
Theseus retired to the Island S^yros, where he ended his days. Mnesteus usurped
the Kingdom; but having held his ill gotten honor but a little while, the sons
of Theseus were remitted to the Throne of their father, and Theseus was ever
after adored amongst them as a God.

Now if there be any thing in this story, which makes for our Author, much good
may it do him.

And lastly, Romulus cannot sure be said to have instituted the Commonwealth of
Rome, any more than Charles the Fifth the Republic of Holland, from whose
successors those people rebelled. Tacitus says most clearly, That Rome was
governed in the beginning by Kings, and that their liberty was procured by L.
Brutus. Vrbem Romam a principio reges habuere. Libertatem and consulatum L.
Brutus instituit. And to show the extent of his power, he tells us, Ann. lib.
3. that Romulus governed them according to his will. Romulus ut libitum nobis
imperaverat. Plutarch calls the Government all along a Monarchy, and after
Romulus had instituted the Senate, composed of the Patricii or chief Citizens,
whenever he appointed them to meet, they were obliged, says he, to observe
his orders and commands, without making any reply. Constat initio civitatis
Reges omnem potestatem habuisse, says Pomponius. That in the beginning of the
City (of Rome) their Kings enjoyed entirely the whole Sovereign Authority.

But not to multiply Authorities, to prove such vulgar truths, I shall refer
you to our Authors chief Divine, I mean the Divine Machiavel, (as he styles him
more than once) his words are full and very intelligible, where he calls all
three Princes and their Governments Kingdoms. Verum ut ad eos, qui non fortuna,
sed singulari virtute in Principes sunt evecti veniamus, (speaking all the
while of Kings) excellentiores dico fuisse Mosen, Cyrum, Romulum, Theseum, and
again, which puts all out of dispute, At qui Cyrum and reliquos, qui Regna sibi
pepererunt, and constituerunt, and c. And farther of Romulus, quo Romano
imperio potiretur, de Principe, ca. 6. And yet Plato Red. has the confidence
to affirm p. 31. that Romulus himself was no more than the first officer of the
Commonwealth, and (chosen as the Doge of Venice is) for life.

But if Plato's Divine were not an ignorant Ass, then our Author is certainly a
very impudent impostor.

Merch. Indeed, Cousin, I have great reason to believe, that Plato's
authorities and examples are as false, as his principles absurd. Besides,
supposing these great men had instituted popular Governments, (as I am fully
convinced they did not) what does that concern us? Is there no difference
between the foundation of a new Government, and the continuation of an old one?
Is there no distinction between the Roman State in its infancy, which extended
not for several years above fifteen Miles, beyond their Walls, and the Empire
of great Britain and Ireland? We know that many privileges may be granted to
the people at first for encouragement, which afterward may be inconsistent
with the safety of the Government. And is there no regard to be had to
different circumstances? but let us proceed.

In p. 62. we read, That it is not dangerous to a City, to have their people
rich; but to have such a power in the Governing part of the Empire, as should
make those, who manage the affairs of the Commonwealth depend upon them, which
came afterward to be that, which ruined their liberty, and which the Gracchi
endeavored to prevent, when it was too late. What means he by this?


Trav. Sir, We will preserve his sense, but giving other names to the Country,
People, and Governors, we shall see more plainly how it runs. Let us say then,
that it is not dangerous for England, to have their people rich even in land
(for he speaks immediately before of the Romans purchasing lands) but to have
such a share in the right of Government as should make the King, who manages
the affairs of the Kingdom depend upon them; methinks it is very clear, and it
has ever been my judgment, that the people might have what proportion their
industry could procure them in the lands, provided they did not pretend to any
share in the Sovereign authority.


Mer. But this is directly contrary to his own beloved Aphorism. Sure there
must be somewhat more in it, or else you will make him contradict himself.


Trav. Faith, Sir, I cannot help that, Truth will come out sometimes in spite
of the Devil. Nor know I how to mend his sense, except I should make him
appear, at the same time, the most false, partial, and prejudiced scribler that
ever wrote.


Mer. No matter, Sir, let us, if we can, preserve his sense, which I believe he
values himself most upon, and let his honestly and honor take their chance.


Trav. Let us then see what follows, Which, says he, came afterward to be that
which ruined their liberty, and which the Gracchi endeavored to prevent. Pray
Cousin, what is the antecedent to which, in these two places?


Mer. Sure, Sir, that is most plain; and according to my understanding, it is,
that power in the governing part of the Empire, etc.


Trav. You are right without doubt; and I dare affirm, that Q. Ennius himself,
could not make any other construction of it. And if so, then the whole sentence
runs thus. It was not dangerous to the Commonwealth of Rome to have their
Subjects rich; but it was dangerous that the Subject should have such a power
in the governing part of the Empire, as should make their Governors depend
upon them, which power of the people in the governing part of the Empire, came
afterward to be that, which ruined the peoples liberty. And which power (for
all the world knows, that, and, in this place is a conjunction copulative) the
Gracchi endeavored to prevent, etc.

Now, Sir, the first part of this Sentence is most really sound doctrine and
truth, though diametrically opposite to Plato's grand proposition, upon which
undeniable Aphorism, as he says, he is to build most of his subsequent
reasoning.

For indeed the people, though never so rich, are by no means to be trusted
with a right of power, but as I have said, rather the contrary, lest they
should confound government, or set it upon its head, with its feet uppermost.
And so that power, which the Roman people pretended to, under the Seditious
Gracchi and others, was the true cause which made the Commonwealth no longer
governable under that form. Haec ipsa in perniciem redibant and misera
Respublica in exitium suum merces erat. Flor. l. 3. c. 13.

But lest all should come to ruin, and the conquering Romans be at last
overcome by their own victorious arms, the arbitrary government of the Roman
Emperors was introduced, as the only remedy for the truly distempered State.
Non aliud discordantis patriae remedium fuisse quam ut ab uno regeretur, Tacit.
Ann. 1.

But how the Gracchi endeavored to prevent this power in the people, who stood
up so violently for them, is a riddle, which can be salv'd this only way, That
in truth, though they set on foot the popular pretense of Liberty and Property,
yet honor and Empire was the true game, which they themselves hunted.
Seditionum omnium caus^s (says Florus) Tribunitia potestas excitavit, quae
specie quidem Plebis tuendae, cujus in auxilium comparata est, re aut^m
Dominationem sibi acquirens, studium populi ac favorem Agrariis, frumentariis,
Judiciariis legibus, aucupabatur.


Mer. Sir, I am apt to believe, that our Author means by which, in the last
place, The ruin of the people's Liberty, which the Gracchi endeavored to
prevent.


Trav. Indeed the sense is somewhat mended, but the English is stark naught,
however we will consider it according to your construction, the story then is
this, Tib. Gracchus an ambitious Gentleman, and discontented with the Senate,
for what reason I care not, struck in with the people, and became their Tribune.

The first great thing which he undertook, (in outward appearance, for the good
of the people, but truly for the advancement of his own private designs and
Empire, which he affected) was, the establishment of the Agrarian law, and
restitution of the lands among the people.


Mer. Pray what was the Agrarian law, and land, which the people so much
desired might be restored. Had they any injustice done them, or were they
forceably taken from them?


Trav. No sure, Sir, If there were any injustice in the case, it lay in the
restoration; but you shall be Judge your self. When the Romans under the
Infancy of their Government had conquered any of their neighbors, they usually
took away some of their lands, which were disposed of, partly for the support
of the State, or public revenue, and the other part was distributed among the
indigent Citizens and Soldiers, especially the Lame, Ancient, and decrepit, and
such as had deserved well, who were thence called Emeriti, or Veterani milites,
now these Lands remained to them and their heirs, upon the payment of some
small acknowledgment, or performance of some certain Services which were in the
Nature of Tenures. But in process of time, when the Roman Empire, and with it,
luxury increased, the common people, following the example of their Governors,
lived in great ease and plenty. To support which, many sold their lands, either
to the richer Noblemen, or to their fellow Citizens, as they could find a
Chapman. Vnde enim Pop. Romanus Agros and Cibarios flagitat, nisi per sam^m,
quam, Luxus, fecerat, hinc ergo Gracchana seditio, Flor. l. 3. cap. 12.


Mer. Was there no difference between the Lands given to the Citizens, and
those which were thus bestowed upon the Soldiers?


Trav. Yes, those granted to the Citizens were of the more ancient Institution
and called Clientela's, which some good Authors believe to have been the
original of all Tenures. Those given to the Soldiers were called Praeda
militaria, or stipendiaria, and were such lands as had been taken from some
conquered Provinces (as has been before declared) Those which bordered upon
the Skirts of the Enemies Countries, were generally granted unto some of their
principal Captains and Commanders, which became an Inheritance to themselves,
and posterity upon presumption and Condition, that they should, and would
defend their Prince and Country, with the greater courage and fidelity, since
in effect they secured at the same time, their own Estates. Hence it is
supposed, that those Inheritances which we now call Feuds had (in process of
time) their first Institution, though the word Feod^m was unknown to the
ancient Romans.

And it is further conjectured, That from the differences between those
Clientela's and these Praeda militaria, sprang our ancient Tenures, and their
several diversities, as grand Serjeanty, Knights Service, Soccage, etc. Now
these Praeda militaria were not (in their Original Institution) alienable, so
as the Clientela's were, whence (as has been said) the Citizens or Clientes,
took the liberty to sell these lands* as their occasions required, which lands
so sold, became, as in good reason they ought, the inheritance of the
purchasers, and so descended from father to son for several generations, till
at last it came into the fancy of Tib. Gracchus to have these lands restored
again to the people.

And that he might kill two birds with one stone, that is, impoverish the
Senate, or Government, which (being an Aristocracy) he hated, and enrich the
people whom he seemingly protected, he order*d that the purchasers, or those in
whose families these lands were found, should be re-imburst out of the public
revenue.

You may guess what a disturbance this must needs make, among the Senators and
Noblemen whom it chiefly concerned, and what inconveniences would inevitably
happen upon a redistribution of those lands, which had been so long
consolidated with their own.


Mer. Nothing, methinks, could be more unreasonable, and unjust.

Trav. No matter, Sir, for as I have seen two doors of a room so artificially
contrived, that the shutting of one, has at the same motion opened the other;
so generally wheresoever Ambition enters, Justice immediately avoids the place;
and indeed, Haud been convenient. --

Gracchus therefore, eagerly pursuing Dominion, Vt qui die Comitiorum prorogari
sibi vellet Imperium, puts forward this Agrarian Law with great vehemence.
Which, when his Colleague, and another Tribune of the people, M. Octavius,
opposed; (without whose consent nothing could be concluded, nor law passed)
most contrary to all Justice, and Law too, Gracchus by force and violence, (a
thing before unheard of) turns him out of his Office.

Having thus gained his point, and ready to finish what he had so prosperously
begun, Scipio Nasica, with the most worthy of the Citizens and Nobility cuts
him off; and for a mark of ignominy, flings his carcass into the river.

Now as the same Laws were promoted by his brother Caius, with this difference,
that he extended his insolence farther, deferring the Judgment of cases, which
had been ever particular to the Senate, to the people, and introducing the
antiquated Licinian Law, by which no Citizen was to possess above 500. acres of
land, within the Domicilium Imperii; so the same fate attended him, and that
even with the consent of the people, for whose sake he seemed to have pursued
this specious design; Who perceiving at length the ambition and irregular
proceedings of their great Patron, the injustice of their pretensions, and the
little good the restitution of these lands would do themselves, they totally
deserted him. Insomuch, that Caius, when his fatal hour drew near, fell down
before the Statue of Diana, praying, That the people, who had so basely
abandoned him, might never enjoy that liberty, which he endeavored to have
obtained for them.


Mer. I am much satisfied with this story, and am apt to believe, that many of
our own worthy Patriots, who cry up so much for Liberty and Property, and the
interest of the people, intend more really their own particular advancement;
yet nevertheless you see our Author calls these men Illustrious, and renowned
persons, their actions and undertakings Heroic.


Trav. He does so; and undoubtedly he would say the same thing if he durst, not
only of Brutus, but of the Dominican Friar, Ravillac, and Hugh Peter's himself,
(or whoever else it was) that murdered our late Sovereign.

But you have heard the opinion of Florus, with whom Plutarch agrees, and all
the ancient Authors, that I have yet met withal. And to conclude, Tacitus, who
seems to have been friend enough to a Democratical Government, calls them
disturbers of the people. Hinc Gracchi, and Saturnini turbatores plebis. Ann.
l. 3.


Merch. It Is well; We come now to Agis and Cleomenes. Who were they?


Trav. They were Kings of Sparta, and their Designs and Fates much the same
with the Gracchi. The difference was chiefly this, that the former being
already Kings, they endeavored by the same means, that is to say, by abolition
of debts, or novae tabulae, distribution of lands and favor of the people, to
procure to themselves an absolute authority against the usurped power of the
Ephori. The Gracchi, being truly Subjects, followed the same course to usurp
the Empire, but against the lawful Authority of the Senate. This is only to be
observed of Cleomenes, that at the same time, when he endeavored to possess
the Sovereign power, he thought it nevertheless no Solecism in the Politics,
to give the property of the Lands among the people. In a word, the same wheel,
troublesome and dangerous ambition, moved equally all four; against which
Plutarch inveighs most severely, in his introduction to the Lives of those
Spartan Kings.


Merch. And may all ambitious disturbers of our peace, meet with the same
Catastrophe. Next our Author tells us, that alteration of the property, is the
Vnica corruption politica.


Trav. I grant it, Sir, if you apply property to the right of power in
Government, but not if restrained to Lands, as has been already proved. And
for the favorable opinion which he has of confusion, or Anarchy, may himself
be confounded (in this world I mean) by his own loose principles, and
ungovernable unquiet Spirit.


Merch. What say you of the Laws and Government of Switzerland, and the Low
Countries?


Trav. Little Sir; their Laws and Governments are as notoriously known, as
their Rebellions; and several Authors have writ fully of both.


Merch. Very good, we come next to the most famous Republic of Venice, where
amongst other things vulgar enough, our Nobleman tells us, that the great
difficulty in the administration of that Republic, has been to regulate their
Nobility, and to bridle their Faction and ambition, which can alone breed a
disease in the vital part of their Government. And this they do by most severe
Laws, and a very vigorous execution of them.


Trav. Right: But because he has not been pleased to let you know what those
Laws are, give me leave to inform you. I shall not speak of little Mutineers,
those poor Rogues are easily cut off. But come to the great and noble Villains,
and concerning such their Law is this: -- when any eminent man, whose relations
and dependences are commonly very great, shall (using as yet no other weapon
than his tongue) -- defame the Government, by calumnies and opprobrious
Speeches, and thereby endeavor to draw off, first the affection, and next the
obedience of the people to their lawful Magistrate, and that the Government
thinks not fit to call him publicly to account, lest some disturbance might
happen through the interest of his friends; or least the municipal Laws of the
State might not be sufficient to reach his life for any particular thing,
though his complicated ills make him obnoxious, in general to the Government,
and dangerous in it, or that a perjured Jury should acquit him, which would
make him more malicious than before, knowing full well, that when a man becomes
so purged, the Devil enters into him again with nine Spirits worse than
himself. I say under such circumstances, their method of -- proceeding is this.
First, information being given to some of the Consiglio di Dieci -- and
sufficient evidence concerning matter of fact, his process is made, which
requires very little time, and by majority of votes he is condemned to die; the
offender being all this while ignorant of what is doing, and at liberty as at
other times. This done, the business comes into the hands of the Inquis^tori
del Stato, who are three annual officers, chosen out of the Dieci -- as also
the Gao or Capo di Dieci -- who are also three, but chosen monthly, and out of
the same body. These Inquisitori are to see the Sentence executed, which is
left to their discretion, and which they manage according to the circumstances
of the offender. If there be no difficulty in taking him at home, then the way
is this: the Inquisitori, or any two of them, send for a file of Musketeers or
more, who accompanied with an Officer, Confessor, and Executioner, and in the
most quiet time of the night, they force (if need be) the house of the
offender; where being apprehended, he is acquainted, at the same instant, both
with his offense and punishment. It is too late, and in vain to plead, or
dispute; but being carried away into a Gondola prepared to receive him, they
put off, accompanied with another, toward the Sea, and being come to the place
they design, the offender having received absolution from his Confessor, they
place him upon the midst of a Plank laid between the two Gondola's, with a
Stone about his neck, then putting off their Boat, the criminal falls, for ever
forgotten, to the bottom of the Sea, nor is there a man in the whole state of
Venice, who dares ever after inquire what is become of this Great Nobleman;
sometimes in such case they are strangled. But if the offender happens to be a
person having a great retinue (as many have of Bravos) and that the forcing of
his Palace may prove troublesome, and make too great a noise from the opposition
which the officer may meet withal, from the number of the Domestics, then the
Inquisitori send for some of the most daring and notorious of the Banditi, and
at the same time accompany the message with a pass or safe conduct, both for
his coming to Venice, and return.

Upon his appearance before the Inquisitori, they inform him of their business,
which is, to hire him, at the price of his own pardon, and a considerable
reward, to shoot or stab such a Nobleman, who has been condemned by the
Consejo di Dieci -- and that to be done wherever he meet him even in the midst
of the place of St. Marco.

The Bandito seldom refuses these conditions, but requires their order for his
own absolution. Upon which the Inquisitori give him a billet, or piece of white
paper folded up after a certain manner, and marked with their nail only, without
any word or written letter whatever. This done, the Bandito dispatcheth the
Nobleman, but no man knowing that this person had ever been accused, much less
condemned. The Bandito, as an assassinate, is carried immediately to prison.
Who when he comes there, demands the Keeper of the Prison, or chief officer, to
whom he delivers his billet, upon sight of which, the doors of the Prison are
immediately set open, and the Bandito returns whither he thinks fitting himself.

After which, none even of his near Relations -- dare ever make any question
concerning his death. Such is the punishment, and such the manner of executing
notorious and eminent Calumniators of the Venetian Government. And sure it has
been one of the greatest reasons, that has preserved that State so long from a
Popular or a Monarchical Usurpation.

Now though this be the practice of the most renowned Republic of Venice, yet
I am confident our Author would much blame such an Arbitrary way of proceeding
under any Monarchical government, especially if himself (as he justly deserves)
should happen to be made the first example, as he is of that kind, one of the
greatest offenders.


Mer. The Tongue indeed is an unruly and a dangerous member, and in my opinion,
in some cases, ought to be restrained under no less penalties, than we do the
violent actions of our hands.

Your next remark is in p. 88. where it is said, that the people, (under the
Roman Emperors) who had really an interest to endeavor a change of
Government, were so prevented by seeing the Prince, whom they designed to
supplant, removed to their hand, that they were puzzled what to do; taking in
the mean time great recreation to see those wild beasts hunted down themselves,
who had so often preyed upon their lives and estates, etc.


Trav. Very fine sport indeed for an old Rebel, and I am persuaded, Plato would
be highly pleased (as old as he is) to follow briskly some such Royal chase.
But his bloodhounds are at present a little out of tune, and I hope he will
lose his impious diversion. But to return to his Historical observation, he
tells us, that the people, who had an interest to change the Government, wanted
time to destroy their Prince themselves, because it was done so to their hands.
And yet the mischief on it is, that under the first change of the Government
which is generally the most insupportable, the people had as much time as they
could have wished. For Augustus lived an Emperor about forty years, and died
in peace, beloved and lamented.

Tiberius, his Successor, had obtained the age of Seventy eight before he left
his Empire, with the world; a time long enough for such good Subjects and
Patriots of their country as Plato Redivivus, to have changed the Arbitrary
Government to its ancient popular constitution.

Claudius also reigned long enough, and the people wanted not time nor
opportunity. And for those succeeding Caesar's, as Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
they were taken off rather by the fury of the Soldiers, and private malice and
ambition of particular men, than discontent of the Citizens. Nay, the people,
as they chiefly defended their Emperors whilst alive, so they were the most
considerable sufferers by their deaths. And notwithstanding the great
irregularity in the Politic principles of those Emperors, by keeping the
Sovereign power, and yet leaving the property to the people. That Empire
(though latterly much divided and dismembered, chiefly by the Emperors
themselves, and partly by the Ambition of the Roman Bishops) has subsisted
1700 years, and may for ought we know, continue as many more, and yet no
Government more averse to our great Politicians rule.

But, Sir, if we must answer all the impertinencies, incongruities, and
misapplications of this Scribbling Statesman, there will be no end of our
discourse. Pray therefore let us make as short work as we can, and to that
purpose we will reduce what is most considerable under some heads. And the
first thing which occurs, is the account which he gives, p. 97. and 145. of the
Government of France; In which he tells us, that France has no Freemen below
the Nobility, that is Yeomen. That the Gentry are very needy and numerous,
because the elder brother in most parts of the Kingdom, has no more share in
the division of the paternal estate, than the Cadets, excepting the principal
house, etc. which they call, Vol de Chapon. And from hence he draws several
false arguments. To the first, I cannot find, upon the best examination I could
make, any considerable difference between the constitution of France, and that
of England, as to the Gentry and Commonalty. For although I do not observe, any
such titular distinction as Yeomen in France, which is also antiquated, or
almost lost and confounded amongst us. Yet there is a notorious difference
between the Roturiers, or those whom he calls Villains, and the Freeholders.
The latter are composed generally of little Merchants, Tradesmen, Shopkeepers,
and such like, and they are distinguished by their Tenures or Services, which
they call Droit de Corvie, and Droit de Censive. The first is properly
Villenage, as, working for his Lord, either with his Body, Cart, or Horses, or
such like. The other, that is to say, Droit de Censive, does not oblige the
Freeholder to any manner of servile office, but only the payment of some small
rent, as Cocks, Hens, or some little part of the profits. They have their Quint
and Requint, which are certain Fines upon Alienations, as also their
Copyholders, and lands held in Gavelkind; and in a word, I know no greater
difference, between the French and English Subjects, as to the point of Lands
and Properties, than this, That the Lands ennoble, or at least give Titles in
France, as Comte, Baron, Marquess, which privileges were taken away, I think,
from the English, under the reign of Hen. 3. and which came originally from the
French, being introduced by William the Conqueror.

As for the needy and numerous Gentry, to the last, all the world knows, that
France is extreme populous, as well in Commonalty as Gentry. The men being very
Brisk, and the women, it seems, very Pregnant. But for their wants, I mean of
the Gentry, I think it is as publicly known, that they proceed generally from
a different cause, from what our Author has assigned. That is, from the
Scruple which they make of undertaking any Mercantile employment, which is the
greatest support of our English families, so that there is no Cadet of a house
ennobled, who had not rather trail a pike, than be an apprentice to the
greatest Merchant in France.

All these Cadets, our Author has brought to Court, and made them the chief
props of the present French Government and greatness. But he has forgot, That
as the young French Nobility are very numerous, so the vast number of
Ecclesiastical Preferments, Monasteries and Temporal offices, depending
eternally and at all times upon the Crown, do entertain so many of these young
Cadets, that I am confident, at least two thirds of the younger children, are
provided for after this manner, without depending immediately upon the King's
Purse. As to the division of the Paternal estate, amongst the Cadets, except
the principal house, which he calls Vol de chapon, our Buzzardly Author of a
French Capon, has made a long-wing'd Hawk. For what he calls most part of the
Kingdom, is particular to Paris only, as with us in London, and Kent formerly,
(I suppose by reason of the Traders) the Isle of France, Limousin, Xantonge,
and it may be some one Province more, which possibly I have not remembered.

Thus you see, Cousin, how our Author augments, or diminishes, changetth or
disguiseth the truth of things, as they make most convenient for his purpose,
and what little credit ought to be given to him. We shall therefore take no
more notice of France. For his premises being demonstrably false, his
consequence whatsoever it be, cannot hold good.


Mer. Sir, I never thought all to be Gospel, that has been preached by our
divine Plato. But now we come to the Clergy, let us see what respect he has
for the Spiritual Government, since the Temporal does so much offend him. He
tells us then very sincerely and frankly, that he could wish, there never had
been any Clergy amongst us, etc. For you know the Northern people did not bring
Christianity into these parts, but found it here.


Trav. Most excellent. You may perceive how happy we are like to be under the
New Government of our infamous Author, who rebelling against God, and Man
appointed to rule over us by Gods authority, has left nothing that I know of,
to set up for, but H^ll and the Devil. But his argument is very strong, for the
Northern people did not bring Christianity into these parts.

Indeed it is great pity that we have not retained the Gothic, or Saxon, and
Northern Paganism with the Gothic Polities. But our learned Historian, should
have had at least so much respect for Antiquity as to have considered, that the
Ecclesiastical Government, or Clergy, was established here according to his own
confession, even before the barbarous Northern people came here themselves, and
I thank God, it still continues in a great measure amongst us, even at this
day, and I hope is like to do so, notwithstanding the Fanatical and pernicious
doctrine of Plato and his hellish disciples. And for the institution of our
Ecclesiastical government, and foundation of our Bishoprics, and many of our
Monasteries, which our Author ascribes to most villainous causes, it is certain
from the best Histories extant among us, that King Lucius, about the year 180.
converted no less than thirty one of the Temples of the Heathenish Flamins and
Arch-flamins into so many Christian Bishoprics, whereof London, York and
Caerlyon, now S. David's, were made the Metropolitans of the Province.

But our Pagan Politician, hating Christianity it self, hates no less the
establishment of the Christian Religion, which he vilifies with notorious
slanders and falsities. And as for Monasteries, not to give a particular
account of all their several beginnings, which were generally from the
benevolence of most pious men and women, and too many to be numbered, we read
that King Edgar the peaceable, founded no less for his own share than forty
seven.


Mer. Sir, I concur with you both in your History and your hopes, and shall
ever add my most hearty prayers, and wishes. But our Author proceeds, and in
the next page, had he had wit enough, he would have turned the whole order into
ridicule. But knowing well that his strongest arguments, and chiefest talent
consists in opprobrious language, the foul-mouthed Fanatic is not ashamed to
call our Christian Ancestors barbarous, and those good men, who at the expense
of their blood and liv^s, planted and prop^gated the Christian Faith amongst
^s, Vipers.


Trav. He is equally mistaken in both. For not six pages farther, that is in p.
106. he there is pleased to give our Ancestors, the title of a plain-hearted
and well-meaning people, who were barbarous before in p. 100. But to call a man
a Saint or a Devil, is indifferent to him, and promiseuously used, according as
either serves best for his purpose.

For the Ecclesiastical Vipers, I do not think indeed that his wit has
furnished him, with a character answerable to the design of his malice. For a
Viper is known to be an Animal, much more useful and valuable, than our Author
himself is like to be. For although that God and Nature have given it a sting,
or teeth if you will, to defend it self from violence, and punish such as
offend it, yet we know, that of its body are composed the most Sovereign
Cordials: Such are the excellent Works of our Learned Clergy, which are found
to be the most effectual Antidotes against the poisonous Blasphemies and
Heresi^s of our Schismatical Dissenters. Besides, Naturalists assure us, that
the Viper has such a care, and tender affection for its young, that upon any
pressing danger, she receives them again into her own body, and charged with
the load and safety of what her self gave life to, suffers no injury to
approach them until first it has passed through her own body, and she
destroyed. But our unnatural sneaking and malicious worm, and good besides for
nothing, is barbarous enough to tear out the bowels of his indulgent mother,
(the Holy Church I mean) even whilst those very bowels, are yearning to see the
sad condition of her desperately abandoned Son, and in the height of his
wickedness, opens her tender arms to receive this child of perdition into her
Sacred bosom. But the Prodigal will never return, and so let us leave him,
whilst our Church of England, wanting as little my defense as, apprehending his
reproaches, will still remain firm upon the rock, secure, though sadly
lamenting those miserable shipwracks, which storms of our own rasing have
procured.


Merch. And may the providence of Heaven preserve her, until from militant she
becomes triumphant. In the mean time, I perceive, we are like to have more work
about the civil Government. For in p. 103, our Author tells us, that the
Sovereign power of England is in King, Lords and Commons.


Trav. Right, Sir, when there is a Parliament in being, and as it is taken for
one entire body, of which, the King is Principium, caput and finis. But there
is no Sovereign power in the house of Commons, neither is there a Sovereign
power in the house of Lords, either conjunctim or divisim, jointly or
separately without the King, therefore the Sovereign right of power can be no
where but in the King; right of council is in the Lords and Commons in
Parliament duly assembled, but right of command is in the King. For he both
calls the Parliament and dissolves it. One Sovereign power cannot dissolve
another Sovereign power (could they be supposed together) except by force. But
the Kings of England have ever called and dissolved Parliaments, not by force,
but by right of power and command, which belongs to them by inherent
birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession. A Bill which shall have
regularly past both Houses, and brought even to the Royal assent, is no Act,
nor has it any manner of force, as such, without the Kings will. Le Roy le
veult does solely, and necessarily transform a Bill into a Statute, and is the
essential constituent part of it. His Will does alone give life and being to
that which is no more than a dead insignificant letter without it. Nay though a
Bill should pass both Houses with the unanimous consent, and approbation of
every individual Member, yet the King may refuse it; and it is indisputably the
right of our Kings so to do, if they shall so think sitting; which prove
evidently (amongst other things) that the Sovereign Power is solely in our
Kings.


Merch. But, Sir, Plato Red. insinuates very strongly, p. 123. that It is a
violation of right, and infringment of the Kings Coronation Oath, to frustrate
the counsels of a Parliament by his negative voice, and that in his opinion the
King is bound confirmare consuetudines, or pass such laws as the people shall
choose.


Trav. The Delphick Oracle did never impose Laws more peremptorily to the
Greeks, than Plato Red. would arrogantly obtrude his private opinions upon us;
for notwithstanding all the Laws are against him, yet he alone would pretend to
divest the King of this his undoubted Prerogative.

But, Sir, there is a difference between new modelling a Government, and
maintaining it according to its ancient institution: If Plato designs the
first, he may as well pretend it is inconvenient that the Imperial Crown of
England should be Hereditary, and Successive, and endeavor to make it
Elective; for the right of a negative voice in Parliament, is as certainly the
Prerogative of the Kings of England, as their right of Inheritance or
Succession is.

But having no design to d^te so much at this time, what ^lteration might be
convenient for us, as ^o maintain, what the Kings Right ^^* and ever has been,
according to the ^^cient, as well as present Cons^tion of the Government, I
must, (...) do averr, That the King, enjoyin^ ^^reditarily, and undeniably this
N^tive voice in Parliament, has himself the Supreme power of England. And
this, the English Gentleman and his Doctor seem to acknowledge, p. 105.

Besides, If the Sovereign power of England were not solely in the King, then
when there is no Parliament there could be no Sovereign power in England, which
is ridiculous and absurd. For there is no Free and independent Kingdom, or
Commonwealth upon earth, in which there is not at all times, a Sovereign power
in being. If the Sovereign power cease for a moment, the power which remains
becomes dependent, and at the same instant a higher power must appear. But the
Imperial Crown of England depends upon none but God. Omnis sub Rege, and ipse
sub nullo, nisi tantum Deo, says Bracton, an ancient and a Learned Author: and
again, Rex non habet superiorem nisi Deum, The King has no Superior but God.
Or as it was expressed under H. 4. The Regality of the Crown of England, is
immediately subject to God, and to none other.


Mer. But since the King can neither make any Laws, nor levy any Taxes without
the consent of both Houses, it shows sure, that at least some of the Sovereign
power resides in them.


Trav. I perceive, Cousin, you have forgot your Grotius, for he tells you, that
you must distinguish between the Empire, and the manner of holding the Empire,
or the Jus ab usu Juris. Aliud enim est Imperium, aliud habendi modus. So that
although the Kings of England do generally promise, or swear not to alter the
Government, nor to make Laws, or levy impositions, but according to the ancient
Constitutions of the Kingdom; yet nevertheless this takes not from him his
Sovereign right of power, for that he has in him by Birthright and
Inheritance, and according to the Original Institution of the Kingdom, and
which is antecedent and Superior also to any Oaths or Obligations. I Will give
you Grotius his own words, as you will find them, l. 1. c. 3. s. 16. Non
definit summum esse Imperium, etiamsi is qui imperaturm est, promittat aliqua
subditis, etiam talia, quae ad imperandi rationem pertineant. But he confesses
indeed, that such a Constitution, is a little limitation to the Supreme power.
Fatendum tamen arctius quodammodo reddi Imperium. But it does not follow from
thence, that there is any authority Superior to his own. Non inde tamen
sequitur ita promittenti Superiorem dari aliquem. And he gives you the example
of the Persian Monarchs, who though they were as absolute as any Kings could
be, yet when they entered upon the Government, they swear to observe certain
Laws, which they could not alter. Apud Persas, Rex summo cum Imperio erat,
tamen and jurabat, cum regnum adiret, and leges certa quadam forma latas mutare
illi nefas erat. So also that the Egyptian Kings were bound to the observance
of several Customs and Constitutions, Aegyptiorum Reges, quos tame^ ut alios
Reges Orientis, summo imperio usos non est dubium, ad multarum rerum
observationem oblig abantur.


Mer. Very well, Sir, but pray why may not the Sovereign power remain still in
the people, especially if all be true, which our Author boldly affirms, p. 119.
viz. That our Prince has no authority of his own, but what was first entrusted
in him by the Government, of which he is head.


Trav. Here Plato plays the Villain egregiously, is a Traitor incognito, and
carries Treason in a dark lanthorn, which he thinks to discover or conceal
according to the success of Rebellion which he evidently promotes. But we shall
unmask this Republican Faux. And first our King, whom he calls Prince, (not
understanding, it may be, the difference between Regnum and Principa^us) has
no authority, says he, but what was first entrusted by the Government. Here
Government is a word of an amphibious nature, and can as well subsist under a
Monarchy, as a Commonwealth. For if Rebellion does not prosper, then Government
in this place signifies the Law of the Land; and indeed, the King's authority
over us is established by the Law, that is to say, the consent and
acknowledgment of the People in due form, That the King has inherently,
antecedently, and by Birthright, a Sovereign authority over all his people,
and this is confirmed to him, both by Statute, Common Law and Custom, according
to that of 19. H. 6. 62. The Law is the inheritance of the King and people, by
which they are ruled, King and people. But if the Commonwealths men gain their
point, if the Association, and its brat, bloody murder, had taken its damnable
effect, then Government had most plainly signified the People, and that is
truly our Authors meaning; for the words which immediately follow are these,
Nor is it to be imagined, that they would give him more power, than what was
necessary to govern them. What can be the antecedent to They and Them, but the
word Subjects, which precedes in the beginning of the Sentence. This is the
true Presbyterian or Phanatick way of speaking their most mischievous Treasons,
which like a Bizzare, with a little turn of the hand, represents either the Pope
or the Devil.

But since we are so plainly assured of his meaning, I Will take the liberty for
once, to put it plainly into words, and I think it will then run thus: That our
King, having neither by birthright, nor by a long undoubted Succession of above
six hundred years, any Authority of his own, but only that which the people
have entrusted in him, ( for they would give him no more, than what was just
necessary to govern them, p. 119.) the people, in whom the Sovereign power
resides, may call this their minister, otherwise called King, to an account for
the administration of this his trust; and in case he should not acquit himself,
according to their expectation, the Sovereign Subject might punish this their
Subject King, turn him out of his office, as all Supreme governors may their
subordinate officers, nay and set up any other form of Government whatsoever,
without doing any manner of injustice to their King.

This is our Authors doctrine, as appears not only by inevitable consequences,
drawn from this m^tuated or fide-commissary power, which he has placed in the
King, but from the whole context, and course of his Libel.

Now though Hell it self could not have invented a proposition more notoriously
false, though the whole Association could not have asserted a more Traitorous
principle, though the Supreme power or Sovereign right of Government, has been
fixed to the imperial Crown of England, ever since the beginning of History or
Kings amongst us, or the memorial of any time, though more than twenty
Parliaments, which are the wisdom and Representatives of the whole Nation, have
by several explanatory Acts and Statutes, confessed, declared and affirmed,
that this Sovereign Authority, or power of England is solely in the King, and
his la^^ul Heirs and Successors, in exclusion to all other mortal power
whatsoever. Rex habet potestatem and jurisdictionem super omnes qui in regno
suo sunt; Nay although all the Power, Privileges, Liberties, and even the
Estates of the people proceeded originally from the mere bounty of our Kings;
as both ancient and modern Authors, and Histories have evidently made it
appear; And after all, notwithstanding our Author has not produced one single
authority, or one little piece of an Act, Statute or Law, to prove that the
Sovereign power is in the people, or that the King held his authority only in
trust from them, (as he plainly affirms) or when they entrusted him with it, or
had it in themselves to grant; yet by an unparallelled piece of impudence and
vanity, he dares to bring his own private opinion, in competition with the
wisdom, learning, practice, decrees and justice of the whole Nation, condemn
our Ancestors, as betrayers of the peoples rights and privileges, and by a
single, ipse dixit, prove himself, the only true Physician, learned Statesman,
and (except some who in most Ages have been Executed for their most horrid
Treasons) the only worthy Patriot of his Country and Defender of its rights.

Now lest some of our ignorant and infatuated multitude, like the Children of
Hamel, should dance after our Authors popular and Northern Bagpipe, until he
precipitates them all into inevitable ruin and destruction, I am resolved not
to insist at present upon his Majesty's Hereditary and undoubted Sovereign
right of power, which he now possesses, not only by prescription and a
Succession of more than eight hundred years, but by all the La^s of the Land,
as has been already declared, and the universal consent of all his good
Subjects, confirmed by their Oaths of Allegiance, from which none but Rebels
and perjured men can depart: I will not I say at present urge those arguments,
which are sufficient to convince* opiniastrete, and wilful ignorance it self,
but will attack him in his strongest Gothic ^orts, and the rational part, upon
which he seems most to value himself.

And first for these Goths, I cannot find in any History, when it was they came
over into England, nay I am confident that all Learned men will agree, that
there is no probable conjecture from any Author, that they ever have been here,
or crossed our Seas, or came nearer us than Normandy; one argument (amongst
others) is the flourishing condition of our Island above France (where the
Goths and Vandalls had made some ravage) in point of Learning and Sciences,
insomuch that Alcuinus an Englishman, and Scholar to the Venerable Bede, was
sent unto Charles the Great, to whom he became Doctor or Professor in Divinity,
Astronomy and Philosophy, and by his direction erected the University of Paris.
But to return to our Goths, it is certain, that at first they traveled
South-East, which is very different from South-West, such as i^ our situation
from theirs. And yet our politic Author tells us positively, according to his
usual method, that they established their government in these parts after their
conquest, p. 93. And endeavoring to prove in p. 46. and 97. that according to
their institution, the people had an influence upon the Government, he tells us
that the Governments of France, Spain and England by name, and other countries,
where these people settled, were framed accordingly.

Here we see our Country conquered, and an excellent form of Government
established by the Goths, so good, and admirably just, that we in this age must
quit our happy Monarchy, which has subsisted most gloriously many Hundreds of
years, only to run a wool-gathering after these precarious Gothic Princes, and
yet no man could ever tell us when this conquest happen*d, nor by whom, nor
what became of them, nor indeed any thing more, than what the extravagant fancy
of our Author has imagined.

As for the Romans who conquered us, sure they were neither Goths, nor Northern
people, and so nothing can be pretended from that Conquest, nor are the Saxons,
who next invaded us, to be called Northern people, by us at least, who lie so
much North to them our selves.

But forgiving Plato all his absurdities and incongruities, the rather that we
may find out the Truth, and confound him with it, we will suppose, that by his
Goths and Northern people, he means the Saxons, for the Danes were but a very
little while, I think not thirty years, masters of England, and so, what may be
gathered in favor of his popular Government from them, if any thing could,
would not be much material.

We will imagine then that our Saxons were of the race of the Goths, and that
(retaining their customs) They introduced many of them amongst us, such as
might be the division of the lands, into several Feuds, which they called Thane
lands, (and were like our Manors or Lordships) under certain Tenures or
Services. Many also they might have found amongst the Britains, and retained
them under their own Government: for it is certain the Britains held lands by
several Tenures, but whether they were originally of their own Institution, or
the remains of the Roman Clientela's, and Praeda militaria, I will not
determine.

I have already told you, that the Goths upon their first Transplantation, and
after they were settled in their new possessions, were governed by Kings, whose
power increased despotically, according as the people grew secure and
civilized, and so they continued above a thousand years; nor do I find that the
people in all this time pretended to any other share in the government, than to
meet in General Councils, when the affairs of the Kingdom obliged their King to
assemble them. And truly I ever thought such National Assemblies, when well
regulated, very conducible to the security, and happy subsistence of all
Governments, and such our ancient Monarchs have thought fit to make use of, and
have transmitted the custom of convoking such Councils, which we not call
Parliaments, even to our days. But that these Counselors should have any right
of command, is so contrary to the design of their Institution, that as this
must needs be dangerous to the Government it self, so they make their good
Institution useless, by rendering themselves suspected to the King, who alone
has the right to assemble them. For what wise Magistrate, would by his own
authority raise a power, which he apprehends might shock his own.

The sad effects of this, we have seen of late days among our selves, when our
Commoners in Parliament, who were mere Counselors, and no more, or
Representatives with a power to consent, have arrogated to themselves a
Sovereign authority, and under that pretense, have forceably and violently
subverted our ancient Government, and destroyed our Lawful and Natural
Governor himself, and have besides, of late, spent so much time in unnecessary
new disputes concerning their own rights and prerogatives, which really do not
much concern us, that they have totally neglected those main ends of their
meeting, which are the Security of our Government, under our Lawful Sovereign,
and the peace and happiness of his people, and which are the only blessings and
benefits, which we desire of them.

Nay, they have been so far from procuring those advantages for us, to which
purposes they have been solely entrusted by us, that their disputes concerning
the Succession to the Crown of England, which is indisputable; The Right which
the King has to borrow money upon good Security, which was never taken from
the poorest of his Subjects; showing mercy upon unfortunate offenders, which is
his Nature, as well as undoubted Prerogative, and several such other irregular
Heats and Animosities, are the most apparent causes of our present horrid
Conspiracies, troubles and distractions.

But to return to our Goths, I have told you, that after their division* --
those that spread toward the West and Southern parts of Europe, were in a
continual state of war, and so their King was but their General, whom sometimes
they did depose or continue, according as they found him capable of that great
employment, upon whose conduct, in their dangerous circumstances, their Lives
and Fortunes did chiefly depend, and such in some respects was the case of our
Saxons under their Heptarchy here in England. All the world knows that they
invaded us without any pretense of title, being only called in as friends by
Vortigern, the British King, to assist him against the Scots, and by degrees
encroaching upon the Britains, they erected several Kingdoms, until at length
the Native Inhabitants were totally overpowered.

But this made very little alteration in their affairs; for wanting a common
enemy, they were always quarrelling amongst themselves, usurping upon one
another, until their several little Governments were united under one
Sovereign Monarch, who was Egbert as some write, or Alfred the eighteenth King
of the West Saxons.

`Tis true, that during Vide Chron. Sir R Baker.
their Heptarchy, they chose one amongst themselves, who was the Supreme head
of the rest, and was called King of Engle-lond. And it is recorded that eight
of the Mercian Kings, in a continued succession, kept the Imperial Crown of the
Heptarchy. But it was rather a titular honor, than a Sovereign right of
Government, and I do not find, but that every particular King in his own
Province, did generally exercise those two great Regalities, of making Laws,
and levying Taxes, by virtue of his own authority. But whether they did or not,
it is little to our purpose, since we have no reason to follow the examples of
those petty Kings and Usurpers, especially when we consider their
circumstances. But if we must lay aside the form of Government since the Norman
conquest, from whence our Era begins, and concerning which our Histories are
more certain and Authentic, let us then rather consult the Administration of
those West Saxons, who solely and Soveraignly enjoyed the Crown of England. And
not to be too tedious, we will six upon King Edward the Confessor, the last
(except Harold) of our English Saxon Kings. I shall not trouble you with much
neither concerning him, because you may find at large whatever can be said of
him, in our own English Histories. I shall only therefore make this remark,
that we have had no Kings since William the Conqueror, nor was he himself, more
absolute, than King Edward the Confessor was.

I remember nothing of his impositions, but rather believe there might have
been none during his reign, because I find that he remitted to his people the
yearly Tribute of 40000 l. that had been gathered by the name of Danegelt. But
for Laws which now are made by Act of Parliament, I observe no such
Parliamentary way of proceedings in his days. It is true, that he called a
Council, or Wittena Gemote (which some call very improperly a Parliament,
especially as it is now understood) in the second year of his Reign, but the
Commoners were so far from having any right of power, that their presence was
not really necessary. Minores laici non sammoneri debent, sed si eorum
praesentia necessaria fuerit, etc. Which shows plainly, that they might be
omitted. Nay although they were summoned and did not appear, nevertheless the
Parliament was taken to be full without them. Which is a sufficient proof, that
the Commons, were not so much as an essential part of the Parliament; and it is
certain that Edward the Confessor took the same course about his Laws, as the
Greeks and Romans formerly had done, the first fetching their institutions from
the Egyptians, and the latter from the Greeks. So King Edward having gathered
together the Laws of the Mercians, West Saxons, Danes, and Northumbrians, he
selected the best, and compiled them into one body, which (being approved in
Council^) by his own authority, he commanded they* should be observed, and they
were the fountain of those which we call at this day the Common Law.

Canutus the Danish Vsurpe^, called also a Council or Parliament at Oxford, in
which he made several good Laws, but I do not find that the Commoners*
pretended any right, in the Supreme authority, at that time, any more than
afterward.

But however I cannot believe, that their example is any argument for us, to
forsake the present constitution of our English Monarchy, to hunt after the
polity of an Invader, who with his Successors enjoyed not the Crown of England,
the fiftieth part so long, as the Norman Line has done.

Now, Cousin, you see what is become of those great expectations which we might
have had, from the noise and bustle, which our Author makes of the Northern
polities, and their exact rules of Government, but so it falls out, that in our
days, mountains are no less apt to bring forth mice, than formerly. And that
when there is a great cry, there is not always the more wool. For in this
case, contrary to his undeniable Aphorism, though it may possibly be true, that
the Saxons made some division of the Lands amongst the people (for our present
division of Lands and Tenures also, were generally made and instituted by the
Normans) yet they retained the Sovereign authority themselves.


Merch. Sir, I am obliged to you for remembering me, of what I had read before,
but could not apply it so well to our present purpose, as you have done. But
believing that you are clearly in the right, I shall not trouble you any
farther concerning those Northern polities, but desire that you would proceed,
and let me know what you mean by the rational part.


Trav. By the rational part, I mean this, that granting all to be true, which
our Author has affirmed, concerning those Goths and Northern people, and that
in the original constitution of our Government, the people had a share in the
Supreme Authority, and that the prerogative, which our King at present lawfully
possesses, has been by degrees gained from the people. (All which is so
notoriously false, that on the contrary, the people have lately encroached upon
the prerogative), yet I say at this time, and as our present circumstances
stand, it is more rational, that all honest and sober men, who laying aside
ambition and malice, consider impartially the just rights and liberties of the
people, together with the preservation of our Government, and the general
happiness of the Nation, should rather endeavor by all lawful means, to
increase the power of his present Majesty, than diminish it. And supposing we
were at liberty, to choose what form of Government we pleased, rather continue
it a Monarchy as it is, than set up such a Democratical form, or fantastical
model, as our Author, (having stolen it in a great measure, from the
propositions of the Rebels sent to the late King in the Isle of Wight, and the
transactions of Forty Eight) has proposed to us.


Merch. The performance of this, Sir, will be such a full satisfaction to us
all, that nothing will remain farther for our consideration, but to contrive a
means, how we may better secure our present Government, and by enacting farther
good Laws, if necessary, with a strict execution of them, reduce our pestilent
Republican disturbers of our peace, unto a due obedienc^ to their Natural and
Lawful Prince.

One thing more I must beg of you by the way, which is, to let me know, why you
suppose all along, that ou^ Author would set up a Commonwealth, since he tells
us plainly, p. 209. That he abhorrs the thoughts of wishing a Democracy, much
less endeavoring any such thing, during these circumstances we are now in,
that is, under Oaths of obedience to a Lawful King.


Trav. I thank you, Sir, for putting me in mind of it, but indeed I thought,
you had by this time sufficiently understood, how to distinguish a
Presbyterian, or otherwise Phanatical Commonwealth man's public declaration,
from his more private meaning. I must therefore mind you of this observation by
the way, that I never yet met with any of those Authors who was not
demonstrably a wilful, malicious Knave in his writings. But truly in this case,
I think, our Author is frank and plain enough. I shall therefore mind you of
some passages, which I shall leave to your own Interpretation. He tells us, p.
182. That our present estate inclines to popularity, and I do not find, but
that he inclines as much to comply with our estate as they could* wish, but let
us come to his declaration against it, where he protests that he hates the
thoughts of wishing a Commonwealth, but yet insinuates, from the story of
Themistocles his firing the Grecian ships, That nothing could be more
advantageous and profitable for us, which surely shows his good inclinations
plain enough. But I am fully persuaded that our Governors have taken no less
care to secure us against the literal, than the metaphorical sense of his ^ine
tale, and will as well preserve our Navy, as our Government from his Diabolical
designs.

But now, he gives us the reason, why he cannot think of a Commonwealth,
because (conscientious good man) he is loath to break his oath of obedience to a
Lawful King.

But for this Lawful King himself, it is no matter if he be perjured to the
very bottom of destruction, who having no less sworn, and that solemnly too, to
maintain the ancient Monarchical Government, as at present by Law confirmed and
established, with all the rights and prerogatives belonging to the Imperial
Crown of England, may break all, betray his poor Subjects, their rights and
liberties, abandon them to the mercy of unmerciful Tyrants, and be damned if he
pleases. Nay our Author kindly advises him to it, and rather than his cursed
project should fail, he persuades him, it is the best thing he can do. Whereas
it is plain, That the power of the Kings of England is restrained or limited
(as we may say) in nothing more considerable, than this, viz. That they cannot
by their own Grant sever their Prerogatives from the Crown, nor communicate any
part thereof to any one, no not to the Princes their eldest Sons, as may be
seen more at large in Sir J. Davies, upon Impositions, cap. 29. besides many
other good Authors. Nay more, he tells us there, That neither the Kings Acts,
nor any Act of Parliament, can give away his Prerogative; and farther, that no
Act of Parliament in the Negative, can take away the Kings Prerogative in the
Affirmative. Yet notwithstanding this, (and ten times more that may be said to
this purpose,) our King is advised and persuaded, nay, almost necessitated (as
our Author would have it) not only to quit some One of his Prerogatives, but
(to make short work) to release, and give them up all at once.

In the next place, let us consider Plato's excellent new model it self, and
here (like a wise Politician) he has made Three coordinate powers in being at
the same time, that is to say, King, Lords, and Commons.

I confess, for the King, he says little of him, and with great reason, for
indeed he signifies nothing more than a Cipher, which, as in Arithmetic, is
only to make the Commons more valuable.

But to do our Author right, he has yet a farther use to make, of this his
otherwise useless Prince; that is to say, whilst neither his own Right, nor
his Power, nor our Laws can secure himself; his Name nevertheless is to
preserve these his Masters. With that they hope to prevent all opposition, and
civil wars at home. For should they forceably depose him, they justly
apprehend, that his Loyal Subjects in England, would endeavor to revenge such
an insupportable wrong. Nor can they believe that the Kingdoms of Scotland, and
Ireland, would again tamely submit their Necks to the servile yoke of a few
ambitious, English Commoners; or that foreign Princes themselves, would even
for their own securities sake, quietly, and unconcerned, countenance this
horrid injustice, and outrage done to the sacred dignity of Kings. But if they
can persuade his Majesty willingly to depose himself, and at the same time
disinherit his Heirs and Successors, they imagine that none can pretend to
disapprove, much less blame, or impute to them, the volunry act of a King. For
as, Volenti non fit injuria, and by consequence no offense in them; so they
will certainly reserve to themselves the honor of punishing in the King, as
their masterpiece, and last act of justice, the Treason which he shall have
committed against himself. To facilitate all this, our Author has taken from
his Majesty, his Militia, and his Revenue, that is, men and mon^y, which are
the strength and sinews of Power, and in the Commoners he has placed the Royal
authority, of Calling, Proroguing and Dissolving themselves. And left the King,
in this miserable condition, should have yet any hopes left, even of securing
his own Person, he has taken from him the power of making his own Officers,
and bestowing those employments, which have always depended upon the Regal
authority. Nay, the Lords themselves are no more to receive their Honors from
the Fountain of all Honor, but must lick the dust from the shoes, of their
once obsequious vassals.

So our poor Master, having nothing now to give, must lose the hopes, even of a
grateful friend, who in his extremity, might at least wish him well, and speak
a good word for him to his insolent Governors.


Mer. But, Sir, our Author leaves most of these things in the disposition of
the Parliament, by which he tells us, that he ever understood, the King, Lords
and Commons, so that neither his Militia nor Revenue, can be said to be so
absolutely taken from himself, as granted to the Parliament in general, of
which he is still to be the head.


Trav. Ah, Cousin, there is deadly poison in this his varnished treacherous
Cup, and you will easily perceive it, when you consider, Plato cares not so
much, that the Militia should be in the power of the Commons, as out of the
King. For whilst the King cannot dispose of it, without the consent of his
Lower House, judge you, whether they will ever agree to the raising any force,
which they shall not themselves command.

If then any difference arise, upon that, or any other point, (which
unavoidably, and designedly will happen) then are the Commoners become
immediately masters of all. For what can the King do, though joined with the
House of Lords, without a right of command or force, against a multitude, and
that so unequal too, that (if the House of Commons in Parliament, represent the
whole Nation, as they pretend they do) then are they at least ten thousand men
against one, though all the Nobility be included with the King. The necessary
consequence of all this must be, that if on the one hand, the King and Lords,
agree with the Commons in all things, then the Commons govern more absolutely,
than if there were neither the one nor the other, because there is no pretense
against them.

On the other hand, if they in any thing differ from the Commons, then
undoubtedly the disagreeing Lords, as formerly, shall be turned out of doors,
the King set aside, and the Votes made by the House of Commons, Jan. 4. 1648,
revived and confirmed, which being very short, but plain, I shall here repeat.
First, That the people, under God, are the original of all just power;
Secondly, That the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, being chosen by,
and representing the people, have the Supreme Authority of this Nation;
Thirdly, That whatever is enacted, and declared for Law by the Commons of
England assembled in Parliament, has the force of a Law; Fourthly, That all
the people of this Nation are included thereby, although the consent and
concurrence of the King and House of Peers, be not had thereunto.

What think you now, Cousin, of these four Votes, even whilst the King and
Lords were yet in being. Do they not look, as if they designed a Commonwealth,
or rather to establish an arbitrary Tyrannical power, in the House of Commons,
and yet their propositions all along to the King, were the same, which Plato
has again offered us, that is, leaving the Militia, the public revenue,
nomination of officers, and such like to the Parliament, by which was always
meant, King, Lords and Commons. This is the politic web, which our Author
pretends to have spun out of his own shallow brains, and indeed it is so very
wondrous thin, that if our present Statesmen could not with half an eye, see
through it, I should be apt to agree, with our Author, p. 22. that they ought
in conscience to excuse themselves, from that sublime employment, and betake
themselves to callings more suitable to their capacities, as Shoomakers,
Tailors, and such other mechanic professions.


Merch. Sir, the Sun at noon day is never more clear, than that he designs, at
best, a Commonwealth. And indeed where three coordinate powers are in being at
the same time, it is impossible they should continue long in that state, but
some one or two must certainly in time over balance, and get the advantage of
the other. I think Lucan confirmed this long ago, when he said,

Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erit. --
And the King having neither power, strength, money nor officers, it is ten
thousand to one, as you observe, on the Commons side, who are actually
possessed of all. Pray therefore proceed, and let us know, why in reason we
should not comply, with our Authors Popular Government, since he tells us that
our present state inclines to Popularity.


Trav. Most willingly. But in the first place, in all changes of Government we
must consider, what inconveniences we find, under the present constitution, and
what way we propose to our selves, to have them prevented by an alteration,
otherwise we shall never be able to assign any reason for a change at any time.
I must therefore desire you to tell me frankly, what fault you find,
grievances, according to the cant of our Dissenters, in our Monarchy as at
present Established.


Merch. Truly, Cousin, I have oftentimes thought seriously with my self, what
those grievances should be. And though I was once carried a little away with
the stream, and cried, Liberty, and Property, and Grievances of the Nation,
with some others of the wide mouthed pack, yet to deal plainly with you, I
could never be satisfied from them, nor from my own observation, what those
grievances were in particular.


Trav. I believe it indeed, but however since our Author, who is a knowing man,
ass^res us, that our disease is so desperate, that we have no hopes but in a
desperate cure. Pray let us both, though no State Physicians, lay our heads
together, and think with our selves, what our sickness may be, especially since
the beginning of every cure, proceeds from the true knowledge of the distemper.
For my part, I do assure you, I will assist you what I can, in finding out the
one, and for the other, we will leave it to our betters.

First then I should think, that as all diseases show themselves by some
Symptoms upon the natural body, so the distempers of the body politic, must be
also visible, and will discover themselves, either in our liberties,
properties, or our Religion. We will begin with our Liberties, and pray,
Cousin, think with your self, whether you want any such civil liberty, as you
could wish for, or know to be given under any other Government upon earth.


Mer. Trouble not your self for that, for except I could have somewhat granted
particularly to my own person, I am so far from wishing our Subjects more
liberty in general, that I really think we have too much.


Trav. What mean you by too much?


Mer. I mean, Sir, amongst other things, that men, especially of late, have
taken to themselves the liberty of reflecting upon, or calumniating the
Government, and our Governors, as also to slander one another, with so much
bitterness and cunning, that we are ready to be destroyed before we know any
thing of the matter. And yet they keep so within the compass of the Law, that
the Scrutiny of a Jury can never reach them. Nay, I have heard say, that some
are so excellent at it, that they will talk you an hour together, within a
hairs breadth of Sedition, and Treason, dance upon the low rope, with children
tied to their feet, and naked swords in their hands, and upon the high rope,
hanging only by their toes, or nape of the neck.


Trav. Right, but I have seen some of them hang, with the rope round about
their necks, and indeed I never wondered at it.


Mer. Yes, men who are only impudent bold fellows, and have not the skill to
cut a feather, very often dance themselves into that noose. But to be serious,
really, Cousin, methinks, that calumniating is a most pernicious liberty; for
in my opinion, men should either accuse judicially or not at all.

In the first case, the accused has, we suppose, a fair Trial, at which he may
make his defense, and if he prove innocent, will be freed. But in the latter, a
man is condemned, and executed too, before he hears of his accusation. It is
like killing a man with those invisible subtle poisons, which work their
effect, even whilst you are reading the complementing Letter, which conveys
them; your reputation and good name is gone, your acquaintance gaze upon you,
with a different air than formerly; you find a coldness in your friends,
neglect in your relations, and disrespect from all. And at length the poison,
having crept through those with whom you might have occasion to converse, you
find your self generally condemned, before you know of what, or by whom you
were accused; and in truth Brinvillers were more tolerable in any Government,
than these pestilent Calumniators.


Trav. Indeed, Cousin, you have spoke a great deal of reason, and I am
persuaded, that the immediate cause of our distractions, proceeds from the
malicious Calumnies of a few knaves, who know they lie dispersed amongst a
great many fools, who think they speak truth.

The Publisher of the divine Machiavels Prince, is very just in this
particular, telling us, that in all good Governments, Calumniators ought to be
restrained, and punished by the strictest severity: Qui Rempublicam recte
instituere velit, ferri nullo modo debent calumniae, sed puniendi sunt
calumniatores. Quodsi hisce rebus in Republica non recte prospectum sit, multa
mala patrantur, unde seditiones and turbae ortum habent. And concludes with the
story of Furius -- Camillus, who having gained a great deal of honor amongst
the Romans, for the good service which he had done, in freeing them from the
imminent danger of the Gauls: Manlius Capitolinus, envying above all, his great
reputation, endeavored by all means to lessen his credit. But finding the
Senate and Nobility firm in their good opinion concerning Camillus, he then
applied himself to the Commonalty, who being ever the most susceptible of false
impressions, were continually plied with the false aspersions of the envious
Manlius, insinuating amongst other things, that the vast sum of money, which
was supposed to have been paid the Gauls, remained yet in a great measure, in
the possession of Camillus, and the Senators, who appropriating to their use,
what was said to have been paid their enemies, instead of Governors and
Protectors, became themselves the greatest enemies the people had, by
endeavoring to support their own luxury, at the expense of the peoples misery.
Whereas, if that money were again distributed, (as in justice it ought) amongst
the poor Citizens, it would make their present condition much more easy, than
otherwise it was like to be in a great many years. Interest is the great wheel,
that moves all the world, either to good or evil actions. The Commonalty thus
ini^cens'd by Manlius, were now worked up to that point which he desired, and
ready either for rebellion, or any other insolence, which their Incendiary
should suggest. In the mean time the Senate, perceiving this growing mischief,
to obviate any farther disturbance, they create a Dictator, on purpose to
examine into the whole matter, and punish the offender, wherever he should
find the offense. He appoints therefore a day to Manlius, who attended with
vast multitudes of the credulous Commons, is asked by the Dictator, where or
with whom, that vast sum of money was lodged. But Manlius, unprovided to answer
a question, which it seems he did not expect, and hesitating much, without
giving any satisfactory account of what was demanded, he was cast into chains,
and punished according to the hainousness of the offense.


Mer. And may all the Manlii amongst us be alike confounded. Next, Sir, I
cannot approve of the liberty men take, of publishing their private sentiments,
which are generally grounded upon nothing but conjecture, and Enthusiastical
follies.


Trav. Certainly, nothing would conduce more to our quiet, than that the
liberty of the press should be restrained. But since it is not our business, to
look into those liberties, which we enjoy, so much as into those, which we
want, let us leave the consideration of these, and many other such things, to
our prudent Governors.

I shall only note this one thing by the way, that since the Act of Habeas
Corpus, I think I may confidently affirm, that even at this time, when there is
so much danger of a pretended slavery, the Subjects of England enjoy a greater
liberty, than was known to any of our Ancestors before us.

Pray therefore proceed to the second consideration, which is our properties.


Mer. That is wholly unnecessary, for all the world knows, that whatsoever we
possess, is so secured by the Laws of the Land, that the King himself does not
pretend in prejudice of those Laws (which indeed are his own Laws) to touch the
least Chattel that belongs to us, nor can any Tax be imposed, but such as shall
be granted by Act of Parliament, which is the very Government, that our Author
so much approves. And in a word, Plato himself has cleared this point, telling
us, p. 127 That the people by the fundamental Laws, that is, by the
constitution of the Government of England, have entire freedom, in their lives,
properties, and their persons, neither of which, can in the least suffer, but
according to the Laws.

And to prevent any oppression that might happen in the execution of these good
Laws, which are our Birthright, all Trials must be by twelve men of our equals:
and in the next page, lest the King's Sovereign authority, might be urged as a
stop, to the execution of those Laws, he tells us, That neither the King, nor
any by authority from him, has any the least power or jurisdiction, over any
English man, but what the Law gives him.

And if any person shall be so wicked, as to do any injustice to the life,
liberty, or estate, of any Englishman, by any private command of the Prince,
the person aggrieved, or his next of kin, (if he be Assassinated) shall have
the same remedy against the offender, as he ought to have had, by the good Laws
of the Land, if there had been no such command given. Now, dear Cousin, in the
name of sense and reason, where can be the fault and distemper of our
Government, as it relates to the ease and privilege of the Subject, if this be
the constitution of it, as at least our Author himself affirms?


Trav. Faith, Sir, I could never find it out, nor any man else, that ever I
could meet withal. And what is still stranger, our great Platonic Physician
has not vouchsafed to give us any one particular instance, in what part our
disease lies, notwithstanding he alarms us with dismal news of being dead men,
and that without such a strange turn of Government, as his pregnant Noddle has
found out, we are ruined for ever.

It Is true, he tells us, that the property being in the hand of the Commoners,
the Government must necessarily be there also, and for which the Commoners are
tugging and contending very justly, and very honorably, which makes every
Parliament seem a present state of war.


Mer. But, Sir, if it be true, that we enjoy all those benefits and blessings
before mentioned, and that the Government it self secures these properties,
inviolably to us, (which we know to be most certain, without the testimony of
Plato or any man else) what then does this tugging concern us, or what relation
has it to our happiness, which is already as great, as we can wish it to be?
Must the enjoyment of our properties, put us into a state of war? Must our
health become our disease, and our fatness only make us kick against our
masters? what can this contention for Government signify more, than ambition?
and what could their success produce less than Tyranny? should the House of
Commons become our masters, what could they bestow upon us, more than we
already enjoy, except danger and trouble? And what can our present Government
take from us, except the fears of those fatal consequences, which such a
popular innovation would induce? Let then the property be where it will, and if
we possess it securely, we are the happier for it.


Trav. Your reasons are too plain, and strong to be resisted, I shall quit
therefore this point* and inform you, how our Author seems in many places to
insinuate, that the want of frequent and annual Parliaments, is the cause of
our distemper, and that calling a Parliament every year, might prove a pretty
cure, according to a certain Act in the time of Edward the first, and that
then, instead of hopping upon one leg, we might go limping on upon three.


Mer. Faith, Cousin, you are now gotten out of my reach, and you must answer
this your self. I can only proceed according to my former rule, which is, that
if we be as happy as we can be, a Parliament cannot make us more.


Trav. That answer is, I think, sufficient to satisfy any reasonable man.
However we will speak somewhat more particularly concerning this matter, as we
find it recorded in History.

Our Author informs us in p. 110. That by our Constitution the Government was
undeniably to be divided, between the King and his Subjects. (which (by the
way) is undeniably and notoriously false: for according to our ancent
Constitution as well under the Saxon as our Norman Kings, the Government or the
right of Power was originally and solely in our Kings) And that diverse of the
great men, speaking with that excellent Prince King Edward the first about it,
called a Parliament, and consented to a Declaration, of the Kingdoms right in
that point. So there passed a Law in that Parliament, that one should be held
every year, and oftener if need be. The same he confirms in p. 159. and in other
places.

Now, Sir, if after these fine Speeches by those great men, (whom undoubtedly
our Author could have named) to this excellent Prince, it should happen at
last, that there was no such Act, during the Reign of Edward the first, what
would you think of our Author?


Merch. In troth, Sir, it would not alter my opinion, for I already believe him
to be an impudent, magisterial Impostor.


Trav. I fear indeed he will prove so, for except he has found in his politic
search, some loose paper, that never yet came into our Statute books, we must
conclude that he is grossly mistaken. For the first Act that is extant of that
kind, was in the Fourth of Edward the Third, and the words of it are these: It
is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and more often
if need be.

Now, Sir, you must observe, that this Act was made, whilst the King was but
Nineteen years of age, and both himself and Kingdom under the care of Twelve
Governors. His Mother, Queen Isabel, and Roger Mortimer, very powerful, the
Governors of the Pupil King divided amongst themselves, and many other
pressing affairs of the Nation, obliged most people to propose that expedient
of frequent Parliaments, as the most probable means to secure the peace, and
prosperity of the Kingdom, at least until the King should come of riper years,
and thereby many differences be reconciled.

After this, in the Thirty sixth year of his Reign, he called a Parliament, and
wanting money, (as generally he did,) the Parliament would grant nothing, until
an Act passed for maintenance of former Articles and Statutes there expressed,
And that for redress of diverse mischiefs and grievances, which daily happen, a
Parliament shall be holden every year, as another time was ordained by Statute.

These are the two Statutes intended by our Author, when he tells us that the
Statute of Edward the first, was confirmed by that glorious Prince Edward the
third. Whereas in truth they were both made by the same King, and both in a
great measure, revoked in his own time. Having declared after the making this
last Act, that he yielded to it, only to serve his own turn.

This Sir, is the matter of Fact, upon which our Author builds his great
pretensions to the old constitutions of Annual Parliaments. The first Act was
made whilst the King was very young, the second, when he wanted money, and had
Twenty six shillings and eight pence granted him upon every sack of wool
transported for three years. And both first, and second Acts were broken by
several intermissions before he died.

Besides, we must make this remark, that a Parliament seldom met, without
giving the King some money, which might encourage those Kings to assemble them
oftener, than lately they have done. But the truth is, Annual Parliaments were
looked upon as so great a grievance to the Nation, that we find, that about the
Tenth year of Richard the Second his Successor, it was thought a great
Prerogative in the King, that he might call a Parliament once a year. And both
Houses appointed the Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely, to
acquaint the King, that by an old Statute, the King once a year might lawfully
summon his Court of Parliament, for reformation of corruptions and enormities
within the Realm.

And if we consider with our selves, we shall find, that if yearly Parliaments
were imposed upon us, they would become grievances, equally insupportable, as
to have no Parliaments at all.

For if the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses be chosen out of the Country
Gentlemen and Merchants, inhabiting those Countries, where they are elected,
(as sure they ought to be) what inconvenience, if not ruin, must it bring upon
their affairs, when they shall be forced to run every year, a hundred or two
hundred Miles from their particular domestic affairs, to serve in a formal
Parliament, in which it may be, the greatest business will be, to make business
for the next.

Indeed, for idle persons, who live about Town, and have nothing to do, but to
scrible knavish politics, to the disturbance of honest men, such a
constitution might do well enough, if they could get to be chosen members. But
we find from experience and History, that in those days, when Ambition and
Faction, were not so much in vogue as at present, men were so far from making
parties, to get into the Parliament, that many Commoners, and Lords too, have
petitioned and been excused their attendance, The King's, Queen's, and Prince's
Servants, have stood upon their privilege of exemption. So James Barner was
discharged by the King's command, Quia erat de retinentia Regis, 7. R. 2* and
the Lord de Vessey, in Edward the Fourths time, obtained License not to serve
in Parliament during his life. Rex concessit Henrico Bromflet, Dom. de Vessey,
quod ipse, durante vita, sit exoneratus de veniendo ad Parl. Besides, the very
Writ of Summons shows, that in the original institution and design of
Parliaments, a frequent meeting could not be necessary. For they were only to
treat, and concilium impendere de magnis and arduis negotiis. Now God help us,
if every year should produce, such magna and ardua negotia, such difficult and
weighty affairs, that the King, with his Judges and ^rivy Council, could not
determine them, without assembling his great Council the Parliament. I confess,
in our Authors Chimerical model, I am persuaded our circumstances would be bad
enough; but I thank God, we are not gotten there yet. Thus you see, Sir, that
this grievance, in not having annual Parliaments, is become no grievance at all.


Mer. I begin, Cousin, to lose all manner of respect, for this mistaken
Mountebank. For I perceive, notwithstanding his great words and pretenses, all
is but wind, emptin^ss and cheat. Having therefore fully satisfie^ me,
concerning our liberties, properties, and Parliaments* pray forget not to say
somewhat of our Religion.


Trav. Sir, I shall not presume to meddle with the Doctrinal part of any
Religion, that being none of my Province. Nor shall I say much concerning the
Ceremonial part or discipline of our own, that is to say, the Church of
England. It is sufficient to mind you, that both the Doctrine and Discipline in
Church Government, have been established and confirmed by several Acts of
Parliament, and Statutes: Which Parliaments, being the most Sovereign power,
that our Author himself pretends to, set up amongst us, we ought all to
acquiesce in, and be concluded by what they have done, until an equal authority
shall repeal those Acts, or otherwise determine concerning us.


Mer. There is no objection can be made against this answer. But, Sir, since
the difference in our Religion, seems manifestly to occasion most of our
troubles, why may not the King, by his own authority, dispense with the penal
part of these Laws, or grant a toleration, especially to Protestant Dissenters,
or encourage an Act of Parliament for uniting them into the Church of England,
or else why might not the same Church release some part of the rigor of the
Discipline and Ceremony, since it is agreed on all hands, that the observance or
non-observance of them, are not points necessary, or absolutely conducing to
Salvation.


Trav. Cousin, I shall answer you all these questions as plain as I can. And
first, I shall never believe, that true and unfeigned Religion, especially
amongst men, where the Doctrine agrees, is ever the real cause of any troubles,
disturbance or disobedience to lawful authority, such as is that, which
produces an Act of Parliament, (even in our Authors sense) being so contrary to
the Doctrine and Principles of Christian Religion, that I may confidently
affirm, where one is, the other cannot be.

Such men therefore, who make use of that Sacred name, to countenance any
disquiet in the Government, ought, according to the most impartial judgment
which we can make of men's opinions by their actions, to be esteemed as men
having no Religion, rather than as true Professors of the Christian Faith, and
that they put the highest abuse, and indignity, upon Christ and his Apostles,
when they make the profession of their most peaceable doctrine, a pretense,
mask or cloak to cover their Secular interest or ambition.


Mer. But, dear Cousin, we must judge charitably, and not conclude all
Dissenters such knaves and villains, as either to have no Religion, or to make
that which they have, a blind to some other worldly design.


Trav. Truly, Sir, for the commoner sort of people, I am inclined enough to
think (it may be) better of them, than they deserve, knowing well how apt they
are to be carried away with every wind of doctrine. But those who are their
Ringleaders, are by so much the more inexcusable, by how much they take
advantage of the peoples weakness. Yet this would be only pernicious to
themselves, and punishable in the world to come. But their ungodly and
malicious Preachers, and factious heads, mingling dexterously worldly poison,
with their spiritual food, at length their whole bodies, and mass of blood
becomes corrupted, when grown rank, and swelled (like the heathen
Prophetesses,) with the deadly poison, and power of the Devil, they ravingly
dispense their Enthusiastical dreams and visions, no less injurious to the
Providence of God, than to the government of man. Since then, I say, these
their wicked Counselors do certainly produce these effects, it is equally
charitable to think, that they have no Religion, as to say, that they abuse
that which they profess, to such damnable ends.


Mer. But they tell you no such thing. On the contrary, no men talk more of
God, none inveigh more bitterly against the debaucher^es of the age we live in,
none pretend greater humility, and in a word (to outward appearance at least)
none seem to practice more sincerely the doctrine which they preach.


Trav. Quid opus est verbis, cum facta videam? What Poisoner, do you think,
would not tell you, that the Ratsbane which he offers you is the purest sugar?
You and I, Cousin, cannot forget, how these very men, (some of which are living
at this day) and their disciples, behaved themselves, when in the rebellious
sanctified times, they usurped the whole power of the land.

Can you forget how they persecuted the Church of England? how they Sequestered
our Estates? Imprisoned, Proscribed and murdered our Persons? forced many to
seek out Dens and Caves in Woods and Rocks, to secure their lives, from the
insolence and fury of these humble-minded, gospel-preaching, holy Wolves? Are
they yet changed? are they not pursuing still the same point? Are their
Associations and Conspiracies against the foundation of our ancient rights,
privileges, government, and life it self of His present Sacred Majesty,
evidences of their repentance for the murder of the late Blessed Martyr, for
those floods of innocent blood, which have corrupted our land ever since, and
those violent extortions and impositions executed upon the Estates of their
fellow Subjects, and fellow laborers too, in that Vineyard, which both pretend
to cultivate, and with whom they profess to agree in the Substantial and
Doctrinal part of Religion? Are these arguments to convince us of their sincere
intentions toward us?


Mer. This is indeed notorious matter of fact, and undeniable; but however,
they now express a willingness to comply with us, and to be comprehended, all
under one Church, and Church government. Only they desire that our Ceremonies
might be abolished, which being circumstantial only, and not absolutely
necessary to Salvation, (which is the great end of Religion,) they pray that
our Governors in consideration of their weakness, would not tie them to harder
meat than they can digest, but (being babes, and to be fed with milk,) would
have us condescend to their infirmities, and not to boast too much of our own
strength, for those who are strong ought to take heed l^st they fall.


Trav. I perceive, Sir, you have been more conversant with this sort of people,
than I thought you had, for I find that you have gotten their very Cant; but
you shall have, I hope, a very satisfactory answer. And first for our strength,
I confess it behooves us all to take heed lest we fall: but if that great care
be an argument against us, it is no less against themselves. For if it be so
difficult for the strong to pass through this narrow way, and over these
dangerous preoipices; what circumspection then ought the weak Travelers to use
in this their Pilgrimage? Ought they not rather to seek to us for some support,
than trust to their own imbecility? And you cannot deny, but that they do
truly acknowledge themselves to be weak, or that they abuse us, when they
desire we should condescend to them, both which will equally reflect upon them.
And next, Sir, for our compliance with them, rather than their conformity with
us, I think it the most unreasonable request that ever men made. Will a wise
Father comply with a froward Son, or a Master with his obstinate Servant, or a
Physician with the depraved and false appetite of his sick patient? Sure it
would be nothing less, than inverting the whole course and order of nature.


Mer. Sir, I am convinced that they may and ought to comply with our
Government, but since your hand is in, pray let me have your opinion concerning
the Popish Recusants, and whether you do not think that they are more to be
apprehended in our Government, than the Dissenters are, and by consequence,
that a Parliament, or Parliamentary way of Government might not be very
conducible to our security against them, especially as our circumstances stand,
and may probably continue.


Trav. I understand you, Sir, and shall give you my sense of the thing freely
as hitherto I have done. And in the first place, I answer plainly, that I do
not think the Papists (I mean now and always the Secular or Temporal Papists*
or Lai^y) so dangerous to our Government, as the Dissenters; but that according
to the rule of true Polity, the former are more tolerable among us than the
latter.


Mer. Have a care, Cousin, that you do not contradict the good account which
you gave of your own Religion yesterday. For whosoever stands up for a Popish
toleration at this time, will be shrewdly suspected to be at least Popishly
inclined, if not a Papist.


Trav. Sir, I again confirm what I said yesterday, nor do I tell you now, that
I would have the Papists tolerated, it belongs to the Government to look after
these matters, but I must affirm, according to my judgment, that if the
question be put, which may be the most safely tolerated, the Papists or
Dissenters, I must give it for the Papists; and I think I shall produce good
reason, and authority for this my opinion.


Mer. Pray, Cousin, use all manner of liberty in your discourse, for I only
minded you of your Profession yesterday, not that I question your sincerity,
but as being an impartial Judge, neither a Papist nor a Dissenter, I might
oblige you to settle this point equally between them.


Trav. I do not pretend to be a Judge, but shall endeavor to open the case
faithfully, and leave the rest to your more prudent determination.

First then, we must state the difference between these two parties, as they
relate to us -- and not to descend to particular points, I shall only say, that
the Papists differ from us in the doctrinal part of Religion, that is to say,
in points which they believe absolutely necessary to Salvation. The Dissenters
in the Discipline only, viz. Ceremonies and Church Government, which they
declare may be -- either used or neglected, without the necessary consequence
of damnation.


Mer. Right, Sir, and from hence I should conclude, that the Dissenters
agreeing more nearly with us than the Papists, ought rather to be tolerated
than they, who differ so much, and so materially from us.


Trav. And I for that very reason hold the contrary.


Mer. Pray, Sir, proceed, and unriddle this Paradox.


Trav. Next then, we must agree, that the doctrinal parts of the Popish
Religion in which they differ from us, (as Transubstantiation, and some others,
supposing them right and nec^ssary as they believe they are) consist of such
high speculative points, as cannot possibly be made demonstrable by humane
reason, nor otherwise be seen than by the eyes of faith, but require a
supernatural revelation, or the special Grace of an invisible omnipotent power,
working in our hearts. Hence Grotius tells us, that Doctrina h^c penitus in
animum admitti nequeat, nisi sanctis Dei auxiliis accedentibus. lib. 2. ^4. 20.

This then supposed, I must affirm, that outward force is not a proper means to
convince a man's reason of speculative truths* For a man cannot always believe
just when he says he will; but rather oftentimes, when he pretends he will not,
he is then forced to believe, (if proportionate arguments be used) even whether
he will or no, and these proportionate arguments are such as force the reason
only, and whilst they perstringe the mind, do not constrain the body, such as
oblige by way of ^atiocination to consent to certain propositions, and
necessary consequences, which they cannot avoid, arguments which reach the
inward man, but leave the outward man untoucht. Now how improper a means
^orporal violence is, to obtain such a spiritual end, I leave to your judgment.

If it be then necessary that a man's reason should be convinced of a
speculative truth, before he can believe it, it will follow, that those who use
violence and force, to oblige a people to embrace an opinion, which they do
not, or can not understand, commit either the greatest injustice toward man,
or the greatest impiety toward God.

The injustice toward man lies in this, that they either force them to
profess, what they do not believe, which is hypocrisy and a lie; or they
punish them for not doing that, which is not in their power to do, which is the
height of Tyranny. And Grotius tells us, in his Cap* de poenis, that it was
provided in the Council of Toledo, That then^eforward no man should be forc'^
to believe, for God will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy; and whom he
pleases to harden, he hardens. Praecipit sancta Synodus nemini deinceps vim
inferri, cui enim vult Deus* miseretur, and quem vult, indurat. And he adds,
quod perinique faciunt, that they do most wickedly, who punish men amongst
Christians, for not believing or erring in some speculative points, which they
do not understand. St. Augustine also, Athanasius, Hilarious, and Salvi^nus are
all of the same opinion, as may be seen there more at large in the same Cap. de
poenis, where Grotius farther informs us, that the French Bishops were
condemned by the Church, for using violence against the Priscili^nist^.

In the next place, if it be not injustice toward man, it is impiety toward
God, and must suppose, that the gift of the holy Spirit* ^ra^e o^ Ill^mination,
which is necessary for the understanding these Divine mysteries* is in the
power of mortal man, which was the sin of Simon Magus* son to buy the holy
Ghost for money, or to o^tain it by force, is equally injuriou^, and
dishonorable to a Deity. And we find, that although the Sadduces differed from
the rest of the Jews, in so material a point, as that of the Resurrection,
which they totally denied, yet they received no manner of punishment upon that
account, nor was there any force used to persuade them* to embrace and believe
so necessary a doctrine, when yet, at the same time* Sabbath Breakers, because
it related to the discipline and Government of the Church, were punished with
Death.


Merch. I thank you, Sir, and do assure you, that I was ever of this opinion.
But I do not yet understand, why you do not apply the same reasons for
Dissenters and other people, as well as the Papists.


Trav. I thought, Sir, the last instance would have answered that question,
which is, that the Dissenters differ only in point of discipli^ and Government,
which according to our constitution they agree -- command nothing damnable, or
impossible to be understood, or contrary to the hopes of Salvation. And in such
case, outward force is the proper means to reduce obstinate men to their duty,
and a compliance with that Government which they ought, and which they confess
they may obey. So in some Roman Catholic Countries the Protestant Religion is
tolerated, and its professors secured by many Grants and Privileges, because
their difference consists in speculative points, whereas those Roman Catholics
themselves who (agreeing in the Doctrinal part) shall differ in the Discipline
or Church Government, are punished with the extremest rigor. We must
distinguish therefore between Discipline and Doctrine, as also between faith
and obedience.

And in confirmation of this, we may remember another reason, why a toleration
is more allowable to Popish Rec^sants, than to the Dissenters, viz, because it
is notoriously known, that the Papists have ventured both their lives and
fortunes to support our present Government, as it is by Law established, even
against these very dissenters, who rebelled against it, and by force of arms,
and open hostility, endeavored totally to subvert it. And having obtained a
victory, did actually destroy both our lawful King and Governor, as well as
government.


Mer. This is too true, and it were impudence to deny any part of it. But it
has been said, that the Papists in our late troubles ventured their lives,
more out of hopes of their own establishment, than of the Government.


Trav. That, under favor, is a malicious and a frivolous objection. For what
grounds of hopes had they to alter the Government, against the consent of the
whole Nation, when joined with so considerable a part, as the Church of
England, they were both overcome by the Dissenters, it was morally impossible.
Besides, they had generally taken the Oath of Allegiance, which for ought I can
hear, they have not broken, ( generally I suppose, for if there be any of them
who refuse the Oath of Allegiance, I look upon them as out of the Kings
Protection, and little better, or full as dangerous as open enemies.) Nor can I
imagine, what other Government, they could, or were ever supposed to introduce,
contrary to that, which was then established, and which they swore to maintain.
I am apt enough to believe, that they might hope for some ease or exemption
from the rigor of the pen^l Laws, which neither you, nor I, can blame in them,
if they had desired.


Mer. But though they have taken the Oath of Allegiance, yet you see, that they
will not be prevailed upon, to take the Oath of Supremacy. And you know, that
according to our Law, the King is no less head of the Ecclesiastical, than of
the Civil Government.


Trav. True, Sir, But this is as much an argument against the Dissenters, as
the Papists. For it is not a greater crime in them, nor prejudice to the State,
to tolerate men, who by the principles of their Religion, are taught to submit
their Consciences to another Spiritual guide in Spiritual matters, as many
Sovereign Princes themselves do at this day; than those, who owning the King to
be Supreme head of the Church by their words, disown him by their actions, that
is, in not obeying his Laws, or Rebelling against him as such.

Besides* it is well known, that the general opinion of the Popish Recusants,
(the Laity I mean) concerning the Pope's Supremacy has no ill influence upon
our Civil Government, which is that, which I chiefly intend in this discourse,
but that they think themselves indispensably obliged, to defend our Lawful
Kings, and their Civil Authority, not only against all temporal powers
whatsoever, but even against the Pope himself.


Mer. This, Sir, I have heard much controverted, and the contrary opinion
affirmed by some of their own Writers, that is to say, That the Pope may, and
does Excommunicate heretic Kings, as he calls them. By which act, their
Subjects are no more bound to pay them their obedience, nay, and can absolve
the people from their Oath of Allegiance, and empower them to depose their
natural and lawful Prince, and set up some other in his stead. Now, Sir, this
is such a doctrine, as makes the Papists incapable of ever being trusted under
any Protestant Government.


Trav. I confess, Sir, I have heard that some private men have maintained some
such erroneous and perniciou^ Principles, and flattering the Pope, have
endeavored to raise his power to a much sublimer pitch, than ever Christ
himself, or any of his Apostles pretended it should arrive. But, Sir, as
Temporal Princes have been ever usurping upon one another, and by most
unchristian ways, sacrificed the innocent blood of many thousands of men, for
the promoting their own greatness, and satisfying their ambitious designs, so
these Spiritual Emperors have followed too much the ill examples of Temporal
Princes. And being, it may be, more solicitous to extend their power, than
increase the number of true believers, have perverted the good use of St.
Peter's Keys, and have rather opened by them the door of dissension, and discord
upon earth, than the gates of the Heavenly Paradise.

For some years, these holy Fathers exercised their arms against one another,
and how much blood and horrid troubles the dispute between the Bishop of Rome,
and Patriarch of Constantinople concerning Primacy, has cost Christendom, is
sufficiently recorded in History. I may add farther, that this their
contention, became at last the ruin of the Greek Empire; but hitherto the
Temporal Princes enjoyed their rights and Prerogatives undisturbed, until
Hildebrand, otherwise called Gregory the seventh, arrogated to himself a
Sovereign authority over all Christian Kings and Emperors, as may be seen at
large in the History of Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany, who was the first
unfortunate example of the Papal usurpation, which is confirmed by a learned
Roman Catholic Bishop, and one who lived in the Reign of Fred. the first, his
words are these: Lego and relego, says he, Romanorum Regum and Imperatorum
gesta, and nunquam invenio quenquam eorum ante hunc a Romano Pontifice
excommunicatum vel regno privatum, nisi forte quis pro Anathemate habendum
ducat, quod Philippus ad breve tempus a Romano Episcopo inter poenitentes
collocatus, and Theodosius a beato Ambrosio propter cruentam caedem a liminibus
Ecclesiae sequestratus sit. Ottofrising. c. 35.

After this, several encroachments were made upon other Princes, and the Popes
(making use as well of St. Paul's Sword, as St. Peter's Keys) reduced most of
them under their obedience, and as the same Author expresses it, destroyed them
by that very power, which they had first received from the benevolence of the
Emperors themselves; seeming to imitate therein the Prophet David, who first
overcame the Philistine by the providence of God, and then cut off his head
with his own Sword. Videntur culpandi Sacerdotes per omnia, qui regnum suo
gladio, quem ipsi a regum habent gratia ferire conentur, nisi forte* David
imitari cogitent, qui Philistinum pri^o virtute Dei stravit, postmodum pr^prio
gladio jugulavit.

Now, Sir, after the Popes were in possession of these great Prerogatives, and
had persuaded the people to contribute as well to their own, as their Princes
slavery, by granting them this universal right of power, it is no wonder if
some of their own Clergy have endeavored by false arguments, to maintain this
usurped authority. But, Cousin, it is well known, that this is now become no
more, than an old antiquated title, and gives him no right over Sovereign
Princes at this day.

It is true, those Princes, who submitted themselves to the constitutions of
the Council of Tre^t, permit the Pope to exercise some Spiritual Jurisdiction
in their Kingdoms. But it is universally, and publicly declared, that the
Popes have no Civil or Temporal Authority over Sovereign Princes, nor can they
by their Spiritual power, or, authoritate clavium Ecclesiae, depose any King*
or absolve any Subject* from their Faith, Obedience, or Oath of Allegean^e.


Mer. Can you give an instance of (...) made by any Popish Kings, and consented
to by the Roman Clergy.


Trav. Yes, Sir, and that so fully, that there can remain no scruple or
difficulty, and it is by the most Christian King of France, and eldest son of
the Roman Church, and a severe persecutor of the Protestant Religion. I will
give you the words of the Declaration it self, as far as it concerns this
particular, that you may the better judge your self of the truth. It is
Declared by the Gallick Church, Primum beato Petro ejusque successoribus,
Christi Vicariis ipsique Ecclesiae rerum spiritualium, and ad aeternam salutem
pertinentium, non autem civilium and temporalium a Deo, traditam potestatem,
etc. Reges ergo and Principes in temporalibus nulli Ecclesiasticae potestati
Dei ordinatione subjici, neque authoritate clavium Ecclesiae, direct vel
indirecte deponi, aut illorum subditos eximi, a side atque obedientia ac
praestito fidelitatis Sacramento, solvi posse. Hancque sententiam public^
tranquillitati necessariam nec minus Ecclesiae quam Imperio utilem, ^t verbo
Dei patrum traditioni and Sanctorum exemplis consonam -- omnino retinendam.

Which is thus Englished. It is Declared -- First, that the Power of Spiritual
things and such as concern eternal Salvation, but not of Civil or Temporal
affairs, was delivered by God to the blessed Peter and his Successors Christ's
Vicars, and to the Church it self, etc. Kings therefore and Princes in Temporal
affairs are not Subjected by the appointment of God to any Ecclesiastical
power; nor can they be directly or indirectly deposed by the authority of the
Keys of the Church; nor can their Subjects be freed or absolved from their
Faith and Obedience, and their Oath of Fidelity. And let this Sentence
necessary to the public tranquillity, nor less profitable for the Church than
State, be irrevocable as agreeing with the Word of God, the Tradition of
Fathers, and the Examples of the Saints or holy men.

This, Sir, is the first article in the Declaration of the French Clergy, which
is asserted, registered, and confirmed by the whole University of Paris, the
Sor^one, and Faculties des Droits Civil and Canon, as may be seen fully in the
Edit du Roy, sur la Declaration faitte par le Clergy de France de ces
sentimens touchant la puissance Ecclesiastique, and published this present year
1683.

Now Sir, in my opinion, this so solemn and national declaration, together with
the concurrence and constant profession of all the English Roman Catholics,
that I have met with, does sure by much overbalance the writings of any private
men or Jesuits whatsoever. And such Principles (although they be most
erroneous, and most damnable) yet when we come to examine the case impartially
between the very Jesuits, and our Dissenters, even as it relates to these most
horrid positions, we shall find these Dissenters have so far outgone the
Jesuits themselves in the Doctrine of Deposing Heretic Princes (that is to say
Princes who differ from the Church of Rome in Fundamentals, or Speculative
Doctrines, which they believe absolutely necessary to Salvation) that they have
dared to maintain publicly the Doctrine of Deposing even Protestant Princes,
and their own natural and most lawful Sovereigns, and absolving their Subjects
from their Oaths of Allegiance, and this, not for any difference in the
Doctrinal part, which is absolutely necessary to Salvation, but for Discipline
only and Church Government, which right of Government is so inherent to the
Imperial Crown of England, that it makes up, and is one of the constituent
parts of it. And that these are the very principles of our Dissenters, I refer
you, for ample satisfaction, to their own very words where and when delivered,
as they have been Collected and Published by the care and diligence of the most
worthy Mr. L'Estrange, in his Dissenters Sayings. Now when our Dissenters shall
think fit to make so Solemn and Public a Declaration as the Papists have done
at Paris, against the Doctrine of Deposing Kings, and absolving Subjects (as is
before recited) I shall be as ready to do the Dissenters justice in that
particular, as I have now done to the Papists.


Merch. Sir, I perceive you are a very good advocate for the Papists, and
indeed I must needs confess, that I am abundantly satisfied, with those
arguments, which you have produced in their favor, and do heartily wish, they
could as well comply with the Spiritual, as I am persuaded they will live
peaceably and quietly under the Civil Government.

And as to the present question of Toleration between the Papists and the
Dissenters, I perceive that the force of your argument consists in this, that
the Dissenters, (besides their more than Jesuitical principles, most pernicious
to Civil Government, as has been now declared) that they (I say) agreeing with
the Church of England in the Doctrine, differ chiefly concerning Government, to
which in conscience they ought, and confess, they may submit: but the Papists
disagreeing in the Doctrine and speculative points, which they believe
absolutely necessary to Salvation, cannot possibly comply with us, without the
apparent danger of eternal damnation. So having a more justifiable pretense, to
differ from us in the Spiritual Government only, than the Dissenters in either
the Ecclesiastical or Temporal, they ought the rather of the two to be
tolerated. Truly the reason of this is very obvious in the Economy of our
families. For if a Master should command two of his Sons or Servants, to go,
for example, half a score miles upon earnest business; and the one should
excuse himself for this reason, that he is certainly assured, or believes
positively and unfeignedly, that a company of Robbers, or a Lion is in the way,
(which answers to Damnation, in the case of the Papists) and that he shall be
murdered or devoured; that the other Son, or Servant, having no such fears upon
him, does nevertheless upon some much more slight, and frivolous pretense
obstinately refuse to obey the Master, desiring also that hence forward, the
Master would go upon his own errands himself, (which agrees with the
condescension that the Dissenters require from the Government) I think indeed
in this case, though both be guilty of disobedience, yet the former is much
more excusable, and tolerable than the latter, and that the obstinate Servant,
is much more unreasonable, and dangerous in the family, than the other. I can
say nothing against this, but only wish, that the one had less fear, and the
other more duty and respect.

Having then, Sir, given me full satisfaction, concerning these three main
points, viz? our Liberties, Properties, and Religion, under our present
Government; in which having found no faults negatively, we ought not to desire
any change or innovation. Yet nevertheless be pleased to let me know
affirmatively why a Commonwealth might not be rationally promoted and set up in
this present troublesome conjuncture of our affairs.


Trav. Let us then agree, that our Author designs a Commonwealth, as I have
already proved from his own mouth. Besides, the constitution of his mixed
Government will inevitably bring it upon us, or return us again to a Monarchy,
where we are. For though he does not tell us plainly, that he designs totally
to remove the King and Royal family, yet so many inconveniences will happen,
that as (it may be) in the beginning of the late Traitorous Association, all
the Traitors might not at first resolve upon the barbarous murder of his
Majesty and Royal Highness; yet when they were once engaged in the one, they
found the other so necessary to be effected, that it was morally impossible to
succeed in the former, until the latter was actually executed.

It being then most certain, that our Authors intention was to establish a
Common wealth, I shall now give you my reasons, why we ought not upon any terms
to admit of it.

And first, I shall not insist much upon those vulgar inconveniences, which are
visible to all men. As for example, the inevitable consequences of most bloody
wars. For can any rational man believe, that all the Royal family, should be so
insensible of their right and honor as never to push for three Kingdoms, which
would so justly belong to them, or could they be supposed to leave England,
under their popular usurpation; what reason has Scotland to truckle under the
Domination of the English Commonalty? What pretense has the English Subject,
(supposing they were to share in the English Government,) over the Kingdom of
Scotland? All the world knows that that Kingdom, belongs so particularly to our
King, that the late Rebels themselves, did not scruple to call him King of the
Scots. Why should Ireland also become a Province to an English Parliament? Or
should both Kingdoms be willing to shake off the Government of their Natural,
Lawful and ancient Monarchy, why should they not set up a Democracy, or an
Aristocracy, or what else they pleased amongst themselves? Is there never a
Statesman in the three Kingdoms but Plato Redivivus? Can none teach them to
Rebel but he? No rules to maintain an usurpt Authority, but what we find among
his extravagancies? I am confident you do not believe it. Shall these people,
notoriously known to have hated one another, whilst formerly they were under
different Governors, become the strictest friends, when they shall return unto
those circumstances, under which they were the greatest enemies? Will the
French King take no advantage, (having so good a pretext) of our Divisions? Or
should we unite against him, under our popular Governors, was it ever known
that a Confederate army was able to defend themselves long, against an Army of
equal strength, commanded by one sole absolute Monarch? Can we foresee any
thing, but most desperate wars; and can wars be supported, but by most heavy
taxes? Were not our Thimbles and Bodkins converted in the late times into
Swords and Mortar pieces, and by a prodigious transmutation, never before heard
of, were not our Gold and Earrings turned into a brazen Idol? These
consequences, Cousin, and dismal effects of a Commonwealth, besides many other,
are so obvious, that I shall not spend any more time to mind you of them.
Supposing then that none of those former horrid inconveniences might happen, I
must mind you by the way, that one reason why our Author and the Associators
desire a Commonwealth, proceeds from the fear of a certain Arbitrary power,
which they pretend the King would introduce, as may be seen, page 161. 208* and
in several other places.

Now, Though nothing be more extravagant, than such a groundless imagination,
our Author having assured us, that his Majesty never did one act of Arbitrary
power, since his happy restoration. And moreover, page 176. That our laws
against Arbitrary power, are abundantly sufficient. Yet, that we may no more
dispute this point, I must produce Plato's own authority against himself in
these words: That the King fears his power will be so lessened by degrees, that
at length it will not be able to keep the Crown upon his head, page 208. Nay,
farther in page 214. he shows us, That it is impossible he should ever become
an Arbitrary King. For his present power, as little as it is, is yet greater,
than the condition of property can admit* and in a word, from his beloved
Aphorism, and the whole course of his Libel, he endeavors to prove, that
Dominion being founded on the property, and the property being in the people,
the King can have no manner of hopes upon earth, of becoming absolute, nor
introducing an Arbitrary Government, but by some Army of Angels from Heaven,
who must procure him an Authority, which he cares not for.

The next, and main reason, why our Author would set up a Democracy, at least
as far as I can collect, from the whole scope of his discourse, is, because the
State inclines to popularity.

Now, Sir, for this last time, I must make use of our Author's own reasons
against his own positions, and do affirm, that for this very reason, (were
there no other) all sober men, and true Politicians, ought to oppose with their
utmost endeavors, a Popular Government.

I will not recount to you the many mischiefs, desolations and destructions,
which a popular power has brought along with it, wherever it go^ ^he better
of the ancient Established Government of the place. Somewhat has been already
said to this purpose in our discourse, and much more may be read, in the
Histories of most parts of the world, to which I refer you, and shall only mind
you of some inevitable consequences, which will follow such an innovation
amongst our selves. And first, if it be true, that the King has no power to
make himself absolute, then we have no cause to apprehend an Arbitrary power in
him, and by consequence, no reason to change.

But if the inclination of the people be such, that they will take advantage of
the King's want of power, and introduce their own Government, what moderation
may we expect from men, toward those, who are to become their Subjects, who
shaking off all sense of Justice, Law, Religion, and temper, dare usurp the
Sovereign authority over their natural Governor? Where shall we appeal for
mercy, when having cut the throat of the most merciful King in Europe, we
expose our own to our ambitious and unmerciful Tyrants? Where shall we expect
compassion toward our selves, when we shall become Parricides and Regicides to
our father and our King? Where shall we seek after Eq^ity, when the House of
Lords* the supreme Court of Equity, are most unjustly turned out of doors? and
what end of our miseries can we ever hope for, when our Tyrants by our
villainous Authors constitution, have not only got all the Wealth and Militia
into their hands, but have perpetuated their usurpation, by annual Parliaments,
never to end? Who being Judges of their own privileges, p. 254. may regulate
elections, as they shall think fit, p. 249. Sit, Adjourn, Prorogue, and
Dissolve, as they alone shall judge expedient.

What more barbarous villainy was ever proposed, and published, under a lawful
and peaceable Government, besides our own, upon earth? But suppose our poor
Country thus enslaved, and our ancient Kingdom turned into a Commonwealth, what
can our new masters do for us more* than is already done? Can our lib^rties be
greater, as to our persons and estates? It is impossible to suppose it* Will
our properties be more secured? all the Laws that ever were upon earth, under
any Government, cannot make them more inviolable.

Nothing then can remain, but liberty in Religion, which we call, of
Conscience. Shall all Religions, as Papists, Orthodox Protestants,
Presbyterians, Independents, and other Fana^icks and Secta^i^^, be
promiscuously tolerated? If not ^ll, then injustice must be done to those who
are restrained. Who being all equally freeborn Subjects, our grievances will
not thereby be healed. If all, can any man of sense and sobriety imagine, that
men of such different principles, aggravated too by strong animosities, and
prejudice, will rejoice, or be satisfied, to see the tranquillity or
propagation of those principles which they hate and believe most damnable? Or
should they establish one Church, which should be the mother Church, under
whose discipline and government, the other different Congregations were to be
regulated? would it be the Orthodox Church of England? Ah, Cousin, let us
consider, what our Author declares, p. 188. I will add, says he, the little
credit the Church of England has among the people, most men being almost as
angry, with that Popery, which is left amongst us, in Surplices, Copes, Altars,
Cringes, Bishops, Ecclesiastical Courts, and the whole Hierarchy, besides an
infinite number of idle, useless -- Superstitious Ceremonies, and the ignorance
and viciousness of the Clergy in general, as they are with those dogm^'s that
are abolished. So that there is no hopes that Popery can be kept out, but by a
company of poor people called Fanatics, who are driven into corners as the
first Christians were, and who only in truth, conserve the Purity of Christian
Religion, as it was planted by Christ and his Apostles, and is contained in
Scripture.

Now, Sir, can we hope that an impudent Fanatic, who dares publish all this,
even whilst our Government is yet entire, will fa^l to introduce his Geneva
discipline, and bring his poor F^naticks out of their corners, when he or his
disciples, shall be once themselves at the helm in our Palaces?

Will he suffer, think you* the orthodox Religion of the Church of England, by
Law established, or its professors, to enjoy those just rights and privileges,
which they have done ever since the first plantation of Christianity among us?
Or shall we not be all crowded into those corners, from whence he shall have
fetched his poor Apostolic Fanatics? Will the Papists have better measure than
the Protestants, and will this be a settling the Nation* and redressing its
Grievances? Must our gracious King, and his lawful Successors, who alone do and
can, and are willing still to protect us, be deserted, and shall we run
headlong into the open jaws of those weeping, wa^ling, canting, praying, still
dissembling, but ever devouring Crocodiles? Dear Cousin, oblige me not to speak
more upon such a dismal subject, the consideration of which, must either break
our hearts* or raise our indignation beyond that temper, which I would
willingly retain*


Merch* Sir, assure your self, that I heartily comply with you* in all that you
have said, and sym^athise with you no l^ss in your ^ust resentment* than fears
of their diabolical machination^* But we have a God most manifestly gracious to
us, in his wonderful preservation of his Majesty's person, and discoveries of
their deep and damnable Conspiracies against him* We have a King, merciful,
loving, and tender of u^, oven beyond the ordinary extent of humane nature; a
Council wise, Loyal and ^^cumspect, and a people universally ^testing this
Traitorous Association, and all the consequences of it. And for my own
particular, let that moment b^ the last of my life, when I comply with our
false Authors detestable propositions.


Trav. Sir, I am most truly glad to find you so well satisfied, and will hope,
that the plainness and sincerity, which I have used, in obeying your commands,
will qualify the ted^ousness, and my want of judgment. If there yet remains
any thing, which you would have me explain to you, pray proceed, for we have
yet a little time left before Dinner.

Merch. Sir, I find one l^^f o^ two ^urned down, let us see what they contain,
and then I have done* In p. 112. speaking of a certain Act of Parliament, which
it seems he cannot produce, concerning answering all petitions, before the
Parliament could be dismissed, he tells us, That if there were nothing at all
of this, nor any record extant concerning it, yet he must believe that it is
so, by the fundamental Law of the Government, which must be lame and imperfect
without it. For it is all one to have no Parliaments at all, but when the King
pleases, and to allow a power in him, to dismiss them when he will, that is,
when they refuse to do what he will. Here you see, Sir, he couples granting
petitions, and a power in the King to dissolve Parliaments together. The one he
affirms, the other he denies. What have you to say to this?


Trav. Nothing* Sir, only desire you to remark, as I suppose you have done all
along, the prodigious impudence, and vanity of our Author, who dares advance
his own private opinion in matter of Law, against several Statutes determining
absolutely the contrary, the universal consent of all Lawyers, and continu^l
practice of near six hundred years standing.


Merch. What say you next to the Title of the Duke of Mo^^outh*


Trav. Little; our Author himself looks upon it as ridiculous, and impossible
to be supported* Nor do I think, that we are much beholden to his honesty or
conscience alone for this frank declaration, though indeed it is plain and
agreeable to reason* But* he hates the thoughts of a single person* and it is
no injustice to him, to believe from all that he has said, that if Jesus
Christ should come upon earth again, and pretend to govern according to the
present constitution of ^ur Government under a Monarchi^^l form he would find
Plat^ Redivivus a Rebellious Spirit* and ever the Son of Ambitious Lucifer. For
the fa^lts of that unfortun^^^ Duke, I shall only say* that if he ^a^ have
merit enough to be lamented, he has sense enough to think himself the most
unhappy of all manki^d, and must believe the pres^rv^tion of his life the
^everest punishment.


Merch. Will you say nothing of the Duke of York? Our Author you see, speaks a
great deal concerning him. Somethings look fair, but it is easy to perceive
his mali^^ through the disgu^^^.


Trav. No, Sir, his Royal per^^^, and high merit, are as much above my needless
defense, as our Authors little fri^olous acc^sation: we have only therefore to
pray, that God would please to continue him long a blessing to these Nations,
and that we may be no less protected by his Council, than defended by his more
than Heroic ^o^r^ge.


Merch. Pray give us then your opinion concerning our ^ure in general.

Trav. Where there is no disease, there can be no ^ure, besides, I ever held it
to be the greatest insolence and v^^ity imaginable to presume to give counsel,
to the great Counnil of the Nation, undestred and unauthorised* And for my own
part, I have no ^ner of pretense to ^o g^e^^ an (...) Have you any thing more*
Co^sin, i^ particular?


Merch. Sir, I have made some other few remarks, as the impertinent comparison,
which Plato has made of a Bailiff, Attorney, or Referr^e, as they relate to
the choosing the Speaker of the House of Commons, all which is directly against
himself, his magisterial definition of Prerogative, and many other arrogances
and follies, all which, I hope I shall be able to answer my self without giving
you any farther trouble.


Trav. Sir, I do not in the least qu^st^on it, however if any thing has been
omitted, in which I may be able to give you farther satisfaction, I shall ^v^r
be ready to obey your Commands.


Coelum ipsum p^timus stultiti^, neque
Per nost^um p^^im^^ scel^^
Iracunda, Jovem ponere, fulmina.
Hora^. ^arm. l. 1.
THE CONTENTS.
DISCOURSE I.
OF the Gra^i^n Commonwealt^^, comp^red w^^h England* Page ^4, ^5. Of Plato,
Lycurgus, Sparta, and Athens, p. 26. 27. and sequent. The original of the
Grecian Governments, p. 34. and seq. Of Solon, p. 37. Of Athens, p. 41. Of
Sparta, p. 47. The Ephori, p. 48.

DISCOURSE II.
Division of Government, p. 59. Of the House of Commons, p. 65. their
Institution, p. 68. Of the House of Lords, p. 66. 67. Of the Kings prerogative
in Adjourning, Proroguing, and Dissolving Parliaments, p. 7^. The beginning of
Government before the Flood, p. 76. After the Flood, 7^. Of Ogyges, Sithuthrus,
Deucalian Noe, p. 79. Of Nat^^e, p. 8^. First Kingdoms af^ the Flood,
instituted by fathers of Fam^lies, p. 87. 802. No right of Power nor Liberty
originally in the People* p. 89* Commonwealths founded upon Vsurpa^^on, etc. p.
90. Of the Cre^tion of the World, and Mankind, according to ^^cretius, and some
other. Heathen Philo^o^^ers, p. 91. and seq. Of Moses ^^d ^^^ History, p. 97.
and seq. Abraham h^d Regal Authority, p. 107* Saul^ ^^t chosen by the people
nor depended ^po^ them, p. 109. Empire not founded o^ Property, p. 113. upon
^^at it is found^^, p. 125. 127. Not reason^ble th^^ the People who have the
greatest interest in the Property, should have any right of power in the
Governmeent, except what is subordinate, p. 14^. Of Power, ^48. God governs
human^ affairs, p. 154. Of force, p. 156. That the people by ^^ving an interest
in the Property, have ^ot ^^ere^^ ^ greater power, force, or stre^gt^ than if
they h^d it ^o^, p. 1^2. Of ^es, p. 169. All Sovereign Pri^^^s ^^v^ ^ ^igh^ of
^o^er ^ve^ the (...) the proper^y be divi^ the people, p* ^71. Mo^^rchs who
h^ve ^^jo^e^ the S^p^e^e A^thority* h^ve yet left the property to the people*
Of the Scythians, p. 178. Of the Assyrian^, Medes and Persians, p. 180. Of the
Egyptian Kings, p. 182. Of the Romans, p. 185. Of the British Kings, p. 192.
Of the Kings of Israel ^r of the Jews* p. 193. Definition of an ^bsolute
Monarch, p. 196, 197. David ^^ ^bsolute Monarch, p. 199. Of Zed^kia^, and
Jeremiah, p. 204. Of the ^a^hedrim, p. 209. Of the Goths, ^. 212. Of the
Lombards, p. 216. Of the Vandalls, p. 221. Of Cl^^m^^^s King of Sparta, p. 225.
The death of the last Christian Greek Emperor, and loss of Constantinople, p.
226.

DISCOURSE III.
Moses, Theseus, and Romulus, ^ot Founders of Demo^r^ci^s a^ Plato Red* averrs,
p. 242. Of the Gracchi and Agrarian L^w* p. 25^. ^53. Of Agis, ^n^ Cl^^m^ne^,
p. 260. Punishment of Sedition* an^ Cal^mni^^ors of the Government in Venice,
26^* Of the French Gentry, Fr^emen, and R^^^^^^rs their ^res, p. 27^*
Vindi^^tion of (...) Clergy and Ecclestastical Government against the malicious
reflections of Plato Red. p. 274. 277. Sovereign right of power solely in the
King, p. 279. 284. Of the Kings negative voice in Parliament, p. 281. The Kings
of England depend not upon the people, nor received their right of power from
them, p. 285. and seq. 288. The Goths not in England, p. 291. Of the Saxons and
their Tenures, p. 293. 297. Of our late Parliament, p. 295. Of K. Edward the
Confessor, p. 298. Plato Red. designs to set up a Commonwealth, p. 304. Of the
King^ prerogative, p. 306. Of our Liberties, p. 315. Of Calumniators, p. 317.
Of our Properties, p. 322. Of Annual Parl. p. 325. Of Religion* p. 333. Of
Dissenters, p. 335. Of Popish Recusants, 340. Of Toleration, 342. Of the Popes
Supremacy, 350. 355. Dissenters Doctrine of Deposing Princes, 357. A
Commonwealth not to be promoted in this present conjuncture of affairs, 361.
367. Of Arbitrary power* in the King, 365. Of Liberty of Conscience, 369.

ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Line 1. for Inquity, read Iniquity* p. 66. l. 17. put out But.
p. 80. for p^rsonatus, r. pers^^^tatu^* l. 12. for Abydnu^, r. Abydenu^. p. 86
l. 11. for Government, r. faith. p. 143. l ult. for Vital heat, r. Animal
^pirits* p 144. l. 1. for Veins, r. Nerves. p. 185, 255, 256, 294 for Praeda,
r. praedia. p. 186. for lientiam, r. licentiam.


