The Just and Pious SCORPIONIST: OR THE NATIVITY Of that thrice Excellent Man
Sir Matthew Hales, Late Lord Chief Justice of England.

Who was born in the Year of our Lord 1609. on Wednesday, November. the first, 7h
8 mane, Under the Celestial Scorpion: Astrologically considered,

By JOHN GADBURY, Student in Physic and Astrology.

-- Sapiens dominabitur Astris. Si quis animas and corpora humana fatalibus
Stellis credit astringi, sicut Pagani and Priscillianus dixerunt, Anathema sit.
Conc. Brac. Licensed Feb. 21. 1676/7. To. L'Estrange.

London, Printed by J. D. for Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange. 1677.

To the Honest and Intelligent READER.
THat I present thee with the following Geniture, it is partly to illustrate
the Horoscope thereof; and partly to let the World plainly see the vanity and
daring of those ignorant and malicious Pens, that are constantly darting forth
their Arrows of Envy against all Persons drawing their breath under the same.
As if the Signs of Heaven had an uncontrollable Influence to enforce Men to
Good or Evil! and that We were by Original appointment left destitute of Power,
and freedom of Will to oppose their Energie; but born the Slaves of Fate and
Destiny, to wear their Fetters, and go no further than they permit us a Chain,
and condemned so (by our Stars) to remain and continue, even against the very
Principles of Natural Light, Reason and Religion.

Had I conceived it necessary, I could have published the Genitures of sundry
Princes and Potentates, etc. born under the Sign Scorpio, ( beyond what I have
done already in my Obsequium Rationabile) but this one Instance, in the Birth
of so excellent a Man, I deem sufficient; He being so well known (by his
Virtues) to the whole English World; and a Person without exception, as well in
his Principles as Practices, that a more apt and positive Example cannot be
produced. And I hope that no one (once having perused this Nativity) will be so
idly impudent hereafter, as to charge Scorpio as the most vicious Sign in the
Heavens.

If what Divine Seneca says be true, -- That we abuse our selves when we think
Vices are born with us, and that they do not rather steal upon us, and so come
to be ingested in us. -- It must needs be a grand Error, to make the Signs of
Heaven, under which we are born, chargeable with our Crimes and Misdemeanors.
For it is no fair or rational proof, that any Sign is naturally capable of
producing vice and ill habits, because it happens sometimes, that ill People
are born under it: since such an Argument would conclude cost and damage
against the whole Mazzaroth, or Twelve Signs: there having been ill Persons
born under every one of them; as is very easy to be evinced.

Nor yet is it any valid or convincing Testimony, against the worth and virtue
of Scorpio, that some Ancient as well as Modern Authors have spoken ill
thereof; since some of both have argued friendly for it. And it is not hard to
believe, that an Astrologer may be biased by Interest, as well as a Professor
of any other Science: our own Age affording us most eminent proofs thereof.

Would you know how Scorpio came to be reputed of sharp Influence? It was not
from any innate venefique Principle therein lodged, but because it was observed
commonly to bring the first tidings of the cold and dismal Winter; And for this
reason Antiquity has added a Sting to it: Winter being the destruction of
Vegitables, and the death of all outward Comforts. But was this, think you, for
the Sign's sake, or for the Seasons, in which the Sun enters into that Sign,
that Scorpio was thus termed? the sharp cold Weather, as his Austral
Declination, then notably increasing: And, that you may be farther convinced,
that this Office of first bringing news of the approaching Winter, is not
entailed upon Scorpio by Patent, let it be considered, -- That in August last
year, viz. 1676. the Fall of Leaf began. And, as I am informed by a Learned
Divine of this Nation, (viz. Mr. Butler, Author of Christologia) about 30 Years
since, it did the same: which he attributes to some peculiar Influence of
Saturn 's being in Taurus. So that you see Virgo can prove as prejudicial to
humane Felicities, (and to humane Life also) as Scorpio, and yet neither of
them may have power of themselves to enforce these things. The Passive Flint
never yields any Fire, but when it is struck against the Active Steel.

Besides, should we admit it for an unquestionable Verity, that Scorpio were
always destined to be the Harbinger of the Winter's cold Frosts and Gloominess,
etc. (which you see it is not) Must it therefore follow, that it has a power
to freeze up the Spirit of Virtue and Religion in us too? This is a
Non-sequitur with a witness! and every Apothecary can show the absurdity
thereof: In that the most stinging Frost that the envious Winter is able to
produce, cannot prey upon Spirits or Essences. The nobler part of Man has a
privilege above the Stars; his brutish part is only liable to their
Influences; and he may secure that Fort from them also, if Reason do but
interpose. -- For, Astra non necessitant, sed inclinant.

Yet a little further: Let but the unsatisfied in these Matters confult the
Globe, and there they will find that the Celestial Balance is placed in Scorpio;
as if Justice it self did delight to quarter in that Particular Dodecatemoria.
And should we estimate things according to their Emblems, it were very easy to
prove, -- That Scorpio does inherit the Librarian Virtues, and Sagittarius is
vested with the Vices said to belong to the Scorpion. But, this were to play at
Push-pin with Astrology, and make sport with the most glorious part of the
Creation, to the great dishonor of God and the Stars.

But alas! Astrology fostereth many hard-favour'd-Brats, which have no
legitimate relation to the Truth of that Noble Art. Direct Falsehoods, masked
with seeming Verities, are to be found within her Palaces, viz. (1.) As that
Children born upon a New or Full Moon, are not long vital. (2.) That Saturn on
the Ascendent, is an absolute Argument of short Life. (3.) That Saturn with
Spica Virginis induces beggary. (4.) That Venus joined to Mercury, sub Radiis
Solis, menaceth Castration. (5.) That Persons are generally improsperous who
have their Moon void of Course. (6.) That Saturn in the Mid-heaven destroys
Honor, Fame, etc. -- All which I assert to be so far from being absolute
certainties, that there is scarce one of them, that (of it self, singly) is so:
And, ought therefore to be exploded, and banished the Pale and Court of True
Astrology; together with the common bruited Opinion of Scorpio 's being
naturally vicious; Virgo 's being essentially Barbarous; Mars 's being joined
to Mercury, making the Man's name Matthew.

Neither let any Ingenious Astrologer think that I hereby intend to lessen,
much less to destroy Astrology, but rather to improve it; because I like well
of the Wine of this worthy Science, shall I be compelled to drink the dregs too?
I know that the Principles of the Art are Just and True. But the
Superstructures that have been by Parasites, and other partial Students raised
or built upon them, has been of such rotten, defiled, and deceitful Stuff,
that all sober Artists must judge it an excellent Service done to the Truth, if
they were wholly destroyed.

And the Garden of this chief and worthy Science, once well weeded, we might
then be in hopes to find growing and thriving therein, such an admirable
variety of Flowers of Truth and Certainty, that the Orchard of no other Art (
though never so happily and neatly cultivated) can ever be able to boast of.
For, it is the Divine Urania! and, she alone! that is the Mistress and Queen of
all Natural Sciences.

Brick-Court by the Deansyard, Westminster. John Gadbury.

The Just and Pious SCORPIONIST OR, The Nativity of that Excellent Man Sir
Matthew Hales, late Lord Chief Justice of England; who was born November. 1 d. 7
h. 8 m. A. M. 1609. in the Latitude of 52 d. North.
THe Planets places, at the time of this worthy Natives Birth, are as
follows, out of the Ephemerides of David Origanus, with Reduction considered.

Longitudo Planetarum.

-- 18 53 -- 14 26 -- 21 24 --.06 16 -- 18 40 -- 24 44 -- 06 10 -- 07 18

Latitudo Planetarum.

-- 04 34 Meridional. -- 00 07 Meridional. -- 01 24 Meridional. -- 00 13
Septentrional. -- 01 54 Septentrional. -- 02 24 Meridional.

Antiscia Planetarum.
-- 11 07 -- -- 15 34 -- -- 23 44 -- -- 11 20 -- -- 05 16 -- -- 23 50 -- -- 22
44 -- Ascentio Recta -- Solis 226 05 Ascentio Recta -- Temporis Substr. 73 00
Ascentio Recta -- Medii Caeli 153 05 Ascentio Obliqua Horoscopi 243 05

For the Cusp of the Mid-heaven.

Proxime Major 154 01 02 Ascent. R. 153 05 Proxime Minor 153 04 01 Arc. Min.
153 04 0 57 01 0 01

If 57 give 60; what will 1 give? Answer, 1. which added to the lesser degree,
leaves the Cusp of the Medium Caeli in the Ecliptic in 1 1.

For the Cusp of the Horoscope in the Latitude of Birth.

Proxime Major 243 12 14 Ascent. O. 243 05 Proxime Minor 241 46 13 Arc. Min.
241 46 1 26 1 1 19

If 1 26 give 60, or one Degree, what shall 1 19? Answer, 55; which added to
the lesser degree, makes the Cusp of the Horoscope in the Latitude of Birth,
in. 13 55 in the Ecliptic.

The Cusps of the Intermediate Angles are obtained truly enough by the
Domifying Tables, fitted to the Latitude of Birth. -- And --

The Figure of the Nativity follows.

The Position of Heaven at the Birth of that Excellent Man, Sir Matthew Hales,
late Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND, November 1 7h 8. mane 1609. hor.. a ad 8.

Arcturus. 6. 10. 3.

1.1. Helice.

21.24. 17.

Auriga. 18.40. 9.

24. 24.44. Lanx Australis.

. 13.55. ^ 18.53. Cor.. 7.18.

14.26. 13.55.

9.

Fomabant. 1.1.

17. 21. 24. 6. 16.

3.

9. 28. 24.



Judicium Astrologicum.
It is eminently observable, that all the Angles of the Figure are adorned with
eminent Constellations, viz.

The Stars of Helice are Culminant in the Mid-heaven.

The South Balance, and the Sun, arising in the Horoscope.

The Pleiades setting with the Moon in the West-Angle.

The glorious Star Fomahant in the North Angle;

A Star (which the Learned Gardan says) bestows Immortality upon Mortal Men.

And most of the Planets are, not only very powerful in the Scheme, but near
great Fixed Stars also, viz.

Jupiter, is near the Stars of Auriga, and Orion.

Mars, with the Virgins Spike, a glorious Star.

Venus is placed with the Star Arcturus.

Mercury, is in Conjunction of the Scorpions Heart. It is a glorious Scheme of
Heaven, both in the parts thereof, and in the whole: Of which more anon.

A Table of the Dignities of the Planets in this great Persons Nativity.
Strong 9 Strong 16 Strong 18 Strong 2 is Strong by 9 Testimonies. Strong 20
Strong 21 Strong 8

1. Of the Almutens, or Lords of the Geniture.
From this Collection of Testimonies, it is apparent, that there are not less
than four Planets contending and notably striving for the Dignity of Almuten,
or Dominator over this Learned Natives Inclinations, Manners, Actions,
Affections, and Passions, viz. Mercury, Venus, Saturn, and the Moon: And a
fifth, also, will not be debarred a share in the Dominion thereof, the Sun, I
mean. And by these five Planets, generally, was this excellent Native
Influenced all his Life time.

First, There was Conspicuous in him, the Learning, Dexterity, Apprehension,
and Ingenuity of Mercury. And Men of great Places (such as this Natives were)
had need of strong and powerful Mercuries. Persons of mean Souls, are not
capable of being employed, or fit to be entrusted in Lofty Matters.

This Honorable Native had a Mercury fortunate in earnest, though in
Sagittarius: [Which tells me, that Astrologers are Arbitrary, and impose upon
the World, when they assign Imbecility, or Male-effects to Planets, simply,
for being in Detriment, and not regarding other assistances. Besides, we know
it for a certain truth, -- That a Man may be as free in the House of another,
with whom he has a fair and noble Reception, as if he were in his own, and had
all his Tenants about him, paying to him the greatest Fealty and Homage.]
Mercury is here, not only near a Kingly fixed Star, and in a glorious Reception
of Jupiter, befriended by the kind beams of Saturn and Venus; which, as
Astrologers tell us, naturally inclines Men to be Just, Prudent, Honest, and to
be of Praiseworthy and Upright preserving Principles. It shows Men propense to
the study of the Law, and Theology, and to all good Literature; and declares
such Natives to be eminent pursuers of Justice and Goodness, and to be
remarkably serviceable to their Prince, and to the People they shall live
among. As an afflicted Mercury shows turbulent, disturbant spirited Persons,
and promoters of Mischief and Discord; so an assisted and fortunate Mercury,
denotes quiet; worthy, and peaceable Natures, abetters to Amity, Friendship,
and Concord, and to all generous and laudable Actions among Men; all which was
true in this Native.

Such a happy Mercury does likewise make Excellent Poets, Orators,
Philosophers, etc. And, was not this great Native all this? For his Oratory,
the World sufficiently was acquainted herewith, from all his Excellent, Legal
Orations, made on the Judgment Seat. For his Philosophy, let his Learned
Labors emitted into the World, be given in Evidence. For his admirable
acquaintance with the Rules and Measures of Poetry; let his many Divine Poems
made upon the Birth of our ever Blessed Savior's Birthday, be a Testimony and
Proof, how excellently well he understood that Seraphique Science.

2. The Sun cannot be excluded from bearing a share considerable in the Honor
and Dignity of Almuten in this Nativity; because he is so happily posited in
the Ascendant. -- Sol in Horoscopo -- tribuit Dominium super alios, and
Authoritatem, Honores, Dignitatesque a Principibus, etc. The Sun, in any
Geniture, being posited in the East-Angle, generally gives Honor, Authority
and Dignity, from Kings and Princes; and fits Men for Rule and Dominion over
the meanner sort of People. He declares such Natives to be of excellent
Prudence and Judgment, Honor, Gravity, Affability, Courtesy, and
Cheerfulness; and signifies them to be great observers of their Promises,
haters of all Sordid, Base, and Dishonorable things. All which Excellencies
did shine in this our Pious Scorpionist. The Sun, like Truth, non quaerit
angulos, disdains to lurk in Corners. And such Persons that will perform brave
and noble things, must have the Sun for their Friend. For all Actions of Honor
and Gallantry, of public Worth and Generosity, do naturally derive from the
Sun. -- If therefore thou find in any Geniture, the Luminaries free and
powerful (no matter, though they be in Conjunction or Opposition of each other;
for that is another fraudulent Aphorism in Astrology, which Charactereth such
Configurations, without exception, bad: As I shall elsewhere have occasion to
demonstrate) thou may certainly pronounce that Native, who has them so in
his Geniture, to be of a generous and worthy Mind and Spirit, scorning mean and
ignoble things; disdaining to be the Author of Mischiess, or Prejudices to any
Man: but rather covetous and ambitious to do all sorts of People good; the
Native is never well at ease, but when he is scattering of Courtesies and
Benefits among others. All which was admirably verified in this generous Native.

The Sun is disadvantaged himself, when he is Obnubilated, and hindered from
discovering his glorious Rays: But when he is enabled to appear in his Native
Claritude, he is Glorious in earnest. -- And what does he then? -- Ask the
whole Creation, and not the Rational and Sensitive parts thereof only, whether
he does not Pride himself in being nobly kind and beneficial unto all things?

It is true, the Sun, as Seneca says, does draw his nourishment from the Earth:
Yet, like a good King, who receives a Tribute or a Tax from his Subjects, is
never quiet, until he find a way to divide and scatter it among them again. --
The Sun, or Solar Person, is too noble and generous minded, to be a Hoarder; he
hates Avarice, and bequeaths it to his opposite, close-sisted Saturn. His
Treasury is always open. He is better pleased with the Fork, than the Rake.

The Sun (says Haly) Est Planeta magni Dominii, Potentiae, Nobilitatis, etc.
He is a Planet of great Dominion, Power, and Nobility; and therefore
Astrologers do reasonably signify under him, Kings, Princes, Potentates, and
the most worthy and honorable of Men. He tells us further, that the Sun is
melior and nobilior omnibus aliis Planetis, and in nobilitate clarior: And he
gives this reason for his being so, in these words. -- Quia natura sua operator
in omnibus naturis, and nulla naturarum aliarum operatur in eo. He is, -- Lumen
and Candela Caeli, Gubernator Mundi, Factor Temporum, etc. The Light and Candle
of Heaven, Lord of the World, and Distinguisher of Times and Seasons. How aptly
therefore are the worthiest of Persons attributed to the Sun? And how happy are
they, when so particularly signified by him? As this our Learned Native was.

Well might the famous Plutarch term the Sun, The Image of God; And, the
Learned Author of Religio Medici, style him, The Visible Deity. For we
experimentally know, his Image upon Earth, (I mean a Man born under him, as was
this worthy Judge, in a great Degree) is ever aiming at Noble, Virtuous, and
Worthy things. I could produce Instances almost infinite of this truth, were it
needful. But since it is a Verity nearly as Conspicuous and Glorious as the Sun
it self, -- That Persons Born under the Sun, (well Dignified, as in this
Geniture) or such as have the Sun for significator of their Manners,
Inclinations, etc. are propense naturally to Just and Honorable things, etc. I
conceive it stands in need of no proof. -- If any Worthy and Learned Astrologer
think it do, I let him, and the whole World know, that this Reverend and
Learned Judge, had the Sun so to friend at his Birth: And accordingly did shine
to the English Nation in all the Characters of Honor, Goodness, and
Magnanimity.

3. The gentle Planet Venus, had a share likewise in the significations of this
honorable Scorponist's Actions, Temper, etc. And her sweet and curious
Influences were eminently visible in him. -- Not a Person frequenting
Westminster Hall, and observing his Method and Demeanor in his dispensing of
Justice, but is able to make Affidavit of this excellent Natives sweetness of
Temper and Disposition: Of his great Patience and Gentleness: Of his readiness
to hear the meanest Plaintiff or Defendant that came before him for Relief.

In his Place, and on his Seat of Justice, a Pauper was as much his Care, as
the greatest Man in the Kingdom; he was always ready to help the Helpless, and
to assist the Distressed. His gentleness of Humor did more convince People
that were in the wrong, than his Power. And his Patience wrought better Effects
upon the Perverse and Obstinate, than his Authority, or the Sword he bore for
the Punishment of Offenders.

But, if you would see a larger and more ample Copy of his Mind, read his
Contemplations, those excellent Discourses, which were his private Meditations,
wherein he breathed forth his soul to God; with whom a just Man dares not
dissemble. -- And there you will find much more of the Gentleness, Sweetness, and
Affability of his Temper, Humor, and Disposition, than I am able to express:
Or, it maybe, than his Stars are fully able to declare. -- For, though they
discover great and illustrious Things of him, yet there were greater things in
him, than his Stars alone could own.

And I am of Opinion, that there is somewhat which moves the Stars in the
Generation of Mankind, (especially of Good and Pious Men) of greater Influence
than they, viz. The Spirit of God. From which Spirit, (and not singly from his
Horoscope, as the Fatists teach) Man became a Rational Creature. And, if Reason
be a spark of the Deity, (which Hermes Trismegistus affirms in his Divine
Pymander: Nay, the holy Evangelist St. John seems to say the same, Chap. 1.)
Man has thereby a better Title to his Dominion and Lordship over the Creation,
than all the Stars in the Heavens could afford him; he being Jure Divino, a
Governor thereof, as Created in the Image of God. And so I have done with the
significations of the mild and gentle Planet Venus, in the Nativity of this our
thrice Learned Native.

4. Nor were the Influences of Saturn well dignified, mean, or inconspicuous in
this great Man's Geniture. For it is very obvious to every discerning Artist,
that he had interspersed throughout all his Actions and Expressions, the great
Judgment, Gravity, Wisdom and Sobriety, which that sober Planet is Author of:
He had an admirable Memory, profound Cogitations, and Conceptions, etc. which
mixed with the excellent significations of a happy Mercury, before spoken of,
gave him so great and deserved an esteem in the Breasts of the People:
Insomuch, that all Men would willingly commence their Suits in that Court where
he sat Judge: And, many of them who had begun in other Courts, would frequently
appeal to him, and remove their Causes accordingly.

Good Lawyers coveted to Plead before him, and refer themselves unto him; as
knowing, that where a Wise and Learned Man was to direct to the conclusion of a
Difference, their Reasons and Arguments would never be neglected, but made the
best use of, for a discovery of the Truth, and for the honor and security of
Justice. But, as Good Men coveted to be Judged by him, so Bad Men would fly
his Award, and rather choose to comprimise their Differences, than stand to his
Determination and Judgment. As knowing him to be an Encourager of Truth and
Justice, and an utter Enemy to Fraud and Falsehood; and so in no wise fit for
their turns.

Do thou think (good Reader) that the great Trine of Saturn and Venus, and
the same glorious Configuration between Mars and Jupiter, and Saturns platique
Trine to Jove, together, with the fortunate Mercury, as before; are not of
excellent signification? They are great and famous Positions, I assure thee:
And declared this renowned Native to be blessed with a Spirit of Discerning;
and with so great a portion of Judgment, Reason, and Courage too, (for a Coward
dares not to be virtuous, cannot be so) that as he was thereby armed
intellectually for to dispense Justice rightly, and discover Truth nimbly: So
he was provided also with an Amulet of Praiseworthy, and Honest-policy, to
prevent his being cheated with a Fallacy. He would search a crafty Cause, as a
skilful Surgeon a dangerous Wound, viz. to the bottom, and discover the
Corruption thereof to the owners shame and blushing.

I could relate sundry Stories of his Dextrous Sagacity, did I hold it
requisite or needful; or, yet believe, that I have not said enough to prove, --
That this worthy Man had an eminent share in the Influence of Saturn (well
dignified) in him. To conclude this Point, His Saturn is assisted by Venus, and
his Mercury by Jupiter and Venus -- And if the Fortunes in any Geniture, can
befriend the significators of Wit and Judgment, then this Honorable Native had
a great advantage in both those intellectual Weapons, above most Men by his
Stars.

5. Lastly, We come to the Moon, for she has a share in the Gubernation of
this worthy Natives Inclinations, Actions, etc. together with the others
mentioned. For, she is herein, not only Angular, but in her Exaltation too. A
Planet in his Exaltation, says Bethem, is as a Person in his Castle or strong
Hold, and is of admirable Influence. The Moon signifies the Commonalty
generally: And if Vox Populi, be Vox Dei, the love and respect of the Common
People, is to be preferred as eminently worthy: It was from the Moons strength
and Angularity, as well as the Suns, (though I say not so much as his) that
this Native had so popular a Fame and Esteem attending him; and she is in this
Geniture a Copartner with the Sun in the presages of Popularity and Authority.
The Holy Scripture characters her for a Great Light, made by God in the
beginning. And such an one she is, truly, in respect of us, though not in her
self, as the Doctrine of Astronomy teaches.

The Books of Genethliacal Astrology, relating to Honor, Fame, and Esteem,
abound with Instances of the Moon, and her Significations therein.

That pious, yet valiant Prince, King Edward the Third of England, had his Moon
so posited; and his Geniture, in many respects, was like this most excellent
Natives.

I need not quote many Instances and Authorities for the proof of a thing so
commonly and famously known.

This Nativity is rather fit for to stand as a President, or Touchstone, to
prove others by, than to need a proof from any: Albeit, you see, that there
wants not some Genitures of the greatest among Men to parallel it.

I remember to have read somewhere, That a Man of great Learning, perusing the
Works of Virgil, was pleased to say, -- That if all the Books in the World
should be destroyed, and Virgil only remaining, there would some Vestigia of
all Sciences be found therein: Certain I am, that if all the Nativities of
worthy Men, that are to be found among the Writings of Astrologers should be
consumed, and this one of our Reverend Natives only remaining, there would be
Arguments enough of Virtue and Honor, of Justice, Wisdom, and Piety found
therein, as would serve to build up the whole Genethliacal Doctrine again, so
far as Virtue and Honor, etc. are therein concerned. And so I conclude my
Discourse of the Almutens, or Governors in this Geniture. I shall be briefer in
the other parts of the Scheam.

2. Of the Hylech in this Nativity.
From the Almutens, we descend to a consideration of the Hylech, or giver of
Life. And in this great Worthy's Nativity, the Sun is the Planet which so
governs, as being placed in the Horoscope, the prime Aphetical Angle of the
whole Figure, and the Geniture being nearly Diurnal. And, as the Sun, just
rising, was the giver of Life, so he did confer on this Excellent Native a
splendid, clear, and spotless one. -- Such a Life! that nothing but the
greatest Envy dares pretend, in the least measure, to tax or blemish. And yet
this Reverend Native has Scorpio for his Horoscope, and the Sun (that glorious
Lamp and Light of Honor and true Worth) posited therein.

What shall we say? Either the Sign Scorpio is not so wicked as some People
pretend it; or if it be, the Sun by his Horoscopical presence in this just
Man's Nativity, was able to dispel the Fogs and Clouds of Prejudice that are
presumed naturally to attend it. Which, if allowed, it will then follow, that
Scorpio has no native Vice belonging to it, (for Essences cannot be permuted,
the Leopard and his Spots must keep together) nor is it so bad, but that it can
admit of a mitigation, possibly a total alteration, from what some proclaim it
chargeable withal, by an innate right and property.

And, if an allay, in any sense, be permitted as proper to the Sign Scorpio,
may we not reasonably indulge the same to any other Sign of the Zodiac? -- And
then, who is there that will doubt, but that we may be enabled to find a Native
born under the just Sign Libra, to be as vicious as any to be found brought
into the World under the wicked Sign Scorpio? and e contra. And if we come once
to have it allowed, that the Signs of the Zodiac, as they become the
Horoscopes of Men, may submit in their significations to other more prevalent
Causes; The Consequence is unavoidable, and I aver it for a splendid and fixed
Truth, -- That a very virtuous Man may be born under Scorpio, and a very
vicious Man under Libra or Pisces.

These Circumstances being considered, (as they must be, or else Astrology is
no Science, but a mere System of Folly, Idleness, and Confusion) then may that
excellent humane Sign of Aquarius, produce as wicked, as envious, and
ungrateful a Nature, (supposing the Moon in quadrate of Saturn, and Mars in the
seventh Angle) as any other Sign whatsoever. -- Can any Astrologer give me a
just Reason to the contrary?

But this Theme is handled more largely in my Obsequium Rationabile, or Defense
of Scorpio; unto which Book I refer my Reader, as being unwilling to enter upon
any thing of Controversy, in this place especially. And thus much shall serve
for the Hylech.

3. Of the Alchocoden, or Giver of Years.
The Alchocoden, or Giver of the Number of Years, the Native might (according
to Natural Causes) Live, or Arrive unto, is the vigorous Planet Mars; as being
not only Dispositor of the Sun, who is Hylech, but of the Horoscope also: So
that you see, he claims to be Governor of the Years of the Natives Life by a
double Prerogative, and therefore must have the Honor thereof. And he being so
considerably strong, and near to the Virgins Spike, an eminent fixed Star of
the first Magnitude, of noble Nature and Influence; and also in a happy Trine
Aspect of the benign Planet Jupiter: All which did very naturally portend this
Renowned Native to arrive unto the great Years signified by Mars, which Ptolomy
tells us, are Sixty and six. And, the Sun being in the Horoscope, might
reasonably have extended his Line of Life beyond that Number too, had not the
Alchocoden been in an obscure Angle, (which is Inimical to Life) and Saturns
great strength prevented it: For he being so powerful, and in Quadrate Aspect
of the Horoscope, Minuit vitam Nati, as Haly says; he did abate of the length
of this glorious Natives Life. -- Nevertheless, we know he did survive his
Alchocodonean Circle, and lived sixty and seven Years, and fifty five Days
over: and exchanged this Mortal Life for one Immortal, on December 26. 1676.

And thus much shall serve to be said of the Alchocoden, in this just
Scorpionists Nativity.

4. Of the Anareta, or Abscissor of Life.
In the last place we shall speak a word of the Anareta, or Destroyer of Life;
and that is in this Nativity, the benevolent Planet Jupiter [good Planets you
see, may be designed sometimes, to the Execution of ill Offices:] as being both
Locally and Virtually in the 8th House, viz. The Angle representing Death, and
in reception of Mercury, Lord thereof; whose Position there, does ever render
the Death to be Natural, unless there happen some great Conspiracy among the
Stars to signify the contrary; as there does not in this Geniture. Possibly,
his Position there, was one great Reason, why the Death of this worthy Hero of
Justice and Piety, is so much lamented and bewailed in this Sarcastical,
Obdurate, and (I was about to say) Profligate Age. Which spirit of sorrow
appearing so remarkably among us, helps to prove, -- That there is yet
remaining in this (once Valorous and Religious) Nation, the Seeds of true
Conscience and Goodness, in that we can be really moved ( Non obstante the
natural Vitiousness and Obstinacy of the Times) to Mourn in earnest, when so
great and so good a Man is taken from among us, though to Heaven.

I will not pretend to so exact an acquaintance with all the Actions and
Passions of this excellent Natives Life, as to suit every one of them to its
proper Direction, or meetings of the Stars. Let it satisfy, that I have
published this glorious Nativity, nearly, as I received it from the honored
Hand of my Learned Friend, John Aubery Esquire; a worthy Member of the Royal
Society: And, that it accords with the Animodar of Ptolomy; and most happily
and truly represents the public Honors, Actions, and End of this thrice
excellent Scorpionist; Of whom the World was not worthy.

5. Something touching the Revolutions, etc. preceding this great Man's Death.
To Conspire with this worthy Natives Death, Astrologically the Horoscope was
directed ad Quadratum Veneris, in dignitatibus Saturni; and she in Aspect of
Saturn radically, and Lady or Governess (in a great measure) of the Seventh,
and Fourth Angles. The seventh Angle is opposite to the Angle signifying Life,
and the fourth Angle represents the Grave, or End of all things. -- But this is
not a Direction of force sufficient to signify so great an Accident, may some
say? No! Assure thy self but it is, when the Alchocodonean Circle is finished,
and the Direction chance to happen in the terms of an Interficient Planet, as
this did. -- Besides, the Luminaries were, by direction, in Interficient, or
Unfortunate Terms also.

And if thou think that this was not enough to play the Atropos, and cut off
this great worthys Life; Observe what follows in the Revolution, and grand
Transits and Aspects of the Stars that concomitated the said Directions, and
then thou will be convinced that there were Stellary Causes, sufficient, to
introduce the Death of this excellent Native.

Schema Revolutionis, aut Sol ad Radicem, 1676. October 31d. 11h 36. mane. Sub
Lat. 52d. a ad.

10. 29

13. 18. 53.

16.

15. 15.

^. 22.

7. 18. 22.

15. 7.

22. 10.

23. 13.

15. 15.

16.

29.



In this Revolutional Figure, the place of the Direction ascends the Horoscope,
and the Moon is in Conjunction of Jupiter, the Planet Anaretical, and both of
them in Opposition of Mars, Lord of the Ascendent at Birth. Arguments very
prejudicial unto Life. But above all, the Opposition of the Sun and Saturn in
this Figure, is remarkable; for as much as it is Angular both in respect of the
Radical and Revolutional Scheams; together with Saturns obviating the Radical
places of both Luminaries. These are formidable Arguments in earnest, and in an
Astrological sense, did plainly point out the Death of this glorious Native.

Nor may it be forgotten that the two great Solar Eclipses, Anno 1676, which
but little preceded this excellent Persons Death, were of eminent signification
therein. The one of them falling in the eighth House, upon the very place of
the Anaretical Planet, and the other in Opposition unto it.

Before a great and just Man Dies, the Sun himself, is wont to put on Sables.
He did so before the Death of that good King, and glorious Martyr, King Charles
the First. And before the Death of many more he did so, that I could mention;
but History is so full thereof, it needs not.

Neither were the two grand Configurations of the Sun and Saturn in that very
Year of a slight tendency or import, or fit to be neglected, viz. the
Conjunction of the Sun and Saturn, in fifteen Degrees of Taurus, upon April the
24th Day, on the Radical place of this great Natives Moon. And (2.) The
Quadrate of the same Planets from Taurus and Leo, on August the 7th Day; they
happening in the prime Angles of the Nativity.

And, to add a little more weight hereunto, let the Lunar Revolution,
immediately preceding this just Man's Death, be but consulted: And therein you
will find the same Position of Heaven, as in that of the Solar Revolution; and
Jupiter, the Anaretical Planet, ascending in the Horoscope thereof. Which
Argument, together with the former mentioned, did naturally concur (in the
Judgment of Astrologers) to the Extinguishing the glorious Light and Life, of
this great and glorious Lamp of Learning, Honor, true Piety, Worth and Justice.

The Moons return to her Radical place December the 6 th 9h. 40. mane. 1676.
Sub Latit. 52 d. a ad

13. ^.

5. 22.

11. 29.

22. 25.

9.

17. 26.

17.

9.

10. ^ 22.

29. 20. 14. 26

22. 6.

7. 13.



It is eminently observable, that, as the Moon did apply to the Sun, or, was in
Configuration with him, in the Figure of the Nativity, so she applied to the
Body or Beams of Saturn, in the Luminarian Revolutions preceding this great
Natives Expiration. The Sun and Saturn are of opposite Natures and Influences:
This preserves Life, that promotes Death.

Origanus de Effectib. Stellarum, p. 522. Pertinet ad fidem and diligentiam
Astrologorum, omnium quantum fieri potest Principum, Ducum, Comitum, Nobilium,
Consulum, praecipuorum quoque Theologorum, Episcoporum, Consiliariorum,
Medicorum Genituras inquirere: -- Non enim magna solummodo laus est, priori
consulta experientia de ipsis in specie aliquid dicere: Sed publica quoque fata
ex eorum salute pendent. --
FINIS.

