DIES NOVISSIMVS: OR, Doomsday Not so Near as Dreaded.

Together with something Touching the present INVASION Of the TURK Into the
German Empire; And the probable SUCCESS thereof.

By JOHN GADBURY, (...).

To determine the day and year of the end of the World, is not only
convincible, and statute-madness, but manifest Impiety. Relig. Med. Sect. 46.
(...) -- etc. For of that day and hour knows no man; no, not the Angels of
Heaven, Mat. 24. 36. LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel. 1664.

TO The Eminent FAVORERS OF Art and Learning, And true Examples of HONOR and
LOYALTY,

The Worthily Accomplished ROBERT BAKEHOUSE of the Inner Temple Esque THOMAS
SMITH of Westminster Esquire; ROBERT RICHARDSON of London Merchant:

John Gadbury, In Testimony of the Honor he bears unto their Virtues, Humbly
dedicates to their Perusal and Censure, the better part of the following
Treatise.

To the Courteous Readers.
SIRS,
ONce more I presume to entrench upon your Candor and Patience, which I request
you to interpret favorably, because I intend not to make it customary thus to
trouble you. -- I well know, he that writes Books, runs himself in debt to
every man that reads him. -- Yet I must needs acknowledge, I have been called
on but by few of you for any my Obligations of that kind; which Lenity of
yours, persuades me to believe that the Interest in little time will so
increase my sum, that my penury will render me incapable of payment. --
However, I am bold to beg a Boon of you, viz. To add this one kindness more
unto your Ten years friendships; and (if God permit me life, and my Stars prove
not more inauspicious then I expect) I intend to present you with an entire
Body of Astrology, and therein endeavor a satisfaction unto you once for all.

Of the occasion of my now appearing public, I need not labor much to
acquaint you, since there is hardly a Page in the Book but will inform you
that. Yet my brevity is such, that may possibly render me the more obscure unto
many; chiefly, in that each subject I handle, afforded me a more spacious Field
to walk in, then I have made use of; there being not one of them (had I
affected copiousness) but I might have raised into a Volume in Folio: but that
had been to have toiled my self, and troubled as well as charged you.

I have herein (though briefly, yet) succinctly touched upon the nature of a
great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and shown the Impossibility of
particular, or indeed any Judgments to be made from them: for which I expect
both Favor and Fury: The Courteous Reader has always afforded me the first;
the Captious Reader has constantly bestowed on me the latter: For which I
elect him none of my Patron, and care not whether he read me, or let me alone.
I am not sollicitous to enquire how many various censures shall pass on me for
the Arguments I have used on this subject; yet believe they will not be few,
nor yet many of them friendly.

And in my treating of the pretended Planetary Synod or Council December. 1.
1662. in Sagittary, I hope I may expect, and find as fair quarter for
defending the truth thereof, as the learned Serarius, and others, for
assaulting it therefrom. I pop no Impossibilities into the minds of men, nor
threaten them with what is never like to happen. Let my Reasons and Allegations
be considered, as well as their Fancies and Pretenses pondered, and I am sure
the Votes of the Ingeniously Impartial will not be found against me.

Then for my Discourse of Visions and Prodigies; etc. I expect to be exclaimed
on, by every Vulgar Fanatic Tongue: I divine each prejudiced Pate will turn it
self into a Mint, and be Coining somewhat of malice against me. -- They will be
loath to be robbed of their Titles to Visions; of their prophesying and
predicting strange things from Prodigies, of their determining the Fates of
Kingdoms, Countries and Persons, and the end of the World also, by
Chronograms, and suchlike fictitious Conceits. -- And I adventuring to bereave
and deprive them of their Darling Fooleries, (to say no worse of them) what
Portion can I hope for, other then Clamours, Scandals, Contumelies, Scoffs and
Disgraces from so Waspish and Peevish a Generation?

For Defending my self against the Sarcasms of that abusive person W. L. I
suppose all Rational men will excuse me; he having fallen foul on me after a
Truce was procured betwixt my self and him, by Captain G. W. which I kept
inviolable, (I speak it in the presence of God, who is (...), the only
Heart-Judger and Heart-Searcher) even in very words, from the very time I first
thereunto consented: and not only so, but have reproved others that (in hopes
to please me) have reproachfully spoken of him; and of this, I have many
Witnesses. -- And the matter concerning Mr. Gresham was written long before
that time. Howbeit, my Charge therein was, and is true, and L. well knows it to
be so: but he thought because Dr. Fiske was dead, that I could have made no
proof thereof; forgetting it seems that himself had afforded me a ground
sufficient for that my assertion against him, in his Epistle to the Prophetic
Merlyn. And in confidence of that, labors to distain my Reputation; and so
rubs up, and frets the old Sores, which before had been so happily (and I had
hoped for ever) healed.

But L's Lies and Abuses, together with the Reproaches of another Plagiary,
(whose name (himself being not an Ace above a mere Vagabond) I scorn to
mention) only confirm me in the verity of Astrology, and teach me
experimentally the effects of Luna ad Quadratum Mercurii: but I dispose of the
Direction, and consequently triumph over their Vilifications. Let the one of
them do so upon Medium Coeli ad Quadratum Saturni and Solis, now approaching;
and the other, upon the same Significator directed ad Quadratum Martis in
Ariete, etc. if they can. This cannot sure be Ingratitude in me, for giving
them such friendly notice of what may reasonably requite their blessed Actions.
But though they both tax me with Ingratitude, yet I believe themseves suppose
there is no such thing in nature: If they do, I can charge them both as
notoriously guilty. The one of them I having (at his request) wrote four Books
for, and calculated many Nativities Gratis, besides a Hicks-hall kindness, by a
grateful person not easy to be forgotten. And the other I have not only
preserved from starving, but after defended his Ears from the Pillory.

To conclude: Since my writing this Treatise, I have obtained the Nativities of
the Grand Seignior, and of Leopold the Emperor of Germany; and upon
Consultation find they confirm my Judgment of their present Difference; and
at convenient opportunity may probably see the light. In the interim, if what I
have here emitted into the world, be but as freely accepted, as I have
faithfully intended it, I have my Wishes; and shall still remain during Life, a
true Friend to Astrology, and its honest and able Professors.

JOHN GADBURY.
January 13. 1664. From my House in Jewen- Garden, against the Sun in Jewen-
street, near Aldersgate Street.
Licensed

Roger L'Estrange.
December. 19. 1663.
Doomes-Day
Not so Near, as Dreaded.
IT has been the subtle aims and endeavors of Impostors, Incendiaries and
Deluders, in all Ages, first to coin, and then to spread Stories and Fables
incredible and miraculous, upon the Understandings and Beliefs of the Vulgar
(which are always the most credulous) sort of Men. And the better to Angle for
credit to their delusory Devices, and dangerous Designs, they commonly bait
the hook of their Villainies with some serious pretense of an Heavenly Embassy;
laying the load and main weight of their Deceits upon the Stars, and Celestial
Apparitions sometimes; and other times upon pretended Visions, and
Enthusiastical Conceits, etc.

Thus some among us have endeavored, first, to make a meeting of all the
Planets in Sagittarius, December. 1. 1662.

(which, as I shall hereafter prove, is not at all true) and next, to force
this meeting (as they call it) to portend a period to the World, or at least
many mischiefs and mishaps to England, the only place they most of all hope to
affright and terrify; and (the better to make room for these their idle and
fictitious insinuations) they reflect upon the Flood of Noah, and tell us, that
as a fit (...), or Forerunner thereof, the Planets were then all of them
conjoined in the Watery Sign Pisces: And as then (and from that cause only)
the world was drowned with water; so now, from this meeting of all the Planets
in a Fiery Sign, they tell us, we must expect the world shall be consumed by
fire.

And these Mischief-Mongers, and hotheaded Enthusiasts* to the end they may
affright the world the more, they would seem to call-in to their assistance (as
a fit second to the meeting of the Planets in Sagittary) the great Conjunction
of the two-Superiour Planets Saturn and Jupiter; which (according to
Astronomical supputation) I grant did happen October 10. 1663. And thence they
twattle of a Fiery Trigon One or two Pamphlets I have seen in p^int so Entitled.
, and other amusing matters; which upon a serious debate or question, I dare
aver themselves know nothing of.

And that these Forgers of Fables may prevail in their designs the better,
unto these Planetary Assertions (which I shall, I suppose, anon prove
groundless) they subjoyn many strange relations of Visions, Revelations, etc.
as also of diverse Suns and Moons seen in the Heavens, besides the true ones; as
also, of many other strange lights, and of Rainbows, etc. conceiving them the
certain presages of what they conceive the others to be. Thus then, (to speak
favorably) they not knowing the proper causes of things, they opiniate that
miraculous and monstrous, and of no less mischievous tendency, then the
destruction of the world, or the infallible ruin of this Kingdom, etc. when
indeed the grand evil and prejudice such things foretoken, are only to be
found in the disturbed fancies of those that thus vainly and groundlesly talk
of them, and the credulity and ignorance of those that put Faith in them.

And that I may the better evince unto the World the incertainty of suchlike
Fancies and Fictions, and convince the Propugners of such impossibilities and
reports, (not reasonably to be believed) I shall particularly consider,

1. The Positions of the Planets December 1. 1662. with their probable Effects,
etc. and unto whom they partiticularly relate. 2. The great Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, October. 10. 1663. 3. Something of Visions, Prodigies, etc.
4. Some Reflections upon Doomsday, or the End of the World.
For the satisfaction of the discontented sort of people in this Nation, (whose
good I aim at in my appearing public upon this occasion) I shall be somewhat
the larger; and prosecute every one of these Particulars in a distinct Section,
as my method prescribes.

Section 1.
Of the Positions of the Planets December 1. 1662. with their probable Effects,
etc.
UPon the first day of December 1662. at Noon, (a day by many presumed to carry
so much of horror and dreadful signification in it) the seven Planets were
(both in Longitude and Latitude) according to the best Astronomical
Calculations, thus disposed in the Meridian of London.

Longit. Planetarum.
19 degrees. 47 min.. 28 degrees. 19 min.. 9 degrees. 17 min.. 0 degrees. 6 min.. 25 degrees. 40
min.. 5 degrees. 2 min.. 10 degrees. 6 min.. 13 degrees. 57 min.


Latitudo Planetarum.
4 degrees. 45 min. North. 1 degrees. 33 min. North. 0 degrees. 46 min. North. 0 degrees. 45
min. South. 0 degrees. 44 min. North. 2 degrees. 34 min. North.


By which Systeme of their Positions, The pretended meeting of the Planets in
Sagittary December. 1. 1662. apparently false.
at the time aforesaid, it plainly appears unto my sight, that all of them
are so far from being in Conjunction, that not any two of them are exactly so
united. And indeed, if we shall but seriously consider this Position of the
Planets in the Heavens, we shall find that (although I have, following the
steps of our best Ephemeridist-Masters, noted their places for the Noon-time of
the day) they are not all of them really then in Sagittary. A Planet according
to his Latitude, may be in a Sign different from what his Longitude discovers.
For, Astronomers esteem a Planet to be properly and really in that Sign of
the Zodiac with which he ascends and cutteth the Horizon. This perpended, it
will plainly follow, that Jupiter is truly and properly (secundum Latitudinem)
in Scorpio. For a certain proof whereof, observe the Demonstration following.

The Oblique Ascension of Jupiter in six minutes of Sagittarius, in the
Latitude of London, is (fine Latitudine) 265 degrees. 32 min. But his Oblique
Ascension (...) Latitudine, viz. with 46 min. of North Latitude is 264 degrees. 31
min. which exactly agrees to 29 degrees. 22 min. of Scorpio in the Ecliptique:
Jupiter must therefore cut the Horizon with that point of the same.

Now then, if thus it be, that all the Planets are not in Sagittarius, (as has
been proved) must it not be both vain and frivolous for any man (let him be
either Astrologer or other) to affright, terrify and amuse the world upon a
pretended meeting of them all in the Fiery Triplicity? and thence for to
threaten a destruction of the world by fire?

But suppose we should admit (what some Brainsick Prognosticators would
willingly have) that the Planets were all of them in Sagittarius that day; yet
unless they had been in Conjunction there, I must tell them it is such a
Position, and so strange a Marvel, that indeed signifies nothing at all! I
mean no such general and malignant matters or things as are by them pretended
therefrom. Yet I deny not but that the progression of the Planets through the
whole twelve Signs of the Zodiac, or their Position in any part thereof (have
a particular (yea, remarkable) signification: but then it is relative only to
such whose Genitures either Sympathize or Antipathize therewith. The Transits
of the Planets of great signification in a Nativity.
As for instance: Such Persons or Natives that shall happen to have Saturn or
Mars pass the Hylegiacal points of their Nativities shall receive great damage
and prejudice thereby, etc. But those that shall have the benign Planets
Jupiter or Venus upon the principal points of their Radixes, such will be made
prosperous, and obtain considerable advantage therefrom. And of this,
Experience is an assiduous Evidence.

Again still supposing that all the Planets had then been in Sagittary, as is
most untruly (you see) obtruded upon the beliefs of many people; yet, unless
they all of them had been in Conjunction there, either Platiquely or Partilly,
(as Astrologers speak) viz. in the same degree, or within the mediety of their
Orbs; they could not afford any true or real ground to any sober or serious
man, to threaten or menace the world with a Destruction or Ruin by fire. For
it is the union of Beams that signifies Desolation, or Destruction and Ruin,
or portendeth Happiness. But on the day beforementioned, of all the Planets
there is only Saturn and Mercury which are in Conjunction, and that not
absolutely Partil, and Venus within the moiety of their Orbs; which according
to the opinion of Astrologers, has no such amazing or terrifying
significations, as the burning of the world.

Yet a little further, A Planet has no strength in a Sign before the Fifth,
nor after the five and twentieth Degree thereof.
the learned Ptolomy tells us, That the strength of a Planet is to be observed
from the Fifth, to the twenty fifth degree of a Sign. Which in this matter
seriously considered, we shall find that neither Jupiter, Mars or the Moon,
can then have any real signification of those strange and amusing Matters
pretended to be portended by this (as it is idly and untruly worded) prodigious
meeting of all the Planets in Sagittary; the one of those three Planets being
not in that Sign, and the other two just going out thereof. And there is no
man but will (if his Reason be not depraved) judge it most absurd, to suppose
that to have signification, which wants strength or power to turn such
signification into act. Thus we see that by this last Argument, here are no
less then near half of the seven Planets in their signification, and position
likewise, taken away from this pretended mighty Celestial Congress.

But letting pass these Arguments as too curious and knotty, for many of our
ignorant Astrologers either to cut in two, or untie; I will descend to another,
but more familiar Question, and such an one as may better consort with the
general Reason; viz. If all the Planets at the time beforementioned had been
in Sagittarius, as is falsely pretended, I would then fain know, why the burning
of the world, or any such eminent mischiefs to these Nations, must therefore
needs have been presignified more, now then at other times? For I find by
being conversant in the study of the Motions of the Planets, that this is not
the first time since the (supposed) time of the Creation of the world, that
they have been thus (yea, more unfortunately) profited. And it is no news to
any man, though but meanly versed in Astronomy, to find almost all the Planets
posited in one sign of the Zodiac, and that very often; as I shall prove by a
few instances.

Anno 1562. June 19. all the Planets (except Jupiter and the Moon) were in
Cancer, a Sign of the Watery Triplicity.

Anno 1564. several days together in the month of July, were all the Planets
(except Venus and the Moon) in Leo, a Sign of the Fiery Trigon.

Anno 1584. March 28. and 29. days, all the Planets were in the Watery Sign
Pisces, except the Sun and Jupiter, who were conjoined in Aries.

Anno 1603. November 22 and 23. all the Planets were in Sagittarius, (a Sign
of the Fiery Triplicity) except Mars, who was then in Virgo, in Quartile unto
several of them; in effect more mischievous then if he had been in Conjunction
with them. And the world (we see) has outlived that, 60 years and upward.

Anno 1618. on April 29. and 30. days, all the Planets were in the Fixed,
Earthy Sign Taurus, except Jupiter and the Moon. And the Moon was then in
Opposition unto them from Scorpio; (by some Astrologers called the most
malicious and pestilent Sign of the Zodiac) yet no dismal Effects attended
this Satellitium.

Anno 1622. on June 27. and 28. all the Planets were in Cancer, except Venus,
and she was with Cauda Draconis in Taurus.

Anno 1623. June 21 day, all the Planets were in Leo, (a Sign of the Fiery
Triplicity) excepting the Sun and Mars; and they were in Opposition to each
other at that time, from Cancer and Capricorn, which Astrologers call Cardinal
and Tropical Signs.

Anno 1624. Sept. 1, 2, 3. days, all the Planets excepting Saturn, were posited
in Virgo; and he was then in Leo, his Detriment.

Anno 1642. Feb. 28. and March 1. all the Planets were in Pisces, except Mars
and the Moon; and they were upon those days in Opposition from the Signs
Cancer and Capricorn.

Anno 1643. Febr. 9. all the Planets were in Pisces, a Sign of the Aquatique
Triplicity, excepting Mars, who was in Taurus, the place where he receives his
Detriment.

Anno 1656. September 7. and 8. days, all the Planets were in Virgo, a Sign of
the Earthly Trigon, excepting Jupiter: Upon which occasion I wrote my
Celestial Ambassador; and have therein prescribed an easy method for to judge
of the Effects of Conjunctions, fit and reasonably to be judged of.

Anno 1658. Sept. 17. five of the seven Planets were in Libra, a Sign of the
Aereal Triplicity, an Aequinoctial Sign, and the Exaltation of the cruel
Planet Saturn.

Anno 1664. upon December. 14. five Planets will be pofited in Capricorn, a Sign
of the Earthly Triplicity.

Anno 1677. upon May the 21. and 22. that year, all the Planets, except Jupiter
and Mars, will be in Gemini; and they will be in Opposition to each other from
Leo and Aquarius, Fixed Signs.

And if any person minded to take the pains to consider of the Motions and
Positions of the Planets further, they shall find more Examples of this kind,
(for I have herein but given the Reader a brief taste of what I could more
largely have presented him withal) which will tell him plainly, and truly too,
That it is either men's ignorance of these things that makes them to wonder at
them, and to be so ready to assign such impertinent and incongruous Effects
unto them; or else their knavery, that they may thereby bring to pass their
villainous and dangerous Designs, and not be subject to suspicion. Otherwise, I
would fain know why the same Positions formerly, were not attended with the
same Effects, as these Positions of them (now under discourse) were, and yet
are, by many expected.

-- labuntur and ordine certo
Sydera; Pontanus, Lib 1. de Stellis.
tam varios rerum patientia casus.
Illa suos peragunt motus, servantque tenorem
Sort datum, etc.
-- The Lamps of Heaven move on
In their old paths: The Planets cannot stray
In all their wanderings from their Native way;
Or loose that Influence which first they got
Consigned unto them, by their proper Lot.
This therefore shall serve for the explanation and signification of the
meeting of all the Planets (as is supposed) in Sagittary, December. 1. 1662. and
for the satisfaction or conviction of all those that would have any thing of
Doomsday thereby be pre-signified.

Sect. 2.
Some Reflections upon the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Sagittarius, October 10. 1663.
IN my Ephemeris, or Almanac for this present year 1663. I have delivered
somewhat touching this subject, and have (I suppose) fully evinced unto the
Intelligent Reader not only an improbability, but impossibility for any man to
predict the certain effects that shall succeed this so famous Conjunction.

Not that I believe or suppose such a Conjunction can or shall want Effects,
and those very splendid; and therefore I say in my Octobers Observations,
against the time this eminent Conjunction happens, thus: -- Conjunctio magna
Saturni and Jovis. -- It happens but once in seven or eight hundred years; its
Effects therefore cannot be discovered by the wisest of Mortals. We may say
they will be famous: but what they shall be, or when they shall appear,
Astrology has no tongue to declare. Let us therefore warily eye the
Providence of God in those Mutations (whether good or evil) that this eminent
and unusual Congress is the precursor of.

That this eminent Celestial meeting shall have very famous and glorious
Effects, is most Rational to be believed, and that upon several eminent good
grounds, viz.

1. The Planets conjoined are the two superior Celestial Movers. 2. Their
congress or meeting is in Sagittarius, a Sign of the Fiery Trigon. 3. It is a
Celestial meeting that (Astrologers well know) very seldom happens.
Now, Though the spects of this great Conjunction will be famous, yet it is not
in the power or skill of the wisest of men to particularize them.
the more considerable the Planets are that meet, the more famous will the
Effects of that their meeting prove: and the more worthy and eminent the place
is in which they thus conjoyn, the more admirable are or will be their
significations: and the more rarely and seldom such Bodies do unite, the more
significant and illustrious is the Embassy they have to deliver to the world:
For those Bodies that do not often meet, when they do, they join together for
the greater and more famous purposes.

But although this be granted, (as indeed it must) yet I hold it impossible for
the wisest of men to predict or divine the particular effects or signification
of this great Conjunction; and that for these Reasons, viz.

(1.) It is a Conjunction that seldom happens, viz. but once in seven or eight
hundred years; no man therefore can have any particular experience of what
Effects may probably succeed the same. Chronology not certain, a cause of
error in Predictions of this kind.
And if any shall presume to hope to be assisted by Chronology, I tell them
that is uncertain, and subject to error.

(2.) But should I grant that Chronology could truly furnish an Artist with
the exact and precise truth of what has happened after the celebration of such
Conjunctions, (which I deem somewhat improbable) yet would he be to seek of a
certain foundation whereon to build a Judgment for time to come, The true
Figure of a great Conjunction not attainable.
it being impossible to obtain the true Position of Heaven when such a
Conjunction ad punctum happens; and without a Figure to pretend to give a
Judgment, is every whit as vain and idle, as for a Pilot to steer or guide a
ship without the assistance of his Compass.

(3.) But should we allow a possibility (of what is indeed impossible) that a
Figure thereof were attainable, yet the Artist being a Man, An Artist may
easily mistake in taking a non-cause for a true cause.
and so subject to error, may be apt to mistake in his Calculation of the
Effects which (allowing Chronology likewise certain) may have succeeded such a
Conjunction formerly: for he may easily assign such and such matters or things
to the Conjunction as the Effects thereof, which very probably may be presumed
to have been signified by Eclipses, or other less Conjunctions, or Transits, or
Vernal Ingresses, etc.

This seriously preponderated, I assert, That this Great Conjunction affords no
ground at all from which either our Astrological or Presbyterian Enthusiasts
can any way rationally threaten the world with a destruction by sire; or
England in particular with Wars, or other mischiefs; no, although it happen in
the Fiery Trigon.

Before I close this Section, give me leave to correct the gross errors and
mistakes of some Astrologers among us, committed in their Writings this present
year 1663. because they somewhat relate to this great Conjunction, and are
occasioned by the same.

One there is among us, who (having made the world believe he has had a great
deal of skill in these matters) calls this Conjunction very often a Little
Conjunction, and a Minor Conjunction: An ignorant Artist in his pretended
Judgments upon this great Conjunction justly taxed.
telling us that some able Artist (such another probably as himself) intends a
particular Treatise thereof: but lest this Artist boasted of should fail, and
we be deprived of some Astrological Ignorance, and (I was about to say)
Nonsense, to be in Print fathered upon this Great Conjunction, this Author
gives us an account of the Conjunctions Effects in these words: -- We conceive
the genuine sense of this present Conjunction is, that generally men's
intentions or actions will wholly intend to settle or unsettle the Laws and
Constitutions, Customs, Vsanees, of whole Nations, Governments, Kingdoms and
Commonwealths; or the full establishing, or utter disturbance of Families, and
their Estates, Religion of several Judgments, and its attendances,
Privileges, etc.

In which words, if any man can find either good Connection, true Art, or fair
propriety of speech, --

As great Apollo, Erit mihi magnus Apollo.
he
Shall ever be to me.
Men's intentions, intend to settle, or unsettle, etc. and this is the genuine
sense of the present Conjunction. -- To pass over the apparent Tautologie
hereof, I suppose it will be a truth believed on all hands, to carry the
undeniable, That if Men intend any thing at all about Laws, Customs,
Constitutions, etc. it must be either to settle or unsettle them; Let this
intention proceed from the influence of such a Conjunction, or other less
considerable Celestial Phenomenon: And so likewise for Families, Estates,
Religions, etc. if men intend any thing of, for, or concerning them, must it
not be for, or in order to either their disturbance or establishing?

But when persons pretending to give Judgment (under the specious color or
covert of Science) upon Conjunctions and Aspects of the Stars, they can have no
proper or serious grounds for; what wonder is it, that they thus become
Fugitives to Art and Learning, and wander (as led by the ignis fatuus of their
ignorance or presumption, or somewhat worse) from the grounds of Science*
Sense, and Right Reason! Any Man (without the knowledge of the Planets) may be
most reasonably supposed to be oraculous in such kind of presages as these:
for how can he be mistaken in his Divination, whose Predictions purely depent
upon I or No? It is impossible for any Medium to be found between those terms,
which are purely contradictory. Nor is there any more of Art herein, (or
certainty of the truth pretended hereby) then in the throwing up Half a Crown;
by which action we certainly conclude, that either Cross or Pile shall be
uppermost.

The same Author in the next Leaf comes to deliver another kind of Judgment
upon this Great Conjunction, viz. A firm Establishment of new-acquired
Dominions, or new Families, or new Leagues: -- and this in many places of
Europe.

Now you see in this persons Judgment by this Conjunction, men will sometimes
intend to settle and unsettle Governments, Kingdoms and Commonwealths, etc. --
and at other times intend only a firm Establishment of new-acquired Dominions,
etc. And this only in many places of Europe. And in the same breath (almost)
he urges another passage like to the first we examined, -- viz. -- It secondly
intends a Confirmation or Extinguishment of ancient Church Matters, Discipline
or Ceremonies. Which Terms every one may see are directly opposite as the
former.

How ridiculous, contradictory* idle and vain such Predictions are, I need not
take pains to illustrate, but leave them to be judged of by Persons able to
distinguish of Terms, and discern the Imposture, and ignorant juggling of the
Predictor, who rather then he will not be seen to be somebody, adventures to
make an Enthusiastique noise, though it be Groundless, Artless, Senceless.

I come in the next place (having briefly examined the substance of his
Predictions) to demand his Reason, why he calls this Conjunction A Little, This
Conjunction and in, not a little or minor, but a major, or great Conjunction.
or Minor Conjunction: for as I can perceive he has rendered no account
wherefore it should be so esteemed. -- There seems to me two things essentially
to be considered in the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, which makes their
Congress to be called great: viz. (1.) The Regality of the Triplicity they
conjoyn in; (2.) The Beginning of their Conjunctions for their whole circuit in
that Trigon. And both these concur to make this a great Conjunction. For (1.)
it is the Fiery Trigon in which this Celestial Congress is celebrated, the
most Noble of all the rest, even as Fire is the most eminent among the
Elements. (2.) Albeit it so happened, that there were two Conjunctions of these
Planets in the same Triplicity, viz. anno 1603. Dec. 7. and anno 1623. June 8.
yet these Planets not continuing their several Conjunctions in that Trigon,
till they had naturally ended their circuit there, they could not be called
great Conjunctions, but rather mean, or middle Conjunctions. and will make
their Conjunctions in the Fiery Triplicity many hundred years yet before they
leave the same.
But this Conjunction now in Sagittary, so begins the Fiery Triplicity, that
for many Ages these Planets will make their Conjunctions in the same Trigon;
and this without any alteration, or mutation into any other Triplicity: Ergo,
this must be, not a little, or minor Conjunction, but a great Conjunction. Nay,
the Gentleman that has been pleased to call this a Minor Conjunction, has
been also pleased to call that in 1603. December 7. not only a Great, but the
greatest Conjunction: which how truly it may be so termed, I freely confess I
understand not: Perhaps he may have learnt a secret way to demonstrate unto us
impossibilities, viz. why that Conjunction in 1603. should be called a Great,
or the greatest Conjunction, and this in 1663. (though greater then that) shall
be esteemed and termed a Minor or Little one.

Astrologers consent, that there are three manner of ways how Saturn and
Jupiter make their Conjunctions; whence they have their several Denominations.
The several Conjunctions of and, and how they are called, and in what time they
are severally made.
(1.) They make their Conjunctions in any of the Trigons in the space of
nineteen years, three hundred and sixteen days; and this is called a Minor
Conjunction. (2.) They make their Conjunctions from one Trigon to another,
according to the order of the Signs, as out of the Fiery into the Earthy, in
an hundred ninety and nine years, and three hundred sixty six days; and this is
called a middle or mean Conjunction. (3.) They make their Conjunctions in seven
hundred ninety five years, two hundred and twelve days; as from Aries to Aries,
or Sagittarius to Sagittarius, with respect to the mutation of the Triplicity,
etc. and this is called a great, or the greatest Conjunction that can be. But
of this subject let the ingenious Reader apply himself to Cardan, in his
Commentary upon Ptolomy, fol. 362. (that I mean printed a Lions, anno 1555.)
where he may receive exacter satisfaction then my present occasions will permit
me to afford him.

There is another Person who pretends to be well acquainted with the
Calculations and Effects of Conjunctions; Another pretended Artist taken tardy
in his fictitious and groundless Predictions upon the great Conjunction of and,
etc.
and he says in one place of his Book, anno 1663. this Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter happens on October. 10. near high Noon; (it may be as near Midnight,
for ought he or any man else knows) yet in another place of the same Book he
tells us, it happens the 12 day, near 7 a Clock in the morning.

This I know, these two Planets will be in Conjunction at the least ten days
(perhaps more) before and after the tenth day of October; but the precise day
according to the best Astronomical Tables, they will make their exact
Conjunction, will be on October the tenth, anno 1663. but their Orbs touch many
days both before and after. But this pitiful Judger of Conjunctions commits a
greater error then this immediately following it, in these words: -- There
has been six Trigonical Revolutions past, before this last entrance of the
Planets into Aries 1603. -- In 1603. these Planets were in Sagittarius, and as
far from Aries as a Trine is distant from a Conjunction, viz. 120 Degrees; and
so far is this strange Astrologer distant from the truth. I should willingly
have conceived this to have been the Printers error, as not willing to believe
any man pretending Astrology so ignorant, and subject to error; but meeting
it in his Book in words at length, and no way corrected, I cannot do less then
suppose it to be a part of its Authors remarkable property, Ignorance: and that
which confirms me so much the more, is, A most egregious mistake by him
committed in the month of January in his Almanac. The Sun combures all
Planets, but can be combured of none.
He says there, -- The 28 day,, and, viz. Mars, Sol, Venus, and Mercury, are
all Combust. Certainly his Brains and Skill likewise must needs be in
combustion, that shall say or write, the Sun, which combures all the Planets,
can himself be combust. But he proceeds, -- Observe, the two Superiors conjoyn
23 day, and all the rest the 28 day. Expect great and prodigions* Effects. --
On the twenty third day there is no such Conjunction of the superior Planets,
as this idle fellow ignorantly twattles of; nor are the other five in exact
Conjunction that day neither: Although I grant the Moon is applying to the
Conjunctions of the Sun, Mars, Mercury, and Venus, but meets with the Sextiles
of Saturn and Jupiter by the way. I perceive this forward Astrologer
understands not what Frustration, in an Astrological sense, means. Now
therefore, if Persons should expect from these idle stories any great and
prodigious Effects, they must likewise expect to be deceived therein, as
certainly, as before they have been by him in their pretended causes.

To demonstrate unto the ingenious Readers, that those days he mentions, viz.
January the 23. and 28. there were no such causes, and therefore there can be
no such prodigious Effects, I will present them with the Planets places in
Longitude, those two days at Noon, that either his ignorance or imposturism, or
both, may the more conspicuously appear.

Jan. 23. 1663.
13 degrees. 50 min. 14 degrees. 42 min. 10 degrees. 12 min. 6 degrees. 38 min. 11 degrees. 42 min.
7 degrees. 5 min. 8 degrees. 41 min. 11 degrees. 8 min.


Jan. 28. 1663.
18 degrees. 54 min. 15 degrees. 4 min. 10 degrees. 57 min. 10 degrees. 34 min. 17 degrees. 58 min.
15 degrees. 40 min. 10 degrees. 57 min. 10 degrees. 53 min.


By which Glass, you may easily perceive the causeless cause this Person had to
terrify the world with the expectation of great and prodigious Effects.

But notwithstanding these gross errors and oversights, this confident Fellow
is not quiet, but rails at diverse persons professing knowledge in the Stars;
calling them Star-Fools, that babble so much of the Stars, and know no more
virtue they have then a Hop-pole; calling them Moon-calves, etc. But whether
his ignorant self do not more properly deserve those Epithets he so lavishly
bestows upon others, (the foregoing Discourse considered) I leave such as are
Artists to judge.

Sect. 3.
Touching some pretended Revelations, Prodigies, and their Forged Effects.
BUt although the Stars (or Astrology, the Science of the Stars) are no way
favoring such idle Opinions as the Destruction of the world by Fire, or the
time of its Dissolution; yet so strangely impudent are many in this our Age,
that they pretend to believe they have a certain prescience of these things,
either by Revelation from the Spirit, as they (sometimes blasphemously) word
it: or else from the observation they seem to make of certain Apparitions or
Prodigies.

As to the first, it is very sufficiently known, that none but Melancholy
Persons are subject thereunto; and these kind of people pretend unto the
acquaintance of Revelations, and suchlike mysteries, either from Envy or
Frenzy: for the former, they deserve censure; for the latter, pity. History
informs us, Moor Enth.
(as one ingeniously notes) that many men have fancyed themselves Monarks,
Triumph.
Popes and Emperors; when as in truth they have been but Foot-boys, Grooms,
and Serving-men. And many again, pretending to these matters of Revelation,
have been found to have more of Villainy, then Melancholy in them; by which
means they have acted, agitated, and brought about very eminent and
considerable Designs.

But suppose we, Persons pretending Visions, Revelations, etc. mo^e melancholy
then spiritual.
that many of these kind of persons in their pretenses to Revelation,
Inspiration, etc. have no design at all, either against the Church or State
they live under; yet it is not enough that because they pretend to these
matters, that we must therefore believe them to be more then they are; or that
they are able (beyond others) to approach the presence of God; or that they are
as Lords of Gods Council, because they pretend so highly to the Spirit: for all
these their fair and spiritual pretenses, are nothing but the effects of an
absurd Melancholy; and proceed not from any preternatural or supernatural
cause: as it happened in David George, John of Leyden, Jacob Behmen, and
infinite others, both of former and latter times; of whose Actions and
Exploits, History is not barren. For when this humor predominates in a man, it
makes his brain (or rather the Nut, or Top-kernel thereof, as Des Carts
expresses it, Des Carts Pass. Soul.
to) seem like a cracked Looking-glass, receiving thereby a thousand various
thoughts, conceits, and shapes of things, which they (with a confused
imagination and Judgment) beholding, do suppose real; and are therefore the
more bold in pretending to Vision and Revelation, and in reporting things
(incredible and untrue) which they believe to have heard and seen.

But I shrewdly fear, the Enthusiasts of our days deserve no such charitable
construction to be made of their actions or pretenses. For it appears
conspicuously to all men, that the Visions and Revelations they lay claim unto,
and pretend an interest in, proceed rather from Envy then Frenzy; and that
under pretense of these matters, masking their intentions with the glittering
Vizard of Religion, (I mean those Piae frauds formerly used among us, to the
almost ruin of the three Nations) they design to act over their old Villainies
again in these Kingdoms.

And to assure the Reader, that these are not the men they seem to be, although
they color and cover their intentions with a specious pretense to Piety, etc.
let him consider them according to the Characters that rationally bespeak both
what they have been, and at present are.

1. The Discontents of these Kingdoms, the only discoverers of Prodigies, and
B^oache^s of Visions and Revelations
These Persons that thus pretend to Visions, Revelations, etc. and thence to
cant the confusion of this Kingdom, as well as the destruction of the World;
are Discontents, either of the Clergy, or Laity: (i. e.) Such as have been
thought worthy by the grand Council of this Nation, the Parliament, not to
exercise any Office or place of Trust in this Realm, either in Church or State.
Which Act, though it be but their just due and merit, yet gives a pretended
occasion for their Envy to sit and brood upon their Melancholy; whence issues
their pretended Prophecies, Visions, and Revelations of the Ruin and
Destruction of those, whom they had once by Perjury, Rebellion, and mocking of
God, pro tempore destroyed.

2. They are not only Persons disgusted, but the most of them Men of desperate
Fortunes; and value not therefore any matter or thing they shall have
opportunity to report or spread, though it be to the infection of the whole
Kingdom: for their conditions being as abject and low already as possible,
they stand in dread and fear of nothing they shall promote, or pretend unto;
being captivated by the Proverb, He that sits on the ground can fall no lower.
This is the plain (though poor) encouragement they take to kindle their sparks
of Mischief and Rebellion; which if they catch, England will once more be cast
into the fiery furnace. Such persons being of the nature of fire, are always
desirous to convert every thing into its own likeness. The poor man, says
Solomon, (or person of a desperate Fortune) is like a sweeping Rain, Prove. 28.
3.

3. They are not only persons desperate in their Fortunes, and discontents in
their Minds; but like the Grave, or Barren Womb, in their desires unsatiable.
From this vicious temper and thirst unquenchable of theirs, they have ruined
and destroyed more in twenty years, then by the greatest Zeal, Care, Loyalty
and Industry can be repaired in one thousand; and yet they are not satisfied.
For since it has pleased God to restore his Majesty to his Kingdoms, and the
Kingdoms to their pristine Government, these persons cannot be content to have
their Rebellions and Treasons defaced with a Royal Deleatur, but because they
have not the power to reign in their insatiable pleasures which they took in
Ruin and Destruction, as before, they take upon them (with the greatest
ingratitude imaginable) maliciously, to doom that to death which gave (and yet
continues unto them) Life.

4. These Persons use this their Engine of Villainy and Politic way of
mischief, for the discomfiting and terrifying this Kingdom, as may be
reasonably presumed for this Reason; In that they were (many of them) men of
eminent Grandeur, and great Estate; which in our late times of confusion they
had by Rapine, War and Bloodshed acquired; and being now in some respects
forced to refund, and part with much of their ill-gotten Goods, they labor
(with the Dragon or Devil in the Revelations) and struggle hard, that they may
not fall from the Heaven of their (once not thought of) happiness, without
pulling thence a third part of the Stars with them. Could they but have the
power (as they have the stomach) to lay Englands Peace and Glory in the dust,
and once more embrue us in another Civil War, setting us all in a flame, they
would then be contented; though by the light thereof, they should read the
Bills of their own Losses. But that they may assure themselves, that neither
their Designs, or their forged Revelations, shall either have effect, or
signification of this Kingdoms Ruin, the only thing they seem so zealously
to thirst after, I assert, -- That the happiness of this Nation is built upon a
Rock, too mighty for them to attempt, and too powerful for any Enemies to
impugn. And this I have demonstrated at large in my Treatise, entitled,
Britains Royal Star; unto which I refer the Reader.

What has been said of those that thus thunder of Visions and Revelations, may
equally be referred to them that pretend to lay such great weight upon
Prodigies. Howbeit, I would not have any to suppose me so irrational as to deny
Prodigies, for I acknowledge that God Almighty oftentimes gives forth his
Premonitions by Prodigies, especially when he has an intention of punishment
either to Nations or Persons: That there are Prodigies in Nature is not
questioned; but that all things said to be such, are so, is (and ought to be)
denied.
according to that true saying of Herodotus, Cum Deus puniturus est gentem vel
orbem, prodigiis id solet prius significare: (i. e.) When God intends to punish
a Nation, Country, or City, he is first wont to give them notice thereof by
Prodigies, -- It is this only that I contend against, viz. That many things
said and pretended to be Prodigies by the Enthusiasts and Discontents of this
Age, are neither Properly or Really such. For, if a Rainbow, or two or three
Suns or Moons, or a Hyatus, appear in the Clouds; or if a River abate but of
its common Quantity of Water; these things (I say) are immediately bruted about
for Prodigies, when in truth they are none at all; for there is hardly a month
in the year (a month did I say! nay a week, perhaps a day) but in some place
of this earthy Globe, some (if not all) of these things happen. And should we
conceive these to be Prodigies, we must necessarily believe, that the whole
world consists of nothing but wonders; and that there is not any thing natural
therein, of which a sober account can be rendered: but it is equally erroneous
to conceive the first, as to conclude the latter.

I do allow that Prodigies have eminent, wonderful, and astonishing
significations: but that these things are either such, or have such
significations, may be reasonably denied upon the former ground urged. It is
true, that the apparition of them to the eyes of Vulgar men, and such that are
illiterate; whose ears before having been abused with strange stories, beget
amazement; whereas indeed they would be less terrified and affrighted thereat,
very probably nothing at all, were it not for the forged significations that
the subtle and knavish Reporter makes of them. Now that I may the better
evince to the Readers hereof, that these several things have a real and proper
cause in Nature, (and therefore not properly at all to be esteemed as
Prodigies) I will consider them briefly apart, in manner and form following.

1. Of the Rainbow.
THe Rainbow is an apparition of many colors (Bowfashion) in a dark, The true
and proper causes of the Rainbow, acquit it from being a Prodigy.
waterish, and hollow cloud, reflected by the Sunbeams in opposition unto it,
as most Philosophers and Naturalists urge. For your Luminous Bodies do cause
bright Images and Colors at a distance, upon any clean and thin object; and
the Sun of all Bodies being the most lucid, and the water thin and clear, is
the reason why by the Suns reflection upon a waterish Cloud, a Rainbow is
begotten. And this apparition is commonly to be seen; yet never has any other
signification but of Rain, or Fair Weather: Of Rain, because it cannot appear
but in a waterish Cloud, which is so prepared, that it is ready to fall into
drops. Of Fair Weather, because when the Sunbeams are strong, and the heat is
grown so great, that the moisture of the Cloud is thereby dried up, and the
drops attenuated into thin Air. These are not only naturally the common
significations, but the natural significations of Rainbows. Other
significations hereof, (besides that which Divines urge, as, That it is a sign
of the Covenant between God and his people; whence, say they, it has its Name,
and is called Iris, from (...), which in Latin is Dico, signifying, I say,
declare, or publish; as if God intended by this sign never to drown the world
again) I am I acknowledge fully ignorant of, and would be glad of further
information hereof, and satisfaction herein from any man.

2. Of many Suns seen at once.
NOr is it miraculous and prodigious for more Suns then one to appear
(seemingly) at one time. Mock-Suns not miraculous or prodigious.
For when a smooth Watery Cloud of equal thickness is placed on either side of
the Sun, there will be an appearance of three Suns, whereas in truth there is
but one; and the other two are only (...), or as Peucer calls them, Solis
imagines, the images or shadows of the true Sun, caused only by reflection or
refraction of the Sun upon the cloud on either side: and if at any time there
be more pieces of such a cloud then one, set at a convenient distance on either
side, then may there be many Suns seen to appear. These being the proper causes
of the Parelii, or Mock-Suns, I cannot see any reason why they should (when
they do appear) have any more signification then other common clouds, who
always loose their significations with their disappearing.

3. Of the (...), or many Moons.
HAving before treated of the Parelii, Mock-Moons common, and not supernatural.
or Mock-Suns, it is not very difficult for any ordinary capacity without
further instruction to arrive at the knowledge of the causes of the
Paraselenae: for they are Lunae Imagines, or certain Images or shadows of the
Moon, represented in an equal cloud, which is watery, smooth and polished, even
like Glass. And that the Mock-Moons have some signification of the Weather, no
Naturalist (as I know of) denies: but not one of them, as I can find,
assigns any other effects unto them at all. I do not hold it impossible for
such things as these to appear either at or before some eminent Catastrophe on
earth; but should I make them the signs or causes of such a Catastrophe, I
must prove them always to be attended with such effects; and that surely is
impossible for the wisest of Mortals to perform.

4. Of the Hyatus*
THis Hyatus is a Meteor that is to be seen in any hot Evening, Gapings or
chaps in the Clouds almost every hot Evening to be seen.
as it were to rend the clouds; whence it is called Chasma, (...), (i. e.) to
gape or open. And of these gapings or chaps in the clouds, there are several
sorts; some whereof are wide and large, of various colors; others round, and
as it were deep holes; as my self have often observed. The first are caused by
the light its being cast into a shadowy cloud, according as it exceeds more
or less in thickness* whence some appear (though in the middle of the Night) of
a bright white, almost like to the Day; this is when the Exhalation of which it
consists is very thin. Some are yellowish, when the Exhalation is thicker. And
some again are ruddy, when the Exhalation is meanly thick. And some are very
black, when the Exhalation is thickest of all. and when this Meteor appears
so wide, that, ad visum, it seems to cleave the Heavens asunder; then is the
Exhalation of which it is made, very thick in the midst, and thin on the
edges, so that the Light being received into it, causes it to appear as though
the Sky did rend, and fire break out of it. Secondly, these Meteors appearing
round, or like unto deep holes in the Heavens, differ nothing at all from those
wide gapings, but that they are less; and therefore seem as if they were
certain deep Pits or Holes in the Heavens, and not at all rending or gaping
like to the other.

The Natural causes of these things being thus shown, can it be less then
Madness, or manifest Villainy in any, that shall seem to conclude from these, or
suchlike Apparitions, That Wars, Seditions, Tumults, Change of Government,
etc. shall succeed? -- When as we know by assiduous experience, that (almost)
every hot Evening produces such miraculous (what shall I call them?) Nothings:
[For so they are (you see) in signification, though some overheated, and other
malicious heads, would make them of some signal consequence;] and that
necessarily from the Causa Materialis, of which these Meteors are formed.

5. Of the drying up of Rivers.
AMong newfound Prodigies, The abatement or drying up of Rivers, Natural. The
several Causes thereof.
this to be sure is none, That Rivers are caused by the assembling or meeting
together not only of many Springs, but of Brooks and Fords: which being
received in diverse places as they pass, are at length for the most part carried
into the Sea. But some Rivers there are, which disappearing, seem to be
swallowed up of the earth; but probably into the Sea, by some secret and
unknown Channels. Some Rivers again there be, that hide their heads under the
earth, and in another place far distant break out again. But that the
exsiccation or drying up of a River for a time, or for ever, can be of any evil
signification or tendencie unto that Kingdom or Nation where it shall happen,
(beyond the loss of the water) no Philosopher, or learned Naturalist ever yet
urged. Nevertheless here in England a great Pretender to the mysteries of
Nature, in his Book Anno 1662. writes, -- The drying up of the River Darwent
near the Town of Derby, for some certain hours, is no less then a Wonder, etc.
-- In answer, or in opposition rather, to which, I assert, That that only is
to be esteemed wonderful and prodigious, of which no Natural reason is to be
rendered, or for which no cause can be found. But we by experience know, it is
natural for Rivers to abate, and to increase. -- They then abate or grow less,
when the terrene parts at the bottom are of an exsiccating nature; as it is
often seen in those Rivers, whose bottoms are of a sandy quality, and
themselves sed by Springs descending from Hills somewhat remote from them. This
very commonly happens in a hard Winter, which probably may be caused by the
Frost binding up the mouth of the Spring that feeds it, and not suffering it to
perform its natural Office to the River, unto which it is designed. -- They
then increase, when from diverse certain Ebullitions or Boylings at the bottom,
constant Excitations of the water are made, (for there are Springs most
certainly below or under, as well as above, or without the River, unto which it
is beholding) or from a constant and neverfailing supply, from the visible
Spring that feeds it. Ergo, neither way prodigious or miraculous.

What would the Reporter of this insignificant story of the River Darwent have
wrote, had he had a certain River in Palestina for his subject, De bello Judaic.
which (as Josephus reports) keeps a violent swift course for six days space
together, and always on the seventh day remains dry? Lib. 7* c. 24
whenas an abatement of this River for some few hours, has so far dissetled
his fancy, that nothing but a Miracle must set him right again. Nor does his
urging the story of the River Ouse in Bedfordshire, (ceasing its course
suddenly, and standing still Anno 1399. so that men passed three miles on foot
in the very depth of the Chanel) any way favor or support his idle
insnuations; Brit. Bac. page 85.
since (as Dr. Childrey soberly, and with good ground supposes) the cause
thereof might be some sudden Frost (the time of the year being seasonable for
it) which might congeal those waters that fed the stream at their first issuing
out of the earth, at the head of the River; the rest of the waters in the mean
time passing away, because being in motion, they were not so capable of
congelation. Notwithstanding the story mentions not a word of the Frost, which
peradventure might be the cause of it for all that: the custom of those that
tell such strange stories, being prudently to conceal those particulars that
are likely to bewray the natural cause, and spoil the miracle; it being as
natural to the generality of humane Creatures to love being the Authors of
wonderful stories, as to laugh. And so I conclude the third Section.

Section 4.
Some Reflections upon Doomsday, or the End of the World.
LEt not the Reader expect that I shall trouble my self much about the
Etymology of the word Doomsday; let it suffice that we know it is that Day in
which each man shall receive his sentence or Doom according to merit. In the
time of William the Conqueror, there was a Book made, and kept in the Tower of
London, wherein all the ancient Demean Lands of this Nation are Registered,
called, Dooms-Day-Book; because upon any difference, the parties contending
thereby received their Doom. Others call it Doomsday, Quasi domus Dei. But
thus much of the Word, now to the Thing.

As the Beginning of the World has puzzled the wisest Intellects to discover,
so the End of it has posed the greatest Clerks to determine. Generatio una
abit, and altera advenit; quamvis terra in seculum permaneat: One Generation
passes away, another comes; but the earth abides for ever, Eccles. 1. 4.
Which [for ever,] most Divines interpret to signify the Last day, or
Doomsday, viz. that time, in which the Heavens shall melt with fervent heat,
and the Earth shall pass away, or be changed.

That the World shall have an end, (and this as certain as ever it had a
beginning) is a truth so splendid, that it cannot reasonably be questioned; no,
not by the subtilest Critique, or Sceptique therein. But to believe every
fancy, or idle Notion, that the Melancholy heads either of former Ages, or of
our own time, have broached concerning the end thereof, would be in an
ingenious Person an absurdity of the grossest kind. Philosophy teaches us,
whatsoever has a birth, passes and hastes toward death; and that every
thing that has a beginning, does necessarily and interchangeably roll toward
its end. And if any man should show himself so grand an Infidel, as not to
believe this; let him but call to his mind the Annual and Quotidian Examples
hereof in all things Sublunary, (which are as so many certain Demonstrations in
Epitomy of the end of the World) and he must necessarily be convinced.
Nevertheless, to determine the end of the world, is (I take it for granted)
such a Determination as will never give the Author cause to boast of a
judicious Brain.

There are three manner of ways by which I find Persons too apt and busy in
prefixing the time of the end of the world.

1. By Apparitions, Visions, etc. 2. By Mathematical Conclusions. 3. By
Arithmetical Conceits.
1. Apparitions and Visions not to be credited so far, as by them to assign
the particular time of the end of the world.
By Apparitions, etc. When persons by reason of an overheated Brain and
Imagination, shall conceive and believe they converse with Angels or Spirits,
etc. As it is reported of one Thoda, a certain Woman of Suevia in Germany, Anno
Christi 848. who prophesyed the Destruction of the world in that year, and her
Message she pretended to have received from the mouth of an Angel. After whom
in several years, we have had diverse others, as certain and true Prophets and
Prophetesses as her self. Story makes mention of one of S. Gallus in Helvetia,
Anno 1526. who running up and down the streets of that City, cried with great
earnestness, That the day of the Lord was come, and that it was at present. And
Anno 1530. one in Germany, pretending to be acted by the Spirit, raves at the
same rate; and at last so strongly prevails with many, to believe that the end
of the World was come, that they grew prodigal of their Goods and Substance,
fearing they should want time to consume them.

And it is still fresh in memory, that in our late times of confusion, here in
London, many Ministers of the Gospel, as Saltmarsh, Sedgwick, etc. (and from
their examples, many illiterate men and women) were constantly from the years
1647. to 1656. canting, -- That the end of the World was come, and that the day
of the Lord was at hand: Which persons we see have been no less mistaken then
the former. Enthusiastic and direct Madness did so extremely rage and reign in
those years, (and a spice thereof we yet have in these) and the end of the
World was supposed and talked of, to be so near, That many People (upon my
knowledge I speak it) sold their Estates, and threw Moneys about the streets,
(expecting themselves to find the same Quarter as Solomon's Lily) but
afterward turned Beggars, and were glad to live on the Alms of others.

Some there were again, that they might be the more noted for their Message and
Embassy, and to demonstrate themselves the more eminent Converts unto this
great Delusion, would wear Sackcloth, and shave their crowns, that thereby they
might the more aptly ape and imitate the true Prophets formerly sent of God.
Others would wear Papers in different shapes and figures upon their Breasts and
Backs, England has had more Madmen and Enthusiasts within this 20 years, then
all Europe, if not the whole world besides.
with idle Inscriptions thereon, pretending to come before as a Guard for the
approach of the King of Heaven, whom they said was coming. But these Madmen
remember not that the Scripture says, He shall come like a thief in the night.
And others there were, that ran naked not only about the streets, but into
Churches, denouncing destruction to the Preachers, and to Mankind in general,
and a sudden end to the world. Which wild and unheard of Actions, etc. moved
Doctor Boreman in his Nuntius Propheticus to say, -- That there sprang up more
Heresies and strange Opinions in England in one year, then in an Age in any
other part of the world there did before.

Secondly, Mathematical Conclusions, no sure ground whereon to build our
Conjectures of the worlds ending.
by Mathematical Conclusions. For sundry are and have been the Opinions of
Mathematicians and Astrologers about the end of the World, viz. As that it
should suffer a total and absolute Destruction and Dissolution at the finishing
the great year, or Circle; and this is at the least 36000 Solar Revolutions, or
common Years: so slow is the Motion of the eighth Sphere. Nay, Heraclitus (as
Plutarch witnesses) says, it consists of 80000 Solar years. But if we shall
give credit to the (incredible indeed) vast number of years of the Chinesses,
we shall find that the world, according to this way of reckoning, should have
had ere now many endings. For (says Scaliger) according to their (the
Chinesses) account, this year of Christ 1594. (it being the year in which he
wrote his Book, entitled, De emendatione temporum) is, since the Creation,
eight hundred eightscore thousand and seventy three. And Diodorus tells us, the
world was so ancient in the opinion of the Caldaeans, that they reckoned it
from the time they first began to observe the Stars, unto the expedition of
Alexander into Asia, no less then four hundred and seventy thousand years;
supposing the beginning thereof to be long before they began their Observation.

But these Opinions may reasonably be supposed to be as wide of Truth, as the
others fall short of it. I only urge them to show the impossibility of their
designs, who will needs have the time of the worlds ending concluded by such a
reasonless conceit: As if the Almighty because he has tied all the works of
his hands to act and perform his pleasure, by a certain Rule, the which they
cannot transgress, (I speak here only of natural things) should therefore be
tied unto a Rule himself. Others there are, who suppose when the Polar Star
touches the Pole exactly, that then the end of the world shall be; and now they
say it is very near the same. But this conceit is purely Contra-Astronomical,
and therefore vain and idle. For unless it were possible for the Fixed Stars to
alter their Latitude as they do their Longitude and Declination, which as
Astronomy teaches is impossible for them to do, this opinion cannot have so
much as the shadow of truth to countenance it.

Regiomontanus an eminent Astrologer, prescinding from his Rules, (as a Learned
Divine of our Dr. Swan.
Nation observes of him) unhappily fell into this melancholy error, and
supposed the year 1588. should have put a period to the whole Fabric and Frame
of Nature, because (says he) that year there was a great Conjunction of
Saturn, Jupiter and Mars. But here by the way I must acquaint the world, that
either this learned Author was mistaken in reading Regiomontanus, (for I have
not his Predictions for that year, neither could I ever get them) or else
Regiomontanus was much more erroneous then he reports him. For in that year
there was no such great Conjunction as he mentions: for Saturn and Jupiter
were in Quartile in a manner all the year round. It is true, there was that
year a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Taurus, the 28 of April; but such a
Conjunction happens every two years, and in the same Sign once in thirty years
constantly. But the end of the world is a Question of so curious a nature, that
it even mooketh not only the Prophecies and Presages of Melancholy heads, but
many times the serious Predictions of the most Learned.

Thirdly, Arithmetical Conceits not sufficient to discover the end of the world
by.
by Arithmetical Conceits. And that is by picking out certain Numeral Letters
out of Sentences, and applying them to such and such years, which their number
shall seem to agree with. As for instance: One there was, who to make the year
1532. the dangerous year, or the year in which the world should be dissolved,
collects the same out of these words, VIDebVnt In qVeM pVpVgerVnt, the Numeral
Letters in which make up 1532. exactly. Another would have had the world to
have ended in 1645. from such a like fancy, by reason of the Numeral Letters
in these words, aDVentVs DoMInI; which signifies the coming of the Lord; which
words make 2012. But now although these words afford more Numerals then makes
up the former sum, Viz. 2012.
yet the Author hereof was so ingenious, that he could easily bring the
Mountain to Mahomet, and make things exactly to agree; and to this purpose out
of 2012. substracts the Numerals in these words, Dles abbreVIabVntVr, [the days
shall be shortened,] viz. 517. and then there remains 1495. unto which he adds
as many Numerals as are to be found in the words Propter eLeCtos, [for the
elects sake] which is 150. and that produces you the exact number 1645. Now,
although this conceit were witty, and bespeaks a nimble fancy in the Author
thereof, yet we see that the World has outgrown the danger inculcated hereby
many years, and is yet likely to continue safe.

Another I have read of, that would have had the world to have ended Anno 1657.
because of the Numerals in Conf LagratIo MVnDI, (which signifies the burning of
the world) that make up precisely that number of years. And many there were (to
my knowledge I speak it) of great Learning, and very sober Judgments, that
began to be persuaded into an opinion of the dissolution of the world in that
year; not only for the Chronograms sake, (which is not so fit and apposite for
the purpose as by many supposed) but for another reason, viz. because as some
opinion, that as the Universal Deluge happened Anno Mundi 1657. so in the year
of Christ 1657. shall happen the Universal Conflagration. And in the year 1657.
was this Doctrine both from the Press and Pulpit eminently enforced, and that
from the words of our blessed Savior, Mat. 24. 37. Sicut autem erant dies Noe,
it a erit and adventus Filii hominis.

But these fancies and conceits are too light and Aerie to gain a general
credit, and accordingly were not long believed: for anno mundi 1657. and anno
Christi 1657. likewise, are only brought in to father what the Chronogram
inculcates, and to make the pretended Prophecy the more evident and famous.
Whereas it plainly appears by Chronology, compared with Scripture, that the
world was 1656 years old when first the Flood came upon it; and so (but for the
Chronograms sake) it should have been anno Christi 1656. not 1657. in which the
Conflagration should have happened. But that year being now six Solar
Revolutions past us, has sufficiently evinced unto us the folly of the
Chronogram, and indeed the vanity as well as great uncertainty of all Numerical
Doctrine.

Concerning the end of the World, the Turks hold very ridiculous and reasonless
opinions, as, That at the winding of a Horn, not all flesh only, but the
Angels themselves shall die: That the earth (with an earthquake) shall be
kneaded together like a lump of dough: That a second blast of the same Horn
shall after forty days restore all again: That Cain shall be the Captain or
Ringleader of the damned, who shall have the countenance of Dogs and Swine:
That they shall pass over the Bridge of Justice laden with their Sins in
Satchels: That the great Sinners shall fall into Hell, the lesser into
Purgatory only. With many other vain and idle fopperies needless to be
repeated here, seeing the Alcoran it self is commonly to be had in the English
Tongue.

Now although these opinions of the Turks are idle, reasonless, and
inconsiderate, yet I do not find that they are all out so mad and Fanatical,
as to assign the particular time of the worlds dissolution, as our European
Enthusiasts are (almost) constantly adventuring at.

To conclude: If men will yet give credit to the Opinions of Melancholy heads,
concerning the worlds ending, which we see still has failed, as often as
presaged; I shall leave them to the misery of their own merits, viz. in stead
of Truth, to hug and embrace a Lie. And if we shall rigidly adhere to the
literal sense of Sacred Writ, (In relation to the matter in question) which
tells us, -- before the end of the world there shall be wars, and rumors of
wars, etc. (as one learnedly observes) it will be very difficult for us, truly,
to term these, or any other, the Last Days; since all times from the beginning
have been acquainted with such reports: And yet the World (as Doctor Hackwel
prudently observes) is not grown old, nor does Nature suffer any real decay,
or abatement.

It Is the Form only, not the Essence of things that cease to continue.

Something touching the Turk's invading the Empire of Germany, and what may
probably be the Success thereof.
DIfferent are the opinions among Astrologers of the Ascendents of Countries in
general, as well as of the Empire of Turkey in particular. Some would have the
Ascendent of Turkey to be the Regal Sign Leo, the great dignity of the Sun, by
reason of the Majesty, Height and Grandeur of that people. Others would have it
to be Scorpio, the Dignities of the Fiery and Warlike Planet Mars, in that they
are a Nation so apt unto War, and so covetous of Victory, that in comparison
thereof, they value not the loss of thousands of their subjects.

This I am sure of, the Doctrine of Ascendents is the meanliest studied of all
the parts in Astrology: we therefore should not too rigidly adhere to the one,
nor yet too nimbly reject the other. It is probable that both in some sense may
be true. For, although I shall grant that it is impossible for both of them to
be their true Horoscope, yet they may be concerned in both, viz. by having one
for their Ascendent, the other for the place of their Sun or Moon.

For some reasons, I am partly inclined to believe Spineu^, who in his
Catastrophe Mundi, affirms positively, That the Turks have Scorpio for their
Ascendent. For by consulting History I find that in the year 1602. the Turks
were exceedingly worsted, and lost not only Alba Regalis, but 60000 of his
Men. Now, that year, and a year almost before and after, the envious Planet
Saturn was in the sign Scorpio, and in the month September made a Conjunction
with Mars there; which Transit and Conjunction had (in an Astrological sense)
most remarkable and admirable signification of the same, as all persons versed
in the Sydereal Science must readily acknowledge.

And in the year 1618. (when Ottoman the second (who succeeded his Uncle
Mustapha) was unsuccessful in his war against Poland, and was therefore slain
by his Janissaries) there happened in May that year a Conjunction of Saturn and
Mars in Taurus, the opposite Sign to Scorpio; and Saturn was transiting Taurus
long before and after, vitiating Scorpio (and consequently all under the same)
with his malignant opposite Rays. A Conjunction and Transit of every whit as
mischievous tendencie as the other. And (if I could put any Faith in the
Effects of Comets) there happened that year a Comet in Scorpio, which (if
Comets operate at all) might heighten the beforesaid Effects.

Many more Examples of this kind, I could instance in; but being only in part
satisfied, as I before declared, I dare not be so confident as to be positive
in the Ascendent of this great and numerous people. For it is a very great
question, Whether the true year of the Turks Original be known; and therefore a
greater question, Whether the Day and Hour thereof were truly taken notice of;
as we know it must be, if we would discover any thing of moment from their
proper Horoscope or Ascendent.

Howbeit, the same Spineus undertakes to tell us, That the great Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter anno 1603. should have signified the destruction of the
Empire of Mahomet, together with the change of the Aux or Absis of Saturn. For
(says he) about the year 1603. when the Aux of Saturn passes into Capricorn,
the opposite Sign to Cancer, (in the which it was at the beginning of Mahomets
Law) then shall be the end and destruction thereof. But by the word end, (says
he) we understand not a total Extirpation, but a sensible beginning of
Destruction. And he pretends to give an Astrological Demonstration thereof in
these words: -- Seeing the Faith of Mahomet is Martial and Lunar, if we will
take the lesser years of these Planets, they make up the forty Mahumetan-years,
(i. e.) twenty five of the Moon, and fifteen of Mars. Lastly, take the lesser,
greater, and mean years, and add them to the 591 year of Christ, in which year
Mahomet was born; his destruction shall begin about 1648. and if to these years
we add the Affrydary years of those Planets, his total and last Destruction
shall be about the year 1663.

Now if this pretended Demonstration were true, it would be no ill News for
Europe to hear, but of very great encouragement unto them in resisting so
potent an Adversary. But here is the unhappiness of all, this conceit of
Spineus is very liable unto exception. For if we take the greater, lesser, and
meaner years of these Planets, viz. Mars and the Moon, and add them unto the
year 591. they are so far from making up 1648. that they make not up fully
1000. See the operation.

Great Years of Mars; 66 of 108 Mean Years of Mars; 40 of 66 Least Years of
Mars; 15 of 25


Which years of themselves make but 320. and being added unto 591. make no more
then 911. so far fall they short of 1648 and Spineus of being reconciled (in
this matter) unto himself.

And then for the Affrydary years of those two Planets, he must mean their
Affrydary years either by day or night, or both; if by day alone, those amount
unto one way but 14. if by night alone, they amount unto but 16. if both, they
amount unto but 30. Now the other way, is, by considering the years they
particularly govern in man's life; as the Moon in the Affrydary years by day
governs from the 32 year to the 41. and Mars from the 64 unto the 70. And by
night the Moon governs from the first year unto the ninth year, and Mars from
the 33 unto the 39 year: but neither way will it make up 1663. This is
therefore a conceit, fit only to be ranked with the follies of Mother Shipton,
and the forgeries of the English Merlyn; and no more to be credited then the
Prophecies of the one, or Impostures of the other.

Passing therefore by all these stories as vain and erroneous, I shall come
unto a more rational ground whereon to build my probable Conjectures of the
grand Seigniors success in invading the Territories of the Germane Emperor: And
that is this: -- When the Turks began this their Invasion, (which was about
July 1663.) there happened a most cruel Opposition of the two grand Infortunes
Saturn and Mars: and certainly we may reasonably conclude, whatsoever is begun
(let it be either of the lostiest or lowest concernment) under so mischievous a
Configuration, though it may thrive and prosper, (and that to admiration for a
time) cannot be attended with a pleasant and smiling end. Beginnings are
adjudged always ominous.

Rarus Principii est exitus bonus mali.
Things ill begun, do seldom come to good.
And instances enough can I produce hereof, both of elderly as well as latter
times: however, take a few within the compass of our own memory, and in our own
Nation likewise.

And first, let it be remembered, that Anno 1640. Nov. 3. that Parliament
Surnamed the Long, began in England; and Sept. 30. that year, there happened a
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Aquarius, (whose Horoscope the Sign of the
Conjunction happened after to be) Ergo, under the effects of that Conjunction
they convened. And whether their prodigious Actions, and afterward the ends of
many of them, were not equally violent, with the effects of so cruel a
Conjunction, I leave the whole world to judge.

Anno 1648. Sept. 18. the Mock-Treaty in the Isle of Wight began: A little
before that, there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Gemini. The world
knows the pretenses of that Treaty were Serious, Loyal and Pious; they know
likewise that the intentions were like to the end of it, Dishonorable,
Mischievous, Cruel and Murtherous.

Anno 1656. there happened in September a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in
Virgo. Oliver Cromwell in that year, and under the effects thereof, did lustily
drive at the Government of these three Kingdoms; his Tyrannical Actions
therein, and the many thousands of persons he ruined, and the Murder, Perjury,
Shame and Ignominy he brought upon the Nation in general, and his own Family in
particular, etc. sufficiently prove and declare his entrance upon that
undertaking to be malicious, unfortunate and cruel.

Anno 1658. Sept. 4. Richard Cromwell began (at his fathers decease) to act (as
well as he could) his fathers part; but within five weeks after, viz. on October.
11. there was celebrated a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars; and how soon and
easily the effects thereof blew Richard away from the Government of these three
Kingdoms, is yet fresh in every man's remembrance.

Infinite examples could I give of this kind, as well in private Genitures, as
public Radixes; but these I suppose sufficient.

If then the Conjunctions of Saturn and Mars be of such malefique and cruel
signification, surely their Oppositions cannot be supposed to portend less
mischief and damage. And if so, it naturally emergeth, -- That the Turks their
invading the Empire being begun under the dangerous Influence of an Opposition
of Saturn and Mars, -- Non obstante, their being a little rampant and
victorious at the first, they may (in a little time) fall from their present
power and greatness, and be glad to retreat and return home again with
considerable loss and damage. And this I assert to be the natural effect of
this their so mighty and eminent undertaking.

Malum principium, malus finis sequitur. Some Odd Reckonings between the
Author, and that grand Impostor W. L. set even.
IN my Novice Astrologer instructed, the Spurious Prognosticator, the King of
Swedens Nativity, and in Britains Royal Star, I thought I had said so much of
W. L. at least to the satisfaction of all that knew W. L. that I had need to
have said no more of W. L. Howbeit, he is pleased to invite me to the field
again; and in point of Credit I am engaged (though not much, because he is W.
L.) to meet him.

The main matter that he seems to snarl at, and recriminate upon me for, now,
is a passage I printed in Part 3. Fol. 179. of my Collectio Geniturarum, urged
in favor of Mr. Gresham, and descrying the eminent Plagiarism of him the said
L. in a Book he published under the Title of Englands Prophetical Merlyn. My
words were these: -- Mr. Gresham wrote a learned and ingenious Discourse upon a
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, which by him was never published; but since
his Death, printed by another under the Title of Englands Prophetical Merlyn:
and that Book-Pyrate which published the same, has never so much as once named
Mr. Gresham therein; but after an usurping of his Pains, has endeavored to
obliviate his Name for ever. Of which Injustice and Plagiarism, unless I would
consent to, and wink at, I could not but give the world notice, that the Ashes
of this worthy (though much abused person) might not rise up in Judgment
against me for my silence herein.

Now although I knew that W. L. was the Man that thus had abused Mr. Gresham,
yet so charitable was I toward him, as not to mention his Name, being guided
by that known Law of Civility, which enjoins men, --

Parcere personis, dicere de vitiis. Howbeit, W. L. is pleased to spit his
venom at me to purpose, for that my respect to Mr. Greshams memory, and this
my civility toward himself: and is not contented thus nefariously to rob Mr.
Greshams Ashes of their honor, but (with a brow of brass) would fasten it upon
the belief of the world, -- That nothing in the Prophetic Merlyn was Mr.
Greshams, but all his own. And is so maliciously impudent, as to term me The
most ungrateful of men living, for offering to vindicate him who is not here to
defend himself, in a matter which L's own Conscience (if at least he have but
so much as a Sparrow has Brains, or a Pidgeon Liver) knows to be an eminent
Truth.

In return unto which, (that L. may see I am not ashamed of what I have written
in behalf of Mr. Gresham) I must tell the world, that L. is, and has shown
himself the more ungrateful of the two, for offering to bury in the Urn of
forgetfulness the Honor, Parts and Pains of him, without whose Labors, L's
Prophetic Merlyn would have looked with the same complexion and countenance as
do his Supernatural Sights, and Dreadful Dead-man: fit only for Laughter!
whereas now it is furnished with the Calculations and Figures of several
Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter. -- Yet I will not deny, but L may have set
the Figures of them: for none but such an Ignorant in Astronomy as himself,
would adventure at things impossible, as is the obtaining a Figure of such a
Conjunction.

But surely, L. will not be so impudent as to say he Calculated the Planets
places, etc. for all Astronomers know, that he is not able to perform any thing
of that nature.

And I must tell L. that his Sophistry, whereby he endeavors to prove himself
the Legitimate Author of that Work, is so idle, impertinent and sapless, that a
Schoolboy would blush to own. -- For does it follow, because King James, Lord
Finch, Campanella, Alstedius, Keplar, etc. persons not living in Mr. Greshams
time, their Names are mentioned in that Book, that therefore Mr. Gresham was
not Author of the better part of it? L. might as well argue, and as truly, that
because we find W. L. in the front of it, Mr. Gresham had no hand it; which is
a pure Non-sequitur. -- Yet I will not deny, but L. having the advantage of Mr.
Greshams pains, might add thereunto many ridiculous and idle matters, (as I am
sure he has) which Mr. Gresham (had he been alive) would have been ashamed to
own.

Well, but if it be not L's, how (may some say) do you prove it to be Mr.
Greshams? I prove it thus: -- When L. was first about to make himself public
by Astrology, viz. Anno 1643. or 1644. he applies himself to Dr. Nicholas
Fiske, my honored Friend and Tutor; (a Person (but for the necessity of this
occasion) too honorable to be mentioned in the same Page with W. L.) and from
him (as I have heard the Doctor in his lifetime often report, and that with
shaking his head at L's impudence and ignorance) he received the best part of
his Prophetical Merlyn in Manuscript. And not only so, but my self saw in the
Doctors Study, a Manuscript formerly written by Mr. Gresham, of the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter 1603. part of which I find printed in the Prophetical
Merlyn. And how easy a matter it is to invert the Judgment of one Conjunction
to another, every Artist knows.

But I need not trouble my self so far, since Mr. L. has been pleased in his
Epistle to the Prophetic Merlyn to acknowledge nearly as much himself, in
these words: -- Let me with much thank fullness acknowledge, that my ancient and
learned Friend Mr. Nicholas Fiske, has freely lent me either his Manuscripts,
or any Books in his Library, treating of this subject, with much love and
willingness; from whom since my happy acquaintance with him, I have received
plentiful enlargement of my Judgment -- It is true, his Arrogance would not
permit him to name Mr. Gresham here; yet the truth one way or other must out,
and so he acknowledges, he received Manuscripts. I assert, I saw a Manuscript
of the Conjunction abovesaid, in the Doctors hands, and that the Doctor told me
it was written by Mr. Gresham; in which Manuscript, the times of many of the
Conjunctions, and the Positions of the Planets were noted, as Mr. L. has
printed them: Ergo, Mr. L. has made use of Mr. Greshams Manuscript, whose Name
he has injuriously concealed.

Well, but says L. in the same Epistle, notwithstanding this his Confession,
-- I have not perused any Man's Notes upon this subject, or received assistance
in Judgment from any. How, Mr. L? Do you confess that you have received
Manuscripts, and assistance in Judgment, etc. and yet in the same Epistle deny
it? Can you with the Satyr in the Fable, blow hot and cold in a breath so
handsomely? and yet complain unto all Astrologers of the unkind dealings of J.
G. toward you.

I account it beneath me to complain of L's Nonsense or unworthiness, or to
tell the World he has (sine causa) complained of me. Yet I shall assume some
of his boldness to state the matter in question, from whence he pretends to
ground his grievous complaint against me; and it is thus.

My self saw (and indeed so did many of L's best Friends if they would speak)
in Doctor Fiske's hands, a Manuscript of a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
wrote by Mr. Gresham.

L. confesses to have borrowed Dr. Fiske's Manuscripts. The question then in
short is, Whether Mr. Gresham, or L. be the prime Author of that work?

Unto this, L. replies, That he is. -- I deny it, and urge L's own words
against L. to strengthen my Negation, as also Dr. Fisks acknowledgement.

L. pretends to prove himself the prime Author, by his beforementioned
Sophistry. -- I reject such proof, (and so do all rational men that have read
it) as impertinent, idle, and vain. L. must therefore either prove his claim
better, or else be content to loose his Title unto Englands Prophetic Merlyn,
as being the prime Author thereof. Howbeit, as I said before, I deny not but L.
has added many things of his own unto that Work of Mr. Greshams. As to
instance, in Page 30. he has these words: --

This Conjunction flndeth (his Majesty Charles King of
England) engaged in an uncivil and unnatural War against his own subjects, the
English Nation, and in particular against the Parliament, the Representative
body of the Kingdom, against the most famous City of London, the Kingdoms
Metropolis, and almost against the whole Commonalty and Yeomanry of England. --
[Here is such Astrology, that I believe Mr. Gresham never dreamt of.] He
proceeds thus: -- His Majesty in defense of his own rights, and of the persons
of several Delinquents and Malignant Counselors, so voted by both Houses; the
Parliament stand in opposition of those Malefactors, and in defense of
themselves, Protestant Religion, Liberties of the Parliament and Subject.

And in Page 103. he has this passage: -- The Wars we now groan under, and the
infinite pressures we suffer by his Majesty's averseness from his Parliament,
and City of London; the desertion of those many Lords, and untrusty Members of
the House of Commons, do all make way, and prepare matter for their own, and
Posterities confusion in the first place, and next for the utter desolation of
this Kingdom, and his Majesty's posterity. -- And a little further, he says,
-- Let the undeserving Bishop and Clergyman suffer; they only have stirred
these Tumults with the assistance of the Jesuit.

And in Page 109. he says, -- Tyranny in Religion first broke the neck of an
insulting Episcopacy.

These (with many more) of L's Predictions, (if so he will have them called) I
believe Mr. Gresham knew nothing of; neither would any Man, but a
State-Parasite, have so heightened, and encouraged Rebellion under pretense of
Astrology.

And in Page 35. I find also some Astrological Ignorance, which I dare be
confident was L's own, and not Mr. Greshams. -- There he gives us the motion in
Longitude of the Comet in 1618. and gives us its daily motion besides, in a
Column by it self, most strangely different from its motion in Longitude: which
how he will reconcile, for my part I understand not. Cum multis aliis, quae
nunc perscribere longum est.

Thus have I fully proved what in my Collectio Geniturarum I asserted in the
behalf of Truth and Honor of Mr. Gresham. And to be quit with L. in every
matter as near as I can, for his Oportet Mendacem esse memorem -- I return him
the Rule in the Civil Law, Qui semel verecundia fines transicrit, cum been and
gnaviter impudentem esse oporter.
-- Mendax semel, mendax semper praesumitur. For L. having once transgressed
the bounds of Truth, it behooves him, he thinks, now to grow impudent to
purpose, and rail at large at those that shall publish his playing the
Plagiary.

But why should Mr. L. be so extremely angry at me for my taxing him with
pilfering from Mr. Gresham, and concealing his Name? Since this is not the
only piece of Plagiarism that he has been guilty of, in his Writings. As for
instance: In his Annus Tenebrosus, Page 60. etc. he prints Forty Astrological
Aphorisms, as his own, but he has stolen them out of Astrologia Aphoristica,
Fol. 295. and onward.

And for the greater part of his Christian Astrology, my self saw in
Manuscript in the hands of the beforementioned Dr. Fiske, which by the Doctor
was translated from Haly, de judiciis Astrorum, as many of L's best Friends
know also to be true; and yet has he been so impudent therein, as to print in
Page 830. of that his Book, That he has not advised with any man living in any
thing comprehended in that Work.

What thinks Mr. L. now? Does not he better deserve to consult the Proverb,
Oportet Mendacem, etc. then J. G. against whom he falsely urges it, and of whom
he so causlesly complains?

Well, but let Mr. L. play the Plagiarie still, and pilfer from whom he can;
lisp and jabber, say and unsay as fast and as often as he pleases; he judges it
wisdom it seems and honor enough to himself to rail upon my Person and
Education, and that he thinks is satisfaction sufficient from him.

Howbeit, me thinks he might readily conceive it is no hard matter for me to
retort his Scomma's. Nay, he knows in my Novice Astrologer instructed, I have
accounted with him already for his Cuckow-Notes: and since he will needs have
me to follow him, I am obliged to acquaint the world, that wherein he most
pretends to wound me, the more he honors me, viz. in taxing my Education: For
the meaner that has been, the greater has been my pains in the Study that now
I follow. And the lesser assistance any man receives, it is always presumed the
greater Industry he uses in the matter he undertakes.

For a Shoemaker to make Boots or Shoes, or a Tailor a Suit of Clothes, I
adjudge no great piece of Ingenuity, because it is their Profession so to do;
they were bred unto it: So for a Scholar to write a Book, or defend a Thesis
well, is not to be wondered at; since his Education has been to Learning: but
for either of these to take to the contrary, is certainly an Argument that
Education does not naturally concentre with Inclination; and the person that so
does, may reasonably be termed Ingenious. -- And here, by the way, were not L.
so strangely ambitious, I could be content to think him a little ingenious,
This he has 100 times confessed in my hearing: Besides, there are yet persons
living in the Strand, that knew him an Apprentice to Pawlin the Tailor.
because he has left the Trade of a Tailor, to adventure as Astrology;
although he was never able to do any thing in it but Quack. See this proved in
Captain Whartons Merlini Anglici Errata, printed 1647. as also in L's own
Nativity, calculated and published by Mr. James Blackwel, Anno 1660. But
although these Gentlemen have been pleased to pronounce and prove him a Tailor,
I suppose they do it by the same Figure as a Pedlar is termed a Merchant, and
not otherwise: for I am apt to believe he was as bad at the Trade of a Tailor,
as at the Profession of an Astrologer: -- A very Botcher at both.

Yea, but says Mr. L. J. G. is not only an Ungrateful Person, but the most
Ungrateful of men living.

Mr. L. should have done well to have told me for what: for four years since he
exhibited this charge against me, See more of this in my Britains Royal Star,
from pa. 29. 10 page 34.
for which I questioned him before Mr. E. Carrent, (now Adjutant-General of the
honorable City of London) before whom he did not only deny the Expression,
and called a Learned Minister False Scot, for telling me of it, but pronounced
me to him, The most Grateful Person living.

And I am sure I have had no Dealings with Mr. L. since; no, not so much as to
drink a Glass of Wine. But let him rail on; I have more then the
acknowledgement of so envious a Fellow, (who I perceive abhors to hear I live)
to acquit me from so soul a Crime as Ingratitude. And I am the less troubled at
his Scandals, because I know -- Contra Sycophant^ morsum non est remedium:
There is no remedy to be had against the venomous Tongues and Teeth of
Sycophants; who make it their main Business, -- Calumniare fortiter, to tax and
traduce stoutly, in hopes that with some, their words may beget credit.

But cui fini? To what purpose trouble I my self thus far with so known an
Impostor, from whom I must be content to accept of Railings and Revilings for
Reason, and Personal Reflections and Scandals for the proof of the matter in
question? -- But this is the best on it, he has served all others that have
touched his Copyhold with the same sauce; so that I am not singular in
partaking of his Scurrility. As for instance, -- Captain G. Wharton he terms
Asinego, Vagadond, Irish Wolf, Obsoure Footman, neither Booted or Gowned: with
many suchlike terms of Opprobry and Contumely. And in stead of soberly
answering Mr. Gataker, he calls him, Thomas Wiseacre, Covetous Churl, A stiff
Prelate, Preaching impudently for the liberties or sports of the Sabbath, viz.
Cards, Dice, etc. -- This is the curious Logique that Wise W. L. makes use of
against all that oppose his Ignorance, or discover his grand Juggling and
Plagiarism. And possibly for my present dealing with his Filth, as well as for
my former, I may again have my Reputation defiled by his scandalous Viperous
Pen. But this I assure him, That if he shall endeavor to support (by
Calumniations and Forgeries) the Untruths that I have here and elsewhere proved
him guilty of, I shall scorn hereafter to intermeddle with so shameless a
Person, but rather for answer do homage to Harpocrates, and by silence give him
my suffrage for the Whetstone. Howbeit, if he shall Rationally, and not
Railingly, endeavor to defend himself from the Errors I have charged on him,
I promise him soberly to rejoyn, for the satisfaction of all those that have
taken notice of the difference between him and my self.

FINIS.
Advertisements of several Books published by the Author of this Treatise.
AStronomical Tables of the Fixed Stars in the Heavens, made to continue fifty
years yet to come. Useful for Astronomers, Astrologers, Physicians, Navigators,
etc. Printed for the Company of Stationers. Large Quarto.

The Doctrine of Nativities, Revolutions, etc. both Calculative and Judiciary,
in three Parts. Sold by the Booksellers of London. Folio.

The Collection of Genitures, both Princely, Prelatical, Causidical, Physical,
Mercatorial, of short Life, Twins, etc. With an hundred Aphorisms pertaining to
Nativities. Sold by Mr. Sawbridge at the Bible on Ludgate Hill. Folio.

The Nativity of our late dread Sovereign King Charles 1. being occasionally a
brief History of the late unhappy Wars. Sold by Mr. Sawbridge on Ludgate Hill.
Octavo.

Britains Royal Star. Sold by S. Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet. Quarto.

Coelest is Legatus, or the Celestial Ambassador. Sold by the Booksellers in
London. Quarto.

Natura Prodigiorum, or a Discourse touching the Nature of Prodigies; with an
Appendix touching Sigils, Lamens, Spirits, Prophecies, the Crystal, etc.
Octavo.

The Novice Astrologer instructed. Octavo.

Nuncius Astrologicus: or, an Astrological Decision of the the great
Controversy between the Kings of Denmark and Sweden. Octavo. All three sold by
F. Cossinet at the Anchor and Mariner in Tower-street.

The King of Swedens Nativity. Quarto. Sold by the Booksellers of London.

Tutela Sanitatis, sive Vita protracta: The Protection of Long Life, and
Detection of its brevity, from Diatetic Causes and Customs. Hygiastic
Precautions and Rules, appropriate to the constitutions of Bodies, and various
discrasies or passions of Mind; with a Treatise of Fontinels or Issues. By
Everard Maynwaring, Dr. in Physic. Sold by T. Basset under St. Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet, London.


