A GLORIOUS VICTORY OBTAINED BY SIR WILLIAM WALLER, and Sir WILLIAM BALFOURE,
against the Lord Hoptons Forces, near Alsford, on Friday last March 29.

BEING An exact Relation of the whole manner of the fight, which continued
from eight of the Clock the same morning till, six at night, wherein the Lord
Hoptons, Forces were routed, with the taking of all their Ordinance and
Ammunition, Bag, and Baggage, and his Army, put to flight: The Lord John
(brother to the Duke of Lenox) the Earl of Forth, General of his Majesty's
foot-forces, the Lord Ruthven, and diverse other eminent persons slain.

With the names of several Commanders, and Officers of note, which were then
taken prisoners.

Sent in a Letter from an Intelligent Officer in the Army to his friend in
London.

with a true Coppie of the thanksgiving for the same, appointed to be read in
all Churches about London on the Lords day, March 31.

Printed according to Order.

April 1. Printed for Thomas Bates, and are to be sold in the Old Baily, Anno
Dom. 1644.

A glorious victory obtained by Sir WILLIAM WALLER, and Sir WILLIAM BELFOUR,
against the Lord Hoptons Forces near Alsford, on Friday last, March 29.
HAving so fit an opportunity to tender my respects unto you, I should have
been very ungreatefull, if I had omitted it, besides the great m^rcy of God in
prospering the proceedings, and giving success unto our Armies, could not but
be pressing motives to engage me to acquaint your self and the rest of my good
friends (to whom I desire you to show this Letter) of his gracious dealings
toward us. On Monday last, March 25. we were drwan forth from a Town called
Traford, into a heath appointed by Sir William Waller for the meeting of all
his forces, where we appeared a considerable army of above 10000. horse and
foot; Major General Brown with the London Regiments were designed to quarter
that night at Westmeane, whereupon our Quartermaster advanced thither with a
party of horse, beat the enemy out of the Town, took the Officer that
commanded the enemies forces, and some common soldiers prisoners, besides a
good booty.

On Tuesday, March 26. part of one of our Troops under Captain Bosvile
commanded by his Cornet, advanced within half a mile of the ford where the
Enemy quartered, and took away two fat Beeves, diverse Swine, Calves, and other
provisions ready dressed, and carrying to the enemy, with an horse loaded with
other provision, and brought them to us. The same day also, five of Sir
William VValler's horse which were scouting forth, chased 16 (...) the enemy,
and took three of them prisoners: Such a spiri(...) fear had the Lord put
into the enemy, according to that prom^^^ of his, Deuteronomy. 28. 7. Wednesday and
Thursday nights, we lay (...) the open field, about three miles from Alsford,
where the ene^^ kept a garrison. The day we marched from VVestmeane, th^^ faced
us all the way in our march with a great body of theirs, a^ we quartered within
a mile of each other on Wednesday night. (...) Thursday, March 28. we
skirmished all day long with several p^^ties, wherein we slew diverse of the
enemy, and took some prisone^^

This morning, Friday March 29. we drew forth into the fiel^ the London
Regiments, viz. The white and yellow Regiments w^^^ first drawn forth against
the enemies forelorne hope, which w^^ about eight of the clock, who came off
bravely at last, thoug^ at first they were put to some straight, and a Captain
of our Foroc^^ missing; Then Sir William Belfour came in to our aid with fou^e
thousand horse about one of the clock in the afternoon: After which the
maine bodies were engaged, and had a sharp bickerin^ it was a great while
doubtful to which side the victory would ha^pen; But at length (through the
assistance of the Almighty) o^ Forces caused the enemy to retreat, and routed
them with small loss on our side. We took in the fight above an hundredth
prisoner^, with all their Ordinance, Ammunition, Bag and Baggage (the names
of the most eminent whereof I have hereafter expressed besides those which were
taken in the chase (whereof I have not yet intelligence) we pursued them, and
had the slaughter of them for five or six miles, continuing our pursuit till
after six that night, their Body of Foot dispersed four or five several
ways, we hope not to be rellied again possibly.

We are assured by a Captain of theirs, now in hold, that the Lord John
(brother to the Duke of Lonox) is slain, and was carried off in a Coach, and
buried here at Alsford: And I hear also by good hands, that the Earl of Forth
General of his Majesty's forces w^^^ also slain in this encounter; and that
not a Captain of the Lord Hopt. forces, but are either taken, wounded, slain,
I cannot as yet tell the certain number that are wounded, or were slain, and
therefore I will not trouble you with uncertainties, yet I viewed the Field,
which was full of dead bodies, besides what most needs be slain in the pursuit,
which as yet we have no certain intelligence of: In their flight they set fire
on diverse houses in Alsford; and intended to have fired the whole Town, had we
not prevented them: They cried out as they ran away* The kingdom is lost, and
the truth is, God was seen most miraculously in the carriage of this action,
especially toward the conclusion thereof. Our Commanders carried themselves
with an undaunted resolution and courage during the fight, and amongst the
rest, our ever honored General Sir William Waller, and the renowned Major
Brown, engaged themselves all the time both with the Horse and foot, using
many incuragements to animate the Soldiers. In all the fight we lost not that
we know of above twenty men, and I hear Sergeant Major Thomson had his leg shot
off, whereof he is not likely to recover, and some 20 prisoners at most, and
but few wounded: The Enemy had the greatest strength they could make in the
Field, having drawn forth most of their Garrisons from Banbury, Oxford,
Wallingford, and Abington, which adds much to the glory of the Victory.

We intend to march the morrow morning for Winchester, resolving to clear
the way forth with, in pursuit of the enemy. The Lord Hopton himself we
hear is fled to Basing house, and the rest is dispersed to Salisbury and other
places. Let God alone have all the glory of this, and all others successes
which he vouchsafes unto his people against the implacable enemies of his
Truth, and let us say with David Blessed be God who has taught our hands to
war, and our fingers to fight, Sir I have nothing else to inform you at
present, but rest.

Alsford, Friday night. March 29. Yours to command, H. T.

A CATALOGVE OF THE PRISONERS taken at the battle, near Alsford on Friday Mar.
29. 1644.
Sir Edward Stowell Colonel of Horse and Foot.
Colonel Bear, Lieutenant Coll. Kingston. Captain Price. Captain Chidleigh.
Captain Blackston. Captain Seymour. Captain Catesby. Ensign Cooper. Lieutenant
Kite. Ensign Melos. Ensign Marsh. Ensign Medley. Cornet Constable Cornet
Ducket. John Morley Physician,
BY THE MAYOR To every Minister within the City of London, Liberties, Line of
Communication, and Bills of Mortality.
THe extraordinary blessing of God upon the Forces under the command of Sir
William Waller, and Sir William Belfour against the Army, led by Sir Ralph
Hopton, for the destruction of the Parliament, this City and kingdom, in a
battle near Winchester, yesterday being Friday being the 29 of March instant,
which continued from 8 a clock in the morning until night, wherein the enemy
was obsolutly routed, and pursued many miles with good execution, being
signified unto me by the most Honorable Committee of both kingdoms, requires a
more solmne thankesgiving then upon so short warning can be performed;
especially consideting that this mercy has beyond expectation cast in from
heaven into our bosoms so soon after a long Fasting and Humiliation, after the
sad blow about Newark; I do heartily (according to the order of the said
Committee of both Kindomes) desire and require you to morrow being the Lords
Day, to give notice of this goodness to your Congregation, using your best
endeavors to quicken them to the highest pitch of thankfulness to the God of
our mercies, and to engage their hearts and hands yet further, To help the Lord
against the Mighty, with their prayers and all others, helps of Money, Arms,
Horse, men, and other provisions for the instant, making up and supplying of a
body of horse and foot to go out and follow the enemy, to prevent the rallying
of his men, or raising of new* Forc^ to do further mischief* that God may give
a speedy end to the p^sent Calamities, and restore a stable peace in this
aflicted Nation to the comfort of all Gods people in all the kingdoms.

And what God shall move the hearts of men to subscribe and c^^bute, or what
men they shall send out or mentaine, to this most ^^cessary service, not only
my self, but the Committee of the Militi^ do make it your joint request that
you, with some others well affe^ ed, would set down in writting and return
upon Monday morni next without fail, to the Committee of the Militia at
Gild-Hal

Dated the 30. of March, Anno Dom. 1644. John VValaston, Major.

FINIS.
A GLORIOUS VICTORY, OBTAINED By Sir WILLIAM WALLER, and Sir WILLIAM
BALFOURE, against the Lord Hoptons forces, near Alsford, on Friday last March
29.

BEING An exact Relation of the whole manner of the fight, which continued from
eight of the Clock the same morning, till six at night, wherein the Lord
Hoptons forces were routed, with the taking of all their Ordinance and
Ammunition, Bag, and Baggage, and his Army put to flight: The Lord John
(brother to the Duke of Lenox) the Earl of FORTH, General of his Majesty's
foot-forces, the Lord RUTHEN, and diverse other eminent persons slain.

With the names of several Commanders and Officers of note which were then
taken prisoners* Sent in a Letter from an Intelligent Officer in the Army to
his friend in London

With a true Coppie of the Thanksgiving for the same, appointed to be read in
all Churches about LONDON on the Lords day. MARCH 31.

Printed according to Order.

April 1. Printed for Thomas Bates, and are to be sold in the Old Bailey. 1644.

A glorious Victory obtained by Sir William Waller, and Sir William Belfour,
against the Lord Hoptons forces near Alsford, on Friday last, March 29.
HAving so fit an opportunity to tender my respects unto you, I should have
been very ungrateful, if I had omitted it, besides the great mercy of God in
prospering the proceedings, and giving success unto our Armies, could not but
be pressing motives to engage me to acquaint your self and the rest of my good
friends (to whom I desire you to show this Letter) of his gracious dealings
toward us. On Monday last, March 25. we were drawn forth from a Town called
Traford, into a heath appointed by Sir William Waller for the meeting of all
his forces, where we appeared a considerable army of above 10000. horse and
foot; Major General Brown with the London Regiments were designed to quarter
that night at Westmeane, whereupon our Quartermaster advanced thither with a
party of horse, beat the enemy out of the Town, took the Officer that commanded
the enemies forces, and some common soldiers prisoners, besides a good booty.

On Tuesday, March 26. part of one of our Troops (under Captain Bosvile)
commanded by his Cornet, advanced within half a mile of the ford where the
Enemy quartered, and took away 2 fat Beeves, diverse Swine, Calves, and other
provisions ready dressed, and carrying to the enemy, with a horse loaded with
other provision, and brought them to us. The same day also, five of Sir
William Waller's horse which were scouting forth, chased 16. of the enemy, and
took 3. of them prisoners: such a spirit of fear had the Lord put into the
enemy, according to that promise of his, Deuteronomy. 28. 7. Wednesday and Thurday
nights, we lay in the open field, about 3 miles from Alsford, where the enemy
kept a garrison. The day we marched from VVestmeane, they faced us all the way
in our march with a great body of theirs, and we quartered within a mile of
each other on Wednesday night.

On Thursday March 28. we skirmished all day long with several partees,
wherein we slew diverse of the Enemy, and took some Prisoners.

This morning Friday March 29. we drew forth into the Field, the London
Regiments, viz. the white and yellow Regiments were first drawn forth against
the Enemies forlorn hope, which was about 8 of the clock, who came off bravely
at last* though at first they were put to some streights, and a Captain of our
Forces missing; then Sir William Belfour came into our aid with 4000. horse
about one of the clock in the afternoon; After which the maine Bodies were
engaged, and had a sharp Bickering, it was a great while doubtful to which
side the Victory would happen; But at length (through the assistance of the
Almighty) our Forces caused the Enemy to retreat, and routed them with small
loss on our side. We took in the fight above 100. Prisoners, with all their
Ordnance, Amm^ Bag and Baggage (the names of the most Eminent whereof I have
hereafter expressed) besides those which were taken in the chase (whereof I
have not yet intelligence) we pursued them, ^and had the slaughter of them for
5 or 6 miles, continuing our pursuit till after 6 that night, their Body of
Foot dispersed 4 or 5 several ways, we hope not to be rallied again
possibly. We are assured by a Captain of theirs now in hold, that the Lord John
(Brother to the Duke of Lenox) is slain, and was carried off in a coach, and
buried here at Alsford; and I hear also by good hands that the E* of Forth
General of his Majesty's Forces was also slain in this encounter; and that not
a Captain of the L. Hopt. forces but are either taken, wounded, or slain, I
cannot as yet tell the certain numb^^that were slain, and therefore I will not
trouble you with uncetainties, yet I viewed the Field, which was full of dead
bodies, besides what must needs be slain in the pursuit, which as yet we have
no certain intelligence of; In their flight they set fire on diverse houses in
Alsford, and intended to have fired the whole Town, had we not prevented them;
They cried out as they ran away, The Kingdom is lost, and the truth is, God was
seen most miraculously in the carriage of this action, especially toward the
conclusion thereof. Our Commanders carried themselves with an undaunted
resolution and courage during the fight, and amongst the rest, our ever
honored General Sir William Waller, and the renowned Major Brown, engaged
themselves all the time both with the Horse and Foot, using many encouragements
to animate the Soldiers. In all the fight we lost not, that we know of, above
twenty men, and I hear Sergeant Major Thomson had his leg shot off, whereof he
is not likely to recover, and some 20 prisoners at most, and but few wounded;
The Enemy had the greatest strength they could make in the Field, having drawn
forth most of their Garrisons from Banbury, Oxford, Wallingford, and Abington,
which adds much to the glory of the Victory.

We intend to march to morrow morning for Winchester, resolving to clear the
way forthwith in pursuit of the enemy. The Lord Hopton himself we hear is
fled to Basing house, and the rcst is dispersed to Salisbury and other places.
Let God alone have all the glory of this, and all other successes which he
vouchsafes unto his people against the implacable enemies of his Truth, and let
us say with David, Blessed be God who has taught our hands to war, and our
fingers to fight. Sir, I have nothing else to inform you at present, but rest.

Alsford, Friday night. March 29. 1644. Yours to command, H. T.

A Catalogue of the Prisoners taken at the Battle near Alsford on Friday
March 29. 1644.
Sir Edward Stowell Colonel of Horse and Foot.
Colonel Beard, Lieutenant Coll. Kingston. Capt. Price. Capt. Chidleigh. Capt.
Blackeston. Capt. Seymour. Capt. Catesby. Ensign Cooper. Lieutenant Kite.
Ensign Melos. Ensign Marsh. Ensign Medley. Cornet Constable. Cornet Ducket.
John Morley Physician.
By the Major To every Minister within the City of London, Libertyes, Line of
Communication, and Bills of Mortality.
THe extraordinary blessing of God upon the Forces under the command of Sir
William Waller, and Sir William Belfour, against the Army led by Sir Ralph
Hopton, for the, destruction of the Parliament, this City and Kingdom in a
battle near Winchester, yesterday being Friday the 29 of March instant,
which continued from 8 a clock in the morning until night, wherein the enemy
was absolutely routed, and pursued many miles with good execution, being
signified unto me by the most Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, requires
a more solemn thankesgiving then upon so short warning can be performed;
especially considering that this mercy has been beyond expectation cast in
from heaven into our bosoms so soon after a long Fasting and Humiliation, after
the sad blow about Newark; I do heartily (according to the order of the s^id
Committee of both Kingdoms) desire and require you to morrow, being the Lords
Day, to give notice of this goodness, to your Congregation, using your best
endeavors to quicken them to the highest pitch of thankfu^sse to the God of
our Mercies, and to engage their heartsand ^ands yet further, To help the Lord
against the Mighty, with their prayers and all others, helps of Money, Arms,
Horse, men, and other provisions for the instant, making up and supplying
o(...) (...)die of Horse and Foot to go out and follow the the enemy, to
prevent the rallying of his men, or raising of new Forces to do further
mischief, that God may give a speedy end to the present Calamities, and
restore a stable peace in this afflicted Nation, to the comfort of all Gods
people in all the Kingdoms.

And what God shall move the hearts of men to subscribe and contribute, or what
men they shall send out or maintain* to this most necessary service, not only
my self, but the Committee of the Militia, do make it your joint request that
you, wi^h some others well affected, would set down in writing, and return
upon Monday morning next without fail, to the Committee of the Militia at
Guild Hall.

Dated thi^ 30. of March, Anno Dom, 1644. John Wollaston, Major.

FINIS.

