London's Deliverance predicted: IN A Short Discourse Showing the Causes of
PLAGUES IN GENERAL; AND The probable time (God not contradicting the course of
second Causes) when this present PEST may abate, etc.

By JOHN GADBURY, (...).

2 Samuel 24. 25. So the Lord was entreated for the land, and the Plague was
stayed from Israel.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for E. Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle, at the
West End of St. Paul's, 1665.

To the worthily Accomplished, My singularly approved good Friend, Mr. Luke
Cropley Of St. Michaels Bassishaw London; The AUTHOR, For many Eminent (and
never to be forgotten) FAVORS, In the stead of a better acknowlegdement,
Humbly presents The following Discourse.

TO THE Friendly Reader.
ALthough many in these days, have but an indifferent opinion of Astrology,
some out of Interest, but most out of ignorance, Damning and Reprobating it.
For ignorance we know it is, Matter devotionis; and Interest what is it but
filius diaboli, the Son and He^r of Falsehood! and it is no wonder that the best
of Sciences sit, and suffer under the censure of such malicious and incapable
Judges. Yet, when the world does plainly see how far short all other Arts fall
of giving satisfaction to mankind in the Causes and Limits of this most
terrible Pest, that we at present groan under, in comparison of what is
afforded by Astrology; me thinks it should abandon and cashier its darling
errors, and cease to be at odds with, ei^^er the Art, or its honest and able
Professors any longer.

We see apparently, that the Science of Physic (next unto Astrology I grant
the most excellent of all Natural knowledge, joined with it, the most worthy of
all! but alone,) is much too short to acquaint us, either when such great and
terrible Plagues shall come; or when come, at what time they shall cease. The
Pulse of the times deceives them herein; the excellent temperature of the
season this year we see has failed all their common Prognostics; and told
them plainly, the true and certain Causes of such astonishing effects, are else
where lodged; nor can a Crisis or Indication thereof, any where be found, but
in the Study of Celestial influences; unless it please God to vouchsafe an
immediate revelation thereof unto any! in this sense, I and every man must
acknowledge the meanest Peasant may as soon as the mightiest Prince, come to a
prevision of the greatest alterations.

In matter of Miracle, we must be content to submit; although we are Masters of
the most demonstrable Arts in the world. But among all the Noble Science
wherein a man may argue from the Cause to its effect, there is not one by which
this Pest could be foretold, but Astrology. Nay, the Learned Serarius himself
(though a Physician) pretends not to predict the Plague by the Art of Physic,
but takes for his subject the Stars, and other Celestial Phenomenon (as may be
seen in his discourse of all the Planets meeting in Sagittary, December 1662.)
as thereby allowing greater certainty in these things, to the Axioms of
Astrology, then he could hope to find in that worthy Study of Medicine.

Howbeit, Physic is a Study I exceedingly love and honor, and its Learned and
legal professors (whether Galenists or Chemists) I truly reverence. But I must
be excused if I detest and protest against the unworthy practices of many, who
(under pretense of that worthy knowledge) so impudently and falsely boast of
their success and skill in Physic; painting both Posts and Walls with their
Lying Oracles in Print: every one crying up his own stuff, for the Elixir, or
Panacaea, etc. and all but to delude the credulous multitude! who (as one
wittily and truly observ^s) find their Medicines dear enough, when in taking
they cost them their lives. Some of them pretend to cure the most malignant and
inveterate diseases in six hours time, others in twelve hours, or a day or two,
at the furthest, if you will believe them. And this they are so impudent as to
promise (by their prints) infallibly to perform. An Artifice the wise and
prudent Physician disdains, as knowing the success of a cure to depend on his
hand that first gave the wound, viz. Gods. But notwithstanding all this their
pretended skill, and shameless boastings, we find but few good effects; they
all work great cures, and yet the weekly Bills increase. Certainly God Almighty
(as if angry at such a presumptuous and shameless sort of men) is pleased (in
opposition to their ^^ctitious pretenses) to suffer this great sickness to
destroy the more, and devour the greater numbers. It was ^ronically and truly
sung of old, Saul has slain his Thousands, and David his Ten Thousands! But it
may ^e truly and without Irony sung of this great City; That be neglect of the
People in sickness; their ill looking uno, penury, and Nastiness, etc. have
slain their Thou^nds; but the Ignorant and confident Practices of Il^erate and
Impudent pretenders to Physic, have ^urthered their Ten thousands! It is
impossible for any ^t the eminently Learned, truly to consider and be acquaind
with the noble subject of Physic; which is Man! ^e Microcosm and the Lord of
the Creation! Gods Image! and yet every Bayard does now adays confidently run
upon so great a Practice, and attempts things out of his reach, with as little
remorse, as a Carnifex does the Execution of such as the Law has condemned to
death. There are such Nodi in Physic, that the best of Physicians many times
are to seek of what is proper to unty them.

Nonest in Medico semper relevatur ut aeger:
Interdum Docta, plus valet Art malum.
If then, the ablest of Physicians, at sometimes are at a stand or nonplus;
how miserably must your pitiful Quacks be gravel'd at all times? If men of
Parts and Learning, are sometimes apt to be at a loss, in the curative part of
Physic; How strangely (and always) must they be mistaken, that are not able to
write true English? nay scarce able to speak sense? for some such there are,
that take on them the Glorious titles of Doctors, to my knowledge. And yet they
must (forsooth) be squirting out their filth and shame against the Learned
College of Physicians. The suffering, nay permitting of which, is a scandal
upon Government at large; For, by the same rule, any sort of men would destroy
or cut off a part of Government; let them but have liberty to go on and they
will make but little conscience in destroying the whole. But it is but to add
folly to misery, to complain; and seeing it is so, I Will resolve to let these
Cypres^ trees alone; and if men will be any longer contented an^ born down with
fair and glozing pretenses, Leaves, instead of Fruit; Let Master Emperick be
their Doctor! they will find their folly soon enough, I doubt not though perhaps
too late for Remedy.

But a word or two of the book, and I have done* have in the ensuing discourse
touched upon several subjects; yet none but what I adjudged necessary; and if
therein I have unmasked any vulgar errors (i. e.) shown the Face of Truth
without a Vizor; I hope the ingenious will accept my endeavors kindly, and not
be ashamed or afraid to behold her brightness and glory.

When I speak of the Causes of the Plague, you are to understand that I tacitly
acknowledge, God the chief and supreme Cause of all things! and that it is in
his power to alter or suspend second Causes, even as he pleases; but this he
seldom, nay never does, but by Miracle, as in the days of Joshua and good King
Hezekiah.

And when I justly censure persons, that out of a slavish fear leave their
habitations, thereby hoping to fly from the judgments of God, I would not be
understood as if I condemned all that leave the City. For many have done it
rather out of Custom and for pleasure, then any fear really; and many more out
of a prudent care, rather then from a servile fear; as judging it better to be
subject to the ^^ll of a Slate or Tyle, then a whole house; to the fate of a
little village, then to the destiny of so great a City! and although I believe
that the Plague is sent, not so much to afflict the City, as the Citizens; the
Houses, as the owners of them: Yet I am persuaded that it is the greatest
Plague to the City, that so many have run out of it. We know the Famousest
Edifices have a time to flourish, and another to decay; and as the Poeth says,
Quandoquidem data sunt ipsis quoque fata fepulchris.
Even Tombs themselves are subject unto Fate.
And that it is a Fate most cruel to this great City, to have her children so
subject to fear, that by their leaving her, all trading is at an ebb, and she
in Summer forced to undergo a dismal, dreadful Winter of Evil; there is no one
that has any sense of humane sufferings, but must truly and sorrowfully
acknowledge.

To conclude, I shall not Apologize for my present attempt; it is sufficient
that I saw this great City wanted encouragement, and knew that God (in mercy)
had enabled me to present them with this Celestial Cordial; and to be a
messenger of good news unto them. Now, that God would graciously vouchsafe to
protect this great City and the Nations from so great a scourge for the Future:
Bless and defend his Sacred Majesty, etc. Settle us in Peace, and preserve the
Government both of State and Church! is the Cordial fervent Prayer of the
earnest implorer of Englands happiness,

From my house in Jewen Garden against the Sun in Jewen-street, near
Aldersgate Street. John Gadbury.

These few escapes of the Press: be pleased thus to correct. PAge. 2. l. 11. r.
Apodictical, p. 8. l. 2. r. and as these, l. 21. r. cause or causes, p. 29. l.
10. dele the, p. 35. l. 1. r. from a Sickness, p. 37. l. 35. for with r. of.

Licensed

Aug. 25. 1665. Roger L'estrange.

Prooeme.
WHether the Doctrine of Democritus and his followers (who maintain that by the
Worlds which perish without this, and by the strange bodies which from that
infinity of worlds run into this, there arise many times the beginnings of
Plague and Pestilence, and of other extraordinary accidents) be true, I will
not take on me here to dispute; because there would many eminent questions,
hard to be resolved (at least to the satisfaction of many) arise from such
enquiries, and possibly of little emolument unto the Readers. Or whether the
particular corruptions which happen in diverse Countries, either by Earthquakes,
Excessive droughts, extreme heats, and unusual rains, etc. do infect, disease,
and alter the Winds and Rivers, which arise out of the Earth, and consequently
the humors of Man; or whether the alteration of Drinks and Diet, and other
customs, etc. be not the proper and immediate causes of the Pestilence in
mankind, [both which are very likely] is not my present intention to discuss.

My design is, not to trouble or consult either Physics or Metaphysics; but
as the Stars and their influences have been my Study for many years, and are
(sub Deo) the causes of all action and passion in this inferior world (which
is a Physical Science too, I must acknowledge, though few Physicians
understand, and fewer make use of it) so I shall make it my business at this
time, thence to discover the Cause and continuance of this great Pest; being
assured in this Learning to meet with Demonstration, whereas all others afford
but likelihoods of proof, grounding things upon false Hypotheses. In Astrology
(God not altering the course of second Causes, as in Joshua's and Hezekia's
time he did) there is an Apodyctical proof of the matter in Question, without
being beholden to the poor shifts and effeminate evasions, that other Arts (not
in conjunction with this) are constantly compelled to lay hold on. My Method
then shall be to consider,

1. The Causes of the Plague in general* 2. How long a Pestilence may naturally
last? 3. Of the several Plagues that happened Anno 1593, 1603, 1625, 1636. and
how they increased and abated. 4. Of this present Plague, when (according to
natural causes) it may abate. 5. Whether the Plague be catching? 6. The Folly
of People in flying from their habitations for fear of the Plague, evinced. 7.
That this present Plague was foretold by Astrology* 8. The Air unjustly
suspected to lodge the Contagion. 9. Conclusion.
CHAP. I.
The Causes of the Plague in general.
IT is an Axiom agreed unto by all Philosophers, That a Cause is that,
whereupon depends, or whence issues an effect, or that by which any thing
happens. Some hold that there are four causes of every thing, viz. Causa
Essentialis, Materialis, Formalis, and Finalis. Plato mentions three kinds of
Causes, and distinguishes them by these three Terms, By which, Of which, and
For which; but takes the most principal to be that, By which, it being the
Efficient Cause. And that the Heavens are the Efficient and Essential Causes of
Plagues, or other Contagious diseases, we need not doubt, it being so congruent
to Reason to believe.

Physicians tell us, that the Plague is a disease most Malignant and
Pestilential; a Fever in the highest degree, which does suddenly putrify and
corrupt, both the Solid and Fluid parts of the body; which having done, by an
(almost) uncontrolable and unrepellable siecity, dries up and destroys the
Natural Powers, then seizes or preyeth upon the vitals, and so lets in the
everlasting Enemy, DEATH. And since by Divine Logic we are able to prove, that
all effects have suitable and corresponding Causes [Men do not gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figgs of Thistles!] It is most Rational to believe, that this so
terrible disease, must proceed from some Cause or Causes, most Illustrious,
eminent and Celestial; it being so remarkably terrifying wheresoever it
settles, or makes its abode. And for men to hope to find out a Cause [I mean of
Energy and honor sufficient] here below, is to befool themselves with a vain,
empty, and idle enquiry. For we know there is nothing sublunary but is its
fellow effect; and (though in a different manner) has a dependancy on
Celestial influences with it: and for an effect to produce an effect, is all
out as improbable and unlikely, as for a Child to beget a Child. Therefore the
true and certain Causes of this astonishing adversary [the Plague] are no where
to be found but in the Heavens. Qualis effectus, talis Causa; If the effect be
eminent, so must the Cause.

All Astrologers with good reason affirm, That all popular diseases are
irritated by Mars and Saturn their Influences; and indeed the skilful in the
Sydereal Science, may readily read those dismal effects in their Natures. Mars
is a Planet fiery, hot and dry, Choleric; and therefore Author of all
Pestilential diseases: Saturn is a Planet Earthy, cold and dry, and Author of
all tedious and durable infirmities. And it is observable that Mars (though his
effects are violent, like his Nature) never hurts so cruelly, or causes so
raging a Pestilence, as when in Configuration of Saturn. Nor do their
Conjunctions and Aspects in every part or place of Heaven produce such
Malignant and cruel effects, but only when they are conjoined or configurated
in earthy, fiery or Humane signs or Asterisms, and receive some assistance from
the Conjunctional, Opposite, or Quadrantal Rays of Jupiter, who (according to
Astrologers) is significator sanguinis. Then, I say, and at such times, Mars by
his Choleric intemperate Nature, causes not only the Plague, but the raging
sury of it; and Saturn, by reason of his destructive temper, and inimical
qualities to all natural existencies, portends the Diuturnity and continuance
thereof, and the sweeping away of Multitudes thereby.

And both these Planets Natures being so pernicious to Mankind, and indeed all
other Generable and Corruptible things, they possessing the two extremes of a
mischievous temperature, is (perhaps) one main reason why we have seldom any
Plagues or Pestilences, that are not accompanied, of at least attended in the
sequel with Wars and Famine. Hear the Learned Anton how ingeniously he
expresses their Natures and Qualities, in his Philosophical Satyrs. Thus of
Saturn,

-- Saturns sullen face,
Pale and of Ashy color, malcontent,
A Catiline to Mortal Temperament,
That would blow up the Capitol of Man
With Envious influence! --
And if there hate be in a Heavenly breast,
This Planet with that Fury is possessed.
And of Mars he says,

Blood, Death, and Tragic stories, Mars does yield,
A Golgotha of Graves, whose purple-field
Died Crimson with his fatal Massacres,
Craves bloody Ink and Scarlet Characters;
A Pen that like a Bullets force would reel
A Marble Conscience --
Other cooperating Causes there are of the Pestilence, as Comets, Eclipses of
the Luminaries, and Grand Satellitiums of the Planets, etc. which as they
happen to be more or less in number, so the Plague is either intended or
remitted. And hence it is, that all Plagues are not alike mischievous in their
devourings; their Causes being sometimes more or less forcible then at others.

Aristotle (that great Master of Reason) acknowledges, that there is neither
generation nor corruption, but is effected by the Heavenly Motions. And any man
though but meanly conversant in History, may find, that there never happened
any eminent Plague, or other prodigious Accidents, as War, Famine, etc. but
there were either Great Conjunctions, or Aspects of the superior Celestial
bodies, terrible Comets, Eclipses of the Luminaries, and other (...), or
Appeatances, as the certain Causes and Precursors of them. Take a few instances.

Anno 1348. There happened a Plague so great in England (and indeed in other
parts also) that the Chronicles tell us, there were buried thereof in the
Charter-house-yard London, 50000 People. Nay, Mr. Cambden says, that in that
little Town of Yarmouth, there (then) dyed about 7000 Persons. It is
observable, a little before this great Pestilence, there happened a very great
Comet in Taurus an Earthly sign, as is witnessed by Leovitius; and also a great
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and Mars, in Aquarius. So terrible were the
Effects of these Celestial Appearances then, that it is dismal to mention: God
of his Mercy grant, that only the Plague be our Portion at this time, we
laboring (now) under the like cruel influences, if not greater.

Anno 1527. That great Plague, called the Sweating Sickness began to rage: a
great and terrible Comet, of a bloody color, appeared but a little before in
the Heavens. They then labored also under the weighty effects of a Conjunction
of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars in Risces, a watery sign, perhaps a main reason
why that Pestilence was attended with a Sweat.

Anno 1593. Anno Regni Elizab. 35. There was another very great Plague, the
Celestial Causes of which were the two Conjunctions and Oppositions of Saturn
and Mars from and in Capricorn and Cancer, Tropical signs; and an Opposition of
Saturn and Jupiter from the same signs; besides three great Eclipses of the
Luminaries of Heaven.

Anno 1603. When the great Plague happened then, we may remember that there was
a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Sagittarius. And a little before that, a
great Eclipse of the Sun; and a Comet also of great Magnitude appeared.

Anno 1625. That Contagion was the consequence of a great Conjunction of
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, in the Celestial sign Leo, a sign of the fiery
triplicity, and representing the heart in the Microcosme, Ergo, the more
dangerous.

Anno 1636. There happened another Plague in London, but not so great as any
the former: there were then two Conjunctions, etc. of Saturn and Mars; and two
invisible Eclipses (I mean as to us) of the Sun; the first on January 27. the
other on July 22. one happening in Aquarius, the other in Leo, the greatest
dignities of the Sun.

I purposely omit an infinite of instances more of this kind, as the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Pisces, Anno 1643. and other concomitant
configurations; under the effects whereof, we then laboring, ^^ri^ok of the
rage of a cruel Civil War; and not only so, but a Plague brake forth very
violently, in all the South and Southwest parts in this Kingdom of England* and
in the Northwest likewise. Thus then we see, that immediately upon Eclipses,
great Conjunctions, the Apparitions of Comets, etc. the Pestilence, etc. has
constantly followed; and these Celestial Causes have been more or fewer in
number, or greater or l^sser in Nature (for great Conjunctions have the
preh^minence from meaner Conjunctions, Aspects, Eclipses, etc. and they from
Comets or other Apparitions) so has the Pestilence been more or less durable
and raging: Ergo, we may with good ground assert, That the Configurations of
the Planets, Eclipses of the Luminaries, and other Celestial Apparitions, as
Comets* etc. are the most certain efficient Causes of such Effects.

To conclude, If the Pestilence be not an effect of the before mentioned
Causes, it must be an effect of some other Causes, more powerful then they; but
there is nothing in Nature of equal Energy with the Heavens: Ergo. If it could
rationally be presumed to depend on other Causes, we might (for our conviction)
happily have a Plague when no such Causes are apparent; but there is never any
Pestilence, but when either Comets, Eclipses, or great Conjunctions, etc.
happen: It therefore roundly (and without obstruction) follows, That Plagues
are caused by Celestial influences. For further confirmation of this truth (if
what I have concisely spoken be not enough) read Origanus de Effecti^us
Stellarum, p. 517. Peucer de Astrolog. Haly pars 8. p. 398. Cardan in P^ol.
Guido Bonatus, cummultis alii^.

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
CHAP. II.
How long a Pestilence may naturally last?
MAny there are, who hold an opinion that the Plague or Pestilence may last
eight years; some others believe it may endure fifteen years; and others
opinionate, it may continue a longer or lesser time. Nay, there is one that
has lately printed (but I confess with small show of probable Reason) that
this great City London, has not been free from the Plague since the year 1636.
which is now twenty nine years agone complete. Nor is it usual, with those that
determine thus positively of the duration of Plagues, etc. to give any
satisfactory Reason wherefore they so conclude; so that we are left at liberty
either to believe what they assert, or examine whether their Assertions be true.

If by the Plague, they mean only a Fever in the highest degree, as in the
definition formerly set down; I am persuaded they say most true: for it will be
very difficult to prove, not only that a Plague may not remain and continue
eight or fifteen years in that sense; but that we are at any time free from a
Plague: Or that we (indeed) ever shall be, either more or less, as long as the
Erratick Stars have Motion, or whilst the Earthly Globe endures; For, while
the Nature and influence of Saturn and Mars* etc. continue, the diseases they
signify, shall never totally abate: for, should once their Energy for
corruption be presumed to cease, their power for generation must suffer a
deliquium likewise; It being as essentially necessary for the heavenly bodies
to spend their influences in order to a corruption and destruction of the forms
of things (there being nothing else really subject to a Mutation) as to employ
their powers in the Generation or preservation of them. A Plague is (as it
were) a Broom in the hand of the Almighty! with which he sweepeth, the most
nasty and uncomely corners of the Universe, that the more noble parts of it,
may remain secure and safe.

But if by the duration of the Pestilence, for so many years, they mean an
enumeration of Fevers exalted to the highest degree (i. e.) when a great number
of particular Fates unite forcibly to make up the general calamities [as in all
those Plagues which happened in the years 1348, 1593, 1603, 1625, 1636. and now
this 1665.] I say then, they are most grossly mistaken. For a Plague in this
later sense, cannot last above four years; neither did any of the Plagues, in
the years before mentioned last longer, many of them not so long. And of this
opinion is the Learned Cardanus, Seg. 7. Aphor. 121. where he says, Pestem 4.
annis durare nunquam posse; and Origanus ecchoing to him, p. 518. faith, that
experience sufficiently proves, that the Plague never remains in one place
above four years; but in that space of time, the Contagion removes (as it
were) from one place to another; as lately we know (by woeful experience) that
it came out of Turkey into Germany, out of Germany into Italy, out of Italy into
Holland, and out of Holland into England, where now it rages; and all this in
less then four or five years time. And in this sense (faith Origanus) Cardanus
is to be understood.

We know also that an Eclipse of the Sun, etc. cannot operate longer then four
years, scarcely so long. And it is sufficiently known unto Artists, that the
raging effects of a Conjunction of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter, etc. lasts not
longer, then while Saturn is transiting one Twelfth part of the Zodiac; for in
that time the fury of their influences is either wholly abated, or taken off,
by Configurations and Appearances of a contrary Nature and Quality; or else
they are for some certain time suspended; as in a Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter, etc. they may be; such Conjunctions happening but seldom in comparison
of other Configurations. And how opposite to reason it is for us to presume the
Effects should remain in force when the cause is removed, I submit to the
judgments of the ingenious.

Thus then we see, the several opinions of the Plagues duration, either of
eight years, fifteen years, etc. is groundless and uncertain; since it is
proved that no Pestilence can last longer then four years time at the most,
unless the Authors of such appointments will say they are to be understood
according to the first part of the Distinction; which if they do, then I aver
(as before) that the world cannot only be afflicted with the Plague, for Eight
or Fifteen years at a time, but must be content to be united unto it for ever.
The Angel is Gold, as truly as the Five pound piece, and endures the touch as
boldly; So the single violent Fever (which it is impossible for the world to be
a day freed from) is as truly the Pestilence, as the great united numbers of
Fevers are; and it differs no more in Nature and Essence from it, then the
light which appears at seven or eight of the Clock in the morning does, from
that which shines at midday. And it is an illustrious Truth, That single
Bullets kill as certainly as Case^^ot: and it is not the great numbers that dye
in War, should make a private man (if right in his Wits) think a Duel less
dangerous.

CHAP. III.
Of the several Plagues that happened Anno 1593, 1603, 1625, 1636. and how they
increased and abated.
HAving already declared the Efficient Causes of the Pestilence, and shown how
long it is probable for one to last (viz. to rage at one time) I shall in the
next place consider of the four last several great Plagues which happened Anno
1593, 1603, 1625, 1636. together with the Natural and true causes of their
increase and abatement; thereby evincing to my Reader, that what I shall in the
next Chapter write concerning this present Pestilence, and its decrease, shall
be upon grounds most Rational and safe to be built on. First then it is meetly
requisite, that I exhibit briefly, Table-wise, the true increase and decrease
of the Pestilence, in those four years, which take as follows.

A Table showing the Increase and Abatement of the Plague in the years 1593,
1603, 1625, 1636.
Months names. Week 1593 1603 1625 1636 March. 17 3 3 4 24 31 2 8 31 29 6 11
April. 7 27 4 10 2 14 33 4 24 4 21 37 8 25 14 28 41 10 26 17 May. 5 29 11 30 10
12 38 18 45 55 19 42 22 71 35 26 58 32 78 62 June. 2 62 30 69 67 9 81 43 91 87
16 99 59 165 103 23 108 72 239 79 30 118 158 390 104 July. 7 927 262 593 81 14
893 424 1004 104 21 258 917 1819 120 28 852 1396 24^1 15^ August. 4 983 1922
3659 206 11 797 1745 4115 283 18 651 2713 4463 321 25 449 2539 4218 429
September. 1 507 3035 3344 638 8 563 2724 2550 650 15 451 2818 1672 865 22 349
2195 1561 775 29 330 1732 852 928 October. 6 327 1641 538 921 13 323 1149 511
752 20 308 642 331 555 27 302 580 134 458 November. 3 301 554 89 838 10 209 442
92 715 17 107 251 48 573 24 93 105 27 476 December. 1 94 102 15 312 8 86 52 15
167 15 71 96 6 85 22 39 74 1 76 By this Table you may observe how the Sickness
increased and decreased in the four several years mentioned; give me leave now
to show you the Celestial Cause of its augmentation and diminution, etc.

1. In Anna 1593* by the Table (you see) the Pestilence but meanly increased,
until the month (...) June, and then there began to dye above an hundred week
thereof; the Envious Planet Saturn then cam^ to the opposite point of the
Ascendent of the figur^ of the world that year. And in July when it began to
rage, the fiery Planet Mars passed the Quadrat^ place of the Moon; and the Sun
the opposition (...) Mars and Jupiter, and Conjunctional place of Saturn. In
August, when Venus was stationary, in loco Saturni, you see it abated from
almost a thousand a week to under five hundred. And in September, when the same
fortunate Planet came to the Trine of both the Luminaries, the Plague
constantly grew less tyrannous and prevailing. And when in October she came to
the Trine of the Ascendent of the figure; and in November that the benign
Planet Jupiter came to the Ascendent it self, it vanished by degrees to almost
nothing; there being in the later week of December but 39 dying thereof.

2. In the year 1603. the Pestilence was inconsiderable in its increase, until
the last week in June, and the month of July, at which times the fiery Planet
Mars came to the opposite point of the Ascendant of the Revolution, and also
passed the place of the Moon. And in August, September, and October, when it
raged most, the cruel Planet Saturn was on the Ascendant ^ll the time, and that
in a manner stationary to do mischief. But in November when Venus came to the
Trine of the Moon, and Jupiter to the Ascendant and (...) the Trine of the Sun,
and Venus also to the Ascen^ant, etc. the Plague began to cease its fury,
insomuch that in the last week of December, there dyed thereof ^ut seventy
four; there having in one week in Septem^er before, dyed above 3000 persons.

3. Anno 1625. The Sickness began to increase in May, when Mars came to the
opposite place of the Moon in the Vernal Figure. In June and July it en^reased
greatly; then Mars came to the Quadrate of ^he Ascendant, and to the Cauda
Draconis, thereby ^dding an envenomed fury to the Plague; and the Sun then came
also to the opposite point of Mars, and gave it the greater cause to rage. In
August, when it raged most of all, that there dyed most of that month above
4000 a week; Mars came to the place of the Sun, Jupiter to his opposite point,
and Saturn in Quadrate of the Ascendant, and in opposition to the Lord thereof;
transits and stations most prodigious and very naturally showed the height of
this great Sickness. In September, when Jupiter came to the Trin^ place of
Venus, and Venus to the Trine of the Sun, and place of the Moon, this potent
adversary began to loose its force. And in October, when the Sun came to the
Sextile place of the Moon, and when Jupiter cam^ to the same Aspect, by Gods
blessing, this terribl^ Pest abated apace; and there being not one cruel Aspect
to increase it, but what was counterpoised with two of auspicious import, by
the last week in December there dyed but one of that Contagion.

4. In the year 1636. toward the later end of April when the Sun came to the
opposite point of Mars i^ the figure of the world, the Plague then first began
In May and June, when the Sun came to the opposit^ point of the Ascendant,
Venus to the opposite point o Saturn, and afterward to the Dragons tail, it
increased but not much. In July, when the Sun passed the opposite point of
Saturn, and after that the Quadrate pla^^ of Mars, it increased more; and more
without doub^ it had, but that Venus and Jupiter both, came then t the Moons
place. In August, there happened two Eclipses, and Mars came to the Ascendant
of the world figure, it now increased greatly. In September an October (the
months this Sickness most of all increased) Mars was in the Ascendant upon the
Quadra^^ place of the Moon, and afterward passed the Quadrate place of the
Sun, and Conjunctional place of Saturn; and the Sun likewise passed the place
of Mars. All which were eminent causes of that great increase, the Sickness
then had. In November, Jupiter comes to the Sextile of the Ascendant and the
Sun in Trine to his own place, and then the Pestilence began to grow less
raging, and by degrees decreased to (almost) nothing.

By this short Examen, we find that the furious and bostile beams of the fiery
Planet Mars for the most part gives beginning to the Pestilence, and is the
eminent cause of its raging; and Saturn gives it continuance.

We find likewise, that the friendly rays of the fortunate Stars, do not only
abate the Pestilence in conclusion; but when (by reason of the most violent
Transits and Aspects of Mars and Saturn) the Plague most of all rages, they
lessen the fury, and make it as it were stationary.

It is plain also, that Saturns transits, etc. are of longer duration, and kill
more then Mars's, though Mars's for the time they last, are most violent, as by
the Table foregoing, compared with my observations thereon, most plainly
appears. And so I come to consider in --

CHAP. IV.
Of this present Plague, and when (according to Natural Causes) it may abate.
IN the first Chapter I have acquainted you with the Causes of Plagues in
General; and here I am to inform you of the Causes of this particular great
Pest we now labor under; and they are these several following.

1. The great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter October 10. 1663. in the
Celestial sign Sagittary. 2. A Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, November 12.
1664. in Sagittary. 3. An opposition of the Sun and Saturn, June 5. 1664. from
Sagittary and Gemini. 4. A Quadrate of Saturn and Mars, June 27. 1664. from
Sagittary and Virgo. 5. The Apparition of three Comets in the later end of
1664. and beginning of 1665. 6. The Transit of Saturn through Sagittary unto
his greatest dignities, there to continue for above five years together. All
which are Causes so powerfully impelling, that it is to be feared the
Pestilence we now partake of, will not be the one moiety of the Effects thence
to issue, or thereon depending.

By this connection of Causes, it is somewhat apparent that this Pest should
have took its beginning at the later end of 1664. and truly had not the Winter
then been so extremely sharp (it having a Frost of almost ten weeks continuance
together) to have kept it back, as we know it did; it had beyond all question
broke forth then. Nay, and break forth it did then too, as my self can
experimentally testify; having been personally visited with it at Christmas
that year. And my good friend Mr. Josias Westwood the Surgeon (whose
assistance I then craved, and advice I followed (I bless God) to my
preservation) has told me since, That many of his Patients at that time were
afflicted with the same distemper, and yet obtained cure against it, the Air
being then so friendly to Nature, and an enemy unto the Pestilence. And
besides, it was but prudence in people to keep it from the knowledge of the
world (since few or none dyed thereof) as long as they could; for we find that
it came to a discovery soon enough, to amaze and terrify the whole Nation; and
has bid fair for the Ruin of Trade of all kinds in this great (and once
populous) City. Put now let us consider its progress and increase, with the
causes thereof, and the possibility of its abatement, with the time when.

In this matter I shall consult, but not trouble you with the Figure of the
Suns Ingress into the Equinoctial sign Aries for the year 1655. it being in
almost every Almanac to be seen; and thence draw down the several Arguments of
increase and abatement: and because the Pestilence was hardly perceptible
until the month of June, I will begin there.

And in that month (as if God and Nature had appointed this Sickness to be
Ominous in earnest to these Nations) we may observe two most fatal transits to
usher it in, viz. Mars his then coming to the opposite point of the Ascendant,
and the Sun to the opposite point of Saturn. (Malum Principium, malus finis
sequitur.) A beginning of a Sickness so mischievous, that greater can hardly
be; God grant the end be not as inauspicious: and although (I presume) it will
not be of many months continuance to this great City, yet we are not to suppose
a Pestilence ended, when it seemingly acquits one place.

In the month of July the Pestilence began to increase considerably; especially
toward the later end thereof: there were then fix oppositions of the Erratick
Stars* and two Eclip^es; and to add to these, Mars, Venus, and Mercury (then)
came to the Quadrate place of the Sun, and to the opposite point of Saturn by
transit; and the Sun then came to the opposition of Jupiter both by transit and
aspect. All which were very great arguments of its increase.

In the mon^th of August, Saturn comes to the Quadrate place of the Sun, and
will be stationary upon it all the month; and the two Eclipses last month, do
now begin to operate, which are testimonies of very great A^gmenta^ion;
howbe^t, the fortunate Planer Venus coming to the Sex^ile of her own place, and
of the Moons, at the beginning of the month; and coming to a Trine of the Sun,
the later end thereof, and Jupiter his then being stationary in Trine of the
Sun also, may so happily contemper the fury of it, that it may not [now]
increase or augment to any exceeding great height.

A part of September is likely to prove somewhat dangerous, because Saturn is
in a manner still stationary, and the Sun and Saturn then come to a Quadrate
aspect, and this in ill points of the Vernal figure; Mars and Jupiter (who is
Dominus Ascendentis) then also come to an opposition, and both in square of
Luna's place; whence it is probable, that in the second and last weeks of this
month, the Pestilence may admit of an abarement; but indeed I much fear about
the middle of the month an increase considerable: nevertheless, I hope, and
rationally believe (favente Deo) that this Pestilence cannot ascend to any
higher degree, then it may at that time reach unto.

The month of October seems to promise well, and the Pestilence therein,
cannot meet with any eminent cause for augmentation: yet I suppose the second
and last week will make some s^ight offers at an increase, because then the Sun
comes to the opposite place of the Moon; and Venus has a progressional motion
to the opposition of the Sun, and Quartile of Saturns places.

November and December in this respect (God not ^^us^rating the course of
second Causes, or taking advantage of us for our sins) I question not will
prove very kindly; and the City of London will begin to be in a better heart,
then in many months before. How^eit, it cannot be supposed that this
Pestilence should in so short a time totally vanish; or that so great a
Sickness should not leave some unkind impressions behind it; but in comparison
of what it has been, I dare assert, that we shall [then] be (in a manner)
wholly acquitted from it, and its violent, raging, destructive Qualities and
Company.

To conclude, London has at present been the Patient, and has felt the force
of the Almighties scourge to purpose; while most other places of England have
escaped the ^ash. O Utinam* I wish with all my soul, that London might be the
Scapegoat for them all! but ah! I fear, I fear, before the Planet Saturn be
gotten quite out of Capricorn, that those other parts of this Nation will drink
deep of the same Cup. God and Nature punish none by proxy. It will not be this
Cities sufferings, that can excuse other Towns and Cities, from the violent
strokes of so insatiate an enemy.

CHAP. V.
Whether the Plague be Infectious or catching.
I Shall not here stand to discourse largely of Atoms, nor yet too strictly
enquire into the Sympathies and Antipathies of things. Nor yet shall I trouble
my self to enquire whether there are Spirits (in Nature) of so active and
subtle a faculty* that can penetrate the Pores of the body insensibly, and as
easily as lightning is said to me^^ the sword* and never singe the s^^bberd: Or
whether there be a commanding quality in the body of man, of power and ability
sufficient to send forth infectious and dangerous Spirits or Atoms, as Powder
does a Bullet out of the mouth of a Canon, Musket, or Pistol; which shall
admit of no Reverberation or Repulse, from the body or butt it aims at: Or
whether the body of one man be a trench or channel, capable of receiving the
pretended Noxious esfl^viums of another; or whether Cables can be made of
Cobwebbs! All such enquiries I shall leave to those that have leisure, and take
pleasure to disport themselves with words, and the names and noises of things
only.

That which I here aim at, is to examine whether the Pestilence be infectious
or catching? If it be infectious and really catching in it self; it must be so
equally to all persons that approach it, or that it approaches; and this,
either to some degree of danger, or else unto death; or else it must be
infectious to some particular persons only

If it be infectious to all persons, or catching to all alike; then all persons
that come into the sight, or within the scent o^ it, must necessarily be
subject unto i^; and this either unto death, or other lesser degree of danger.
There cannot be a person, either man, woman, or child, that is either shut up
in a house with persons infected, or that shall talk with any of them so shut
up, though but at a window, or through a Wicket* but m^st be supposed to
pa^take of the infection; ^o^^he T^lo^s of a Contagion in this sense lay hold
on them all. But How wide this is of the Truth, I leave to the judgments of
any, that have their five Senses free from infection, and their Reason from
depravation.

In every great Pest, experience convinces this opinion of Error; for in this
great City we know (and see it daily now) that there are diverse persons, that
have had (and yet have) the Sickness, the very next door unto them; on both
sides of them; before and behind them; and yet their Persons, Houses, and
Families not so much as concerned in it, or touched with it. Many also are
constantly visiting their Friends and Relations that are visited; yet (by Gods
blessing) they remain safe and sound. And many that I know (whose hard hap it
has been to be shut up (with others) in an infected house, out of which there
have been several buried) yet, their good fortune has been such* that they
have not only been freed from it, but have not had so much as a headache all
that time; or in any considerable time afterward. In this present Pestilence,
in Thames street a poor woman dyed of it, having her Childsucking at her br^st
at the same time; yet was the infant preserved from it, and was put unto a
Nurse, where it yet remains healthful (as I am credibly informed) and never had
the least of prejudice (of that kind) attend it. Nay some there are (on my
knowledge I speak it) that have lain in the same bed with those that have had
the soars upon them, and have nevertheless escaped free from all manner of
detriment and danger thereby* How many are there of Physicians, Surgeons,
Apothecaries, Nurses, etc. that are daily among them, and yet escape not only
death, but the disease it self? If any shall reply, that they may possibly have
taken and do take Antidotes, and thereby they escape; I then demand, If there
be such a preserving virtue in any Anti^^te that can be made use of; what is
the reason that any that take Antidotes and Preservatives (as they are called)
at any time are infected, or do dye? of which I could give many instances. Some
we know, have Fates attending them so strenuous, that (S^lamander like) they
can bid defiance to the flames of the greatest Pestilence; as others we have
known to be safe in the heat of a battle, when men have fallen by the sword or
bullets on every side of them. He that has powerful Stars, is not only
shot-free, but Plague-free; and a good Nativity, is the certainest Am^let or
Antidote, that a man can have, or be blessed with.

I need not labor to be more perspicuous in this, which is so plain and clear
of it self. Every Parish where the Vi^itation has come, affords instances more
then enough; and therefore it will be but a blotting of paper to endeavor a
further eviction of this so obvious and Sun-like Truth, That the Plague is not
equally infectious; nor are all persons in danger of catching it.

Secondly, If the Plague be presumed not infectious unto all, but unto some
particular persons only; I say then, it ought not to be deemed or esteemed
infectious at all, at least not any more infectious, then are all other
diseases, viz. Small Pocks, Scurvey, Pleuresie, Ague, Gout, Palsy, Toothache,
etc. since (though the Notion of Infection be laid aside) there is not a person
born into the world, that has not at some time or other in his life (as his
Nativity shall truly show) some one disease or other. As persons Genitures are
either mild and quiet, or ragged and violent, so accordingly do they partake of
diseases in the course of their lives. Never was any person subject to violent
diseases, as the Plague, etc. but had a violent Nativity to show it, and e
contra. And he that has the Sun, Moon, or Ascendant in his Radix, directed to
the hostile beams or body of Mars, in dangerous places of the Heavens (as the
books of Astrology will truly inform you) shall never escape the Plague,
although the Kingdom he lives in (at that time) be free from it. And that the
Pestilence can be otherways (in this later sense) catching, I deny: All persons
must grant that to the first person in a Pestilence it comes ^x Aftris; if not,
I would fain know, from what other Cause? Then, if it be possible for the first
person to meet with the Plague without Infection from another; why is it not so
for a Second, or for a Third, or for a Thousand? A Million, etc?

Do we think that God and Nature cannot suit effects to their proper Causes,
without being beholding to an infection, from so filly a worm as Man? Is it not
as easy for Heaven to strike thousands of Millions of persons with the
Pestilence at once, as to afflict one poor individual mortal therewith? Poor
man! that has hardly breath enough to help himself, must vainly suppose he
has some to spare, to hurt, and offend others. We blaspheme one of the
greatest Attributes of the Almighty, when we restrain his power: it is not we
that can or are able to infect one another; but it is God by his Power over us
that afflicts us all! and indeed the Plague carries not in it so much of
infection, as it does of affliction, and so we mortals find it.

Beyond all peradventure, the (...), (i. e.) Small Pox, Lues Venerea, etc. are
diseases in all respects as loathsome and dangerous, as the Pestilence; yet how
few is the number, that dread infection or Contagion from them, in Comparison
of the vast multitudes of men and women, that bow the knee of their Reason to
this! Nay I dare aver and maintain, that although the Plague be a disease
principally known by the spo^s, yet compared to those other vile, noxious, and
prodigiously-fcul distempers, it is immaculate, and a companion of far less
dangerous tendency. I cannot but smile to think how many there are, that look
askew, and hold their Noses at the sight of a Door with a Red Cross, and a Lord
have mercy upon us, on it; and yet never so much as grutch to eat and drink
with their Relations, that indeed are only fit company for an Hospital; or
once grumble, or think evilly of lying with a Husband or Wife many years
together, whose breaths or issues (for wholsomness) are many degrees below
Carrion, a Jakes, or Charnel-house.

If any diseases be infectious or contagious, to any person or persons; it is
their fear and imagination that makes it so unto them. Thus many persons (who
are (...), of a slavish Nature and temper) come to fight with their own
shaddows, and are often (beyond cure) wounded in the imaginary encounter; and
others, yiedling obedience to the same Tyrant, meet distraction; as O^estes in
Euripides, and Theoclymenus in Homer.

Stultum facit ^ortuna quem v^lt perdere.
The Fates first fool the Wight, they mean to foil.
There are none so apt to catch a Contagion, as they that suffer their Reason
and belief to wander in danger of a Captivity* ^en must be resolute, and demur
to their impelling Fate, if they would avoid being victored by their adversary.
Creed quod habes, and habes. If thou believe the Pestilence cannot escape
thee, thou shall assuredly have it; thy Faith and Fancy will be certainly
answered: whereas another of a generous confidence, and clear resolution
(though in the very midst of it) shall be free, and triumph over fear.

Philosophers affirm, that the Imagination does work that within, in the
Understanding, which the object does without in the Sense. We find
experimentally, that our Reason and Understanding, and all our noblest
faculties, are led Captive by our Imagination ad libitum; and we are slaved by
it in ignoble sort, and yet remain such fools as to indulge our injurer:
mistake me not, I mean by imagination, only that truckling Passion, Fear,
which may very well and properly be termed, the Reverse of imagination, rather
then the thing it self. It being an indiscreet, strange, and (as a Learned
Author aptly terms it) inconsiderate Passion; and as it has its ^ise from
Terrors, so it many times casts us into very emine^t hazards. It is a Tyrant
that hoodwinks Reason, and lays the understanding in fetters, and then
torments us with Masks and Vizors of Danger; as we use to affright children
with Bugbears. How many have fallen into most grievous diseases, and other
mischiefs of all kinds, only by imagining or fearing them? The thing that I
feared is fallen on me, says holy Job.

To conclude then, the infection is in our affections, and keeps court in our
minds; we imagine great dangers from without us, when they have their Rise and
Original within us. It is a sure presage of danger, to be slavishly affected
with a sense of danger. The Timorous-troubled-yielding-mind, brings a Contagion
upon the whole Body, although it inhabit the Fields, and live from the sight or
hearing of persons Infected. Albeit, wisdom inviteth us sometimes to a
reasonable doubting, and Prudence directs us to shun apparent evils; but it is
an Argument of super-insaniated folly in any man to dread any thing to
servility, or to conceit or coin dangers* where none really are to be found.

CHAP. VI.
Evinceth the folly of people in flying from their habitations for fear of the
Plague.
THe Reason why many persons, so willingly sacrifice to their Fears, in flying
from their habitations in the time of a Pestilence, proceeds

1. From the customary advice of Physicians.

2. From a principle of Cowardice in themselves.

First, Physicians in most knotty distempers of a Chronick Nature, advise their
Patients to a change of their Air, which (sine dubio) is very necessary, that
being one of the six non naturales; for they cannot take too much care of that
Patient, who groans under the ty^ anny of Sickness. But to prescribe (unto
persons that a^l nothing) a necessity of removing, because more persons then
ordinary dye about them, I see no clear Reason for. That ancient, but
questionable Oracle of Hippocrates, -- Cito, Long, T^rde; should it with other
Oracles cease, I prefume would be no injury, but advantage to the humane race;
since it may truly be deemed* that the observation thereof has destroyed many
more persons, then it has preserved. If flying could preserve men from the
Pestilence, it were an easy matter for a man to wrestle with the Almighty, and
prevent Divine vengeance; the Creature might frustrate the intention and
resolution of his Creator, and earth might out-plot Heaven. But impossible it
is, for the wisest of Mortals to contrive so securely agai^^t the decrees of
Eternity! or baffle Celestial Destiny*

If Fates Decrees are sure, in vain we fly them;
If they are not, in vain we fear to try them.
How many are there, that by flying from dangers, have fallen into the midst
of dangers? When men Plot to save themselves, their contrivances often procure
their ruin. In the year 1348. when that great and terrible Pest happened, many
people by their Physicians advice, and many more, by their example, not only
changed their habitation, but their Nation also, in hopes to avoid it. But
behold! they that refused to trust God at Land, were overtaken by that his
judgment at Sea, and were forced to make their Graves in the bellies of
Fishes. De^s est abique. God is every where, therefore fly quickly, go far
off, or what thou will, thou can not fly from his presence. It is a more
witty, then true distinction for any man to flatter himself in, by saying, He
flies not from God, but from his Plague. For Gods judgments are never separate
from him; the Rod of his Anger is of such a Longitude, that it can reach us
every where. Men may fly from their houses, their families, their companions
friends, and relations, and thereby become examples of fear and terror to
others; but they cannot fly from God. In vain they at all attempt it.

Quarles
It Is vain to flee, it is neither here nor there,
Can escape that hand, until that hand forbear;
Ah me! where is he not, that is every where?
It Is vain to flee, till g^^tle mercy show
Her better eye, the further off we go,
The Swing of Justice deals the mightier blow.
No advice is prosperous against Heaven: the Physician himself cannot escape by
flying. He that shall undertake to prescribe against the God of Nature, shall
be proscribed by the God of Nature.

Secondly, Men are not only retrograded in their Reasons, by their Physicians
counfel or advice, more then they are from a principle of Cowardice within
them. They fear, and therefore they fly. Cowards hoping to avoid dangers, rush
ignorantly into them. A Bullet may sooner kill him that runs from the battle,
then him that stoutly and resolutely joins therewith; the truly valiant often
escape untoucht. A man's own wit (when bridled by fear) hunts him into those
snares, that above all things he would gladly shun. Cowardice throws contempt
upon the great Creator of all things, as arguing a distrust unworthy of his
power. Can God preserve Daniel in the Lions Den, and not secure thee from the
Plague, think thou? is it harder for him to keep thee sound among the sick,
then it was to protect the three children in the Oven from the devouring
flames, and consuming heat thereof? In a Coward not only Religion, but Reason
endures the Rack; and where a generous confidence is wanting, the faculties of
the Soul are frozen. But a well-poyz'd Resolution, is a bulwark against the
most imminent dangers.

Audaces fortuna juvat. --
The Gods befriend the nobly confident. --
And valor (as one well observes) casts a kind of honor upon God, in that we
show, that we believe his goodness, while we trust our selves in danger upon
his care only; whereas the Coward eclipses his sufficiency* by unworthily
doubting that God will not bring him off.

Sinful Adam cannot hide himself so closely, but God can easily find him; and if
distrustful Jonah will flee to Tarshish, God can raise a Tempest to overtake
him. If God have appointed the Pestilence for thy Portion, thy flying from it,
but throws thee into its embraces. Hence it is, that the Countries round about
us, come to be so suddenly seized with this Sickness; the fears of the
Heartless fugitives, being as so many nimble Chariots, to convey it unto the
places, whither they fly or travel. If men will be afraid to trust God, it is
no wonder that he refuses to protect them.

Let us consider, how small a number of worthy generous persons this Pest preys
upon, in comparison of the vast multitudes of the vulgar that are swept away by
it. There has not been six persons of eminent Note and consideration, known to
dye in this great and populous City since the Plague began. It feeds chiefly
upon those people that fear has slain to its hand. Persons of narrow souls and
understandings, of confused Intellects, and Aguish constitutions, are they that
principally fall sacrifices unto this great devourer; when those of a more
refined Reason and understanding (as if supported by more noble Stars) remain
secure from it. So we see, a virtuous confidence is a security against the
worst of Evils, and a slavish timidity only a herald or harbinger to them.
Lucan tells us;

-- Fortunaque perdat,
Opposita virtute, minas --
Fates greatest Threats be lost,
Where virtue Rules the Roast.
I read in a Book lately Printed upon occasion of this great Pestilence* that
in the time of that raging Sickness, Anno 1348. many People kept themselves up
close in their houses as in Castles; and many retired into deserts and solitary
places to secure and preserve themselves from its violence. But the Pest (as if
it knew no limits; nor could be contrould in its rage and fury, until the hand
that scattered it, restrained it) pursues those poor souls into their close
corners, and there destroys great numbers of them. And at the last, when they
saw, they had (like a bird in a net) by striving, entangled and endangered
themselves the more; they assumed a Christian and man like boldness; and
(resolving to welcome death in that terrible habit, if it fell to their Lot,
they) went promiscuously together* and became serviceable to each other, in
administering to one another necessities; and to crown this happy magnanimity
and fearless Resolution; it so pleased God, the Plague stayed.

And it is ingeniously observed by Mr. Kemp in his Treatise lately published,
page* 39. That in the ending (...) great sickness 1625. the people went
promiscuously (...) another, and the houses were quickly filled with (...) and
fresh comers out of the Country, and yet (...) infection followed. Thus we see
the conceit of (...) hurts more then the thing it self: Minus afficit (...)
^^tigatio, quam cogitatio. And since peoples (...) from their habitations, does
rather betray them (...) the arms of danger, then any way secure them (...) the
thing they fear, it argues professed Folly in any (...) for men may as well
abscond from the (...) presence, as to hope to hide themselves from his (...).

CHAP. VII.
(...) this present Plague was foretold by Astrology.
(...) to say much of that impertinent and worthless scoffer, whose mouth Satan
has lately opened, not only against most honorable and Learned Society of men
in the world (...) the College of Physicians!] but against the (...) of the
Stars and Heavens, and the Augures Coeli (as (...) pleased to term Astrologers)
because I (...) the Flux of his Pen, he understands the Starry (...) a
little; (if at all:) in that he [vainly] goes about to (...) and Eclipse them.
The man by his writing, seems (...) of that number, who for fear of giving that
honor (...) Celestial bodies is their due, are not ashamed of (...) more and
greater energy to a dunghill, or unto a (...) Lake or Pond, or a close sluttish
ally, etc. then unto (...) and ever-busied Creatures; whom God has over us,
that as secondary Causes, they might guide ^^ve^n all things in this inferior
world. But these are (...) prefer a Hog to Venus, embrace a Cloud for Juno!
(...) Aesops Ape, they cannot be content to hugg their own Ethiopian fancies,
etc. but must be idly adventurin^ (...) corrupt and poison the better-informed
judgments of others. Nor yet to examine his frivolous supposition of the
Plague its taking beginning from the disease called the Scorbu^e; or the Lues
Venerea its Rise from a soldier copulating with a foul Mare; as Holy Helmont
and himself dream: a most beastly and unsavory suggestion! and bespeaks the
Author and broacher thereof, to be Sordidu^ in co^tu; as Astrologers say those
are, that have Sa^urn and Venus in their Nativities, in Quadrate or Opposite
Aspect from beas^ial signs.

Not, I say, to take further or other notice of the Author o^ these and many
other insolent and unworthy passages in tha^ defiled Pamphlet, he calls A
consolatory advice, etc. it being (a^ I hear) under the examination of a better
hand: I shall in thi^ Chapter acquaint the world, that this great Pest was
predicted by Astrology, and that not by one Astrologer alone, but by several;
as by these several passages cited from several of their works is apparent.

1. Mr. John Booker in his Telescopium Uranicum, 1665 mentioning a text of Haly
de judiciis Astrorum, of the effect of a and (such an Aspect happening in the
Vernal figure thence predicts, That one part of the people of that Clyma^
(meaning our own) shall be destroyed, consumed and wast away

2. William Andrews in his Almanac for 1665. in the Judicials of the Aestival
figure thereof, has these words: A^ in regard he (that is, Saturn) is in the
eighth house [viz. the hou^ of death and mortality] he does seem thereby to
prenote MORTALITY, which will destroy and bring MANY to the^ Graves.

3. Thomas Trigge in his Calendarium Astrologicum, (...) in his Junes
observation thereof, has these words: I (...) much fear a sickly season in
earnest; from which evil God of (...) mercy protect this great and populous
City, for Mars possesse^ Gemini, the Ascendant of London. And it is observable
that the Sickness then began to increase.

4. In my own Ephemeris for the present year 1665. in the month April, at what
time the Pestilence first began to she^ it self, I had these Poetical
observations.

If England keep but from Sickness free;
Then England may a happy Kingdom be.
^hereby you see, I feared not only the Pestilence, but the ^eat damage that
thereby this Nation has sustained, and i^ like yet to undergo thereby.

5. And in my discourse of the Comets or Blazing Stars, page 47. thereof; after
a consideration of the Natural port^nts of the two first Comets, I subjoyn
these words; When we consider these several dreadful significations (which I
there at large mention, a^ any that list may read) it may put us all to our
^^^tany, From War, PLAGUE and Famine, Libera nos Do^^ine! Good Lord deliver us.

And in page 51. of the same book, as having a sufficient (...) vision of the
present Pest, from the apparition of those ^^lestial Monitor's the Comets, and
other eminent occurring Causes; I bewail the world by reason of the many and
terrible afflictions they denounce unto it, thus: The sword is an enemy, that
by the sword, a man of resolution and magnanimity, may contend with, and be in
hopes of a victory; but the PLAGUE and FAMINE are adversaries there is no fence
for, or defense against. They are so sure an Ambush, that the subtilty of all
the Machiavils in the world cannot enervate or destroy; enemies, that the
stoutest of men cannot take a revenge upon, although they see their dearest
friends murdered by them before their faces. And in page 53. and 54. in my
Catalogue of places that were by those Comets, etc. designed to suffer and
become passive; I name England and London. And although these predictions be
particular enough as to the thing in question, yet had it not been, that I was
lo^th to affright folks too much with the sense or thought of danger before it
came, I could have been much plainer; and much plainer I was also, in this very
particular Pest (some years before it came) to many of my peculiar and better
knowing friends, as are yet in the City; (some of them by my encouragement
only;) and I am confident are both ready and willing to a^^est the truth
hereof, if occasion required it; or if that, that I have now said from diverse
others, as well as my self, in print, do not satisfy in this matter.

Let this therefore (in this place) suffice, to prove to the ingenious, that by
Astrology, this present Pest was foretold; even as Hippocrates (that Prince of
Physicians) by the same Art, was also enabled to predict that raging Plague
which happened in his time; for the which curious skill, he is so honorably
remembered by Sir Christopher Heydon, in his unanswerable defense of Astrology,
as also by many other eminent and worthy Writers.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Air is unjustly suspected to lodge the Contagion.
IT is received generally for a truth, that the Noble Element of Air does
harbor and lodge the Contagion, and that men, etc. suck in a kind of venesick
poisonous matter therewith* and so come to be infected with the Pestilence.
Which i^ true, it proves Custom a most terrible Tyrant, in following whereof,
the Magistrates shut up people infected in Houses or Rooms, to prevent the
spreading thereof: For, if the Air be at such a time infected, and does really
harbor the Contagion; the hotter it is, the more infectious it needs must be,
and consequently the plague in far greater danger of increasing, by this
customary Care, then if it were wholly omitted. Nay, were the Air the Palace of
the Pestilence, in a time of Sickness, it would be even dangerous for persons
to assemble either in Churches, or Courts of Justice; nay for many to talk
together in a street, since the uniting of breaths must make an addition of
heat, unto that which was too hot and pestilential before: but we accuse the
Air unjustly to lodge the contagion, and that for these Reasons.

1. The Air is that Element, whose office it is to preserve all things, and
without which nothing can remain alive; and can we reasonably suppose it should
be able to estrange it self so much from its native quality, as to lodge within
its bosom so destructive an enemy as infection? The Air being a pure Element,
is attracted by the Lungs into man's body, and without it (says Dr. Brown)
there is no durable continuation of Life. It preserves the body by ventilation,
and by its power alone, the Natural flame or torch of life, is kept from
extinction. That therefore which by its natural virtue, is the preserver of
every thing that has life, cannot be presumed to entertain so unhappy and
cruel an inmate, as infection, it being supposed the grand enemy to, and
destroyer of Life.

2. Anaximenes the Milesian, in Plutarch, maintains that Air is the principle
of the world; and as our soul (says he) which is Air, keeps us alive; so
Spirit and Air maintain the being of the whole world. And we know it is for
want of Air that the earth refuses to bring forth its fruits; and it is for
the Aires sake we remove some Plants, and open the roots of others; or else
they either dye, or bring forth nothing worthy. Nay, Fishes (as one ingeniously
observes) though they breath not perceptibly; yet we see the want of Air kills
them: as when a long and tedious Frost, imprisons a Pond in Ice. It cannot
therefore be, that that Element which has all these noble and preserving
qualities, should lodge so foul a guest as the Contagion.

3. The Air (says learned Feltham) is not corruptible; we speak falsely, when
we say the Air infecteth; the Air it self ever clarifies, and is always working
out that taint, which would mix with it. Every breath we take, it goes unto our
heart to cool it. Our Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and in most Marrow, are all
vivified by their participation of Air; and so indeed is every thing that the
world holds; as if this were the Soul that gave it livelihood. It were
therefore great presumption, for so defiled and unclean a Companion as the
Contagion, to attempt the taking up of so fair and pure quarters, as the Air
affords: And however the Air is come to be charged, it is below Reason, to
think that Pure and Impure can at all agree. The Air therefore cannot lodge the
Contagion.

4. If the Contagion should keep its court in the Air, as the Air it self
altered, so should the Contagion: but we see the contrary is true, therefore
the Air has nothing to do in lodging with the Contagion.

The Learned Sir C. H. says, In a general mortality, we cannot impute an
infection to the Air, or to the operations of the Elements, as to intensive or
excessive heat or cold (which we must do, did the Contagion truly lodge there)
since it is evident even by Aristotle himself, that the Elements are altered,
and have their qualities from* heaven. And besides, the long continuance or
duration of a Pestilence, as sometimes a whole year, sometimes two or three,
does sufficiently prove, that it cannot be reasonably thought to proceed from
the Air, or the intention of heat and cold, or any other elementary qualities,
because they vary many times in the same day, and much more in succession of
seasons: And we know, that the state of the Air, etc. is of a quite different
and contrary disposition in Winter to that which it is in Summer; therefore the
Contagion cannot remain in the Air.

Nay, in that great Pestilence in Germany which happened in the years 1598. and
1599. the Learned Physicians of Vienna themselves acknowledge (at the instance
and request of the Archduke Matthias) that although they might presume some
near Cause thereof in the Air, yet the true and certain causes of it were in
the Heavens, the Planets and their Aspects, as is testified by Asuerus in
Iatromathematicis, p. 206. My Author yet goes further* and says, that they
mentioned a preceding Comet in the earthly sign Taurus (such a one as happened
with us at Christmas 1664.) and some notable Conjunctions of the Planets, to be
(Post Deum) the true and absolute causes thereof.

Now, if these Learned persons had been fully satisfied, that the Air had
lodged the Contagion, or that the infection had inhabited there; they needed
not to have climed to Heaven to find a more noble cause thereof.

If any shall ask me (now) whence comes the Pestilence? since I deny it to
inhabit the Air; I answer, that it comes from the Heavens; as in the first
Chapter I have already sufficiently proved, and it were but actum agere, to do
it here again. But if then any shall enquire further, how it comes? I answer,
by that Magnetic power of the heavens, by which all things in Nature, and
Natures self is preserved. As a Needle will work toward a Loadstone, though
through a board of considerable thickness; so our bodies bend to the influences
of the heavenly bodies, by whose power and virtue, they are attracted higher or
tower, in and through all the changes and chances of this mortal life. For* as
my worthy friend Dr. Ed. Bolnest, in his Med. Inst. ^. ^4. has truly urged it,
There is nothing above, but has its lik^^ess below; and whatever is below,
has the same virtue with (...) which is above. Heaven and earth, the things
above, and things below, are like two Lutes equally strung; the one being
touched, the other answers it, with a like sound.

Conclusion.
FRom what has been said in the preceding discourse, these several Conclusions
naturally emerge.

1. That the true and proper natural causes of the Pestilence, are the Aspects
and influences of the Heavens; and when we attribute so great an effect to
other less and inconsiderable causes, we strangely err: and make the Gates too
big for the ^i^y: the building too ponderous for the foundation. A Mouse cannot
cast a shadow like an Elephant, nor a Molehill like the Alpine mountains. If
the effect be great, so must the cause, else Nature knew not Geometry.

2. That the Pestilence cannot last above four years (i. e.) in one place or
Country; for in that time, it either abateth of it self, o^ is removed unto
some other Country, etc. as Celestial causes please to pre-appoint. And
therefore, they that assert Plagues to continue, sometimes eight, sometimes
fifteen years, or more [I mean, in its raging effects] are wrong in their
Conclusions, and not to be believed. He that by second causes appoints
beginnings to Pestilences, proportionates unto them proper Mediums and Periods.

3. That the several Plagues which happened Anno 1593, 1603, 1625* and 1636.
received their beginnings, increase, abatements, and periods, proportionate to
the energy of Celestial Influences; and that the Stations, Transits, and ill
Aspects of Saturn and Mars, in a time of Sickness, are the ^ugmentors thereof;
and the Transits, Aspects and Station^ of Jupiter and Venus, the Alleviators.

4. That this present Plague (God not a^^ering or suspending the power he has
given to second ca^ses) will abate about the later end of September 1665. and
the (...) (...) less apace.

5. That the Pestilence of it self is not catching: That it is the timidity of
our affections, which occasions the (supposed) Infection.

6. That those persons which fly from the Plague, are the most subject unto
it; by seeking to ^hu^ dangers, we often rush into them. God has not a
con^roversie ^o much with wood and stones, as with men* and the rod of his
anger, is not so much for punishment of Cities and Houses, as their
Inhabitants. God can find us o^t* though we hide our selves behind Rocks and
Mountains.

7. That this present Plague was fore^old by Astrology; and that no other Art
whatsoever, is capable of predictions of this kind.

8. That the Air is unjustly suspected to lodge the Contagion: it being so
noble an element, and so advantageous, that without it we cannot live or move*
It is the only preserver of mankind; and the Causa sine qua ^on, of the
vivification of all things. Which seriously considered, whispers unto us, this
great truth:

That the shutting up of People in a time of Sickne^s, and d^nying them the
advantage of the Air, is no small propinquate cause (at least) of the increase
of the Co^^agion.

For by how much the more Men are abridged their Customary liberty, by so much
the more are they subject to Fear; and the greater their Fear is, the seener do
they meet the ill they dread. But see more of this in the sixth Chapter of the
forego^ng d^s^curse.

In the time of the Levitical Law, men were not to be shut up above seven days,
and then only the uncl^an person* and this after the Priest had seen good
reason for it; and if he amended either before, or at the seven days end, then
the Priest pronounced him clean. But we in this Age, shut up not only the
unclean* but the Sound and Sick together; (the only way to be rid of all; if
at the least (...) be such a thing as Infection) And i^ in a Family of ten or
more, one (...) (...) though all the rest be sound and healthy, we shut up the
living, for the sake of ^he dead; and debar them the benefit of (those great
and known preservers of health) the Air, and Exercise, a Month at least
together.

A Custom strangely tyrannous! and I am afraid savors more of Barbarism then
Christian^ty; and as it is (...) to the Laws of Old, and to Charity; so beyond
question it is, a^^ ^ath been considerably detrimental, and injurious to the
Lives of very many thousands in this great City* whose only ^lory is in her
numerous Inhabitants.

FINIS.

