A true and lively CHARACTER Of a right COMMUNICATING Churchmember; Brifely
laid down in Eighteen several ARGUMENTS: Proving an absolute necessity of
separating, not only, from all that are openly Profane, but from such also,
who have not some visible, that is to say, probable work of the sanctifying
Spirit upon them.

By JOHN GOBERT Master of Arts, and Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Sumptner for Tho: Brewster, and Greg: Moule, at the
three Bibles under Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1650.

THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
FOr the Author to commend his own Work, if it were praiseworthy, yet it is
altogether improper, remembering the old saying, Laudet te os alienum, non tuum:
And indeed it deserves no praise, chiefly for the manner of handling, when in
reading the very first page, thou will meet with many Inconsonances, even to
Grammar; wherein the Author confesses his weakness, and craves thy pardon:
Moreover, cease to marveile, for these papers were written by a dead man;
nevertheless I counsel thee to read this Book, and weigh the matter, delight
thy self in seeking the truth, and so then wilt begin to understand the Riddle,
how a dead man may write Books.

Thine, JOHN GOBERT.

To the High Court of Parliament, AND To the Council of State, AS ALSO To His
Excellency; Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General of all the Parliaments Forces.
John Gobert Minister of the Word, wishes increase of Grace and Happiness
here and hereafter.

Right Honeurable,
THe holy Apostle, exhorting to Christian duties, among other important
Exhortations, has this one, viz. That we ought to be always ready to give an
answer to every one that asks a reason of the hope that is in us, with
meekness and reverence, 1 Pet. 3. 15. If in the performance of this duty, we
are obliged to one, much more to many; if to such as have not Power to Examine,
much sooner to such as have: And although your suppliant not being called upon to
give an answer, might in this particular justly plead Exemption, as one, who in
this boldness, might seem rather to Create a business to himself, than to
perform any task imposed: Yet, as often as he confidereth, first, the
condition of his Calling, being both a Minister of the Gospel, and a Member of
the Commonwealth. Secondly, the condition of the present Times, being (in some
respects) the Worst, as they are the Last, wherein Satan, and all his
malignant Instruments, do by all ways and means, seek what they can, to
obstruct and retard (at least) if not utterly to overthrow, that blessed work
of Reformation so happily begun by you. Thirdly, reflecting upon those (too
justly grounded Fears and Jealousies which your Honors yet have) lest the
people of this Nation, chiefly those of our Calling, should be overmuch
wantting to themselves, in not joining with you in your Endeavors to promote
the Churches good. I say, from these; and the like considerations, your
Suppliant could not but presume, that it would not be altogether unwelcome, or
ill taken, if a poor Minister of the Gospel, in a matter of such deep
Concernment, upon which, the whole Fabric of this blessed Reformation, as upon
its proper Hinge, turns; but has also, as far as concerns an External
Church Communion, an influence into the Rights and Privileges of all the
Faithful. Do choose for this once, and in this so weighty a Matter, to deliver
his judgment, not that he attributes any thing to this weak and light
skirmish which he has set upon; or that this most Excellent Cause, should from
the Authors handling it, seem to receive any Grace or Luster: He is far from
conceiving any such improbability; His only Aim and Design in this
undertaking, was partly to give an occasion to the Reader, from the light which
do so manifestly break forth in this brief Polemicall discourse, to give
occasion to think how great good might (in this Subject Matter) to the
Churches further Edification be done. If some one of stronger Gifts, or greater
Abilities, would undert^ke it, partly being as a Spectator, induced to behold
the fru^t of Rebecca, finding two contrary births to struggle in her womb, I
mean the blessed issue of all th^se Church-agonies which these latter times
have afforded, I could not, but in the Spirit admire with Moses at this great
sight, and to become an humble Suitor to all your Honors, that since this
Zara, which in the Primitive times did even then put forth his hand to become
the First borne, and yet, for causes best known to the Divine Majesty, has
pulled back his hand again in that; for most of the Ages since the Churches
Infancy, this Zara, for the scarlet thread of Light and Truth, which Divine
Providence, like Tamars Midwife, did even (as it were) ^h^n put about his hand,
has made all the Spectators since that time, rather to look and wish for
Zara's birth, than to see it; but lo now this Zara is come: Pha^es the first
borne, I mean, the party-colored, or externally-spotted Churchmember, ha^h
already acted his part, too well known to all spectators, ^o the many fearful
breaches, which to others scandal, and his own greater loss and
disparagement he has made in the Womb of the Church. Lo now his brother Zara
is borne, to be known to all that are spir^tually sighted, by the scarlet
thread of Light and Truth about him. Receive him therefore, I most humbly
beseech your Honors: He calls upon, and cries to God, as his Father; and
upon your Honors, as both Midwife and Nurse. Therefore, as you have in the
provision of the sincere Milk of the Word, showed your tender care of this
younger Brothers inward Man; you would also vouchsafe every Zara your
Protection from the wrong and violence of his Mothers children, who would
faigne make him Keeper of their Vineyard.

My meaning is, that according to the Place and Power God has set you in, you
would be Patrons and Protectors of the Sons of Peace, that Ministers, or
People, might not dash themselves one against another, with severitie, and
austeritie, for matters Circumstantiall, whiles both hold the Head, Christ. So
shall you oblige thousands, and my self among the rest, with much love in the
Lord Christ to serve you.

Your Honors most humbly devoted, in all Services to his power, JOHN GOBERT.

That a true Church ought only to be gathered of visible Saints, and that men
either openly wicked, or merely civil; that is to say, such as are not seen
beside their formal profession, to have some work of the Spirit upon them,
ought not to be taken into Church Fellowship.
These following arguments do most manifestly prove the first argument is
taken from Christ's example, in gathering his Disciples.

Thus,

WHatsoever work or practice do abhor from Christ's example, and in that also
wherein we can follow him; that kind of work or practice is not lawful; but
to gather a Church other then of visible Saints, does abhor, and is repugnant
to Christ's example and practice, and in that also wherein we can follow him,
ergo, to gather a Church of such as are not visible Saints, is not lawful.

The major proposition is apparent, because we are bound to become followers
of him as dear children, Ephesians. 5. 1. Paul, that great Archi^^ct of the
Churches of the Gentiles, would have the Corinthians follow him as he followed
Christ. 1 Cor. 1. 11. And he h^th l^ft us an example, that we should follow his
steps, 1 P^t. 2* 21. And in this as in other practices for two causes;

First, It Is the duty of such as are Church-gatherers, to separate the precious
from the vile.

Secondly, Because the Apostles did in this particular work exactly follow
Christ's example. 1 P^t. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 1, 2* 9. 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16. Acts 2. 41, 42.
If it be excepted against, in answer to the major proposition, that it is not
f^ll and sufficient, that Christ's example is not, though imitable, yet in this
cause, at all binding the Churches in gathering their members; and the reason
they will allege, is, that so Prelacy and Presbytery may come in for a jus
d^vinum in matter of Church Government, for that they also can fetch examples
from the Scripture to warrant their cause against all opponents; to which is
again replied, negando, we deny that there is any such example as this in all
the Scripture to warrant a jus divinum, either for Presbytery, or Prelacy,
because we are to distinguish between Christ's a^^ the Apostles examples, such
as may be called occasion all, arising only from circumstance of time, perfers
and places not simply binding, but are to the present Church as arbitrary and
prudentiall ways, to use and refuse as they see cause: and examples of this
kind are nothing material for a jus divinum, though they be derived from
Scripture.

A second sort of examples are such as may be called moral, such as hold forth
duties and graces which ought to be in Christians of this nature, is the
subject matter we now speak of, and are binding to all who desire to keep
faith and a good conscience; so that the major prop^si^ion will stand valid
against all opposers.

For the proof of the minor we need go no further then to Christ's 12.
Apostles, an exact pattern of all Churches which ought to be under the New
Testament* when all were Saints to the eye of others, J^das not once suspected
by any of the eleven.

Secondly, We argue from the several ends of gathering Churches, which are,

1. That God may be glorified in his Saints.

2. That such as be gathered, may be further edified and built up.

3. That others may be daily added to the Churches alread* gathered; that an
unqualified Church gathering of such as have been hitherto for the most part in
this Nation, is repugnant to all these ends, will be abundantly proved.

And first an argument in general, viz. as a gatherig of Churchmembers not
visibly holy, is repugnant to all these ends, thus,

Whatsoever is opposite and repugnant to those ends for which Churches are to
be gather^d, is not in the gathering of them to be admitted, or practiced; but
to gather Church Members other then of visible Saints, i^ repugnant to the ends
for which Churches are to be gathered; therefore to gather Churches of members
not visibly holy, is not to be practiced.

The major proposi^ion will be granted by all parties.

The minor remains to be proved by parts:

First, That any other gathering then such as are visibly holy, is repugnant to
Gods honor, thus;

Whosoever are not enabled by the Spirit in some measure to show forth the
virtues which God has given them, all such are most unfit to be gathered into
Church Fellowship; for the proof hereof, see 1 Pet. 2. 9. But men either
openly scandalous, or merely civil: and merely civil, we call not only such
as have no principle of Religion in them, but such also as are barely taught of
men by way of catechizing, I say such cannon show forth their virtues,
therefore they are not to be gathered into Church fellowship: If any will
except against the d^scription of a civ^ll honest man, a^ ^^ who has in him,
and is able ^o answer to the grounds of Religion, (...)z how such a man can be
c^l^d one merely civil: W(...) very well, because the Scripture will no where
warrant any middle between a civil man and a Saint, 1 Cor. Chap. 1. to verse
9. is a men sed proof of this, if a man be called to be a Saint; we or not to
understand of an outward call, but such as call* as wher^b^ they are pro^a^ly
at least sanct^fied in Christ Jesus* and therefore the Apostle puts these
two together, s^nctified in Christ Jesus, and Saints by calling; to show that
none are to go for Saints, or be counted Church members, which have not b^side
the bare knowledge of the grounds of Religion, some work of the Spirit on
them; see for this in John 17 20, 21. whence we may briefly thus argue.

All that professes Christ ought to be one among themselves, as Christ is one
with the Father; but such kind^ of members, viz. men mee^ly civil, or openly
scandalous, cannot (...) one with the Saints, as Christ is one with the Father,
therefore suc^ ^^e not to be taken in for Church Members.

As to the proposition, there will be no other evasion for answer, then to say,
that the place forecited is to be understood of Saints invisibly holy, such as
may be endued with holiness, though not gathered into Church Fellowship, to
which, thus;

First, in this answer is a fallacy, we call a peti^io principii, or begging of
the question; for it runs upon this supposall, that there is such a
Church-creature as a civil wel-catechized honest man, and to make way for such
a creature, all Scriptures now which do in their nature exclude, are by
supposing, such an one to be, brought by the opponent to uphold him, but this
remains yet to be prove^.

Secondly, Against such an answer we urge the words of the Text, and that in
two respects;

1. In respect of the nature of the union, which the words hol^ forth; John 17.
21. That they may be all one, as thou Father art in me and I in thee, that
they may be also one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me.
And verse. 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one,
and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me, whence we first argue,

Whatsoever union in the Church do not hold a strict and a special or
specificall (if I may so speak) resemblance to that most blessed and sacred
union which is between the Father and the Son, that is not the union commended
or intended by our Savior in this Scripture: but to say, that Christ in
holding forth an union which ought to be in the Church, understood it only of
an internal or spiritual union, and not also of an external, does this, viz.
it urges such an union as cannot hold resemblance to that most sacred union
which is between the Father and the Son, therefore the internal union only
is not the union intended by our Savior.

Both propositions are sufficiently manifest from the words, if we rightly
observe, because the condition and perfection of union in the Church ought to
be in this world, as is the perfection of unity, which is between the Father
and the Son. Now this union is most perfect, and that also whereby the Father
and the Son do enjoy each the other mutually, actually, most bless^dly, and
immediarely; where one has a real influence into the other, for which cause
the Son, as God is said to live by the Father, John 6. 57. Such must be the
fruition as far as is imitable by a creature in a Churchmember, they ought to
be where this union can be had, each to other, and in a spiritual and
convenient way* as is the Father to the Son, or the Son to the Father, but in
members scattered abroad as the Scripture speaks, there cannot be that
resemblance of perfection of unity as is between the Father and the Son,
because that sort of Members are often distressed for want of fellowship with
their fellow Saints, as was Esiah, who desired to live no longer, for want of
it. And in times of persecution, for want of this Church Fellowship* the Saints
of God have complained, that they are as an owl in the desert, or as a Sparrow
on the House top: therefore the 17 chapter of St. John, and the like places,
must be understood of the Saints actual enjoying one another, not only by an
internal, but also by an external Church Fellowship. I say again, what so
has been, and is de facto, yet de jure, it ought to be, and shall be, at
Christ's second coming, in spite of the Devil and all his Malignant Instruments.

Secondly, We argue from the end of the union intended by our Savior in these
words; That the world may believe, that thou have sent me.

Whence briefly thus,

Whatsoever does keep men from believing that Christ is sent of the Father;
That in gathering of a Church is not to be practiced: but to admit of any for
Church members, which do not visibly at least resemble the holiness and unity
of God and Christ, is to keep men from believing that Christ is sent of the
Father; therefore to gather into Church Fellowship such as are not visibly
holy, is not to be practiced.

The minor is thus proved.

Whatsoever is held forth as a fit, sole, and sufficient means to gain men to
believe, and is not so ordained by God, this cannot gather men unto Christ: and
consequently keeps them from believing, because our Savior says, Whosoever
gathers no^ with me, scatters; but to think that the preaching of the word
is this fit, sole, and sufficient means, to bring men to Christ, is to think
otherwise then God has ordained; therefore such as come no better furnished to
gather believers, do so far keep men from believing that Christ is sent of the
Father.

The major I suppose will be denied by none.

The minor is as manifest from the Scripture; for though it cannot be denied
that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word, Romans 10. 17. So that
the word received by faith i^ as the plowed ground sown; but I demand then,
how can men plough their ground without a plough: All the Scriptures will
testify, even from Genesis to the end of the Revel. that either miracles, ^r the
Church rightly ordered, or rightly gathered, coming in place, have been ever
as the plough to the doctrine of the Gospel; we shall find 3. things requisite
to gain the world to become believers.

1. Men must preach purely, that in point of Doct^i^e they may resemble the Sun.

2. The potentiall or material members to be gathered, must in their
conversation be fair as the Moon.

3. This is not all neither; Preachers and Professers for all this will be
esteemed of as a company of imper^inent and lightheaded, or vainglorious men;
therefore a third thing required, she must be terrible either by miracles or by
all right done here as an Army with banners.

3. We argue from that 17. of John, explained by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 4. 5. One
body, one spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father, etc.
whence briefly thus;

None are to be taken into the body or external fellowship of the faithful;
but as such are of on* faith and one spirit with them, it is evident; for if it
were otherwise, there must be either 2. bodies, or 2, spirits.

But civil honest men, or men barely catechized have not one spirit, that is,
are not endued with spiritual graces as the faithful are; Ergo, they are not
to be received into Church fellowship with them: both propositions must be
assented unto by such as will take Scripture for their rule.

3. We argue from the third end of gathering churches, which is, that members
already gathered may be further built up, thus;

Whatsoever does of its own nature threaten the destruction, or at least retard
the growth of the whole body; that in gathering of a church is not to be
suffered; but to admit of a member not visibly holy, is either to destroy the
whole, that is, to threaten with destruction, because the true members of
Christ cannot be uterly, that is to say, spiritually destroyed, or to hinder
and retard the growth of other members, therefore a mixture of Church members,
or taking into Churchfellowship such as are not visibly holy, is not to be
suffered.

The major will be easily granted; because whatsoever is done in a Church, must
be done to the edification of all: When one sins, all are scandalized, 1 Cor.
5. 3. Moreover, several members in a Church are and must be to that Church
whereof they are members, as the members in a natural body, whereof all, even
the weakest must serve to, and be active for the whole body, as is plainly
taught, 1 Cor. 12. Romans 12. 5. All the members of a Church should at least
visibly and (...) as they say, be what the forwardest profess they are,
because all are acted by the same spirit of grace, and live the same life of
faith; they all draw essence and growth from one mystical head, even as the
natural head does complete and actuate all it is members, 1 Cor. 2. Therefore
now if any mystical member want that supply of spiritual nourishment as the
Apostle further teaches, Ephesians. 4. 15. It must necessa^ily at least retard and
keep back the growth of the whole body; neither can this be understood of one
that outwardly is good, and inwardly unsound, because such hurt none but
themselves. The minor proposition is proved sufficiently from the Church of the
Jews, where the coldness of morallists, whom the Apostle calls Abraham's
carnal ^eed did much hinder the growth, and scandalize the graces of the truly
godly among them, see Lu. 3. 7. If any will from the blemishes of the Jewish
Church go about to affirm, that notwithstanding all those blemishes, our
Savior did not unchurch them, as some do in these days, such shall receive
their answer at the 8th Argument in this Treatise. In the mean time it will not
be amiss for such as are better enlightened, to take it for granted, that the
maine Remora, or Stop ship (if I may so call it) of a through-reformation is
this uncircumcised civill-honest man, suffered to be reputed as a member, and
yet by Divine ordinance ought not to be, or to be so reputed; of whom Church
gatherers have not to say as our Savior of the fruitless figtree, that though
it was to be cut down, yet he expected fruit, and good reason, because all
this while they were his plant; but of such members as these in our Churches,
Christ would have said, not why cumbreth it, but, wherefore came it into the
vineyard? the vineyard was no place for it.

A fourth Argument for the proof hereof is taken from the proper and
specificall nature of a church, thus,

That which puts no difference between the Churches of Christ and other
societies and religious men which are in the world; that in constituting and
gathering of church members, is not to be admitted; but to allow of members not
visibly holy, is to do this, viz. It puts no difference between the
Churches of Christ, and other religious which are in the world, therefore such
kind of members are not to be allowed.

The major proposition needs no proof, for that there must be a difference
between the churches of Christ and other men, their religions must not only
differ, but the professors of it, else how do the true churches always
contract an odium from the world, how else can that of Isa. 8. 18. be made
good; Behold I and the children which thou have given me, are ^or sign^s and
for wonders in Israel. If this difference ought not to be at least in their
conversations, how can the world disclaim them for theirs, who belong to
Christ. If you were of the world, the world would love his own; but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hatetb you, John 15. 19. It Is
not their religions that makes them odious; for it is granted by all parties,
that though the religion of Christ is a paradox to carnal men, yet such as
touching profession do often become professors of that which before they
hated, Quanto retro oderunt, quod nunc amant quiour que dolent odisse quod
prius res^i^rant, says Augustine in point of conversion from false beliefs,
neither is it a form external which contracteth it; for in this professions
may agree; Neither is it the practice of moral duty; for if any thing gains
the worlds affections to the church, it is the churches conversation to the
world-ward, therefore it must be their z^ale and their affections for heaven,
the imediate fruit of all necessary and spiritual graces, which causes this
hatred from the world, and consequently puts a constant difference between
the Churches of Christ and other religious professors, as our Savior speaks,
not simply or singly of their Religion, but of the persons, who by the manner
of professing it, render themselves odious, because I have chosen you,
therefore the world hatceth you.

The assumption or the minor proposition proves it self something too
manifestly, for setting aside the empty and bare title of infant baptism, with
a little knowledge by rose, which some meetly catechized in the christian
profession may attain unto; which for curiosity* sake, or other ends, a J^w or
a Turk may be so far principled in, as we for the like ends may aff^ct to be
seen in the knowledge of the Jewish Talmud, or the Turkish Al^^ron. I say
again, setting these things aside which concern the profession it self, not
the professors of it, what difference now in point of z^ale and suitable
conversation between hundreds of something more then our common professors,
and an honest Turk or a J^w; for does not mere nature and morality teach men to
think something rever^n^ly of any thing they account for Religion, be the
profession what it will, are we then said to be risen with Christ, to live the
some life that he lives, to be continually acted by the spirit, and all this
to have no more zeal to our religion which we grant for true, a defiance to
all other, then a Turk or a J^w have to theirs, a^sit.

A fifth A^gument to prove our purpose is taken, both a possibili and comm^do,
that is to say, from that which is both possible to be done, and best to be
done, thus,

Whatsoever may well be done, and what is most profitable to ^e done, that in a
work of weight and moment ought not to be negl^cted; but to gather visible
Saints or members visibly holy, is a thing ^oth which may be done, and which is
most profitable to be done. Ergo, in so weighty a work it ought not to be
neglected.

The Minor is sufficiently evident, because in all our purposes and
undertakings, we ought to go the nearest and speediest way to the effecting of
any thing, much more when it is of special weight and concernment.

The minor proposition is proved by parts: First, That it may be done; and
this, first, from the power the true Church has ever had, both in taking in,
and casting out of Members. All do grant, Papists, Lutherans, and others, that
the Church Governors, rightly qualified, do receive from Gods Spirit a power
of discerning Members worthy and unworthy, as far as concerns the
constitution of a visible Member; leaving the inner man to God; else what use
of the keys; why should that hold bound in heaven, and loosed in heaven, which
by them is bound and loosed on earth? Moreover, that which makes them known to
the world, may easily make them known one to another, or to such as can better
judge: But the visible holiness is known in part to the world, therefore far
sooner to such as have better judgments, John 13. 19. By this shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one toward another.
Furthermore, of one and the same thing, there is the same reason and
consideration: But it is granted by all parties, one and other, who profess
the Christian Religion, That holiness may visibly or probably, (which is
enough for the constituting of a Churchmember) appear in some; why not in
others also; since holiness, whereverit is, is to sin and corruption, as light
is to darkness, or as life to death; the former common sense teaches may be
discerned; why should not faith also discern such qualified Members; therefore
out of all doubt or question it is a thing may be done.

The sixth Argument is drawn from the great benefit which will come of such a
qualified Church-gathering, thus:

Whatsoever does most anger and salt the corruptions of men, and so disposes
them to a blessed care, that is the best way, and likeliest to do most good:
But this does the gathering of such qual^fied members, it does most anger and
salt men's corruptions. Ergo, it is a necessary medium to cure men of thr
maladies of sin, and consequently a most profitable work.

The major Proposition will be granted, without further proof, because all
that are taught of God, do know, that though to anger men simply, may prove
scandalous; yet to anger men's corruptions is profitable to dispose them to
repentance.

The Minor, which is, that the taking of visible Saints, only into
Church Fellowship, have most angered the world, is proved diversely; first, from
that which has been done, the conversion of souls, and gathering of Churches;
secondly, that which is daily done for this end and purpose.

For the first, what other work provoked the envy of Christ and his Apostles
malignant Countrymen, then the effectual work of their preaching, to the
gathering of men into an holy society and fraternity among themselves? It is
granted by all that are godly, that for matter of Doctrine, carnal men have
always lain dark unto it, they have not known what has been preached,
neither have they had either the wisdom, or the patience to enquire or
examine, but when by a necessary separation and withdrawing from their
communion, the godly made a Church among themselves, and went about to save
themselves from a froward generation, this was the work which madded them; see
for this Acts* the second, and forty, and forty one, compared with the Rulers
carriage Acts 4, 2. had not the people by a sacred Church Communion been
subject to have been drawn from them, they would no doubt have been far more
moderate toward the Apostles, see Acts 19, 16. it was the peoples turning from
darkness to light, and gathering from into a Sect, as they called it among
themselves, which so much angered them.

Secondly, we argue from that which is daily done by the course of an ordinary
Ministry.

What Preachers soever have in a blameless and warrantable way provoked most
contumely and obloquy from the wicked world; these are they who have converted
most, and done most good by their preaching; but such as have stood most for
visible holiness in Church Members, have contracted to them most contumely and
obloquy from the wicked world; therefore these are they who have converted
most, and done most good by their preaching. Daily experiment will prove the
Minor; Let a Minister never so well gifted be of this judgment, That any may
be received into Church Communion, who live honestly, and can answer to a
Catechize, and what store of Converts will they have.

The seventh Argument is from pregnancy of Scripture, for this purpose, of a
lawful and necessary separation from the world in matter of Church fellowship,
thus:

Whatsoever opinion or practice do make void the authority and rule of
Scripture; that opinion, or that practice is not by any rrue Believer to be
embraced; but to receive any other into Church fellowship, then such as are
visibly holy, does make void the Authority and Rule of Scripture; therefore
such kind of practice is not lawful.

The Major Proposition is easily granted.

The Minor is thus proved.

Whatsoever opinion or practice do send us from the plain, literal, and
Gramaticall sense of the Scripture, to the glosses and uncertain conjectures
of men, that of necessity must make void the authority and rule of Scripture;
but to make any other Church Members, then such as are visibly holy, does this,
viz. It sends us from the plain, literal, and grammatical sense of
Scripture, to the various glosses and conjectures of men, Ergo.

The assumption is easily proved from Esaias 52. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 17. as many as are
of opinion, that that Scripture, and the like, are to be understood of
Idolators, that we ought not to mingle with them in their vain Superstition,
and Will Worship, if they go no further, they must come short of the true
meaning of the Spirit in such Scriptures, because Idolatry is but one sort and
kind of uncleanness; but that in Esaias forbids all, saying, Touch no unclean
thing, Whence we come to demand to be resolved in two things: First, what it is
to touch any thing unclean? Secondly, whether civil honesty, or to speak more
properly, whether civil Moral men, although they are skilled to answer a
Catechize, whether such be not for all that, as yet in a state of uncleanness?
to both which demands i^e receive a resolution from Scripture, first men touch
not only, in living and mingling with them in their evil works, but to eat
the Sacrament with them, as 1 Cor. 6. uli. with such no not to eat; this cannot
be understood of the other kind of eating, which isi granted by the Apostle to
be lawful, when he says, That otherwise we should go forth of the world. To
be familiarly acquainted with civil honest men, and to invite such, and bid
them welcome to our Table, I suppose no wise man will ^ay the contrary; but to
have Church fellowship with them, here at many scruple, and that for good
cause: Secondly, suppose that the eating there mentioned, is meant of a civil,
and not a Sacramental eating, yet the Sacramental is meant also, and not
excluded; which made our Prelates as much out as they were, in the
administration of Church Discipline, first, to forbid the sacramental, and
then when the greater excommunication came forth, to forbid the other kind of
eating; for the like purpose is Rev. 2. 19 20. All will grant, that Ministers
are not forbiden to suffer such to come and hear therefore Ephesus Angels sin
was in suffering such to partake of the Ordinances, in way of special
communion. For the proof of the second, Whether civil men be not in a state
of uncleanness, I appeal to the consciences of all such as are taught of God.

An eighth Argument for the proof of this purpose, is from the manifest and
certain difference which ought to be between the Jew and the Gentile, thus:

Whatsoever belief or practice do confound the Synagogue of the Jews, with the
Churches of the Gentiles, that belief or practice is not lawful: But to take
in Church Members, such as are not visibly holy, does this, It confounds the
Synagogue of the Jews with the churches of the Gentiles; therefore to take in
such sort of church members, is not lawful.

That these two churches ought not to be confounded, but apparently to differ,
we have Scripture to confirm it, as Romans 3. 1. the Jews are privileged much
every way above the Gentiles, and the covenant, and the promises, and the
glory, belonged to these; not so properly to the Gentiles, Romans 9. 4. And what
greater privilege could there be, next to that of inheriting the Kingdom of
heaven, then to be a church member, so far as to the partaking of all the
privileges, proper and peculiar to that Nation; and yet to be unholy at least,
if not outwardly profane; therefore all of that Nation, both one and another,
were forced to an outward circumcision; whence, though never so unworthy, they
were yet styled the children of the Kingdom, children and sons of Abraham,
who only had right to the childrens bread. The ten Tribes, as corrupt as they
were, and as great Apostates from their God, were for all this, styled Gods
people, the Nation whom he would own above all Nations in the Earth, Amos 3.
1, 2. thus was it with the true Olive, and the cause of this kind of
indulgence was, that they might be placed among the Nations, as a candle or a
lantern in a dark place: It was requisite that all they, the church being
then so small, it was necessary that this people, every one of them, should by
those many carnal ordinances and ceremonies which they held forth be some
light to the world; but now since the calling of the Gentiles, the Church being
spread far and near, it is not needful that every one that professes Christ
should go for a member, because men do not now stand in need of such
qualified members; therefore when Malachie prophesies of this difference which
should be for time to come, he tells us that the Gentiles should offer a pure
offering; we demand then in what since pure? First did not the Jew offer
according to the prescript of Moses Law? if otherwise, how came they then to be
so much upbraided by those strict observances, as Esaias the first, and the sixty
sixth, Chapter. Secondly, were there not many truly godly amongst them? why then
is it said that the Gentiles should offer a pure offering which the Jews did
not? therefore we are here to understand a figure, in this phrase, of a pure
offering, which is a Metonimie of the adjunct: the offering being put for the
offerers: thus food was by the Apostle called pure or impure, according to the
purity or impurity of such as received it, Titus the first and last; So the
word of God is said to grow, because it was an instrument of growth to some; thus
the Gentiles were to offer a pure offering, not in substance but in the
circumstance of the persons, when all as far as humane judgment in way of
charity could discern were to be outwardly and visibly holy.

A ninth Argument is taken from the great scandal which will follow such kind
of Church gathering, as have been hitherto generally practiced, thus:

Whatsoever does of it self, and in its own nature scandalize men from
becoming the true servants of Christ, that in gathering of Church Members is
not to be practiced, but to take Members into Church Fellowship not visibly
holy, is to scandalize men from becoming the true servants of Christ; ergo to
gather Members not visibly holy is not to be practiced.

The Major Proposition being granted.

The Assumption or Minor is thus proved.

Whatsoever causes or makes one not yet regenerate, not to see an absolute
necessity of being regenerate and borne a new, that is it which does scandalize
men from becoming the true servants of Christ, but to take in Members not
endued, that is to say, not probably, at least endued with visible holiness*
does this videlicet, it blinds men and lets them not to see an absolute
necessity of regeneration; ergo, to take in Members not visibly holy does
scandalize men from becoming the true servants of Christ.

Both Propositions are apparent by instance, as thus: Take one meetly
catechized in the principles of the Christian Religion, let such an one make an
historical narration of his faith; such as if the Devils were put to it,
Saint James says they could do the like, but now for zeal and inward
affection to that he knows (God wot) nothing is to be discerned by any
judicious Christian, to make him hope that in the judgment of charity such an
one is a regenerate Christian, let this mere outside and formal Professor
notwithstanding be admitted and allowed of for a Church member, whereby he
apprehends according to the old and blind belief that he is a member of
Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven (and to
speak as it is, what else does the actual receiving of any into Church
communion but presuppose all this) as far as concerns the satis^action of
others, and that commonly which satisfies others, deludeth him by making such
a qualified Member believe that he is the very same that others take him for) I
say therefore the foundation of Church fellowship being thus laid, let the
Minister now according to his duty, and the spirit of holiness God has given
him, notwithstanding all this, press hard for inward sanctity, let him in
meekness and in the demonstration of the Spirit set and prove unto him b^
pregnant and undeniable scriptures that to be an heir of heaven, we must truly
loo^e after not only an outward f^ll^wship with men, bu^ an inward communion
with God also; I say, let such doctrines as these be pressed and applied, how
will such an one already conceited that he is a child of God, as he is a Church
Member, put off the energie and edge (if I may so speak) of these more inward
marks of qualification for Heaven, with such fallacies and parralogisnes as
these are, how that we should do so indeed, and twere well if we could do as
the Minister preaches; God forgive us, we all come short of what we should
do, and the Minister good man would have us all do well, and thus our outside
moral formalist put^e^h off the most necessary instructions as of all others
which are marks of salvation, with I know not what is fitting only and
expedient to be done, whereas if such an one be admitted, only as an hearer,
and kept as it were at the threshold of the Church, and be told by the
Minister, and that he sees the Ministers doctrine in this particular, to be
followed and seconded by a Church practice, that he ought as well to be taught
of God as of men, and that he must be discerned by some better able then
himself to have some inward touch, and to have an affection at least probably
to what he professes, this may happily startle such an one, and make him to
have other conceits for Heaven, and may by the grace of God, not only gain
him to be an outward Churchmember, but to be an inward and true member of
Christ Jesus.

A tenth argument to prove our purpose is taken from the suffering such
Churches, as were already planted by the Apostles, in those corruptions they
after fall into; thus,

Whatsoever was unlawful in Churches for suffering unqualified Members that
was enough to have kept them from being taken in at first; but Churches have
been always threatened, and reproved for suffering unqualified Members; Ergo
it was enough to have kept them from being taken in at first: both propositions
are sufficiently manifest.

The sequel of the Major relieth upon the old axiom, sicut se res habet in
esse sic in operari, moreover, common reason does dictate what ought not, or
what is found unlawful at last, was first unlawful.

The Minor Proposition is pregnant Scripture, as in the Revelation; and where
also is no difficulty in matter of sense, as all will grant, not only the
Members themselves are reproved and threatened; but the Churches also whereof
they were Members ^or suffering such, see Revelation the second and fourteenth
and twentieth verses, also Corinthians the first, the fifth and the sixth
Chapters, when the Apostle tells us that a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump; Whither a well catechized Moralist have purged ^ut his old leaven, and
become a new lump, with some that are more universally conscientious, let that
be left to the scanning of all that are wise to Salvation.

The eleventh Argument is taken from the danger of confonnding the infirmities
of the faithful, with the vices of unregenerate men, thus:

The taking in of Members other then such as are visibly godly, do confound
the infirmities of the regenerate, with the vices of the unregenerats; Ergo,
such a Church-gathering is not lawful: the consequent I suppose to be strong
enough without further proof; Who is it professing the Gospel and zeal to the
Christian Religion, will not affirm that whatsoever causes con^usion in the
Church^, specially as to the right frame and constitution of it, is to be
shunned as rocks at Sea? considering what the Apostle says, Corinthians the
first, the fourteenth and eigth, If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound* who
shall prepare himself to battle? And though such do mainely run the hazard
of confounding things, who neglect sincere and faithful preaching, according
to that in the second of Ez^ki^l, S^nne of man I have made thee a Watchm^n,
etc. yea, the most inward teaching to ^ regenerate understanding is no idle or
uncertain sound, because such as are spie^tuall do savor the things of the
Spirie, Romans the 8th. and the sixth, yet ordinary experience will make it out
for a truth, that as in Armies mingling of Colors, or Trumpets unskillfull
sound, so also in a Church mixture of Members unqualified do breed confusion.

Therefore the Antecedent which I confess should have been first confirmed
neede^h most proof; videlicet, How this mixed gathering do confound the
infirmities of the one with the vices of the other, and for a cle^r^r ^viction
in this particular; we thus argue, That whatsoever it is which makes the
by-stander or third person to think and believe that the infirmities of the one
and the vices of the other to arise from one root and foun^a^ne; videlicet
from an heart affected with the love of sin, that is it which does by an
unhappy scandal confound the vices of the unregenerate with the infirmities of
the faithful; but the mixed gathering of Church Members does this; it causes
the by stander or third person, or any one that is unregenerate, to think that
their vices and the believers infirmities do proceed from one and the same
root and fountain, which is to say, from an heart infected with the love of
sin; Ergo,

Both Propositions are apparent, for if the Preacher be required by Gods Law,
to set forth the difference between th^se to the people, according to those
divine sentences in the Epistle of John, That ^e that is borne of God cannot
sn^^, that is, cannot love it, for so as do all unregenerate men in one kind
or other; And he that is borne of God keeps himself, and that wicked o^e
touches him not, that is, though he may by a temptation be outwardly soyled,
yet if the seed of God remains in his heart, as it does in the regenerate,
cannot be inwardly infected; I say again, if it be required of the faithful
Minister thus far, to set these at a distance in his preaching and
instructions; what good to one, especially in the dregs of nature will acrew:
when by this most wholesome, and no less necessary separation, he ^^eth not
that generally practiced in matter of Church Discipline, which is held forth by
the Minister.

Now to illustrate the truth of the Minor Proposition, take it thus: Suppose
two Members to be taken in one a mere Formalist, another a si^cere hearted
Christian; The first, videlicet, the Formalist, we will suppose him to be
endued first with all endowments of nature. Secondly, with all civil and
moral education, which will cause a generous and noble deportment of himself
to others. Thirdly, all Christian accomplishments, as far as concerns the
exact knowledge of the Principles of Religion. Fourthly, add here unto a
prosperous and usual concurrence of all earthy happiness, where, through his
gracious and glorious abilities to the ontward view, do not only gain him
respect from men, but these are most commonly exempt from, and not often
subject to those miserable provocations, and other straits, the poorer and yet
sincerer Christians are subject to, and the reason is they are appointed to
suffer, These. the first the 3.d and the 3d, and is in this life to receive
their evil things, Luke the 16. and 25. though now this our glorious brother,
both in his own eyes, and in the eyes of such as are like to him is the only
Professor; yet here will be the question, whither such an one ought to be taken
in for a Church* Member? neither speak I this to exclude such as are Saints and
may have these endowments, because God has chosen some both rich and noble,
and wise, (as the Apostle speaks) in the 1* Cor. chap. 1. v. ^6. but this I
say, whither such with all these who are thought to be forward enough in
profession for Heaven, I say again, whither those outward and former
qual^fications are enough. Secondly, on the other side, let another be taken in
unfurnished of all this goodly trapping, his birth mean, his breeding
according, and his knowledge chiefly in any points of high concernment
suitable; add to this happily a crabbed and teachie nature, which is often
rendered far more odious, not only by the cunning and subtle wire drawing of
some selfe-pleasing Pharisee, who ordinarily carries about him a multiplying
glass, as it were to put others faults in, which makes them seem much bigger
then they are, but views his own at a ^ar greater distance.

Add moreover a too often, and unhappy, and ^orced subjection to all, both
domestique and foreign streigts and miseries, which in this life must be the
Saints portion, all that this Brother has to commend him either to God or man,
is an hearty zeal and affection to that he knows, his judgment is often
weak, his best actions through the poisonous venim of naughty tongues,
wrested, disgraced, and disparaged; thus brother for all the prejudice and hard
censure he meets with from carnal men, is yet in the judgment of all true
dis^erners, a ^ight brother* the other not so.

A twelfth argument is taken from the errors which have been in former
Church-builders, thus:

Whatsoever miscarriage in Church building, and gathering Church members, have
come in amongst men, through error of Doctrine, that ought not now in our time
of reformation to be practiced; but to gather Church Members, other h^n of such
as are v^sibly holy, does this, it magnifi^th and sets up errors of
Doctrine, and mistakes of former ages; Ergo, are not now to be practiced.

The major I suppose will be undeniably granted. The Minor is proved by
instance, vide conce^ning Baptism; the Doctrina about not only the esse, but
the absolute necessity of Infants Baptism, have (as it is known to all) been
the cause in former ages, of taking every one into Church Fellowship, witness
the Primitive times, if we may call them Primitive, wherein Augustine, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, the Gregorys, and such famous worthies lived, it is well known to
all who have read their works, that those most godly and ze^lous Worthies, not
having the Light which we have* did unanimousl^ hold, that Baptism made
Infants Christians, and that children u^baptized could not be saved. Neither in
this Tenent do the Papists at all err from the Doctrine of the Ancients
Su^table, though happily not the same altogether, was the Episcopal Tenent,
That Baptism was not only a seal as circumcision was (to which this of
Baptism succeeded) but a means also to receive grace: whence it wa^ g^^erally
believed, that Infant^ did receive such a tincture, such an indeluble character
and stamp of holiness in the Ordinance, that men's particular failings (as they
called them) though this were no other then gross sin, did no whit
unchristianize, but a little blemish their Christianity: Whence millions are so
besotted, that they believe, that as their fathers and mothers in the course of
nature, have made them men and women, the Minister at the Font made them
Christians. Now if all upon this notion were taken in for Church Members, and
the ground of all this, in these days of light, be ^ound extremely faulty,
what reason but the building, on such an unsure foundation erected, should be
now demolished; and other and better Members, upon further Gospel discoveries,
to be taken in.

The thirteenth Ar^ument is taken from the great scandal which a Church
otherwise gathered gives our adversaries the Papists, thu^:

That which makes the Protestants justly excepted against, and taxed by the
Papists, to be a company of gross and Athiesticall Libertines, that is not by
any means to be allowed; but to gather a Church of common Protestants, or of
such as are but barely catechized, is to make all Protestants, by the Papists,
to be so accounted. Ergo, to gather members of other, than of such as are
visibly holy, is not to be allowed.

The major being granted,

The minor is thus proved.

That Profession, the profes^ors whereof do come short of Papists in point of
practice, as touching the Religion, they profess; that profession do
scandalize the Papists, and consequently gives them cause to think, that all
such professors, are but gross and Atheistical Libertines; but this do a
mixture, in gathering Church Members, it makes them come short of Papists, in
point of practice, as touching the Religion they profess. Ergo, it makes the
Papist to think, that the Protestants are a company of gross and Atheistical
Libertines, and consequently, such a Church-gathering is not to be allowed.

The major being granted,

The minor is proved by instance, viz. By comparing the common protestant and
the papist together, in practical part of Religion, in which, of these most
religious forwardness, is to be discerned; and to begin with the papists, let
him be but merely catechized in the principles of his own Religion, he has,
in many things, the start and precedence above the common protestant. First, in
matter of understanding, it is more furnished by far, (I say not better:) As
for the common protestant, he is seen but in his Creed; whereas the other is
taught in the doctrine of 7 Sacraments. Secondly, his belief is racked, and
screwed up to a far higher pitch than is the Protestants, who is ordinarily
accused, and thought of by them, to be a company of brutish and natural men,
to go no further in their belief, then to sense and reason, as in matter of
their carnal presence. Thirdly, the papist will do much more for his
profession, tha^ the common sort of protestants will do for theirs. As for the
papist, he will yield his outward man to fasting, and all kind of penance; and
his heart, and inward man, though to an erroneous, yet to an auricular
confession: whereas the common protestant, makes his religion to consist (for
the most part) in the bare denial of all this. But, will some object: And do
not your visibly holy Saint you speak of, deny all these? We answer. Yea, or
else he cannot be in his belief, any other than a Papist, or worse. But now
observe, and ye shall see these visibly holy members (as far as the judgment
of charity will give them for) to have that by virtue of a special and inward
call, for which, the Papists do undertake all these works: For let papists but
retain the true doctrine of their religion, and they are taught, that all the
Sacraments serve but as means to convey grace to such as are in grace (to
speak in their own phrase) and that by virtue of that they call a foederall
Covenant, as infant Baptism; where the party baptized cannot ponere obicem; or
to such as either retain, or at least recover, their first grace. Now, I say,
if this holy visibly member, can wrarantably prove (as he may well) how that
God works, both how, and when, and where he pleases: without these, he has,
both in his belief, and life also, proved himself to be more excellent than his
neighbor, which is the superstitious Papist, and the common Protestant.

The fourteenth Argument is taken from the disgrace which unqualified members
do bring upon members better qualified, thus:

Whatsoever causes the gifts and graces of the best qualified to be
mis-called, and mis-censured, or mis-construed, that in gathering
Church Members, is not to be practiced; but to take in members not visibly
holy, causes the gifts and graces of the best qualified, to be mis-construed,
and ill spoken of. Ergo, the taking in members into Church Fellowship, not
visibly holy, is not to be practiced.

The major proposition being granted;

The minor is thus proved.

Whatsoever makes the gifts and graces of the best qualified to be counted of
the non-discerning, superfluous, and more then need: or, which is worse, a
desire to be seen above others, that makes their graces to be mis-called and
mis-construed: But the taking in of members not visibly holy, does this; it
makes the gifts and graces of the best qualified, to be counted of the
non-discerning, superfluous, and more then need; or, which is worse, it makes
them to be counted of such non-discerning spirits, to desire only to be seen
above others. Ergo, to take in such kind of members, is not lawful.

Both propositions will be soon granted, if we consider the old axiom,
frustra fit per plura quod fieri potuit per p^uciora; for example, if Thomas,
and Titus, or Timothy, were taken in for Church Members, for their more
excellent endowments of visible holiness; and Robert, and James, and John to
be discerned only by their more heartless profession, upon those easy and
common qualifications also to be taken in; will not now the more part and
worser (there being greater store of these Members then of the other) make the
better part and the fewer to be disgraced, and to have more then need in their
profession above the rest: and thus all things shall return again to their old
Chaos; so doing we shall not only sad the hearts of such whom the Lord has
not sadded, but as much as in us lies, we shall frustrate and make void, all
the blood that has been shed, all the labor, oil, and cost (if I may so
speak) that have been spent for the effecting, and perfecting a through
reformation; for since it is granted by all parties, both Episcopal,
Presbyterian and others, that in matters of doctrine Protestants do agree, if
this matter and way of seperating the precious from the vile, be (not by all
Parties who desire a reformation) more punctually stood upon. What will at
length come of all that has been done? for if we allow of any other way, we
must make Church Members specially, and specifically considered; that is, as
they stand in relation to a visible Church, to consist as well of civil and
moral men, as of the best qualified; and in so doing we shall not only in the
building of Gods House, together with gold, and silver, patch up dirt, and
clay, and stubble, but make the state it self, and all the true subjects to it
a jeere, and a scorn to the Malignant adversary, to say of our pious reformers,
that they would have reformed if they could have found matter: yea, will not
Bellermine himself, that great Stickler in the Church of Rome, shake hands
with us in our reformation? who tells us, that to be inwardly qualified, that
is, beside bare profession, to have some work of the spirit upon them, is no
esse, or necessaty requisite of a Church Member, provided they be Catholics
of the Romish Edition; and so such kind of intruders being let in, all will in
time come to say of things brought again to their old bias, as Captains and
Lievtenants do in martialling their Soldiers, faces about, and as ye were.
Who therefore endued with any measure of zeal for God, will not in his
thoughts abhor, and in his practice, as far concerns him in his place,
endeavor to keep of, and keep out such a medly in Gods Church, least otherwise
ancient possession do (as it did in all the Bishops time) claim custom and
prescription; to say, to the best gifted and graced in our* Churches; as once
Israel said to their zealous brethren on the other side Jordan, Joshuah the 22.
from the 23. verse to the 29. The putting up of a civil moral brother, will
in time pull down the Altar of distinction, between a visible Saint, and a
Morallist: And he that now happily, while these times of reformation last, he
that was hardly the foot, will, if suffered to intrude, in short time so become
the head, that he will altogether shoulder out the other. So far the fourteenth
Argument.

The fifteenth Argument is drawn from the calling of the Jews* the manner of
their conversion, and their deportment when they are called: Thus,

All such as gather Churches ought in the gathering of their Members, to follow
the best example, either of Churches already gathered, or of such as shall be
certainly gathered at Christ's second coming: but if we take in for Members
such as are not visibly holy, we cannot follow these kind of examples,
therefore to take in such unqualified Members, is not lawful.

As to the proof of the major proposition, it is not only jure divino but
ecclesiastico, or parlimentari, for it is the sum of our covenant in our work of
reformation, in it to follow the examples of the best reformed Churches.

The minor is proved by instance, we herein f^llow not the example and practice
of the Jewish Church when it shall be called.

Ergo, such as shall inherit Judah, for all ages shall be all righteous, Esaias
the 60. and 21. Esaias the 61. and 9. They shall be known among the nations, and
therefore among themselves, Esaias the 52. and the 1. the whole subject of the
Revelation (setting the judgments aside which are to be poured upon
Antichrist) concerns the visible holiness, and earthly glory of that Church,
when they shall be called according to the best interpreters of that scripture.
See Revel. the 21. and 27. Revel. the 22* and 14. All that will be objected is,
that well may that Church be pure when Christ himself shall purge it by his
personal presence with it; for that purpose, let us therefore tarry till that
time come, because we are not able to do as Christ can, when he shall come
again. To which we answer, That we are by the word, and by the spirit enabled,
to do in measure what Christ shall perform at that day: for it is not
required, that all wicked men be shut out in statu quo: the best reformed
Churches must allow of hypocrites which not discovered can do no harm to a
Church, whatsoever harm they do themselves: what though Badgers skins covered
the Tabernacle, yet being died red they were useful, Leviticus the 27. and
last. What though the brazen Sea was born up by Oxen, yet their hinder parts,
that is to say, their parts more uncomely were inward: so though Hypocrites
will get in while they are not discovered, may be of excellent use. So far
this 15. Argument; tending to show the necessity of Church gathering, from the
Jews when they shall be called.

The Sixteenth Argument is drawn from the great scarre and scandal which will
otherwise ^lurre the reputation of one of those considerable Parties, from
which those who are called the godly Party* do arise: Thus,

Whatsoever objecteth the reformers of Religion, either to the scorn and
derision of the unreformed, or themselves, to unbrotherly censuring one of
another; that in gathering Church Members is not to be practiced; but to gather
Church Members of any other, then such as are visibly holy, does this. It
objecteth the reformers of Religion, either to the scorn and derision of such
as are unreformed, or themselves to the unbrotherly censuring one of another:
Ergo, such a gathering Church Members is not lawful.

The major proposition is valid without exception, if we prove that the
scandal which lies upon reformers, be that scandal which Divines call datus,
or that which is given.

The minor proposition is proved by parts, as first, That the Episcopal
Professors, are scandall'd and that justly. For since in matters of doctrine
it is famously known, that there is no contest between Protestants of any Party,
either Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independents. 2. Netther in the external
Government of the Church, because such as are now called Presbyterians, were in
the Bishops times called Conformists, because they subscribed to the doctrine
and discipline then established; it must needs follow, that if some other
weighty cause moved not, viz. a reformation of a Church Member, that one of
these Parties, at least, rather sought occasion of exception against the
Bishops, then found it. 3. It sets Professors together amongst themselves;
for who knows not, that though in respect of practice, of taking in* or casting
out, these two Parties, differ not but in circumstanciall, or matter of
discipline: yet the judgment upon which such and such are to be taken, or not
to be taken in, is something more, and a matter doctrinall.

The 17th Argument is from the mimicall imitation of the Papists, wherein they
strive to have all the members of their Church, visibly holy, thus:

Whatsoever is pretended by the adversaries of truth, and so far practiced by
them, as more suitable and serviceable to Gods honor; that in gathering of
Church Members, is not of truths friends to be left out and neglected; but even
the adversaries of truth, do by their doctrine and practice teach, (in pretense
at least) that only members visibly holy, are to be received into
Church Fellowship. Ergo, this ought of truths friends to be sincerely taught
and practiced.

The major will be easily granted, by all such as think it reasonable, that
for zeal of holiness, Churches professedly reformed, come not short of
Papists.

The minor proposition is proved by instance: Take those points of popery which
are truly so called; that is, wherein they and we (the case so standing) do,
and must differ: and we shall all along still observe, that in all their
doings, they aim at perfection in a Churchmember. As first in their belief
concerning Baptism, they teach and believe, that Baptism does absolutely take
away original sin; so that those motions of sin, or unto sin, by some
called reliquiae, or the remnants of sin, are not sin properly, as indeed
they are not of the person, but of the nature, as our Divines distinguish:
Neither is it a specificall property of all sin to be voluntary, by their
own confession, to instance in original sin in an infant. But put the case
now, that a Churchmember of theirs fall into a sin, after Baptism, they
call mortal, they then fall upon another salve, for perfection, or visible
holiness in a Churchmember, and that is their doctrine concerning penance;
wherein they teach, that auricular confession (which by them is made a
Sacrament) conferring grace, do restore them fully to that integrity which
they received in Baptism; and when they are thus restored, they have a
doctrine that of such as are in grace, the Law can be fulfilled and kept; So
that their after-obedience and penance, do not only ex congruo, but ex
condigno, merit life eternal. And all these beliefes (though protestants do
justly except against, as hay, stubble, and wood, built upon the golden
foundation of the christian profession;) yet from these tenants, as bad as they
are, we may gather thus much: That they think it a very unreasonable thing to
admit of a Churchmember into communion in all the ordinances, which is not at
least, visibly holy.

The eighteenth Argument is from hence: That no mischief, or spiritual danger
can follow the taking into Church fellowship, Members only that are visibly
holy: Thus,

Whatsoever can be profitably done, without the least prejudice, or spiritual
hinderance of any one not taken in for a Member, that caeteris paribus (that is
to say, which can be done without any kind of inconvenience) ought to be put in
practice: But the gathering of Members only visibly holy, can be practiced
without the least hazard of such as are not qualyfied; that is, they can run no
spiritual hazard, or danger: Ergo, such kind of Church gathering ought to be
put in practice,

The major is easily proved, and may well serve for a (...), or sign of Gods
will, and pleasure this way: for if there were the least hinderance to man's
salvation by such a practice, we might safely say, this, or such a way could
not be of God. For as among Divines, that sense of scripture is not to be
received, which being so taken oppugneth other scriptures: so neither is that
thought to be Gods ordinance, which opposes the general good of man's
salvation.

The minor is thus proved.

Whatsoever hinders not either the covenant of Gods election, or the
influence of the spirit from working faith and repentance; yea, which hinders
not the increase of grace in any that are actually in Gods favor; that cannot
be a prejudice to the salvation of any, but to take in for Members of a Church,
such only as are visibly holy, does none of these; it neither hinders the
covenant of Gods election, nor the influence of the spirit in working faith and
repentance, neither does it hinder the increase of grace in any that are
actually in Gods favor,

Ergo to take in only such qualified Members is safely and securely to be
practiced.

The major being granted.

The minor proposition is grounded from the example of the woman of Canaan, who
was no visible Member of a Church; and yet her faith was greater then any's in
Israel.

If indeed we were popish in our belief, that the Sacraments were not only
seals, but means of grace, so far that they give grace ex opere operate;
then there might be some question in the point: But our belief is, that one
either well catechized, or preached unto, wants nothing external, simply
necessary to salvation.

If any do now object, that if we can with such safety be out of this
external Church communion, wherefore then, as well not out as in, to what end
is it to become a member? To which we answer; First, that this might be as
safely objected to any professed ordinance, which all acknowledge to be of God.
May we not thus except against Baptism, or the word preached? May not reading
serve instead of preaching; or is it not enough to hear of the doctrine of
Baptism? Therefore as in such cavils the usual answer is: That not the want
of an Ordinance, but the contempt, is damnable; and that ordinance is
contemned, which we might enjoy, and do not. The same answer will serve for
this present purpose: When we may become members, and are not gathered, it is our
contempt. Secondly, this exception would serve, if we held that
Church Communion were only for our selves; but this we do not:
Church Communion is for more necessary and importent ends; as first, that Gods
will and command in this particular, might be fulfilled and done; and this all
parties confess, not only by their own practice; but by believing the
communion of Saints. Secondly, this Church Fellowship is the City set upon an
hill, and a lighted candle set upon a candlestick, that others might see this
^^^ly work, and so glorify God for it in the day of their conversion.

FINIS.

