STIMLVVS ORTHODOXVS; Sive GOADUS REDIVIVVS. A DISPUTATION Partly Theological,
partly Metaphysical, concerning the Necessity and Contingency of Events in the
World, in respect of God's Eternal Decree. Written above twenty years since by
that Reverend and Learned Divine, THOMAS GOAD, Doctor of Divinity, and Rector
of Hadleigh in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed for William Leak, at the Crown in Fleet Street, between the
two Temple Gates. 1661.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
THIS Piece which I here propose to thy view, was the only Remain (that I know
of) of that Reverend Divine, whose name is prefixed to it. A Work certainly
worth two or three hours time to peruse. It came to my hands by buying some of
the Books of his deceased Amanuensis. I need to make no Encomium either of the
Author, or the Work; the one was very well known to, and is still remembered by
some; and the worth of the other needs not beg our Commendation. This our
Reverend Author was one of the most eminent Divines at the Synod of Dort, when
the subject matter of this ensuing Disputation, and matters of the like nature,
amongst other controverted Points, were in contest. Whether our Author was then
of that judgment, which he declares in this Disputation, I am not certain.
However, if his after thoughts (which commonly are the (...)
best) inclined him to the truth, and swayed his belief, we have reason to
bless the God of Truth for the discovery. And I heartily wish, that all men,
who are entangled in the briars of these prickly Disputations, (as our Reverend
Author calls them) would lay aside all prejudice, and suffer their judgments to
be ravished to the embracing of Truth by the argumentative allurements of
Scripture and Rea on. Thou will find the singular use of this ensuing Piece in
affording thee light to, and carrying thee through those obscure intricacies
controverted betwixt the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants. And that it may
be of this singular use and benefit, is the hearty prayer of

Thy Friend and Servant in Christ, J. G.

A DISPUTATION, Partly Theological, partly Metaphysical, concerning the
Necessity and Contingency of Events in the World, in respect of God's Eternal
Decrees.
The Sum of the controversy is this.

1. WHETHER or no all things that ever have or shall come to pass in the world,
have been, or shall be effected necessarily, in respect of an irresistible
Decree, by which God has everlastingly determined, that they should inevitably
come to pass?

2. Whether or no many things have not been done contingently, or after such a
middle manner between impossibility of being, and necessity of being, that some
things which have been might as well not have been, and many things which have
not been might as well have been, for ought God has decreed to the contrary?

An happy composing of this intricate Controversy will be of excellent use,
not only in guiding us safe through the briers of these prickly Disputations
of Predestination, Free Will, the Cause of sin, etc. (which at this day have
set Protestants, Papists, Lutherans, Arminians, Puritans, together by the ears)
but over and above in easing us of many scruples and perplexing cases, which
daily arise in our minds, concerning God's Special Decrees, and particular
Providence, in respect of the passages of our life.

But the singular uses of this Disputation will best appear when it is
finished; and theresore without any further Preface, I betake my self unto it,
purposing to carry such an equal eye to brevity and perspicuity, that the
Reader shall have no just cause to say, that I am either obscure or tedious.

Queries. Many Divines completely Reverend, both for their knowledge and
practice of Religion, (and therefore deservedly of precious esteem in the
Reformed Churches) have subscribed assirmatively to the first Quaerie;
maintaining, that whatsoever any creature does, Man or Beast, Plants or
Inanimate Elements and Meteors; God from all eternity has decreed, that they
should necessarily do it; so that a man does not so much as spit without a
Decree: yea, they say, that there falls not so much as a drop of rain, or
arises a blast of wind, sine speciali Dei jussu.

Learning and love of Orthodox Religion, have subscribed affirmatively to the
second; teaching, that as God in his wisdom has ordered, that some things are
impossible and cannot be; some things necessary, and cannot but be; so also
has he poised some things in such an equal possibility of being or not being,
and left it to his creatures choice to turn the scale, that in respect of him
they fall out contingently; it being as possible for his creatures to have
omitted them, as to have done them.

I have a good while halted between these two opinions, I have Sceptically
hovered over them, to see where I were best to light. Sometimes I have sent out
my assent like Noah's Dove, but she misliking her footing, speedily withdrew
her self back again, till at length she finding better entertainment amongst
this second company, she has returned now at last with an Olive branch in her
mouth, with that emblem of peace, Uniting my distractions.

The Arguments by which Truth first courted, and at last ravished my assent,
are those which both confirm the second, and confute the first opinion.

Heathenish Error, lurking implicitly in the opposite opinion: Our Adversaries
indeed do disallow it explicitly, and I know they heartily mislike it; but it
will too evidently appear, that if that error be Paganism, their opinion is
little better, which I prove thus; It was the conceit of the ancient Stoics,
that all things were governed and brought to pass by an inevitable Destiny,
all things falling out by a fatal necessity, in spite of men and (according
to the addition of Poets) of gods also. Now do not our Opp sites in this
Controversy impose a fatal Necessity on all things? yea, they go further in
this point than some Stoics; for (as it may be collected out of some of their
writings) though they subjected the main Events and ends to irresistible
Destiny, yet they supposed the means (by which a man might, though vainly,
endeavor to cross those ends) arbitrary in man's choice. But our Opposites
impose a necessity on all things whatsoever, not only upon Ends and events,
but also upon the means. For example, according to their Doctrine, God has not
only decreed that I shall, or that I shall not escape this infection, but he
has also decreed that I shall, or I shall not use the means to escape it. So
that all the Absurdities that dog the Stoical dream of fatal necessity at the
heels, are inseparable attendants of this Opinion. For I may not only say, If
I shall die of the Infection, I shall; if I shall not die, I shall not; and
therefore I need not use means to avoid it: But also, if I must use means, I
must; if I must not, I must not: Seeing Gods decree necessitateth as much to
use or omit the means, as to obtain or lose the end. For if their opinion be
true, all things whatsoever, end or means of little or great moment, come to
pass necessarily and unavoidably, by reason of Gods eternal Decree.

Here they have two Evasions.

determined what shall, or what shall not be done concerning us, yet his Decree
is hid from us, and we must use lawful and ordinary means, for the obtaining of
such and such good Ends, keeping on the ordinary course which he has revealed
to us.

Opposites teach, that whatsoever God has decreed shall be done, and
whatsoever is omitted shall be undone. If therefore God has determined that we
should not use such and such means, it is impossible for us to use them; if he
has decreed that we should, it is impossible that we should omit them. And
therefore it is more than ridiculous to say, that although God in his secret
will has determined, that we should not do such a thing, yet we are to do it,
seeing his decree, though it be secret, yet it will have its effect, and it is
absolutely impossible we should do that, which God has determined we shall not
do.

Stoicism, for the Stoics thought, that all things came inevitably to pass, by
reason of an indissoluble Chain and Connection of natural causes: but we teach,
that all events are irresistably necessary, by reason of Gods everlasting
decrees, and His Omnipotency daily executing them.

Stolcks into two particular Tenets.

1. They hold, that all things come to pass inevitably.

2. They thought the reason of this inevitableness of events to be an
unchangeable connection of natural causes.

Our Opposites stisly maintain the former of these Tenets. Now let the Reader
observe, that the most prodigious absurdities accompanying this Stoical error,
follow the first part of their opinion, though sequestered from the second. For
if all things come to pass unavoidably, what need I care what I do? yea, if I
shall care, I shall care whether I will or no; and a thousand the like
horridconceits follow the opinion of the necessity of events, whatsoever we
make to be the cause of this necessity.

It is a great point of Turkish Divinity at this day, that all things are done
unavoidably, and they with our Opposites make Gods will to be the cause of this
unavoidableness; and therefore they judge of Gods pleasure or displeasure by
the event. Yet there is no Christian but abhors this Turcism, and gives it
no better entertainment than Anathema Mararatha.

Its too apparent therefore, that albeit our Adversaries are true Christians,
yet in this point their opinion is guilty by reason of its consequence, both of
Stoicism and Turcism.

Again, if we consider the second part of the Stoics opinion, we shall
perceive, that the opinion which we confute cannot be minced, but that it will
be complete Stoicism. The Stoics thought the connection of causes to be the
cause of the necessity of events, its true; but what did they think to be the
connection of causes? doubtless the eternal Laws of Nature, which they supposed
to be a Deity. It is very probable they thought the Fates to be but Natures
Laws, but whatsoever they meant by the Fates, its evident they made their
decrees to be the cause of the connection of causes. How often read we both in
Philosophers and Poets of Fatorum Decreta, Parcarum Leges, etc. Yea, the word
Fatum it self is as much as a Decree; as Edictum from Edicere, so Fatum from
Fari. Quid aliud est Fatum quam id quod 'Deus de unoquoqut fatur? says
Minutius. Well then, to apply. Do not our Adversaries in this point suppose an
inviolable linking of all things together, one necessarily following in the
neck of another? Do they not make the cause of this linking to be Gods
irresistible decree? Do they not defend complete Stoicism? What part of
Stoicism do they disclaim? Do they not maintain inevitable necessity, Do they
not teach an indissoluble connection of all things? Do they not believe divine
decrees to be the cause of this connection? Certainly they must needs confess
themselves Stoics in this point, unless we will give them leave to grant the
premises, and deny the conclusion. I know the Stoics had mis-conceits
concerning the Deities, (as accounting those to be Deities which are not) whose
decrees they made the causes of all things; but they were the common errors of
Paganism, and are beside the point in hand: And truly these set aside, I see
not wherein our Adversaries differ from the Stoics. I have prosecuted this
Argument more copiously, because it includes many others, I mean, all those
which Scripture or Reason furnish us with, against the error of the Stoics,
and they are many; for I think verily, there are few opinions which have a
greater retinue of ridiculous and erroneous consequences, than this of the un
avoidable necessity of events: Some of them may make one laugh, and some of
them may make one tremble. I omit the former, because they are obvious to every
man's conceit, and I would not willingly make sport of so serious a matter. Of
the last sort I will specify one in a second Argument.

Author of sin, is gross and erroneous, that I may say no worse, but so (I
speak it with horror) does the Opinion of our Opposites. I know they are
renowned Christians, and as they abhor Stoical errors, so they hold this
damnalbe doctrine, (which is worse See this Argument confirmed in the Answer to
the 4th Objection.
than ever any Heretic held) which transformeth God into a Devil, to be most
accursed: yet so the case stands, that as the error of fatal necessity, so
this of the cause of sin, fatally follows their opinion; which I prove thus.

They teach, That nothing is done in the world, not can be done, but what God
has decreed to be done. Now it is too certain, that three quarters of the
things which are done in the world are sins, therefore according to this
opinion, God is the principal cause of sins, Devils and Men are but His
Instruments.

actions that are sinful, but not of the sinfulness of the actions; of all our
works, but not of our obliquities and imperfections: As one that rides upon a
halting Jade is the cause of his metion, and yet not of his halting.

frivolous distinction to keep God from sinning: Might I here (without
wandering) discourse of the nature of sin, I could prove sin it self to be an
action, and confute this groundless distinction that way; but I will keep my
self as much to the purpose as I can, and so answer it thus, or rather confute
it.

That which is a principal cause of any action, is a cause of those events
which accompany that action necessarily. This Rule is most certainly true.
Concomitants.
Therefore if God by His decrees do force us to those actions which cannot be
done without sin, God Himself (I am afraid to rehearse it) must needs be guilty
of sin. For example. If God decreed that Adam should unavoidably eat the
forbidden fruit, seeing the eating of the fruit which he had forbidden must
needs be with a gross obliquity; I do not see how this distinction will
justify God: for Adam sinned because he ate the fruit that was forbidden; but
they say, God decreed that he should eat the fruit which was forbidden,
necessarily and unavoidably. The conclusion is too blasphemous to be often
repeated.

The Reader may see how well that common distinction holds water; yea, if
this nicety were sound, man himself might prove, that he committed no murder
though he stabbed the dead party to the heart; for at his arraignment he might
tell the Judge, that hedid indeed thrust his dagger into his heart, but it was
not that which took away his life, but the extinction of his natural heat and
vital spirits. Who sees not the wild frenzy of him who should make this
Apology, yet this is all our Adversaries say for God. They say, His decree was
the cause that Adam took the fruit, and put it into his mouth, and ate that
which he had commanded he should not eat. Yet they say, He was not the cause of
the transgression of the commandment.

The example of the halting Jade is a mere impertinency; for suppose it were
(as it is not) appliable to us, who halt naturally; yet Adam, before this
action, was sound; and therefore God necessitating him to such an
inconveniency, dealt with him as if one should drive a lusty Nag into rough
passages, where he must needs break his legs. Neither is it (as I said)
appliable unto us the lame posterity of Adam, for the who rides an horse that
was lame before, although he be not a cause of the impotency which he finds
in the horse already, yet in urging him to motion, he is now a cause of the
actual imperfection in the motion, and so perhaps a cause of increasing the
impotency for the future, though he were not the cause of his lameness, yet he
is of his limping at that time. Let the horse stand still, and see whether he
will halt or no. Marry if the horse go of himself, then the Rider is no cause
of his halting, and so we may say, that all our haltings are from our selves
without any instigation from God.

I know our Opposites have another shist, teaching, that God uses to punish
one sin by making us to commit another; so that although we sin, He does but
punish.

Albeit I do not believe this to be true, as it is commonly expounded, yet I
abstain at this time from a farther examination of it, because it weakens not
my Argument about Adam; for his sin was the first that ever he committed, and
the original of all that ever followed; and therefore if Gods decree were the
cause that he ate the forbidden fruit, as our Adversaries teach, its apparent
whom they make the Author of all sin. These two Arguments well scanned, are
sufficient to make any (not fore-stalled with pre-conceits) to be afraid of
that opinion which believes all things to come to pass necessarily, by reason
of Gods irresistible decree, and therefore they shall suffice for the
confutation of it.

Moreover, seeing it is clogged with such monstrous consequences, methinks our
opinion should be far more amiable, which gives no countenance to such hideous
misshapen errors, as it will appear by the process of this disputation.

Now I proceed to the confirmation of our opinion, concerning the contingency
of some events in respect of God, by two Arguments more.

ordinarily, and for the most part, should work according to their several
kinds and endowments, by which he in the Creation distinguished them: For
illustration they may be ranked into three several forms.

natural Agents, inanimate and senseless creatures; to these God has given
certain instincts and inclinations, by which they are determinately swayed to
these or these certain effects and operations, unless they are outwardly
hindered: for heavy bodies cannot choose but descend, fire cannot choose but
burn, etc.

Sersitive creatures, four-footed beasts, fouls, and fishes; to these God has
given sense and knowledge to discern what is good for their nature, and what is
bad; and amongst diverse goods to prefer that which is best. He has given them
also a free appetite or a kind of sensitive will, by which they may either
freely prosecute, or avoid such objects as they like or mislike; not
determinately tied to this or that certain operation, as the other were. A
stone cannot choose but descend, but a beast may as well go up hill as down,
etc.

Men, reasonable Creatures, whom God has made more voluntary than the other,
by giving them greater freedom of choice, and presenting unto their more
elevated knowledge a great variety of objects. Now then, without doubt, God
distinguished thus his creatures in abilities and faculties, that they might
operate in their several kinds, that the natural agents might work naturally,
the voluntary voluntarily, as that eloquent Frenchman Du Vain has well
explained this point. The truth of all this no man will deny explicitly: Well
then, let them hearken to the consequences of this truth, so common both in
Logic and Metaphysics, among those who handle of natural and voluntary
causes. If God has decreed that many things should be done voluntarily by his
creatures, then also has he decreed that many things should be done
contingently, in respect of him; but the first is granted truth, therefore the
second should be. The connection I prove thus. All things are done contingently
in respect of God, which for ought he has decreed might with as much
possibility not be as be: But all things which are done by the crea ures
voluntarily, may as well not be done, as done; therefore if he has decreed
that many things should be done voluntarily, He has also decreed that they
should be done contingently. The Minor is evident, because if the creatures may
not as well omit them as do them, they do them not voluntarily but necessarily.

This Argument both confirms and explains our Opinion, showing how and why many
things come to pass contingently in respect of God; yea, it makes it
questionless, that God has decreed that many things should be done
contingently, or after such a resistable manner, that they might without
frustrating His decree have been life undone: yea, we see now, that contingency
it self is necessary in respect of Gods will, who will have many things done
voluntarily. Otherwise to what purpose did God give his creatures wills, if he
will not suffer them to use them?

See again the inconveniences of the former opinion, which confounds all
sorts of creatures, and makes a man to operate with no more freedom than a
stock or stone. For according to our Opposites, I eat, or drink, or walk with
as much necessity, as Lead sinketh down. God has decreed that that should
sink, and therefore it must; and so God has decreed that I mast walk a mile,
and therefore I must.

decree does not compel any man's will to any thing, that he should do such a
thing whether he will or no; but he so disposes and works it, that it shall
desire that which God would have done. And therefore, they say, Man has use of
his will, because whatsoever he does, though necessitated to it by God, yet he
does it willingly.

slim-slam would move any man's patience, but I will be serious. The prerogative
of a voluntary Agent consists not in doing that which it desires to do, or
rather in desiring to do that which it does, (for according to them, man
desires the thing because it is to be done, yet it is not to be done because
he desires) in freedom from coaction and violence; but in a liberty of choice
to do or not to do this or that, and so in freedom from the necessity of
immutability. So that still for all this shift, they make man no more voluntary
than a stone. A stone has a natural propension or kind of appetite to fall
downward, yet because this appetite is restrained necessarily to this term, so
that the stone must needs fall down, it cannot be said to descend voluntarily,
in any propriety of speech. Is not this just a man's case according to them? A
man drinks, they grant he does it voluntarily; yet they say, his will is so
restrained by Gods decree to this action, that it was not possible for him to
omit it. What difference is there now betwixt the will of a man and the will of
a stone, only that God employeth a man in more actions, which alters not the
case? Surely if this be true, it was no wonder Deucalion and Pyrrha got stones
turned into men so fast.

This Argument does so entangle our opposites, that although in the Question
about particular providence they are peremptory for the necessity of all events
in respect of God; yet when they come to the question about Free Will, and more
particularly in free will about natural matters, as walking, sleeping, riding,
etc. they speak so off and on, that one may plainly perceive how they have a
wolf by the ears: Sometimes they do yield Free Will in such things, not
considering how they contradict what they said before about particular
Providence; sometimes they yield it, they say, not so much because they yield
it to be true, as because they will not contend about such petty matters; a
very sleeveless put off! sometimes they stiffly deny it, but they are unwilling
or unable to produce any Arguments worth a rush.

knowledge absolutely infinite, and most glorifieth His omnisciency, must needs
be better Divinity, than that which supposes by its consequence Gods knowledge
to be but finite. Now our opinion does the first, our opposites the second;
therefore. The Minor Proposition I justify thus. An absolute infinity in
knowledge must be either in respect of the number of objects, or in respect of
the manner of comprehending them. Now according to their opinion, in these
respects Gods knowledge is but finite. Ergo.

For the first respect, to speak exactly, it cannot make knowledge completely
infinite; for seeing there cannot be an exact infinite number of Objects,
seeing that all things that ever were, or ever shall be, cannot be truly
infinite in number; it is impossible that any knowledge whatsoever should be
properly termed infinite in this respect. Yea, seeing the vastest number, and
most incomprehensible to our mortal Arithmetic, may in it self be doubled and
trebled, it is an infallible truth, that any knowledge in this regard may be
trebled also, and yet remain finite, if we speak not vulgarly or unlargely, but
Metaphysical exquisitions. Well, come to the second Respect, here also our
Opposites do much debate Gods knowledge, making it but finite, and that not of
the largest sort; for while they teach, that God has decreed how all things
shall infallibly come to pass, they require indeed of God an infinite power,
whereby to execute his decrees, but seeing all things shall be effected as He
has decreed they should, a finite knowledge may well serve the turn. What
wonder is it if God foreknow what will be done, if he can but remember His own
decrees? It requires indeed a large memory, but not an infinite knowledge.

Suppose a man had but that power to bring to pass what he determined, it would
be no strange matter if he could foretell future events: He would make a hard
shift with his Hypomnemata, Registers, and Records, and the Art of Memory, but
he would remember what he had contrived should come to pass, in such and such a
Country.

Wherefore in the second Respect, viz. in the manner of comprehending of
things, they make the Divine Praescience to be but finite, whilst they teach,
that God knows how all things shall come to pass; because the same knowledge
is the cause, by virtue of decrees, of whatsoever shall be effected in the
world.

Now that our opinion attributes unto God a knowledge exactly infinite, and
makes His Praescience more wnoderful, it will plainly appear. God, say we, ab
aeterno, has ordered that such Agents as he created voluntary, should have a
double liberty in their operations, viz. a liberty of contradiction, to do, or
not do; as a Painter may choose whether he will work or no: and a liberty of
contrariety, to do a thing after this or that manner; as a Painter may use what
colors, in what quantity, after what fashion, he pleases.

Now then, God leaving to His creatures free liberty, to work or not to work,
after this or that manner, so that so any necessity imposed upon their actions
by Him; whatsoever they omit, was as possible to be done, as what they did: And
yet from all eternity fore-knowing whatsoever his creatures would do, or not
do, his foreknowledge must needs be infinite, and most admirable. Infinite, I
say, not in respect of the number of objects, for so, as I said before, no
knowledge can be infinite: but in respect of the omnipotent and boundless
manner of actual comprehending those things with an infallible foresight,
which in respect of God were contingent, their not being being as possible as
their being. And indeed this foresight of future contingents, is the true
character and Royal prerogative of Divine knowledge: and Ergo in the 41 of
Esaias, God upbraideth the Pagan Deities with this privilege peculiar to
Himself, though juglingly pretended by them in their lying Oracles, verse. 21.
The Lord bids them produce Gnatzumotheken, the strongest Arguments by which
they could prove themselves Gods; and in the next verse he particularizeth, and
thrice bids them tell, if they can, what shall happen in the times to come. Its
worth the observing, how that there was never any sort of Diviners Artificial
(I speak not of Devils, Witches, Gypsies, and such palpable Impostors) that
undertook to foretell future contingents: for if you prove those things which
Astrologers and Physiognomers undertake to foretell, to be mere contingent in
respect of the Horoscope or Complexion, and no way to depend on them as natural
causes; you have proved their Arts to be but Impostures. How much then do our
Opposites dishonor God in this case, making the great miracle of his foresight
of future contingents to be as much as nothing? seeing they say, that albeit
they are contingent in respect of us, yet they are necessary in respect of Him.
When any man has answered any of these four Arguments, then will I change my
opinion. In the mean time I proceed to the vindicating of it from such
exceptions and objections, as our enemies in this case make against it. The
dissipating of those mists wherewith they endeavor to obscure this opinion,
will not only clear the truth of it, for belief; but also the sense of it, for
understanding.

Stoicism, as we term it, we fall into flat Epicurism; for while we make so
many things in the world to fall out according to the inconstant bent of
voluntary Agents, we Deifie Chance, and make Fortune a goddess; we do in effect
deny Gods providence, which they say makes all things come to pass according to
a most wise and constant method.

Anathematize him, whosoever he be, who holds any thing to fall out fortuito
in respect of God: I will make it most evident, that our opinion makes no
Chance in respect of God, and most sweetly illustrates Gods Providence.

Contingency and Casuality. Contingency is an equal possibility of being or not
being: Casuality is the coming to pass of an event ex improviso, beside the
forethought, as I may say of the thing. Now it is our assertion, that many
things fall out contingently in respect of God, because he imposed no necessity
upon their being, but left them to the pleasure of the inferior causes, that
they might as well not have been, as been. But we say withal, that nothing
falls out accidentally or casually in respect of God, because nothing comes
to pass without his most certain and unerring foresight; he knowing from all
eternity what his creatures would do, though he left it to their pleasure to do
what they list.

In events there is a great difference between Contingency and Casuality of
events in respect of men; for most things we do, we do contingently, we being
not bound by any inevitable necessity to do them; yet as long as we do them
upon certain persuasive reasons, for certain ends, we do them not by chance.
The same events yet are not after the same manner contingent in respect of God,
as they are in respect of us; for He out of the Prerogative of His Deity
fore-knoweth them; but we, by reason of our mortality, cannot have infallible
foresight of them; and what foresight we have, is in a very little distance.

And indeed, if this point be punctually canvased, we shall perceive, that in
that same proportion we have any knowledge of them, they are not contingent but
necessary: for every thing, so far forth as it is in existence, or in near
preparation for it, is necessary.

Contingency is the middle point between necessity and impossibility of being;
and therefore so much as any thing inclines to existence it is necessary. The
want or neglect of the distinction between contingency and casualty,
has been a great cause of the error we confute: for our Opposites still
taking fortuito and contingenter for Synonyma, because they would have nothing
casual in respect of God, therefore they would have every thing necessary; not
discerning the middle path which we walk in between Epicurism and Stoicism.

Providence we teach, that although according to that ordinary course (which we
call nature) which he has prescribed for the operation of his creatures in the
decree of Creation, many things fall out according to the free choice of
voluntary Agents, no way by Him necessitated; yet God is still busy with a
double providence. The first is universal; by this, whatsoever natural Agents
do contingently, He fore-seeth most clearly, and orders it most wisely,
according to His glory, the preservation of the Universe, and good of His
creatures. The second is particular; by this He puts in oft-times a miraculous
finger into such contingent business as respects his Church, and oft-times so
works the heart of the voluntary Agent, that sometimes he does that which (if
he had been left alone to himself) he would not have done; and sometimes is
secretly diverted from the doing of that, which otherwise he would most
willingly, and (in all likelihood) could most easily have done.

And here our Opposites may please to observe, how our opinion is so far from
denying particular Providence, that it only maintains a Providence properly
termed Particular: for that particular Providence which our Opposites so much
talk of, if it be well looked into, will appear to be in no better sense
particular, than the Roman Church is universal.

They say, That there is not any numerical act performed by any creature,
without an eternal decree from God; this they call particular providence. Alas!
this is the general which concerns all the actions performed by all things,
or at least one mixed of general and particular. As for example, Because it
raineth to day, God so ordering that it should, is it any sense to say, This
rain was by the particular providence of God, unless we espied extraordinary
matter in it? We therefore call that universal providence, whereby God
directs whatsoever His creatures do, according to their natural propensions,
for the preservation and good of the Universe. We term that particular or
special providence, whereby God interposing his extraordinary power amongst
the contingent affairs of Commonwealths, or private men, sometimes by sensible
miracles and prodigies, sometimes by His secret omnipotency, sensible only in
the Event, manifests His Mercy or Justice, to His own Glory, or good of His
Church.

This is properly termed special providence, and in this sense it is taken by
La Vosino the Italian, in his Tract, De particulari Providentia; and by those
who have wrote of that subject. Well then, I will now specify my faith
concerning Gods Providence.

First, it is very probable, that petty trivial matters, such as are
indifferent, not only in respect of themselves, but also of their
consequences, fall out altogether contingently, without any necessitating
decree. These matters of lesser moment are of three sorts.

1. The toys and trifling vanities of voluntary Agents, such as the Italians
term Badalucii, or Ballocametti: What a company of idle gestures and sporting
tricks use we every day, which doubtless for ought God has decreed, we might
have as easily omitted?

2. The petty consequences of the main actions of natural Agents: for example,
though the main drift and scope of the operations of the Elements and Meteors
be according to the method eternally prescribed them by God; yet some
particular events accompanying their operations, some circumstances
questionless were not prefixed by a particular decree; as now and then it
happens to rain when the Sun shines, I cannot believe that there is any special
decree concerning this.

Hear I would have the Reader observe how these events are not so properly
called contingent, as those other are; for they were swayed by no decree either
general or special, from the middle point between necessity and impossibility
of being. But these, though they are contingent in respect of a particular
decree, and may as well not be as be, for ought God has precisely determined
concerning them; yet in respect of the general method prefixed to natural
Agents, they do necessarily come to pass, because their main office cannot be
performed without these circumstances and consequences.

events as result from the contingent concourse of natural and voluntary
Agents; as when the wind blows off ones hat, etc. to say that God
particularly decreed such trifles, I think it injurious to the Majesty of His
Determinations. But here by trifles I mean such matters (as I said before)
which are indifferent, not only in respect of themselves, but also of their
consequences.

2ly.
I believe, that things of greatest moment are done necessarily, by the
immediate power of God, either by swaying men from their own proper
inclinations, or by supernatural means quite crossing their enterprises. So we
read in the Scripture and Church-stories, how God has sometimes quite changed
the hearts of men for some great purpose concerning his Church and glory.

3ly.
I believe that the middle sort of events in the world, such as are neither
trivial nor yet extraordinary, the ordinary serious matters which concern
Religion; Commonwealths, the temporal and spiritual good of private men, the
preservation from confusion, etc. Of these, I say, my belief is, that though
ordinarily men and unreasonable Agents do things contingently, yet God does so
manage this contingency, daily and hourly interposing His power according to
His Mercy or Justice, that very few matters of consequence are merely
contingent. For example, Because I see Marriage for the most part to be either
a great curse or a great blessing This may so happen upon the post-fact.
, I am so far persuaded of the truth of the common saying, that I think that
Marriages for the most part are made in heaven Sure David's was nor, a Sam.
11.17.
, before they are on earth. Let a man diligently peruse any story, and he shall
find many things done ordinarily according to the natural bent of particular
persons, and so contingently in respect of God; and yet let him join all things
done by all the Actors in the story together, let him accurately observe how
one thing follows upon another, he shall find, that still at the last there
will be something from the finger of God manifesting the glory either of His
Mercy or Justice. If we read the History of the Reformation; begun by Luther
and other Divines of Germany, we shall perceive many things done by the natural
humors of men, by the guidance of Divine wisdom made admirable furtherances of
the Reformation. The like may be said of Henry the 8th. his Marriage (which set
most Universities in Christendom a Disputing) and the dissolution of Abbeys.
The like indeed may be observed in any History, especially if it concern
Religion or a Christian Commonwealth; for I conceive that Gods Providence is
more or less remarkable in a place proportionable to the profession of
Religion. Let a man but diligently observe the prime passages of his own times,
let him mark how the chief Actors in them do all things according to their
particular bents and private humors; yet let him more the upshot, he shall
perceive, that there was some secret guide which directed all to God's glory,
though men do what they list according to their own pleasure. The best
Demonstration of this most useful and delightful truth every man might best
make to himself, if he would but seriously and circumspectly consider the whole
course of his own life, and mark how (whatsoever he has done out of the
absolute freedom of his choice) his actions have been turned and winded now and
then contrary to his intent, now and then beyond it, now and then beside it;
sometimes to his grief, sometimes to his comfort, always to be examples of Gods
Mercy, or His Justice; he will easily perceive, how excellently the Divine
Providence works upon Contingencies.

If men would be busied upon such contemplations, they would not shuffle away
so many good hours with those waking dreams of fantastic solitary
discoursings, which Charron and others have wisely taxed.

Here the Reader may see how I suppose some things necessary, some things
contingent, some things mixed, by reason of diverse circumstances of both kinds;
by no means undertaking precisely to determine how many things are done
contingently, or how many necessarily, etc.

Now as we have formerly showed how our opinion does most exactly Blazon the
Divinity of Gods infinite knowledge, by which He simply knows all things; so
also it does most clearly set forth the honor of His active wisdom, by which he
governs all things; for, to order all things in an harmonious concord to
good, (whatsoever the confused distracted discord of choices in inferior causes
produce) is a more glorious and superlative act of wisdom, than first to decree
how all things shall be done according to certain platforms, and to see them
effected according to them: Yea, this conceit (though it be Stoicism in it
self) yet it opens a greater overture to Epicurism than ours; for Ep curus
and his fellows believed there were gods, but they imagined that they encumbered
not themselves with the ordering of sublunary matters, but suffered matters
here below to go for the most part according to the natural and eternal
customs. Even so, if according to the opposite Tenet, God has ab aterno
prefixed an irresistible tenor and method agreeable to which all things should
for ever necessarily come to pass. God might ab aeterno also, from the same
instant He made His Decrees, let all things alone (according to Epicurus his
conceit) For our Opposites say, Quae Deus decrevit sponte flu^nt.
seeing all things must come orderly to pass, by virtue of His Decree, though
he slept all the while.

Savior tells the Apostles, that the hairs of their head were numbered, that
not so much as a contemptible Sparrow falls without his Father. Therefore the
pettiest matters in the world are determined by God Himself.

I remember the Marginal Note indeed in the Protestant Italian Bible upon
Matthew. 10.29. upon these words, [Yet not one of them falls to the ground
without your Father] says thus, [Che nou' intra venga it decreto ela volenta
sua, etc.] i. e. But so that His decree and will came between: But this gloss
is impertinent. The meaning of the place is this, Not one of them falls
without Gods privity and permission. The scope of our Savior was to comfort
and encourage his Disciples, whom he was now sending abroad into the world as
sheep among wolves; to this purpose he tells them, that the hairs of their head
were numbered, etc. the number of them was known to God, without whose
permission they could not lose one of them. That not so much as a Sparrow
falls without their Father, etc i. e. without the knowledge and permission of
Him who was their loving Father: And therefore he bids them not to be afraid,
seeing if such trifles could not be without Gods permission, doubtless God, who
was their more special observer, would not suffer men to meddle with them, more
than should be for His glory and their good. So that it cannot without
absurdity be hence concluded, that God has made any special decree concerning
Sparrows; for, (as St. Paul says) Does God take care for Oxen? so say I, Does
God take care for Sparrows? Here it is worth the observation, that the
Arguments (for the most part) which our Opposites produce for the necessity of
all events, and their kind of particular providence, are such which (as one
says) Aut nihil concludunt, aut nimium, conclude either not so much, or more
than they would have them; being much like the garments which were made for the
Moon, either too big or too little for their conclusions; for either they are
drawn from particular examples, and prove nothing at all, (as when Calvin
proves that there arises no wind without a special decree from God, because
he caused the South Wind to bring the Israelites Quails, and sent the tempest
which caused Jonas to be cast into the Sea) or else they are deduced out of
such reasons and Scriptures, which (as they handle them) prove God to be the
Author of sin, and so a great deal more than they are willing they should.

Free Will; for if God does not Necessitate our Actions, but leave them to our
inclinations, so that it is in our power to work or not work; we have freedom
of will to do or not to do, whatsoever we do contingently.

[which we do contingently] are well put in; for we say many things are done
contingently in respect of God, yet many we say are done by Gods special
determination. But it is most certainly true, that good duties, properly so
called, (to which we are tied pro hoc statu) are never performed without choice
and freedom. Which therefore (amongst other privileges of Christ's purchasing)
are restored under the spiritual Jubilee of the Gospel, and instated on us by
the holy Ghost as one special part of our Redemption. If the Son make your
free, then are you free indeed. And, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty.

In answer then to the Objection, I say, That, for our natural actions, as
eating, walking, etc. I believe that ordinarily we perform them freely and
contingently in respect of God. Likewise I doubt not, but as the ancient
Heathens Aristides, Socrates, Cato, Fabritius) so many now a days perform many
things civilly and morally good, being left alone I do not reject the opinion
of restringent grace, if it be well expounded.
to their contingent educations and complexions. But for matter of grace and
salvation, I confess, to the glory of God, that in us (being dead in sins and
trespasses) dwells no good; That we cannot so much as think (much less do)
any good, unless the holy Ghost gives us the power both to will and to do it.

Adam before his fall The opposite Tenet allows not Adam Free will in his
innocence, as I could easily prove, and is partly affirmed already by the third
Argument.
was equally poised between perseverance and defection; but he falling by the
freedom of his choice, lost those perfections which made him free: so that if
his posterity do any thing truly good, it is from God, not from themselves;
whatsoever bad they do, it is from themselves not from God.

Here it may be noted, that we may do many things contingently in respect of
God, which yet we do not freely but necessarily in respect of our selves; as
our sins are contingent in respect of Him, because he never imposed any
necessity of sinning upon us; yet they are necessary in respect of our selves,
seeing we being left to our selves cannot but sin. So many things which are
contingent in respect of our nature, may be in some sort necessary in respect
of our persons; as those things which our complexions, or customs and habits
necessitate us to: But this is an impertinency.

Scripture and Philosophy.

1. For Scripture, it is said, Act. 14. that in him we live, move, and have our
being; by which words we are taught, that all our motions, of what kind soever,
either natural or moral, vital or rational, are not only guided; but also
caused by God Himself.

2. Both in Logic and Metaphysics there are diverse Rules consonant to this
Scripture, as [Causa causae est etiam causa causati: causa secunda non agit
nisi meta a prim, etc.] Therefore man does no kind of thing but God is the
first cause of it, and consequently whatsoever we do, we do necessarily in
respect of Him.

the Author of sin; for if causa causae be causa causati (as doubtless it is)
while they make God the cause of all those actions, which either are sins, or
the causes of sins, questionless they make God (according to their own
Argumentation) the cause of sins. But they have a limitation for this Rule, and
say, that it holds in causis essentialiter subordinatis, as they say, that
God is the cause of all those things which are essentially and districtly done
by our wills; but sins proceeding from the depravation of our wills, are
effects of a cause, not directly subordinate to God. The limitation is sound,
but not applicable to their instance; yea, the limitation it self quite
spoileth them: For 1. While Adam's will was yet sound, they teach, that God
decreed that Adam should eat the forbidden fruit; now at that time they cannot
say, but that Adam was a cause essentially subordinate to God. 2. They teach,
that God is a cause not only of our actions, but also of our volitions, as I
may say; then these being the causes of our sins, are directly subordinate to
him.

3. Let us consider not only the subordination between God and our wills, but
also between our actions and their moralities, and we shall perceive, that
according to the abuse of these Rules, they make God the cause of our sins. For
that Rule, Causa causae est causa causati, is infillibly true expounded thus,
The cause of any effect, is the cause of all such events as necessarily follow
that effect.

Now then, if (as they say) God be a necessary cause of all our particular
actions, seeing our actions in reference to such and such objects must needs be
sinful, it is manifest what follows. For example: Though to take money in
general be no sin, yet to take this or that money, being none of our own, is a
sin. Now then, if God be a cause of this action in reference to this object (as
he is if he be the cause of this particular action) it is impossible their
Doctrine should excuse God from sin. Eating, in reference to the forbidden
fruit, was a sin; but according to them, God was a principal cause of eating
the forbidden fruit. Ergo.

Minor prob. They say he was the necessitating cause of this particular action.

Eating was a natural action, the individuation of this eating by an unlawful
object was a moral obliquity.

But God was the cause of this individual. Ergo.

The like may be said of all our sinful actions. When I have drunk sufficiently
both for the necessity and comfort of nature, to drink a cup more is sin. But
our Opposites teach, that I cannot take up this superfluous cup without Gods
special determination: Ergo.

This Doctrine is enough to make ones hair stand an end, making God (whatsoever
they say) the cause not only of our actions, but also of our obliquities: for
what are the obliquities of our actions, but the placing of them upon wrong
objects? If therefore they make God the principal cause of all our particular
actions, most of which are particularized by bad objects) what do these men
make of God? But Recrimination is no answer.

Hitherto I have showed (though perhaps without method, yet, I hope, not
without profit) how our Opposites are wounded with their own weapons. Now I
will take their weapons out of their hands, and teach them the right use of
them, showing how God is the cause of all things, only not the cause of sin: a
cause of all good things, yet so as that many good things are contingent also.

We have showed in the third Argument how God has ordained, that all sorts of
Inferior or second causes should work according to their proper kinds; that
voluntary Agents should work voluntarily, etc. God then is the first cause that
all things do work and that they do work in certain kinds: If so, then God is
the cause that many things are done contingently, one of the chiefest sorts of
second causes by this appointment working voluntarily, and therefore
contingently, which connection we have formerly justified. This being well
understood, will instruct us not only that it may be so, but also that it must
be so. That God being the necessary cause of all good things, yet all such
things are not necessary effects of Him. For example, It is impossible that man
should do any thing without God, therefore God is a cause necessary to the
being of all things effected by him; yet because many things done by the free
choice of man, might as well have been omitted (God no ways constraining him to
them) these are not necessary effects of God. The Reason of this is, because
God has decreed that man should work voluntarily, having liberty to do as well
one thing as another, yet so that God gives him the strength to do whatsoever
he chooses to do, and ability to choose what he will without limitation of his
choice,
(for this were else) to take it away, and to make man an involuntary Agent.)
For example, God has given thee strength of body; he has given thee also
ability to choose in what exercise thou will employ it; thou choosest to Ring
or Dance; God then the Author of thy strength is the chief cause of these
exercises, yet so, as they are contingent in respect of Him, because thou
might have omitted them had thou pleased. By this we may plainly see, how
God is the principal cause of all things of which he is capable to be a cause;
and yet many things are contingent in respect of him. This being cleared, we
may with more facility conceive, how and in what sense God is the cause of all
we do, and yet we only the cause of sin.

God sustains us when we are about our sins; even then, in Him we live, and
move, and have our being, as well as when we are better busied. God gives that
strength by which we commit any sin, yet because he does not necessitate or
incline unto it, but we of our selves abuse it to wickedness, God has still
the part of a Creator, we only are sinful. An example will make this clear,
Suppose a King delivers to his Subject Men, Weapons, Money, and Warlike
provision, that he may fight for his Honor against his enemies; his Subject
proves a Traitor, and uses all his Sovereigns strength against himself. His
Sovereign here is a cause that he has the command, and does the Office of a
Captain, but he is no cause of his Treachery, the offense is only the
Captains, and the wrong is only the Sovereigns. This is just the case between
God and us; God has given us many excellent faculties both of body and soul,
which he intended we should use to his Glory, in obedience to his
commandments, and resist His and our enemy the Devil; we most traitorously
siding with Satan, have abused His gifts to His Dishonor; God did the part of a
Creator, we of Rebels. A man lives intemperately, God gave him not strength to
this purpose, he necessitated not the man to this intemperancy: Man therefore
only sinned, God is dishonored. The King made his Subject able to rebel
against him, by delivering his military furniture unto him; the verier
miscreant he that did rebel against him. So God made Adam indeed able to sin,
but he never intended that he should sin with that ability. God then is the
cause of all those things in which we sin, and yet whatsoever he does is
exceeding good; he is not the cause that we intend any sin, but the cause that
we are able to commit those sins we intend; and yet he intended not our
abilities for sin, but for his Service. Of all our good actions he is the first
cause, we are the second: of all our sins we are the proper cause, he is only
the Conditio sine qua non.

But here some man may say, That choice or election of an unlawful object (upon
which we misplace our actions) is that which makes us sinners; now this being
an act of our will, it must suppose also the concourse of God; how then does
our opinion clear the point? The same Answer abundantly suffices; God made
Adam able to be willing to sin, but he made him not to will sin: God set before
him life and death, that he did choose death it was by the strength of will
given him of God; but God did not bind him to choose death, for that were (a
contradiction) a necessitated choice.

voluntary Agents, yet if we choose death, God is not to be blamed, (for he
made us voluntary) and therefore it was as possible for us to have chosen life.
If the nature of a voluntary Agent be well observed, this point will be most
evident.

The last objection is this, Gods foreknowledge of all futures is most
infallible and necessary: Ergo, All futures in respect of him fall out
necessarily, otherwise it is possible God may be deceived; yea, if many things
fall out contingently, Gods foreknowledge of them can be but contingent,
depending after a sort on man's free will.

This Argument is plausible at the first view, but if it be touched it falls to
shatters. It is one thing to know that a thing will necessarily be done, and
another to know necessarily that a thing will be done. God does necessarily and
certainly foreknow all that will be done, but he does not know that those
things which shall be done voluntarily will be done necessarily: he knows
that they will be done, but he knows withal, that they might have fallen out
otherwise, for ought he had ordered to the contrary. So God necessarily knew
that Adam would fall, and yet he knew that he would not fall necessarily, for
it was as possible for him not to have fallen. It was the ancient (and is still
the true) opinion, That Gods Praescience is not the cause of Events; he
fore-knoweth all things because they will be done, things are not done because
he fore-knoweth them. The infallibility of his knowledge consists not in the
immutability of his decreee, but in the prerogative of his Deity; it is
impossible therefore that any man by his voluntary manner of working should
delude Gods foresight; not because God does necessitate his will to certain
effects, (for this were indeed to take it away) but because his foreknowledge
is infinite.

Let our hearts therefore be never so full of Mazes and Meanders, turning and
winding, yet (...), (to use the Poets language) the al-seeing Eye of God cannot
but espy them long before, not because he himself contrived them (for then it
were no wonder if he were (...)) but because to Him (who is every way infinite)
all things cannot be but present and (...), which is the significant word of
the Author to the Hebrews, signifying open, by a metaphor or similitude drawn
from a word that signifies, having the faces laid upwards, because such as lie
so have their face exposed to the sight of all men.

FINIS.
Books Printed or sold by William Leake, at the sign of the Crown in
Fleetstreet, between the two Temple-gates.
YOrks Heraldry, fol. A bible of a very fair largo Roman Letter. 4. Orlando
Furioso. fol. Callis learned readings on the Statute, 21 H. 8. Cap. 5. of
Sewers. Perkins on the Laws of England. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs. 8. The
book of Fees. Parsons Law. 8. Mirror of Justice. 8. Topics in the Laws of
England. 8. Skene de significatione verbarum. 4. Delamans use of the Horizontal
Quadrant. Mathematical Recreations. Wilbey second Set of Music, 3, 4, 5, and 6
parts. 4. Corderius in English. 8. Dr. Pulk's Meteors. Malthus Artificial
Fireworks. Nyes Gunnery and Fireworks. Cato Major with Annotations. by William
Austin Esquire. Mel Heliconium, by Alex. Ross. 8. Nosce te ipsum, by Sir John
Davis. 8. Animadversions on Lillies Grammar. 8. The History of Vienna and
Paris. The History of Lazarillo de Tormes. Hero and Leander, by George Chapman,
and Christopher Marlow. Mayer's Catechism 8. Exercitatio Scholastica Bishop
Andrews Sermons Adams on Peter Posing of the Accidence Amadis de Gaul Guillims
Heraldry. fol. Herberts Travels. fol. Boccas Tables Man become guilty, by John
Francis Senalt, and Englished by Henry Earl of Monmoth. The Idiot in four
books, first, and second, of Wisdom, third of the mind; fourth, of the
experience of the balance. The Life and Reign of Hen. 8. by the Lord Herbert.
fol. Aula Lucis, or the house of Light. The Fort-Royal of holy Scriptures, or a
new Concordance of the chief heads of Scripture, by J. H. A Tragoedy written by
the most learned Hugo Grotius, called CHRISTUS PATIENS) and translated into
English by George Sandys. The Mount of Olives, or Solitary Devotions, by Henry
Vanghan Sylurist, with an excellent Discourse of the blessed estate of Man in
Glory: written by the most Reverend and holy Father Anselm Arch bishop of
Canterbury. The description and use of the double Horizontal Dyall, by W.O.
whereunto is added the description of the General Horological Ring. The Rights
of the People concerning Impositions, stated in a learned Argument, by a late
eminent Judge of this Nation. France painted out to the life, the second
Edition. The Garden of Eden, both parts; or an accurate description of Flowers,
and Fruits now growing in England, by Sir Hugh Plat, Knight. Exercitatio
Scholastica. Book of Martyrs. fol. Willet on Genesis and Exodus.
PLAYS.
The Wedding. Philaster. The Hollander. The Merchant of Venice. The strange
discovery. Maids Tragedy. King and no King. Othello the Moor of Venice. The
grateful servant.
These Books are lately come forth, and sold by Will. Leak at the Crown in
Fleet Street.
The Solemn League and Covenant, Arraigned and Condemned, by the sentence of
the Divines of London and Cheshire, etc. by Lawrence Womack, now D.D. and
Archdeacon of Suffolk. Amorea, the Lost Lover, or the Idea o Love and
Misfortune, being never before printed, written by Patherick Jenlyn, Gent. An
exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, from the Reign of K.
Edward the second, to K. Richard the third, of all the Parliaments holden in
each Kings reign, and the several Acts in every Parliament, by Sir Robert
Cotton, Knight. and Baronet. An Apology for the Discipline of the ancient Church,
intendep especally for that of our Mother the Church of England, in answer to
the Admonitory Letter lately published by William Nicolson, Archdeacon of
Brecon, and now Lord Bishop of Glocestet. Le Prince d' Amor, or the Prince of
Love, Wa collection of several Ingenious Poems and Songs, by the Wits of the
Age. 8. A learned Exposition of the Apostles Creed, delivered in several
Sermons by William Nicholson Archdeacon of Brecon, and now Lord Bishop of
Gloucester.

